<doc id="655575" wikidata="Q44640" url="?curid=655575" title="Sting (wrestler)">
<text>Steve Borden (born March 20, 1959), better known by the ring name Sting, is an American retired professional wrestler. He is signed to All Elite Wrestling (AEW), where he continues to make sporadic appearances since his retirement. Borden is best known for his time spent as the face of two American professional wrestling promotions: World Championship Wrestling (WCW) from 1988 to 2001 and Total Nonstop Action Wrestling (TNA) from 2006 to 2014, as well as his retirement run in AEW from 2020 to 2024. Although the World Wrestling Federation (WWF; renamed WWE in 2002) purchased WCW in 2001, Borden did not sign with them at the time; he would later sign with WWE from 2014 to 2020. Prior to WCW, he wrestled for the National Wrestling Alliance&#x27;s (NWA) Jim Crockett Promotions (JCP)—which became WCW in 1988—the Universal Wrestling Federation (UWF), and the Continental Wrestling Association (CWA). Borden wore face-paint throughout his career, and in 1996, changed from the multi-colored paint of his &quot;Surfer&quot; persona to the monochromatic paint of the &quot;Crow&quot; gimmick; he also incorporated elements of the Joker in the later part of his time in TNA.

Borden started his career in 1985 as Flash in the independent promotion All-California Championship Wrestling, where he was in a tag team with Jim &quot;Justice&quot; Hellwig (who would later become famously known as The Ultimate Warrior) as members of the Power Team USA stable, before he and Hellwig joined the CWA as the Freedom Fighters. In 1986, they joined the UWF as the Blade Runners, with Borden changing his ring name to Sting. His association with JCP and its successor WCW began in 1987, which saw him win the NWA World Heavyweight Championship for the first time in 1990. He rose to main event status and is described as the WCW counterpart to the WWF&#x27;s Hulk Hogan. Dubbed &quot;The Franchise of WCW&quot;, he held 15 championships in the promotion, including six reigns with the WCW World Heavyweight Championship and two reigns with the WCW International World Heavyweight Championship, and made more pay-per-view (PPV) appearances than any other. Against Hogan, Borden headlined WCW&#x27;s highest-grossing PPV event, Starrcade, in December 1997. Upon the WWF&#x27;s acquisition of WCW in March 2001, Borden and rival Ric Flair were chosen for the main event of the final episode of &quot;WCW Monday Nitro&quot;. Borden would later face Hogan and Flair in their last televised matches, which occurred in TNA, defeating both, although Flair would later have one final match in 2022.

Following the expiration of his contract with WCW&#x27;s parent company AOL Time Warner in March 2002, Borden held talks with the WWF, but did not join the promotion and instead toured with World Wrestling All-Stars (WWA), winning the WWA World Heavyweight Championship, before joining the then-upstart TNA in 2003. Over the following 11 years, he won the NWA World Heavyweight Championship on one further occasion and the TNA World Heavyweight Championship four times. As a result, he became the only wrestler to have won the NWA, WCW, and TNA world titles. He was also the inaugural inductee into the TNA Hall of Fame in 2012 before leaving the company in early 2014. Previously described by WWE as the greatest wrestler never to have performed for that promotion, Borden finally joined the company in late 2014, making his first appearance at Survivor Series and having his debut match at WrestleMania 31 the following year. His last match in WWE came at Night of Champions in September 2015, which also marked his sole WWE pay-per-view main event for the WWE World Heavyweight Championship in a losing effort. Borden headlined the WWE Hall of Fame Class of 2016 on April 2, where he announced his first retirement; he remained with the company under a legends contract until early 2020.

In late 2020, Borden signed with AEW, making his first appearance at &quot;Dynamite&quot;: Winter Is Coming, subsequently coming out of retirement where he had his first match in over five years at the promotion&#x27;s pay-per-view, Revolution, on March 7, 2021, a tag team victory with partner Darby Allin. Borden and Allin would continue to work as a team, going undefeated and winning the AEW World Tag Team Championship in February 2024. Sting then had his official retirement match at Revolution on March 3, 2024, retiring both as an undefeated tag team with Allin and as champion.

Borden held 26 total championships throughout his career, including 22 between WCW, TNA, and AEW. Readers of &quot;Pro Wrestling Illustrated&quot; named him &quot;Most Popular Wrestler of the Year&quot; on four occasions, a record he shares with John Cena. In 2016, Borden was inducted into the Wrestling Observer Newsletter Hall of Fame. &quot;Slam! Sports&quot; wrote that he holds &quot;a lofty level of prestige that few will ever touch&quot;.

== Early life ==
Borden was born in Omaha, Nebraska, and raised in Southern California. He played football and basketball in high school and later embarked on a career in bodybuilding, once co-owning a Gold&#x27;s Gym health club. Borden had no interest in professional wrestling and no television access to it within his home community, but decided to pursue a career in the industry after being taken to an &quot;incredible&quot; World Wrestling Federation (WWF) event in Los Angeles where he saw Hulk Hogan, The Iron Sheik, The British Bulldogs, André the Giant and others perform.

== Professional wrestling career ==
=== Continental Wrestling Association (1985–1986) ===
Borden, originally wrestling under the ring name Flash, teamed with Jim &quot;Justice&quot; Hellwig (who would later gain fame as The Ultimate Warrior in the WWF) as two members of Power Team USA in independent All-California Championship Wrestling. Power Team USA was a four-man unit also featuring Garland &quot;Glory&quot; Donahoe and Mark &quot;Commando&quot; Miller, plus manager Rick Bassman. Hellwig and Borden later moved to the Continental Wrestling Association (CWA), a wrestling company based in Memphis, Tennessee, and became known as the Freedom Fighters. Fans were slow to respond to the lumbering hulks, so the team turned heel under &quot;coach&quot; Buddy Wayne and soon afterwards manager Dutch Mantel. The Freedom Fighters left the CWA after an uneventful run, the highlight of which was an angle in which they broke the leg of veteran wrestler Phil Hickerson.

=== Universal Wrestling Federation (1986–1987) ===

The duo surfaced in the Universal Wrestling Federation (UWF), an organization run by Bill Watts and based in Alexandria, Louisiana, where they were known as the Blade Runners. Borden changed his ring name from Flash to Sting, while Hellwig became known as Rock. They soon joined Hotstuff &amp; Hyatt International, a heel stable headed by &quot;Hot Stuff&quot; Eddie Gilbert and Missy Hyatt. Together with &quot;Russian&quot; wrestler Kortsia Korchenko, the Blade Runners became henchmen in Gilbert&#x27;s on-screen feud with Watts. Hellwig left the promotion in mid-1986, leaving Sting without a partner. Sting won the UWF World Tag Team Championship twice with Gilbert in 1986 and a third time with Rick Steiner in 1987.

Sting and Steiner lost their tag titles to the Lightning Express after Gilbert accidentally hit Sting with his boot during a title defence, leading to a falling out between the two (with Steiner siding with Gilbert). Shortly afterwards, following a match against Terry Taylor in mid-1987, Gilbert interfered on Taylor&#x27;s behalf, costing Sting the match. Taylor and Gilbert then ganged up on Sting until Taylor&#x27;s former tag partner Gentleman Chris Adams came to Sting&#x27;s aid. Adams cleared the ring and then asked Sting if he was with him or against him in his feud with Taylor and Gilbert. Sting turned face by declaring his allegiance to Adams.

Behind the scenes, Gilbert endorsed Borden by telling a dirt sheet that Sting would be a megastar in the future. Later that year, Sting was tabbed to win the UWF Television Championship, then held by Gilbert, until Jim Crockett of the National Wrestling Alliance (NWA) bought the company from Watts. Crockett&#x27;s booker, Dusty Rhodes, decided to put the Television title on Taylor to set up a feud between Taylor and NWA Television Champion Nikita Koloff to unify the two titles. Rhodes used then-unknown Shane Douglas as the transitional champion from Gilbert to Taylor because Rhodes did not want to diminish Sting&#x27;s growing stardom with a brief title run.

=== Jim Crockett Promotions / World Championship Wrestling (1987–2001)===
==== Rise to stardom (1987–1989) ====
Sometime after Sting&#x27;s arrival to the NWA in July 1987, Dusty Rhodes used the opening bout of Crockett&#x27;s first foray into pay-per-view, Starrcade &#x27;87, to showcase the young superstar. Sting partnered with Michael P.S. Hayes and Jimmy Garvin in a six-man tag team match against Gilbert, Steiner, and Larry Zbyszko that ended in a 15-minute time-limit draw.

Having established himself as a rising star, Sting was one of the few UWF alumni to be pushed in the NWA. At &quot;Clash of the Champions I&quot; in March 1988, Sting challenged Ric Flair for the NWA World Heavyweight Championship. The match ended in a draw after the 45-minute time limit expired and the ringside judges could not declare a winner. Sting lost to Flair in several non-televised rematches following the Clash and, later that year, battled other members of Flair&#x27;s stable, the Four Horsemen. Sting teamed with Koloff at The Great American Bash in July 1988 to challenge Horsemen Tully Blanchard and Arn Anderson for the NWA World Tag Team Championship; Blanchard and Anderson retained the titles when the match ended in a 20-minute time-limit draw.

Rhodes continued to book Sting in title matches throughout the year against both NWA United States Champion Barry Windham and NWA Television Champion Mike Rotunda. In the fall of 1988, Sting was attacked by Hawk and Animal of The Road Warriors after a televised match. Rhodes, as booker, identified Sting as the face who was most over with the fans, despite knowing that turning the Road Warriors heel would be no easy task. Rhodes himself teamed with Sting to challenge the Road Warriors for the tag team championship at Starrcade &#x27;88 that December. Rhodes and Sting got the win by disqualification, allowing the Road Warriors to retain the titles.

Sting returned to singles matches in 1989, starting the year off by wrestling Flair to a one-hour draw in Atlanta&#x27;s Omni on New Year&#x27;s Day. He would also have his first experience in Japan with a brief tour in All Japan Pro Wrestling (AJPW), with his most notable match in AJPW against Dan Spivey at Nippon Budokan in June 1989. After a long push, Sting won his first title in the NWA when he defeated Rotundo for the NWA Television Championship at a live event in March. In mid-1989, The Great Muta challenged Sting at The Great American Bash. The match was booked with a classic, controversial Dusty finish even though Rhodes (the namesake of the technique) had been fired months earlier. Sting got the three-count and was announced as the winner, but a replay showed Muta&#x27;s shoulder was up at the count of two. The NWA decided to declare the title vacant. Sting and Muta battled in many rematches for the vacant Television title, but they always ended in a disqualification, giving neither man the championship. Eventually, Muta won a No Disqualification match against Sting at a live event in September by using a blackjack to get the win and the title.

In the main event of that year&#x27;s Great American Bash, Flair defended the NWA World Heavyweight Championship against Terry Funk, who was a member of Gary Hart&#x27;s J-Tex Corporation. After Flair got the victory, he was attacked by Funk&#x27;s stablemate, Muta. Sting came to the aid of his old rival Flair, and the two feuded with Muta and Funk for the rest of the summer and fall, culminating in a Thunderdome Cage match between the two teams, which Flair and Sting won, at Halloween Havoc &#x27;89. The alliance with Flair resulted in Sting joining the newly reformed and now-face Four Horsemen along with the Andersons, Arn and Ole (kayfabe cousins). Sting finished out the year by winning a four-man round-robin Iron Man tournament at Starrcade &#x27;89. In the final match of the night, Sting defeated Flair to accumulate the necessary points to win the tournament. The victory made Sting the number one contender for Flair&#x27;s NWA World title, leading to tension within the Four Horsemen.

==== Feud with The Four Horsemen (1990–1991) ====
Sting was summarily dismissed from The Four Horsemen on February 6, 1990, at Clash of the Champions X: Texas Shootout after refusing to relinquish his title shot against Flair, thus restarting their rivalry. Later that evening, Borden experienced a legitimate knee injury while interfering in a steel cage match featuring the Horsemen. Borden&#x27;s injury forced the bookers of World Championship Wrestling (WCW), the dominant promotion in the NWA, to find a new opponent for Flair for the forthcoming WrestleWar pay-per-view event.

Lex Luger was chosen to challenge Flair at WrestleWar. During the match between Flair and Luger, Sting came down to motivate Luger to come back and beat Flair. Before this, Sting and Luger had been at odds. When Luger was close to winning, Sting was attacked by Ole Anderson. Luger opted to save the already injured Sting and ended up losing the match by count-out while assisting his friend. Behind the scenes, WCW officials had wanted Flair to drop the title to Luger at WrestleWar, but Flair refused, saying he had promised Borden he would hold the title until Borden could return to the ring. Despite the injury, Sting was still utilized on television and pay-per-views when necessary.

At the Capital Combat event in May, Sting was accosted by the Four Horsemen and thrown into a metal cage at ringside. In a promotional crossover, Sting was rescued by his buddy RoboCop. After Borden&#x27;s recovery, Sting finally defeated Flair for the NWA World Heavyweight Championship on July 7, 1990, at The Great American Bash. Sting went on to feud with title contenders Flair and Sid Vicious. Vicious appeared to defeat Sting in a title match at the 1990 Halloween Havoc, but the &quot;Sting&quot; that Vicious pinned was revealed to be an impostor played by Horseman Barry Windham. The real Sting appeared soon after and pinned Vicious to retain his title after the match was restarted.

During Sting&#x27;s title run, a masked man known as The Black Scorpion would taunt and attack Sting on many occasions. This feud culminated in a final showdown between Sting and The Black Scorpion at Starrcade: Collision Course in December. The cage match ended with Sting pinning and unmasking the Scorpion, who turned out to be Flair in disguise.

==== WCW World Heavyweight Champion (1991–1993) ====

Sting&#x27;s first world championship reign ended January 11, 1991, when Flair defeated him in a rematch from Starrcade. In the same month, WCW seceded from the National Wrestling Alliance, in the process of recognizing a WCW World Heavyweight Championship and a WCW World Tag Team Championship. Sting then took part in what many consider to be the best match of 1991, teaming with Luger to face The Steiner Brothers at the SuperBrawl I pay-per-view for the world tag-team titles. The Steiners won by pinfall after Koloff, who had been feuding with Luger, interfered in the match by swinging a chain at Luger, but hitting Sting instead. Consequently, Sting feuded with Koloff throughout the summer of 1991. In August 1991, Sting defeated Steve Austin to win a tournament for the vacated WCW United States Heavyweight Championship. Sting held the title for 86 days before losing it to Rick Rude at Clash of the Champions XVII.

At Starrcade &#x27;91, Sting won the first-ever Battlebowl battle royal, for which he received a Battlebowl championship ring. Sting then became embroiled in a feud with the Dangerous Alliance, headed by manager Paul E. Dangerously. The stable targeted Sting because he was the so-called &quot;franchise&quot; of WCW, and the Alliance vowed to destroy both Sting and the promotion he was the face of. At the same time, Sting was being targeted by Luger, who had once again turned heel and, as WCW Champion, viewed Sting as a threat. Sting engaged in many matches with Dangerous Alliance members, especially Rude, who was the group&#x27;s biggest star. It was during this feud that Sting won the first of his six WCW World Heavyweight Championships, defeating Luger on February 29, 1992, at SuperBrawl II. The feud ended when Sting formed Sting&#x27;s Squadron, consisting of allies Ricky Steamboat, Dustin Rhodes, Windham, and Koloff, and defeated the Alliance (Rude, Austin, Arn Anderson, Zbyszko, and Bobby Eaton) in a WarGames match at WrestleWar in May 1992. Dave Meltzer awarded the match his highest rating of five stars.

Near the end of Sting&#x27;s battles with the Dangerous Alliance, the seeds were sown for what became arguably one of the most famous feuds of Sting&#x27;s career. Sting defended his WCW World title on April 12, 1992, at The Omni in Atlanta against the 450-pound Big Van Vader. During the match, Vader splashed Sting, cracking three of Sting&#x27;s ribs and rupturing his spleen. Sting recovered and defended his title on July 12 against Vader at The Great American Bash, dropping the belt to Big Van Vader after missing a Stinger Splash, hitting his head on the ring post, and receiving a powerbomb. After beating Cactus Jack in a Falls Count Anywhere Match at Beach Blast and WCW newcomer Jake Roberts in a Coal Miner&#x27;s Glove match at Halloween Havoc, Sting defeated Vader, who had lost the WCW World Heavyweight Championship in August, in the &quot;King of Cable&quot; tournament final at Starrcade.

The Sting-Vader feud continued into 1993, with Vader, who was again WCW World Heavyweight Champion, defeating Sting in a bloody Strap match at SuperBrawl III. Sting exacted revenge by beating Vader for the WCW World Heavyweight Championship on March 11 in London, England, but lost it back to Vader six days later in Dublin, Ireland. Sting then teamed with WCW newcomer Davey Boy Smith to beat the team of Vader and Vicious at Beach Blast in a match that was set up by a mini-movie in which an evil midget blew up Sting&#x27;s boat. At the end of 1993, Sting was one of the first people to congratulate Flair, who had just returned from the World Wrestling Federation, after his WCW World Heavyweight Title victory over Vader at Starrcade.

==== WCW International World Heavyweight Champion (1994–1995) ====
Sting feuded with Vader and Rude through the first half of 1994. Sting won the WCW International World Heavyweight Championship from Rude in April. Rude recaptured the title on May 1 at Wrestling Dontaku 1994 in Japan, but the decision was reversed because Rude had allegedly hit Sting with the title belt during the match; this was to cover for a real-life back injury Rude sustained in the match that forced Rude into retirement. Sting refused to have the title handed to him, and instead defeated Vader for the vacant WCW International World Heavyweight Championship at Slamboree. Soon afterward, Flair defeated Sting in a title unification match at &quot;Clash of the Champions XXVII&quot;, turning heel in the final moments of the match when Sensuous Sherri turned on Sting and took Flair&#x27;s side. Sting spent the second half of 1994 and most of 1995 teaming with WCW&#x27;s newest signee, Hulk Hogan in his battles against Kevin Sullivan&#x27;s Three Faces of Fear and its successor stable, The Dungeon of Doom.

At The Great American Bash 1995, Sting defeated Meng to win another tournament for the WCW United States Championship. Sting defeated Meng in a rematch for the title at Bash at the Beach 1995. Sting competed on the first-ever &quot;WCW Monday Nitro&quot; in a match where Flair defeated Sting by disqualification as a result of a run-in by Arn Anderson, who attacked Flair. At Fall Brawl, Sting teamed with Hogan, Luger, and Randy Savage to defeat the Dungeon of Doom, consisting of Kamala, Zodiac, Shark and Meng, in the event&#x27;s WarGames match. In October 1995, Flair convinced Sting to team with him in a match against Anderson and Brian Pillman at Halloween Havoc. Anderson and Pillman had attacked Flair earlier in the night, rendering Flair unable to come out for the first part of the match. Sting fended off his opponents until Flair emerged. Later in the match, Flair turned on Sting and reformed the Four Horsemen with Anderson and Pillman, later adding Chris Benoit to fill out the group.

Sting defeated Flair on a subsequent &quot;Nitro&quot; with the Scorpion Deathlock, refusing to let go until Luger persuaded him to do so. Sting defeated Flair again at the World War 3 pay-per-view. Later in the night, Sting competed in the World War 3 battle royal for the WCW World Heavyweight Championship, which was won by Randy Savage. Sting&#x27;s alliances with Hogan and Savage led the Horsemen to attack them as well. Sting&#x27;s second U.S. title reign lasted until November 13, when he was defeated by Kensuke Sasaki in Japan. At Starrcade, Sting defeated Sasaki, representing New Japan Pro-Wrestling, in a non-title match to win the &quot;World Cup of Wrestling&quot; for WCW. In the next match that night, Sting lost a Triangle match involving Flair and Luger; Flair won by count-out to become number one contender for the WCW World Heavyweight Championship, which Flair won from Savage in the next match.

==== Feud with the New World Order (1996–1998) ====

Early in 1996, Sting&#x27;s appearance started to change: he grew longer, darker hair, replacing his blond flattop haircut, and he often wore black tights with a multi-colored scorpion, although he occasionally wore his colorful ones and maintained his colorful face paint. Sting teamed with his old friend Luger, who had returned to WCW from WWF in September 1995, despite Luger&#x27;s standing as a heel. The duo beat Harlem Heat for the WCW World Tag Team Championship on the January 22 episode of &quot;Nitro&quot;. The team often retained the championship as a result of Luger&#x27;s cheating tactics, to which Sting remained oblivious. When Luger was temporarily unavailable for WCW Uncensored in March, Harlem Heat member Booker T teamed up with Sting to successfully prevent the titles from changing hands. Sting and Booker T developed a mutual respect that showed itself when Sting and Luger granted Harlem Heat a rematch. During the tag title run, Sting received a world title shot against The Giant at Slamboree in May, but lost after accidental interference from Luger. Harlem Heat eventually won the titles back on the June 24 episode of &quot;Nitro&quot;.

In the summer of 1996, Sting was the first WCW competitor to stand up to The Outsiders: Kevin Nash and Scott Hall, who had recently competed in the WWF, whose alliances and agenda were unclear, and who had been infiltrating and causing chaos at various WCW events. Sting teamed with Luger and Savage to defend WCW against Hall, Nash, and a mysterious third Outsider to be revealed at the Bash at the Beach. Hall and Nash started the bout without their third partner, but the WCW&#x27;s temporary three-on-two advantage was short-lived: Luger left the match after he was accidentally injured by a mistimed Stinger Splash. The two-on-two match continued until Hulk Hogan, who had been a face character for nearly fifteen years, emerged at ringside. Hogan appeared ready to back up the WCW wrestlers, until he attacked Savage with his leg drop finisher in one of wrestling&#x27;s most famous swerves. The match was ruled a no-contest, and Hall, Nash, and Hogan declared a new world order in professional wrestling. The name stuck, and Sting became one of WCW&#x27;s stalwarts against the New World Order, or nWo for short.

As part of this, Sting and Luger went up to rivals and Four Horsemen members Ric Flair and Arn Anderson some time after Bash at the Beach and asked them to team with him, saying that they needed to put aside their personal differences for the greater good of WCW. Flair and Anderson agreed and the four wrestlers composed Team WCW for the annual WarGames match at Fall Brawl in September 1996. They would be facing the nWo&#x27;s team of Hall, Nash, Hogan, and a fourth member yet to be determined. On the final &quot;Nitro&quot; prior to the event, however, the nWo played a trick on WCW claiming that Sting was joining their side. A vignette was shown where the nWo had a recording of Sting&#x27;s voice playing in its limousine as Luger was being lured into the parking lot. Once he was there a man dressed as Sting, played by Jeff Farmer, attacked him and the crowd at home, as well as the live audience and commentators, were led to believe that Sting had joined up with the nWo and would be their fourth man against what was now a three-man WCW team. Sting, however, was not at that episode of &quot;Nitro,&quot; and showed up at Fall Brawl just as his teammates declared that they would face the nWo by themselves. Sting told Luger that he did not attack him, but Luger refused to believe him. Later, during the match, Sting entered as the fourth and final man for Team WCW, after the impostor Sting had entered for the nWo. Once in the ring, Sting immediately took out all four members of the nWo. He then stopped, turned to Luger, and angrily said to him, &quot;Is that good enough for you right there? Is that proof enough?!?&quot; Sting then gave Luger an obscene gesture and walked out of the match, leaving Team WCW at a four-on-three disadvantage, which they did not overcome. The next night on &quot;Nitro&quot;, Sting came out unannounced during the middle of the show with no music or entrance pyrotechnics. He entered the ring and, with his back turned to the camera side of the audience, launched into an angry tirade about what had transpired over the last week:

Declaring he would visit &quot;from time to time&quot;, Sting threw the microphone down and left the ring. Days after the infamous promo, he was booked for shows in New Japan Pro-Wrestling, to take part in the Japan/U.S. Superstars Tournament, where he defeated Masahiro Chono in the first round, but was eliminated in the second round by Shiro Koshinaka. His last match of 1996 took place on September 23 at the Yokohama Arena, where he and Lex Luger teamed up to defeat Arn Anderson and Steven Regal. It would end up being his last tour of Japan. On the October 21 episode of &quot;Nitro&quot;, Sting returned for the first time since the night after Fall Brawl in a match where the impostor Sting was wrestling Mr. JL. Sting emerged wearing a trench coat and white face paint with black marks around his eyes. He went in the ring and attacked nWo Sting (who was still imitating Sting&#x27;s old mannerisms at this point) with his new finisher, an inverted DDT dubbed the Scorpion Death Drop, two jumping elbow drops, a Stinger Splash and a Scorpion Deathlock while the rest of the nWo stood around ringside. Rather than intervene and save their stablemate, they simply stood by and watched. After Sting was done, the nWo came into the ring. Ted DiBiase, Scott Hall, and Kevin Nash made Sting an offer to join the nWo and get back at WCW for betraying him. Sting, after a slight pause, first called out the nWo Sting as a &quot;cheap imitation,&quot; before telling the nWo, &quot;the &quot;real&quot; Sting may or may not be in your price range,&quot; and then concluded by saying &quot;the only thing that&#x27;s for sure about Sting is nothing&#x27;s for sure&quot;. With that, Sting left the ring and would not speak (on the microphone) on WCW programming again for over a year. A silent, almost ghostly Sting, carrying a baseball bat as a weapon, began appearing in the rafters at WCW events and began painting his entire face with black and white corpse paint. In retaliation, nWo Sting, who was still imitating Borden, began painting his face this way as well. Sting&#x27;s new gimmick was directly inspired by the title character of the 1994 film &quot;The Crow&quot;, and Borden credits Scott Hall for suggesting the idea of the &quot;Crow&quot; character. Sting still maintains the core aspects and aesthetic of his &quot;Crow&quot; persona to this day, occasionally with different designs and use of color integrated into the face paint.

In a series of unusual loyalty tests over the next months, Sting would confront a random WCW wrestler in the ring and shove the wrestler several times with his bat until the wrestler was provoked enough to advance on him. Then Sting would draw the weapon back as if he were going to assault him, causing the wrestler to stop. Sting would then hand the bat to the offended wrestler and turn his back, offering the wrestler a chance at retaliation. When the wrestler hesitated or declined, Sting would nod, retrieve the bat and leave the ring. In January 1997, a &quot;blackballed&quot; Randy Savage returned to WCW for the first time since Halloween Havoc and aligned himself with Sting as a &quot;free agent&quot; as he refused to join the nWo although WCW Vice President Eric Bischoff, also one of the leaders of the nWo, declared he would not be allowed back in WCW if he didn&#x27;t. For the next few weeks, the two were seen in the rafters together and coming to the ring together. This story, however, petered out at SuperBrawl VII in February; Sting and Savage had come to the ring together to watch Roddy Piper face Hogan in a match for the WCW World Championship. As Sting left, Savage did not follow suit, instead opting to go to the ring and help Hogan win the match, thus going back on his word and joining the nWo. Over the next couple of weeks, Sting would accompany the nWo, indicating that he too had joined the group. However, at Uncensored in March 1997, as the nWo celebrated a victory in the main event battle royal which guaranteed them title shots whenever they desired with their newest recruit, Chicago Bulls NBA star Dennis Rodman, Sting rappelled from the roof of the arena on a vertical zip-line. When Hall and Nash went to approach him, Sting attacked them as well as attacking Randy Savage when he tried to intervene, revealing his true allegiance to WCW.

In subsequent weeks, Sting frequently rappelled from the rafters or came up through the ring to attack unsuspecting nWo members, came to the aid of wrestlers who were once subjected to his loyalty test as they battled the nWo, and employed decoy &quot;Stings&quot; to play mind games with the nWo during the closing segments of &quot;Nitro&quot;. Sting&#x27;s appearances to fight the nWo at the end of almost every &quot;Nitro&quot; helped WCW keep and widen its television ratings advantage over the WWF&#x27;s &quot;Monday Night Raw&quot; throughout the summer. In the midst of all this, on-screen WCW commissioner J. J. Dillon tried many times to get Sting to return to wrestling by making contracts to fight various nWo members. Sting, however, did not accept any of the contracts, often tearing them up in Dillon&#x27;s face. Finally, during an episode of &quot;Nitro,&quot; a confused and frustrated Dillon asked Sting who he wanted to face. Sting went out to ringside, picked up a fan&#x27;s sign, and pointed out one name on it: Hogan. Eventually, Sting got his wish and he and Hogan finally met in December at Starrcade for the WCW World Heavyweight Championship. The finish of the match was supposed to echo the Montreal Screwjob finish that the WWF had used to double-cross Bret Hart just one month earlier at their annual Survivor Series event. Nick Patrick, the referee for the contest, was supposed to execute a fast count on Sting while Hart, whose signing with WCW was the linchpin for the Montreal Screwjob, would come out to protest the decision and, since he had already served as the guest referee for the match between Larry Zbyszko and Eric Bischoff earlier that evening, order the match to be restarted and Sting would emerge victorious by forcing Hogan to submit to the Scorpion Death Lock. However, Patrick did not do his part properly and instead counted the pin at normal speed, which added an unintentional level of controversy to the finish.

The next night on &quot;Nitro&quot;, Hogan protested the decision claiming that Patrick&#x27;s decision should have been considered final and a rematch was granted. The match ran over &quot;Nitro&#x27;s&quot; allotted time slot and the finish was aired later in the week on the inaugural episode of &quot;Thunder&quot;. Similar to the Starrcade result, two different referees declared both men as the winner. Later that night, Dillon vacated the WCW World Heavyweight Championship, forcing Sting to surrender the belt. Sting responded with his first words (on mic) since October 1996 when he told Dillon, &quot;You&#x27;ve got no guts!&quot; Sting turned to Hogan and said, &quot;And you... You&#x27;re a dead man!&quot;.

==== The Wolfpac (1998–1999) ====

As 1998 began, the nWo began to splinter. Sting recaptured the vacant WCW World Heavyweight Championship in February at SuperBrawl VIII with the help of Savage, who was beginning to split from the nWo. Sting went on to successfully defend the title against the likes of Hall, Nash, and Diamond Dallas Page (DDP). Like Savage, Nash began to pull away from the Hogan-dominated nWo, and Nash helped Savage beat Sting for the championship at Spring Stampede in April. Nash and Savage officially split from the original nWo on May 4, forming the face group nWo Wolfpac, while Hogan&#x27;s heel faction became identified as nWo Hollywood. The two nWo factions vied for Sting&#x27;s allegiance, with Sting&#x27;s friends The Giant joining nWo Hollywood and Luger joining nWo Wolfpac. Sting seemed to have joined nWo Hollywood when he appeared wearing a black and white nWo shirt, but he soon tore off the shirt to reveal the red and black of the nWo Wolfpac. Sting began wearing red and black face paint and tights as a member of nWo Wolfpac.

Sting and The Giant won the WCW World Tag Team Championship at Slamboree in May when Hall turned on his teammate Nash. Sting and The Giant then split due to each man joining opposite sides of the nWo, and the team was forced to vacate the titles 18 days later. Sting then defeated The Giant at The Great American Bash in June to take control of the Tag Team titles and chose Nash as his partner. Throughout the summer, Sting and fellow nWo Wolfpac members Nash, Luger, and Konnan feuded with Hogan and nWo Hollywood. Sting also got involved in a feud with Bret Hart over their similar finishing holds, the Sharpshooter and the Scorpion Deathlock. Hart cost Sting and Nash the Tag titles by interfering in their match with Hall and The Giant on the July 20 &quot;Nitro&quot;. Sting and Hart squared off at Halloween Havoc, where Hart, the United States Champion, attacked Sting with a baseball bat, putting Sting out of action for several months. Ironically, Hart would eventually be pinned by Sting after he himself fell afoul of a baseball bat, wielded by Lex Luger, eleven months later.

Sting returned to &quot;Nitro&quot; in March 1999, sporting the black and white &quot;Crow&quot;-inspired attire he debuted in 1996 and began to participate in more mic work. By this time, the nWo storyline had faded, and Sting was not aligned with any of its factions. Sting competed in the main event of April&#x27;s Spring Stampede, a Four Corners match for the World Championship, against Hogan, DDP, and champion Flair. Savage served as special guest referee and delivered a diving elbow drop to help DDP win the match and the title.

==== Final world title reigns (1999–2000) ====
Sting defeated Page on the April 26 episode of &quot;Nitro&quot; to win the WCW World Heavyweight Championship for the fifth time. Later that night, Sting defended the title in a four-way match featuring DDP, Goldberg, and a returning Nash. DDP pinned Nash, allowing DDP to win the title without directly beating Sting. Sting&#x27;s 90-minute reign was only the second shortest WCW World Heavyweight Championship reign in WCW history. Sting lost to Rick Steiner in a Falls Count Anywhere match at The Great American Bash after he was attacked by Steiner&#x27;s three pet dogs backstage and Steiner forced the referee to prematurely declare himself the victor, claiming his dogs had pinned Sting for him.

Over the next several months, Sting feuded with Goldberg, Rick Steiner, Vicious, and Savage. Sting teamed with WCW World Heavyweight Champion Nash at the Bash at the Beach in July to take on Vicious and Savage of Team Madness. Savage pinned Nash and won the World title as a result. Hogan returned from injury on July 12 as a face to win the WCW World Heavyweight Championship. Sting defeated Flair on the July 19 episode of &quot;Nitro&quot; to become the on-screen president of WCW. Later that night, Nash turned heel by attacking Hogan during a title defense against Vicious. Sting remained president for just one week and used his power to book a main event pitting Hogan and himself against Nash and Vicious. Sting vacated the presidency the following week because he only wanted Flair out of the position rather than wanting the power for himself. Along with Goldberg, Sting and Hogan feuded with Nash, Vicious and Rick Steiner for the next month.

Sting began to question Hogan&#x27;s trustworthiness and credibility in the weeks leading up to Fall Brawl. At the September pay-per-view, Luger brought a baseball bat to the ring and Sting used it to beat Hogan for his sixth and final WCW World Heavyweight Championship, turning heel for the first time in WCW. Sting&#x27;s heel turn and subsequent attitude change did not resonate with the WCW fans. They still cheered Sting despite the fact he was supposed to be the villain (reminiscent of The Road Warriors&#x27; heel turn in late 1988). It was during this heel turn that Sting and Luger, with helpful interference from DDP, defeated supposed faces Hogan and Hart in a tag-match, Sting pinning Hart after Luger hit him with a bat. Then, at Halloween Havoc, Sting retained the WCW World Heavyweight Championship against Hogan after Hogan entered the ring in street clothes and lay down for Sting to pin him. After the match, Sting sounded his disdain of the result and issued an open challenge for later tonight. Later that night, Sting lost an unsanctioned match to Goldberg, who accepted his open challenge and then attacked referee Charles Robinson. Sting was stripped of the title the next night for attacking the official.

Sting entered the 32-man tournament that was set up to award the vacant WCW World Heavyweight Championship. Sting defeated Brian Knobs, Meng, and Luger to reach the semi-finals to be held at WCW Mayhem. At the November event, Sting lost to Hart, the eventual winner of the tournament, by disqualification after ostensibly &quot;bungled&quot; interference by Luger (in fact payback for Sting&#x27;s quarterfinal win). This led to a falling out with Luger. However, Hart asked for an immediate rematch, which was granted, and won by submission to advance to the final. After the match, Sting shook hands with Hart in a sign of respect, turning face again. Sting sought revenge against Luger the next month at Starrcade. Sting won by disqualification when Luger and Miss Elizabeth assaulted Sting with a steel chair and baseball bat, putting Sting out of action for some time. Sting ended his feud with Luger by defeating him in a Lumberjacks with Casts match at Uncensored the following March.

==== Last feuds and contract expiration (2000–2001) ====
WCW officials Vince Russo and Eric Bischoff, in an attempt to save the fading company, rebooted all current storylines on April 10, 2000, and declared all titles vacant. At Spring Stampede the following week, Sting advanced to the finals of the United States Championship tournament by defeating Booker T and Vampiro in the first two rounds. Vampiro then cost Sting the championship in the finals against Scott Steiner, leading to an intense feud between Sting and Vampiro. Sting pinned Vampiro at Slamboree in May, and Vampiro beat Sting in a Human Torch match at The Great American Bash the next month; for the climax of the match, Borden switched with a stuntman, who was set on fire and thrown off the top of the frame of the stage&#x27;s entrance video screen. At Bash at the Beach, he returned wearing another Sting mask as men wearing cloaks and Sting masks carried him in a casket, attacking Vampiro.

Sting went on to feud with Jeff Jarrett and then Scott Steiner. Steiner attacked and injured Sting in November 2000. Sting remained absent from WCW programming until the final episode of &quot;Nitro&quot; on March 26, 2001. By this point, WCW had been purchased by the World Wrestling Federation (WWF), and the final match in WCW history pitted Sting against his longtime rival Flair; the two had also competed on the first episode of &quot;Nitro&quot; on September 4, 1995. Sting defeated Flair and the two embraced at the end of the contest.

After the WWF chose not to buy out Sting&#x27;s contract with AOL Time Warner, he rejected a buyout offer of 50 cents on the dollar from AOL Time Warner, instead waiting until his contract expired in March 2002 (he announced a short-lived retirement in February of that year). Borden then entered into contract negotiations with the WWF, but ultimately did not join the promotion.

=== World Wrestling All-Stars (2002–2003) ===
In November 2002, after over a year-and-a-half of hiatus, Borden toured Europe with the World Wrestling All-Stars (WWA) promotion throughout November and December. His first match in the WWA took place on November 28, 2002, in Dublin, Ireland, where he reunited with Lex Luger to defeat Buff Bagwell and Malice. At The Retribution on December 6, 2002, in Glasgow, Scotland, United Kingdom, Sting lost to Luger in a bout for the vacant WWA World Heavyweight Championship. Sting defeated Luger to claim the WWA World Heavyweight Championship in Zürich, Switzerland, on December 13.

Sting embarked on a second tour with WWA in May 2003, successfully defending his championship against Rick Steiner, Shane Douglas, and Disco Inferno. The WWA held its final show, The Reckoning, on May 25 in Auckland, New Zealand, where NWA World Heavyweight Champion Jeff Jarrett defeated Sting for the WWA World Heavyweight Championship, unifying the two championships.

=== NWA Total Nonstop Action / Total Nonstop Action Wrestling (2003–2014)===
==== Sporadic appearances (2003–2004) ====
In 2003, Sting signed a contract committing him to four appearances with the NWA Total Nonstop Action (NWA/TNA) promotion. He debuted in TNA on the June 18, 2003 one year anniversary show, teaming with Jeff Jarrett to defeat AJ Styles and Syxx-Pac. Following this, Borden engaged in a comprehensive series of sit down interviews with Mike Tenay, discussing his career and his faith. Sting returned to TNA on November 5, 2003, defeating Jarrett by disqualification in a match for the NWA World Heavyweight Championship. On November 12, Sting teamed with Styles to defeat Jarrett and Lex Luger. He made his final TNA appearance of 2003 on December 17, defeating Jarrett in a non-title match. On March 24, 2004, Borden was interviewed once again by Mike Tenay as part of the promotion for his direct-to-video biographical film, &quot;Sting: Moment of Truth&quot;, and on March 31, he returned to the company for one night only as the special guest enforcer for the main-event, a four-way match between Styles, Abyss, Raven, and Ron &quot;The Truth&quot; Killings, which Raven won.

Sting would wrestle in the independent circuit in 2004 and 2005, only competing in two matches. On July 21, 2004, Sting teamed up with The Great Muta defeating Diamond Dallas Page and Satoshi Kojima at HCW Battle Hawaii in Honolulu, Hawaii. Then on January 22, 2005, he defeated Billy Gunn at NWA Mid-Atlantic in Seoul, South Korea.

==== Feud with Jeff Jarrett (2005–2006) ====
On December 11, 2005, at Turning Point, as Jeff Jarrett stood in the ring celebrating his victory, the lights in the arena went out as images of a scorpion — Sting&#x27;s signature symbol — appeared on the arena screens, along with the date &quot;January 15, 2006&quot;. Spotlights then illuminated the ring, revealing a chair bearing Sting&#x27;s signature trench coat, boots, and a black baseball bat in the center of the ring. His return to TNA was officially announced one minute after midnight on the January 1, 2006 episode of &quot;Impact!&quot;. On January 15 at Final Resolution, Sting and Christian Cage defeated NWA World Heavyweight Champion Jeff Jarrett and Monty Brown in a tag team match after Sting pinned Jarrett. On the January 28 episode of &quot;Impact!&quot;, Sting made his Spike TV debut and first appearance on national television in almost five years, announcing his retirement.

With Sting gone, the storyline continued with Jeff Jarrett and Eric Young worrying that Sting had not actually retired and sending Alex Shelley to California to videotape Sting at home. Sting eventually discovered Shelley filming, then walked up to Shelley&#x27;s car and told him that he was going to show up at Destination X and confront Jeff Jarrett as Steve Borden. Clad in street clothes and without face paint, Borden returned on March 12 at Destination X, saving Christian Cage and Rhino as they were attacked by Jarrett&#x27;s Army. He then placed Jarrett in the Scorpion Deathlock, but was attacked by the debuting Scott Steiner shortly thereafter. This led to a Lethal Lockdown match between Sting, AJ Styles, Ron Killings, and Rhino against Jarrett&#x27;s Army. On April 23 at Lockdown, Sting&#x27;s team won the match. Following Lockdown, Sting proceeded to seek out partners to help him defeat Jeff Jarrett and Scott Steiner for good. After bringing out Lex Luger, Buff Bagwell, and Rick Steiner as potential options, he settled on Samoa Joe. On May 14 at Sacrifice, Sting and Joe defeated Jarrett and Steiner after Joe pinned Jarrett with a Muscle Buster. Still having proven unsuccessful at putting Jarrett away, Sting defeated Scott Steiner by disqualification to earn a spot in the King of the Mountain match for the NWA World Heavyweight Championship at Slammiversary on June 18. However, due to a confrontation with Christian Cage during the match, Sting was distracted, allowing crooked referee Earl Hebner to knock over the ladder both were on, sending both men to the floor and allowing Jarrett to pick up the victory.

On July 16 at Victory Road, Sting won a fatal four-way match to earn a title shot at Jarrett&#x27;s NWA World Heavyweight Championship. Sting received his title shot on August 13 at Hard Justice, but failed to capture the title after Christian Cage turned heel and hit Sting with Jarrett&#x27;s guitar. Sting would have another match at Bound for Glory on October 22, putting his career on the line as an added stipulation. He went on to claim his second NWA World Heavyweight title when he made Jarrett submit to the &quot;Scorpion Deathlock,&quot; marking the first major championship title Sting had won since 1999. With that victory, Sting became the oldest NWA World Heavyweight Champion of the TNA era, as well as the only person to ever win the title both before and after the inception of TNA. This would also go on to make Sting the longest superstar to recapture his second NWA title from 1990 to 2006 (16 years).

Sting lost the title to Abyss on November 19 at Genesis by disqualification after pushing aside the referee and pushing Abyss into a stack of tables covered in barbed wire. In the weeks following Genesis, Sting&#x27;s feud with Abyss continued and Christian Cage was involved, leading to a three-way match for the NWA World Heavyweight Championship on December 10 at Turning Point, where Abyss retained the title.

==== TNA World Heavyweight Champion (2007–2008) ====
Sting continued his feud with Abyss while trying to recapture the NWA World Heavyweight Championship, facing him at Final Resolution on January 14, 2007, Against All Odds on February 11 and Destination X on March 11 in a Last Rites match, but he never claimed the title. Also, Abyss and Sting were placed in different teams in the Lethal Lockdown match at Lockdown on April 15. Sting, with the help of Jeff Jarrett, pinned Abyss to win the match for his team and end their bitter rivalry.

At Sacrifice on May 13, a match between Sting, Kurt Angle and NWA World Champion Christian Cage was booked. However, on the day of Sacrifice, the National Wrestling Alliance (NWA), the owners of the NWA World Heavyweight and the NWA World Tag Team Championships, stripped Cage of the world title and Team 3D of the tag team titles. NWA Executive Director Robert K. Trobich stated the reason was that Cage refused to defend the NWA Title at NWA live events. At Sacrifice, Cage, still holding the physical NWA Championship belt, defended what was billed as the &quot;World Heavyweight Championship&quot; against Sting and Angle. Angle was the victor of said contest by making Sting submit, and was announced as the new &quot;TNA World Heavyweight Champion&quot;. The &quot;Impact!&quot; following the event, the title was labelled as the &quot;TNA World Heavyweight Championship&quot;, but the title was vacated. A tournament was then held for the title which culminated in a King of the Mountain match at Slammiversary on June 17. Sting lost his qualifying match with Samoa Joe after Christopher Daniels interfered. Sting instead faced Daniels at Slammiversary, which he ultimately won.

After his feud with Daniels, Sting began teaming up with his former enemy, Abyss, who had recently turned face. Together, the two went on to defeat AJ Styles and Tomko on July 15 at Victory Road. While trying to help Abyss win a match against Styles, Sting and Abyss were attacked by Christian&#x27;s Coalition. Abyss was pulled under the ring and Sting was slammed into broken glass by Tomko, before Abyss emerged bleeding profusely, before being slammed into the broken glass and thumbtacks. The following week, Sting and Abyss got revenge by defeating Christian and Styles in a ladder match, in the process earning a contract that allowed them to pick the type of match between Abyss and Christian at Hard Justice on August 12. Sting&#x27;s team won in a &quot;Doomsday Chamber of Blood&quot; match, with Abyss pinning Styles to become the number one contender for the TNA World Heavyweight Championship.

After that, Sting started a feud with the TNA World Heavyweight Champion Kurt Angle. First, on the August 30 episode of &quot;Impact!&quot; Sting defeated Styles, Christian Cage, and Samoa Joe in a four-way match to become the co-holder of the TNA World Tag Team Championship with Angle, but lost it 10 days later against Adam &quot;Pacman&quot; Jones and Ron Killings at No Surrender on September 9. Sting would face Angle for the TNA World Heavyweight Championship at Bound for Glory on October 14, where Sting won his first TNA World Heavyweight Championship. However, he would lose the title back to Angle just eleven days later on &quot;Impact!,&quot; when Kevin Nash interfered on Angle&#x27;s behalf. Sting would face Angle and Nash at Genesis on November 11, with the debutant Booker T as his mystery partner. As per the stipulation, whoever scored the pinfall in the match would win the TNA World Heavyweight Championship, which Angle won after pinning Sting to retain the TNA World Heavyweight Championship. This would be the final TNA appearance of Sting in 2007, as he would take some time off to be with his family.

Sting then made his official return on the March 27, 2008 live episode of &quot;Impact!&quot;. At Lockdown on April 13, he teamed with Team Cage (Christian Cage, Kevin Nash, Rhino, and Matt Morgan) and defeated Team Tomko (Tomko, AJ Styles, James Storm, and Team 3D). After the TNA World Tag Team Championship was vacated, Jim Cornette held a Deuces Wild Tag Team Tournament to determine the new champions. Four teams were already in the Sacrifice finals, while Cornette named eight wrestlers as the &quot;Egotistical 8&quot;. Sting&#x27;s partner was James Storm and on May 11 at Sacrifice on May 11, they came up short due to their inability to get along, and towards the end, Sting attacked Storm and walked out. Sting was not seen after that except in an interview which talked about his career and his eventual retirement.
On July 13 at Victory Road, Booker T faced Samoa Joe for the TNA World Heavyweight Championship. During the match, Sting tried to talk sense into Joe, as he was brutally beating Booker T, and was potentially heading towards a disqualification. Joe rebuked him, and Sting struck him with his trademark black baseball bat. Over the coming weeks, the feud between Joe and Booker intensified, with episodes ending with either Booker T or Sharmell striking Samoa Joe with Sting&#x27;s trademark bat as &quot;Impact!&quot; went off the air, leading to a question of whether or not Sting had turned on Samoa Joe and became a heel. Although still receiving a face reaction from the fans, Sting sided with Booker T. On August 10 at Hard Justice, Sting attacked Styles after he and Kurt Angle wrestled a Last Man Standing match.

==== The Main Event Mafia (2008–2009) ====
On October 12 at Bound for Glory IV, Sting defeated Samoa Joe to win the TNA World Heavyweight Championship after Kevin Nash returned and hit Joe with Sting&#x27;s baseball bat. After Bound for Glory, Sting, along with Kurt Angle, Booker T, Kevin Nash and Scott Steiner created The Main Event Mafia, a stable formed by veterans and former World Champions. The faction feuded with younger wrestlers, dubbed the TNA Frontline. Sting defended the title against Frontline&#x27;s AJ Styles at Turning Point on November 9 and Rhino on January 11, 2009 at Genesis. Sting also feuded with the leader of The Main Event Mafia Kurt Angle. At Against All Odds on February 8, Sting defended the title against Angle, Brother Ray and Brother Devon. He then faced off with Angle in a singles match at Destination X on March 15. At Lockdown on April 19, Sting lost the TNA World Heavyweight Championship to Mick Foley inside the Six Sides of Steel, ending his reign at 189 days (his longest world title reign for any organization). On May 24 at Sacrifice, Sting defeated Kurt Angle to become the new &quot;godfather&quot; of the Main Event Mafia. On June 21 at Slammiversary, Sting defeated Matt Morgan in a singles match, thus preventing Morgan from joining the Main Event Mafia. On the following episode of &quot;Impact!&quot;, Sting&#x27;s fellow Main Event Mafia members attacked him, removing him from the group, and Kurt Angle reclaimed his role as &quot;godfather&quot;. The following week, Sting took his revenge upon the Mafia, when he attacked every member of the group and stole Angle&#x27;s world heavyweight championship belt, becoming a full-fledged face as a result. On July 19 at Victory Road, Sting was defeated by new Main Event Mafia member Samoa Joe in a singles match after the debuting Taz interfered on Joe&#x27;s behalf. On August 16 at Hard Justice, Sting unsuccessfully challenged Angle for the TNA World Heavyweight Championship in a triple threat match, which also included Matt Morgan. On September 20 at No Surrender, Sting lost a five-way match for the TNA World Heavyweight Championship that also included AJ Styles, Hernandez, Kurt Angle, and Matt Morgan. Instead of pinning Angle, he opted to attack Morgan, allowing Styles to pin Angle and become the new TNA World Heavyweight Champion. As a token of gratitude, Styles offered to give him a title shot at the following month&#x27;s PPV Bound for Glory on October 18 in a match billed as possibly being Sting&#x27;s retirement match. At Bound for Glory, Styles defeated Sting to retain his title, ending Sting&#x27;s undefeated streak at Bound for Glory. After the match, Sting announced that he didn&#x27;t know whether he would continue his career or not, saying that &quot;the way you fans are reacting right now, makes me wanna stay forever!&quot; At the end of the year, the match was voted the match of the year by the fans of TNA.

==== Feud with Immortal (2010–2011) ====
On the January 4, 2010, live-three-hour, Monday night episode of &quot;Impact!,&quot; Sting returned to the Impact! Zone appearing in the rafters of the arena. Sting reappeared two months later on the March 8 episode of &quot;Impact!&quot;, attacking Hulk Hogan and Abyss during a match against AJ Styles and Ric Flair, turning heel as a result. He was later defeated by the debuting Rob Van Dam. During the following months, Sting would join other heel wrestlers against face wrestlers like Van Dam, Jarrett or Hogan. At Lockdown on April 18, Team Flair (formed by Sting, Desmond Wolfe, Robert Roode and James Storm) were defeated by Team Hogan (Abyss, Jeff Jarrett, Rob Van Dam and Jeff Hardy). After defeating Jeff Jarrett at Sacrifice on May 16, Sting faced Rob Van Dam for the TNA World Heavyweight Championship at Slammiversary VIII on June 13. However, during the match, Jarrett made his return and cost Sting the title.

After assaulting Jarrett from behind on the June 24 episode of &quot;Impact!&quot;, TNA president Dixie Carter (storyline) suspended Sting for 30 days. When he returned, Sting changed his gimmick, wearing his nWo Wolfpac red face paint, and was paired with Kevin Nash. They would start a feud with Jeff Jarrett and Samoa Joe, facing them No Surrender on September 5 and Bound for Glory on October 10, where Sting, Nash and D&#x27;Angelo Dinero defeated Jarrett and Joe after Jarrett turned heel by leaving the ring and having Joe wrestle alone. At the end of Bound for Glory, it was revealed that Sting had been right about Hogan and Bischoff all along, as they turned heel along with Jarrett and Jeff Hardy as Abyss&#x27;s &quot;they&quot;. This consequentially turned Sting, Nash and Dinero back to being faces. On the October 14 episode of &quot;Impact!&quot;, Sting and Nash refused to join Hogan, Bischoff and their new group, Immortal. After the promo, they walked out on TNA, although Nash had legitimately left TNA. Borden took a hiatus from TNA television, as his contract had expired at the end of 2010.

Sting returned on the March 3, 2011 episode of &quot;Impact!&quot;, where he appeared as a surprise challenger and defeated Immortal&#x27;s Jeff Hardy to win the TNA World Heavyweight Championship for the third time, debuting a new hybrid attire paying homage to his Surfer, Crow and Wolfpac attires. On March 13 at Victory Road, Sting successfully defended the title against Hardy in a No Disqualification rematch that lasted 90 seconds. According to word from backstage, the match was planned to last longer, but it was cut short after Hardy was deemed too intoxicated to wrestle. Sting was later heard agreeing with a fan&#x27;s claim that the match was &quot;bullshit&quot;. The following month at Lockdown on April 17, Sting successfully defended the title against Mr. Anderson and Rob Van Dam in a three-way steel cage match, against Van Dam at Sacrifice on May 15, and against Anderson at Slammiversary IX on June 12, where he lost the title following outside interference from Eric Bischoff.
Over the next few weeks, Sting began displaying a more maniacal character similar in look and style to Heath Ledger&#x27;s portrayal of the Joker from the 2008 film &quot;The Dark Knight&quot;. On the July 14 episode of &quot;Impact Wrestling&quot;, Sting, now dubbed as the &quot;Insane Icon&quot;, regained the TNA World Heavyweight Championship from Mr. Anderson after Fortune and Kurt Angle, disguised as his clown minions, attacked each member of Immortal, preventing them from interfering in the match. He would go on to lose the title to Kurt Angle on August 7 at Hardcore Justice, after Angle hit him with a chair that was brought to the ring by Hulk Hogan. Sting continued tormenting members of Immortal with his strange new personality, and on the August 18 episode of &quot;Impact Wrestling&quot;, his longtime rival Ric Flair made his return to TNA and challenged him to a match. Sting agreed to put his career on the line in the match in exchange for Flair promising to deliver him his long-awaited match with Hogan, should he be able to defeat him. On the September 1 episode of &quot;Impact Wrestling&quot;, Sting received a rematch against Angle for the TNA World Heavyweight Championship, but was defeated following interference from special enforcer Hulk Hogan and the rest of Immortal. On September 11 at No Surrender, Hogan once again cost Sting the TNA World Heavyweight Championship in a three-way match, which also included Mr. Anderson. On the September 15 episode of &quot;Impact Wrestling&quot;, Sting defeated longtime rival Ric Flair to earn the right to face Hogan at Bound for Glory on October 16. On the October 6 episode of &quot;Impact Wrestling&quot;, after being exposed for his false claim of retiring and his secret ridicule of the fans, a furious Hogan impulsively agreed to hand TNA back to Dixie Carter, should Sting manage to defeat him at Bound for Glory. At Bound for Glory, Sting defeated Hogan to bring Dixie Carter back to power. After the match, Hogan turned on Immortal and helped Sting overcome the odds in his battle with the stable. On the following episode of &quot;Impact Wrestling&quot;, Carter placed Sting in charge of the program. Sting returned to the ring on the December 22 and February 9, 2012, episode of &quot;Impact Wrestling&quot;, where he teamed up with Jeff Hardy to defeat TNA World Heavyweight Champion Bobby Roode and Bully Ray.

==== Final feuds and departure (2012–2014) ====
During the first months of 2012, Sting feuded with the TNA World Heavyweight Champion Bobby Roode. He was defeated by Roode at Victory Road in a non-title No Holds Barred match, and at Slammiversary in a title match. During this time, he also left the General Manager position in favor of Hulk Hogan, signed a new contract extension with TNA and was announced as the first inductee into the TNA Hall of Fame.
His next feud was against a newly formed masked faction called &quot;Aces &amp; Eights&quot;, where he was appointed as the interim general manager after Hogan took a hiatus due to a back injury. The feud led to a match at Bound for Glory alongside Bully Ray, where they were defeated by the Aces &amp; Eights, following interference from a man who was afterwards unmasked as Ray&#x27;s longtime partner, the returning Devon. As a result of their win, the Aces &amp; Eights earned full access to TNA. On the following episode of &quot;Impact Wrestling&quot;, Sting defeated Devon via disqualification, following interference from the Aces &amp; Eights. On the November 8 episode of &quot;Impact Wrestling&quot;, Sting was sidelined with a storyline injury, after being put through a table and beaten with a ball-peen hammer by DOC, a member of Aces &amp; Eights.

Sting returned on the January 3, 2013, episode of &quot;Impact Wrestling&quot;, saving Kurt Angle and Samoa Joe from Aces &amp; Eights before beating the group down with a baseball bat. Sting wrestled his return match the following week, defeating Aces &amp; Eights member Mike Knox after he injured Kurt Angle. Three days later at Genesis, Sting gained his revenge on DOC by defeating him in a singles match. On the February 7 episode of &quot;Impact Wrestling&quot;, Sting teamed up with Bully Ray to defeat Devon and DOC in a Tables match. On March 10 at Lockdown, Team TNA, consisting of Sting, Eric Young, James Storm, Magnus, and Samoa Joe defeated Aces &amp; Eights, consisting of Devon, DOC, Garett Bischoff, Mike Knox, and Mr. Anderson in a Lethal Lockdown match. After Bully Ray won the TNA World Heavyweight Championship and revealed himself as the president of Aces &amp; Eights later that night, Hulk Hogan blamed Sting, as he had encouraged Hogan to give Ray the title shot, while also encouraging Hogan to support Ray&#x27;s marriage with his daughter Brooke. Sting then proceeded to walk out on Hogan. Sting returned on the April 25 &quot;Impact Wrestling&quot;, saving Hogan from an attack by the Aces &amp; Eights. The following week, Sting reconciled with Hogan and became the number one contender to the TNA World Heavyweight Championship later that night after defeating Matt Morgan. On June 2 at Slammiversary XI, Sting unsuccessfully challenged Bully Ray for the TNA World Heavyweight Championship in a No Holds Barred Match after an interference by Aces &amp; Eights. Per stipulation, Sting would never get another title opportunity again.

On the June 13 episode of &quot;Impact Wrestling&quot;, Sting noted that nobody in the back helped him during his title match, but he would form a New Main Event Mafia to battle the Aces &amp; Eights. In the following weeks, Sting would recruit Kurt Angle, Samoa Joe, Magnus, and Rampage Jackson as members of the New Main Event Mafia. Before Bound for Glory, MEM member Magnus complained to Sting because of his constant losses. Magnus was told by Sting he had Flair to put him on the map, but Magnus had nobody, so Sting challenged him to a match at Bound for Glory, seemingly as a way to pass the torch. At Bound for Glory, Sting was defeated by Magnus. On the October 31 episode of &quot;Impact Wrestling&quot;, Dixie Carter offered to lift the lifetime ban so Sting can get another World title opportunity again by entering him first in a Battle Royal Gauntlet match, which was won by Magnus as Sting attempted to eliminate Kazarian, and Magnus eliminated the both of them. Sting then disbanded The Main Event Mafia after Aces &amp; Eights disbanded, and while other members began to chase their TNA World Heavyweight Championship dreams, Sting started a feud against Ethan Carter III and Dixie Carter after they began humiliating TNA Legends, like Curry Man and Earl Hebner at the behest of Carter. On the December 12 episode of &quot;Impact Wrestling&quot;, Carter was confronted by Sting, and was issued an ultimatum: either face Sting immediately, or enter the Feast or Fired match. Carter entered the Feast or Fired match, and grabbed one of the briefcases. On the December 19 episode of &quot;Impact Wrestling&quot;, the Feast or Fired briefcase revealed to contain a future TNA World Tag Team Championship match, and also led to the firing of Chavo Guerrero. On the January 16, 2014 episode of &quot;Impact Wrestling: Genesis&quot;, Sting lost a match to Ethan Carter III, due to interference from the TNA World Heavyweight Champion Magnus and subsequently challenged Magnus to a Title vs. Career match for the January 23 episode of &quot;Impact Wrestling: Genesis&quot;, which Sting lost, and his TNA contract was terminated as a result.

At Slammiversary, on June 19, 2022, Sting appeared in a video message to congratulate Impact Wrestling, which had changed its name from TNA in 2017, on their 20th anniversary.

=== WWE (2014–2020)===
==== Pre-debut appearances (2014) ====
Veteran professional wrestling journalist Bill Apter chronicled Sting&#x27;s career in a piece for WWE.com on February 19, 2014, wherein he stated that Sting&#x27;s &quot;best days may still be yet to come&quot;. He appeared in a WWE Network production on April 15, 2014, sharing a story of his former tag team partner The Ultimate Warrior, who had recently died. This marked Sting&#x27;s first non-archive appearance on a WWE-branded show. Sting was a prominent contributor to the documentary film &quot;Warrior: The Ultimate Legend&quot;, which premiered on the WWE Network on April 17. The following day, online retailer Zavvi announced the upcoming WWE Home Video DVD and Blu-ray release &quot;The Best of Sting&quot;. The three-disc set released on September 23, 2014. On July 14, Sting appeared in a vignette on &quot;Raw&quot; to promote the video game &quot;WWE 2K15&quot;, in which he was featured as a pre-order bonus character in both his &#x27;Crow&#x27; and &#x27;Surfer&#x27; (pre-1996) incarnations. That same day, WWE began selling official Sting merchandise. On July 24, Borden made his first public appearance for WWE, in full Sting garb, as a special surprise guest at the 2014 San Diego Comic-Con. The event was held to announce WWE&#x27;s upcoming line of Mattel action figures, in which the company&#x27;s first-ever Sting figure would appear. Prior to that appearance, Sting gave his first interview with WWE.com, which was released later that day. On August 4, WWE announced Sting as a guest on the &quot;WWE 2K15&quot; &quot;Roster Reveal&quot; panel, which took place on August 16 in Los Angeles.

==== Feud with The Authority (2014–2015) ====

On November 23, during the main event of Survivor Series, Sting made his first-ever appearance in a WWE ring by attacking Triple H with a Scorpion Death Drop and also costing Team Authority the match. On January 19, 2015, Sting made his live &quot;Raw&quot; debut by appearing backstage during the main event, before walking to the stage, causing a distraction that cost Authority members Big Show, Kane, and Seth Rollins their handicap match against John Cena; this win gave the recently fired Dolph Ziggler, Ryback, and Erick Rowan their collective jobs back. Triple H then challenged Sting to a face-to-face confrontation on the February 2 episode of &quot;Raw&quot;. Sting accepted this challenge on the February 9 episode by sending a Sting doppelganger into the ring to scare Triple H, after airing a vignette on the big screen accepting Triple H&#x27;s challenge. Sting and Triple H had a confrontation at Fastlane on February 22. Following some slight physicality between the two, Sting pointed to the WrestleMania 31 sign with his baseball bat, issuing a challenge for the event that was accepted by Triple H. On the March 16 episode of &quot;Raw&quot;, Sting made yet another surprise appearance, helping Randy Orton fight off The Authority. Immediately following the television broadcast on USA Network, Sting spoke for the first time in-ring, the clip of which was then available to view on the WWE Network. Sting lost at WrestleMania 31 in a match involving interference from members of both D-Generation X (DX) and the New World Order (nWo), but shook hands with Triple H afterward.

Sting returned on the August 24 episode of &quot;Raw&quot;, challenging Seth Rollins for the WWE World Heavyweight Championship at Night of Champions. Sting defeated Big Show by disqualification in his first match on &quot;Raw&quot;, as a consequence of Rollins attacking Sting. That same night, a second match was booked with John Cena and Sting defeating Show and Rollins. At Night of Champions, Sting was defeated by Rollins and experienced a legit neck injury after a turnbuckle powerbomb. Sting later told Bill Apter that he does not blame Rollins for his injury, describing the incident as a &quot;freak accident&quot;.

==== Hall of Fame and first retirement (2016–2020) ====
It was announced on the January 11, 2016, episode of &quot;Raw&quot; that Sting would be the first member of the WWE Hall of Fame Class of 2016. Sting ultimately reneged on having surgery; on March 22, 2016, he explained that he felt &quot;completely normal&quot; and had none of the side effects commonly associated with cervical spinal stenosis. On April 2, during his WWE Hall of Fame induction speech, Sting announced his first retirement from professional wrestling. He appeared at WrestleMania 32, alongside his fellow 2016 inductees, the following night.

In August 2016, Sting appeared on the WWE Network show &quot;Legends with JBL&quot; and talked about his career. He also stated that he had still not undergone surgery, which would definitively end his career, and he still held hope for a match with The Undertaker, claiming that such a match is his &quot;unfinished business&quot; in wrestling. However, the match would never happen as despite Sting pitching the idea for a cinematic match with The Undertaker, it was never approved, and The Undertaker himself officially retired in 2020.

On the February 25, 2019, episode of &quot;Raw&quot;, Sting made his first appearance on WWE television since 2016 for the 70th birthday celebration of Ric Flair, but Flair was attacked by Batista before he could make it to the ring. This would end up being Sting&#x27;s final appearance for the company, other than interviews recorded for WWE Network.

In May 2020, it was reported that Sting was no longer under WWE contract. In October 2020, WWE stopped selling Sting merchandise and pulled his page from WWE Shop.

=== All Elite Wrestling (2020–present) ===
====First appearances (2020–2021)====
On December 2, 2020, Sting made his All Elite Wrestling (AEW) debut after a tag team match that pitted Cody Rhodes and Darby Allin against Powerhouse Hobbs and Ricky Starks at &quot;Dynamite&quot;: Winter Is Coming. This marked his first appearance on TNT since defeating his long-time rival Ric Flair in the final episode of &quot;WCW Monday Nitro&quot; in nearly 20 years on March 26, 2001. After Sting rescued Rhodes and Allin from Hobbs and Starks, he silently checked on each of the four individuals remaining in the ring: his former Four Horsemen rival Arn Anderson, Dustin Rhodes, Cody Rhodes, who had idolized Sting as a child, and Allin.

It was later announced that Sting had officially signed a multi-year contract with AEW. AEW also began selling Sting merchandise. On the December 9 episode of &quot;Dynamite&quot;, Sting spoke for the first time on TNT in nearly 20 years, confirming to Cody Rhodes he was &quot;signed officially with AEW&quot;.

====Teaming with Darby Allin (2021–2023)====

Following his debut with AEW, Sting aligned himself with Allin, and on January 21, 2021, it was announced that Sting would team with Allin against Team Taz (Brian Cage and Ricky Starks) in a Street Fight at Revolution on March 7, marking Sting&#x27;s first match since September 2015, thus coming out of retirement. Sting and Allin won the match, which was pre-taped on location.

Sting and Allin again teamed up and defeated the team of Scorpio Sky and Ethan Page at AEW&#x27;s marquee event Double or Nothing on May 30, 2021, which was done live in front of a full capacity crowd after Florida lifted its COVID-19 protocols. Sting had initially planned to only appear in cinematic matches for AEW, but Allin convinced him to compete in live events beginning with Double or Nothing, which was his first live match in front of a crowd since WWE Night of Champions in 2015.

On the August 18, 2021, episode of &quot;Dynamite&quot;, Sting wrestled on TNT for the first time in 20 years as he and Allin teamed up at the Fertitta Center in Houston, Texas to defeat 2point0 (Jeff Parker and Matt Lee). On the January 19, 2022, episode, Sting appeared on TBS for the first time in over 20 years (since his last appearance in a November 2000 episode of &quot;WCW Thunder&quot;). During the event, which was held in the Entertainment and Sports Arena in Washington D.C., he and Allin teamed up to defeat The Acclaimed (Anthony Bowens and Max Caster). At &quot;Dynamite&quot;: Holiday Bash, Sting, Allin, and CM Punk defeated The Pinnacle (MJF, Cash Wheeler, and Dax Harwood) in what was Sting&#x27;s (and Punk&#x27;s) first AEW main event match. At Revolution, Sting would win a Tornado tag team match with Sammy Guevara and Allin over Andrade El Idolo, Matt Hardy, and Isiah Kassidy.

Sting and Allin appeared at AEW x NJPW: Forbidden Door, an event co-promoted by AEW and New Japan Pro-Wrestling (NJPW), on June 28, 2022, where they teamed with &quot;Los Ingobernables de Japon&quot; member Shingo Takagi in a six-man tag team match in which they defeated Bullet Club members The Young Bucks (Matt Jackson and Nick Jackson) and El Phantasmo. Hiromu Takahashi was intended to take part in the match as part of Sting&#x27;s team, but was unable to travel to the United States due to an illness, and the match was reconfigured. At All Out, Sting, Allin, and Miro defeated the House of Black (Malakai Black, Brody King, and Buddy Matthews) in another six-man tag team match. At &quot;Rampage&quot;: Grand Slam, Sting and Darby Allin defeated the House of Black (King and Matthews). During the Grand Slam match, Sting&#x27;s long-time in-ring rival The Great Muta made a surprise appearance to rescue Sting from an attack by Matthews. At Full Gear, Sting and Allin defeated Jeff Jarrett and Jay Lethal.

As a result of Muta appearing in AEW to help Sting at &quot;Rampage&quot;: Grand Slam in September 2022, Sting then took part in The Great Muta Final &quot;Bye-Bye&quot; on January 22, 2023, marking Sting&#x27;s only Pro Wrestling Noah appearance where he teamed with Allin and Muta in Muta&#x27;s final match. Sting, Allin, and Muta defeated Akira, Hakushi, and Naomichi Marufuji in a trios match.

At Forbidden Door on June 25, 2023, Sting, Allin, and Tetsuya Naito defeated the team of Chris Jericho, Sammy Guevara, and Minoru Suzuki.

In the summer of 2023, Sting and Allin entered into a feud with the Mogul Embassy stable, after Allin&#x27;s longtime friend AR Fox turned heel, attacked Allin, and joined Allin&#x27;s rival Swerve Strickland in the group on the July 26 &quot;Dynamite&quot;. Sting appeared as his &quot;Joker&quot; persona on the August 16 &quot;Dynamite&quot; in a segment featuring Mogul Embassy member Prince Nana. The next day, Sting and Allin made a surprise appearance at a World Wrestling Alliance 4 show in Atlanta to attack Fox. Sting, Allin, and Nick Wayne saved Fox from an attack by Strickland and Brian Cage on the August 23 &quot;Dynamite&quot; after Fox was fired from Mogul Embassy, and Allin and Fox reconciled. Sting (with his &quot;Joker&quot; persona) and Allin defeated Strickland and Christian Cage in a coffin match at All In on August 27, 2023.

In the fall of 2023, Sting and Allin feuded with Christian Cage and Luchasaurus. At WrestleDream on October 1, Wayne betrayed Sting and Allin and joined Cage&#x27;s group. Sting and Allin were then attacked by Cage, Luchasaurus, and Wayne, but were saved by Adam Copeland in his AEW debut.

==== Final matches and second retirement (2023–2024)====

On the October 18, 2023, episode of &quot;Dynamite&quot;, Sting announced that he would be retiring from in-ring competition in 2024, with his final match to be held at Revolution on March 3 that year. On the October 25 episode of &quot;Dynamite&quot;, Sting&#x27;s longtime NWA and WCW rival Ric Flair made his debut for AEW as a surprise gift from AEW co-owner and president Tony Khan, with Flair saying he would be in Sting&#x27;s corner for his final match. Sting, Allin, and Copeland then defeated Cage, Wayne, and Luchasaurus in a six-man tag team match at Full Gear on November 18.

On the February 7, 2024, episode of &quot;Dynamite&quot;, Sting and Allin defeated Ricky Starks and Big Bill to win the AEW World Tag Team Championship. This marked Sting&#x27;s first championship since his final run with the TNA World Championship in 2011. After winning the tag team title, Sting and Allin were attacked by The Young Bucks (now individually preferring to be called Matthew and Nicholas Jackson). The Young Bucks then became the number one contenders for the title, with Sting and Allin scheduled to defend the AEW World Tag Team Championship against them in a tornado tag team match at Revolution for Sting&#x27;s retirement match.

Sting and Allin defeated The Young Bucks in Sting&#x27;s final match at Revolution to retain their tag team titles. Sting won the match for his team after Matthew Jackson submitted to the Scorpion Death Lock. The Revolution event that included the match was held at the Greenboro Coliseum in Greensboro, North Carolina, where Sting had fought Flair to a 45-minute time-limit draw at Clash of the Champions I in 1988. The match featured Ricky Steamboat as guest timekeeper, and run-ins from Flair and Sting&#x27;s sons Garrett and Steven Jr., who were dressed as their father&#x27;s Surfer and Wolfpac personas. Several of Sting&#x27;s former WCW and NWA colleagues attended the match, including Nikita Koloff, Lex Luger, Magnum T.A., and Diamond Dallas Page.

Sting retired with an undefeated record in AEW, having won all 29 matches he competed in for the promotion. As a result of Sting&#x27;s retirement, the AEW World Tag Team Championship was vacated, ending he and Allin&#x27;s reign at 25 days. At the post-show media scrum, Sting expressed interest in having talks about staying in AEW in a non-wrestling role but was not interested in becoming a manager or an agent.

==== Sporadic appearances (2024–present) ====
At All In on August 25, 2024, Sting made his first post-retirement appearance. After Darby Allin had lost his Coffin match to Jack Perry, The Elite (Matthew Jackson, Nicholas Jackson, and Perry) were about to set the coffin that Allin was in on fire. Sting then made a surprise appearance to save Allin and took out The Elite, hitting a double Scorpion Deathdrop on the Jacksons before freeing Allin from the coffin. In October 2024, Sting announced that he had signed a new multi-year contract with AEW on a &quot;Legends deal&quot;.

== Legacy and influence ==
Sting is widely regarded as the greatest performer in WCW history. Former rival Hulk Hogan asserted that Sting should be mentioned in any conversation regarding the top 10 greatest pro wrestlers of all time; numerous outlets have placed him in such listings. Digital Spy writer Mayer Nissim commended Sting&#x27;s ability to constantly evolve his gimmick while fellow franchise players Hulk Hogan and John Cena largely failed to do so, in order to maintain spectator interest. Borden is known for his charity work, once regarding his involvement with the Make-A-Wish and Starlight Children&#x27;s Foundations as his &quot;most fulfilling activity&quot;. Prior to his signing with WWE, Sting&#x27;s legacy was perpetuated by the organization. It hailed him as &quot;one of sports-entertainment&#x27;s elite&quot;, and ranked him at number one in listings of the greatest wrestlers to never perform in WWE, and the greatest stars in WCW history. In 2013, the company named Sting&#x27;s WCW World Heavyweight Championship contest against Diamond Dallas Page, on April 26, 1999, as the greatest match ever aired on WCW&#x27;s flagship &quot;Monday Nitro&quot; program. At Night of Champions 2013, WWE organized a viewer poll to determine the greatest United States Champion of all time: Sting, a two-time champion, beat out the other four contenders – all WWE Hall of Famers – in a landslide victory with 53% of the overall vote. In regard to Sting&#x27;s creative handling after he signed with WWE, &quot;PWInsider&quot; editor Dave Scherer wrote that &quot;he really represented WCW so he was never going to get that [legend] treatment&quot;.

Sting was the inaugural inductee into the TNA Hall of Fame. TNA president Dixie Carter credits Sting with being the major wrestling superstar that TNA needed to establish itself. The company describes him as having had an &quot;unparalleled career&quot; and as being a legend who surpasses time.

Sting was regarded by colleagues in WCW as a professional and well-respected locker room leader. Prominent adversary Big Van Vader felt that Sting had unsurpassed athletic prowess within the business, and &quot;ranks right up at the top&quot; as an in-ring performer. Ric Flair called Sting his greatest opponent. Former rival Diamond Dallas Page, commenting on Sting&#x27;s entry into WWE in 2014, said: &quot;Everyone there grew up watching him... No one did it better than Sting, nobody&quot;.

John Cena mimicked Sting&#x27;s hairstyle in his younger years and recalled, &quot;he was my guy&quot;; Seth Rollins would dress up as Sting in his youth. Tommy Dreamer told how he &quot;wanted to be Sting&quot;—a sentiment shared by Jeff Hardy. Cody Rhodes and Shelton Benjamin named him their favorite childhood wrestler, while Tyson Kidd professed to being &quot;a huge Sting fan as a kid&quot;. He was also a prominent influence on industry veterans Kurt Angle, Bill Goldberg, Kane, A. J. Styles and Dustin Rhodes/Goldust. Bray Wyatt said that he &quot;&quot;really&quot; would like to take on&quot; Sting, adding: &quot;I have to have [that] before I die; I don&#x27;t care if it happens outside a Waffle House, somewhere.&quot;

Sting&#x27;s comeback run with AEW was acclaimed by wrestling journalists, with some expressing surprise at his predilection for high-flying spots despite his age. Lauren Theisen of &quot;Defector&quot; observed, &quot;In the two-dozen or so matches he performed in front of live fans for the company, Sting became something of a reincarnated daredevil, taking as many cues from [Darby] Allin&#x27;s stuntshow fearlessness as the younger man was supposed to be taking from him.&quot; Justin Henry of Cultaholic compared Sting&#x27;s work on 2021&#x27;s Double or Nothing as similar to his championship match against Ric Flair at 1990&#x27;s Great American Bash, in which he was also working following recovery from a serious injury. On Sting&#x27;s participation in a match at 2022&#x27;s Revolution, Sean Rueter of SB Nation wrote, &quot;The man is 62 years old, and could just be living off a WWE Legends deal and autograph signings. But he&#x27;s out here jumping off balconies onto Andrade El Idolo and crashing them both through three tables. I have no idea why The Man Called Sting continues to do this, but I assume it&#x27;s because he loves it.&quot; Mike Piellucci of &quot;D Magazine&quot; wrote, &quot;With everything Borden has accomplished since his return to television, the greatest is that he&#x27;s escaped becoming a nostalgia act. He can deliver most of his trademark maneuvers, and his physique has held up better, longer, than arguably anyone before him. The Stinger Splash recalls Jordan&#x27;s farewell tour with the Washington Wizards more than his soaring heyday with the Chicago Bulls, but it&#x27;s still credible. Sting still has it.&quot; After Sting&#x27;s retirement match, Rueter wrote, &quot;A timeless, ageless wonder, Sting redefined what a final run in wrestling could look like. A career that closed with a bang, not a whimper.&quot;

===Popularity===

Pro wrestling journalist Bill Apter wrote of Sting, &quot;His colorful face paint, piercing war cry and signature Stinger Splash electrified fans both young and old... he boasted one of the largest and most loyal fanbases of any in-ring personality in history.&quot; A young Jeff Hardy was overwhelmed by the crowd reaction to Sting, on whom fans were &quot;really hooked&quot;, and &quot;reaching out to want to know, and want to support.&quot; Then-WCW colleague Ric Flair recalled, &quot;When he flew out that door with that blonde hair and the paint, man, the chicks went crazy. The people went crazy.&quot; Former WCW and WWE announcer and current AEW announcer Jim Ross described Sting as &quot;truly one of the great stars of the 90s in &quot;any&quot; organization&quot;. He was voted by &quot;Pro Wrestling Illustrated&quot; readers as &quot;Most Popular Wrestler of the Year&quot; four times (a record shared with John Cena), for the years 1991, 1992, 1994 and 1997. His young supporters were known as the &quot;Little Stingers&quot;.

Former WCW booker Kevin Sullivan said of Sting&#x27;s rivalry with Flair: &quot;If I needed to draw a rating, Sting and Flair always drew. It was like [Muhammad] Ali and [Joe] Frazier&quot;. The &quot;Clash of the Champions I&quot; event in 1988, which aired opposite the WWF&#x27;s WrestleMania IV and was headlined by Sting vs. Flair, generated a record-setting 5.6 rating on TBS. The pair also main-evented The Great American Bash 1990, which was the NWA&#x27;s biggest pay-per-view success up to that point. Reflecting on Sting in the early 1990s, then-colleague Kevin Nash said: &quot;There weren&#x27;t many draws in WCW at that point, but he was one of them&quot;. Another of the company&#x27;s bookers, Mike Graham, asserted that Sting was a television ratings success during the Monday Night War; he was highly profitable in 1997, being WCW&#x27;s top merchandise seller (second only to the WWF&#x27;s Steve Austin overall) and, versus Hollywood Hogan, headlining the biggest-grossing pay-per-view event in the company&#x27;s history at Starrcade 1997. Sting went on to join the nWo Wolfpac stable, which dominated WCW&#x27;s merchandise sales at events in mid 1998. Discussing Sting&#x27;s entry into WWE in 2014, Kevin Nash said that he is &quot;so valuable to the company as a trademark&quot;. On December 3, 2020, Pro Wrestling Tees owner Ryan Barkan stated that Sting&#x27;s AEW t-shirt quickly broke the single day record for t-shirt sales.

On the other hand, &quot;Pro Wrestling Torch&quot; editor Wade Keller wrote that Sting was a &quot;valuable player during &quot;Nitro&quot;″s peak years&quot;, but not a &quot;consistent draw for WCW&quot;. Keller said Sting coasted on &quot;natural charisma and athletic ability&quot;, but also chided WCW, where Sting observed &quot;incompetence and political decision-making&quot;, and &quot;was never challenged to be better than he was because he didn&#x27;t have much competition&quot;. Fin Martin of &quot;Power Slam&quot; also felt that Sting&#x27;s box office successes in WCW were sporadic. Martin said Sting &quot;did not grow into the [NWA] champion&#x27;s role&quot;, but allowed that his prospects as franchise player were damaged by the &quot;story lines and booking techniques&quot; and the &quot;list of contenders&quot;. Wrestling journalist Dave Meltzer claimed that Sting was not a formidable draw, although this assertion was disputed by Sting&#x27;s former WCW colleague Steve Austin. Dave Scherer of &quot;PWInsider&quot; wrote that Sting &quot;didn&#x27;t draw huge&quot;, but is nevertheless an &quot;all-time great&quot;.

Sting&#x27;s AEW tag team partner Darby Allin said that Sting had transcended wrestling and had become part of popular culture; Allin remarked, &quot;You may not know any of the stuff he&#x27;s done, but you can see the face paint, and people will go, &#x27;Yo, that&#x27;s that wrestler guy.&#x27;&quot; AEW founder and booker Tony Khan, a fan of Sting since the 1980s, called him a &quot;real-life superhero.&quot;

=== Resistance to signing with WWE ===
Prior to his signing with WWE in 2014, Sting was widely considered the greatest wrestler never to perform for the company, although he had &quot;really good conversations&quot; with the promotion during his career. His loyalty to WCW, even in its dying days, has been noted. That organization was purchased by the WWF (now WWE) in 2001, and Sting&#x27;s contract with its parent company AOL Time Warner expired in 2002, but he still refused to make the jump, alternately attributing this to the WWF&#x27;s creative usage of former WCW talents and negative dealings with their attorneys. The company&#x27;s onerous live schedule and the content of its programming were also factors. Sting has, however, downplayed rumors of a difficult relationship with WWE.

Rather than sign with the WWF in 2002, Sting performed for smaller promotions, becoming the centerpiece of TNA by the mid-2000s. His pre-WWE career included &quot;dream&quot; matches against former WWF stars Hulk Hogan and Bret Hart in WCW, as well as bouts opposite names such as Ric Flair, Randy Savage, Kurt Angle and Mick Foley. Sting often wrestled Steve Austin in WCW; he had positive negotiations with WWE in 2003, with his proposed debut angle being a confrontation with Austin at the conclusion of WrestleMania XIX.

He was also &quot;very, very close&quot; to making a deal with the company in 2011, which would potentially have involved a match against The Undertaker at WrestleMania XXVII. In early 2011, during a period where Sting had not re-signed with TNA, WWE teased a mystery wrestler to appear on &quot;Monday Night Raw&quot; on February 21, 2011, with vignettes labelled &quot;2.21.11&quot;. This led to speculation that Sting had signed with WWE. Since this &quot;Raw&quot; was billed as the &quot;Return of the Undertaker&quot;, it was believed that this was building a Sting vs. Undertaker match at WrestleMania XXVII. Although Sting wrestled Mark Calaway in his pre-Undertaker character, &quot;Mean&quot; Mark Callous, at untelevised WCW live events in 1990, WWE viewers clamored for a televised Sting vs. Undertaker match. Ultimately, Sting re-signed with TNA, and on the February 21, 2011 &quot;Raw&quot;, the Undertaker returned to begin a feud with Triple H. TNA then began airing similar vignettes labelled &quot;3.3.11&quot;, building to Sting&#x27;s real return on the March 3, 2011 episode of &quot;Impact!&quot;.

== Other media ==

Borden appeared in the music video for the song &quot;Fire in the Hole&quot; by Lȧȧz Rockit in 1989. He made his acting debut in the action-adventure show Super Force as an assassin. He starred in a pay-per-view only film titled &quot;The Real Reason (Men Commit Crimes)&quot; (1998). Borden was featured in a Sprite commercial in 1999. He also appeared in four episodes of the Hulk Hogan action-adventure series &quot;Thunder in Paradise&quot; as Adam &quot;Hammerhead&quot; McCall. Borden made a guest appearance on &quot;Walker, Texas Ranger&quot; as biker and drug dealer Grangus in the episode &quot;Unsafe Speed&quot;. He also appeared in &quot;Ready to Rumble&quot; (2000) as Sting. In 2001, Sting appeared on an episode of R.L. Stine&#x27;s show, &quot;The Nightmare Room&quot; in the episode titled &quot;Tangled Web&quot;. He also appeared in the Christian film, &quot;The Encounter&quot; (2011) and was featured as the lead actor in the TV movie &quot;Shutterspeed&quot; (2000). He makes a cameo appearance as Sting on an episode of &quot;Upright Citizens Brigade&quot;. Borden played an outlaw biker in the film &quot;Revelation Road&quot; (2013).

His autobiography, &quot;Sting: Moment Of Truth&quot;, was released on December 1, 2004. In October 2015, WWE released a second Sting DVD titled &quot;Sting: Into the Light&quot;. The three-disc set features a behind-the-scenes documentary with Sting himself as he prepares to step into a WWE ring for the first time ever at WrestleMania 31.

== Personal life ==
Borden was previously married to Sue Borden in 1986. They have two sons, Garrett Lee and Steven, Jr. and a daughter named Gracie, who was born in 2000. Borden and Sue divorced in 2010 after 24years of marriage. Borden married his second wife Sabine in 2015.

Borden was an admitted anabolic steroid user in the 1980s. He became a born-again Christian in August 1998 after confessing his adultery, and substance and alcohol abuse to his then-wife. His elder son Garrett attended Azusa Pacific University, where he played college football as a running back. Steven Jr. attended Kilgore College, where he played tight end; on December 19, 2012, he committed to attend the University of Kentucky. After the 2015 NFL draft, Steven Jr. was invited by the Kansas City Chiefs to try out for the team at their rookie mini-camp, but did not receive a contract offer.

Borden met the other famous performer called Sting, English musician Gordon &quot;Sting&quot; Sumner, in the early 1990s at one of the musician&#x27;s concerts in Atlanta. Sumner called Borden wanting to meet him after the former saw his then-nine-year-old son&#x27;s posters of the wrestler in his bedroom, to which Borden enthusiastically accepted.

== Championships and accomplishments ==

* All Elite Wrestling
** AEW World Tag Team Championship (1 time) – with Darby Allin
** AEW Dynamite Award (1 time)
*** &quot;Biggest Surprise&quot; (2021) – Debuting during the special &quot;Winter Is Coming&quot; episode of &quot;Dynamite&quot; on December 2, 2020
*Cauliflower Alley Club
**Iron Mike Mazurki Award (2024)
* Jim Crockett Promotions / World Championship Wrestling
** NWA World Television Championship (1 time)
** NWA World Heavyweight Championship (1 time)1
** WCW International World Heavyweight Championship (2 times)
** WCW United States Heavyweight Championship (2 times)
** WCW World Heavyweight Championship (6 times)
** WCW World Tag Team Championship (3 times) – with Lex Luger (1), The Giant (1), and Kevin Nash (1)
** Battlebowl Battle Royal (1991)
** European Cup (1994, 2000)
** Iron Man Tournament (1989)
** Jim Crockett, Sr. Memorial Cup (1988) – with Lex Luger
** King of Cable Tournament (1992)
** London Lethal Lottery Tag Team Tournament (2000) – with Scott Steiner
** WCW United States Championship Tournament (1991)
** WCW United States Championship Tournament (1995)
** World Cup of Wrestling (1995) – with Randy Savage, Lex Luger, Johnny B. Badd, Eddie Guerrero, Chris Benoit, and Alex Wright
** Third WCW Triple Crown Champion
* NWA: Total Nonstop Action / Total Nonstop Action Wrestling
** NWA World Heavyweight Championship (1 time)2
** TNA World Heavyweight Championship (4 times)
** TNA World Tag Team Championship (1 time) – with Kurt Angle
** TNA World Heavyweight Championship Tournament (First Bracket, 2009)
** TNA Hall of Fame (2012)
**TNA Year End Awards (3 times)
***Most Inspirational Wrestler of the Year (2007)
***Match of the Year (2007) 
***Match of the Year (2009) 
* Pro Wrestling Illustrated
** Comeback of the Year (2006, 2011, 2014)
** Match of the Year (1991) 
** Most Improved Wrestler of the Year (1988)
** Most Inspirational Wrestler of the Year (1990)
** Most Popular Wrestler of the Year (1991, 1992, 1994, 1997)
** Wrestler of the Year (1990)
**Stanley Weston Award for Lifetime Achievement (2023)
** Ranked No. 1 of the top 500 singles wrestlers in the &quot;PWI 500&quot; in 1992
** Ranked No. 15 of the top 500 singles wrestlers of the &quot;PWI Years&quot; in 2003
** Ranked No. 52 of the top 100 tag teams of the &quot;PWI Years&quot; with Lex Luger in 2003
*Professional Wrestling Hall of Fame
**Class of 2018
* Universal Wrestling Federation
** UWF World Tag Team Championship (3 times) – with Eddie Gilbert (2) and Rick Steiner (1)
* World Wrestling All-Stars
** WWA World Heavyweight Championship (1 time)
* Wrestling Observer Newsletter
** Match of the Year (1988) 
** Most Charismatic (1988, 1992)
** Most Improved (1988)
** Most Unimproved (1990)
** Best Babyface (1992)
** Worst Worked Match of the Year (1995) 
** Worst Worked Match of the Year (2011) 
** Wrestling Observer Newsletter Hall of Fame (Class of 2016)
* WWE
** WWE Hall of Fame (Class of 2016)
** Slammy Award (2 times)
*** &quot;This is Awesome&quot; Moment of the Year (2014) – Debuting to help Team Cena defeat Team Authority at Survivor Series
*** &quot;Surprise Return of the Year&quot; (2015) – as Seth Rollins&#x27; statue, and attacks Rollins on &quot;Raw&quot;

== See also ==
* Sting and Lex Luger
* The Blade Runners
* The Four Horsemen
* The Main Event Mafia
* The Varsity Club

== Notes ==
== References ==
== Further reading ==
* &quot;Sting: The Moment of Truth&quot;, Steve Borden with George King, Thomas Nelson, 2004, 

== External links ==
* 
* Sting on Twitter
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q44640" start="0" end="12" title="Sting (wrestler)" label="Steve Borden"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132964" start="56" end="65" title="ring name" label="ring name"/>
<link wikidata="Q44640" start="66" end="71" title="Sting (wrestler)" label="Sting"/>
<link wikidata="Q131359" start="96" end="117" title="Professional wrestling" label="professional wrestler"/>
<link wikidata="Q60324825" start="135" end="154" title="All Elite Wrestling" label="All Elite Wrestling"/>
<link wikidata="Q11336206" start="300" end="332" title="professional wrestling promotion" label="professional wrestling promotion"/>
<link wikidata="Q130171" start="335" end="363" title="World Championship Wrestling" label="World Championship Wrestling"/>
<link wikidata="Q131728" start="392" end="422" title="Total Nonstop Action Wrestling" label="Total Nonstop Action Wrestling"/>
<link wikidata="Q35339" start="517" end="543" title="World Wrestling Federation" label="World Wrestling Federation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068680" start="719" end="746" title="National Wrestling Alliance" label="National Wrestling Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1931754" start="760" end="783" title="Jim Crockett Promotions" label="Jim Crockett Promotions"/>
<link wikidata="Q4520528" start="819" end="849" title="Universal Wrestling Federation (Bill Watts)" label="Universal Wrestling Federation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128866" start="865" end="898" title="Continental Wrestling Association" label="Continental Wrestling Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q620505" start="918" end="928" title="Body painting" label="face-paint"/>
<link wikidata="Q2095133" start="1076" end="1080" title="Crow (comics)" label="Crow"/>
<link wikidata="Q217533" start="1133" end="1138" title="Joker (character)" label="Joker"/>
<link wikidata="Q44640" start="1215" end="1220" title="Sting (wrestler)" label="Flash"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062492" start="1228" end="1249" title="Independent circuit" label="independent promotion"/>
<link wikidata="Q333421" start="1321" end="1352" title="The Ultimate Warrior" label="Jim &amp;quot;Justice&amp;quot; Hellwig"/>
<link wikidata="Q1443451" start="1450" end="1456" title="Professional wrestling stable" label="stable"/>
<link wikidata="Q4923705" start="1556" end="1569" title="Blade Runners" label="Blade Runners"/>
<link wikidata="Q1961715" start="1700" end="1734" title="NWA World Heavyweight Championship" label="NWA World Heavyweight Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q6591235" start="1743" end="1753" title="List of NWA World Heavyweight Champions" label="first time"/>
<link wikidata="Q44176" start="1850" end="1860" title="Hulk Hogan" label="Hulk Hogan"/>
<link wikidata="Q721063" start="1914" end="1927" title="Professional wrestling championship" label="championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q3104711" start="1956" end="1966" title="List of WCW World Heavyweight Champions" label="six reigns"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066467" start="1976" end="2010" title="WCW World Heavyweight Championship" label="WCW World Heavyweight Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q2608085" start="2035" end="2083" title="WCW International World Heavyweight Championship" label="WCW International World Heavyweight Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q851440" start="2099" end="2111" title="pay-per-view" label="pay-per-view"/>
<link wikidata="Q3178296" start="2206" end="2215" title="List of WCW pay-per-view events" label="PPV event"/>
<link wikidata="Q7602246" start="2217" end="2226" title="Starrcade (1997)" label="Starrcade"/>
<link wikidata="Q44546" start="2317" end="2326" title="Ric Flair" label="Ric Flair"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2365" end="2378" title="WCW Monday Nitro#The Night of Champions – Final broadcast" label="final episode"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193741" start="2388" end="2404" title="WCW Monday Nitro" label="WCW Monday Nitro"/>
<link wikidata="Q112797890" start="2556" end="2571" title="Ric Flair&amp;#x27;s Last Match" label="one final match"/>
<link wikidata="Q191715" start="2654" end="2669" title="Time Warner" label="AOL Time Warner"/>
<link wikidata="Q2255530" start="2772" end="2797" title="World Wrestling All-Stars" label="World Wrestling All-Stars"/>
<link wikidata="Q7957106" start="2817" end="2851" title="WWA World Heavyweight Championship" label="WWA World Heavyweight Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057466" start="3005" end="3039" title="TNA World Heavyweight Championship" label="TNA World Heavyweight Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q2749213" start="3040" end="3050" title="List of TNA World Heavyweight Champions" label="four times"/>
<link wikidata="Q128971" start="3185" end="3201" title="TNA Hall of Fame" label="TNA Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q17562073" start="3428" end="3443" title="Survivor Series (2014)" label="Survivor Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q16320207" start="3474" end="3489" title="WrestleMania 31" label="WrestleMania 31"/>
<link wikidata="Q19016011" start="3540" end="3558" title="Night of Champions (2015)" label="Night of Champions"/>
<link wikidata="Q35826" start="3609" end="3621" title="List of WWE pay-per-view events" label="pay-per-view"/>
<link wikidata="Q332814" start="3641" end="3675" title="WWE Championship" label="WWE World Heavyweight Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q36001" start="3717" end="3733" title="WWE Hall of Fame" label="WWE Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q55637302" start="3734" end="3747" title="WWE Hall of Fame (2016)" label="Class of 2016"/>
<link wikidata="Q102411121" start="3943" end="3981" title="Winter Is Coming (2020)" label="&amp;quot;Dynamite&amp;quot;: Winter Is Coming"/>
<link wikidata="Q64137401" start="4093" end="4105" title="List of All Elite Wrestling pay-per-view events" label="pay-per-view"/>
<link wikidata="Q105081322" start="4107" end="4117" title="Revolution (2021)" label="Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q60194617" start="4169" end="4180" title="Darby Allin" label="Darby Allin"/>
<link wikidata="Q64729414" start="4266" end="4297" title="AEW World Tag Team Championship" label="AEW World Tag Team Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q679633" start="4344" end="4360" title="retirement match" label="retirement match"/>
<link wikidata="Q123684889" start="4364" end="4374" title="Revolution (2024)" label="Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156863" start="4577" end="4602" title="Pro Wrestling Illustrated" label="Pro Wrestling Illustrated"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4625" end="4658" title="List of Pro Wrestling Illustrated awards#Most Popular Wrestler of the Year" label="Most Popular Wrestler of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q44437" start="4708" end="4717" title="John Cena" label="John Cena"/>
<link wikidata="Q373374" start="4757" end="4799" title="Wrestling Observer Newsletter Hall of Fame" label="Wrestling Observer Newsletter Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q902502" start="4807" end="4819" title="Canoe.com" label="Slam! Sports"/>
<link wikidata="Q43199" start="4947" end="4962" title="Omaha, Nebraska" label="Omaha, Nebraska"/>
<link wikidata="Q844837" start="4978" end="4997" title="Southern California" label="Southern California"/>
<link wikidata="Q124100" start="5082" end="5094" title="bodybuilding" label="bodybuilding"/>
<link wikidata="Q1536234" start="5113" end="5128" title="Gold&amp;#x27;s Gym" label="Gold&amp;#x27;s Gym"/>
<link wikidata="Q35339" start="5343" end="5369" title="WWE" label="World Wrestling Federation"/>
<link wikidata="Q65" start="5385" end="5396" title="Los Angeles" label="Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q44176" start="5410" end="5420" title="Hulk Hogan" label="Hulk Hogan"/>
<link wikidata="Q289781" start="5422" end="5436" title="The Iron Sheik" label="The Iron Sheik"/>
<link wikidata="Q2268808" start="5438" end="5458" title="The British Bulldogs" label="The British Bulldogs"/>
<link wikidata="Q44368" start="5460" end="5475" title="André the Giant" label="André the Giant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066670" start="5643" end="5649" title="Tag team" label="teamed"/>
<link wikidata="Q333421" start="5655" end="5686" title="The Ultimate Warrior" label="Jim &amp;quot;Justice&amp;quot; Hellwig"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128866" start="6024" end="6057" title="Continental Wrestling Association" label="Continental Wrestling Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q16563" start="6094" end="6112" title="Memphis, Tennessee" label="Memphis, Tennessee"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6218" end="6224" title="List of professional wrestling terms#T" label="turned"/>
<link wikidata="Q1206729" start="6225" end="6229" title="Heel (professional wrestling)" label="heel"/>
<link wikidata="Q4502323" start="6294" end="6306" title="Dutch Mantel" label="Dutch Mantel"/>
<link wikidata="Q16729810" start="6451" end="6465" title="Phil Hickerson" label="Phil Hickerson"/>
<link wikidata="Q4520528" start="6544" end="6574" title="Universal Wrestling Federation (Bill Watts)" label="Universal Wrestling Federation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134918" start="6605" end="6615" title="Bill Watts" label="Bill Watts"/>
<link wikidata="Q985351" start="6629" end="6650" title="Alexandria, Louisiana" label="Alexandria, Louisiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q4923705" start="6681" end="6694" title="Blade Runners" label="Blade Runners"/>
<link wikidata="Q5336063" start="6859" end="6894" title="Eddie Gilbert (wrestler)" label="&amp;quot;Hot Stuff&amp;quot; Eddie Gilbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q6879951" start="6899" end="6910" title="Missy Hyatt" label="Missy Hyatt"/>
<link wikidata="Q7876132" start="7140" end="7171" title="UWF World Tag Team Championship" label="UWF World Tag Team Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q577661" start="7221" end="7233" title="Rick Steiner" label="Rick Steiner"/>
<link wikidata="Q6546441" start="7291" end="7308" title="Lightning Express (professional wrestling)" label="Lightning Express"/>
<link wikidata="Q3898163" start="7507" end="7519" title="Terry Taylor" label="Terry Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q860227" start="7684" end="7705" title="Chris Adams (wrestler)" label="Gentleman Chris Adams"/>
<link wikidata="Q721663" start="7860" end="7864" title="Face (professional wrestling)" label="face"/>
<link wikidata="Q60790149" start="7960" end="7970" title="dirt sheet" label="dirt sheet"/>
<link wikidata="Q7876133" start="8062" end="8089" title="UWF Television Championship" label="UWF Television Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q6194435" start="8119" end="8131" title="Jim Crockett" label="Jim Crockett"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068680" start="8139" end="8166" title="National Wrestling Alliance" label="National Wrestling Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q361235" start="8228" end="8240" title="Dusty Rhodes" label="Dusty Rhodes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1343090" start="8324" end="8347" title="WCW World Television Championship" label="NWA Television Champion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1885672" start="8348" end="8361" title="Nikita Koloff" label="Nikita Koloff"/>
<link wikidata="Q5070155" start="8365" end="8370" title="Championship unification" label="unify"/>
<link wikidata="Q692991" start="8412" end="8425" title="Shane Douglas" label="Shane Douglas"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8433" end="8454" title="List of professional wrestling terms#T" label="transitional champion"/>
<link wikidata="Q851440" start="8816" end="8828" title="pay-per-view" label="pay-per-view"/>
<link wikidata="Q3968395" start="8830" end="8848" title="Starrcade (1987)" label="Starrcade &amp;#x27;87"/>
<link wikidata="Q974049" start="8904" end="8922" title="Michael Hayes (wrestler)" label="Michael P.S. Hayes"/>
<link wikidata="Q6200169" start="8927" end="8939" title="Jimmy Garvin" label="Jimmy Garvin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2029350" start="8998" end="9011" title="Larry Zbyszko" label="Larry Zbyszko"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9143" end="9149" title="List of professional wrestling terms#P" label="pushed"/>
<link wikidata="Q4115547" start="9171" end="9195" title="Clash of the Champions I" label="Clash of the Champions I"/>
<link wikidata="Q44546" start="9234" end="9243" title="Ric Flair" label="Ric Flair"/>
<link wikidata="Q1961715" start="9252" end="9286" title="NWA World Heavyweight Championship" label="NWA World Heavyweight Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q202784" start="9552" end="9565" title="Four Horsemen (professional wrestling)" label="Four Horsemen"/>
<link wikidata="Q7737631" start="9595" end="9618" title="The Great American Bash (1988)" label="The Great American Bash"/>
<link wikidata="Q651329" start="9654" end="9669" title="Tully Blanchard" label="Tully Blanchard"/>
<link wikidata="Q690063" start="9674" end="9686" title="Arn Anderson" label="Arn Anderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1961703" start="9695" end="9726" title="NWA World Tag Team Championship" label="NWA World Tag Team Championship"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9845" end="9849" title="List of professional wrestling terms#B" label="book"/>
<link wikidata="Q252782" start="9906" end="9932" title="WWE United States Championship" label="NWA United States Champion"/>
<link wikidata="Q734682" start="9933" end="9946" title="Barry Windham" label="Barry Windham"/>
<link wikidata="Q1933507" start="9975" end="9987" title="Mike Rotunda" label="Mike Rotunda"/>
<link wikidata="Q726060" start="10032" end="10036" title="Road Warrior Hawk" label="Hawk"/>
<link wikidata="Q725403" start="10041" end="10047" title="Road Warrior Animal" label="Animal"/>
<link wikidata="Q384497" start="10051" end="10068" title="The Road Warriors" label="The Road Warriors"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10155" end="10159" title="List of professional wrestling terms#O" label="over"/>
<link wikidata="Q3968397" start="10347" end="10365" title="Starrcade (1988)" label="Starrcade &amp;#x27;88"/>
<link wikidata="Q1970067" start="10602" end="10606" title="Omni Coliseum" label="Omni"/>
<link wikidata="Q1359107" start="10701" end="10724" title="All Japan Pro Wrestling" label="All Japan Pro Wrestling"/>
<link wikidata="Q3076581" start="10777" end="10787" title="Dan Spivey" label="Dan Spivey"/>
<link wikidata="Q386246" start="10791" end="10805" title="Nippon Budokan" label="Nippon Budokan"/>
<link wikidata="Q927964" start="10976" end="10990" title="Keiji Mutoh" label="The Great Muta"/>
<link wikidata="Q7737632" start="11011" end="11034" title="The Great American Bash (1989)" label="The Great American Bash"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11087" end="11099" title="Glossary of professional wrestling terms#Dusty finish" label="Dusty finish"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11196" end="11207" title="List of professional wrestling terms#T" label="three-count"/>
<link wikidata="Q679633" start="11534" end="11559" title="No Disqualification match" label="No Disqualification match"/>
<link wikidata="Q121650" start="11614" end="11623" title="Blackjack (weapon)" label="blackjack"/>
<link wikidata="Q470019" start="11776" end="11786" title="Terry Funk" label="Terry Funk"/>
<link wikidata="Q5525222" start="11808" end="11817" title="Gary Hart (wrestler)" label="Gary Hart"/>
<link wikidata="Q6103788" start="11825" end="11842" title="J-Tex Corporation" label="J-Tex Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q679633" start="12060" end="12082" title="Domo de la Muerte" label="Thunderdome Cage match"/>
<link wikidata="Q30599828" start="12136" end="12160" title="Halloween Havoc 1989" label="Halloween Havoc &amp;#x27;89"/>
<link wikidata="Q690063" start="12284" end="12287" title="Arn Anderson" label="Arn"/>
<link wikidata="Q240582" start="12292" end="12295" title="Ole Anderson" label="Ole"/>
<link wikidata="Q3968398" start="12400" end="12418" title="Starrcade (1989)" label="Starrcade &amp;#x27;89"/>
<link wikidata="" start="12787" end="12827" title="Clash of the Champions X: Texas Shootout" label="Clash of the Champions X: Texas Shootout"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12959" end="12969" title="Glossary of professional wrestling terms#Legit" label="legitimate"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13005" end="13021" title="Professional wrestling match types#Steel cages" label="steel cage match"/>
<link wikidata="Q130171" start="13089" end="13117" title="World Championship Wrestling" label="World Championship Wrestling"/>
<link wikidata="Q21189153" start="13213" end="13223" title="Wrestlewar 1990" label="WrestleWar"/>
<link wikidata="Q115347" start="13245" end="13254" title="Lex Luger" label="Lex Luger"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050180" start="13943" end="13957" title="Capital Combat" label="Capital Combat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1033152" start="14113" end="14120" title="RoboCop (character)" label="RoboCop"/>
<link wikidata="Q30599839" start="14244" end="14267" title="The Great American Bash (1990)" label="The Great American Bash"/>
<link wikidata="Q703668" start="14323" end="14334" title="Sid Eudy" label="Sid Vicious"/>
<link wikidata="Q48800870" start="14398" end="14413" title="Halloween Havoc 1990" label="Halloween Havoc"/>
<link wikidata="Q734682" start="14511" end="14524" title="Barry Windham" label="Barry Windham"/>
<link wikidata="Q7718433" start="14685" end="14703" title="The Black Scorpion (professional wrestling)" label="The Black Scorpion"/>
<link wikidata="Q3968399" start="14833" end="14860" title="Starrcade (1990)" label="Starrcade: Collision Course"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066467" start="15259" end="15293" title="WCW World Heavyweight Championship" label="WCW World Heavyweight Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156985" start="15300" end="15331" title="WCW World Tag Team Championship" label="WCW World Tag Team Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q1405303" start="15433" end="15453" title="The Steiner Brothers" label="The Steiner Brothers"/>
<link wikidata="Q7641977" start="15461" end="15473" title="SuperBrawl I" label="SuperBrawl I"/>
<link wikidata="Q44313" start="15775" end="15787" title="Stone Cold Steve Austin" label="Steve Austin"/>
<link wikidata="Q252782" start="15824" end="15866" title="WWE United States Championship" label="WCW United States Heavyweight Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q732642" start="15921" end="15930" title="Rick Rude" label="Rick Rude"/>
<link wikidata="Q4115547" start="15934" end="15961" title="Clash of the Champions XVII" label="Clash of the Champions XVII"/>
<link wikidata="Q3968400" start="15967" end="15985" title="Starrcade (1991)" label="Starrcade &amp;#x27;91"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16012" end="16022" title="Battle royal (professional wrestling)#Battlebowl" label="Battlebowl"/>
<link wikidata="Q5216068" start="16138" end="16156" title="Dangerous Alliance" label="Dangerous Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q382188" start="16176" end="16195" title="Paul Heyman" label="Paul E. Dangerously"/>
<link wikidata="Q44187616" start="16754" end="16767" title="SuperBrawl II" label="SuperBrawl II"/>
<link wikidata="Q379538" start="16846" end="16861" title="Ricky Steamboat" label="Ricky Steamboat"/>
<link wikidata="Q314657" start="16863" end="16876" title="Dustin Rhodes" label="Dustin Rhodes"/>
<link wikidata="Q4934975" start="16967" end="16978" title="Bobby Eaton" label="Bobby Eaton"/>
<link wikidata="Q7968353" start="16985" end="16999" title="WarGames match" label="WarGames match"/>
<link wikidata="Q21189155" start="17003" end="17013" title="Wrestlewar 1992" label="WrestleWar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1173293" start="17027" end="17039" title="Dave Meltzer" label="Dave Meltzer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1970067" start="17314" end="17322" title="Omni Coliseum" label="The Omni"/>
<link wikidata="Q23556" start="17326" end="17333" title="Atlanta" label="Atlanta"/>
<link wikidata="Q26848" start="17356" end="17369" title="Big Van Vader" label="Big Van Vader"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17395" end="17403" title="Professional wrestling aerial techniques#Corner slingshot splash" label="splashed"/>
<link wikidata="Q10381434" start="17540" end="17563" title="The Great American Bash (1992)" label="The Great American Bash"/>
<link wikidata="Q2478923" start="17683" end="17692" title="powerbomb" label="powerbomb"/>
<link wikidata="Q10731" start="17708" end="17719" title="Mick Foley" label="Cactus Jack"/>
<link wikidata="Q679633" start="17725" end="17751" title="Falls Count Anywhere Match" label="Falls Count Anywhere Match"/>
<link wikidata="Q21188133" start="17755" end="17766" title="Beach Blast 1992" label="Beach Blast"/>
<link wikidata="Q919492" start="17784" end="17796" title="Jake Roberts" label="Jake Roberts"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17802" end="17831" title="Professional wrestling match types#Object on a Pole match" label="Coal Miner&amp;#x27;s Glove match"/>
<link wikidata="Q48842773" start="17835" end="17850" title="Halloween Havoc 1992" label="Halloween Havoc"/>
<link wikidata="Q3968404" start="17990" end="17999" title="Starrcade 1992" label="Starrcade"/>
<link wikidata="Q679633" start="18130" end="18141" title="Strap match" label="Strap match"/>
<link wikidata="Q44265474" start="18145" end="18159" title="SuperBrawl III" label="SuperBrawl III"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="18258" end="18264" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q1761" start="18319" end="18325" title="Dublin" label="Dublin"/>
<link wikidata="Q452557" start="18372" end="18387" title="Davey Boy Smith" label="Davey Boy Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q21188134" start="18429" end="18440" title="Beach Blast 1993" label="Beach Blast"/>
<link wikidata="Q3968402" start="18731" end="18740" title="Starrcade (1993)" label="Starrcade"/>
<link wikidata="Q2608085" start="18889" end="18937" title="WCW International World Heavyweight Championship" label="WCW International World Heavyweight Championship"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18996" end="19018" title="Wrestling Dontaku#1994" label="Wrestling Dontaku 1994"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="19022" end="19027" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q48842785" start="19383" end="19392" title="Slamboree 1994" label="Slamboree"/>
<link wikidata="Q4115547" start="19469" end="19497" title="Clash of the Champions XXVII" label="Clash of the Champions XXVII"/>
<link wikidata="Q115343" start="19557" end="19572" title="Sherri Martel" label="Sensuous Sherri"/>
<link wikidata="Q44176" start="19709" end="19719" title="Hulk Hogan" label="Hulk Hogan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1382255" start="19743" end="19757" title="Kevin Sullivan (wrestler)" label="Kevin Sullivan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4636491" start="19765" end="19784" title="The Three Faces of Fear" label="Three Faces of Fear"/>
<link wikidata="Q1265732" start="19811" end="19830" title="The Dungeon of Doom" label="The Dungeon of Doom"/>
<link wikidata="Q28453365" start="19836" end="19864" title="The Great American Bash (1995)" label="The Great American Bash 1995"/>
<link wikidata="Q1386431" start="19881" end="19885" title="Tonga Fifita" label="Meng"/>
<link wikidata="Q48834577" start="20002" end="20024" title="Bash at the Beach 1995" label="Bash at the Beach 1995"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193741" start="20065" end="20081" title="WCW Monday Nitro" label="WCW Monday Nitro"/>
<link wikidata="Q1443451" start="20163" end="20169" title="Rub (professional wrestling)" label="run-in"/>
<link wikidata="Q48842758" start="20210" end="20220" title="Fall Brawl 1995" label="Fall Brawl"/>
<link wikidata="Q59635" start="20258" end="20270" title="Randy Savage" label="Randy Savage"/>
<link wikidata="Q983418" start="20316" end="20322" title="Kamala (wrestler)" label="Kamala"/>
<link wikidata="Q371049" start="20324" end="20330" title="Brutus Beefcake" label="Zodiac"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345719" start="20332" end="20337" title="John Tenta" label="Shark"/>
<link wikidata="Q7968353" start="20368" end="20382" title="WarGames match" label="WarGames match"/>
<link wikidata="Q912923" start="20472" end="20485" title="Brian Pillman" label="Brian Pillman"/>
<link wikidata="Q48741325" start="20489" end="20504" title="Halloween Havoc 1995" label="Halloween Havoc"/>
<link wikidata="Q44292" start="20801" end="20813" title="Chris Benoit" label="Chris Benoit"/>
<link wikidata="Q3110726" start="20902" end="20920" title="Sharpshooter (professional wrestling)" label="Scorpion Deathlock"/>
<link wikidata="Q28453376" start="21011" end="21022" title="World War 3 1995" label="World War 3"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="21079" end="21103" title="Battle royal (professional wrestling)#World War 3" label="World War 3 battle royal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1739023" start="21352" end="21366" title="Kensuke Sasaki" label="Kensuke Sasaki"/>
<link wikidata="Q11704059" start="21380" end="21389" title="Starrcade 1995" label="Starrcade"/>
<link wikidata="Q1150494" start="21427" end="21450" title="New Japan Pro-Wrestling" label="New Japan Pro-Wrestling"/>
<link wikidata="Q679633" start="21571" end="21585" title="Triple Threat match" label="Triangle match"/>
<link wikidata="Q1427424" start="21919" end="21926" title="flattop" label="flattop"/>
<link wikidata="Q19125" start="21988" end="21996" title="scorpion" label="scorpion"/>
<link wikidata="Q620505" start="22074" end="22084" title="Body painting" label="face paint"/>
<link wikidata="Q7617415" start="22092" end="22124" title="Sting and Lex Luger" label="teamed with his old friend Luger"/>
<link wikidata="Q542396" start="22232" end="22243" title="Harlem Heat" label="Harlem Heat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156985" start="22252" end="22283" title="WCW World Tag Team Championship" label="WCW World Tag Team Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q28453386" start="22497" end="22511" title="Uncensored 1996" label="WCW Uncensored"/>
<link wikidata="Q44633" start="22541" end="22549" title="Booker T (wrestler)" label="Booker T"/>
<link wikidata="Q44378" start="22812" end="22821" title="Big Show" label="The Giant"/>
<link wikidata="Q30668045" start="22825" end="22834" title="Slamboree 1996" label="Slamboree"/>
<link wikidata="Q721658" start="23056" end="23069" title="The Outsiders (professional wrestling)" label="The Outsiders"/>
<link wikidata="Q280793" start="23071" end="23081" title="Kevin Nash" label="Kevin Nash"/>
<link wikidata="Q352713" start="23086" end="23096" title="Scott Hall" label="Scott Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q4866761" start="23371" end="23388" title="Bash at the Beach (1996)" label="Bash at the Beach"/>
<link wikidata="Q770395" start="23815" end="23823" title="leg drop" label="leg drop"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="23872" end="23879" title="List of professional wrestling terms#S" label="swerves"/>
<link wikidata="Q549944" start="23952" end="23967" title="New World Order (professional wrestling)" label="new world order"/>
<link wikidata="Q202784" start="24159" end="24172" title="The Four Horsemen (professional wrestling)" label="Four Horsemen"/>
<link wikidata="Q44546" start="24181" end="24190" title="Ric Flair" label="Ric Flair"/>
<link wikidata="Q690063" start="24195" end="24207" title="Arn Anderson" label="Arn Anderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q48842761" start="24468" end="24478" title="Fall Brawl 1996" label="Fall Brawl"/>
<link wikidata="Q4993800" start="24934" end="24945" title="Jeff Farmer (wrestler)" label="Jeff Farmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3090501" start="26450" end="26464" title="Masahiro Chono" label="Masahiro Chono"/>
<link wikidata="Q940170" start="26527" end="26542" title="Shiro Koshinaka" label="Shiro Koshinaka"/>
<link wikidata="Q953936" start="26902" end="26908" title="Jerry Lynn" label="Mr. JL"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="27162" end="27181" title="DDT (professional wrestling)#Inverted DDT" label="Scorpion Death Drop"/>
<link wikidata="Q344997" start="27432" end="27443" title="Ted DiBiase" label="Ted DiBiase"/>
<link wikidata="Q46384" start="27919" end="27929" title="microphone" label="microphone"/>
<link wikidata="Q809910" start="28016" end="28028" title="baseball bat" label="baseball bat"/>
<link wikidata="Q749230" start="28143" end="28155" title="corpse paint" label="corpse paint"/>
<link wikidata="Q461070" start="28275" end="28282" title="gimmick (professional wrestling)" label="gimmick"/>
<link wikidata="Q250912" start="28351" end="28359" title="The Crow (1994 film)" label="The Crow"/>
<link wikidata="Q48834580" start="29279" end="29294" title="Halloween Havoc (1996)" label="Halloween Havoc"/>
<link wikidata="Q285372" start="29412" end="29425" title="Eric Bischoff" label="Eric Bischoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q45319210" start="29662" end="29676" title="SuperBrawl VII" label="SuperBrawl VII"/>
<link wikidata="Q59630" start="29746" end="29757" title="Roddy Piper" label="Roddy Piper"/>
<link wikidata="Q28453384" start="30086" end="30096" title="Uncensored (1997)" label="Uncensored"/>
<link wikidata="Q128109" start="30258" end="30271" title="Chicago Bulls" label="Chicago Bulls"/>
<link wikidata="Q155223" start="30272" end="30275" title="National Basketball Association" label="NBA"/>
<link wikidata="Q201608" start="30281" end="30294" title="Dennis Rodman" label="Dennis Rodman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154882" start="30353" end="30361" title="zip-line" label="zip-line"/>
<link wikidata="Q699413" start="30989" end="31007" title="Nielsen ratings" label="television ratings"/>
<link wikidata="Q18754" start="31044" end="31060" title="WWE Raw" label="Monday Night Raw"/>
<link wikidata="Q112988900" start="31126" end="31142" title="Professional wrestling authority figures" label="WCW commissioner"/>
<link wikidata="Q6136663" start="31143" end="31155" title="J. J. Dillon" label="J. J. Dillon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7602246" start="31645" end="31654" title="Starrcade (1997)" label="Starrcade"/>
<link wikidata="Q35546" start="31748" end="31765" title="Montreal Screwjob" label="Montreal Screwjob"/>
<link wikidata="Q81324" start="31811" end="31820" title="Bret Hart" label="Bret Hart"/>
<link wikidata="Q80695" start="31860" end="31875" title="Survivor Series (1997)" label="Survivor Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q4386316" start="31883" end="31895" title="Nick Patrick (referee)" label="Nick Patrick"/>
<link wikidata="Q2029350" start="32166" end="32179" title="Larry Zbyszko" label="Larry Zbyszko"/>
<link wikidata="Q285372" start="32184" end="32197" title="Eric Bischoff" label="Eric Bischoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q736244" start="32803" end="32810" title="WCW Thunder" label="Thunder"/>
<link wikidata="Q45345464" start="33376" end="33391" title="SuperBrawl VIII" label="SuperBrawl VIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q382078" start="33542" end="33561" title="Diamond Dallas Page" label="Diamond Dallas Page"/>
<link wikidata="Q28451243" start="33694" end="33709" title="Spring Stampede 1998" label="Spring Stampede"/>
<link wikidata="Q44378" start="33970" end="33979" title="Big Show" label="The Giant"/>
<link wikidata="Q48842794" start="34356" end="34365" title="Slamboree 1998" label="Slamboree"/>
<link wikidata="Q48344113" start="34587" end="34610" title="The Great American Bash (1998)" label="The Great American Bash"/>
<link wikidata="Q533475" start="34766" end="34772" title="Konnan" label="Konnan"/>
<link wikidata="Q48842777" start="35098" end="35113" title="Halloween Havoc 1998" label="Halloween Havoc"/>
<link wikidata="Q28451246" start="35702" end="35717" title="Spring Stampede 1999" label="Spring Stampede"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="35863" end="35880" title="Professional wrestling aerial techniques#Diving elbow drop" label="diving elbow drop"/>
<link wikidata="Q3104711" start="36339" end="36403" title="List of WCW World Heavyweight Champions" label="shortest WCW World Heavyweight Championship reign in WCW history"/>
<link wikidata="Q679633" start="36437" end="36463" title="Falls Count Anywhere match" label="Falls Count Anywhere match"/>
<link wikidata="Q48344041" start="36467" end="36490" title="The Great American Bash (1999)" label="The Great American Bash"/>
<link wikidata="Q18499993" start="36829" end="36846" title="Bash at the Beach 1999" label="Bash at the Beach"/>
<link wikidata="Q7691535" start="36888" end="36900" title="Team Madness" label="Team Madness"/>
<link wikidata="Q48842770" start="37726" end="37736" title="Fall Brawl 1999" label="Fall Brawl"/>
<link wikidata="Q809910" start="37785" end="37797" title="baseball bat" label="baseball bat"/>
<link wikidata="Q384497" start="38124" end="38141" title="The Road Warriors" label="The Road Warriors"/>
<link wikidata="Q48842780" start="38375" end="38390" title="Halloween Havoc 1999" label="Halloween Havoc"/>
<link wikidata="Q2960155" start="38769" end="38785" title="Charles Robinson (referee)" label="Charles Robinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q712539" start="38986" end="38997" title="Brian Knobs" label="Brian Knobs"/>
<link wikidata="Q28163854" start="39054" end="39064" title="Mayhem (1999)" label="WCW Mayhem"/>
<link wikidata="Q506816" start="39570" end="39579" title="Starrcade (1999)" label="Starrcade"/>
<link wikidata="Q966588" start="39626" end="39640" title="Miss Elizabeth" label="Miss Elizabeth"/>
<link wikidata="Q679633" start="39791" end="39819" title="Lumberjack match" label="Lumberjacks with Casts match"/>
<link wikidata="Q48842809" start="39823" end="39833" title="Uncensored (2000)" label="Uncensored"/>
<link wikidata="Q1090803" start="39927" end="39938" title="Vince Russo" label="Vince Russo"/>
<link wikidata="Q285372" start="39943" end="39956" title="Eric Bischoff" label="Eric Bischoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q1343020" start="40000" end="40008" title="Reboot (fiction)" label="rebooted"/>
<link wikidata="Q28451339" start="40086" end="40101" title="Spring Stampede (2000)" label="Spring Stampede"/>
<link wikidata="Q1354240" start="40222" end="40229" title="Vampiro" label="Vampiro"/>
<link wikidata="Q48842797" start="40411" end="40420" title="Slamboree (2000)" label="Slamboree"/>
<link wikidata="Q679633" start="40457" end="40474" title="Inferno match" label="Human Torch match"/>
<link wikidata="Q48343883" start="40478" end="40501" title="The Great American Bash (2000)" label="The Great American Bash"/>
<link wikidata="Q48842744" start="40682" end="40699" title="Bash at the Beach (2000)" label="Bash at the Beach"/>
<link wikidata="Q352873" start="40850" end="40862" title="Jeff Jarrett" label="Jeff Jarrett"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="41062" end="41084" title="History of WCW#Acquisition by the World Wrestling Federation and aftermath" label="WCW had been purchased"/>
<link wikidata="Q35339" start="41092" end="41118" title="WWE" label="World Wrestling Federation"/>
<link wikidata="Q191715" start="41430" end="41445" title="Time Warner" label="AOL Time Warner"/>
<link wikidata="Q2255530" start="41884" end="41909" title="World Wrestling All-Stars" label="World Wrestling All-Stars"/>
<link wikidata="Q1761" start="42023" end="42029" title="Dublin" label="Dublin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1001910" start="42083" end="42095" title="Buff Bagwell" label="Buff Bagwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q4994217" start="42100" end="42106" title="Jerry Tuite" label="Malice"/>
<link wikidata="Q60738872" start="42111" end="42126" title="WWA Retribution" label="The Retribution"/>
<link wikidata="Q4093" start="42151" end="42158" title="Glasgow" label="Glasgow"/>
<link wikidata="Q22" start="42160" end="42168" title="Scotland" label="Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q7957106" start="42231" end="42265" title="WWA World Heavyweight Championship" label="WWA World Heavyweight Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q72" start="42339" end="42345" title="Zürich" label="Zürich"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190195" start="42512" end="42525" title="Disco Inferno (wrestler)" label="Disco Inferno"/>
<link wikidata="Q60763274" start="42556" end="42569" title="WWA Reckoning" label="The Reckoning"/>
<link wikidata="Q37100" start="42584" end="42592" title="Auckland" label="Auckland"/>
<link wikidata="Q131728" start="42946" end="42970" title="NWA Total Nonstop Action" label="NWA Total Nonstop Action"/>
<link wikidata="Q83816" start="43094" end="43103" title="AJ Styles" label="AJ Styles"/>
<link wikidata="Q178796" start="43108" end="43116" title="Sean Waltman" label="Syxx-Pac"/>
<link wikidata="Q2078391" start="43203" end="43213" title="Mike Tenay" label="Mike Tenay"/>
<link wikidata="Q5410500" start="43245" end="43250" title="faith" label="faith"/>
<link wikidata="Q353163" start="43641" end="43650" title="Promotion (marketing)" label="promotion"/>
<link wikidata="Q844580" start="43659" end="43674" title="direct-to-video" label="direct-to-video"/>
<link wikidata="Q645928" start="43675" end="43692" title="biographical film" label="biographical film"/>
<link wikidata="Q165350" start="43876" end="43881" title="Abyss (wrestler)" label="Abyss"/>
<link wikidata="Q452217" start="43883" end="43888" title="Raven (wrestler)" label="Raven"/>
<link wikidata="Q310690" start="43894" end="43928" title="R-Truth" label="Ron &amp;quot;The Truth&amp;quot; Killings"/>
<link wikidata="Q927964" start="44083" end="44097" title="The Great Muta" label="The Great Muta"/>
<link wikidata="Q382078" start="44108" end="44127" title="Diamond Dallas Page" label="Diamond Dallas Page"/>
<link wikidata="Q3473982" start="44132" end="44146" title="Satoshi Kojima" label="Satoshi Kojima"/>
<link wikidata="Q18094" start="44171" end="44187" title="Honolulu, Hawaii" label="Honolulu, Hawaii"/>
<link wikidata="Q708144" start="44227" end="44237" title="Billy Gunn" label="Billy Gunn"/>
<link wikidata="Q16958500" start="44352" end="44365" title="TNA Turning Point 2005" label="Turning Point"/>
<link wikidata="Q19125" start="44474" end="44482" title="scorpion" label="scorpion"/>
<link wikidata="Q654290" start="44685" end="44696" title="trench coat" label="trench coat"/>
<link wikidata="Q64160" start="44866" end="44873" title="Impact! (TV series)" label="Impact!"/>
<link wikidata="Q21003398" start="44898" end="44914" title="Final Resolution 2006" label="Final Resolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q44537" start="44926" end="44940" title="Christian (wrestler)" label="Christian Cage"/>
<link wikidata="Q715481" start="44998" end="45009" title="Monty Brown" label="Monty Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q47460738" start="45123" end="45131" title="Spike (TV channel)" label="Spike TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q933039" start="45295" end="45305" title="Eric Young (wrestler)" label="Eric Young"/>
<link wikidata="Q715073" start="45363" end="45375" title="Alex Shelley" label="Alex Shelley"/>
<link wikidata="Q3024676" start="45545" end="45558" title="Destination X (2006)" label="Destination X"/>
<link wikidata="Q7201114" start="45752" end="45771" title="Planet Jarrett" label="Jarrett&amp;#x27;s Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q467367" start="45856" end="45869" title="Scott Steiner" label="Scott Steiner"/>
<link wikidata="Q85776363" start="45904" end="45925" title="Lethal Lockdown match" label="Lethal Lockdown match"/>
<link wikidata="Q6665318" start="46020" end="46028" title="TNA Lockdown (2006)" label="Lockdown"/>
<link wikidata="Q115347" start="46199" end="46208" title="Lex Luger" label="Lex Luger"/>
<link wikidata="Q1001910" start="46210" end="46222" title="Buff Bagwell" label="Buff Bagwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q577661" start="46228" end="46240" title="Rick Steiner" label="Rick Steiner"/>
<link wikidata="Q381825" start="46277" end="46286" title="Samoa Joe" label="Samoa Joe"/>
<link wikidata="Q30901396" start="46301" end="46310" title="Sacrifice 2006" label="Sacrifice"/>
<link wikidata="Q2601350" start="46531" end="46557" title="King of the Mountain match" label="King of the Mountain match"/>
<link wikidata="Q1961715" start="46566" end="46600" title="NWA World Heavyweight Championship" label="NWA World Heavyweight Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q7538609" start="46604" end="46617" title="Slammiversary (2006)" label="Slammiversary"/>
<link wikidata="Q2531270" start="46747" end="46758" title="Earl Hebner" label="Earl Hebner"/>
<link wikidata="Q30901415" start="46888" end="46900" title="Victory Road (2006)" label="Victory Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q30901351" start="47056" end="47068" title="Hard Justice (2006)" label="Hard Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q44537" start="47108" end="47122" title="Christian Cage" label="Christian Cage"/>
<link wikidata="Q4922859" start="47211" end="47226" title="Bound for Glory (2006)" label="Bound for Glory"/>
<link wikidata="Q30901166" start="47847" end="47854" title="TNA Genesis (2006)" label="Genesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q30901395" start="48166" end="48179" title="Turning Point (2006)" label="Turning Point"/>
<link wikidata="Q30901248" start="48383" end="48399" title="Final Resolution 2007" label="Final Resolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q30901129" start="48421" end="48437" title="TNA Against All Odds (2007)" label="Against All Odds"/>
<link wikidata="Q29918770" start="48457" end="48470" title="Destination x 2007" label="Destination X"/>
<link wikidata="Q85776363" start="48598" end="48619" title="Lethal Lockdown match" label="Lethal Lockdown match"/>
<link wikidata="Q3257738" start="48623" end="48631" title="Lockdown (2007)" label="Lockdown"/>
<link wikidata="Q3461003" start="48760" end="48769" title="Sacrifice 2007" label="Sacrifice"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068680" start="48903" end="48930" title="National Wrestling Alliance" label="National Wrestling Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068680" start="49112" end="49129" title="Robert Trobich" label="Robert K. Trobich"/>
<link wikidata="Q2749213" start="49599" end="49633" title="List of TNA World Heavyweight Champions" label="TNA World Heavyweight Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q2601350" start="49731" end="49757" title="King of the Mountain match" label="King of the Mountain match"/>
<link wikidata="Q3486525" start="49761" end="49774" title="Slammiversary (2007)" label="Slammiversary"/>
<link wikidata="Q464152" start="49840" end="49859" title="Christopher Daniels" label="Christopher Daniels"/>
<link wikidata="Q30901411" start="50126" end="50138" title="Victory Road (2007)" label="Victory Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q5109236" start="50228" end="50254" title="Christian&amp;#x27;s Coalition" label="Christian&amp;#x27;s Coalition"/>
<link wikidata="Q3178703" start="50525" end="50537" title="ladder match" label="ladder match"/>
<link wikidata="Q30901357" start="50648" end="50660" title="Hard Justice (2007)" label="Hard Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057466" start="50816" end="50850" title="TNA World Heavyweight Championship" label="TNA World Heavyweight Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q722801" start="51097" end="51128" title="TNA World Tag Team Championship" label="TNA World Tag Team Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q2537838" start="51175" end="51204" title="Adam Jones (American football)" label="Adam &amp;quot;Pacman&amp;quot; Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q30901387" start="51225" end="51237" title="No Surrender (2007)" label="No Surrender"/>
<link wikidata="Q4924043" start="51323" end="51338" title="Bound for Glory (2007)" label="Bound for Glory"/>
<link wikidata="Q5532772" start="51596" end="51603" title="Genesis (2007)" label="Genesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q44633" start="51638" end="51646" title="Booker T (wrestler)" label="Booker T"/>
<link wikidata="Q3076670" start="52081" end="52089" title="Lockdown (2008)" label="Lockdown"/>
<link wikidata="Q28932" start="52168" end="52179" title="Matt Morgan (wrestler)" label="Matt Morgan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190952" start="52241" end="52248" title="Dudley Boyz" label="Team 3D"/>
<link wikidata="Q7828043" start="52326" end="52357" title="Deuces Wild Tournament" label="Deuces Wild Tag Team Tournament"/>
<link wikidata="Q7397352" start="52564" end="52573" title="Sacrifice (2008)" label="Sacrifice"/>
<link wikidata="Q16960313" start="52825" end="52837" title="Victory Road (2008)" label="Victory Road"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="53396" end="53402" title="List of professional wrestling terms#T" label="turned"/>
<link wikidata="Q721663" start="53462" end="53466" title="Face (professional wrestling)" label="face"/>
<link wikidata="Q5655263" start="53534" end="53546" title="Hard Justice (2008)" label="Hard Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q679633" start="53605" end="53628" title="Last Man Standing match" label="Last Man Standing match"/>
<link wikidata="Q2922184" start="53691" end="53709" title="Bound for Glory IV" label="Bound for Glory IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q3109889" start="53952" end="53972" title="The Main Event Mafia" label="The Main Event Mafia"/>
<link wikidata="Q15304050" start="54084" end="54097" title="TNA Frontline" label="TNA Frontline"/>
<link wikidata="Q7883892" start="54162" end="54175" title="Turning Point (2008 wrestling)" label="Turning Point"/>
<link wikidata="Q9296670" start="54223" end="54230" title="Genesis (2009)" label="Genesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1316834" start="54305" end="54321" title="TNA Against All Odds" label="Against All Odds"/>
<link wikidata="Q3024683" start="54459" end="54472" title="Destination X (2009)" label="Destination X"/>
<link wikidata="Q3042826" start="54489" end="54497" title="Lockdown (2009)" label="Lockdown"/>
<link wikidata="Q10731" start="54564" end="54574" title="Mick Foley" label="Mick Foley"/>
<link wikidata="Q679633" start="54586" end="54604" title="Cage match" label="Six Sides of Steel"/>
<link wikidata="Q3075417" start="54702" end="54711" title="TNA Sacrifice (2009)" label="Sacrifice"/>
<link wikidata="Q3076274" start="54818" end="54831" title="Slammiversary (2009)" label="Slammiversary"/>
<link wikidata="Q3131634" start="55353" end="55365" title="Victory Road (2009)" label="Victory Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q3064554" start="55518" end="55530" title="Hard Justice (2009)" label="Hard Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q3342469" start="55691" end="55703" title="No Surrender (2009)" label="No Surrender"/>
<link wikidata="Q287569" start="55806" end="55815" title="Shawn Hernandez" label="Hernandez"/>
<link wikidata="Q2922182" start="56078" end="56093" title="Bound for Glory (2009)" label="Bound for Glory"/>
<link wikidata="Q29097377" start="56662" end="56682" title="TNA Impact!&amp;#x27;s move to Monday nights" label="Monday night episode"/>
<link wikidata="Q44628" start="57005" end="57016" title="Rob Van Dam" label="Rob Van Dam"/>
<link wikidata="Q3042845" start="57143" end="57151" title="Lockdown (2010)" label="Lockdown"/>
<link wikidata="Q930665" start="57194" end="57207" title="Nigel McGuinness" label="Desmond Wolfe"/>
<link wikidata="Q322969" start="57209" end="57221" title="Robert Roode" label="Robert Roode"/>
<link wikidata="Q44137" start="57305" end="57315" title="Jeff Hardy" label="Jeff Hardy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3461005" start="57350" end="57359" title="TNA Sacrifice (2010)" label="Sacrifice"/>
<link wikidata="Q3122134" start="57441" end="57459" title="Slammiversary VIII" label="Slammiversary VIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q378224" start="57648" end="57660" title="Dixie Carter (wrestling)" label="Dixie Carter"/>
<link wikidata="Q387294" start="57662" end="57671" title="Kayfabe" label="storyline"/>
<link wikidata="Q3342470" start="57888" end="57900" title="No Surrender (2010)" label="No Surrender"/>
<link wikidata="Q2922185" start="57920" end="57935" title="Bound for Glory (2010)" label="Bound for Glory"/>
<link wikidata="Q369141" start="57973" end="57993" title="D&amp;#x27;Angelo Dinero" label="D&amp;#x27;Angelo Dinero"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186696" start="58482" end="58490" title="Immortal (professional wrestling)" label="Immortal"/>
<link wikidata="Q376321" start="58981" end="58993" title="Victory Road (2011)" label="Victory Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q3130799" start="59367" end="59375" title="Lockdown (2011)" label="Lockdown"/>
<link wikidata="Q297240" start="59435" end="59447" title="Mr. Kennedy" label="Mr. Anderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2598655" start="59516" end="59525" title="TNA Sacrifice (2011)" label="Sacrifice"/>
<link wikidata="Q2981409" start="59561" end="59577" title="Slammiversary IX" label="Slammiversary IX"/>
<link wikidata="Q40572" start="59768" end="59780" title="Heath Ledger" label="Heath Ledger"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="59805" end="59810" title="Joker in other media#The Dark Knight (2008)" label="Joker"/>
<link wikidata="Q163872" start="59836" end="59851" title="The Dark Knight" label="The Dark Knight"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049677" start="60037" end="60044" title="Fortune (professional wrestling)" label="Fortune"/>
<link wikidata="Q3067629" start="60236" end="60252" title="Hardcore Justice (2011)" label="Hardcore Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q3342471" start="60989" end="61001" title="No Surrender (2011)" label="No Surrender"/>
<link wikidata="Q2922186" start="61262" end="61277" title="Bound for Glory (2011)" label="Bound for Glory"/>
<link wikidata="Q322969" start="62038" end="62049" title="Bobby Roode" label="Bobby Roode"/>
<link wikidata="Q969537" start="62054" end="62063" title="Mark LoMonaco" label="Bully Ray"/>
<link wikidata="Q3557766" start="62241" end="62253" title="Victory Road (2012)" label="Victory Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q3075454" start="62299" end="62312" title="Slammiversary (2012)" label="Slammiversary"/>
<link wikidata="Q128971" start="62505" end="62521" title="TNA Hall of Fame" label="TNA Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q2083971" start="62592" end="62609" title="Aces &amp;amp; Eights" label="Aces &amp;amp; Eights"/>
<link wikidata="Q2922187" start="62746" end="62761" title="Bound for Glory (2012)" label="Bound for Glory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1209452" start="62942" end="62947" title="Devon Hughes" label="Devon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1535657" start="63330" end="63346" title="ball-peen hammer" label="ball-peen hammer"/>
<link wikidata="Q946637" start="63350" end="63353" title="Drew Hankinson" label="DOC"/>
<link wikidata="Q590892" start="63660" end="63669" title="Mike Knox" label="Mike Knox"/>
<link wikidata="Q868988" start="63719" end="63726" title="Genesis (2013)" label="Genesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q224830" start="63945" end="63953" title="Lockdown (2013)" label="Lockdown"/>
<link wikidata="Q137983" start="64011" end="64017" title="Magnus (wrestler)" label="Magnus"/>
<link wikidata="Q500580" start="64087" end="64102" title="Garett Bischoff" label="Garett Bischoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q234556" start="64454" end="64460" title="Brooke Hogan" label="Brooke"/>
<link wikidata="Q28932" start="64779" end="64790" title="Matt Morgan (wrestler)" label="Matt Morgan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7538612" start="64805" end="64821" title="Slammiversary XI" label="Slammiversary XI"/>
<link wikidata="Q437584" start="65332" end="65347" title="Quinton Jackson" label="Rampage Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370964" start="66225" end="66241" title="Ethan Carter III" label="Ethan Carter III"/>
<link wikidata="Q44683" start="66807" end="66821" title="Chavo Guerrero Jr." label="Chavo Guerrero"/>
<link wikidata="Q15631613" start="66864" end="66889" title="Genesis (2014)" label="Impact Wrestling: Genesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q111710924" start="67207" end="67220" title="Slammiversary (2022)" label="Slammiversary"/>
<link wikidata="Q131728" start="67290" end="67306" title="Impact Wrestling" label="Impact Wrestling"/>
<link wikidata="Q4907936" start="67485" end="67495" title="Bill Apter" label="Bill Apter"/>
<link wikidata="Q35339" start="67542" end="67545" title="WWE" label="WWE"/>
<link wikidata="Q36070" start="67673" end="67684" title="WWE Network" label="WWE Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q333421" start="67762" end="67782" title="The Ultimate Warrior" label="The Ultimate Warrior"/>
<link wikidata="Q8067281" start="68067" end="68072" title="Zavvi (retailer)" label="Zavvi"/>
<link wikidata="Q5474463" start="68096" end="68110" title="WWE Home Video" label="WWE Home Video"/>
<link wikidata="Q5294" start="68111" end="68114" title="DVD" label="DVD"/>
<link wikidata="Q47770" start="68119" end="68126" title="Blu-ray" label="Blu-ray"/>
<link wikidata="Q18754" start="68267" end="68270" title="WWE Raw" label="Raw"/>
<link wikidata="Q17048749" start="68309" end="68317" title="WWE 2K15" label="WWE 2K15"/>
<link wikidata="Q279385" start="68640" end="68659" title="San Diego Comic-Con" label="San Diego Comic-Con"/>
<link wikidata="Q596139" start="68720" end="68726" title="Mattel" label="Mattel"/>
<link wikidata="Q65" start="69053" end="69064" title="Los Angeles" label="Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q17562073" start="69155" end="69170" title="Survivor Series (2014)" label="Survivor Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q44567" start="69236" end="69244" title="Triple H" label="Triple H"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="69252" end="69271" title="DDT (professional wrestling)#Inverted DDT" label="Scorpion Death Drop"/>
<link wikidata="Q15691681" start="69294" end="69303" title="The Authority (professional wrestling)" label="Authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q44378" start="69503" end="69511" title="Big Show" label="Big Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q44354" start="69513" end="69517" title="Kane (wrestler)" label="Kane"/>
<link wikidata="Q715014" start="69523" end="69535" title="Seth Rollins" label="Seth Rollins"/>
<link wikidata="Q44437" start="69565" end="69574" title="John Cena" label="John Cena"/>
<link wikidata="Q310683" start="69609" end="69622" title="Dolph Ziggler" label="Dolph Ziggler"/>
<link wikidata="Q438691" start="69624" end="69630" title="Ryback" label="Ryback"/>
<link wikidata="Q579136" start="69636" end="69647" title="Erick Rowan" label="Erick Rowan"/>
<link wikidata="Q349625" start="69854" end="69872" title="Heath Slater" label="Sting doppelganger"/>
<link wikidata="Q18640777" start="70027" end="70035" title="Fastlane (2015)" label="Fastlane"/>
<link wikidata="Q16320207" start="70124" end="70139" title="WrestleMania 31" label="WrestleMania 31"/>
<link wikidata="Q44449" start="70329" end="70340" title="Randy Orton" label="Randy Orton"/>
<link wikidata="Q248713" start="70416" end="70427" title="USA Network" label="USA Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q849496" start="70619" end="70633" title="D-Generation X" label="D-Generation X"/>
<link wikidata="Q549944" start="70647" end="70662" title="New World Order (professional wrestling)" label="New World Order"/>
<link wikidata="Q332814" start="70805" end="70839" title="WWE Championship" label="WWE World Heavyweight Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q19016011" start="70843" end="70861" title="Night of Champions (2015)" label="Night of Champions"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="71158" end="71163" title="Glossary of professional wrestling terms#Legit" label="legit"/>
<link wikidata="Q36001" start="71508" end="71524" title="WWE Hall of Fame" label="WWE Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q55637302" start="71525" end="71538" title="WWE Hall of Fame (2016)" label="Class of 2016"/>
<link wikidata="Q18820013" start="71882" end="71897" title="WrestleMania 32" label="WrestleMania 32"/>
<link wikidata="Q44692" start="72032" end="72035" title="John Layfield" label="JBL"/>
<link wikidata="Q679633" start="72383" end="72398" title="cinematic match" label="cinematic match"/>
<link wikidata="Q100280765" start="72470" end="72496" title="Survivor Series (2020)" label="officially retired in 2020"/>
<link wikidata="Q44158" start="72688" end="72695" title="Dave Bautista" label="Batista"/>
<link wikidata="Q60324825" start="73135" end="73154" title="All Elite Wrestling" label="All Elite Wrestling"/>
<link wikidata="Q299222" start="73202" end="73213" title="Cody Rhodes" label="Cody Rhodes"/>
<link wikidata="Q60194617" start="73218" end="73229" title="Darby Allin" label="Darby Allin"/>
<link wikidata="Q100155725" start="73238" end="73254" title="Powerhouse Hobbs" label="Powerhouse Hobbs"/>
<link wikidata="Q95996088" start="73259" end="73271" title="Ricky Starks" label="Ricky Starks"/>
<link wikidata="Q102411121" start="73275" end="73313" title="Winter Is Coming (2020)" label="&amp;quot;Dynamite&amp;quot;: Winter Is Coming"/>
<link wikidata="Q688333" start="73351" end="73354" title="TNT (American TV network)" label="TNT"/>
<link wikidata="Q44546" start="73391" end="73400" title="Ric Flair" label="Ric Flair"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="73408" end="73421" title="WCW Monday Nitro#The Night of Champions – Final broadcast" label="final episode"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193741" start="73431" end="73447" title="WCW Monday Nitro" label="WCW Monday Nitro"/>
<link wikidata="Q690063" start="73658" end="73670" title="Arn Anderson" label="Arn Anderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q314657" start="73672" end="73685" title="Dustin Rhodes" label="Dustin Rhodes"/>
<link wikidata="Q65684241" start="73912" end="73920" title="AEW Dynamite" label="Dynamite"/>
<link wikidata="Q104882547" start="74253" end="74261" title="Team Taz" label="Team Taz"/>
<link wikidata="Q3072844" start="74263" end="74273" title="Brian Cage" label="Brian Cage"/>
<link wikidata="Q95996088" start="74278" end="74290" title="Ricky Starks" label="Ricky Starks"/>
<link wikidata="Q679633" start="74297" end="74309" title="Street fight (professional wrestling)" label="Street Fight"/>
<link wikidata="Q105081322" start="74313" end="74323" title="Revolution (2021)" label="Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="74463" end="74484" title="Professional wrestling match types#Cinematic match" label="pre-taped on location"/>
<link wikidata="Q7435382" start="74544" end="74555" title="Scorpio Sky" label="Scorpio Sky"/>
<link wikidata="Q45189785" start="74560" end="74570" title="Ethan Page" label="Ethan Page"/>
<link wikidata="Q96376575" start="74599" end="74616" title="Double or Nothing (2021)" label="Double or Nothing"/>
<link wikidata="Q84263196" start="74713" end="74721" title="COVID-19" label="COVID-19"/>
<link wikidata="Q5876764" start="75123" end="75138" title="Fertitta Center" label="Fertitta Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q16555" start="75142" end="75156" title="Houston, Texas" label="Houston, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q4634263" start="75167" end="75174" title="2point0" label="2point0"/>
<link wikidata="Q7855903" start="75255" end="75258" title="Turner Broadcasting System" label="TBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q736244" start="75358" end="75369" title="WCW Thunder" label="WCW Thunder"/>
<link wikidata="Q30488454" start="75418" end="75448" title="Entertainment and Sports Arena" label="Entertainment and Sports Arena"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="75452" end="75467" title="Washington D.C." label="Washington D.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q101834415" start="75517" end="75531" title="Anthony Bowens" label="Anthony Bowens"/>
<link wikidata="Q105835710" start="75536" end="75546" title="Max Caster" label="Max Caster"/>
<link wikidata="Q110141553" start="75552" end="75586" title="Holiday Bash (2021)" label="&amp;quot;Dynamite&amp;quot;: Holiday Bash"/>
<link wikidata="Q215447" start="75606" end="75613" title="CM Punk" label="CM Punk"/>
<link wikidata="Q106097435" start="75623" end="75635" title="The Pinnacle (professional wrestling)" label="The Pinnacle"/>
<link wikidata="Q61102628" start="75637" end="75640" title="Maxwell Jacob Friedman" label="MJF"/>
<link wikidata="Q18225677" start="75642" end="75654" title="Cash Wheeler" label="Cash Wheeler"/>
<link wikidata="Q17231196" start="75660" end="75671" title="Dax Harwood" label="Dax Harwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q110010982" start="75747" end="75757" title="Revolution (2022)" label="Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="75777" end="75799" title="Professional wrestling tag team match types#Tornado tag team match" label="Tornado tag team match"/>
<link wikidata="Q60674329" start="75805" end="75818" title="Sammy Guevara" label="Sammy Guevara"/>
<link wikidata="Q5954685" start="75834" end="75850" title="Andrade El Idolo" label="Andrade El Idolo"/>
<link wikidata="Q26621" start="75852" end="75862" title="Matt Hardy" label="Matt Hardy"/>
<link wikidata="Q75144231" start="75868" end="75881" title="Isiah Kassidy" label="Isiah Kassidy"/>
<link wikidata="Q111692568" start="75912" end="75938" title="Forbidden Door (2022)" label="AEW x NJPW: Forbidden Door"/>
<link wikidata="Q1150494" start="75972" end="75995" title="New Japan Pro-Wrestling" label="New Japan Pro-Wrestling"/>
<link wikidata="Q27089333" start="76051" end="76077" title="Los Ingobernables de Japon" label="Los Ingobernables de Japon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3482203" start="76091" end="76104" title="Shingo Takagi" label="Shingo Takagi"/>
<link wikidata="Q13617356" start="76156" end="76167" title="Bullet Club" label="Bullet Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q2187828" start="76176" end="76191" title="The Young Bucks" label="The Young Bucks"/>
<link wikidata="Q2187828" start="76193" end="76205" title="Matt Jackson (wrestler)" label="Matt Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2187828" start="76210" end="76222" title="Nick Jackson" label="Nick Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5351837" start="76228" end="76240" title="El Phantasmo" label="El Phantasmo"/>
<link wikidata="Q11671227" start="76242" end="76258" title="Hiromu Takahashi" label="Hiromu Takahashi"/>
<link wikidata="Q113134147" start="76428" end="76435" title="All Out (2022)" label="All Out"/>
<link wikidata="Q2833189" start="76455" end="76459" title="Miro (wrestler)" label="Miro"/>
<link wikidata="Q112567298" start="76473" end="76487" title="House of Black" label="House of Black"/>
<link wikidata="Q23007573" start="76489" end="76502" title="Malakai Black" label="Malakai Black"/>
<link wikidata="Q60194660" start="76504" end="76514" title="Brody King" label="Brody King"/>
<link wikidata="Q18822524" start="76520" end="76534" title="Buddy Matthews" label="Buddy Matthews"/>
<link wikidata="Q113114827" start="76574" end="76605" title="AEW Grand Slam (2022)" label="&amp;quot;Rampage&amp;quot;: Grand Slam"/>
<link wikidata="Q927964" start="76744" end="76758" title="Keiji Muto" label="The Great Muta"/>
<link wikidata="Q113712119" start="76833" end="76842" title="Full Gear (2022)" label="Full Gear"/>
<link wikidata="Q352873" start="76869" end="76881" title="Jeff Jarrett" label="Jeff Jarrett"/>
<link wikidata="Q952803" start="76886" end="76896" title="Jay Lethal" label="Jay Lethal"/>
<link wikidata="Q116290263" start="77028" end="77068" title="The Great Muta Final &amp;quot;Bye-Bye&amp;quot;" label="The Great Muta Final &amp;quot;Bye-Bye&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1209832" start="77116" end="77134" title="Pro Wrestling Noah" label="Pro Wrestling Noah"/>
<link wikidata="Q4701172" start="77242" end="77247" title="Akira Nogami" label="Akira"/>
<link wikidata="Q3025012" start="77249" end="77256" title="Jinsei Shinzaki" label="Hakushi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1859112" start="77262" end="77279" title="Naomichi Marufuji" label="Naomichi Marufuji"/>
<link wikidata="Q117314516" start="77302" end="77316" title="Forbidden Door (2023)" label="Forbidden Door"/>
<link wikidata="Q2836958" start="77353" end="77366" title="Tetsuya Naito" label="Tetsuya Naito"/>
<link wikidata="Q44144" start="77388" end="77401" title="Chris Jericho" label="Chris Jericho"/>
<link wikidata="Q1705122" start="77422" end="77435" title="Minoru Suzuki" label="Minoru Suzuki"/>
<link wikidata="Q19901974" start="77506" end="77519" title="Mogul Embassy" label="Mogul Embassy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4653989" start="77563" end="77569" title="AR Fox" label="AR Fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q19668687" start="77629" end="77646" title="Swerve Strickland" label="Swerve Strickland"/>
<link wikidata="Q7244172" start="77827" end="77838" title="Prince Nana" label="Prince Nana"/>
<link wikidata="Q120716040" start="77978" end="77988" title="Nick Wayne" label="Nick Wayne"/>
<link wikidata="Q3072844" start="78032" end="78042" title="Brian Cage" label="Brian Cage"/>
<link wikidata="Q44537" start="78228" end="78242" title="Christian Cage" label="Christian Cage"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="78248" end="78260" title="Professional wrestling match types#Casket match" label="coffin match"/>
<link wikidata="Q117459670" start="78264" end="78270" title="All In (2023)" label="All In"/>
<link wikidata="Q3629960" start="78360" end="78371" title="Luchasaurus" label="Luchasaurus"/>
<link wikidata="Q122167916" start="78376" end="78388" title="WrestleDream (2023)" label="WrestleDream"/>
<link wikidata="Q44164" start="78550" end="78563" title="Edge (wrestler)" label="Adam Copeland"/>
<link wikidata="Q123684889" start="78810" end="78820" title="Revolution (2024)" label="Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q55636022" start="79018" end="79027" title="Tony Khan" label="Tony Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q122074332" start="79204" end="79213" title="Full Gear (2023)" label="Full Gear"/>
<link wikidata="Q95996088" start="79314" end="79326" title="Ricky Starks" label="Ricky Starks"/>
<link wikidata="Q769073" start="79331" end="79339" title="W. Morrissey" label="Big Bill"/>
<link wikidata="Q64729414" start="79351" end="79382" title="AEW World Tag Team Championship" label="AEW World Tag Team Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057466" start="79457" end="79479" title="TNA World Championship" label="TNA World Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q11316150" start="79809" end="79831" title="tornado tag team match" label="tornado tag team match"/>
<link wikidata="Q679633" start="79863" end="79879" title="retirement match" label="retirement match"/>
<link wikidata="Q842952" start="80152" end="80170" title="Greensboro Coliseum Complex" label="Greenboro Coliseum"/>
<link wikidata="Q49238" start="80174" end="80200" title="Greensboro, North Carolina" label="Greensboro, North Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q4115547" start="80265" end="80289" title="Clash of the Champions I" label="Clash of the Champions I"/>
<link wikidata="Q379538" start="80318" end="80333" title="Ricky Steamboat" label="Ricky Steamboat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1885672" start="80577" end="80590" title="Nikita Koloff" label="Nikita Koloff"/>
<link wikidata="Q115347" start="80592" end="80601" title="Lex Luger" label="Lex Luger"/>
<link wikidata="Q953089" start="80603" end="80614" title="Magnum T.A." label="Magnum T.A."/>
<link wikidata="Q382078" start="80620" end="80639" title="Diamond Dallas Page" label="Diamond Dallas Page"/>
<link wikidata="Q6805996" start="80901" end="80912" title="media scrum" label="media scrum"/>
<link wikidata="Q721834" start="81037" end="81044" title="Manager (professional wrestling)" label="manager"/>
<link wikidata="Q1443451" start="81051" end="81056" title="Road agent (professional wrestling)" label="agent"/>
<link wikidata="Q123347265" start="81108" end="81114" title="All In (2024)" label="All In"/>
<link wikidata="Q44176" start="81748" end="81758" title="Hulk Hogan" label="Hulk Hogan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1111380" start="81927" end="81938" title="Digital Spy" label="Digital Spy"/>
<link wikidata="Q461070" start="82015" end="82022" title="Gimmick (professional wrestling)" label="gimmick"/>
<link wikidata="Q509625" start="82036" end="82052" title="franchise player" label="franchise player"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192980" start="82223" end="82234" title="Make-A-Wish Foundation" label="Make-A-Wish"/>
<link wikidata="Q7602075" start="82239" end="82275" title="Starlight Children&amp;#x27;s Foundation" label="Starlight Children&amp;#x27;s Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q382078" start="82703" end="82722" title="Diamond Dallas Page" label="Diamond Dallas Page"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193741" start="82805" end="82817" title="WCW Monday Nitro" label="Monday Nitro"/>
<link wikidata="Q14504029" start="82836" end="82859" title="Night of Champions (2013)" label="Night of Champions 2013"/>
<link wikidata="Q252782" start="82915" end="82937" title="WWE United States Championship" label="United States Champion"/>
<link wikidata="Q36001" start="83020" end="83036" title="WWE Hall of Fame" label="WWE Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q642590" start="83046" end="83063" title="landslide victory" label="landslide victory"/>
<link wikidata="Q51845393" start="83193" end="83205" title="Dave Scherer" label="Dave Scherer"/>
<link wikidata="Q128971" start="83352" end="83368" title="TNA Hall of Fame" label="TNA Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q26848" start="83724" end="83737" title="Big Van Vader" label="Big Van Vader"/>
<link wikidata="Q44546" start="83875" end="83884" title="Ric Flair" label="Ric Flair"/>
<link wikidata="Q44437" start="84105" end="84114" title="John Cena" label="John Cena"/>
<link wikidata="Q715014" start="84209" end="84221" title="Seth Rollins" label="Seth Rollins"/>
<link wikidata="Q313706" start="84260" end="84273" title="Tommy Dreamer" label="Tommy Dreamer"/>
<link wikidata="Q44137" start="84339" end="84349" title="Jeff Hardy" label="Jeff Hardy"/>
<link wikidata="Q299222" start="84351" end="84362" title="Cody Rhodes" label="Cody Rhodes"/>
<link wikidata="Q299570" start="84367" end="84383" title="Shelton Benjamin" label="Shelton Benjamin"/>
<link wikidata="Q352677" start="84435" end="84445" title="Tyson Kidd" label="Tyson Kidd"/>
<link wikidata="Q44453" start="84559" end="84569" title="Kurt Angle" label="Kurt Angle"/>
<link wikidata="Q115547" start="84571" end="84584" title="Bill Goldberg" label="Bill Goldberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q44354" start="84586" end="84590" title="Kane (wrestler)" label="Kane"/>
<link wikidata="Q83816" start="84592" end="84604" title="AJ Styles" label="A. J. Styles"/>
<link wikidata="Q314657" start="84609" end="84630" title="Dustin Rhodes" label="Dustin Rhodes/Goldust"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139993" start="84632" end="84642" title="Bray Wyatt" label="Bray Wyatt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1701206" start="84808" end="84820" title="Waffle House" label="Waffle House"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="84981" end="84986" title="List of professional wrestling terms#S" label="spots"/>
<link wikidata="Q97959695" start="85028" end="85036" title="Defector Media" label="Defector"/>
<link wikidata="Q96376575" start="85393" end="85410" title="Double or Nothing (2021)" label="Double or Nothing"/>
<link wikidata="Q44546" start="85456" end="85465" title="Ric Flair" label="Ric Flair"/>
<link wikidata="Q30599839" start="85481" end="85500" title="The Great American Bash (1990)" label="Great American Bash"/>
<link wikidata="Q110010982" start="85629" end="85639" title="Revolution (2022)" label="Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q2155307" start="85656" end="85665" title="SB Nation" label="SB Nation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5954685" start="85826" end="85842" title="Andrade El Idolo" label="Andrade El Idolo"/>
<link wikidata="Q85308" start="86024" end="86034" title="D Magazine" label="D Magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q41421" start="86344" end="86350" title="Michael Jordan" label="Jordan"/>
<link wikidata="Q169165" start="86381" end="86399" title="Washington Wizards" label="Washington Wizards"/>
<link wikidata="Q128109" start="86438" end="86451" title="Chicago Bulls" label="Chicago Bulls"/>
<link wikidata="Q4907936" start="86756" end="86766" title="Bill Apter" label="Bill Apter"/>
<link wikidata="Q317724" start="87398" end="87406" title="Jim Ross" label="Jim Ross"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156863" start="87533" end="87558" title="Pro Wrestling Illustrated" label="Pro Wrestling Illustrated"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="87582" end="87615" title="List of Pro Wrestling Illustrated awards#Most Popular Wrestler of the Year" label="Most Popular Wrestler of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q44437" start="87655" end="87664" title="John Cena" label="John Cena"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="87788" end="87794" title="Glossary of professional wrestling terms#Book" label="booker"/>
<link wikidata="Q1382255" start="87795" end="87809" title="Kevin Sullivan (wrestler)" label="Kevin Sullivan"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="87872" end="87876" title="Glossary of professional wrestling terms#draw" label="draw"/>
<link wikidata="Q36107" start="87928" end="87942" title="Muhammad Ali" label="[Muhammad] Ali"/>
<link wikidata="Q102301" start="87947" end="87960" title="Joe Frazier" label="[Joe] Frazier"/>
<link wikidata="Q4115547" start="87978" end="88002" title="Clash of the Champions I" label="Clash of the Champions I"/>
<link wikidata="Q50846" start="88060" end="88075" title="WrestleMania IV" label="WrestleMania IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q543534" start="88155" end="88158" title="TBS (U.S. TV channel)" label="TBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q30599839" start="88187" end="88215" title="The Great American Bash (1990)" label="The Great American Bash 1990"/>
<link wikidata="Q851440" start="88250" end="88262" title="pay-per-view" label="pay-per-view"/>
<link wikidata="Q280793" start="88344" end="88354" title="Kevin Nash" label="Kevin Nash"/>
<link wikidata="Q6847053" start="88488" end="88499" title="Mike Graham (wrestler)" label="Mike Graham"/>
<link wikidata="Q35530" start="88565" end="88581" title="Monday Night War" label="Monday Night War"/>
<link wikidata="Q44176" start="88722" end="88737" title="Hulk Hogan" label="Hollywood Hogan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7602246" start="88823" end="88837" title="Starrcade (1997)" label="Starrcade 1997"/>
<link wikidata="Q549944" start="88865" end="88876" title="New World Order (professional wrestling)" label="nWo Wolfpac"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="88877" end="88883" title="Glossary of professional wrestling terms#Stable" label="stable"/>
<link wikidata="Q56489925" start="89104" end="89122" title="Pro Wrestling Tees" label="Pro Wrestling Tees"/>
<link wikidata="Q7959076" start="89292" end="89303" title="Wade Keller" label="Wade Keller"/>
<link wikidata="Q3400951" start="89747" end="89757" title="Power Slam" label="Power Slam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1173293" start="90094" end="90106" title="Dave Meltzer" label="Dave Meltzer"/>
<link wikidata="Q44313" start="90227" end="90239" title="Stone Cold Steve Austin" label="Steve Austin"/>
<link wikidata="Q55636022" start="90711" end="90720" title="Tony Khan" label="Tony Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q191715" start="91227" end="91242" title="Time Warner" label="AOL Time Warner"/>
<link wikidata="Q44176" start="91807" end="91817" title="Hulk Hogan" label="Hulk Hogan"/>
<link wikidata="Q81324" start="91822" end="91831" title="Bret Hart" label="Bret Hart"/>
<link wikidata="Q44546" start="91880" end="91889" title="Ric Flair" label="Ric Flair"/>
<link wikidata="Q59635" start="91891" end="91903" title="Randy Savage" label="Randy Savage"/>
<link wikidata="Q44453" start="91905" end="91915" title="Kurt Angle" label="Kurt Angle"/>
<link wikidata="Q10731" start="91920" end="91930" title="Mick Foley" label="Mick Foley"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="92045" end="92050" title="Glossary of professional wrestling terms#Angle" label="angle"/>
<link wikidata="Q50902" start="92106" end="92122" title="WrestleMania XIX" label="WrestleMania XIX"/>
<link wikidata="Q44304" start="92263" end="92277" title="The Undertaker" label="The Undertaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q51025" start="92281" end="92299" title="WrestleMania XXVII" label="WrestleMania XXVII"/>
<link wikidata="Q44567" start="93076" end="93084" title="Triple H" label="Triple H"/>
<link wikidata="Q1430842" start="93345" end="93356" title="Lȧȧz Rockit" label="Lȧȧz Rockit"/>
<link wikidata="Q3504185" start="93420" end="93431" title="Super Force" label="Super Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q206978" start="93575" end="93581" title="Sprite (soft drink)" label="Sprite"/>
<link wikidata="Q44176" start="93643" end="93653" title="Hulk Hogan" label="Hulk Hogan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1304013" start="93684" end="93703" title="Thunder in Paradise" label="Thunder in Paradise"/>
<link wikidata="Q426432" start="93789" end="93809" title="Walker, Texas Ranger" label="Walker, Texas Ranger"/>
<link wikidata="Q15696820" start="94144" end="94157" title="The Encounter (2010 film)" label="The Encounter"/>
<link wikidata="Q309438" start="95071" end="95087" title="anabolic steroid" label="anabolic steroid"/>
<link wikidata="Q613015" start="95119" end="95139" title="born again (Christianity)" label="born-again Christian"/>
<link wikidata="Q234213" start="95176" end="95184" title="adultery" label="adultery"/>
<link wikidata="Q3184856" start="95190" end="95199" title="Substance abuse" label="substance"/>
<link wikidata="Q7331102" start="95204" end="95217" title="alcohol abuse" label="alcohol abuse"/>
<link wikidata="Q4583636" start="95267" end="95291" title="Azusa Pacific University" label="Azusa Pacific University"/>
<link wikidata="Q6406863" start="95365" end="95380" title="Kilgore College" label="Kilgore College"/>
<link wikidata="Q1360303" start="95458" end="95480" title="University of Kentucky" label="University of Kentucky"/>
<link wikidata="Q16987467" start="95492" end="95506" title="2015 NFL draft" label="2015 NFL draft"/>
<link wikidata="Q223522" start="95538" end="95556" title="Kansas City Chiefs" label="Kansas City Chiefs"/>
<link wikidata="Q483203" start="95716" end="95747" title="Sting (musician)" label="Gordon &amp;quot;Sting&amp;quot; Sumner"/>
<link wikidata="Q23556" start="95810" end="95817" title="Atlanta" label="Atlanta"/>
<link wikidata="Q60324825" start="96042" end="96061" title="All Elite Wrestling" label="All Elite Wrestling"/>
<link wikidata="Q64729414" start="96065" end="96096" title="AEW World Tag Team Championship" label="AEW World Tag Team Championship"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="96098" end="96104" title="AEW World Tag Team Championship#Reigns" label="1 time"/>
<link wikidata="Q60194617" start="96113" end="96124" title="Darby Allin" label="Darby Allin"/>
<link wikidata="Q105102992" start="96128" end="96146" title="AEW Dynamite Award" label="AEW Dynamite Award"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="96190" end="96194" title="AEW Dynamite Awards#2021" label="2021"/>
<link wikidata="Q102411121" start="96232" end="96248" title="Winter Is Coming (2020)" label="Winter Is Coming"/>
<link wikidata="Q65684241" start="96272" end="96280" title="AEW Dynamite" label="Dynamite"/>
<link wikidata="Q5054524" start="96308" end="96330" title="Cauliflower Alley Club" label="Cauliflower Alley Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q1931754" start="96366" end="96389" title="Jim Crockett Promotions" label="Jim Crockett Promotions"/>
<link wikidata="Q130171" start="96392" end="96420" title="World Championship Wrestling" label="World Championship Wrestling"/>
<link wikidata="Q1343090" start="96424" end="96457" title="WCW World Television Championship" label="NWA World Television Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q6603661" start="96459" end="96465" title="List of WCW World Television Champions" label="1 time"/>
<link wikidata="Q1961715" start="96470" end="96504" title="NWA World Heavyweight Championship" label="NWA World Heavyweight Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q6591235" start="96506" end="96512" title="List of NWA World Heavyweight Champions" label="1 time"/>
<link wikidata="Q2608085" start="96518" end="96566" title="WCW International World Heavyweight Championship" label="WCW International World Heavyweight Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q2608085" start="96568" end="96575" title="List of WCW International World Heavyweight Champions" label="2 times"/>
<link wikidata="Q252782" start="96580" end="96622" title="WWE United States Championship" label="WCW United States Heavyweight Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q1944330" start="96624" end="96631" title="List of WWE United States Champions" label="2 times"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066467" start="96636" end="96670" title="WCW World Heavyweight Championship" label="WCW World Heavyweight Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q3104711" start="96672" end="96679" title="List of WCW World Heavyweight Champions" label="6 times"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156985" start="96684" end="96715" title="WCW World Tag Team Championship" label="WCW World Tag Team Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q6603664" start="96717" end="96724" title="List of WCW World Tag Team Champions" label="3 times"/>
<link wikidata="Q115347" start="96733" end="96742" title="Lex Luger" label="Lex Luger"/>
<link wikidata="Q44378" start="96748" end="96757" title="Big Show" label="The Giant"/>
<link wikidata="Q280793" start="96767" end="96777" title="Kevin Nash" label="Kevin Nash"/>
<link wikidata="Q3968400" start="96785" end="96815" title="Starrcade (1991)" label="Battlebowl Battle Royal (1991)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="96819" end="96844" title="WCW tournaments#European Cup Tournament 2000" label="European Cup (1994, 2000)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3968398" start="96848" end="96874" title="Starrcade (1989)" label="Iron Man Tournament (1989)"/>
<link wikidata="Q16997740" start="96878" end="96908" title="Jim Crockett, Sr. Memorial Cup Tag Team Tournament" label="Jim Crockett, Sr. Memorial Cup"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="96910" end="96914" title="Jim Crockett, Sr. Memorial Cup Tag Team Tournament#1988" label="1988"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="96936" end="96967" title="WCW tournaments#King of Cable Tournament" label="King of Cable Tournament (1992)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="96971" end="97019" title="WCW tournaments#London Lethal Lottery Tag Team Tournament (2000)" label="London Lethal Lottery Tag Team Tournament (2000)"/>
<link wikidata="Q467367" start="97027" end="97040" title="Scott Steiner" label="Scott Steiner"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="97044" end="97092" title="WCW tournaments#WCW United States Championship Tournament (1991)" label="WCW United States Championship Tournament (1991)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="97096" end="97144" title="WCW tournaments#WCW United States Championship Tournament (1995)" label="WCW United States Championship Tournament (1995)"/>
<link wikidata="Q11704059" start="97148" end="97177" title="Starrcade 1995" label="World Cup of Wrestling (1995)"/>
<link wikidata="Q59635" start="97185" end="97197" title="Randy Savage" label="Randy Savage"/>
<link wikidata="Q115347" start="97199" end="97208" title="Lex Luger" label="Lex Luger"/>
<link wikidata="Q1389602" start="97210" end="97224" title="Johnny B. Badd" label="Johnny B. Badd"/>
<link wikidata="Q44374" start="97226" end="97240" title="Eddie Guerrero" label="Eddie Guerrero"/>
<link wikidata="Q44292" start="97242" end="97254" title="Chris Benoit" label="Chris Benoit"/>
<link wikidata="Q68719" start="97260" end="97271" title="Alex Wright" label="Alex Wright"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="97281" end="97306" title="Triple Crown (professional wrestling)#List of WCW Triple Crown winners" label="WCW Triple Crown Champion"/>
<link wikidata="Q131728" start="97309" end="97367" title="Total Nonstop Action Wrestling" label="NWA: Total Nonstop Action / Total Nonstop Action Wrestling"/>
<link wikidata="Q1961715" start="97371" end="97405" title="NWA World Heavyweight Championship" label="NWA World Heavyweight Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q6591235" start="97407" end="97413" title="List of NWA World Heavyweight Champions" label="1 time"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057466" start="97419" end="97453" title="TNA World Heavyweight Championship" label="TNA World Heavyweight Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q2749213" start="97455" end="97462" title="List of TNA World Heavyweight Champions" label="4 times"/>
<link wikidata="Q722801" start="97467" end="97498" title="TNA World Tag Team Championship" label="TNA World Tag Team Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q6598935" start="97500" end="97506" title="List of TNA World Tag Team Champions" label="1 time"/>
<link wikidata="Q44453" start="97515" end="97525" title="Kurt Angle" label="Kurt Angle"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="97529" end="97596" title="Impact Wrestling tournaments#TNA World Heavyweight Championship Tournament (2009)" label="TNA World Heavyweight Championship Tournament (First Bracket, 2009)"/>
<link wikidata="Q128971" start="97600" end="97616" title="TNA Hall of Fame" label="TNA Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q48837924" start="97626" end="97645" title="Impact Year End Awards" label="TNA Year End Awards"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="97700" end="97704" title="Impact Year End Awards#2007 TNA Year End Awards" label="2007"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156863" start="97766" end="97791" title="Pro Wrestling Illustrated" label="Pro Wrestling Illustrated"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="97795" end="97815" title="List of Pro Wrestling Illustrated awards#Comeback of the Year" label="Comeback of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="97838" end="97855" title="List of Pro Wrestling Illustrated awards#Match of the Year" label="Match of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="97867" end="97901" title="List of Pro Wrestling Illustrated awards#Most Improved Wrestler of the Year" label="Most Improved Wrestler of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="97912" end="97951" title="List of Pro Wrestling Illustrated awards#Inspirational Wrestler of the Year" label="Most Inspirational Wrestler of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="97962" end="97995" title="List of Pro Wrestling Illustrated awards#Most Popular Wrestler of the Year" label="Most Popular Wrestler of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="98024" end="98044" title="List of Pro Wrestling Illustrated awards#Wrestler of the Year" label="Wrestler of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="98054" end="98099" title="List of Pro Wrestling Illustrated awards#Stanley Weston Award for Lifetime Achievement" label="Stanley Weston Award for Lifetime Achievement"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="98169" end="98176" title="Pro Wrestling Illustrated#PWI 500" label="PWI 500"/>
<link wikidata="Q865105" start="98373" end="98408" title="Professional Wrestling Hall of Fame and Museum" label="Professional Wrestling Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q4520528" start="98427" end="98457" title="Universal Wrestling Federation (Bill Watts)" label="Universal Wrestling Federation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7876132" start="98461" end="98492" title="UWF World Tag Team Championship" label="UWF World Tag Team Championship"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="98494" end="98501" title="UWF World Tag Team Championship#Title history" label="3 times"/>
<link wikidata="Q5336063" start="98510" end="98523" title="Eddie Gilbert (wrestler)" label="Eddie Gilbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q577661" start="98532" end="98544" title="Rick Steiner" label="Rick Steiner"/>
<link wikidata="Q2255530" start="98551" end="98576" title="World Wrestling All-Stars" label="World Wrestling All-Stars"/>
<link wikidata="Q7957106" start="98580" end="98614" title="WWA World Heavyweight Championship" label="WWA World Heavyweight Championship"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="98616" end="98622" title="WWA World Heavyweight Championship#Title history" label="1 time"/>
<link wikidata="Q43898963" start="98626" end="98655" title="Wrestling Observer Newsletter" label="Wrestling Observer Newsletter"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="98659" end="98676" title="List of Wrestling Observer Newsletter awards#Match of the Year" label="Match of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="98688" end="98704" title="List of Wrestling Observer Newsletter awards#Most Charismatic" label="Most Charismatic"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="98721" end="98734" title="List of Wrestling Observer Newsletter awards#Most Improved" label="Most Improved"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="98745" end="98760" title="List of Wrestling Observer Newsletter awards#Most Unimproved" label="Most Unimproved"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="98771" end="98784" title="List of Wrestling Observer Newsletter awards#Best Babyface" label="Best Babyface"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="98795" end="98825" title="List of Wrestling Observer Newsletter awards#Worst Worked Match of the Year" label="Worst Worked Match of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q373374" start="98879" end="98921" title="Wrestling Observer Newsletter Hall of Fame" label="Wrestling Observer Newsletter Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q35339" start="98940" end="98943" title="WWE" label="WWE"/>
<link wikidata="Q36001" start="98947" end="98963" title="WWE Hall of Fame" label="WWE Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q55637302" start="98965" end="98978" title="WWE Hall of Fame (2016)" label="Class of 2016"/>
<link wikidata="Q964292" start="98983" end="98995" title="Slammy Award" label="Slammy Award"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="99058" end="99062" title="Slammy Award#2014 Slammy Awards" label="2014"/>
<link wikidata="Q44437" start="99088" end="99092" title="John Cena" label="Cena"/>
<link wikidata="Q15691681" start="99105" end="99114" title="The Authority (professional wrestling)" label="Authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q17562073" start="99118" end="99133" title="Survivor Series (2014)" label="Survivor Series"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="99179" end="99183" title="Slammy Award#2015 Slammy Awards" label="2015"/>
<link wikidata="Q715014" start="99190" end="99202" title="Seth Rollins" label="Seth Rollins"/>
<link wikidata="Q18754" start="99246" end="99249" title="WWE Raw" label="Raw"/>
<link wikidata="Q7617415" start="99274" end="99293" title="Sting and Lex Luger" label="Sting and Lex Luger"/>
<link wikidata="Q4923705" start="99296" end="99313" title="The Blade Runners" label="The Blade Runners"/>
<link wikidata="Q202784" start="99316" end="99333" title="The Four Horsemen (professional wrestling)" label="The Four Horsemen"/>
<link wikidata="Q3109889" start="99336" end="99356" title="The Main Event Mafia" label="The Main Event Mafia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7916142" start="99359" end="99375" title="The Varsity Club" label="The Varsity Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q918" start="99559" end="99566" title="Twitter" label="Twitter"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="655582" wikidata="Q980895" url="?curid=655582" title="Mbini">
<text>Mbini is a town in Río Muni, Equatorial Guinea, lying at the mouth of the Benito River. &quot;Mbini&quot; is the Ndowe name for Río Muni. It is located 44 km southwest of Bata.

In 1994, the population was around 14,000 and the city is linked by ferry with Bolondo. The town is known for its seafood and for nearby beaches.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q845368" start="19" end="27" title="Río Muni" label="Río Muni"/>
<link wikidata="Q983" start="29" end="46" title="Equatorial Guinea" label="Equatorial Guinea"/>
<link wikidata="Q2634342" start="74" end="86" title="Benito River" label="Benito River"/>
<link wikidata="Q36459" start="113" end="118" title="Ndowe language" label="Ndowe"/>
<link wikidata="Q320792" start="171" end="175" title="Bata, Equatorial Guinea" label="Bata"/>
<link wikidata="Q1647504" start="257" end="264" title="Bolondo" label="Bolondo"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="655583" wikidata="Q2844575" url="?curid=655583" title="Amy Ray">
<text>Amy Elizabeth Ray (born April 12, 1964) is an American singer-songwriter and member of the contemporary folk duo Indigo Girls with Emily Saliers. She also pursues a solo career, releasing ten albums under her own name, and founded the independent label Daemon Records in 1989. Ray is known for her alto and tenor range, and plays both electric and acoustic guitar, as well as mandolin and harmonica.

==Biography==

Born in Decatur, Georgia, Amy Ray met Emily Saliers when they both attended the same elementary school. They began performing together and recorded a demo in 1981. After graduation, Ray and Saliers went to different colleges with Ray attending Vanderbilt University. By 1985, they had both transferred to Emory University in Atlanta and formed the Indigo Girls. In 1986, Ray graduated from Emory with majors in English and Religion.

In March 2001, Ray released her first solo album, &quot;Stag&quot;, a southern and punk rock album. The Butchies, a punk band whose members include Kaia Wilson, Melissa York, and Alison Martlew, provided support for five songs, and Joan Jett played on &quot;Hey Castrator&quot;. In April 2005, Ray released the softer edged &quot;Prom&quot;, and in December 2006, she released &quot;Live from Knoxville&quot;. Her fourth solo album, the melodic &quot;Didn&#x27;t It Feel Kinder,&quot; was released in August 2008. &quot;Lung of Love&quot;, which has more of an indie-rock sound, was released in 2012.

Her backup band for her &quot;Stag&quot; tour was The Butchies. In 2004, when she embarked on her &quot;Prom&quot; tour, she brought Les Nuby (guitar), Will Lochamy (drums), and Jody Bleyle (bass). Tara Jane O&#x27;Neil replaced Bleyle when she began maternity leave in October. Ray&#x27;s backup band for her 2012 &quot;Lung of Love&quot; tour was The Butchies. Jenn Stone, former keyboard player for Kesha, also performed on the tour.

==Side projects==

In addition to the Indigo Girls and her work as a solo artist, Ray also runs an independent record label, Daemon Records, which she founded in 1990 and which is based in Decatur, Georgia. Some performers signed to Daemon include Girlyman, Magnapop, Nineteen Forty-Five, Michelle Malone, Three Finger Cowboy, Danielle Howle and the Tantrums, Gerard McHugh, New Mongrels, Grady Cousins, The Oblivious, Snow Machine, Utah Phillips and Rose Polenzani.

She often collaborates with The Butchies, a punk band featuring drummer Melissa York and vocalist/guitarist Kaia Wilson. She has contributed the live track &quot;Lucy Stoners&quot; on &quot;Calling All Kings &amp; Queens&quot; (2001) and the Mr. Lady Records sampler album as well as a live recording of &quot;On Your Honor&quot; on a compilation for Home Alive.

Ray is also an activist involved in multiple political and social causes, including gay rights, low-power broadcasting, women&#x27;s rights, indigenous struggles, gun control, environmental protection and the anti-death penalty movement among others. She has made several trips to Chiapas, Mexico to support the Zapatista Army of National Liberation.

In 1993, she and Emily Saliers co-founded Honor the Earth with Winona LaDuke. Honor the Earth&#x27;s mission is &quot;to create awareness and support for Native [American] environmental issues and to develop needed financial and political resources for the survival of sustainable Native [American] communities. Honor the Earth develops these resources by using music, the arts, the media, and indigenous wisdom to ask people to recognize our joint dependency on the Earth and be a voice for those not heard.&quot;

Justin Vernon (Bon Iver) appears on her 2014 album &quot;Goodnight Tender&quot;, and she and Vernon continue to maintain a friendship.

Ray was also a judge for the 3rd and 11th Annual Independent Music Awards to support independent artists&#x27; careers.

== Personal life ==
Ray uses she/her pronouns and is a lesbian.
Ray lives in the foothills of North Georgia with her partner, Carrie Schrader, and their daughter, Ozilline Graydon. In March 2021, Ray spoke on the &quot;LGBTQ&amp;A&quot; podcast about having gender dysphoria and being genderqueer.

Ray identifies herself as &quot;religious&quot; and a &quot;Pagan Christian&quot;.

==Discography==
===Studio albums===
*&quot;Stag&quot; (2001)
*&quot;Prom&quot; (2005)
*&quot;Didn&#x27;t It Feel Kinder&quot; (2008)
*&quot;Lung of Love&quot; (2012)
*&quot;Goodnight Tender&quot; (2014)
*&quot;Holler&quot; (2018)
*&quot;If It All Goes South&quot; (2022)

===Live albums===
*&quot;Live from Knoxville&quot; (2006)
*&quot;MVP Live&quot; (2010)
*&quot;The Tender Hour: Amy Ray Live from Seattle&quot; (2015)

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2844575" start="0" end="17" title="Amy Ray" label="Amy Elizabeth Ray"/>
<link wikidata="Q772035" start="113" end="125" title="Indigo Girls" label="Indigo Girls"/>
<link wikidata="Q256038" start="131" end="144" title="Emily Saliers" label="Emily Saliers"/>
<link wikidata="Q986200" start="424" end="440" title="Decatur, Georgia" label="Decatur, Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q256038" start="454" end="467" title="Emily Saliers" label="Emily Saliers"/>
<link wikidata="Q29052" start="660" end="681" title="Vanderbilt University" label="Vanderbilt University"/>
<link wikidata="Q621043" start="721" end="737" title="Emory University" label="Emory University"/>
<link wikidata="Q23556" start="741" end="748" title="Atlanta" label="Atlanta"/>
<link wikidata="Q772035" start="764" end="776" title="Indigo Girls" label="Indigo Girls"/>
<link wikidata="Q7596735" start="906" end="910" title="Stag (Amy Ray album)" label="Stag"/>
<link wikidata="Q2901172" start="950" end="962" title="The Butchies" label="The Butchies"/>
<link wikidata="Q13561705" start="998" end="1009" title="Kaia Wilson" label="Kaia Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q6812913" start="1011" end="1023" title="Melissa York" label="Melissa York"/>
<link wikidata="Q2901172" start="1029" end="1043" title="Alison Martlew" label="Alison Martlew"/>
<link wikidata="Q231106" start="1082" end="1091" title="Joan Jett" label="Joan Jett"/>
<link wikidata="Q7249656" start="1180" end="1184" title="Prom (album)" label="Prom"/>
<link wikidata="Q2844575" start="1233" end="1252" title="Live from Knoxville" label="Live from Knoxville"/>
<link wikidata="Q5274210" start="1301" end="1327" title="Didn&amp;#x27;t It Feel Kinder" label="Didn&amp;#x27;t It Feel Kinder"/>
<link wikidata="Q118124424" start="1370" end="1382" title="Lung of Love" label="Lung of Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q2398467" start="1630" end="1641" title="Jody Bleyle" label="Jody Bleyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q7685080" start="1650" end="1671" title="Tara Jane O&amp;#x27;Neil" label="Tara Jane O&amp;#x27;Neil"/>
<link wikidata="Q33605" start="1854" end="1859" title="Kesha" label="Kesha"/>
<link wikidata="Q5564724" start="2138" end="2146" title="Girlyman" label="Girlyman"/>
<link wikidata="Q312706" start="2148" end="2156" title="Magnapop" label="Magnapop"/>
<link wikidata="Q6837144" start="2179" end="2194" title="Michelle Malone" label="Michelle Malone"/>
<link wikidata="Q5219386" start="2217" end="2231" title="Danielle Howle" label="Danielle Howle"/>
<link wikidata="Q7010452" start="2265" end="2277" title="New Mongrels" label="New Mongrels"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2309" end="2321" title="Snow Machine (band)" label="Snow Machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q366306" start="2323" end="2336" title="Utah Phillips" label="Utah Phillips"/>
<link wikidata="Q13561977" start="2341" end="2355" title="Rose Polenzani" label="Rose Polenzani"/>
<link wikidata="Q2901172" start="2386" end="2398" title="The Butchies" label="The Butchies"/>
<link wikidata="Q6812913" start="2430" end="2442" title="Melissa York" label="Melissa York"/>
<link wikidata="Q13561705" start="2466" end="2477" title="Kaia Wilson" label="Kaia Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5022149" start="2548" end="2578" title="Calling All Kings &amp;amp; Queens" label="Calling All Kings &amp;amp; Queens"/>
<link wikidata="Q1951424" start="2600" end="2616" title="Mr. Lady Records" label="Mr. Lady Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q5888196" start="2709" end="2719" title="Home Alive" label="Home Alive"/>
<link wikidata="Q17898" start="2806" end="2816" title="gay rights" label="gay rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q2015033" start="2818" end="2840" title="low-power broadcasting" label="low-power broadcasting"/>
<link wikidata="Q223569" start="2842" end="2861" title="women&amp;#x27;s rights" label="women&amp;#x27;s rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q103817" start="2863" end="2883" title="Indigenous peoples" label="indigenous struggles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1305384" start="2885" end="2896" title="Gun politics in the United States" label="gun control"/>
<link wikidata="Q2855609" start="2898" end="2922" title="Environmentalism" label="environmental protection"/>
<link wikidata="Q60123" start="3003" end="3010" title="Chiapas" label="Chiapas"/>
<link wikidata="Q188590" start="3034" end="3071" title="Zapatista Army of National Liberation" label="Zapatista Army of National Liberation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5896900" start="3116" end="3131" title="Honor the Earth" label="Honor the Earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q118969" start="3137" end="3150" title="Winona LaDuke" label="Winona LaDuke"/>
<link wikidata="Q3432151" start="3590" end="3603" title="Justin Vernon" label="Justin Vernon"/>
<link wikidata="Q357340" start="3605" end="3613" title="Bon Iver" label="Bon Iver"/>
<link wikidata="Q118126144" start="3647" end="3663" title="Goodnight Tender" label="Goodnight Tender"/>
<link wikidata="Q1270787" start="3876" end="3883" title="she/her" label="she/her"/>
<link wikidata="Q104857753" start="4066" end="4077" title="LGBTQ&amp;amp;A" label="LGBTQ&amp;amp;A"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049021" start="4105" end="4121" title="gender dysphoria" label="gender dysphoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q48270" start="4132" end="4143" title="Non-binary gender" label="genderqueer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7596735" start="4273" end="4277" title="Stag (Amy Ray album)" label="Stag"/>
<link wikidata="Q7249656" start="4298" end="4302" title="Prom (album)" label="Prom"/>
<link wikidata="Q5274210" start="4323" end="4349" title="Didn&amp;#x27;t It Feel Kinder" label="Didn&amp;#x27;t It Feel Kinder"/>
<link wikidata="Q118124424" start="4370" end="4382" title="Lung of Love" label="Lung of Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q118126144" start="4403" end="4419" title="Goodnight Tender" label="Goodnight Tender"/>
<link wikidata="Q118126171" start="4440" end="4446" title="Holler (album)" label="Holler"/>
<link wikidata="Q118126172" start="4467" end="4487" title="If It All Goes South" label="If It All Goes South"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="655584" wikidata="Q256038" url="?curid=655584" title="Emily Saliers">
<text>Emily Ann Saliers (born July 22, 1963) is an American singer-songwriter and member of the musical duo Indigo Girls. Saliers sings soprano and plays lead guitar as well as banjo, piano, mandolin, ukulele, bouzouki and many other instruments.

== Early life and education ==
Saliers was born in New Haven, Connecticut, as the second eldest of four daughters to Don and Jane Saliers (née Firmin), a librarian. Since approximately age 11, she was raised in Decatur, Georgia (in Metro Atlanta). Don Saliers was the William R. Cannon Distinguished Professor of Theology and Worship at the Candler School of Theology at Emory University. He is Theologian-in-Residence and a professor emeritus . In addition to teaching theology and worship, as an organist he directed the master of sacred music program there.

Emily attended Laurel Ridge Elementary School in Decatur, Georgia. She later attended Shamrock High School, which she did not like. She began her college education at Tulane University but transferred to Emory University, graduating in 1985 with a bachelor&#x27;s degree in English.

== Musical career ==

=== Indigo Girls ===
Saliers first met her future Indigo Girls bandmate Amy Ray when they were students at Laurel Ridge Elementary School in Decatur, Georgia. As students at Shamrock High School, they started performing music together at talent shows and local venues (including bars when she was still under age) under the band names of &quot;Saliers &amp; Ray&quot; and the &quot;B-Band&quot;. When Saliers (the elder of the duo) left Georgia for college in Louisiana, Ray frequently visited her. They would play together for tips in New Orleans&#x27; French Quarter. Saliers and Ray eventually reunited when they transferred from their respective colleges to Emory University. At Emory they settled upon the band name Indigo Girls; Ray came across the word in the dictionary and &quot;thought it sounded cool&quot;.

=== Performing as Emily Saliers ===
In 2004, Saliers composed her first film score for the independent short film, &quot;One Weekend a Month&quot;. She occasionally performs solo at benefit shows or as a guest with friends&#x27; bands. She and her father Don Saliers performed together once at the Washington National Cathedral in 2007.

In 2014, she began working on her first solo album, &quot;Murmuration Nation,&quot; which was released on August 11, 2017 and was produced by longtime friend and Juilliard-trained violin player for Indigo Girls, Lyris Hung. The album was recorded in New York City and engineered by Ryan Kelly and Tom Morello. Appearing with Saliers are drummers Robert &quot;Sput&quot; Searight and Will Calhoun, bassist Tim Lefebvre, and keyboardist Rachel Eckroth, along with guest vocalists Jonatha Brooke, Jennifer Nettles, and Lucy Wainwright Roche.

== Non-performance career ==
Saliers was a co-owner of Watershed, a restaurant in Atlanta, Georgia, from its founding until she sold her share in April 2018. Emily was one of the initial investors in the Flying Biscuit Cafe. She was a co-founder of the (now-defunct) Common Pond environmental gift shop in Atlanta, Georgia.

Saliers has co-written a book with her father, Don Saliers, a retired theology professor at Candler School of Theology at Emory University, called &quot;A Song to Sing, a Life to Live: Reflections on Music as Spiritual Practice&quot;. Emily and her father attended book signings and church appearances around the US in support of the book, including the National Cathedral in Washington, D.C. in May 2005 and October 2007.

== Personal life ==
Saliers married her longtime girlfriend, former Indigo Girls tour manager Tristin Chipman at New York City Hall on August 20, 2013. Chipman, a Canadian, is from Calgary, but she spent most of her adult life in Toronto, according to Saliers between songs when performing onstage in Vancouver in 2013. The couple already had a daughter, Cleo, born in November 2012.

Saliers had a passion for wine collecting, with a wine cellar that was reported to be at 2,000 bottles, but in 2015 she announced that she had given up drinking. She has since disclosed that she became sober in 2011, calling it her &quot;biggest challenge.&quot;

Saliers assisted in funding a music room at Emory University&#x27;s Schwartz Center for Performing Arts which was named for her parents Don and Jane Saliers.

== References ==
== External links ==
*Watershed </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q256038" start="0" end="17" title="Emily Saliers" label="Emily Ann Saliers"/>
<link wikidata="Q772035" start="102" end="114" title="Indigo Girls" label="Indigo Girls"/>
<link wikidata="Q30903" start="130" end="137" title="soprano" label="soprano"/>
<link wikidata="Q258896" start="171" end="176" title="banjo" label="banjo"/>
<link wikidata="Q302497" start="185" end="193" title="mandolin" label="mandolin"/>
<link wikidata="Q61285" start="195" end="202" title="ukulele" label="ukulele"/>
<link wikidata="Q322675" start="204" end="212" title="bouzouki" label="bouzouki"/>
<link wikidata="Q49145" start="293" end="315" title="New Haven, Connecticut" label="New Haven, Connecticut"/>
<link wikidata="Q5293464" start="359" end="362" title="Don Saliers" label="Don"/>
<link wikidata="Q986200" start="453" end="469" title="Decatur, Georgia" label="Decatur, Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q971998" start="474" end="487" title="Atlanta metropolitan area" label="Metro Atlanta"/>
<link wikidata="Q5031983" start="583" end="609" title="Candler School of Theology" label="Candler School of Theology"/>
<link wikidata="Q621043" start="613" end="629" title="Emory University" label="Emory University"/>
<link wikidata="Q2881228" start="819" end="849" title="DeKalb County School District" label="Laurel Ridge Elementary School"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193547" start="971" end="988" title="Tulane University" label="Tulane University"/>
<link wikidata="Q163727" start="1052" end="1074" title="bachelor&amp;#x27;s degree" label="bachelor&amp;#x27;s degree"/>
<link wikidata="Q2844575" start="1182" end="1189" title="Amy Ray" label="Amy Ray"/>
<link wikidata="Q602939" start="1664" end="1678" title="French Quarter" label="French Quarter"/>
<link wikidata="Q668710" start="2228" end="2257" title="Washington National Cathedral" label="Washington National Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q116762766" start="2326" end="2344" title="Murmuration Nation" label="Murmuration Nation"/>
<link wikidata="Q297552" start="2565" end="2576" title="Tom Morello" label="Tom Morello"/>
<link wikidata="Q3568279" start="2651" end="2663" title="Will Calhoun" label="Will Calhoun"/>
<link wikidata="Q22278828" start="2673" end="2685" title="Tim Lefebvre" label="Tim Lefebvre"/>
<link wikidata="Q56222192" start="2703" end="2717" title="Rachel Eckroth" label="Rachel Eckroth"/>
<link wikidata="Q437787" start="2746" end="2760" title="Jonatha Brooke" label="Jonatha Brooke"/>
<link wikidata="Q2627462" start="2762" end="2778" title="Jennifer Nettles" label="Jennifer Nettles"/>
<link wikidata="Q6698548" start="2784" end="2805" title="Lucy Wainwright Roche" label="Lucy Wainwright Roche"/>
<link wikidata="Q5293464" start="3180" end="3191" title="Don Saliers" label="Don Saliers"/>
<link wikidata="Q5031983" start="3225" end="3251" title="Candler School of Theology" label="Candler School of Theology"/>
<link wikidata="Q668710" start="3487" end="3505" title="Washington National Cathedral" label="National Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065206" start="3670" end="3688" title="New York City Hall" label="New York City Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q36312" start="3738" end="3745" title="Calgary" label="Calgary"/>
<link wikidata="Q24639" start="3858" end="3867" title="Vancouver" label="Vancouver"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="655587" wikidata="Q3347287" url="?curid=655587" title="Nór">
<text>Nór (Old Norse Nórr) is according to the Orkneyinga Saga the eponymous founder of Norway.

==Icelandic accounts==

===Source material===
Nór of Norway appear in “Fundinn Nóregr” (‘Norway Founded’), hereafter called F, which begins the &quot;Orkneyinga saga&quot;, and in &quot;Hversu Noregr byggðist&quot; (‘How Norway was Settled’), hereafter called B, both found in the &quot;Flatey Book&quot;. The term is described differently in different sources.

===About Thorri===
King Thorri (&quot;Þorri&quot; &#x27;frozen snow&#x27;) was son of Snær (&#x27;Snow&#x27;) the Old, a descendant of Fornjót (&quot;king of Jotlandi (also spelled Gotlandi), later known as Quennlandi and Finnlandi&quot;). See Snær and Fornjót for further information. The name Þorri has long been connected with that of Þórr, the name of the Norse thunder god Thor, or thunder personified.

A grandson of King Snow, and Frost before that, king Nór marries Hedda (Höddu) daughter of Svaða Jótun that may be seen as descending from the Scyldings, from the Kings of Lejre, the stronghold of the descendants of Dan in Denmark. Þorri is the brother of Driva, mother of Visbur, as attested by the scolding poetic genealogy known as Ynglingatal, by King Vanlande (from the land of the Wends), as well as Fónn and Mjól, by their father Snow the Old (Snær ins Gamli) – who lived for 360 years. He was an offspring of Frost (Frosti), child of Kári (master of the arctic wind), sibling to Logi (master of the fire – eponymous to Hålogaland – High Logi), &amp; Hler (master of the sea, also known by the name Ægir, and cognate with Llyr as well as King Lear of Shakespeare, as well as eponymous to Lejre and Læsø), as well as Gymir the husband of Aurboda, whose daughter becomes the famous Åsynje Gerðr.

==Chronicon Lethrense==
The &quot;Chronicle of Lejre&quot; (“Chronicon Lethrense”) written about 1170 introduces a primeval King Ypper of Uppsala whose three sons were Dan who afterwards ruled Denmark, Nori who afterwards ruled Norway, and Östen who afterwards ruled the Swedes. But the account then speaks only of the descendants of Dan. Although not matching, there are some correspondences between the sources. In the B-source (&quot;Hversu Noregr byggðist&quot;) Nór is married Höddu, granddaughter of a King Östen, on her mother Åshild&#x27;s side. Her and her brother Hrolf of Berg&#x27;s father, Svaða Jótun appears in a number of obscure genealogies as a descendant from Dan, through Hjörvard Halgison, also named Åsathor Oðinnson who married Helga Friðleifsson; Friðleif was born to Fróði King of Denmark, descendants of Skjöldr, eponymous ancestor of the Scyldings.

Both accounts state that great sacrifice was made yearly at mid-winter, whence was derived both the name of the mid-winter sacrifice and the name of the winter month Thorri corresponding to late January and early February in the Roman calendar.

===The story of Nór===
One year, at the time of Thorri&#x27;s Sacrifice, Gói the daughter of King Thorri suddenly vanished. Thorri held a second feast the following month hoping to learn what had become of Gói. That sacrifice was afterward also observed regularly and known as Gói&#x27;s Sacrifice and the name of the month was thence named Gói.

When Gói was still not found after three years, her brothers Nór and Gór set out separately in search of her with many folk in their following, Nór and his folk going by land on skis while Gór went by ship and searched the islands and skerries.

Eventually Nór and his following came to the Kjölen Mountains (the Keel) and passed into was later to be called Norway, defeating any who opposed him. F relates in particular that Nór defeated the folk around what was later called the Trondheimsfjord, that Nór also took possession of the eastern lands near Lake Mjors (modern lake Mjøsa), then slew King Sokni, the eponym of Sokna Dale (modern Sogndal) and Sognefjörd (modern Sognefjorden) and took possession of his kingdom. But B mentions instead the defeat of four kings named Véi, Vei, Hunding (&quot;Hundingr&quot;), and Heming (&quot;Hemingr&quot;).

Then, in Heidemark (approximately the modern region of Hedemarken in the more extensive province of Hedmark), Nór met with King Hrólf of the Hill (&quot;Hrólfr í Bergr&quot;). Hrólf was son of the giant Svadi (&quot;Svaði&quot;) from Dovre Mountain in the north. According to B Hrólf&#x27;s mother was Áshild (&quot;Áshildr&quot;) daughter of King Eystein of Heidemark. It was this Hrólf who had taken Gói captive and had then made her his wife. Nór and Hrólf came to terms (after a long single combat according to F). Hrólf kept Gói as his wife and Nór afterwards married Hrólf&#x27;s sister (called Hödd in B) and became Nór&#x27;s man.

Both accounts relate that Gór eventually joined Nór and the two brothers made an agreement that Nór would rule all the mainland but Gór would rule all islands around the mainland, that he would be lord over any island that was separated from the mainland by a channel through which a ship with a fixed rudder was able to pass. The mainland was then named Norway (&quot;Noregr&quot;) after Nór. Nór&#x27;s new kingdom is now said to have been what is south-eastern Norway today, as it extended from Jötunheim mountains in the north to what was later known as &quot;Álfheim&quot; (roughly the modern Swedish Bohuslän) in the south, the southern border of Nór&#x27;s land being what is now the Glomma river whose southwestern course is not very far inside the southeastern border of modern Norway.

The sons and grandsons and later descendants of Nór continually divided their inheritances among themselves so that Norway became filled with many small kingdoms and lordships.

===Descendants of Nór===

According to B, Nór&#x27;s sons by Höddu were Thránd (&quot;Þrándr&quot;) and Gard (&quot;Garðr&quot;). B later brings in another son of Nór named Raum (&quot;Raumr&quot;). Presumably either Raum had another mother than Höddu, or Raum&#x27;s name has accidentally dropped out from the earlier listing of Höddu&#x27;s sons.

====Thránd====
Thránd ruled Trondheim (&quot;Þrándheimr&quot;) which was named after him and refers approximately to present day county of Sør-Trøndelag and the southern parts of Nord-Trøndelag, rather than to the city now called Trondheim.

&quot;Eireks saga víðförla&quot; (&#x27;The Saga of Eirek the Traveller&#x27;) also brings in Thrand as the first king to regin of Trondheim. Thrand&#x27;s ancestry is not given here, but he is the father of Eirek the Traveller (&quot;Eirekr inn víðfǫrli&quot;) the hero of the saga.

&quot;Hálfdanar saga Eysteinssonar&quot; (&#x27;Saga of Halfdan Eystein&#x27;s son&#x27;) states instead that Trondheim was named from King Thránd, the father of Eirek the Traveller, but also states that Thrand was son of King Sæmingr of Hálogaland, son of Odin, and that Thránd&#x27;s mother and Sæmingr&#x27;s wife was Nauma after whom Naumu Dale was named. For more on Sæmingr see Sons of Odin. Thrand&#x27;s wife is here said to be Dagmær sister of Svanhvít the wife of Hrómund Grip&#x27;s son, the protagonist of &quot;Hrómundar saga Gripssonar&quot;. The saga says that Eystein, son of Thrand and Dagmær, married Ása, a daughter of Sigurd Hart (the maternal grandfather of Harald Fairhair), and she gave birth to Halfdan, the hero of the saga. This places Thrand just three generations back from Harald Fairhair. But this saga seems to be a late and untraditional creation, dating only to the early 14th century.

====Gard====
Gard son of Nór was also called Gard Agdi (&quot;Garðr Agði&quot;), apparently as ruler of Agdir (&quot;Agðir&quot;): the modern counties of Vest-Agder and Aust-Agder. Gard Agdi&#x27;s descendants ruled the southwestern regions of Norway. See Gard Agdi for details.

====Raum the Old====
Raum inherited south-eastern Norway and also the northwestern valley of the Rauma river to the western sea which waters the region called Raums Dale (modern Romsdal). Raum in this account also ruled the land of Álfheim to the south. See Raum the Old for further details on Raum and his descendants.

===Descendants of Gór===
Gór had sons named Heiti and Beiti (and according to B two other sons named Meitir and Geitir). Heiti and Beiti often made war against the sons of Nór.

Beiti the sea-king had one of his ships put on sledge runners and so passed in the ship over the snow-covered land starting from what was afterwards called Beitstad on Beitstadfjorden from Beiti&#x27;s named and passing north across Ellidæid (&quot;Elliðæið&quot; &#x27;Galley-neck&#x27;) to Naumu Dale (&quot;Naumudal&quot;) with his father Gór in the ship with his hand on the tiller. So, by the agreement that had been made between Nór and Gór, the land between the path of the ship and the sea became Beiti&#x27;s.

The names of Beiti&#x27;s descendants are missing from B. Heiti the sea-king was the father of Svadi (&quot;Svaði&quot;). Geitir was father of Glammi and Gylfi; and Meitir the sea-king was father of two sons named Mævil and Myndil (&quot;Myndill&quot;), Myndil being father of two sons named Ekkil (&quot;Ekkill&quot;) and Skekkil (&quot;Skekkill&quot;).
But F speaks only of Gór&#x27;s son Heiti as the father of Sveidi (&quot;Sveiði&quot;) the father of Halfdan the Old, who confusingly is named identically to Halfdan the Old who is a descendant of Nór. But it is from Halfdan the Old who is called a descendant of Gór from whom springs at last the Jarls of Orkney who are the subject of the &quot;Orkneyinga saga&quot;. See Halfdan the Old to follow this lineage further. A famous family descending from Gór exists to this day in the 42nd generation, the old Hardanger male lineage of Galte.

==Alternative spellings==
Alternative Anglicizations are: 
* Glói: &quot;Gloi&quot;
* Gór: &quot;Gorr&quot;
* Hrólf: &quot;Hrolf&quot;, &quot;Rolf&quot;
* Nór: &quot;Norr&quot;
* Forniot, &quot;Forniotr&quot;
* Hlér: &quot;Hler&quot; ; : &quot;Kari&quot;
* Snær: &quot;Snaer&quot;, &quot;Snœr&quot;, &quot;Snow&quot;
* Véi: &quot;Vee&quot;.

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3347287" start="0" end="3" title="Nór" label="Nór"/>
<link wikidata="Q35505" start="5" end="14" title="Old Norse language" label="Old Norse"/>
<link wikidata="Q3347287" start="15" end="19" title="Nór" label="Nórr"/>
<link wikidata="Q1642345" start="41" end="56" title="Orkneyinga Saga" label="Orkneyinga Saga"/>
<link wikidata="Q20" start="82" end="88" title="Norway" label="Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q20" start="144" end="150" title="Norway" label="Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1642345" start="241" end="256" title="Orkneyinga saga" label="Orkneyinga saga"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163659" start="277" end="299" title="Hversu Noregr byggðist" label="Hversu Noregr byggðist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1427347" start="378" end="389" title="Flatey Book" label="Flatey Book"/>
<link wikidata="Q3356266" start="492" end="497" title="Þorri" label="Þorri"/>
<link wikidata="Q389673" start="589" end="596" title="Fornjót" label="Fornjót"/>
<link wikidata="Q2666970" start="661" end="671" title="Kvenland" label="Quennlandi"/>
<link wikidata="Q33" start="676" end="685" title="Finland" label="Finnlandi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3356435" start="698" end="702" title="Snær" label="Snær"/>
<link wikidata="Q389673" start="707" end="714" title="Fornjót" label="Fornjót"/>
<link wikidata="Q3356266" start="749" end="754" title="Þorri" label="Þorri"/>
<link wikidata="Q42952" start="792" end="796" title="Þórr" label="Þórr"/>
<link wikidata="Q42952" start="832" end="836" title="Thor" label="Thor"/>
<link wikidata="Q83301" start="841" end="848" title="thunder" label="thunder"/>
<link wikidata="Q2469181" start="1006" end="1014" title="Scylding" label="Scylding"/>
<link wikidata="Q2689028" start="1035" end="1040" title="Lejre" label="Lejre"/>
<link wikidata="Q2715224" start="1079" end="1082" title="Dan (king)" label="Dan"/>
<link wikidata="Q520498" start="1136" end="1142" title="Visbur" label="Visbur"/>
<link wikidata="Q1332731" start="1198" end="1209" title="Ynglingatal" label="Ynglingatal"/>
<link wikidata="Q776205" start="1219" end="1227" title="Vanlande" label="Vanlande"/>
<link wikidata="Q158281" start="1250" end="1255" title="Wends" label="Wends"/>
<link wikidata="Q2262887" start="1490" end="1500" title="Hålogaland" label="Hålogaland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2689028" start="1658" end="1663" title="Lejre" label="Lejre"/>
<link wikidata="Q683719" start="1668" end="1672" title="Læsø" label="Læsø"/>
<link wikidata="Q1380165" start="1686" end="1691" title="Gymir (father of Gerðr)" label="Gymir"/>
<link wikidata="Q2504194" start="1707" end="1714" title="Aurboda" label="Aurboda"/>
<link wikidata="Q170358" start="1750" end="1756" title="Æsir" label="Åsynje"/>
<link wikidata="Q1127847" start="1757" end="1762" title="Gerðr" label="Gerðr"/>
<link wikidata="Q2715163" start="1826" end="1845" title="Chronicon Lethrense" label="Chronicon Lethrense"/>
<link wikidata="Q25286" start="1903" end="1910" title="Uppsala" label="Uppsala"/>
<link wikidata="Q2715224" start="1933" end="1936" title="Dan (Danish)" label="Dan"/>
<link wikidata="Q35" start="1958" end="1965" title="Denmark" label="Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q20" start="1993" end="1999" title="Norway" label="Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q34" start="2036" end="2042" title="Sweden" label="Swedes"/>
<link wikidata="Q33101151" start="2557" end="2562" title="Fróði" label="Fróði"/>
<link wikidata="Q1771470" start="2595" end="2602" title="Skjöldr" label="Skjöldr"/>
<link wikidata="Q2469181" start="2630" end="2638" title="Scylding" label="Scylding"/>
<link wikidata="Q200966" start="2871" end="2885" title="Roman calendar" label="Roman calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q279579" start="3716" end="3731" title="Trondheimsfjord" label="Trondheimsfjord"/>
<link wikidata="Q212209" start="3813" end="3818" title="Mjøsa" label="Mjøsa"/>
<link wikidata="Q490923" start="3876" end="3883" title="Sogndal" label="Sogndal"/>
<link wikidata="Q208495" start="3908" end="3920" title="Sognefjorden" label="Sognefjorden"/>
<link wikidata="Q50616" start="4189" end="4196" title="Hedmark" label="Hedmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q486677" start="4323" end="4328" title="Dovre" label="Dovre"/>
<link wikidata="Q204102" start="5227" end="5236" title="Jotunheim" label="Jötunheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q250646" start="5293" end="5300" title="Álfheim" label="Álfheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q209523" start="5335" end="5343" title="Bohuslän" label="Bohuslän"/>
<link wikidata="Q214535" start="5420" end="5426" title="Glomma" label="Glomma"/>
<link wikidata="Q50628" start="6192" end="6205" title="Sør-Trøndelag" label="Sør-Trøndelag"/>
<link wikidata="Q50629" start="6232" end="6246" title="Nord-Trøndelag" label="Nord-Trøndelag"/>
<link wikidata="Q25804" start="6283" end="6292" title="Trondheim" label="Trondheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q937953" start="6301" end="6321" title="Eireks saga víðförla" label="Eireks saga víðförla"/>
<link wikidata="Q2082099" start="6586" end="6614" title="Hálfdanar saga Eysteinssonar" label="Hálfdanar saga Eysteinssonar"/>
<link wikidata="Q657811" start="6807" end="6814" title="Sæmingr" label="Sæmingr"/>
<link wikidata="Q2262887" start="6818" end="6828" title="Hålogaland" label="Hálogaland"/>
<link wikidata="Q43610" start="6837" end="6841" title="Odin" label="Odin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7562334" start="6964" end="6976" title="Sons of Odin" label="Sons of Odin"/>
<link wikidata="Q327173" start="7104" end="7129" title="Hrómundar saga Gripssonar" label="Hrómundar saga Gripssonar"/>
<link wikidata="Q206123" start="7259" end="7274" title="Harald Fairhair" label="Harald Fairhair"/>
<link wikidata="Q50623" start="7654" end="7664" title="Vest-Agder" label="Vest-Agder"/>
<link wikidata="Q50621" start="7669" end="7679" title="Aust-Agder" label="Aust-Agder"/>
<link wikidata="Q5522125" start="7756" end="7765" title="Gard Agdi" label="Gard Agdi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1467860" start="7958" end="7965" title="Romsdal" label="Romsdal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7296207" start="8038" end="8050" title="Raum the Old" label="Raum the Old"/>
<link wikidata="Q4881493" start="8435" end="8443" title="Beitstad" label="Beitstad"/>
<link wikidata="Q2894061" start="8447" end="8462" title="Beitstadfjorden" label="Beitstadfjorden"/>
<link wikidata="Q100166" start="9460" end="9466" title="Orkney" label="Orkney"/>
<link wikidata="Q13581242" start="9527" end="9542" title="Halfdan the Old" label="Halfdan the Old"/>
<link wikidata="Q4443170" start="9688" end="9693" title="Galtung (noble family)" label="Galte"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="655599" wikidata="Q1093701" url="?curid=655599" title="Portishead (album)">
<text>Portishead is the second studio album by the English electronic music group Portishead, released on 29 September 1997 by Go! Discs.

==Music==
With &quot;Portishead&quot;, the band chose to eschew sampling other records, which had been a defining feature of their debut album &quot;Dummy&quot;. Instead, they created original pieces which they wove into the songs, resulting in a more textured sound. The only song to employ samples was &quot;Only You&quot;, which incorporates elements of Ken Thorne&#x27;s &quot;Inspector Clouseau&quot; score and The Pharcyde&#x27;s &quot;She Said&quot;. &quot;Western Eyes&quot; is listed as sampling &quot;Hookers &amp; Gin&quot; by the Sean Atkins Experience in the album&#x27;s liner notes. In reality, this song does not exist; like most of the samples on the album, it was created by the band.

==Artwork==
The album cover is a still image from the music video of the song &quot;All Mine&quot;.

==Release==
Released in September 1997, the album reached 2 on the UK Albums Chart and No. 21 on the &quot;Billboard&quot; 200.

On 3 December 2008, Universal Music Japan re-released &quot;Dummy&quot; and &quot;Portishead&quot; as a limited SHM-CD version.

==Reception==
&quot;Portishead&quot; received critical acclaim upon its release. In a rave review for &quot;Q&quot;, Andrew Harrison said that the album showed Portishead sounding &quot;less and less like a conflation of influences, and more and more like themselves&quot;, finding the music &quot;almost cinematic&quot; and the lyrics &quot;more rounded&quot; in perspective than on &quot;Dummy&quot;. Caroline Sullivan of &quot;The Guardian&quot; credited the band for rendering their debut album&#x27;s sound &quot;even more haunting&quot; on &quot;Portishead&quot;. Commenting on the textures of the music, Barry Walters wrote in &quot;Spin&quot; that the group had created a &quot;gothic&quot;, &quot;deadly&quot; and &quot;trippy&quot; atmosphere and gotten &quot;darker, deeper, and more disturbing.&quot; AllMusic&#x27;s Stephen Thomas Erlewine stated that while &quot;on the surface, &quot;Portishead&quot; isn&#x27;t all that dissimilar from &quot;Dummy&quot;&quot;, the &quot;darker and more adventurous&quot; quality of the music becomes apparent over repeated listens, adding that &quot;the sonics... would make it an impressive follow-up, but what seals its success is the remarkable songwriting.&quot;

===Year-end lists===


==Track listing==
==Credits==
All songs produced by Geoff Barrow, Adrian Utley, Beth Gibbons and Dave McDonald.

===Portishead===
* Beth Gibbons – vocals
* Adrian Utley – guitar (tracks 1, 2, 4, 5, 7–10), bass (tracks 2, 4, 5, 7, 9), synthesizer (tracks 4, 6), Rhodes piano (track 9), piano (track 11)
* Geoff Barrow – drums (tracks 4, 5, 9), turntables, programming, samples

===Additional musicians===
* Clive Deamer – drums (tracks 1, 6, 7, 11), addidional drums (track 3)
* Shaun Atkins – additional vocals (tracks 1, 11)
* John Baggot – organ (track 9), piano (track 10)
* Andy Hague – horns (track 2)
* Ben Waghorn – horns (track 2)
* John Cornick – horns (track 2), trombone (track 7)
* S. Cooper – violin (track 4)

==Charts==

===Weekly charts===

===Year-end charts===

==Certifications and sales==




==References==
==External links==
* Portishead Info</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q9778" start="53" end="69" title="electronic music" label="electronic music"/>
<link wikidata="Q191352" start="76" end="86" title="Portishead (band)" label="Portishead"/>
<link wikidata="Q1533331" start="121" end="130" title="Go! Discs" label="Go! Discs"/>
<link wikidata="Q911143" start="282" end="287" title="Dummy (album)" label="Dummy"/>
<link wikidata="Q16960505" start="443" end="451" title="Only You (Portishead song)" label="Only You"/>
<link wikidata="Q332046" start="490" end="500" title="Ken Thorne" label="Ken Thorne"/>
<link wikidata="Q921042" start="514" end="532" title="Inspector Clouseau (film)" label="Inspector Clouseau"/>
<link wikidata="Q1856396" start="549" end="561" title="The Pharcyde" label="The Pharcyde"/>
<link wikidata="Q7492049" start="575" end="583" title="She Said (The Pharcyde song)" label="She Said"/>
<link wikidata="Q4729074" start="921" end="929" title="All Mine (Portishead song)" label="All Mine"/>
<link wikidata="Q719415" start="1005" end="1020" title="UK Albums Chart" label="UK Albums Chart"/>
<link wikidata="Q188819" start="1039" end="1064" title="Billboard 200" label="&amp;quot;Billboard&amp;quot; 200"/>
<link wikidata="Q911143" start="1127" end="1132" title="Dummy (album)" label="Dummy"/>
<link wikidata="Q217629" start="1304" end="1305" title="Q (magazine)" label="Q"/>
<link wikidata="Q104872628" start="1313" end="1328" title="Andrew Harrison (journalist)" label="Andrew Harrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q11148" start="1626" end="1638" title="The Guardian" label="The Guardian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1025912" start="1836" end="1840" title="Spin (magazine)" label="Spin"/>
<link wikidata="Q31181" start="2009" end="2017" title="AllMusic" label="AllMusic"/>
<link wikidata="Q976031" start="2025" end="2048" title="Stephen Thomas Erlewine" label="Stephen Thomas Erlewine"/>
<link wikidata="Q233264" start="2569" end="2581" title="Beth Gibbons" label="Beth Gibbons"/>
<link wikidata="Q2049773" start="2593" end="2605" title="Adrian Utley" label="Adrian Utley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1373294" start="2741" end="2753" title="Geoff Barrow" label="Geoff Barrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q2979419" start="2843" end="2855" title="Clive Deamer" label="Clive Deamer"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="655601" wikidata="Q411804" url="?curid=655601" title="Toad (disambiguation)">
<text>A [[toad]] is any of a number of species within the amphibian order Anura.

Toad may also refer to:

==Fictional characters==
* Mr. Toad, in Kenneth Grahame&#x27;s children&#x27;s novel &quot;The Wind in the Willows&quot;
* Toad (Marvel Comics) or Mortimer Toynbee, a villain in &quot;The X-Men&quot;
* Toad (Mario), a mushroom-like character in the &quot;Mario&quot; franchise
* Toad the Brake Van, a character in &quot;The Railway Series&quot; and in &quot;Thomas and Friends&quot;
* Toad, a character in the &quot;Frog and Toad&quot; children&#x27;s books
* Terry &quot;the Toad&quot;, in the movie &quot; American Graffiti&quot;

==Music==
* Toad (band), a Swiss rock band
** &quot;Toad&quot; (album), their debut album
* &quot;Toad&quot; (instrumental), a 1966 instrumental by Cream from &quot;Fresh Cream&quot;
* &quot;Toad&quot;, a 1994 song by Die Monster Die from &quot;Withdrawal Method&quot;
* Theory of a Deadman, a Canadian rock band

==Other uses==
* GWR Toad, a railway brake van
* Toad (solitaire), a solitaire card game
* Toad (software), a database management tool
* Saab Toad, a prototype of the Saab 99
* USS &quot;Toad&quot; (1914), a United States Navy patrol boat in commission from 1918 to 1919
* The Oxford Artisan Distillery (TOAD), a distillery in Oxford, England
* TOAD, a line of computers by XKL

==See also==

* Salientia, the clade for frogs, toads, proto-frogs
* True toad, anurans within the family Bufonidae
* Horned toad or horned lizard, various species in the genus &quot;Phrynosomatidae&quot;
* Toad the Wet Sprocket, an American rock band
* Toadies, an American rock band
* Toads and Frogs
* Frog and Toad
* 
* Frog (disambiguation)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q411804" start="2" end="10" title="Toad (disambiguation)" label="[[toad]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q411804" start="76" end="80" title="Toad (disambiguation)" label="Toad"/>
<link wikidata="Q6929261" start="128" end="136" title="Mr. Toad" label="Mr. Toad"/>
<link wikidata="Q2377661" start="224" end="244" title="Toad (Marvel Comics)" label="Toad (Marvel Comics)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061603" start="303" end="315" title="Toad (Mario)" label="Toad (Mario)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6738326" start="380" end="398" title="Toad the Brake Van" label="Toad the Brake Van"/>
<link wikidata="Q5505227" start="517" end="530" title="Frog and Toad" label="Frog and Toad"/>
<link wikidata="Q375855" start="609" end="626" title="American Graffiti" label="American Graffiti"/>
<link wikidata="Q7811355" start="646" end="657" title="Toad (band)" label="Toad (band)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7811354" start="680" end="704" title="Toad (album)" label="&amp;quot;Toad&amp;quot; (album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7811356" start="726" end="757" title="Toad (instrumental)" label="&amp;quot;Toad&amp;quot; (instrumental)"/>
<link wikidata="Q8028126" start="879" end="896" title="Withdrawal Method" label="Withdrawal Method"/>
<link wikidata="Q744242" start="905" end="924" title="Theory of a Deadman" label="Theory of a Deadman"/>
<link wikidata="Q5515056" start="965" end="973" title="GWR Toad" label="GWR Toad"/>
<link wikidata="Q5505172" start="997" end="1013" title="Toad (solitaire)" label="Toad (solitaire)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1755829" start="1039" end="1054" title="Toad (software)" label="Toad (software)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7395528" start="1085" end="1094" title="Saab Toad" label="Saab Toad"/>
<link wikidata="Q7874789" start="1125" end="1152" title="USS Toad (1914)" label="USS &amp;quot;Toad&amp;quot; (1914)"/>
<link wikidata="Q108495672" start="1221" end="1250" title="The Oxford Artisan Distillery" label="The Oxford Artisan Distillery"/>
<link wikidata="Q8042244" start="1322" end="1325" title="XKL" label="XKL"/>
<link wikidata="Q1746027" start="1343" end="1352" title="Salientia" label="Salientia"/>
<link wikidata="Q55372" start="1396" end="1405" title="True toad" label="True toad"/>
<link wikidata="Q288720" start="1445" end="1456" title="Horned toad" label="Horned toad"/>
<link wikidata="Q2166292" start="1534" end="1555" title="Toad the Wet Sprocket" label="Toad the Wet Sprocket"/>
<link wikidata="Q7811375" start="1581" end="1588" title="Toadies" label="Toadies"/>
<link wikidata="Q7811378" start="1614" end="1629" title="Toads and Frogs" label="Toads and Frogs"/>
<link wikidata="Q5505227" start="1632" end="1645" title="Frog and Toad" label="Frog and Toad"/>
<link wikidata="Q294915" start="1651" end="1672" title="Frog (disambiguation)" label="Frog (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="655610" wikidata="Q2720293" url="?curid=655610" title="Mozambique (music)">
<text>Mozambique refers to two separate styles of music.

==Cuban-style mozambique==
Mozambique (pron.: mo.sam.&#x27;βi.ke) is a vigorous style of Cuban music and dance derived, like the conga, from music of Cuban street carnivals or comparsas. It was invented or developed by Pello el Afrokan (Pedro Izquierdo) in 1963.

===Music===
Although the rhythm shares many characteristics with Sub-Saharan African music traditions, it does not have anything to do with music from the African nation of Mozambique. The Cuban mozambique features conga drums, bombos (bass drums), cowbells and trombones. [See: &quot;Mozambique Lesson in Cuba, 1985&quot; (Pello el Afrokan), and &quot;Mozambique Rhythm from Cuba&quot; (Kim Atkinson). Izquierdo&#x27;s composition &quot;María Caracoles&quot; was later recorded by Santana on their 1977 album &quot;Festival&quot;.

Izquierdo&#x27;s rhythm made its début in 1963 in Havana on the television programme &quot;Ritmos de Juventud&quot;, with the presenter surrounded by drummers so in tune with each other that they created a piano-like sound, while simultaneously performing the Mozambique dance.
===Dance===
The dance consists of bending the knee and lowering the body at the same time as lifting up a foot while returning the body to its normal upright position, continuing to bend the knees, and lowering the body. The dance looks like a cross between the &quot;timeless&quot; Afro-Cuban rumba and son, and the African-American twist, which was popular in the States during the early 1960s.

Mozambique peaked in 1965, when Izquierdo took a group to the Olympics in Paris, then was quickly discarded. Despite its short time in the spotlight, first Izquierdo, and later his son, have kept the mozambique alive through recordings and live performances. Mozambique was the first new genre of post-revolution Cuba, and the first popular band music to systemically use rumba clave. The mozambique began a new trajectory in band rhythms, which can be heard in its descendants—songo and timba.

== New York–style mozambique ==
In New York City during the 1960s, Eddie Palmieri created a rhythm called Mozambique that was inspired by Izquierdo&#x27;s creation of the same name. Although both rhythms are based on conga de comparsa drums, they have no parts in common. [See: &quot;The History of the New York–Style Mozambique&quot; (Andy Gonzalez interviews Manny Oquendo).] Even the clave patterns are different; Izquierdo&#x27;s rhythm uses rumba clave, while Palmieri&#x27;s uses son clave. Izquierdo’s mozambiques are, for the most part, in major keys. Palmieri’s mozambiques are mostly in minor keys. However, both groups primarily use chord progressions in a 2-3 clave sequence, and a trombone horn section.

The following piano guajeo is in the New York style.

Rebeca Mauleón makes the point that because Cuban Mozambique originally began as a percussion genre, there is no set piano part for it. By contrast, while Izquierdo created specific percussion parts for his Mozambique, the only specific percussion part in the New York style is the bell pattern.

===Bell pattern===
The bell pattern used in Palmieri&#x27;s rhythm was originally a guaguancó cáscara pattern. The Mozambique bell is similar to the pattern used in Havana-style conga de comparsa.

Tommy Lopez played congas in Palmieri&#x27;s group. The bell pattern was first played by Palmieri&#x27;s timbalero Julito Collazo and later by Manny Oquendo, who came to be closely associated with the Mozambique timbales part. [See: &quot;Mozambique&quot; (Manny Oquendo).] The NY Mozambique bell was later adopted by drumset players in North American jazz and popular music. For example, drummer Steve Gadd can be heard playing the NY Mozambique bell part on drumset (cymbal) during Paul Simon&#x27;s song &quot;Late in the Evening&quot;.


The NY Mozambique bell is nearly identical to the basic songo stick pattern. [See: &quot;Basic Songo for Drum Kit&quot; (Ignacio Berroa). The only difference is the stroke on main beat 3, sounded in the songo pattern. Both songo and NY Mozambique departed from the typical &quot;angular&quot; rhythms used in son montuno, mambo, and salsa, allowing more improvisational freedom for the conga drummer throughout the song.
== References ==
==External links==
* &quot;Pello el Afrokan 1964 &quot;Mozambique&quot; Web. &quot;YouTube&quot;. https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Shf-i-rms9Y&amp;playnext=1&amp;list=PL39747ACC706E2222
* &quot;Maria Caracoles&quot; (Pello el Afrokan 1964). Web. &quot;YouTube&quot;. https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=3NGjZYN2k84
* &quot;Pello el Afrokan (inventor of the mozambique rhythm) gives us mozambique lesson in Cuba 1985.&quot; Web. &quot;YouTube&quot;. https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=sN5FF3tVVbI
* &quot;From Arsenio to Songo&quot; (Kevin Moore 2011). Web. &quot;Timba.com.&quot; http://www.timba.com/encyclopedia_pages/the-roots-of-timba-part-ii?source_type=Artist&amp;source_id=6
* &quot;Mi mambo conga&quot; (Eddie Palmieri 1965). Web. &quot;YouTube&quot;. https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=tcqLR2pvuoc
* &quot;Mozambique&quot; (Manny Oquendo). &quot;Unlocking Clave. Facebook&quot;. https://www.facebook.com/video/video.php?v=200210736684253
* &quot;The History of the New York-Style Mozambique,&quot; Andy Gonzalez interviews Manny Oquendo. &quot;Unlocking Clave. Facebook&quot;. https://www.facebook.com/video/video.php?v=196776013694392
* &quot;The Mozambique Rhythm from Cuba&quot; Kim Atkinson. Web. &quot;YouTube&quot;. https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=M1gG5I8j4Mo</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2720293" start="0" end="10" title="Mozambique (music)" label="Mozambique"/>
<link wikidata="Q184377" start="91" end="96" title="pronunciation" label="pron."/>
<link wikidata="Q1544863" start="141" end="152" title="Cuban music" label="Cuban music"/>
<link wikidata="Q11639" start="157" end="162" title="dance" label="dance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1125657" start="181" end="186" title="Conga (music)" label="conga"/>
<link wikidata="Q16938385" start="228" end="236" title="comparsa" label="comparsa"/>
<link wikidata="Q7630590" start="381" end="417" title="Sub-Saharan African music traditions" label="Sub-Saharan African music traditions"/>
<link wikidata="Q2294872" start="489" end="499" title="Music of Mozambique" label="Mozambique"/>
<link wikidata="Q270200" start="531" end="542" title="conga drums" label="conga drums"/>
<link wikidata="Q211028" start="552" end="561" title="bass drum" label="bass drum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1236988" start="565" end="572" title="cowbell" label="cowbell"/>
<link wikidata="Q8350" start="578" end="587" title="trombones" label="trombones"/>
<link wikidata="Q873384" start="798" end="805" title="Santana (band)" label="Santana"/>
<link wikidata="Q2443739" start="832" end="840" title="Festival (Santana album)" label="Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q1563" start="899" end="905" title="Havana" label="Havana"/>
<link wikidata="Q289" start="913" end="923" title="television" label="television"/>
<link wikidata="Q5994" start="1055" end="1060" title="piano" label="piano"/>
<link wikidata="Q37425" start="1173" end="1177" title="knee" label="knee"/>
<link wikidata="Q388475" start="1415" end="1426" title="Cuban rumba" label="Cuban rumba"/>
<link wikidata="Q4428744" start="1431" end="1434" title="son music" label="son"/>
<link wikidata="Q387916" start="1461" end="1466" title="Twist (dance)" label="twist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1099007" start="1897" end="1908" title="clave rhythm" label="rumba clave"/>
<link wikidata="Q1756680" start="2003" end="2008" title="songo music" label="songo"/>
<link wikidata="Q371745" start="2013" end="2018" title="timba" label="timba"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="2056" end="2069" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q1282931" start="2088" end="2102" title="Eddie Palmieri" label="Eddie Palmieri"/>
<link wikidata="Q1326471" start="2665" end="2682" title="chord progression" label="chord progression"/>
<link wikidata="Q1099007" start="2689" end="2707" title="clave (rhythm)" label="2-3 clave sequence"/>
<link wikidata="Q4883319" start="3113" end="3125" title="bell pattern" label="bell pattern"/>
<link wikidata="Q3322619" start="3174" end="3183" title="guaguancó" label="guaguancó"/>
<link wikidata="Q1125657" start="3268" end="3273" title="Conga (music)" label="conga"/>
<link wikidata="Q6309617" start="3403" end="3417" title="Julito Collazo" label="Julito Collazo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2882911" start="3431" end="3444" title="Manny Oquendo" label="Manny Oquendo"/>
<link wikidata="Q379248" start="3500" end="3508" title="timbales" label="timbales"/>
<link wikidata="Q454031" start="3685" end="3695" title="Steve Gadd" label="Steve Gadd"/>
<link wikidata="Q4028" start="3772" end="3782" title="Paul Simon" label="Paul Simon"/>
<link wikidata="Q20874833" start="3801" end="3820" title="Late in the Evening" label="Late in the Evening"/>
<link wikidata="Q1756680" start="3886" end="3891" title="songo music" label="songo"/>
<link wikidata="Q654693" start="4010" end="4014" title="beat (music)" label="beat"/>
<link wikidata="Q290869" start="4139" end="4150" title="son montuno" label="son montuno"/>
<link wikidata="Q1646666" start="4152" end="4157" title="mambo (music)" label="mambo"/>
<link wikidata="Q208239" start="4163" end="4168" title="salsa music" label="salsa"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="655613" wikidata="Q248747" url="?curid=655613" title="Jonathan King">
<text>Jonathan King (born Kenneth George King; 6 December 1944) is an English singer, songwriter and record producer. He first came to prominence in 1965 when &quot;Everyone&#x27;s Gone to the Moon&quot;, a song that he wrote and sang while still an undergraduate, achieved chart success. King&#x27;s career in the music industry was effectively ended in 2001, when he was convicted of sexually abusing five teenage boys.

King discovered and named the rock band Genesis in 1967, producing their first album &quot;From Genesis to Revelation&quot;. He founded his own label UK Records in 1972. He released and produced songs for 10cc and the Bay City Rollers. In the 1970s King became known for hits that he performed and/or produced under different names, including &quot;Johnny Reggae&quot;, &quot;Loop di Love&quot;, &quot;Sugar, Sugar&quot;, &quot;Hooked on a Feeling&quot;, &quot;Una Paloma Blanca&quot; and &quot;It Only Takes a Minute&quot;; between September 1971 and 1972 he produced 6 top 30 singles in the UK.

In the 1980s King appeared on radio and television in the UK, including on the BBC&#x27;s &quot;Top of the Pops&quot; and &quot;Entertainment USA&quot;. In 1990-91 he produced the Brit Awards and in 1997 he selected and produced the winning British entry for the Eurovision Song Contest, &quot;Love Shine a Light&quot; by Katrina and the Waves.

In September 2001, King was convicted of child sexual abuse and sentenced to seven years in prison for having sexually assaulted five boys, aged 14 and 15, in the 1980s. In November 2001, he was acquitted of 22 similar charges. He was released on parole in March 2005. A further trial for sexual offences against teenage boys resulted in several not guilty verdicts and the trial being abandoned in June 2018.

==Early life==
===Family background===

King was born in a nursing home in Bentinck Street, Marylebone, London, the first child of George Frederick John &quot;Jimmy&quot; King, managing director at Tootal, a tie manufacturer, and his wife, Ailsa Linley Leon (1916–2007), a former actress. Originally from New Jersey, Jimmy King had moved to England when he was 14. He attended Oundle School and Trinity College, Cambridge, before joining the American Field Service during World War II and later Tootal Ties and Shirts as managing director.

King&#x27;s birth was a forceps delivery and a muscle on his upper lip was affected during it, giving him his slightly crooked smile. After he was born, the family lived in Gloucester Place, Marylebone, then moved to Surrey, where King and his younger brothers, James and Anthony, were raised in Brookhurst Grange, near Ewhurst.

===Stoke House and Charterhouse===
King was sent to boarding school, first as a weekly boarder to pre-prep school in Hindhead, Surrey, then, when he was eight, to Stoke House Preparatory School in Seaford, East Sussex. A year later, in 1954, after his father died from a heart attack, Brookhurst Grange was sold and the family moved to Cobbetts, a cottage in nearby Forest Green.

Music became his passion around this time. King would save his pocket money for train trips to London to watch &quot;My Fair Lady&quot;, &quot;The King and I&quot;, &quot;Irma la Douce&quot;, &quot;Salad Days&quot;, &quot;Damn Yankees&quot; and &quot;Kismet&quot; from the cheap seats in the balcony. He also discovered pop music and bought his first single, Guy Mitchell&#x27;s &quot;Singing the Blues&quot; (1956).

In 1958, King became a boarder at Charterhouse in Godalming, Surrey. He wrote that he &quot;loved Charterhouse immediately&quot;, with its history and &quot;every possible area of encouragement from sport to intellectual pursuits.&quot; Unlike at Stoke House, there were other boys there who appreciated pop music. He bought a transistor radio and earphones and joined the &quot;under the bedclothes&quot; club, listening to Tony Hall, Jimmy Savile, Don Moss and Pete Murray on Radio Luxembourg, and keeping track of the &quot;New Musical Express&quot; charts. The music, particularly Buddy Holly, Adam Faith, Roy Orbison and Gene Pitney, made him &quot;ache with desire&quot;:

Since &quot;It Doesn&#x27;t Matter Anymore&quot; swept me off my feet, I had become a raving pop addict, desperate for a fix every few seconds. I kept thick notebooks packed with copies of the weekly charts, adverts for new products, pages of predictions of future hits, reviews and comments about current artistes. Looking at them now, there was no way I could ever have avoided a future in the music industry.

===Gap year===
King left Charterhouse in 1962 to attend Davies&#x27;s, a London crammer, for his A levels. With his wages from a job stacking shelves in a supermarket, he made a demo of himself the following year singing &quot;It Doesn&#x27;t Matter Anymore&quot; and &quot;Fool&#x27;s Paradise&quot; Eden Kane song with the Ted Taylor Trio, a professional group in Rickmansworth. Wearing a pinstripe suit and trainers, he approached John Schroeder of Oriole Records and told him he could make a hit record. &quot;I have been studying the music industry for the last three years and it is one big joke,&quot; Schroeder reported him as saying. &quot;Anyone can make it if they&#x27;re clever and can fool a few people.&quot; After hearing King&#x27;s demo, Schroeder booked a studio session with an orchestra but suspected that King could not sing in tune.

King also joined a local band in Cranleigh, the Bumblies, as manager/producer and occasional singer, sometimes wearing thigh-length boots and long black gloves, during the band&#x27;s appearances at birthday parties and similar.

King failed the scholarship exam for Trinity College, Cambridge, but he was offered a place in 1963 after an interview. He accepted, but first took a gap year and spent six months travelling with a round-the-world ticket from his mother. Staying mostly in youth hostels, he visited Greece, the Middle East, Asia, Australia and the United States, including Hawaii, where, in June 1964, he met the manager of the Beatles, Brian Epstein. In October that year King began to study for his degree in English literature at Cambridge, lodging in Jesus Lane.

==Career==

===Early success===

Around the time King began at Cambridge, the Bumblies (featuring Terry Ward) recorded a song he had written and produced, &quot;Gotta Tell&quot;, which King persuaded Fontana Records to release. It appeared in April 1965 and &quot;rightly sank without trace&quot;, King writes, but the experience of taking it from label to label, and then trying to find people to play it, taught him how to promote a record. He called DJs and television producers to ask them to listen to it and, because it was Easter, delivered hundreds of vinyl singles to music critics complete with Easter eggs he had painted himself. King and the Bumblies recorded another of his songs, &quot;All You&#x27;ve Gotta Do&quot;, with producer Joe Meek, but nothing came of it.

Keen to break into the music business, King contacted Tony Hall of Decca Records, who put him in touch with The Zombies&#x27; producers Ken Jones and Joe Roncoroni. King played them one of his songs, &quot;Green is the Grass&quot;, and they asked him to write a B side. He offered them six songs, including &quot;Everyone&#x27;s Gone to the Moon&quot;, which became the A side. They also suggested he change his name.

Decca released &quot;Everyone&#x27;s Gone to the Moon&quot; in August 1965. Relying on the contacts he had made while promoting &quot;Gotta Tell&quot;, King plugged it relentlessly to radio stations to get it on their playlists. DJ Tony Windsor of Radio London, a pirate station broadcast from the &quot;MV Galaxy&quot;, was the first to play it, not only once, but three times in a row. (Windsor later said he did this only because of a problem with his other turntable.) It sold 26,000 copies the next day.

When the song made number 18 in the charts, King was invited onto the BBC&#x27;s &quot;Top of the Pops&quot;. The following day it sold 35,000 copies. It peaked at number four in the UK (the Beatles were at number one with &quot;Help!&quot;) and 17 in the US, and was awarded a gold disc. Nina Simone, Bette Midler, and Marlene Dietrich all covered it. Dietrich sang &quot;Everyone&#x27;s Gone to the Moon&quot; and its B side, &quot;Summer&#x27;s Coming&quot;, at the Golders Green Hippodrome in October 1966, with an arrangement by Burt Bacharach. The single reached No. 17 in the US &quot;Billboard&quot; Hot 100 and was one of the songs carried on the Apollo 11 Moon mission. In 2019, the track was included in the soundtrack of the Hollywood film &quot;In The Shadow of the Moon&quot; over the closing credits.

His next release, &quot;Green is the Grass&quot;, flopped, but the third (which he wrote and produced, but did not perform), &quot;It&#x27;s Good News Week&quot; by Hedgehoppers Anonymous, was more successful. It was released in September 1965 through Decca and credited to King and his new publishing company, JonJo Music Co. Ltd, which was named after King, Ken Jones and Joe Roncoroni and based in Jones&#x27; and Roncoroni&#x27;s office at 37 Soho Square. Briefly banned by the BBC because of its lyrics about birth control, the song made the top five in the UK and top 50 in America.

Also in 1965, King began contributing a column to &quot;Disc and Music Echo&quot;, a weekly magazine edited by Ray Coleman. King adopted a deliberately provocative style, promoting new acts but also publishing criticism of the music industry and particular artists. Michael Wale described him as &quot;the butterfly who stamped its foot&quot;.

===Discovery of Genesis===
In early 1967, King attended an old boys&#x27; reunion at Charterhouse School. He said he went there to show off, &quot;oust[ing] Baden-Powell as their most famous Old Boy.&quot; When they heard he was going to be there, a school band recorded a demo tape for him, and a friend, John Alexander, left the cassette in King&#x27;s car with a note, &quot;These are Charterhouse boys. Have a listen&quot;. Calling themselves Anon, the band consisted at that point of Peter Gabriel, Tony Banks, Anthony Phillips, Chris Stewart and Mike Rutherford, then all aged 15 to 17.

King liked several songs such as &quot;She is Beautiful&quot; (which became &quot;The Serpent&quot; on the band&#x27;s first album) and, according to Philips, they got the deal with King on the basis of that song. King signed the band to JonJo Music and licensed the short-term rights to Decca Records. He paid them £40 for four songs, and came up with their name, Genesis, to mark the start of his own career as a serious record producer. According to Phillips, King was &quot;hugely patient and indulgent&quot; with the band. John Silver, drummer on the first album, wrote in 2007:
We would be pretending to rehearse or simply waiting around and somehow somebody would bring a message to the flat, &quot;Quick, get over to Jonathan King&#x27;s flat, because Paul McCartney&#x27;s turning up.&quot; We would scurry over as quickly as possible because the art was to be there, looking casual, before the next famous person arrived, so that Jonathan King could say, &quot;Hey, these are my new protégés.&quot; I trusted him as a god, because he knew these people. It wasn&#x27;t celebrity like it is now. There were only a few famous people and he knew them. If Jonathan said jump or stand backwards or stand on your head, basically you did it. This was the nature of the relationship; he was completely omnipotent, in a decent way.

King produced their first three singles, including &quot;The Silent Sun&quot; (1968) and an album, &quot;From Genesis to Revelation&quot; (1969). Banks and Gabriel wrote &quot;The Silent Sun&quot; as a late-1960s Bee Gees &quot;pastiche&quot; to please King; Robin Gibb&#x27;s voice was apparently King&#x27;s favourite at the time. The records made little impact; the album sold just 649 copies &quot;and we knew all of those people personally,&quot; wrote Banks. King slowly lost interest in the band. Their next demo was even less &quot;poppy&quot;; the more complicated the songs, the less King liked them. Genesis left King in 1970 for Tony Stratton Smith&#x27;s Charisma Records, were joined by Phil Collins and Steve Hackett—and, after another two unsuccessful albums, released &quot;Foxtrot&quot; (1972) to critical acclaim. King retained the rights to the first album and re-released it several times under different titles. Rutherford said in 1985 that, &quot;for all his faults&quot;, King had given the band an opportunity to record, which at that time was hard to come by.

===After graduating and broadcasting===
King graduated from Cambridge in June 1967. Shortly afterwards King started presenting &quot;Good Evening&quot;, a weekly television show that ran nationally on ATV at 6:30 pm on Saturdays from October 1967 to 1968. The following year he began broadcasting for BBC Radio 1, including a &quot;blast off&quot; slot on the Stuart Henry show.

===Early 1970s===

&quot;It&#x27;s Good News Week&quot; (1965) was the last big hit King had for four years. Then his cover of &quot;Let It All Hang Out&quot; (1969) made the top 30 in January 1970, and he went on to become the top singles producer of 1971 and 1972, beginning with &quot;It&#x27;s the Same Old Song&quot;. Released by B&amp;C Records in December 1970 under a pseudonym, the Weathermen, it moved into the charts a month later. Using pseudonyms meant more airtime: radio producers might play several songs by the same artist during a programme without realizing they had devoted so much airtime to one person.

King&#x27;s 1971 releases included a version of Bob Dylan&#x27;s &quot;Baby, You&#x27;ve Been On My Mind&quot;, released as Nemo, which failed to chart; &quot;The Sun Has Got His Hat On&quot;, also as Nemo; &quot;Sugar, Sugar&quot; as Sakkarin; &quot;Leap Up and Down (Wave Your Knickers in the Air)&quot; by St Cecelia (this one a real band, rather than a pseudonym), which went to number 12; and &quot;Lazybones&quot;, &quot;Flirt&quot; and &quot;Hooked on a Feeling&quot; – all released under his own name.

Bell Records asked King to produce four songs for the Bay City Rollers, including their first hit, &quot;Keep on Dancing&quot;, on which King sang the 13 backing vocals himself. Released in May 1971, the single reached number nine.

&quot;Hooked on a Feeling&quot;, a country song that King had turned into a pop hit, adding &quot;ooga chaka ooga ooga&quot; to the intro, was a Top Thirty hit. King&#x27;s arrangement later gave Swedish group Blue Swede a US number one in April 1974. The arrangement featured in &quot;Reservoir Dogs&quot; (1992), at least one episode of &quot;Ally McBeal&quot;, where it provided the music for the Dancing Baby (1998), and &quot;Guardians of the Galaxy&quot; (2014), although King writes that he made no money from the Blue Swede version. Years later the track still garners coverage.

Another top three 1971 hit was &quot;Johnny Reggae&quot;, a ska pop song about a skinhead, written by King after he was introduced to a Johnny Reggae at the Walton Hop disco in Surrey. It was sung by King and middle-aged session singers pretending to be teenagers, credited to The Piglets and released by Bell. John Stratton writes that &quot;Johnny Reggae&quot; was the &quot;first British hit with a ska beat to have been written by a white Englishman ... and performed by white English singers and musicians.&quot; While, according to Lloyd Bradley, the BBC was reluctant to play reggae by black Jamaican artists, &quot;Johnny Reggae&quot;, which Bradley described as &quot;lamentable [and] audibly jarring&quot;, reached number three in the UK in November 1971 (when Slade&#x27;s &quot;Coz I Luv You&quot; was number one) and stayed in the top 50 for 12 weeks.

It has been reported that, under various different names and in assorted formats, he sold around 40 million records.

===UK records===

In 1972, King founded the UK Records label which was distributed by Decca and later PolyGram in the UK and London Records in the US. Chris Denning left Bell to run the UK office and Fred Ruppert, formerly of Elektra Records, the US office. Don Wardell then took over the US office, Denning left and Wardell moved back to run the UK company. King&#x27;s brother Andy was hired in 1974 as the promotion manager. Clive Selwood, who had helmed John Peel&#x27;s label Dandelion, then took over as manager.

The label&#x27;s first hit was &quot;Seaside Shuffle&quot; by Terry Dactyl and the Dinosaurs, followed by King&#x27;s &quot;Loop di Love&quot;, which reached number four, released under the pseudonym Shag. Other signings included Ricky Wilde, then 11 years old and promoted to fill the gap later taken by Donny Osmond, a potential David Cassidy, Simon Turner, Roy C, the First Class and Lobo. The label also released King&#x27;s cover of &quot;(I Can&#x27;t Get No) Satisfaction&quot; (1974) under the name Bubblerock, described as a &quot;Grateful Dead&quot;-style country version&quot;, which met with the approval of Mick Jagger.

In June 1973, after seeing &quot;The Rocky Horror Show&quot; on its second night, King invested a 20% stake in it, making him one of its two original backers, along with Michael White, and produced and released &quot;The Rocky Horror Show Original London Cast&quot;.

The label&#x27;s most significant signing was 10cc. Eric Stewart, one of the band members, had known King since 1965, when Stewart was with The Mindbenders and King had wanted to manage them. The band had planned to release &quot;Donna&quot; as a B side, but decided it could be a hit: &quot;We only knew of one person who was mad enough to release it,&quot; Stewart said, &quot;and that was Jonathan King.&quot; King gave the band its name and released two of the group&#x27;s albums (&quot;10cc&quot; and &quot;Sheet Music&quot;) and eight singles. &quot;Donna&quot; (1972) and &quot;Rubber Bullets&quot; (1973), reached number two and one respectively, followed by &quot;The Dean and I&quot; (1973) and &quot;The Wall Street Shuffle&quot; (1974). The band only dented the American market, with &quot;Rubber Bullets&quot; making 73 on the Billboard Hot 100. 10cc left UK Records in 1975 for Mercury Records, after which they achieved success in America, particularly with &quot;I&#x27;m Not in Love&quot; (1975).

===Move to New York===

In April 1978, King stood for parliament as an independent in the Epsom and Ewell by-election, calling himself the Royalist party. He gained 2,350 votes. A year later he decided to leave the music industry and closed UK Records. He wrote to the charts committee of the British Phonographic Industry in August 1979 alleging that the lower levels of the charts reflected &quot;clever promotion and marketing rather than good records&quot;, and suggesting that only information about the top 30 should be made available. The idea was that this would force programmers to base their airplay decisions on something other than the lower charts.

The UK Records New York office on 57th Street was turned into an apartment, and King set about building a new career in writing and broadcasting. He was given a weekly five-minute slot on BBC Radio 1 called &quot;A King in New York&quot;, a &quot;Postcard from America&quot; slot in Radio 4, and he reported for Radio 1 on the 1980 presidential election. In December 1980, watching television in bed, he heard there had been a shooting outside the Dakota Apartments. He called and woke up BBC producer Tom Brook, who was living in New York; Brook became the first to announce to the UK that John Lennon had died.

Throughout 1980 and 1981 King presented a radio talk show on New York&#x27;s WMCA from 10–12 weekday mornings, and regularly reported from the United States on &quot;Top of the Pops&quot;. He devised and hosted a spinoff series, &quot;Entertainment USA&quot;, broadcast on BBC 2, which was nominated for a BAFTA in 1987. He also created and produced &quot;No Limits&quot;, a youth programme.

His first self-published novel, &quot;Bible Two&quot;, was published in 1982. It tells the story of a window dresser in &quot;Selfishes&quot; who inherits his family&#x27;s millions. He was also hired by Kelvin MacKenzie, editor of &quot;The Sun&quot;, to write a weekly column, &quot;Bizarre USA&quot;, which began in February 1985 and continued for eight years. He continued with several music projects, including with the hard-rock supergroup Gogmagog, which released an EP, &quot;I Will Be There&quot; (1985).

===Brit Awards, Eurovision Song Contest===
In 1987, King wrote and hosted the Brit Awards for the BBC, and from 1990 to 1992 was the event&#x27;s writer and producer. He resigned just after the 1992 show because he and the British Phonographic Industry, which runs the awards, disagreed about the show&#x27;s format. The following year he founded &quot;The Tip Sheet&quot; (1993–2002), a weekly trade magazine promoting new acts.

Also in 1987, King accused the Pet Shop Boys of plagiarising the melody of Cat Stevens&#x27; song &quot;Wild World&quot; for their UK No. 1 single &quot;It&#x27;s a Sin&quot;. He made the claims in &quot;The Sun&quot;, for which he wrote a regular column during the 1980s. King also released his own cover version of &quot;Wild World&quot; as a single, using a similar musical arrangement to &quot;It&#x27;s a Sin&quot;, in an effort to demonstrate his claims. This single flopped, while the Pet Shop Boys sued King, eventually winning out-of-court damages, which they donated to charity.

King&#x27;s media work included finding and producing the Eurovision Song Contest entrant for the BBC in 1995. He selected several songs for them. Love City Groove&#x27;s song, &quot;Love City Groove&quot;, came tenth in 1995. Gina G&#x27;s &quot;Ooh Aah... Just a Little Bit&quot; came eighth the following year, and was number one on the UK chart. &quot;Love Shine a Light&quot; by Katrina and the Waves came first in 1997. His entry for 1998, when the UK hosted the event in Birmingham, was by Imaani and came second. His writing continued. His second novel, &quot;The Booker Prize Winner&quot;, was published that year. He was involved in promoting the Baha Men&#x27;s number one hit, &quot;Who Let the Dogs Out?&quot; (2000) which he first released under the name Fat Jakk and his Pack of Pets in 1998.

In October 1997, King received a Music Industry Trusts Award. The following year he devised &quot;The Record of the Year&quot;, produced by his &quot;Tip Sheet&quot; and London Weekend Television, a show in which the public voted for the year&#x27;s best single. In 2000 Nigel Lythgoe, executive producer of the new &quot;Popstars&quot; talent show, considered hiring King as anchor of its judging panel, but he turned it down. Lythgoe took the position himself.

King reportedly turned down the chance to manage the KLF.

== Sexual offences ==

===2001 trials===
In September 2001, King was convicted, after a two-week trial at the Old Bailey, on four counts of indecent assault, one of buggery and one of attempted buggery, committed between 1983 and 1987 against five boys aged 14 and 15. In a second trial, he was found not guilty after an alleged victim (someone King denied having ever met) acknowledged that he could have been 16 or older at the time. Three further trials that had been scheduled were ordered abandoned. King claimed, among other things, that the lack of a statute of limitations in the UK for sex offences meant he had been unable to defend himself adequately because of the many years that had passed.

The National Criminal Intelligence Service had begun investigating King for child sexual abuse in 2000, when a man told them he had been assaulted by King and others 30 years earlier. The man had originally approached publicist Max Clifford, himself later jailed in 2014 for sexual assault; Clifford told him that he should go to the police. King was arrested in November 2000 and bailed on £150,000, £50,000 of which was put up by Simon Cowell. He was arrested again in January 2001 on further allegations. 27 men told police that King had sexually assaulted them during the period 1969–1989. Police found pictures of teenagers in a search of King&#x27;s home. King admitted having approached thousands of people with questionnaires about youth interests, doing market research. The questionnaires asked recipients to list topics according to importance including music, sport, friends and family; the prosecution claimed that boys who listed sex high in their list of priorities were then targeted by King.

After the second trial at the Old Bailey on 21 November 2001, Judge David Paget QC sentenced King to seven years in prison using the first trial verdict as a sample for &quot;all previous sexual behaviour&quot;. In addition, King was placed on the Sex Offenders Register, prohibited from working with children, and ordered to pay £14,000 costs. In 2003, the Court of Appeal rejected his application to appeal both the conviction and the sentence; he had argued that the conviction was unsafe and the sentence, with guidelines of two years, had been &quot;manifestly too severe&quot;. He appealed twice unsuccessfully to the Criminal Cases Review Commission, and was released on parole in March 2005.

King has complained about his media coverage since his 2001 conviction. In 2005, he went to the Press Complaints Commission about an article in the &quot;News of the World&quot; that said he had gone to a park to &quot;ogle&quot; boys. In fact he had gone there at the request of a documentary maker. The complaint was not upheld, but Roy Greenslade argued that King had a good case. In October 2011, then-BBC Director-General Mark Thompson apologised to King for the removal of King&#x27;s performance of &quot;It Only Takes a Minute&quot; from a repeat, on BBC Four, of a 1976 episode of &quot;Top of the Pops&quot;. King described the cut as a &quot;Stalinist revision approach to history&quot;. When asked by a newspaper in 2012 if he believed he had anything to apologise for, to anybody from his past, King replied, &quot;The only apology I have is to say that I was good at seduction. I was good at making myself seem attractive when I wasn&#x27;t very attractive at all&quot;. He appeared in front of the Leveson Inquiry.

===After prison===
Journalist Robert Chalmers wrote that King&#x27;s creative output after he left prison &quot;resembled a primal scream of rage&quot;. Two self-published novels appeared: &quot;Beware the Monkey Man&quot; (2010), under the pen name Rex Kenny, and &quot;Death Flies, Missing Girls and Brigitte Bardot&quot; (2013), under his real name, Kenneth George King. He also published a diary, &quot;Three Months&quot; (2012), and two volumes of his autobiography, &quot;Jonathan King 65: My Life So Far&quot; (2009) and &quot;70 FFFY&quot; (2014). King maintained an interest in prison issues and writes a column for &quot;Inside Time&quot;, the national newspaper for prisoners.

He released &quot;Earth to King&quot; in 2008. One of the new songs on the album, &quot;The True Story of Harold Shipman&quot; was about the serial killer Dr. Harold Shipman, in which King suggested that Shipman may have been a victim of the media. He also self-produced three films. &quot;Vile Pervert: The Musical&quot; (2008), available for free download, is a 96-minute film in which King plays all 21 parts and presents his version of events surrounding his prosecution. He portrays his viewpoint of the events responsible for his troubles. In one scene King, dressed as Oscar Wilde, sings that there is &quot;nothing wrong with buggering boys&quot;. Rod Liddle in &quot;The Spectator&quot; called it &quot;a fantastically berserk, bravado performance&quot;. &quot;Me Me Me&quot; (2011) was described by King as &quot;a re-telling of &quot;Romeo and Juliet&quot;&quot;. &quot;The Pink Marble Egg&quot; (2013) is a spy story; for publicity King drove down the Promenade de la Croisette in Cannes with a pink papier-mâché egg on top of his Rolls-Royce during the Cannes Film Festival.

===2018 trial===
In August 2015, King wrote an article for &quot;The Spectator&quot; magazine concerning Sir Edward Heath, the subject of the now-discredited Operation Midland. In September that year, King was arrested as part of Operation Ravine, a further investigation into claims of sexual abuse at the Walton Hop disco in the 1970s. He was later released on bail. On 25 May 2017, he was charged by Surrey Police with 18 sexual offences, relating to nine boys aged between 14 and 16, allegedly carried out between 1970 and 1986. He was released on bail and appeared at Westminster Magistrates&#x27; Court on 26 June, where he was released on conditional bail to appear at Southwark Crown Court on 31 July. His trial began on 11 June 2018; on 27 June, he was declared not guilty on several charges, and the jury was discharged.

On 6 August 2018, Judge Deborah Taylor, saying that Surrey Police had made &quot;numerous, repeated and compounded&quot; errors during the investigation, described the situation as a &quot;debacle&quot;. In her ruling she said &quot;I have concluded that this is a case where even if it were possible to have a fair trial, it is in the rare category where the balance, taking account of the history, the failures and misleading of the Court, is in favour of a stay on the basis that following what has occurred, continuation would undermine public confidence in the administration of justice&quot;. Taylor said that the case against King had been motivated by &quot;concerns about reputational damage to Surrey Police&quot; following the allegations of sexual abuse against Jimmy Savile. Surrey Police &quot;wholeheartedly apologised&quot; to King, saying: &quot;We deeply regret that despite these efforts we did not meet the required standards to ensure a fair trial.&quot; King refused to accept the apology, and criticised Surrey Police for &quot;deep, institutional faults&quot;. He urged both the Chief Constable and the Police and Crime Commissioner to go.

In August 2019, Chief Constable Stephens, who had replaced Ephgrave, announced that, in the year since King&#x27;s acquittal, the Surrey Police success rate for convictions in sex abuse cases had dropped from 20% to &quot;under 4%&quot;. On 22 November 2019, an independent review into the police investigation leading to the trial was published. It was critical of the handling of disclosure of documents to King&#x27;s defence prior to the trial, and questioned whether some of the staff involved had been qualified or experienced enough to handle the case.

==Selected works==
===Discography===
===Books===
*(1982) &quot;Bible Two: A Novel According to Jonathan King&quot;, London: W. H. Allen/Virgin Books.
*(1997) &quot;The Booker Prize Winner&quot;, London: Blake Publishing.
*(2009) &quot;65: My Life So Far&quot;, London: Revvolution Publishing Ltd.
*(2010) &quot;Beware the Monkey Man&quot; (as Rex Kenny), London: Revvolution Publishing Ltd.
*(2012) &quot;Three Months: 100 Glorious Sunny Days in the Summer of 2012. A Diary&quot;, London: Kingofhits.com.
*(2013) &quot;Death Flies, Missing Girls and Brigitte Bardot&quot; (as Kenneth George King), Amazon Media.
*(2014) &quot;70 FFFY&quot;, London: Revvolution Publishing Ltd, Amazon Media.
*(2016) &quot;The Spirit Phone&quot; (as Kate Genifer), London: Revvolution Publishing Ltd, Amazon Media.
*(2018) &quot;Don&#x27;t Go In&quot; (as KG Jonathan King), London: Revvolution Publishing Ltd, Amazon Media.
*(2019) &quot;Guilty&quot;, London: Revvolution Publishing Ltd, Amazon Media.

===Films===
*(2008) &quot;Vile Pervert: The Musical&quot;
*(2011) &quot;Me Me Me&quot;
*(2013) &quot;The Pink Marble Egg&quot;
*(2019) &quot;Guilty&quot;
*(2022) &quot;The Great ReSet - It&#x27;s Good News Week&quot;

==Notes==
==References==
==External links==

*King&#x27;s website
*&quot;Vile Pervert&quot; movie website
*&quot;Me Me Me&quot; movie website
*&quot;The Pink Marble Egg&quot; movie website</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q248747" start="0" end="13" title="Jonathan King" label="Jonathan King"/>
<link wikidata="Q248747" start="20" end="39" title="Jonathan King" label="Kenneth George King"/>
<link wikidata="Q5417863" start="159" end="191" title="Everyone&amp;#x27;s Gone to the Moon" label="Everyone&amp;#x27;s Gone to the Moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q151012" start="457" end="464" title="Genesis (band)" label="Genesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q834578" start="508" end="534" title="From Genesis to Revelation" label="From Genesis to Revelation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2467208" start="567" end="577" title="UK Records" label="UK Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q169145" start="622" end="626" title="10cc" label="10cc"/>
<link wikidata="Q812073" start="635" end="651" title="Bay City Rollers" label="Bay City Rollers"/>
<link wikidata="Q6267559" start="766" end="779" title="Johnny Reggae" label="Johnny Reggae"/>
<link wikidata="Q17067672" start="793" end="805" title="Loop di Love" label="Loop di Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q516203" start="819" end="831" title="Sugar, Sugar" label="Sugar, Sugar"/>
<link wikidata="Q836565" start="845" end="864" title="Hooked on a Feeling (song)" label="Hooked on a Feeling"/>
<link wikidata="Q2595913" start="878" end="895" title="Paloma Blanca" label="Una Paloma Blanca"/>
<link wikidata="Q3650391" start="912" end="934" title="It Only Takes a Minute" label="It Only Takes a Minute"/>
<link wikidata="Q193259" start="988" end="1002" title="UK Singles Chart" label="top 30 singles"/>
<link wikidata="Q930414" start="1111" end="1126" title="Top of the Pops" label="Top of the Pops"/>
<link wikidata="Q16991798" start="1143" end="1160" title="Entertainment USA" label="Entertainment USA"/>
<link wikidata="Q223313" start="1195" end="1206" title="Brit Awards" label="Brit Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q276" start="1278" end="1301" title="Eurovision Song Contest" label="Eurovision Song Contest"/>
<link wikidata="Q1086679" start="1309" end="1327" title="Love Shine a Light" label="Love Shine a Light"/>
<link wikidata="Q934582" start="1337" end="1358" title="Katrina and the Waves" label="Katrina and the Waves"/>
<link wikidata="Q16826570" start="1402" end="1420" title="Child sexual abuse in the United Kingdom" label="child sexual abuse"/>
<link wikidata="Q180652" start="1864" end="1874" title="Metropolitan Borough of St Marylebone" label="Marylebone"/>
<link wikidata="Q28401377" start="1970" end="1976" title="Tootal" label="Tootal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1408" start="2077" end="2087" title="New Jersey" label="New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q3358331" start="2149" end="2162" title="Oundle School" label="Oundle School"/>
<link wikidata="Q332342" start="2167" end="2193" title="Trinity College, Cambridge" label="Trinity College, Cambridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q292201" start="2214" end="2236" title="American Field Service" label="American Field Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q28401377" start="2267" end="2273" title="Tootal" label="Tootal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364965" start="2337" end="2353" title="Forceps in childbirth" label="forceps delivery"/>
<link wikidata="Q66086101" start="2486" end="2502" title="Gloucester Place" label="Gloucester Place"/>
<link wikidata="Q123634" start="2504" end="2514" title="Marylebone" label="Marylebone"/>
<link wikidata="Q23276" start="2530" end="2536" title="Surrey" label="Surrey"/>
<link wikidata="Q5419030" start="2633" end="2640" title="Ewhurst, Surrey" label="Ewhurst"/>
<link wikidata="Q3034872" start="2760" end="2768" title="Hindhead" label="Hindhead"/>
<link wikidata="Q1640242" start="2840" end="2860" title="Seaford, East Sussex" label="Seaford, East Sussex"/>
<link wikidata="Q4667856" start="3009" end="3021" title="Abinger" label="Forest Green"/>
<link wikidata="Q591943" start="3141" end="3153" title="My Fair Lady" label="My Fair Lady"/>
<link wikidata="Q6431690" start="3167" end="3181" title="The King and I" label="The King and I"/>
<link wikidata="Q1672988" start="3195" end="3208" title="Irma La Douce (musical)" label="Irma la Douce"/>
<link wikidata="Q7403382" start="3222" end="3232" title="Salad Days (musical)" label="Salad Days"/>
<link wikidata="Q1158684" start="3246" end="3258" title="Damn Yankees" label="Damn Yankees"/>
<link wikidata="Q3815652" start="3275" end="3281" title="Kismet (musical)" label="Kismet"/>
<link wikidata="Q222921" start="3383" end="3395" title="Guy Mitchell" label="Guy Mitchell"/>
<link wikidata="Q3372814" start="3409" end="3426" title="Singing the Blues" label="Singing the Blues"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067870" start="3476" end="3488" title="Charterhouse School" label="Charterhouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q909146" start="3492" end="3501" title="Godalming" label="Godalming"/>
<link wikidata="Q506260" start="3769" end="3785" title="transistor radio" label="transistor radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q21597856" start="3867" end="3876" title="Tony Hall (music executive)" label="Tony Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q713479" start="3878" end="3890" title="Jimmy Savile" label="Jimmy Savile"/>
<link wikidata="Q7172170" start="3905" end="3916" title="Pete Murray (DJ)" label="Pete Murray"/>
<link wikidata="Q3196539" start="3920" end="3936" title="Radio Luxembourg" label="Radio Luxembourg"/>
<link wikidata="Q192632" start="3969" end="3988" title="New Musical Express" label="New Musical Express"/>
<link wikidata="Q5977" start="4027" end="4038" title="Buddy Holly" label="Buddy Holly"/>
<link wikidata="Q1387148" start="4040" end="4050" title="Adam Faith" label="Adam Faith"/>
<link wikidata="Q188426" start="4052" end="4063" title="Roy Orbison" label="Roy Orbison"/>
<link wikidata="Q175238" start="4068" end="4079" title="Gene Pitney" label="Gene Pitney"/>
<link wikidata="Q9010044" start="4133" end="4163" title="It Doesn&amp;#x27;t Matter Anymore" label="It Doesn&amp;#x27;t Matter Anymore"/>
<link wikidata="Q118547" start="4614" end="4621" title="Cram school" label="crammer"/>
<link wikidata="Q16981711" start="4631" end="4638" title="GCE Advanced Level (United Kingdom)" label="A level"/>
<link wikidata="Q9010044" start="4761" end="4791" title="It Doesn&amp;#x27;t Matter Anymore" label="It Doesn&amp;#x27;t Matter Anymore"/>
<link wikidata="Q51139" start="4835" end="4849" title="Shane Fenton" label="Eden Kane song"/>
<link wikidata="Q9611" start="4900" end="4913" title="Rickmansworth" label="Rickmansworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q16097381" start="4968" end="4982" title="John Schroeder (musician)" label="John Schroeder"/>
<link wikidata="Q7102740" start="4986" end="5000" title="Oriole Records (UK)" label="Oriole Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q2681944" start="5424" end="5433" title="Cranleigh" label="Cranleigh"/>
<link wikidata="Q332342" start="5658" end="5684" title="Trinity College, Cambridge" label="Trinity College, Cambridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1493854" start="5771" end="5779" title="gap year" label="gap year"/>
<link wikidata="Q2142056" start="5819" end="5841" title="round-the-world ticket" label="round-the-world ticket"/>
<link wikidata="Q1299" start="6032" end="6039" title="The Beatles" label="Beatles"/>
<link wikidata="Q203690" start="6041" end="6054" title="Brian Epstein" label="Brian Epstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q6188196" start="6159" end="6169" title="Jesus Lane" label="Jesus Lane"/>
<link wikidata="Q729590" start="6372" end="6387" title="Fontana Records" label="Fontana Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q741007" start="6918" end="6926" title="Joe Meek" label="Joe Meek"/>
<link wikidata="Q21597856" start="7007" end="7016" title="Tony Hall (music executive)" label="Tony Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q557632" start="7020" end="7033" title="Decca Records" label="Decca Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163207" start="7061" end="7072" title="The Zombies" label="The Zombies"/>
<link wikidata="Q215233" start="7215" end="7221" title="A-side and B-side" label="B side"/>
<link wikidata="Q5417863" start="7266" end="7298" title="Everyone&amp;#x27;s Gone to the Moon" label="Everyone&amp;#x27;s Gone to the Moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2003205" start="7620" end="7632" title="Wonderful Radio London" label="Radio London"/>
<link wikidata="Q7197843" start="7636" end="7650" title="Pirate radio in the United Kingdom" label="pirate station"/>
<link wikidata="Q7868833" start="7676" end="7685" title="USS Density (AM-218)" label="MV Galaxy"/>
<link wikidata="Q930414" start="7969" end="7984" title="Top of the Pops" label="Top of the Pops"/>
<link wikidata="Q839842" start="8111" end="8116" title="Help! (song)" label="Help!"/>
<link wikidata="Q241365" start="8160" end="8169" title="music recording sales certification" label="gold disc"/>
<link wikidata="Q174957" start="8171" end="8182" title="Nina Simone" label="Nina Simone"/>
<link wikidata="Q190631" start="8184" end="8196" title="Bette Midler" label="Bette Midler"/>
<link wikidata="Q4612" start="8202" end="8218" title="Marlene Dietrich" label="Marlene Dietrich"/>
<link wikidata="Q5580113" start="8351" end="8375" title="Golders Green Hippodrome" label="Golders Green Hippodrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q212762" start="8416" end="8430" title="Burt Bacharach" label="Burt Bacharach"/>
<link wikidata="Q180072" start="8468" end="8497" title="Billboard Hot 100" label="&amp;quot;Billboard&amp;quot; Hot 100"/>
<link wikidata="Q43653" start="8538" end="8547" title="Apollo 11" label="Apollo 11"/>
<link wikidata="Q55614382" start="8640" end="8665" title="In the Shadow of the Moon (2019 film)" label="In The Shadow of the Moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q22030673" start="8830" end="8854" title="It&amp;#x27;s Good News Week" label="It&amp;#x27;s Good News Week"/>
<link wikidata="Q1593266" start="8864" end="8886" title="Hedgehoppers Anonymous" label="Hedgehoppers Anonymous"/>
<link wikidata="Q2705335" start="9146" end="9157" title="Soho Square" label="Soho Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q122224" start="9213" end="9226" title="birth control" label="birth control"/>
<link wikidata="Q3282454" start="9345" end="9364" title="Disc (magazine)" label="Disc and Music Echo"/>
<link wikidata="Q7297340" start="9400" end="9411" title="Ray Coleman" label="Ray Coleman"/>
<link wikidata="Q24266635" start="9555" end="9567" title="Michael Wale" label="Michael Wale"/>
<link wikidata="Q12665" start="9791" end="9803" title="Robert Baden-Powell, 1st Baron Baden-Powell" label="Baden-Powell"/>
<link wikidata="Q149757" start="9965" end="9973" title="Compact Cassette" label="cassette"/>
<link wikidata="Q7713883" start="10081" end="10085" title="Anon (band)" label="Anon"/>
<link wikidata="Q175195" start="10123" end="10136" title="Peter Gabriel" label="Peter Gabriel"/>
<link wikidata="Q321332" start="10138" end="10148" title="Tony Banks (musician)" label="Tony Banks"/>
<link wikidata="Q453600" start="10150" end="10166" title="Anthony Phillips" label="Anthony Phillips"/>
<link wikidata="Q713526" start="10168" end="10181" title="Chris Stewart (author)" label="Chris Stewart"/>
<link wikidata="Q321092" start="10186" end="10201" title="Mike Rutherford" label="Mike Rutherford"/>
<link wikidata="Q151012" start="10593" end="10600" title="Genesis (band)" label="Genesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q740537" start="10756" end="10767" title="John Silver (musician)" label="John Silver"/>
<link wikidata="Q2599" start="10988" end="11002" title="Paul McCartney" label="Paul McCartney"/>
<link wikidata="Q2915840" start="11618" end="11632" title="The Silent Sun" label="The Silent Sun"/>
<link wikidata="Q834578" start="11666" end="11692" title="From Genesis to Revelation" label="From Genesis to Revelation"/>
<link wikidata="Q133405" start="11774" end="11782" title="Bee Gees" label="Bee Gees"/>
<link wikidata="Q188482" start="11820" end="11830" title="Robin Gibb" label="Robin Gibb"/>
<link wikidata="Q585330" start="12202" end="12221" title="Tony Stratton Smith" label="Tony Stratton Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063242" start="12229" end="12245" title="Charisma Records" label="Charisma Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q144622" start="12262" end="12274" title="Phil Collins" label="Phil Collins"/>
<link wikidata="Q315811" start="12279" end="12292" title="Steve Hackett" label="Steve Hackett"/>
<link wikidata="Q745724" start="12352" end="12359" title="Foxtrot (album)" label="Foxtrot"/>
<link wikidata="Q795585" start="12949" end="12960" title="BBC Radio 1" label="BBC Radio 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q7626638" start="13008" end="13020" title="Stuart Henry (DJ)" label="Stuart Henry"/>
<link wikidata="Q22030673" start="13053" end="13077" title="It&amp;#x27;s Good News Week" label="It&amp;#x27;s Good News Week"/>
<link wikidata="Q17112440" start="13161" end="13180" title="Let It Out (Let It All Hang Out)" label="Let It All Hang Out"/>
<link wikidata="Q2586597" start="13316" end="13343" title="It&amp;#x27;s the Same Old Song" label="It&amp;#x27;s the Same Old Song"/>
<link wikidata="Q4833577" start="13363" end="13378" title="B&amp;amp;C Records" label="B&amp;amp;C Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q392" start="13702" end="13711" title="Bob Dylan" label="Bob Dylan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6745262" start="13725" end="13758" title="Mama, You Been on My Mind" label="Baby, You&amp;#x27;ve Been On My Mind"/>
<link wikidata="Q7767340" start="13813" end="13839" title="The Sun Has Got His Hat On" label="The Sun Has Got His Hat On"/>
<link wikidata="Q516203" start="13867" end="13879" title="Sugar, Sugar" label="Sugar, Sugar"/>
<link wikidata="Q20979739" start="13905" end="13953" title="Leap Up and Down (Wave Your Knickers in the Air)" label="Leap Up and Down (Wave Your Knickers in the Air)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3113024" start="14058" end="14067" title="Lazybones (song)" label="Lazybones"/>
<link wikidata="Q208704" start="14081" end="14086" title="Flirt" label="Flirt"/>
<link wikidata="Q836565" start="14103" end="14122" title="Hooked on a Feeling (song)" label="Hooked on a Feeling"/>
<link wikidata="Q4883239" start="14165" end="14177" title="Bell Records" label="Bell Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q812073" start="14219" end="14235" title="Bay City Rollers" label="Bay City Rollers"/>
<link wikidata="Q6383128" start="14270" end="14285" title="Keep on Dancing (The Gentrys song)" label="Keep on Dancing"/>
<link wikidata="Q885906" start="14608" end="14618" title="Blue Swede" label="Blue Swede"/>
<link wikidata="Q72962" start="14684" end="14698" title="Reservoir Dogs" label="Reservoir Dogs"/>
<link wikidata="Q244803" start="14743" end="14754" title="Ally McBeal" label="Ally McBeal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3401272" start="14798" end="14810" title="Dancing Baby" label="Dancing Baby"/>
<link wikidata="Q5887360" start="14829" end="14852" title="Guardians of the Galaxy (film)" label="Guardians of the Galaxy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6267559" start="15023" end="15036" title="Johnny Reggae" label="Johnny Reggae"/>
<link wikidata="Q54365" start="15046" end="15049" title="ska" label="ska"/>
<link wikidata="Q485417" start="15067" end="15075" title="skinhead" label="skinhead"/>
<link wikidata="Q2003600" start="15143" end="15153" title="Walton Hop" label="Walton Hop"/>
<link wikidata="Q7757094" start="15263" end="15274" title="The Piglets" label="The Piglets"/>
<link wikidata="Q6662289" start="15524" end="15537" title="Lloyd Bradley" label="Lloyd Bradley"/>
<link wikidata="Q9794" start="15569" end="15575" title="reggae" label="reggae"/>
<link wikidata="Q156872" start="15757" end="15762" title="Slade" label="Slade"/>
<link wikidata="Q5180116" start="15776" end="15789" title="Coz I Luv You" label="Coz I Luv You"/>
<link wikidata="Q2467208" start="16014" end="16024" title="UK Records" label="UK Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q700359" start="16072" end="16080" title="PolyGram" label="PolyGram"/>
<link wikidata="Q935090" start="16095" end="16109" title="London Records" label="London Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q5106385" start="16121" end="16134" title="Chris Denning" label="Chris Denning"/>
<link wikidata="Q726251" start="16196" end="16211" title="Elektra Records" label="Elektra Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q326542" start="16428" end="16437" title="John Peel" label="John Peel"/>
<link wikidata="Q30024" start="16451" end="16460" title="Dandelion" label="Dandelion"/>
<link wikidata="Q7441849" start="16527" end="16542" title="Seaside Shuffle" label="Seaside Shuffle"/>
<link wikidata="Q7704279" start="16552" end="16582" title="Terry Dactyl and the Dinosaurs" label="Terry Dactyl and the Dinosaurs"/>
<link wikidata="Q17067672" start="16614" end="16626" title="Loop di Love" label="Loop di Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q6241890" start="16720" end="16731" title="Ricky Wilde" label="Ricky Wilde"/>
<link wikidata="Q386053" start="16795" end="16807" title="Donny Osmond" label="Donny Osmond"/>
<link wikidata="Q457306" start="16821" end="16834" title="David Cassidy" label="David Cassidy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1711513" start="16836" end="16848" title="Simon Fisher Turner" label="Simon Turner"/>
<link wikidata="Q7372628" start="16850" end="16855" title="Roy C" label="Roy C"/>
<link wikidata="Q1419315" start="16857" end="16872" title="the First Class" label="the First Class"/>
<link wikidata="Q1867120" start="16877" end="16881" title="Lobo (musician)" label="Lobo"/>
<link wikidata="Q158553" start="16934" end="16968" title="(I Can&amp;#x27;t Get No) Satisfaction" label="(I Can&amp;#x27;t Get No) Satisfaction"/>
<link wikidata="Q212533" start="17030" end="17043" title="Grateful Dead" label="Grateful Dead"/>
<link wikidata="Q128121" start="17110" end="17121" title="Mick Jagger" label="Mick Jagger"/>
<link wikidata="Q583612" start="17157" end="17178" title="The Rocky Horror Show" label="The Rocky Horror Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q6835322" start="17294" end="17307" title="Michael White (producer)" label="Michael White"/>
<link wikidata="Q169145" start="17438" end="17442" title="10cc" label="10cc"/>
<link wikidata="Q588591" start="17444" end="17456" title="Eric Stewart" label="Eric Stewart"/>
<link wikidata="Q2261428" start="17532" end="17547" title="The Mindbenders" label="The Mindbenders"/>
<link wikidata="Q2071575" start="17622" end="17627" title="Donna (10cc song)" label="Donna"/>
<link wikidata="Q169139" start="17884" end="17888" title="10cc (album)" label="10cc"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065582" start="17905" end="17916" title="Sheet Music (10cc album)" label="Sheet Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q3020207" start="17978" end="17992" title="Rubber Bullets" label="Rubber Bullets"/>
<link wikidata="Q2578118" start="18066" end="18080" title="The Dean and I" label="The Dean and I"/>
<link wikidata="Q2785014" start="18104" end="18127" title="The Wall Street Shuffle" label="The Wall Street Shuffle"/>
<link wikidata="Q485240" start="18233" end="18242" title="Billboard (magazine)" label="Billboard"/>
<link wikidata="Q165745" start="18285" end="18300" title="Mercury Records" label="Mercury Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q1641864" start="18372" end="18392" title="I&amp;#x27;m Not in Love" label="I&amp;#x27;m Not in Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q11010" start="18462" end="18472" title="Parliament of the United Kingdom" label="parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q5384011" start="18498" end="18525" title="1978 Epsom and Ewell by-election" label="Epsom and Ewell by-election"/>
<link wikidata="Q751895" start="18701" end="18730" title="British Phonographic Industry" label="British Phonographic Industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q2711129" start="19106" end="19117" title="57th Street (Manhattan)" label="57th Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q699716" start="19399" end="19425" title="1980 United States presidential election" label="1980 presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q829806" start="19520" end="19537" title="The Dakota" label="Dakota Apartments"/>
<link wikidata="Q7815073" start="19574" end="19583" title="Tom Brook" label="Tom Brook"/>
<link wikidata="Q2341090" start="19663" end="19683" title="Murder of John Lennon" label="John Lennon had died"/>
<link wikidata="Q3564725" start="19763" end="19767" title="WMCA (AM)" label="WMCA"/>
<link wikidata="Q930414" start="19852" end="19867" title="Top of the Pops" label="Top of the Pops"/>
<link wikidata="Q16991798" start="19921" end="19938" title="Entertainment USA" label="Entertainment USA"/>
<link wikidata="Q216108" start="19959" end="19964" title="BBC Two" label="BBC 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q159661" start="19992" end="19997" title="BAFTA" label="BAFTA"/>
<link wikidata="Q7044383" start="20042" end="20051" title="No Limits (BBC TV series)" label="No Limits"/>
<link wikidata="Q6386696" start="20283" end="20299" title="Kelvin MacKenzie" label="Kelvin MacKenzie"/>
<link wikidata="Q208875" start="20317" end="20324" title="The Sun (United Kingdom)" label="The Sun"/>
<link wikidata="Q215048" start="20514" end="20524" title="Supergroup (music)" label="supergroup"/>
<link wikidata="Q2629696" start="20525" end="20533" title="Gogmagog (band)" label="Gogmagog"/>
<link wikidata="Q169930" start="20553" end="20555" title="Extended play" label="EP"/>
<link wikidata="Q223313" start="20672" end="20683" title="Brit Awards" label="Brit Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q751895" start="20817" end="20846" title="British Phonographic Industry" label="British Phonographic Industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q7769461" start="20947" end="20960" title="The Tip Sheet" label="The Tip Sheet"/>
<link wikidata="Q485625" start="21056" end="21069" title="Pet Shop Boys" label="Pet Shop Boys"/>
<link wikidata="Q154216" start="21100" end="21111" title="Cat Stevens" label="Cat Stevens"/>
<link wikidata="Q1848035" start="21129" end="21139" title="Wild World (song)" label="Wild World"/>
<link wikidata="Q2629703" start="21178" end="21193" title="It&amp;#x27;s a Sin" label="It&amp;#x27;s a Sin"/>
<link wikidata="Q208875" start="21229" end="21236" title="The Sun (United Kingdom)" label="The Sun"/>
<link wikidata="Q276" start="21673" end="21696" title="Eurovision Song Contest" label="Eurovision Song Contest"/>
<link wikidata="Q1352790" start="21762" end="21778" title="Love City Groove" label="Love City Groove"/>
<link wikidata="Q6690456" start="21798" end="21814" title="Love City Groove (song)" label="Love City Groove"/>
<link wikidata="Q260933" start="21842" end="21848" title="Gina G" label="Gina G"/>
<link wikidata="Q2418918" start="21862" end="21890" title="Ooh Aah... Just a Little Bit" label="Ooh Aah... Just a Little Bit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1086679" start="21971" end="21989" title="Love Shine a Light" label="Love Shine a Light"/>
<link wikidata="Q934582" start="21999" end="22020" title="Katrina and the Waves" label="Katrina and the Waves"/>
<link wikidata="Q2256" start="22093" end="22103" title="Birmingham" label="Birmingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q446215" start="22112" end="22118" title="Imaani" label="Imaani"/>
<link wikidata="Q788589" start="22272" end="22280" title="Baha Men" label="Baha Men"/>
<link wikidata="Q286163" start="22310" end="22331" title="Who Let the Dogs Out?" label="Who Let the Dogs Out?"/>
<link wikidata="Q7759814" start="22522" end="22544" title="The Record of the Year" label="The Record of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q3076979" start="22594" end="22619" title="London Weekend Television" label="London Weekend Television"/>
<link wikidata="Q1803708" start="22695" end="22708" title="Nigel Lythgoe" label="Nigel Lythgoe"/>
<link wikidata="Q18153203" start="22746" end="22754" title="Popstars (UK TV series)" label="Popstars"/>
<link wikidata="Q741316" start="22937" end="22944" title="the KLF" label="the KLF"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194829" start="23057" end="23067" title="Old Bailey" label="Old Bailey"/>
<link wikidata="Q9636058" start="23087" end="23103" title="indecent assault" label="indecent assault"/>
<link wikidata="Q206426" start="23112" end="23119" title="buggery" label="buggery"/>
<link wikidata="Q6549469" start="23505" end="23527" title="Limitation periods in the UK" label="statute of limitations"/>
<link wikidata="Q17148333" start="23657" end="23695" title="National Criminal Intelligence Service" label="National Criminal Intelligence Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q16826570" start="23729" end="23747" title="Child sexual abuse in the United Kingdom" label="child sexual abuse"/>
<link wikidata="Q6794659" start="23881" end="23893" title="Max Clifford" label="Max Clifford"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="24034" end="24040" title="Bail#England and Wales" label="bailed"/>
<link wikidata="Q162629" start="24085" end="24097" title="Simon Cowell" label="Simon Cowell"/>
<link wikidata="Q913709" start="24416" end="24431" title="market research" label="market research"/>
<link wikidata="Q7933185" start="24911" end="24933" title="Violent and Sex Offender Register" label="Sex Offenders Register"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137751" start="25021" end="25036" title="Court of Appeal of England and Wales" label="Court of Appeal"/>
<link wikidata="Q5185530" start="25287" end="25319" title="Criminal Cases Review Commission" label="Criminal Cases Review Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q3067228" start="25460" end="25487" title="Press Complaints Commission" label="Press Complaints Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q190534" start="25518" end="25535" title="News of the World" label="News of the World"/>
<link wikidata="Q7372859" start="25699" end="25713" title="Roy Greenslade" label="Roy Greenslade"/>
<link wikidata="Q48181" start="25774" end="25790" title="Director-General of the BBC" label="Director-General"/>
<link wikidata="Q1060609" start="25791" end="25804" title="Mark Thompson (television executive)" label="Mark Thompson"/>
<link wikidata="Q3650391" start="25876" end="25898" title="It Only Takes a Minute" label="It Only Takes a Minute"/>
<link wikidata="Q787211" start="25923" end="25931" title="BBC Four" label="BBC Four"/>
<link wikidata="Q930414" start="25960" end="25975" title="Top of the Pops" label="Top of the Pops"/>
<link wikidata="Q1821839" start="26377" end="26392" title="Leveson Inquiry" label="Leveson Inquiry"/>
<link wikidata="Q6037850" start="27026" end="27037" title="Inside Time" label="Inside Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q310260" start="27243" end="27257" title="Harold Shipman" label="Harold Shipman"/>
<link wikidata="Q30875" start="27660" end="27671" title="Oscar Wilde" label="Oscar Wilde"/>
<link wikidata="Q7356281" start="27740" end="27750" title="Rod Liddle" label="Rod Liddle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1790750" start="27760" end="27773" title="The Spectator" label="The Spectator"/>
<link wikidata="Q2455184" start="28048" end="28073" title="Promenade de la Croisette" label="Promenade de la Croisette"/>
<link wikidata="Q899363" start="28096" end="28108" title="papier-mâché" label="papier-mâché"/>
<link wikidata="Q42369" start="28150" end="28170" title="Cannes Film Festival" label="Cannes Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q1790750" start="28238" end="28251" title="The Spectator" label="The Spectator"/>
<link wikidata="Q128967" start="28278" end="28294" title="Edward Heath" label="Sir Edward Heath"/>
<link wikidata="Q39086073" start="28331" end="28348" title="Operation Midland" label="Operation Midland"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="28403" end="28419" title="Operation Yewtree#Operation Ravine" label="Operation Ravine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2003600" start="28480" end="28490" title="Walton Hop" label="Walton Hop"/>
<link wikidata="Q7646840" start="28576" end="28589" title="Surrey Police" label="Surrey Police"/>
<link wikidata="Q7989178" start="28746" end="28781" title="Westminster Magistrates&amp;#x27; Court" label="Westminster Magistrates&amp;#x27; Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q7571152" start="28849" end="28870" title="Southwark Crown Court" label="Southwark Crown Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q713479" start="29779" end="29791" title="Jimmy Savile" label="Jimmy Savile"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="30108" end="30123" title="Surrey Police#Chief Constables" label="Chief Constable"/>
<link wikidata="Q24993992" start="30132" end="30161" title="Surrey Police and Crime Commissioner" label="Police and Crime Commissioner"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="655622" wikidata="Q7769461" url="?curid=655622" title="The Tip Sheet">
<text>The Tip Sheet (1993–2002) was a weekly magazine and CD insert for UK music industry insiders. Jonathan King founded it and was managing editor until his imprisonment in 2001. His brother, Andy, took over the position, helped by Joe Taylor.

&quot;The Tip Sheet&quot; promoted artists including The Corrs, The Darkness and Eva Cassidy while they were unsigned or unknown, and publicised future hits like Chumbawamba&#x27;s &quot;Tubthumping&quot;, &quot;Cognoscenti Vs. Intelligentsia&quot; from the Cuban Boys and &quot;Who Let the Dogs Out?&quot; by Baha Men.

In 2005 &quot;The Tip Sheet&quot; message board and &quot;Record of the Day&quot; featured the track &quot;No Tomorrow&quot; by then-unknown band Orson. Within days the band had several offers. Within weeks they signed a publishing deal with Universal Records worth an estimated £300,000 and a label deal with Mercury Records for a million pounds. The single topped the UK chart, as did their first album.

&quot;The Tip Sheet&quot; has not been printed since 2002, but an online message board continues. Joe Taylor and fellow-employee Paul Scaife have since been active at &quot;Record of the Day&quot;, which has similar objectives.

From 1998-2001 the Tip Sheet CD was compiled and mastered by Phil Kerby t/a Audio Edit Productions using the SADiE Portable DAW at the Tip Sheet offices in Chiltern Street, London.

==References==
==External links==
*Tipsheet Messageboard site</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q248747" start="94" end="107" title="Jonathan King" label="Jonathan King"/>
<link wikidata="Q192915" start="294" end="303" title="The Corrs" label="The Corrs"/>
<link wikidata="Q421794" start="305" end="317" title="The Darkness (band)" label="The Darkness"/>
<link wikidata="Q229144" start="322" end="333" title="Eva Cassidy" label="Eva Cassidy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1089523" start="403" end="414" title="Chumbawamba" label="Chumbawamba"/>
<link wikidata="Q5141272" start="453" end="483" title="Cognoscenti Vs. Intelligentsia" label="Cognoscenti Vs. Intelligentsia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5192003" start="499" end="509" title="Cuban Boys" label="Cuban Boys"/>
<link wikidata="Q286163" start="520" end="541" title="Who Let the Dogs Out?" label="Who Let the Dogs Out?"/>
<link wikidata="Q788589" start="551" end="559" title="Baha Men" label="Baha Men"/>
<link wikidata="Q1539850" start="708" end="713" title="Orson (band)" label="Orson"/>
<link wikidata="Q38903" start="804" end="821" title="Universal Records" label="Universal Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q165745" start="872" end="887" title="Mercury Records" label="Mercury Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q118094022" start="1354" end="1369" title="Chiltern Street" label="Chiltern Street"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="655628" wikidata="Q2422689" url="?curid=655628" title="Kirkintilloch">
<text>Kirkintilloch (; ; ) is a town and former barony burgh in East Dunbartonshire, Scotland. It lies on the Forth and Clyde Canal and on the south side of Strathkelvin, about northeast of central Glasgow. Historically part of Dunbartonshire, the town is the administrative home of East Dunbartonshire council area, its population in 2009 was estimated at 19,700 and its population in 2011 was 19,689.

==Toponymy==
&quot;Kirkintilloch&quot; comes from the Gaelic &quot;Cair Cheann Tulaich&quot; or &quot;Cathair Cheann Tulaich&quot;, meaning &quot;fort at the end of the hill&quot;. This, in turn, may come from a Cumbric name, &quot;Caer-pen-taloch&quot;, which has the same meaning. A possible reference to the site is made in the 9th century Welsh text Historia Brittonum, in which the Antonine Wall is said to end at &#x27;Caerpentaloch&#x27;. The fort referred to is the former Roman settlement on the wall and the hillock is the volcanic drumlin which would have offered a strategic viewpoint for miles to the West, North and East. The etymology is sometimes taken literally as &quot;Kirk in tilloch&quot; (&quot;church in the field&quot;). Its long name is often shortened by locals to the colloquial &quot;Kirkie&quot; or &quot;Kirky&quot;, as reflected in a number of business names in the town.

==History==
The first known settlement on the site of what is now Kirkintilloch was a Roman fort established in what is now the Peel Park area of the town. Dating from the mid-2nd century, the Antonine Wall, one of the northernmost frontiers in Roman Britannia was routed through Kirkintilloch; its course continues through the centre of the town to this day, although little trace can now be seen above ground. A digital reconstruction of the fort has been created. There are many archeological artifacts found in Kirkintilloch on display at the Hunterian Museum in Glasgow. There is no strong evidence of habitation on the site for the following thousand years until Clan Cumming established a castle (Motte and Bailey) and church there in the 12th century. A small settlement grew and was granted burgh status in 1211, becoming an important staging post for west–east journeys from Glasgow to eastern and north-eastern Scotland. From this time, a weekly market was held in the town, probably at the foot of Peel Brae (along with High Street and Cowgate, one of the three medieval thoroughfares in the town). The castle was of some importance during the wars of independence when an English garrison was stationed there, commanded by Sir Philip de Moubray, who was later to command Stirling Castle at the time of the Battle of Bannockburn. Soldiers from the castle were dispatched to arrest William Wallace at Robroyston in 1305 and escorted him to Dumbarton Castle. Later the same year, the garrison is recorded as having sent a petition to King Edward of England complaining of non-payment of wages. The castle was attacked by Scottish forces in 1306 under Bishop Wishart of Glasgow (using timber given to Glasgow diocese by the English for cathedral repairs), but the siege was unsuccessful. The castle is thought to have been destroyed on the orders of Robert Bruce later in the conflict, although the traces of a mot surrounded by a ditch can still be seen in the Peel Park.

The original Cumming parish church, St Ninian&#x27;s, was constructed around 1140 some distance to the east of the town (where some of the stones remain in the form of an 18th-century watchtower at the entrance to the Auld Aisle Cemetery) as Kirkintilloch was originally in the parish of Lenzie which stretched from Cumbernauld in the East to Kirkintilloch in the West. The establishment was part of the endowment of Cambuskenneth Abbey, and was accompanied by a grant of one oxgang of land (approximately 15 acres), the measurement that lent its name to the area near the church. A chapel to the Virgin Mary was established in the town itself, sometime before 1379, and was endowed with land at Duntiblae by Sir David Fleming. The move of the parish church to the site of the chapel at Kirkintilloch Cross (now the Auld Kirk Museum) in 1644 resulted in a split of the Parish into Easter and Wester Lenzie (later Cumbernauld and Kirkintilloch Parishes) The name Lenzie was later reused for Kirkintilloch&#x27;s railway station on the main Glasgow to Edinburgh line, around which the later village of that name developed.

Following the Scottish victory in the wars of independence and the subsequent decline of Clan Cumming, the baronies of Kirkintilloch, Lenzie, and Cumbernauld were granted by Robert Bruce to Sir Malcolm Fleming, Sheriff of Dumbarton and a supporter of the Bruce faction in the war. Hitherto part of Stirlingshire, the area subsequently became a detached part of the county of Dumbarton, in which it remains today.

On 3 January 1746, the retreating Jacobite army of Charles Stuart made its way through Kirkintilloch, on its way back from Derby, and on the march to Falkirk and ultimately Culloden. One of the Highland army&#x27;s stragglers was shot dead at the town cross by a man hidden in a barn at the Kiln Close (where the library now stands). On hearing of the murder, Charles halted his army on the Kilsyth road and threatened to turn back and burn the town. The town magistrates persuaded him to continue marching, in return for an unspecified payment, and the town was spared.

The town was one of the hotbeds of the Industrial Revolution in Scotland, beginning with the emergence of a booming textile industry in the area. There were 185 weavers in Kirkintilloch by 1790, and in 1867 James Slimon&#x27;s cotton mill at Kelvinside employed 200 women. With the construction of the Forth and Clyde Canal through the town in 1773, and the establishment of the Monkland and Kirkintilloch Railway in 1826, Kirkintilloch developed further as an important transportation hub, inland port and production centre for iron, coal, nickel and even small ships. This industrial heritage lives on in the town&#x27;s designation as the &quot;Canal Capital of Scotland&quot;, and in the redevelopment of the canal and surrounding former industrial sites in the early 21st century.

By the 20th century, the principal employers in the town were the shipbuilders J &amp; J Hay and Peter McGregor, and the Lion (1880–1984) and Star foundries, all of which produced goods for the domestic market and for export around the world. Kirkintilloch&#x27;s most famous exports were the distinctive red British post boxes and phone boxes K2 to K6, produced in the town until 1984.

In the 1930s Kirkintilloch was a location for Irish seasonal workers; it has been estimated at that time a quarter of the inhabitants were of Irish descent. On 15 September 1937 ten young migrant potato pickers from Achill in Ireland died in a fire at Kirkintilloch.

Kirkintilloch was a &quot;dry town&quot; for much of its recent history, with the sale of alcohol on public premises banned from 1923 until 1967. The prohibition on the sale of alcohol had long been demanded by the Liberal Party and the temperance movement, both of which had a strong influence in the town in the early part of the 20th century, largely due to the perceived negative effects of alcohol on the town&#x27;s inhabitants.

The 1960s development plan to redevelop inner city areas of Glasgow saw Kirkintilloch used as an overspill settlement for relocated Glaswegians in combination with the new towns of Livingston and Cumbernauld, offering employment in housebuilding and an increase to the local population to its current levels. Large numbers of new houses for owner occupation have been built since that time.

==Governance==
Kirkintilloch and Lenzie had their own burgh council until the 1975 abolition of the counties of Scotland when it became part of the Strathkelvin local government district within the region of Strathclyde. A second reorganisation in 1996 established East Dunbartonshire council from Strathkelvin and the adjacent district of Bearsden and Milngavie; with Kirkintilloch is its administrative centre and the council&#x27;s headquarters at Tom Johnston House in the town, named after prominent early 20th century politician, Secretary of State for Scotland (1941–45) and Kirkintilloch native, Thomas Johnston. The council&#x27;s headquarters moved to the William Patrick Library in August 2012, forming the local authority&#x27;s first community hub. Tom Johnstone House was demolished in 2015, a mere 30 years after it was built.

==Geography==
As well as the Forth and Clyde Canal the Luggie Water passes through Kirkintilloch, the canal crossing the Luggie on an aqueduct. The Luggie flows into the River Kelvin which in turn flows into the River Clyde in Glasgow.

Communities in and around Kirkintilloch include: Cleddans; Harestanes; Hayston; Hillhead; Oxgang; Rosebank; Langmuir; Greens; Fauldhead; Waterside; Westermains; Lenzie: Gallowhill: Whitegates; Back O&#x27; Loch; Woodilee; Broomhill etc.

==Culture==

Kirkintilloch Town Hall was opened in 1906, paid for by public subscription. Listed as a building of special architectural or historic interest, it was closed by East Dunbartonshire Council in June 2004, largely due to the anticipated expense of restoring a building constructed of notoriously crumbling soft sandstone. In response the Kirkintilloch Town Hall Preservation Trust was established as a registered charity to preserve the hall and restore it for community use. Work began on the redevelopment of the hall in early summer 2016, with major works completed in October 2017. Kirkintilloch Town Hall officially reopened in November 2018.

The town is served by the William Patrick Library, which moved from a converted private villa near Peel Park to a new building on West High Street in the 1990s. The titular William Patrick was a local minister whose brother donated funds to the local people to have a library founded in William&#x27;s name. The neglected old library was sold by the council back into private ownership and returned to residential use after restoration works. William Patrick Library is the main library for East Dunbartonshire Council and also houses the reference department and other council offices including social services, planning and a new community hub.

Kirkintilloch underwent significant population growth in the post-Second World War period, with several new amenities erected to cater for the growing population of the town and its surrounding villages. New shopping facilities were built in the Cowgate and Townhead areas, culminating in the opening, by Diana, Princess of Wales, of the Regent Centre shopping mall in the 1990s.

The local swimming pool and Community Education Centre, built in the 1960s and &#x27;70s in Woodhead Park to the south of the town, were demolished in 1999 and 2005 respectively. Woodhead Park was once home to a petting zoo, bandstand, greenhouses, putting green and public toilets. All are now closed, although a new leisure centre was opened on the same spot as the old pool in July 2007, providing facilities for tennis, badminton, swimming, football and a gymnasium. A large new children&#x27;s play area has been created near the site of the former putting green in the park.

The construction of the new leisure centre came in combination with a wider-ranging artistic, cultural and social regeneration project called &quot;Kirkintilloch&#x27;s Initiative&quot;. This includes the new link road largely funded by housebuilders developing on the site of the former Woodilee Hospital.

Kirkintilloch Learning Centre is located on Southbank Road, overlooking the Forth and Clyde Canal, an offshoot of Cumbernauld College.
Locally, a G66+ Live! Cultural festival offers a wide range of events from talks on history in local churches to musical events in the town&#x27;s local bars. dramas and also entries from the schools in the G66 postcode area. G66+ Live! is annual festival taking place in June. Kirkintilloch&#x27;s most successful musical ensemble is its brass band, the Kirkintilloch Band, who were crowned Scottish Brass Band Champions in 2007 and who have had success in competitions both in Scotland and further afield. Each August the local Canal Festival takes place.

An amateur theatre group, the Kirkintilloch Players, is based at the Turret Theatre in the Eastside area of Kirkintilloch, the former home of the town&#x27;s Liberal Club.

The town has a pipe band of the same name, Kirkintilloch Pipe Band. Established on 12 November 1888, it takes part in civic and private events in the local and surrounding areas and also takes part in competition. Its pipers and drummers are mostly from the local area and the band still practises weekly in the Hillhead Community Centre.

==Education==
There are six primary schools in Kirkintilloch, which are Hillhead, Holy Trinity, Harestanes, Oxgang, Gartconner, Lairdsland and Holy Family. There are also two schools in the area for children with special needs, these being Merkland School in Hillhead and Campsie View School in Lenzie.

The two secondary schools in the area are Kirkintilloch High School (Non-denominational) and St Ninian&#x27;s High School (Roman Catholic) Both schools recently constructed new-build campuses, which were completed in August 2009.

In the Lenzie area primary schools include Lenzie Meadow Primary, Millersneuk and Holy Family Primary. Holy Family is a Catholic school on the edge of Lenzie on the border with Kirkintilloch, and is a feeder to St Ninian&#x27;s High School. The other two non-denomination schools in the area feed onto Lenzie Academy, along with Lairdsland Primary in Kirkintilloch and the nearby Auchinloch Primary.

==Media==
The &quot;Kirkintilloch Herald&quot; is the local newspaper of record, established by town businessman Donald MacLeod in premises on the Cowgate in 1883.

==Notable people==
 
* Moira Anderson, singer
* Alexander Bain, inventor of an electric clock, lived in Kirkintilloch in his latter days.
* Joe Caven (born 1936), Scottish former footballer
* Beatrice Clugston, philanthropist (1827-1888)
* Archibald Scott Couper, chemist.
* Andrew Crumey, novelist
* James Dalrymple Duncan Dalrymple (1852-1908), author and antiquarian
* Joseph Devine, Roman Catholic bishop
* Walter Dick, professional footballer who earned one cap for the United States
* James Fletcher, industrialist 
* John Fletcher, politician in New Zealand
* Jimmy Gallagher, professional footballer who played for the United States
* Alasdair Graham (1934–2016), concert pianist
* David Gray, poet 
* Tom Johnston, Labour politician
* David Lapsley, professional footballer
* Tommy Lorne, comedian 
* Hugh McCartney, Labour politician
* Ian McCartney, Labour politician
* John Meikle, recipient of the Victoria Cross
* Macvey Napier, solicitor and editor of the Encyclopædia Britannica
*Billy Rankin, guitarist.
* Rita Taketsuru (born Jessie Roberta Cowan), Japanese whisky pioneer.
* Jim Watt, boxer


==Sport==
The town has a football club, Kirkintilloch Rob Roy F.C., thrice winners of the Scottish Junior Cup, who formerly played at Adamslie Park in the west of the town, but now play the town&#x27;s Community Sports Complex after years in exile in Cumbernauld, and is also home to the amateur Harestanes A.F.C., three-time winners of the Scottish Amateur Cup.

Lenzie RFC is based in the town, playing their home games at Viewfield Avenue. They are in West regional league 1, the 4th tier of Scottish club rugby.

After the town had been without such facilities for the better part of a decade a replacement swimming pool and gym finally opened in July 2007 at Woodhead Park. The town is also home to the &quot;Kirkintilloch Olympians&quot;, a local athletics club.

Kirkintilloch is also the home of Aberdeen and former Rangers player Gregg Wylde and Celtic and Scotland player, Charlie Mulgrew.

Lenzie Youth Club is a local football club founded in 1980 by Ian Stevenson which has sections from age 5 upwards. Famous ex Lenzie YC players include Barry Bannan and Stephen Crainey.

==Churches==
There are a number of churches in Kirkintilloch. The four Church of Scotland congregations are: St Mary&#x27;s and St David&#x27;s Memorial Park in the town centre and St Columba&#x27;s in Hillhead and Oxgang. The Baptist Union of Scotland has churches at Townhead and Harestanes. There are two Roman Catholic Churches - St Flannan&#x27;s in Hillhead, and Holy Family and St Ninian&#x27;s in the town centre. 
Jehovah&#x27;s Witnesses have a congregation in Kirkintilloch which shares a Kingdom Hall with its sister congregation in Bishopbriggs.

== Twin Town ==
*Yoichi, Hokkaido, Japan

==See also==
* Thomas Muir (political reformer)

==References==
=== Citations ===
=== General bibliography ===
* &quot;Old Glasgow and Suburbs in Their Celtic Garb: Also Parish of Baldernock - Kirkintilloch to Stirling - Robroyston&quot; by Neil Thomson with 80 pages. From a copy of &quot;Old Glasgow&quot; published by Aird &amp; Coghill in 1907 with no ISBN

==External links==
* East Dunbartonshire Council
* G66 Festival
* Canal Festival website
* National Library of Scotland: SCOTTISH SCREEN ARCHIVE (selection of archive films about Kirkintilloch)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2422689" start="0" end="13" title="Kirkintilloch" label="Kirkintilloch"/>
<link wikidata="Q4998629" start="42" end="54" title="Burgh of Barony" label="barony burgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q211889" start="58" end="77" title="East Dunbartonshire" label="East Dunbartonshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1652863" start="104" end="125" title="Forth and Clyde Canal" label="Forth and Clyde Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q4093" start="192" end="199" title="Glasgow" label="Glasgow"/>
<link wikidata="Q1350181" start="201" end="213" title="Shires of Scotland" label="Historically"/>
<link wikidata="Q140090" start="222" end="236" title="Dunbartonshire" label="Dunbartonshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q461231" start="297" end="309" title="Council areas of Scotland" label="council area"/>
<link wikidata="Q9314" start="452" end="458" title="Scottish Gaelic" label="Gaelic"/>
<link wikidata="Q35965" start="610" end="617" title="Cumbric language" label="Cumbric"/>
<link wikidata="Q740004" start="752" end="770" title="Historia Brittonum" label="Historia Brittonum"/>
<link wikidata="Q210957" start="785" end="798" title="Antonine Wall" label="Antonine Wall"/>
<link wikidata="Q901711" start="1193" end="1203" title="colloquial" label="colloquial"/>
<link wikidata="Q185103" start="1388" end="1393" title="Roman Britain" label="Roman"/>
<link wikidata="Q88205" start="1394" end="1398" title="Castra" label="fort"/>
<link wikidata="Q210957" start="1495" end="1508" title="Antonine Wall" label="Antonine Wall"/>
<link wikidata="Q138396" start="1553" end="1562" title="Britannia" label="Britannia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1094924" start="1971" end="1983" title="Clan Cumming" label="Clan Cumming"/>
<link wikidata="Q92062" start="2006" end="2022" title="Motte and Bailey" label="Motte and Bailey"/>
<link wikidata="Q254978" start="2102" end="2107" title="burgh" label="burgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368240" start="2454" end="2478" title="Wars of Scottish Independence" label="the wars of independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q7184111" start="2538" end="2559" title="Philip Mowbray" label="Sir Philip de Moubray"/>
<link wikidata="Q756268" start="2586" end="2601" title="Stirling Castle" label="Stirling Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q222520" start="2621" end="2642" title="Battle of Bannockburn" label="Battle of Bannockburn"/>
<link wikidata="Q82457" start="2695" end="2710" title="William Wallace" label="William Wallace"/>
<link wikidata="Q7353484" start="2714" end="2724" title="Robroyston" label="Robroyston"/>
<link wikidata="Q2177200" start="2753" end="2769" title="Dumbarton Castle" label="Dumbarton Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q57798" start="2846" end="2857" title="King Edward I" label="King Edward"/>
<link wikidata="Q1459814" start="2963" end="2988" title="Robert Wishart" label="Bishop Wishart of Glasgow"/>
<link wikidata="Q1473348" start="3047" end="3064" title="Glasgow Cathedral" label="cathedral repairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q187312" start="3161" end="3173" title="Robert Bruce" label="Robert Bruce"/>
<link wikidata="Q2967298" start="3573" end="3579" title="Lenzie" label="Lenzie"/>
<link wikidata="Q996616" start="3601" end="3612" title="Cumbernauld" label="Cumbernauld"/>
<link wikidata="Q1028378" start="3702" end="3721" title="Cambuskenneth Abbey" label="Cambuskenneth Abbey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1798893" start="3761" end="3767" title="oxgang" label="oxgang"/>
<link wikidata="Q81292" start="3794" end="3798" title="acre" label="acre"/>
<link wikidata="Q996626" start="3981" end="3990" title="Waterside, East Dunbartonshire" label="Duntiblae"/>
<link wikidata="Q23436" start="4335" end="4344" title="Edinburgh" label="Edinburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q6742312" start="4597" end="4616" title="Malcolm Fleming, Earl of Wigtown" label="Sir Malcolm Fleming"/>
<link wikidata="Q1229763" start="4705" end="4718" title="Stirlingshire" label="Stirlingshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q140090" start="4782" end="4791" title="Dunbartonshire" label="Dumbarton"/>
<link wikidata="Q212983" start="4855" end="4863" title="Jacobitism" label="Jacobite"/>
<link wikidata="Q312581" start="4872" end="4886" title="Charles Edward Stuart" label="Charles Stuart"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4944" end="4949" title="Jacobite rising of 1745#Invasion of England" label="Derby"/>
<link wikidata="Q1417580" start="4971" end="4978" title="Battle of Falkirk Muir" label="Falkirk"/>
<link wikidata="Q651919" start="4994" end="5002" title="Battle of Culloden" label="Culloden"/>
<link wikidata="Q2269" start="5432" end="5453" title="Industrial Revolution" label="Industrial Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q192296" start="5509" end="5516" title="weaving" label="textile"/>
<link wikidata="Q192296" start="5554" end="5561" title="weaving" label="weavers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1652863" start="5695" end="5716" title="Forth and Clyde Canal" label="Forth and Clyde Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q6900908" start="5772" end="5806" title="Monkland and Kirkintilloch Railway" label="Monkland and Kirkintilloch Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1103697" start="5950" end="5961" title="Clyde Puffer" label="small ships"/>
<link wikidata="Q712868" start="6512" end="6523" title="Red telephone box" label="phone boxes"/>
<link wikidata="Q631581" start="6784" end="6790" title="Achill Island" label="Achill"/>
<link wikidata="Q848287" start="7453" end="7463" title="Livingston, Scotland" label="Livingston"/>
<link wikidata="Q996616" start="7468" end="7479" title="Cumbernauld" label="Cumbernauld"/>
<link wikidata="Q1350181" start="7764" end="7784" title="counties of Scotland" label="counties of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q7622112" start="7812" end="7824" title="Strathkelvin" label="Strathkelvin"/>
<link wikidata="Q124661" start="7872" end="7883" title="Strathclyde" label="Strathclyde"/>
<link wikidata="Q211889" start="7929" end="7948" title="East Dunbartonshire" label="East Dunbartonshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q4876776" start="8004" end="8026" title="Bearsden and Milngavie" label="Bearsden and Milngavie"/>
<link wikidata="Q255340" start="8268" end="8283" title="Tom Johnston (Scottish politician)" label="Thomas Johnston"/>
<link wikidata="Q1652863" start="8536" end="8557" title="Forth and Clyde Canal" label="Forth and Clyde Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q6699791" start="8562" end="8574" title="Luggie Water" label="Luggie Water"/>
<link wikidata="Q17568312" start="8628" end="8649" title="Luggie Aqueduct" label="Luggie on an aqueduct"/>
<link wikidata="Q183161" start="8677" end="8689" title="River Kelvin" label="River Kelvin"/>
<link wikidata="Q19721" start="8719" end="8730" title="River Clyde" label="River Clyde"/>
<link wikidata="Q4093" start="8734" end="8741" title="Glasgow" label="Glasgow"/>
<link wikidata="Q996626" start="8881" end="8890" title="Waterside, East Dunbartonshire" label="Waterside"/>
<link wikidata="Q2967298" start="8905" end="8911" title="Lenzie" label="Lenzie"/>
<link wikidata="Q4839123" start="8937" end="8954" title="Back O&amp;#x27;Loch Halt railway station" label="Back O&amp;#x27; Loch"/>
<link wikidata="Q8032781" start="8956" end="8964" title="Woodilee Hospital" label="Woodilee"/>
<link wikidata="Q6415702" start="8995" end="9018" title="Kirkintilloch Town Hall" label="Kirkintilloch Town Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q7075" start="10101" end="10108" title="Library" label="Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="10356" end="10372" title="Second World War" label="Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q9685" start="10595" end="10619" title="Diana, Princess of Wales" label="Diana, Princess of Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q1652863" start="11637" end="11658" title="Forth and Clyde Canal" label="Forth and Clyde Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q9842" start="12796" end="12810" title="primary school" label="primary school"/>
<link wikidata="Q159334" start="13080" end="13096" title="secondary school" label="secondary school"/>
<link wikidata="Q7882536" start="13141" end="13159" title="Non-denominational" label="Non-denominational"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138671" start="13195" end="13209" title="Catholic school" label="Roman Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138671" start="13423" end="13438" title="Catholic school" label="Catholic school"/>
<link wikidata="Q6523449" start="13605" end="13619" title="Lenzie Academy" label="Lenzie Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6415700" start="13724" end="13744" title="Kirkintilloch Herald" label="Kirkintilloch Herald"/>
<link wikidata="Q6894692" start="13892" end="13906" title="Moira Anderson" label="Moira Anderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q524036" start="13917" end="13931" title="Alexander Bain (inventor)" label="Alexander Bain"/>
<link wikidata="Q6209046" start="14009" end="14018" title="Joe Caven" label="Joe Caven"/>
<link wikidata="Q18917285" start="14061" end="14078" title="Beatrice Clugston" label="Beatrice Clugston"/>
<link wikidata="Q633479" start="14109" end="14131" title="Archibald Scott Couper" label="Archibald Scott Couper"/>
<link wikidata="Q504303" start="14144" end="14157" title="Andrew Crumey" label="Andrew Crumey"/>
<link wikidata="Q21997483" start="14170" end="14202" title="James Dalrymple Duncan Dalrymple" label="James Dalrymple Duncan Dalrymple"/>
<link wikidata="Q1706852" start="14241" end="14254" title="Joseph Devine" label="Joseph Devine"/>
<link wikidata="Q601745" start="14280" end="14291" title="Walter Dick" label="Walter Dick"/>
<link wikidata="Q164134" start="14344" end="14357" title="United States men&amp;#x27;s national soccer team" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q6133991" start="14360" end="14374" title="James Fletcher (industrialist)" label="James Fletcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q16027012" start="14393" end="14406" title="John Fletcher (New Zealand politician)" label="John Fletcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q2658681" start="14436" end="14451" title="Jimmy Gallagher" label="Jimmy Gallagher"/>
<link wikidata="Q164134" start="14496" end="14509" title="United States men&amp;#x27;s national soccer team" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q28731777" start="14512" end="14527" title="Alasdair Graham (pianist)" label="Alasdair Graham"/>
<link wikidata="Q1174592" start="14559" end="14569" title="David Gray (poet)" label="David Gray"/>
<link wikidata="Q255340" start="14579" end="14591" title="Tom Johnston (British politician)" label="Tom Johnston"/>
<link wikidata="Q5236344" start="14613" end="14626" title="David Lapsley" label="David Lapsley"/>
<link wikidata="Q7819636" start="14654" end="14665" title="Tommy Lorne" label="Tommy Lorne"/>
<link wikidata="Q16017494" start="14679" end="14693" title="Hugh McCartney" label="Hugh McCartney"/>
<link wikidata="Q333318" start="14715" end="14728" title="Ian McCartney" label="Ian McCartney"/>
<link wikidata="Q6248395" start="14750" end="14761" title="John Meikle" label="John Meikle"/>
<link wikidata="Q219578" start="14780" end="14794" title="Victoria Cross" label="Victoria Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q6725854" start="14797" end="14810" title="Macvey Napier" label="Macvey Napier"/>
<link wikidata="Q455" start="14840" end="14863" title="Encyclopædia Britannica" label="Encyclopædia Britannica"/>
<link wikidata="Q2011890" start="14865" end="14877" title="Billy_Rankin_(guitarist)" label="Billy Rankin"/>
<link wikidata="Q15304266" start="14892" end="14906" title="Rita Taketsuru" label="Rita Taketsuru"/>
<link wikidata="Q3178965" start="14963" end="14971" title="Jim Watt (boxer)" label="Jim Watt"/>
<link wikidata="Q6415701" start="15021" end="15047" title="Kirkintilloch Rob Roy F.C." label="Kirkintilloch Rob Roy F.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q7437801" start="15071" end="15090" title="Scottish Junior Cup" label="Scottish Junior Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q4680496" start="15115" end="15128" title="Adamslie Park" label="Adamslie Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q996616" start="15232" end="15243" title="Cumbernauld" label="Cumbernauld"/>
<link wikidata="Q5656918" start="15277" end="15294" title="Harestanes A.F.C." label="Harestanes A.F.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q7437616" start="15322" end="15342" title="Scottish Amateur Cup" label="Scottish Amateur Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q542485" start="15820" end="15831" title="Gregg Wylde" label="Gregg Wylde"/>
<link wikidata="Q933643" start="15864" end="15879" title="Charlie Mulgrew" label="Charlie Mulgrew"/>
<link wikidata="Q442866" start="16033" end="16045" title="Barry Bannan" label="Barry Bannan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2423660" start="16050" end="16065" title="Stephen Crainey" label="Stephen Crainey"/>
<link wikidata="Q922480" start="16139" end="16157" title="Church of Scotland" label="Church of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="16376" end="16397" title="Roman Catholic Church" label="Roman Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348748" start="16645" end="16661" title="Yoichi, Hokkaido" label="Yoichi, Hokkaido"/>
<link wikidata="Q7792602" start="16685" end="16717" title="Thomas Muir (political reformer)" label="Thomas Muir (political reformer)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4093" start="16793" end="16800" title="Glasgow" label="Glasgow"/>
<link wikidata="Q2682379" start="16850" end="16860" title="Baldernock" label="Baldernock"/>
<link wikidata="Q182923" start="16880" end="16888" title="Stirling" label="Stirling"/>
<link wikidata="Q7353484" start="16891" end="16901" title="Robroyston" label="Robroyston"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="655637" wikidata="Q683607" url="?curid=655637" title="Blomberg–Fritsch affair">
<text>The Blomberg–Fritsch affair, also known as the Blomberg–Fritsch crisis (German: &quot;Blomberg–Fritsch–Krise&quot;), was the name given to two related scandals in early 1938 that resulted in the subjugation of the German Armed Forces (&quot;Wehrmacht&quot;) to Adolf Hitler. As documented in the Hossbach Memorandum, Hitler had been dissatisfied with the two high-ranking military officials concerned, Werner von Blomberg and Werner von Fritsch, regarding them as too hesitant with the war preparations he demanded. As a result, a marriage scandal and a manufactured accusation of homosexuality were used to remove Blomberg and Fritsch, respectively.

==Blomberg marriage==
The Blomberg–Fritsch affair began soon after the marriage on 12 January 1938 of War Minister Werner von Blomberg to Erna Gruhn, when the Berlin police discovered she had a long criminal record and had posed for pornographic photographs. According to testimony given much later, at the Nuremberg trials, information received by the Police Commissioner within days also indicated that &quot;Marshal von Blomberg&#x27;s wife had been a previously convicted prostitute who had been registered as a prostitute in the files of seven large German cities; she was in the Berlin criminal files... she had also been sentenced by the Berlin courts for distributing indecent pictures.&quot;

Marriage to a person with such a criminal record violated the standard of conduct expected of officers, as defined by Blomberg himself, and came as a shock to Hitler, as &quot;Luftwaffe&quot; chief Hermann Göring had been Blomberg&#x27;s best man, and Hitler himself had served as a witness at the wedding. Hitler and Göring saw the development as an opportunity to dispose of Blomberg.

Hitler ordered Blomberg to have the marriage annulled to avoid a scandal and to preserve the integrity of the army. Blomberg refused to annul the marriage but after Göring threatened to make his wife&#x27;s past public knowledge, he resigned from his posts on 27 January 1938.

==Fritsch affair==
The events surrounding Blomberg&#x27;s marriage inspired Göring and Heinrich Himmler to arrange a similar affair for Commander-in-Chief of the German Army Werner von Fritsch. Göring did not want Fritsch to become the successor to Blomberg and thus his superior. Himmler wanted to weaken the &quot;Wehrmacht&quot; and its mainly-aristocratic generals to strengthen his &quot;Schutzstaffel&quot; (SS), as a competitor to the regular German Army (&quot;Heer&quot;). In 1936, Reinhard Heydrich had prepared a file on Fritsch that had allegations of homosexuality and had passed the information on to Hitler, but Hitler had rejected it and ordered Heydrich to destroy the file. However, Heydrich did not do so. In 1938, Heydrich resurrected the old file on Fritsch, who was again accused of being a homosexual by Himmler. It was reported that Fritsch had been encouraged by General Ludwig Beck to carry out a military &quot;putsch&quot; against Hitler&#x27;s regime but that he declined and resigned on 4 February 1938, to be replaced by Walther von Brauchitsch, whom Fritsch had recommended for the post.

==Reorganisation of the army==
Hitler used the situation to transfer the duties of the Ministry of War (&quot;Reichskriegsministerium&quot;) to a new organisation, the Supreme Command of the Armed Forces (&quot;Oberkommando der Wehrmacht&quot;, or OKW), and Wilhelm Keitel, who became the new head of the OKW on 4 February 1938. That weakened the traditional Army High Command (&quot;Oberkommando des Heeres&quot;, or OKH), which was now subordinated to the OKW.

Hitler took further advantage of the situation by replacing several generals and ministers with men even more loyal to him and took more effective &quot;de facto&quot; control of the &quot;Wehrmacht&quot;, which &quot;de jure&quot;, he already commanded. Some senior officers of the &quot;Wehrmacht&quot; protested against the changes, most notably Beck, who circulated a petition signed by Colonel General Gerd von Rundstedt and others. 

After the defeat outside Moscow in December 1941, Hitler took personal command of the armed forces through the OKW and appointed himself as commander of the OKH after Brauchitsch was relieved and transferred to the leadership reserve (&quot;Führerreserve&quot;). Hitler then began participating at OKW, where Keitel never dared to oppose him.

==Disproving the charges against Fritsch==
It became known that the charges against Fritsch were false. The information in the file was, in fact, about a &quot;Rittmeister&quot; (cavalry captain), named Achim von Frisch. Himmler and Heydrich still pursued the case, conveniently discovering an individual, called Hans Schmidt, to serve as a witness in support of the charge. The &quot;Wehrmacht&quot; demanded a court of honour of officers to examine the Blomberg–Fritsch affair, as it had come to be known. The proceedings were presided over by Göring. Schmidt claimed to recognise Fritsch as an officer whom he had witnessed in a homosexual act in a public lavatory with a man, known in translation as &quot;Bavarian Joe&quot;. However, Schmidt was exposed as a notorious criminal whose Berlin gang had specialised in the blackmail of homosexuals.

Members of the German officer corps were appalled at the mistreatment of Fritsch, and at the next meeting, Himmler, Göring, and even Hitler might have come under pressure from them, as the case against Fritsch was seen as weak. The successful annexation (&quot;Anschluss&quot;) of Austria shortly thereafter, however, silenced the critics. Beck resigned on 18 August 1938 and Rundstedt obtained permission to retire in October 1938.

Schmidt withdrew his accusations against Fritsch and he was formally acquitted on 18 March, but the damage to his reputation had been done. Although the army demanded he be restored to his former position as Commander-in-Chief, Hitler would only make him honorary colonel of an artillery regiment. Just after the German invasion of Poland, Fritsch was inspecting front-line troops when he was shot by a Polish bullet (either a machine gun or a sharpshooter) in the leg and died.

==See also==
* Hossbach Memorandum

==References==
==Sources==
* Faber, David, &quot;Munich, 1938: Appeasement and World War II&quot; (2008) pp. 46–75.

==External links==
* http://www.dhm.de/lemo/html/nazi/innenpolitik/fritschblom/
* http://avalon.law.yale.edu/imt/04-25-46.asp</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q683607" start="4" end="27" title="Blomberg–Fritsch affair" label="Blomberg–Fritsch affair"/>
<link wikidata="Q683607" start="47" end="70" title="Blomberg–Fritsch affair" label="Blomberg–Fritsch crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q188" start="72" end="78" title="German language" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q128781" start="241" end="250" title="Wehrmacht" label="Wehrmacht"/>
<link wikidata="Q352" start="261" end="273" title="Adolf Hitler" label="Adolf Hitler"/>
<link wikidata="Q125982" start="296" end="315" title="Hossbach Memorandum" label="Hossbach Memorandum"/>
<link wikidata="Q70992" start="402" end="421" title="Werner von Blomberg" label="Werner von Blomberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q57572" start="426" end="444" title="Werner von Fritsch" label="Werner von Fritsch"/>
<link wikidata="Q6636" start="581" end="594" title="homosexuality" label="homosexuality"/>
<link wikidata="Q70992" start="767" end="786" title="Werner von Blomberg" label="Werner von Blomberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q80130" start="959" end="975" title="Nuremberg trials" label="Nuremberg trials"/>
<link wikidata="Q2564009" start="1530" end="1539" title="Luftwaffe" label="Luftwaffe"/>
<link wikidata="Q47906" start="1552" end="1566" title="Hermann Göring" label="Hermann Göring"/>
<link wikidata="Q43067" start="2107" end="2123" title="Heinrich Himmler" label="Heinrich Himmler"/>
<link wikidata="Q57572" start="2194" end="2212" title="Werner von Fritsch" label="Werner von Fritsch"/>
<link wikidata="Q44687" start="2413" end="2426" title="Schutzstaffel" label="Schutzstaffel"/>
<link wikidata="Q701923" start="2489" end="2493" title="German Army (1935–1945)" label="Heer"/>
<link wikidata="Q60039" start="2511" end="2528" title="Reinhard Heydrich" label="Reinhard Heydrich"/>
<link wikidata="Q6636" start="2584" end="2597" title="homosexuality" label="homosexuality"/>
<link wikidata="Q57170" start="2916" end="2927" title="Ludwig Beck" label="Ludwig Beck"/>
<link wikidata="Q57140" start="3072" end="3095" title="Walther von Brauchitsch" label="Walther von Brauchitsch"/>
<link wikidata="Q471063" start="3251" end="3274" title="Ministry of the Reichswehr" label="Reichskriegsministerium"/>
<link wikidata="Q152412" start="3352" end="3378" title="Oberkommando der Wehrmacht" label="Oberkommando der Wehrmacht"/>
<link wikidata="Q76361" start="3399" end="3413" title="Wilhelm Keitel" label="Wilhelm Keitel"/>
<link wikidata="Q155870" start="3525" end="3548" title="Oberkommando des Heeres" label="Oberkommando des Heeres"/>
<link wikidata="Q712144" start="3758" end="3766" title="de facto" label="de facto"/>
<link wikidata="Q132555" start="3823" end="3830" title="de jure" label="de jure"/>
<link wikidata="Q70527" start="4012" end="4030" title="Gerd von Rundstedt" label="Gerd von Rundstedt"/>
<link wikidata="Q151290" start="4055" end="4076" title="Battle of Moscow" label="defeat outside Moscow"/>
<link wikidata="Q476987" start="4286" end="4299" title="Führerreserve" label="Führerreserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q60039" start="4622" end="4630" title="Reinhard Heydrich" label="Heydrich"/>
<link wikidata="Q154681" start="5501" end="5510" title="Anschluss" label="Anschluss"/>
<link wikidata="Q176495" start="5521" end="5528" title="Federal State of Austria" label="Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q150812" start="5987" end="6012" title="Invasion of Poland" label="German invasion of Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q125982" start="6169" end="6188" title="Hossbach Memorandum" label="Hossbach Memorandum"/>
<link wikidata="Q5233519" start="6219" end="6231" title="David Faber (politician)" label="Faber, David"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="655639" wikidata="Q1638770" url="?curid=655639" title="Dead drop">
<text>A dead drop or dead letter box is a method of espionage tradecraft used to pass items or information between two individuals (e.g., a case officer and an agent, or two agents) via a secret location. By avoiding direct meetings, individuals can maintain operational security. This method stands in contrast to the live drop, which involves a face-to-face exchange.

Spies and their handlers have been known to perform dead drops using various techniques to hide items (such as money, secrets or instructions) and to signal that the drop has been made. Although the signal and location by necessity must be agreed upon in advance, the signal may or may not be located close to the dead drop itself. The operatives may not necessarily know or meet each other.

==Methods==
The success of a dead drop depends on the location and method of concealment, ensuring retrieval without the operatives being spotted by the public, police, or other security forces. Common everyday items and behaviors are used to avoid suspicion. Any hidden location is used. 
A &quot;dead drop spike&quot; is a concealment device similar to a microcache. It has been used since the late 1960s to hide money, maps, documents, microfilm, and other items. The spike is resistant to water and mildew and can be placed in the ground or submerged in a shallow stream for later retrieval. 

Various signaling methods are employed to indicate that a dead drop has been made. These include chalk marks on a wall, a piece of chewing gum on a lamppost or a newspaper placed on a park bench. In some cases, signals are made from an agent&#x27;s residence, visible from the outside, such as distinctively coloured towel hung from a balcony or a potted plant positioned on a windowsill.

==Drawbacks==
While the dead drop method is useful in preventing the instantaneous capture of either an operative/handler pair or an entire espionage network, it is not without disadvantages. If one of the operatives is compromised, they may reveal the location and signal for that specific dead drop. Counterintelligence can then use the dead drop as a double agent for a variety of purposes, such as to feed misinformation to the enemy or to identify other operatives using it or ultimately to booby trap it. There is also the risk that a third party may find the deposited material.

==Modern techniques==
On January 23, 2006, the Russian FSB accused Britain of using wireless dead drops concealed inside hollowed-out rocks (&quot;spy rock&quot;) to collect espionage information from agents in Russia. According to the Russian authorities, the agent delivering information would approach the rock and transmit data wirelessly into it from a hand-held device, and later, his British handlers would pick up the stored data by similar means.

==See also==
* Foldering
* PirateBox
* USB dead drop

==References==
==Bibliography==
* &quot;Russians accuse 4 Britons of spying&quot;.International Herald Tribune. January 24, 2006. News report on Russian discovery of British &quot;wireless dead drop&quot;.
* &quot;Old spying lives on in new ways&quot;. BBC. 23 January 2006.
* Madrid suspects tied to e-mail ruse. International Herald Tribune. April 28, 2006.
* Military secrets missing on Ministry of Defence computer files
* Robert Burnson, &quot;Accused Chinese spy pleads guilty in U.S. &#x27;dead-drop&#x27; sting&quot;, Bloomberg, 25 novembre 2019.

== Further reading ==
* Robert Wallace and H. Keith Melton, with Henry R. Schlesinger, &quot;Spycraft: The Secret History of the CIA&#x27;s Spytechs, from Communism to al-Qaeda&quot;, New York, Dutton, 2008. .</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1638770" start="2" end="11" title="Dead drop" label="dead drop"/>
<link wikidata="Q1638770" start="15" end="30" title="Dead drop" label="dead letter box"/>
<link wikidata="Q165950" start="46" end="55" title="espionage" label="espionage"/>
<link wikidata="Q7832118" start="56" end="66" title="tradecraft" label="tradecraft"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="134" end="146" title="Agent_handling#Case_officer" label="case officer"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="154" end="159" title="Espionage#Agents_in_espionage" label="agent"/>
<link wikidata="Q461910" start="253" end="273" title="operational security" label="operational security"/>
<link wikidata="Q1638770" start="313" end="322" title="Dead drop" label="live drop"/>
<link wikidata="Q165950" start="365" end="370" title="Espionage" label="Spies"/>
<link wikidata="Q42915592" start="1083" end="1101" title="concealment device" label="concealment device"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1115" end="1125" title="geocaching#Size classifications" label="microcache"/>
<link wikidata="Q830450" start="1197" end="1206" title="microfilm" label="microfilm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1220207" start="1261" end="1267" title="mildew" label="mildew"/>
<link wikidata="Q183670" start="1453" end="1458" title="chalk" label="chalk"/>
<link wikidata="Q130878" start="1487" end="1498" title="chewing gum" label="chewing gum"/>
<link wikidata="Q503958" start="1504" end="1512" title="Street light" label="lamppost"/>
<link wikidata="Q11032" start="1518" end="1527" title="newspaper" label="newspaper"/>
<link wikidata="Q204776" start="1540" end="1550" title="Bench (furniture)" label="park bench"/>
<link wikidata="Q67903975" start="1860" end="1867" title="Handler (spying)" label="handler"/>
<link wikidata="Q501700" start="2048" end="2067" title="Counterintelligence" label="Counterintelligence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058375" start="2100" end="2112" title="double agent" label="double agent"/>
<link wikidata="Q13579947" start="2156" end="2170" title="misinformation" label="misinformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1568202" start="2242" end="2252" title="booby trap" label="booby trap"/>
<link wikidata="Q58792" start="2388" end="2391" title="Federal Security Service (Russia)" label="FSB"/>
<link wikidata="Q789940" start="2400" end="2407" title="foreign relations of the United Kingdom" label="Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q249" start="2417" end="2425" title="wireless communication" label="wireless"/>
<link wikidata="Q55611839" start="2805" end="2814" title="Foldering" label="Foldering"/>
<link wikidata="Q3389123" start="2817" end="2826" title="PirateBox" label="PirateBox"/>
<link wikidata="Q577528" start="2829" end="2842" title="USB dead drop" label="USB dead drop"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="3097" end="3100" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q5317558" start="3594" end="3600" title="Dutton Penguin" label="Dutton"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="655645" wikidata="Q6765247" url="?curid=655645" title="Marion Hutton">
<text>Marion Hutton (born Marion Thornburg; March 10, 1919 – January 10, 1987) was an American singer and actress. She is best remembered for her singing with the Glenn Miller Orchestra from 1938 to 1942. She was the sister of actress and singer Betty Hutton.

==Early life==
Hutton was born as Marion Thornburg in Fort Smith, Arkansas, the elder sister of actress Betty Hutton. They were raised in Battle Creek, Michigan. The sisters&#x27; father abandoned the family when they were both young; he later committed suicide. Their mother worked a variety of jobs to support the family until she became a successful bootlegger. Both sisters sang with the Vincent Lopez Orchestra.

==Discovery by Glenn Miller==
Hutton was discovered by Glenn Miller and was invited to join the Glenn Miller Orchestra in 1938. &quot;I was only seventeen then [...] and so Glenn and Helen [Miller] became my legal guardians. He was like a father because I never had a father I remembered.&quot; Miller wanted Hutton to appear as an all-American girl, so on her first few performances, he introduced her as &quot;Sissy Jones.&quot; The pseudonym was not used beyond those first performances.

Hutton was too young to sing legally on her own in nightclubs. Miller and his wife Helen officially became her foster parents, allowing them to serve as Hutton&#x27;s chaperone while performing in these venues. 

Hutton considered herself more an entertainer than a singer, and became an important part of the Miller band. She remained with Miller on and off until the orchestra disbanded when Miller joined the army in 1942.

==Film career==
Film historian Jeanine Basinger asserts in her 2007 book on the Hollywood studios system &quot;The Star Machine&quot; that in the early forties Marion Hutton was more popular than her sister Betty. 

Marion had a small role in the film &quot;Orchestra Wives&quot; (1942; Twentieth Century Fox), in which the Glenn Miller Orchestra starred. After Miller joined the Army in 1942, she went with fellow Miller performers Tex Beneke and the Modernaires on a theater tour.

The next important event in her entertainment career was a role in &quot;In Society&quot; with Abbott and Costello in 1944. Marion appeared with the Desi Arnaz orchestra in October 1947 at the Radio City Theatre in Minneapolis. As the 1940s wound down, so did Marion&#x27;s career. Her last film role was in 1949, acting in the Marx Brothers&#x27; &quot;Love Happy&quot;.

==Radio and television career==

In 1949, Hutton became a regular on The Jack Carson Show. As part of the show, Marion toured with Jack Carson and Robert Alda. Hutton appeared on Carson’s television program in 1950 and 1951.&lt;ref name=&quot;bandchirps/marion-hutton&quot;&gt;&lt;/ref&gt;

==Personal life==
Hutton was married three times. She married publicist and television producer Jack Philbin in 1940. They had two sons. Her next marriage, to writer Jack Douglas, produced a third son. Her last and longest marriage was in 1954 to Vic Schoen, an arranger for the Andrews Sisters and Bing Crosby, among other artists in the 1940s. The couple remained married until her death in 1987. Looking back on her first marriage, in 1974 she told George T. Simon, &quot;[W]hat I wanted most of all was to be a wife and mother. I had no drive for a career.&quot;

In 1965 according to the &quot;New York Times&quot;, Hutton sought treatment for various addictions. Hutton went back to school in her late fifties. Starting in 1972, she went on to receive a Bachelor&#x27;s in psychology and a Master&#x27;s in family counseling, then found work at a local hospital. During the 1960s and 1970s, Hutton and Schoen lived in Laguna Beach but later moved due to increasing financial problems. In 1981, Hutton and Schoen moved from Irvine, California, to Kirkland, Washington, and founded Residence XII, a drug addiction center to help alcoholics and addicts. She was the executive director. 

Schoen arranged music for the PBS production &quot;Glenn Miller - A Moonlight Serenade&quot; commemorating the Miller band’s breakthrough performance at the Glen Island Casino. Produced to recognize the 40th anniversary of Miller&#x27;s death, it starred Beneke, Johnny Desmond, and Hutton.

===Death===
Marion Hutton died of cancer on January 10, 1987, at age 67, in Kirkland, Washington.

==Selected discography== 
*1939 &quot;Ding-Dong! The Witch Is Dead&quot;, vocal with Glenn Miller and his Orchestra, Bluebird (recorded July 12, 1939)
*1939 &quot;The Man with the Mandolin&quot;, vocal with Glenn Miller and his Orchestra, Bluebird (recorded July 12, 1939)
*1939 &quot;Bluebirds in the Moonlight&quot;, vocal with Glenn Miller and his Orchestra, Bluebird (recorded October 9, 1939)
*1940 &quot;Ooh! What You Said&quot;, vocal with Glenn Miller and his Orchestra, Bluebird (recorded December 6, 1939)
*1940 &quot;The Rhumba Jumps&quot; vocal with Tex Beneke, with Glenn Miller and his Orchestra, Bluebird (recorded January 26, 1940)
*1940 &quot;Say &quot;Si Si&quot;&quot; vocal with Glenn Miller and his Orchestra, Bluebird 10622 (recorded January 26, 1940)
*1940 &quot;The Woodpecker Song&quot;, vocal with Glenn Miller and his Orchestra, Bluebird (recorded January 29, 1940)
*1940 &quot;Boog It&quot;, vocal with Glenn Miller and his Orchestra, Bluebird (recorded March 30, 1940)
*1940 &quot;Five O&#x27;clock Whistle&quot;, vocal with Glenn Miller and his Orchestra, Bluebird (recorded June 10, 1940)
*1940 &quot;You&#x27;ve Got Me This Way&quot;, vocal with Glenn Miller and his Orchestra, Bluebird (recorded October 11, 1940)
*1941 &quot;Yes, My Darling Daughter&quot;, vocal with Glenn Miller and his Orchestra, Bluebird (recorded November 15, 1940)
*1942 &quot;Don&#x27;t Sit Under the Apple Tree (with Anyone Else but Me)&quot;, vocal with Tex Beneke and The Modernaires, with Glenn Miller and his Orchestra, Bluebird (recorded February 18, 1942)
*1942 &quot;Knit One, Purl Two&quot;, vocal with The Modernaires, with Glenn Miller and his Orchestra, Victor (recorded May 20, 1942)
*1942 &quot;(I&#x27;ve Got a Gal in) Kalamazoo&quot; vocal with The Modernaires, with Glenn Miller and his Orchestra, Victor 27934-A (recorded May 20, 1942)
*1942 &quot;That&#x27;s Sabotage&quot; vocal with Glenn Miller and his Orchestra, Victor (recorded June 17, 1942)
*1942 &quot;Jukebox Saturday Night&quot; vocal with Tex Beneke and The Modernaires, with Glenn Miller and his Orchestra, Victor (recorded July 15, 1942) 

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6765247" start="0" end="13" title="Marion Hutton" label="Marion Hutton"/>
<link wikidata="Q6765247" start="20" end="36" title="Marion Hutton" label="Marion Thornburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q27939" start="89" end="95" title="singing" label="singer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2446255" start="157" end="179" title="Glenn Miller Orchestra" label="Glenn Miller Orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q152713" start="240" end="252" title="Betty Hutton" label="Betty Hutton"/>
<link wikidata="Q79535" start="309" end="329" title="Fort Smith, Arkansas" label="Fort Smith, Arkansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q152713" start="359" end="371" title="Betty Hutton" label="Betty Hutton"/>
<link wikidata="Q810998" start="393" end="415" title="Battle Creek, Michigan" label="Battle Creek, Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q10737" start="509" end="516" title="suicide" label="suicide"/>
<link wikidata="Q1977245" start="608" end="618" title="Rum-running" label="bootlegger"/>
<link wikidata="Q917080" start="647" end="670" title="Vincent Lopez" label="Vincent Lopez Orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q103651" start="728" end="740" title="Glenn Miller" label="Glenn Miller"/>
<link wikidata="Q2446255" start="769" end="791" title="Glenn Miller Orchestra" label="Glenn Miller Orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q6171972" start="1623" end="1639" title="Jeanine Basinger" label="Jeanine Basinger"/>
<link wikidata="Q2900559" start="1850" end="1865" title="Orchestra Wives" label="Orchestra Wives"/>
<link wikidata="Q9212" start="1972" end="1976" title="United States Army" label="Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q488352" start="2025" end="2035" title="Tex Beneke" label="Tex Beneke"/>
<link wikidata="Q7751891" start="2044" end="2055" title="Modernaires" label="Modernaires"/>
<link wikidata="Q3763677" start="2149" end="2159" title="In Society" label="In Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q23679" start="2171" end="2190" title="Abbott and Costello" label="Abbott and Costello"/>
<link wikidata="Q472535" start="2225" end="2235" title="Desi Arnaz" label="Desi Arnaz"/>
<link wikidata="Q36091" start="2291" end="2302" title="Minneapolis" label="Minneapolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q64450" start="2404" end="2417" title="Marx Brothers" label="Marx Brothers"/>
<link wikidata="Q957026" start="2430" end="2440" title="Love Happy" label="Love Happy"/>
<link wikidata="Q55635320" start="2518" end="2538" title="The Jack Carson Show" label="The Jack Carson Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q1393256" start="2580" end="2591" title="Jack Carson" label="Jack Carson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2061166" start="2596" end="2607" title="Robert Alda" label="Robert Alda"/>
<link wikidata="Q6112163" start="2906" end="2918" title="Jack Douglas (writer)" label="Jack Douglas"/>
<link wikidata="Q7924906" start="2987" end="2997" title="Vic Schoen" label="Vic Schoen"/>
<link wikidata="Q972398" start="3019" end="3034" title="Andrews Sisters" label="Andrews Sisters"/>
<link wikidata="Q72984" start="3039" end="3050" title="Bing Crosby" label="Bing Crosby"/>
<link wikidata="Q1908566" start="3664" end="3676" title="Laguna Beach" label="Laguna Beach"/>
<link wikidata="Q49219" start="3769" end="3787" title="Irvine, California" label="Irvine, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q936768" start="3792" end="3812" title="Kirkland, Washington" label="Kirkland, Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q215616" start="3961" end="3964" title="PBS" label="PBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q6266578" start="4194" end="4208" title="Johnny Desmond" label="Johnny Desmond"/>
<link wikidata="Q12078" start="4257" end="4263" title="cancer" label="cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q936768" start="4299" end="4319" title="Kirkland, Washington" label="Kirkland, Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q5278115" start="4360" end="4388" title="Ding-Dong! The Witch Is Dead" label="Ding-Dong! The Witch Is Dead"/>
<link wikidata="Q885977" start="4439" end="4447" title="Bluebird Records" label="Bluebird"/>
<link wikidata="Q488352" start="4884" end="4894" title="Tex Beneke" label="Tex Beneke"/>
<link wikidata="Q7428899" start="4982" end="5003" title="Say &amp;quot;Si Si&amp;quot;" label="Say &amp;quot;Si Si&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q7775744" start="5108" end="5127" title="The Woodpecker Song" label="The Woodpecker Song"/>
<link wikidata="Q12135392" start="5581" end="5605" title="Yes, My Darling Daughter" label="Yes, My Darling Daughter"/>
<link wikidata="Q5291896" start="5706" end="5767" title="Don&amp;#x27;t Sit Under the Apple Tree (with Anyone Else but Me)" label="Don&amp;#x27;t Sit Under the Apple Tree (with Anyone Else but Me)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7751891" start="5801" end="5816" title="The Modernaires" label="The Modernaires"/>
<link wikidata="Q7751891" start="5942" end="5957" title="The Modernaires" label="The Modernaires"/>
<link wikidata="Q4503673" start="6039" end="6073" title="(I&amp;#x27;ve Got a Gal in) Kalamazoo" label="(I&amp;#x27;ve Got a Gal in) Kalamazoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q16919272" start="6310" end="6332" title="Jukebox Saturday Night" label="Jukebox Saturday Night"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="655647" wikidata="Q1997222" url="?curid=655647" title="Petasites frigidus">
<text>Petasites frigidus, the Arctic sweet coltsfoot or Arctic butterbur, is a species of flowering plant in the family Asteraceae. It is native to Arctic to cool temperate regions of the Northern Hemisphere in northern Europe, northern Asia and northern North America.

It is a herbaceous perennial plant producing flowering stems in early spring, and large leaves through the summer. The upright flowering stems are 10–20 cm tall, and bear only 5-12 inflorescences, yellowish-white to pink in colour. The leaves are rounded, 15–20 cm broad, with a deeply cleft base and shallowly lobed margin, and rise directly from the underground rootstock. The underside of the leaves is covered with matted, woolly fuzz. It grows in moist shaded ground, preferring stream banks and seeping ground of cut-banks.


While there is some disagreement, some sources identify five varieties of &quot;P. frigidus&quot;:
*&quot;Petasites frigidus&quot; var. &quot;frigidus&quot;
*&quot;Petasites frigidus&quot; var. &quot;nivalis&quot;, sometimes referred to as &quot;P. nivalis&quot; or &quot;P. hyperboreus&quot;. This variety is common at subalpine and alpine elevations.
*&quot;Petasites frigidus&quot; var. &quot;palmatus&quot;, sometimes referred to as &quot;P. palmatus&quot;, palmate coltsfoot, or western coltsfoot; mâl-ē-mē’ (Konkow language); or tä-tä-tē’; pē’-wē is the root.
*&quot;Petasites frigidus&quot; var. &quot;sagittatus&quot;, arrowleaf sweet coltsfoot.
*&quot;Petasites frigidus&quot; var. &quot;vitifolius&quot;

==Uses==
The leaf stalks and flower stems (with flowers) are edible, and can be used as a vegetable dish. A salt-substitute can also be made by drying and then burning the leaves. This black, powdery substance will provide a salty taste. However, given the high likelihood of the presence of toxic unsaturated, diester pyrrolizidine alkaloids in this species, consumption should be very limited.

==References==

*Germplasm Resources Information Network: &quot;Petasites frigidus&quot;

==External links==
*</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1997222" start="24" end="46" title="Petasites frigidus" label="Arctic sweet coltsfoot"/>
<link wikidata="Q1997222" start="50" end="66" title="Petasites frigidus" label="Arctic butterbur"/>
<link wikidata="Q25314" start="84" end="99" title="flowering plant" label="flowering plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q25400" start="114" end="124" title="Asteraceae" label="Asteraceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q39061" start="182" end="201" title="Northern Hemisphere" label="Northern Hemisphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q46" start="214" end="220" title="Europe" label="Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q48" start="231" end="235" title="Asia" label="Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q49" start="249" end="262" title="North America" label="North America"/>
<link wikidata="Q190903" start="273" end="283" title="herbaceous" label="herbaceous"/>
<link wikidata="Q157957" start="284" end="299" title="perennial plant" label="perennial plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q506" start="392" end="398" title="flower" label="flower"/>
<link wikidata="Q156428" start="446" end="459" title="inflorescence" label="inflorescence"/>
<link wikidata="Q767728" start="858" end="867" title="variety (biology)" label="varieties"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141462" start="1117" end="1126" title="Subalpine zone" label="subalpine"/>
<link wikidata="Q859654" start="1131" end="1137" title="Alpine climate" label="alpine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1997222" start="1300" end="1309" title="Petasites frigidus" label="mâl-ē-mē’"/>
<link wikidata="Q3198700" start="1311" end="1326" title="Konkow language" label="Konkow language"/>
<link wikidata="Q1997222" start="1332" end="1341" title="Petasites frigidus" label="tä-tä-tē’"/>
<link wikidata="Q1997222" start="1343" end="1349" title="Petasites frigidus" label="pē’-wē"/>
<link wikidata="Q11004" start="1602" end="1611" title="vegetable" label="vegetable"/>
<link wikidata="Q101487" start="1823" end="1830" title="Ester" label="diester"/>
<link wikidata="Q75005794" start="1831" end="1853" title="pyrrolizidine alkaloid" label="pyrrolizidine alkaloid"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="655650" wikidata="Q375620" url="?curid=655650" title="Petasites hybridus">
<text>Petasites hybridus, also known as the butterbur, is a herbaceous perennial flowering plant in the family Asteraceae that is native to Europe and northern Asia.

Although used over centuries in traditional medicine to treat various disorders, there are no approved medical uses, but it is sold as a dietary supplement. Concerns about the potential toxic effects of pyrrolizidine alkaloids in butterbur limit its use in human and animal studies.

== Common names ==
&quot;Butterbur&quot; may have derived from the use of leaves to wrap butter centuries ago. It is also called &quot;bog rhubarb&quot;, &quot;Devil&#x27;s hat&quot;, and &quot;pestilence wort&quot;.

== Description ==
The species is dioecious, the male and female flowers being borne on separate plants. In Britain, the male flowers are widespread, but the female flowers have a restricted distribution in northern and central England.

The flowers are produced in the early spring, before the leaves appear. They are pale pink, with several inflorescences clustered on a stem. The leaves are large, on stout tall stems, round, with a diameter of with petioles up to .

== Distribution ==
It is native to central Europe, extending from the British Isles to the Caucasus, and from southern Italy to southern Scandinavia. It is present as an introduced species in North America. In the British Isles, female plants are rarely found outside central and northern England and the species may be naturalized as clonal populations outside this area, propagating via rhizome fragments. The preferred habitats are moist, fertile soils often by rivers, streams, and in wet meadows.

==Dietary supplement and research==
As there are no approved clinical uses of butterbur or its extracts, preparations are sold in some countries as a dietary supplement. There is no evidence that butterbur is useful for treating skin allergies, bronchitis, urinary tract infections, asthma, or other disorders.

===Migraines===
Although some preliminary studies indicate that butterbur may reduce the frequency of migraine headaches in adults and children, clinical neurology associations do not recommend it because of concerns of possible liver toxicity.

===Rhinitis===
Although there have been studies of butterbur root or leaf extracts as possible therapies for symptoms of hay fever (allergic rhinitis), the results were insufficient to determine effectiveness and safety.

===Traditional medicine===
&quot;Petasites hybridus &quot;leaves were used in Austrian and Czech traditional medicine internally (as tea or cold maceration in ethanol) and externally (as compresses or maceration in vinegar) for treatment of infections, fever, flu, colds, hay-fever, and allergies.

==Phytochemicals==
&quot;Petasites hybridus&quot; contains senecionine and other toxic pyrrolizidine alkaloids in its leaves and roots. Also present are the sesquiterpene esters petasin, isopetasin, and neopetasin.
==Potential toxicity==
Butterbur extracts have been found to contain hepatotoxic pyrrolizidine alkaloids at the retail level. These extracts are not recommended during pregnancy or breastfeeding.

The adverse effects of butterbur reported in clinical trials include mainly gastrointestinal problems, such as nausea, flatulence, and belching. In 2015, the American Academy of Neurology withdrew its original endorsement of butterbur due to safety concerns.

Long-term health effects and interaction of butterbur with other drugs have not been well documented. However, it can theoretically interact with certain blood pressure and heart medications, as well as with drugs that can induce a liver enzyme called CYP3A4. Prior cases of liver damage have been reported from people taking butterbur, with cases varying in adverse effects from cholestasis and inflammation to liver failure.

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q375620" start="38" end="47" title="Petasites hybridus" label="butterbur"/>
<link wikidata="Q25314" start="75" end="90" title="flowering plant" label="flowering plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q25400" start="105" end="115" title="Asteraceae" label="Asteraceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q46" start="134" end="140" title="Europe" label="Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q48" start="154" end="158" title="Asia" label="Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q771035" start="193" end="213" title="traditional medicine" label="traditional medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q645858" start="298" end="316" title="dietary supplement" label="dietary supplement"/>
<link wikidata="Q75005794" start="364" end="386" title="pyrrolizidine alkaloid" label="pyrrolizidine alkaloid"/>
<link wikidata="Q148681" start="696" end="705" title="Dioecy" label="dioecious"/>
<link wikidata="Q506" start="904" end="910" title="flower" label="flower"/>
<link wikidata="Q33971" start="957" end="963" title="leaf" label="leaves"/>
<link wikidata="Q156428" start="1005" end="1018" title="inflorescence" label="inflorescence"/>
<link wikidata="Q18869" start="1224" end="1232" title="Caucasus" label="Caucasus"/>
<link wikidata="Q21195" start="1270" end="1281" title="Scandinavia" label="Scandinavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q759978" start="1622" end="1632" title="wet meadow" label="wet meadow"/>
<link wikidata="Q1259977" start="1731" end="1738" title="extract" label="extract"/>
<link wikidata="Q42982" start="1865" end="1879" title="Allergy" label="skin allergies"/>
<link wikidata="Q173022" start="1881" end="1891" title="bronchitis" label="bronchitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q221668" start="1893" end="1916" title="urinary tract infection" label="urinary tract infection"/>
<link wikidata="Q35869" start="1919" end="1925" title="asthma" label="asthma"/>
<link wikidata="Q133823" start="2050" end="2068" title="Migraine" label="migraine headaches"/>
<link wikidata="Q83042" start="2102" end="2111" title="neurology" label="neurology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1349821" start="2177" end="2191" title="Hepatotoxicity" label="liver toxicity"/>
<link wikidata="Q272436" start="2326" end="2343" title="allergic rhinitis" label="allergic rhinitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q40" start="2494" end="2502" title="Austria" label="Austrian"/>
<link wikidata="Q213" start="2507" end="2512" title="Czech Republic" label="Czech"/>
<link wikidata="Q2083871" start="2774" end="2785" title="senecionine" label="senecionine"/>
<link wikidata="Q75005794" start="2802" end="2824" title="pyrrolizidine alkaloid" label="pyrrolizidine alkaloid"/>
<link wikidata="Q80218" start="2872" end="2885" title="sesquiterpene" label="sesquiterpene"/>
<link wikidata="Q101487" start="2886" end="2891" title="ester" label="ester"/>
<link wikidata="Q7171781" start="2893" end="2900" title="petasin" label="petasin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1259977" start="2963" end="2970" title="extract" label="extract"/>
<link wikidata="Q8047" start="3625" end="3631" title="enzyme" label="enzyme"/>
<link wikidata="Q424440" start="3639" end="3645" title="CYP3A4" label="CYP3A4"/>
<link wikidata="Q2047938" start="3746" end="3760" title="adverse effect" label="adverse effect"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075923" start="3767" end="3778" title="cholestasis" label="cholestasis"/>
<link wikidata="Q101991" start="3783" end="3795" title="inflammation" label="inflammation"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="655666" wikidata="Q554900" url="?curid=655666" title="Lee Falk">
<text>Lee Falk (), born Leon Harrison Gross (; April 28, 1911 – March 13, 1999), was an American cartoonist, writer, theater director, and producer, best known as the creator of the comic strips &quot;Mandrake the Magician&quot; and &quot;The Phantom&quot;. At the height of their popularity, these strips attracted over 100 million readers every day. Falk also wrote short stories, and he contributed to a series of paperback novels about &quot;The Phantom&quot;.

A playwright and theatrical director/producer, Falk directed actors such as Marlon Brando, Charlton Heston, Paul Newman, Chico Marx and Ethel Waters.

==Life and career==
Falk was born in St. Louis, Missouri, where he spent his boyhood and his youth. His mother was Eleanor Alina (a name he later, in some form, used in both his &quot;Mandrake the Magician&quot; and &quot;The Phantom&quot; story lines), and his father was Benjamin Gross. Both of his parents were Jewish. Lee was born and raised Jewish. Gross died when Falk was just a boy, and after a time, his mother Eleanor married Albert Falk Epstein, who became the father figure for Lee Falk and his brother, Leslie. Falk changed his surname after leaving college. He took the middle name of his stepfather, but &quot;Lee&quot; had been his nickname since childhood, so he took that name also. His brother, Leslie, also took the name &quot;Falk&quot;.

Falk married three times: to Louise Kanaseriff, Constance Moorehead Lilienthal, and Elizabeth Moxley. Elizabeth sometimes helped him with scripts in his later years and finished his last &quot;Phantom&quot; stories after he died. Falk had three children, Valerie (his daughter with Kanaseriff), and Diane and Conley (his daughter and son with Lilienthal).

Falk died on March 13, 1999.

==Creation of &quot;Mandrake the Magician&quot; and &quot;The Phantom&quot;==
Falk had had a fascination for stage magicians ever since he was a boy. Falk, according to his own recollections, sketched the first few &quot;Mandrake the Magician&quot; comic strips himself. When asked why the magician looked so much like himself, he replied, &quot;Well, of course he did. I was alone in a room with a mirror when I drew him!&quot;.

&quot;The Phantom&quot; was inspired by Falk&#x27;s fascination for myths and legends, such as the ones about El Cid, King Arthur, Nordic and Greek folklore heroes and popular fictional characters like Tarzan and Mowgli from Rudyard Kipling&#x27;s &quot;The Jungle Book&quot;. He was fascinated by the Thuggee of India, and hence based his first Phantom comic on the Singh Brotherhood. Falk originally considered the idea of calling his character &quot;The Gray Ghost&quot;, but finally decided that he preferred &quot;The Phantom&quot;. Falk revealed in an interview that Robin Hood, who was often depicted as wearing tights, inspired the skin-tight costume of The Phantom, which is known to have influenced the entire superhero industry. In the A&amp;E Network&#x27;s &quot;Phantom&quot; biography program, Falk explained that Ancient Greek stone busts inspired the notion of pupils of the eyes of The Phantom not showing whenever he wore his mask. The old Greek busts had no eye pupils, which Falk felt gave them an inhuman, interesting look.

== Theater ==
Falk&#x27;s next large passion after cartooning was the theater and stage plays. During his lifetime, Falk ran five theaters, at one time or another, and he produced about 300 plays, and also directed about 100 of them. Falk wrote 12 plays, including two musicals: &quot;Happy Dollar&quot; and &quot;Mandrake the Magician&quot;, which were both based on his comic strip character.

==Awards and recognition==
Falk won numerous awards for comics and theatre, including:
*Yellow Kid Award (1971)
*Roman Lifetime Achievement Award
*Adamson Award for best foreign comics creator (Sweden, 1977)
*Golden Adamson (Sweden, 1986)
*National Cartoonists Society&#x27;s Silver T-Square Award (1986)
* In 1989, he was awarded the Inkpot Award.
* In May 1994, his birthplace St. Louis honored him with Lee Falk Day.
* In 2013, he was entered into the Will Eisner Hall of Fame.

Lee Falk has also been a candidate for a star on the St. Louis Walk of Fame many times, and was so honored in a ceremony on what would have been his 104th birthday, April 28, 2015.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q554900" start="0" end="8" title="Lee Falk" label="Lee Falk"/>
<link wikidata="Q554900" start="18" end="37" title="Lee Falk" label="Leon Harrison Gross"/>
<link wikidata="Q838795" start="176" end="187" title="comic strip" label="comic strip"/>
<link wikidata="Q59694" start="195" end="216" title="Mandrake the Magician" label="Mandrake the Magician"/>
<link wikidata="Q947755" start="233" end="244" title="The Phantom" label="The Phantom"/>
<link wikidata="Q214917" start="462" end="472" title="playwright" label="playwright"/>
<link wikidata="Q25379" start="477" end="505" title="play (theater)" label="theatrical director/producer"/>
<link wikidata="Q34012" start="536" end="549" title="Marlon Brando" label="Marlon Brando"/>
<link wikidata="Q80739" start="551" end="566" title="Charlton Heston" label="Charlton Heston"/>
<link wikidata="Q41871" start="568" end="579" title="Paul Newman" label="Paul Newman"/>
<link wikidata="Q380054" start="581" end="591" title="Chico Marx" label="Chico Marx"/>
<link wikidata="Q242725" start="596" end="608" title="Ethel Waters" label="Ethel Waters"/>
<link wikidata="Q38022" start="648" end="667" title="St. Louis, Missouri" label="St. Louis, Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q7325" start="925" end="931" title="Jewish" label="Jewish"/>
<link wikidata="Q43958" start="2299" end="2305" title="El Cid" label="El Cid"/>
<link wikidata="Q45792" start="2307" end="2318" title="King Arthur" label="King Arthur"/>
<link wikidata="Q36192" start="2337" end="2345" title="folklore" label="folklore"/>
<link wikidata="Q170241" start="2391" end="2397" title="Tarzan" label="Tarzan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1381592" start="2402" end="2408" title="Mowgli" label="Mowgli"/>
<link wikidata="Q34743" start="2414" end="2429" title="Rudyard Kipling" label="Rudyard Kipling"/>
<link wikidata="Q189509" start="2443" end="2458" title="The Jungle Book" label="The Jungle Book"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139658" start="2491" end="2498" title="Thuggee" label="Thuggee"/>
<link wikidata="Q122634" start="2762" end="2772" title="Robin Hood" label="Robin Hood"/>
<link wikidata="Q277561" start="2936" end="2951" title="A&amp;amp;E Network" label="A&amp;amp;E Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q11772" start="3018" end="3031" title="Ancient Greece" label="Ancient Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q25379" start="3324" end="3328" title="play (theatre)" label="play"/>
<link wikidata="Q2600026" start="3720" end="3736" title="Yellow Kid Award" label="Yellow Kid Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q1781888" start="3779" end="3792" title="Adamson Award" label="Adamson Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q1571762" start="3872" end="3900" title="National Cartoonists Society" label="National Cartoonists Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q2687578" start="3967" end="3979" title="Inkpot Award" label="Inkpot Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q11041074" start="4087" end="4111" title="Will Eisner Hall of Fame" label="Will Eisner Hall of Fame"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="655668" wikidata="Q5539580" url="?curid=655668" title="George Gair">
<text>George Frederick Gair (13 October 1926 – 17 August 2015) was a New Zealand politician. He was once deputy leader of the National Party in the New Zealand Parliament, and was considered by many to be a possible contender for the leadership itself. He was known for his polite and diplomatic style, which often contrasted with the political situation around him – Michael Laws described him as &quot;a refugee from the age of manners.&quot;

==Early life and family==
Gair was born in Dunedin, but moved to Wellington when young. He was a graduate of Victoria University and University of Auckland. He worked as a journalist at &quot;The New Zealand Herald&quot; from 1945 to 1947 then travelled to Japan before moving to Melbourne where he worked for &quot;The Sun News-Pictorial&quot; from 1949 to 1950 before returning to New Zealand after accepting a position at the &quot;Auckland Star&quot; between 1950 and 1952. Gair married Esther Mary Fay Levy in about 1950, and the couple went on to have three children, including make-up artist and body painter Joanne Gair.

From 1952 to 1957 Gair was a public relations officer in Auckland. He also became involved in the organisational wing of the National Party, and briefly served on the parliamentary staff of Keith Holyoake from 1958 to 1960. From 1960 to 1966 he was the personal assistant to the general manager of Air New Zealand.

==Member of Parliament==



He was an organiser for the National Party in the Onehunga and Roskill electorates. He then became the deputy chairman of National&#x27;s Auckland division and a dominion councillor of the party.

Gair first stood for the National Party nomination for the Remuera electorate in the 1966 election, losing the nomination to Allan Highet. Gair then went across the bridge and contested and won the North Shore nomination from retiring National MP Dean Eyre. He was successful, and was elected to Parliament that year. In 1969 he was appointed Parliamentary Under-Secretary of Education and Science.

===Cabinet minister===
In Parliament, Gair came to be regarded as a competent and diligent administrator. He briefly became Minister of Customs in 1972 at the end of the Second National government, but this was interrupted when National lost the 1972 election to the Labour Party under Norman Kirk. After National&#x27;s defeat party leader Jack Marshall appointed Gair as Shadow Minister of Customs. Gair had supported Marshall for the leadership and liked him on a personal level, however by early 1974 had come to the belief that National would have a better chance of winning the next election under the then deputy leader Robert Muldoon. In the lead up to a leadership spill Gair advised Marshall that Muldoon had the numbers to win which led Marshall to retire from the leadership and not contest the leadership ballot. When Muldoon became leader he promoted Gair from 13th to 6th in the caucus rankings and switched him from Customs to Shadow Minister of Housing instead.

When National was returned to power in the 1975 election, Gair was returned to cabinet in the Third National government. Between that time and National&#x27;s defeat in the 1984 election, Gair held a number of challenging portfolios, including serving as Minister of Health and Minister of Social Welfare. He also served as Minister of Housing, Minister of Energy, Minister of Transport, Minister of Railways and a number of other roles.

===Political views===
Gair also distinguished himself for some of his personal views. Gair, although a member of the country&#x27;s main conservative party, generally adopted a &quot;live and let live&quot; approach to social and moral issues, rejecting what he saw as &quot;intolerance&quot; in some of his colleagues. These beliefs were especially noticeable when, in the late 1970s, Gair opposed measures to restrict abortion. Barry Gustafson, in his history of the National Party, called Gair &quot;the most effective strategist of the parliamentary pro-abortion lobby&quot;.

Gair&#x27;s support of abortion earned him the hostility of many National Party colleagues, including that of the party&#x27;s leader, Robert Muldoon. Muldoon was already somewhat distrustful of Gair, as Gair had occasionally been spoken of as an alternative party leader. The political styles of Muldoon and Gair were radically different – Muldoon had a reputation as being tough and confrontational, while Gair was seen as polite and diplomatic. Some members of the party who disliked Muldoon&#x27;s &quot;dictatorial&quot; style saw Gair as a possible alternative.

===Colonels&#x27; Coup===
In 1980, when a number of party dissidents began to plot against Muldoon&#x27;s leadership, Gair was on the list of potential replacements. However, Gair was regarded as too liberal to gain majority support within the party. The dissidents eventually decided to encourage Brian Talboys, the party&#x27;s deputy leader, to make a leadership bid (now called the &quot;Colonels&#x27; Coup&quot;). Gair was not involved in planning this bid, but was supportive of it, and worked hard to convince Talboys that a challenge was a good idea. In the end, however, Talboys bailed out, and the coup collapsed without a vote ever being taken. Gair continued to advocate a challenge, but Talboys was adamant that preserving party unity was more important than curbing Muldoon&#x27;s damaging leadership style. Later, after Talboys had retired from politics, Gair supported another Muldoon opponent, Derek Quigley, to replace Talboys as deputy leader.

After National&#x27;s defeat in 1984 Muldoon designated Gair Shadow Minister of Transport, Railways, Civil Aviation and Meteorological Services. Gair, among others, wished for Muldoon to be replaced as leader as soon as possible. This pressure resulted in a scheduled leadership election being brought forward from February 1985 to November 1984 despite Muldoon&#x27;s objections. Gair, alongside Jim McLay, Jim Bolger and Bill Birch, entered the race to replace Muldoon as leader. However both Birch and himself were to drop out of contention prior to the election being held (with Gair&#x27;s support generally transferring to McLay and Birch&#x27;s to Bolger). Ultimately McLay was successful. Gair was appointed by McLay as Shadow Minister of Labour and Employment.

In a surprise reshuffle in February 1986, Gair (along with Muldoon ally Bill Birch) were demoted considerably. This was intended to make room for new, younger figures, who McLay hoped would &quot;rejuvenate&quot; the party. The move was highly damaging to McLay, however, as it placed both Gair and Birch directly in opposition to him. As two of the most experienced people in the National Party, the two were able to mobilise substantial support in favour of McLay&#x27;s main rival, Jim Bolger. Bolger quickly defeated McLay, and Gair himself took the position of deputy leader. He was additionally given the coveted finance portfolio by Bolger.

===Deputy leader===
Shortly after Gair became deputy leader, he found himself at odds with a number of his colleagues once again. The Homosexual Law Reform Bill, a private bill by Labour&#x27;s Fran Wilde to lift restrictions on homosexuality, was being hotly debated. Gair was somewhat ambivalent towards the bill, believing that while change was &quot;long overdue&quot;, certain aspects of the bill went too far. On 2 July 1986, Gair&#x27;s vote blocked a motion of closure on the bill, which would have brought it to a vote – because of bad weather, a number of the bill&#x27;s supporters were unable to be in Parliament that day, and since a few votes could potentially decide the fate of the bill, Gair believed it unfair to let the vote go ahead. Had he voted for closure, the bill would probably have been defeated, and many of the bill&#x27;s opponents therefore blamed Gair for its subsequent success. One week later, when the vote actually occurred, it passed only by a narrow majority – Gair himself eventually voted in favour. Gair found the entire episode highly stressful, and spoke of his desire for reconciliation.

Following National&#x27;s loss at the 1987 election Gair was challenged for the position of deputy leader by Ruth Richardson. Rather than attempt to beat off the challenge, the genial Gair retired voluntarily and backed Bolger&#x27;s preferred deputy Don McKinnon who narrowly defeated Richardson by a single vote to take his place as deputy leader. Deciding to retire at the end of the term, Gair opted to sit on the backbench. Bolger designated him as spokesperson for accident compensation.

==Diplomatic career==
Gair retired from Parliament at the 1990 election. He later served as the High Commissioner to London. He lived in Northcross on the North Shore.

==Mayor of North Shore City==
Gair served as the 3rd Mayor of North Shore City from 1995 until 1998, defeating incumbent Paul Titchener.

==Later life and death==
In 2010 Gair completed a master&#x27;s degree at Auckland University of Technology, with a thesis on managing change as a minister of the Crown supervised by Marilyn Waring and Grant Gillon. Gair died on 17 August 2015. His wife, Fay Gair, died in 2018.

==Honours and awards==
In the 1988 Queen&#x27;s Birthday Honours, Gair was made a Companion of the Queen&#x27;s Service Order for public services. In the 1994 Queen&#x27;s Birthday Honours, he was appointed a Companion of the Order of St Michael and St George.

==Notes==
==References==
*</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5539580" start="0" end="21" title="George Gair" label="George Frederick Gair"/>
<link wikidata="Q204716" start="120" end="134" title="New Zealand National Party" label="National Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1520966" start="142" end="164" title="New Zealand Parliament" label="New Zealand Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q6832126" start="362" end="374" title="Michael Laws" label="Michael Laws"/>
<link wikidata="Q133073" start="483" end="490" title="Dunedin" label="Dunedin"/>
<link wikidata="Q23661" start="505" end="515" title="Wellington" label="Wellington"/>
<link wikidata="Q1150437" start="549" end="568" title="Victoria University of Wellington" label="Victoria University"/>
<link wikidata="Q492467" start="573" end="595" title="University of Auckland" label="University of Auckland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1199207" start="632" end="654" title="The New Zealand Herald" label="The New Zealand Herald"/>
<link wikidata="Q7767350" start="756" end="778" title="The Sun News-Pictorial" label="The Sun News-Pictorial"/>
<link wikidata="Q4819561" start="875" end="888" title="Auckland Star" label="Auckland Star"/>
<link wikidata="Q6206123" start="1056" end="1067" title="Joanne Gair" label="Joanne Gair"/>
<link wikidata="Q133080" start="1099" end="1115" title="public relations" label="public relations"/>
<link wikidata="Q637012" start="1260" end="1274" title="Keith Holyoake" label="Keith Holyoake"/>
<link wikidata="Q204296" start="1368" end="1383" title="Air New Zealand" label="Air New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q7093643" start="1464" end="1472" title="Onehunga (New Zealand electorate)" label="Onehunga"/>
<link wikidata="Q7369014" start="1477" end="1484" title="Roskill (New Zealand electorate)" label="Roskill"/>
<link wikidata="Q7312233" start="1670" end="1677" title="Remuera (New Zealand electorate)" label="Remuera"/>
<link wikidata="Q7016146" start="1696" end="1709" title="1966 New Zealand general election" label="1966 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q4730691" start="1736" end="1748" title="Allan Highet" label="Allan Highet"/>
<link wikidata="Q7056657" start="1809" end="1820" title="North Shore (New Zealand electorate)" label="North Shore"/>
<link wikidata="Q5246139" start="1858" end="1867" title="Dean Eyre" label="Dean Eyre"/>
<link wikidata="Q65088928" start="2135" end="2154" title="Minister of Customs (New Zealand)" label="Minister of Customs"/>
<link wikidata="Q7443433" start="2181" end="2207" title="Second National Government of New Zealand" label="Second National government"/>
<link wikidata="Q7016151" start="2257" end="2270" title="1972 New Zealand general election" label="1972 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048192" start="2278" end="2290" title="New Zealand Labour Party" label="Labour Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1237120" start="2297" end="2308" title="Norman Kirk" label="Norman Kirk"/>
<link wikidata="Q284733" start="2352" end="2365" title="Jack Marshall" label="Jack Marshall"/>
<link wikidata="Q737739" start="2638" end="2652" title="Robert Muldoon" label="Robert Muldoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q28183106" start="2674" end="2690" title="1974 New Zealand National Party leadership election" label="leadership spill"/>
<link wikidata="Q7016153" start="3034" end="3047" title="1975 New Zealand general election" label="1975 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q7784903" start="3085" end="3110" title="Third National Government of New Zealand" label="Third National government"/>
<link wikidata="Q17055253" start="3164" end="3177" title="1984 New Zealand general election" label="1984 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q6866167" start="3246" end="3264" title="Minister of Health (New Zealand)" label="Minister of Health"/>
<link wikidata="Q25998902" start="3269" end="3295" title="Minister for Social Development (New Zealand)" label="Minister of Social Welfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q40889194" start="3315" end="3334" title="Minister of Housing and Urban Development" label="Minister of Housing"/>
<link wikidata="Q85785670" start="3336" end="3354" title="Minister of Energy and Resources (New Zealand)" label="Minister of Energy"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3356" end="3377" title="Ministry of Transport (New Zealand)#Ministers of Transport" label="Minister of Transport"/>
<link wikidata="Q6866300" start="3379" end="3399" title="Minister of Railways (New Zealand)" label="Minister of Railways"/>
<link wikidata="Q4864283" start="3860" end="3875" title="Barry Gustafson" label="Barry Gustafson"/>
<link wikidata="Q737739" start="4146" end="4160" title="Robert Muldoon" label="Robert Muldoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q461383" start="4878" end="4891" title="Brian Talboys" label="Brian Talboys"/>
<link wikidata="Q5262289" start="5492" end="5505" title="Derek Quigley" label="Derek Quigley"/>
<link wikidata="Q6135999" start="5942" end="5951" title="Jim McLay" label="Jim McLay"/>
<link wikidata="Q139785" start="5953" end="5963" title="Jim Bolger" label="Jim Bolger"/>
<link wikidata="Q4908149" start="5968" end="5978" title="Bill Birch" label="Bill Birch"/>
<link wikidata="Q4908149" start="6388" end="6398" title="Bill Birch" label="Bill Birch"/>
<link wikidata="Q139785" start="6801" end="6811" title="Jim Bolger" label="Jim Bolger"/>
<link wikidata="Q5891687" start="7099" end="7120" title="Homosexual Law Reform Act 1986" label="Homosexual Law Reform"/>
<link wikidata="Q5478204" start="7159" end="7169" title="Fran Wilde" label="Fran Wilde"/>
<link wikidata="Q3882314" start="7194" end="7207" title="LGBT in New Zealand" label="homosexuality"/>
<link wikidata="Q7016158" start="8136" end="8149" title="1987 New Zealand general election" label="1987 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q3453636" start="8207" end="8222" title="Ruth Richardson" label="Ruth Richardson"/>
<link wikidata="Q599938" start="8349" end="8361" title="Don McKinnon" label="Don McKinnon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7016159" start="8651" end="8664" title="1990 New Zealand general election" label="1990 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q6573109" start="8689" end="8716" title="List of high commissioners of New Zealand to the United Kingdom" label="High Commissioner to London"/>
<link wikidata="Q7057784" start="8730" end="8740" title="Northcross, New Zealand" label="Northcross"/>
<link wikidata="Q123499744" start="8815" end="8840" title="Mayor of North Shore City" label="Mayor of North Shore City"/>
<link wikidata="Q20985851" start="8883" end="8897" title="Paul Titchener" label="Paul Titchener"/>
<link wikidata="Q758659" start="8974" end="9007" title="Auckland University of Technology" label="Auckland University of Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q268510" start="9083" end="9097" title="Marilyn Waring" label="Marilyn Waring"/>
<link wikidata="Q5596229" start="9102" end="9114" title="Grant Gillon" label="Grant Gillon"/>
<link wikidata="Q4584342" start="9210" end="9244" title="1988 Birthday Honours" label="1988 Queen&amp;#x27;s Birthday Honours"/>
<link wikidata="Q658976" start="9262" end="9305" title="Queen&amp;#x27;s Service Order" label="Companion of the Queen&amp;#x27;s Service Order"/>
<link wikidata="Q98936045" start="9334" end="9368" title="1994 Birthday Honours (New Zealand)" label="1994 Queen&amp;#x27;s Birthday Honours"/>
<link wikidata="Q585087" start="9389" end="9439" title="Companion of the Order of St Michael and St George" label="Companion of the Order of St Michael and St George"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="655672" wikidata="Q150264" url="?curid=655672" title="288 Glauke">
<text>288 Glauke is a stony, tumbling asteroid and slow rotator from the intermediate asteroid belt, approximately 32 kilometers in diameter. It was discovered on 20 February 1890, by Robert Luther at Düsseldorf-Bilk Observatory in Germany. It was the last of his asteroid discoveries. It is named after Creusa (known as Glauce or Glauke), a daughter of Creon, a king of Corinth in Greek mythology.

&quot;Glauke&quot; has an exceptionally slow rotation period of about 1200 hours (50 days). This makes it one of the slowest-rotating asteroids in the Solar System. The rotation is believed to be &quot;tumbling&quot;, similar to the near-Earth asteroid 4179 Toutatis.

It is a common, stony S-type asteroid in both the Tholen and SMASS classification.

== References ==

== External links ==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q150264" start="0" end="10" title="288 Glauke" label="288 Glauke"/>
<link wikidata="Q3863" start="32" end="40" title="asteroid" label="asteroid"/>
<link wikidata="Q27664618" start="45" end="57" title="List of slow rotators (minor planets)" label="slow rotator"/>
<link wikidata="Q2179" start="80" end="93" title="asteroid belt" label="asteroid belt"/>
<link wikidata="Q77050" start="178" end="191" title="Robert Luther" label="Robert Luther"/>
<link wikidata="Q552312" start="195" end="222" title="Düsseldorf-Bilk Observatory" label="Düsseldorf-Bilk Observatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q269058" start="298" end="304" title="Creusa (daughter of Creon)" label="Creusa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1530059" start="325" end="331" title="Glauke" label="Glauke"/>
<link wikidata="Q786573" start="348" end="353" title="Creon (king of Corinth)" label="Creon"/>
<link wikidata="Q185981" start="439" end="454" title="rotation period" label="rotation period"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="511" end="527" title="List of exceptional asteroids#Slowest rotators" label="slowest-rotating"/>
<link wikidata="Q544" start="545" end="557" title="Solar System" label="Solar System"/>
<link wikidata="Q48999017" start="596" end="604" title="List of tumblers (small Solar System bodies)" label="tumbling"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="647" end="660" title="4179 Toutatis" label="4179 Toutatis"/>
<link wikidata="Q543157" start="685" end="700" title="S-type asteroid" label="S-type asteroid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1750705" start="713" end="719" title="Tholen classification" label="Tholen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1750705" start="724" end="744" title="SMASS classification" label="SMASS classification"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="655676" wikidata="Q160450" url="?curid=655676" title="Samsun">
<text>Samsun, historically known as Sampsounta () and Amisos (Ancient Greek: Ἀμισός), is a city on the north coast of Turkey and a major Black Sea port. Over 700,000 people live in the city. The city is the capital of Samsun Province which has a population of over 1,350,000. The city is home to Ondokuz Mayıs University, several hospitals, three large shopping malls, Samsunspor football club, an opera house and a large and modern manufacturing district. The city is best known as the place where Mustafa Kemal Atatürk began the Turkish War of Independence in 1919.

==Name==
The present name of the city is believed to have come from its former Greek name of () by a reinterpretation of (meaning &quot;to Amisós&quot;) and (Greek suffix for place names) to (: ) and then Samsun ().

The early Greek historian Hecataeus wrote that Amisos was formerly called &quot;Enete&quot;, the place mentioned in Homer&#x27;s &quot;Iliad&quot;. In Book II, Homer says that the &quot;ἐνετοί&quot; (Enetoi) inhabited Paphlagonia on the southern coast of the Black Sea in the time of the Trojan War (c. 1200 BC). The Paphlagonians are listed among the allies of the Trojans in the war, where their king Pylaemenes and his son Harpalion perished. Strabo mentioned that the inhabitants had disappeared by his time.

Samsun has also been known as &quot;Peiraieos&quot; by Athenian settlers and even briefly as &quot;Pompeiopolis&quot; by Gnaeus Pompeius Magnus.

The city was called &quot;Simisso&quot; by the Genoese. It was during the Ottoman Empire, that its present name was written as (&quot;Ṣāmsūn&quot;). The city has been known as Samsun since the formation of the Turkish Republic in 1923.

==History==
===Ancient history===
 
Paleolithic artifacts found in the Tekkeköy Caves can be seen in Samsun Archaeology Museum.

The earliest layer excavated of the höyük of Dündartepe revealed a Chalcolithic settlement. Early Bronze Age and Hittite settlements were also found there and at Tekkeköy.

Samsun (then known as Amisos, Greek Αμισός, alternative spelling &quot;Amisus&quot;) was settled in about 760–750 BC by Ionians from Miletus, who established a flourishing trade relationship with the ancient peoples of Anatolia. The city&#x27;s ideal combination of fertile ground and shallow waters attracted numerous traders.

Amisus was settled by the Ionian Milesians in the 6th century BC, it is believed that there was significant Greek activity along the coast of the Black Sea, although the archaeological evidence for this is very fragmentary. The only archaeological evidence we have as early as the 6th century is a fragment of Wild Goat style Greek pottery, in the Louvre.

===Persian Period===
The city was captured by the Persians in 550 BC and became part of Cappadocia (satrapy). In the 5th century BC, Amisus became a free state and one of the members of the Delian League led by the Athenians; it was then renamed Peiraeus under Pericles. A historical tradition from Theopompus by way of Strabo has it that the city was originally colonized by the Greeks by a man named Athenocles. Starting in the 3rd century BC, the city came under the control of Mithridates I, later founder of the Kingdom of Pontus. The Amisos treasure may have belonged to one of the kings. 
Tumuli, containing tombs dated between 300 BC and 30 BC, can be seen at Amisos Hill but unfortunately Toraman Tepe was mostly flattened during construction of the 20th century radar base.

===Roman Period===
The Romans conquered Amisus in 71 BC during the Third Mithridatic War. and Amisus became part of Bithynia et Pontus province. Around 46 BC, during the reign of Julius Caesar, Amisus became the capital of Roman Pontus. From the period of the Second Triumvirate up to Nero, Pontus was ruled by several client kings, as well as one client queen, Pythodorida of Pontus, a granddaughter of Marcus Antonius. From 62 CE it was directly ruled by Roman governors, most famously by Trajan&#x27;s appointee Pliny. Pliny the Younger&#x27;s address to the Emperor Trajan in the 1st century CE &quot;By your indulgence, sir, they have the benefit of their own laws,&quot; is interpreted by John Boyle Orrery to indicate that the freedoms won for those in Pontus by the Romans was not pure freedom and depended on the generosity of the Roman emperor.

The estimated population of the city around 150 AD is between 20,000 and 25,000 people, classifying it as a relatively large city for that time. The city functioned as the commercial capital for the province of Pontus; beating its rival Sinope (now Sinop) due to its position at the head of the trans-Anatolia highway.

In Late Antiquity, the city became part of the Dioecesis Pontica within the eastern Roman Empire; later still it was part of the Armeniac Theme.

Samsun Castle was built on the seaside in 1192, it was demolished between 1909 and 1918.

=== Early Christianity ===

Though the roots of the city are Hellenistic, it was also one of the centers of an early Christian congregation. Its function as a commercial metropolis in northern Asia Minor was a contributing factor to enable the spread of Christian influence. As a large port city – the commercial capital of Pontus – travel to and from Christian hotbeds like Jerusalem was not uncommon. According to Josephus, there was large Jewish diaspora in Asia Minor. Given that the early evangelist Christians focused on Jewish diaspora communities, and that the Jewish diaspora in Amisus was a geographically accessible group with a mixed heritage group, it is not surprising that Amisus would be an appealing site for evangelist work. The author of 1 Peter 1:1 addresses the Jewish diaspora of the province of Pontus, along with four other provinces: &quot;Peter, an apostle of Jesus Christ, To God&#x27;s elect, exiles scattered throughout the provinces of Pontus, Galatia, Cappadocia, Asia and Bithynia.&quot; (Peter 1:1) As Amisus would have been the largest commercial port-city in the province, it is believed certain that the spread of Christianity in the region would have begun there. In the 1st century Pliny the Younger documents accounts of Christians in and around the cities of Pontus. His accounts center on his conflicts with the Christians when he served under the Emperor Trajan and describe early Christian communities, his condemnation of their refusal to renounce their religion, but also describes his tolerance for some Christian practices like Christian charitable societies. Many great early Christian figures had connections to Amisus, including Caesarea Mazaca, Gregory the Illuminator (raised as a Christian from 257 CE when he was brought to Amisus) and Basil the Great (Bishop of the city 330–379 CE).

Christian bishops of Amisus include Antonius, who took part in the Council of Chalcedon in 451; Erythraeus, a signatory of the letter that the bishops of Helenopontus wrote to Emperor Leo I the Thracian after the killing of Patriarch Proterius of Alexandria; the late 6th-century bishop Florus, venerated as a saint in the Greek menologion; and Tiberius, who attended the Third Council of Constantinople (680), Leo, the Second Council of Nicaea (787), and Basilius, the Council of Constantinople of 879. The diocese is no longer mentioned in the Greek Notitiae Episcopatuum after the 15th century and thereafter the city was considered part of the see of Amasea. However, some Greek bishops of the 18th and 19th centuries bore the title of Amisus as titular bishops. In the 13th century the Franciscans had a convent at Amisus, which became a Latin bishopric some time before 1345, when its bishop Paulus was transferred to the recently conquered city of Smyrna and was replaced by the Dominican Benedict, who was followed by an Italian Armenian called Thomas. No longer a residential diocese, it is today listed by the Catholic Church as a titular see.

===Medieval history===

Samsun was part of the Seljuk Empire, the Sultanate of Rum, the Empire of Trebizond, and was one of the Genoese colonies. After the breakup of the Seljuk Empire into small principalities (beyliks) in the late 13th century, the city was ruled by one of them, the Isfendiyarids. It was captured from the Isfendiyarids at the end of the 14th century by the rival Ottoman beylik (later the Ottoman Empire) under sultan Bayezid I, but was lost again shortly afterwards.

The Ottomans permanently conquered the town in the weeks following 11 August 1420.

In the later Ottoman period, it became part of the Sanjak of Canik (), which was at first part of the Rûm Eyalet. The land around the town mainly produced tobacco, with its own type being grown in Samsun, the Samsun-Bafra, which the British described as having &quot;small but very aromatic leaves&quot;, and commanding a &quot;high price.&quot; The town was connected to the railway system in the second half of the 19th century, and tobacco trade boomed. There was a British consulate in the town from 1837 to 1863.

Previously, the last Armenian Zoroastrians, the &quot;Arewordik&quot;, or children of the sun, lived in Samsun.

===Modern history===
Mustafa Kemal Atatürk established the Turkish national movement against the Allies in Samsun on May 19, 1919, the date which traditionally marks the beginning of the Turkish War of Independence. Atatürk, appointed by the Ottoman government as Inspector of the Ninth Army Troops Inspectorate of the Empire in eastern Anatolia, left Constantinople aboard the now-famous on May 16 for Samsun. Instead of obeying the orders of the Ottoman government, then under the control of the occupying Allies, he and a number of colleagues declared the beginning of the Turkish national movement. The Allies claimed that the Greek population of Samsun was subject looting by Turkish irregular groups, as noted by representatives of the American Near East Relief, an Allied organization. The Turkish National Movement became alarmed due to the presence of Greek warships in the vicinity of Samsun and undertook the deportation which entailed the deportation of 21,000 local Greeks to the interior of Anatolia. By 1920, Samsun&#x27;s population totaled about 36,000, though this figure declined due to the impacts of war and deportations.

Later, in early June 1922, the city was bombarded by the Allied navy, consisting of American and Greek warships. The Allied bombardment against the Turks was a strategic failure. Following Turkey&#x27;s victory, the Greek population left for Greece after the 1923 Population Exchange founding villages including Nea Sampsounda in Preveza, Greece.

After the establishment of the Republic, Samsun was declared a province with five districts Bafra, Çarşamba, Havza, Terme and Vezirköprü. Samsun added additional districts in later years. In 1928, Ladik was established as a district. In 1934, district was Kavak was established followed by Alaçam in 1944 which brought the number of districts in Samsun Province to eight. With the law number 3392 adopted on 19 June 1983 Salıpazarı, Asarcık, Ondokuzmayıs and Tekkeköy districts were established. With the law number 3644 adopted on 9 May 1990, Ayvacık and Yakakent two more districts were established. Samsun entered into a period of economic and population recovery in the years after the establishment of the Republic and quickly restored its status as a vital Black Sea port for Turkey.

Reconstruction of Samsun began quickly after the establishment of the Republic of Turkey. In 1929, the region&#x27;s first electric power plant began operations. Railway access to the city was established in the early 1950s with service to Sivas and Ankara. Major investments in the regions road network were made beginning in the 1960s. In 1975, per law No. 1873, Ondokuz Mayıs University was established in neighboring Atakum. The construction of the university was a major development to the region, bringing a highly regarded and well-funded educational institution and state hospital to Samsun. The region was connect by air in 1998 with the construction of Samsun-Çarşamba Airport 23 km east of the city center. The airport is primarily serviced by Turkish Airlines with service to Istanbul Airport and Ankara Esenboğa Airport but also has international service to Germany and Iraq. In 2008, the Metropolitan Municipality opened the 36.5 km Samsun Tram network which connects Ondokuz Mayıs University to Samsun 19 Mayıs Stadium.

In 1993, Samsun was established as a metropolitan municipality by decree of the national government in Ankara. The decree further enhanced Samsun&#x27;s status as one of Turkey&#x27;s largest and most important cities. As Samsun grew, as did its environs. Neighboring Atakum, a suburb to the west of the city center was established in 2008 with the merger of Atakent, Kurupelit, Altınkum, Çatalçam and Taflan towns into one municipality. Atakum in recent years has become a bedroom community to Samsun and home to much of the region&#x27;s professional class.

Multiple other large developments have further established Samsun as a major urban center. In 2013, Piazza Samsun a 160 store shopping mall, the largest in the Central Black Sea region, opened in the city center. The opening of the mall was followed by the construction of 115 m tall Sheraton Hotel Samsun. Now the second tallest building in the region, the hotel at the time was the first building in Samsun&#x27;s history to stand more than 100 m. In 2017, Samsunspor opened a new 30,000 person stadium in Tekkeköy. Gökdelen Towers is now the tallest building in the Samsun region and representative of a recent trend towards high-rise residential housing.

Under the leadership of Metropolitan Mayor Mustafa Demir, the Samsun regional government has undertaken several major transportation and housing development projects in the city center. Projects include the restoration of the Mert River, the construction of the new National Garden, the restoration of Tarihi Şifa Hamamı and the construction of Samsun Saathane Square.

==Geography==
Samsun is a long city which extends along the coast between two river deltas which jut into the Black Sea. It is located at the end of an ancient route from Cappadocia: the &quot;Amisos&quot; of antiquity lay on the headland northwest of the modern city center.

The city is growing fast: land has been reclaimed from the sea and many more apartment blocks and shopping malls are currently being built. Industry is tending to move (or be moved) east, further away from the city center and towards the airport.
===Rivers===
To Samsun&#x27;s west, lies the Kızılırmak (&quot;Red River&quot;, the &quot;Halys&quot; of antiquity), one of the longest rivers in Anatolia and its fertile delta. To the east, lie the Yeşilırmak (&quot;Green River&quot;, the &quot;Iris&quot; of antiquity) and its delta. The River Mert reaches the sea at the city.

===Climate===
Samsun has a humid subtropical climate (Köppen: &quot;Cfa,&quot; Trewartha&quot;: Cf&quot;), typical for the region, but Samsun is nevertheless drier during summer and milder during winter than most of the southern Black Sea coast.

Summers are warm, the average maximum temperature is around in August. Winters are cool to mild and wet, the lowest average minimum temperature is around in January.

Precipitation is heaviest in late autumn and early winter. Snow sometimes occurs between the months of December and March, but temperatures below the freezing point rarely last more than a couple of days.

The water temperature is generally mild, fluctuating between throughout the year.

==Demographics==
During the Tanzimat period and the subsequent wars, Ottoman Muslims were exiled from the Balkans and Circassians were expelled from the Caucasus region. Many of the present inhabitants trace their origins from further west or east on the Black Sea coast. The overwhelming majority of people are Muslim. Due to depressed economic conditions, Samsun saw slow but gradual population growth until 1990. Beginning with the economic liberalization Turkey, the city&#x27;s population began to rapidly increase. In 1990, the city reported a population of 322,982. That figure grew to 388,509 by 2000, 461,640 in 2008, to 511,601 in 2015. In 2020, the city had an estimated population of 710,000.

== Government ==
Samsun holds an important historical role in the political development of the Republic of Turkey. The city is where the first branch of the Free Republican Party and the first provincial branch of the Democrat Party were opened. For that reason, the city occupies an important place in the history of politics in Turkey. Samsun has traditionally voted for right-wing and nationalistic parties both in local and national elections. In this respect, in Samsun, which is described as the &quot;vote depot of the right&quot;. Until the 2018, nearly 80% of the populace voted for right-wing parties while the membership rate to political parties is around 20%. The majority of the deputies have been from the right in all general elections since 1950. Only in 1989 and 1994 did a candidate from a left-wing party, Muzaffer Önder was elected mayor.

Today, 6 of the 9 deputies of Samsun&#x27;s delegation to the Turkish Grand National Assembly are members of right-wing parties with the exception of those from Atakum. The mayor of the Metropolitan Municipality Mustafa Demir is a member of the Justice and Development Party. Of the members of parliament from Samsun, Ahmet Demircan, Yusuf Ziya Yılmaz, Çiğdem Karaaslan, Fuat Köktaş and Orhan Kırcalı are from the Justice and Development Party, while two are from the Republican People&#x27;s Party, one from Good Party and one from the Nationalist Movement Party.
=== Pollution ===

Air pollution is a problem in some parts of the city, especially in winter when free coal is supplied to poor families by the government. NOx levels from traffic on Yüzüncüyıl Boulevard are among the highest in the country.
==Architecture==
Samsun like many Ottoman Empire cities was composed of stone mosques, baths, markets and government buildings while the residential vernacular was almost exclusively wood. The city was populated with wooden konak style homes with more elaborate yali (residence) style homes for the wealthy. Beginning in the 1950s as the city&#x27;s population grew many of these older wooden structures burned down or torn down and replaced with concrete frame apartment buildings which are now the predominant form of construction in the city center. The city&#x27;s explosive population growth outpaced its ability to formally build housing for its new residents leading to the construction of vast areas of gecekondu on the city&#x27;s suburban periphery. As the region has modernized, the Turkish government has made a full force effort to replace gecekondu with formally designed and built housing. TOKİ, the state agency tasked with housing development has invested heavily in Samsun, building several large social housing developments for the city&#x27;s growing population. 

===Mosques===
* Pazar Mosque, Samsun&#x27;s oldest surviving building, a mosque built by the Ilkhanate Mongols in the 13th century.
* Central Great Mosque (Samsun) was built by Batumlu Hacı Efendi in 1884. Its name &quot;Valide&quot; comes from the mother of Ottoman Sultan Abdulaziz.
* Hacı Hatun Mosque dates from 1694.

===Churches===
* Samsun Protestant Church - located in Atakum 
* Mater Dolorasa Church - located in Ilkadim

Samsun used to have several Greek Orthodox churches however most were destroyed or converted to mosques following the Turkish War of Independence.

==Public squares and parks==
* Republic Square (Samsun)
* Samsun Saathane Square
* Anit Park

===Tallest buildings===
Samsun&#x27;s tallest building is Gökdelen Towers Tower 1 at 115 m followed by the Sheraton Hotel Samsun at 115 m. In recent years dozens of mid-rise residential and commercial buildings have come to populate the city&#x27;s formerly low-rise skyline.

==Transport==
Long distance buses the bus station is outside the city centre, but most bus companies provide a free transfer there if you have a ticket. Passenger and freight trains run to Sivas via Amasya. The train station is in the city center. Freight trains are taken by ferry to railways at Kavkaz in Russia, and will later see service to the port of Varna in Bulgaria and Poti in Georgia.

The Samsun Tram operates between the eastern district of Tekkeköy and Ondokuz Mayıs University. There is a plan to run electrically powered bus rapid transit between the railway station and Tekkekoy. Some city buses are electric. &quot;Dolmuş&quot;, the routes are numbered 1 to 4 and each route has different color minibuses. The long Samsun Amisos Hill Gondola serves from Batıpark the archaeological area on the Amisos Hill, where ancient tombs in tumuli were discovered.

Samsun-Çarşamba Airport is east of the city center. It is possible to reach the airport by Havas service buses: they depart from the coach park close to Kultur Sarayi in the city center. Horse-drawn carriages, (Turkish: fayton) run along the seafront. There was automated bike rental along the seafront, but it is not currently operational.

==Economy==

Samsun has a mixed economy with a cluster of medical industries.

===Ports and shipbuilding===

Samsun is a port city. In the early 20th century, the Central Bank of the Republic of Turkey funded the building of a harbor. Before the building of the harbor, ships had to anchor to deliver goods, approximately 1 mile or more from shore. Trade and transportation was focused around a road to and from Sivas. The privately operated port fronting the city centre handles freight, including RORO ferries to Novorossiysk, whereas fishing boats land their catches in a separate harbour slightly further east. A ship building yard is under construction at the eastern city limit. Road and rail freight connections with central Anatolia can be used to send inland both the agricultural produce of the surrounding well rained upon and fertile land, and also imports from overseas.

====Coal imports from Donbas====
Donbas anthracite, imported via the Russian ports of Azov and Taganrog, is said to be illegally exported Ukrainian coal. In 2019 some crew were rescued but 6 died after a ship sank in the Black Sea.

===Manufacturing and food processing===
There is a light industrial zone between the city and the airport. The main manufactured products are medical devices and products, furniture (wood is imported across the Black Sea), tobacco products (although tobacco farming is now limited by the government), chemicals and automobile spare parts.

Flour mills import wheat from Ukraine and export some of the flour.

===Local government and services===
Provincial government and services (e.g. courts, prisons and hospitals) support the surrounding region. Agricultural research establishments support provincial agriculture and food processing.

===Shopping===


Most of the many new shopping malls are purpose built, but the former tobacco factory in the city center has been converted into a mall. Samsun&#x27;s largest mall is the Piazza Samsun.

==Tourism==
===Nature Tourism===
Samsun has one of the longest coastlines of the Black Sea Region and this strip stretches from Canik until May 19. 90% of this 35 km long coastline consists of fine sandy beaches suitable for swimming, and alternative sports such as surfing, jet skiing and sailing can be practiced besides swimming. There are a total of 39 beaches in Samsun, with the highest number of beaches in Atakum with 19 of them. After Atakum, Alaçam and Çarşamba come with three beaches each. Bafra, Ilkadım and May 19 each have two beaches, and Canik also has one beach. There are no beaches in Asarcık, Ayvacık, Havza, Kavak and Ladik. As of August 2018, all of the beaches measured by the Environmental Health Department are classified as very clean. In addition, 13 beaches, 10 of which are in Atakum, are awarded the Blue Flag beach.

In Samsun, where activities for winter tourism can be carried out in addition to beach tourism, Akdağ Winter Sports and Ski Center, especially in Ladik, is the most important investment in this area with its 1675 m ski track and 1300 m chair lift, attracting tourists from the surrounding cities. Akdağ also stands out as a paragliding, mountaineering and highland tourism center together with Kocadağ; Nebiyan Mountain is visited by mountaineers, and Kunduz Mountains are visited by transhumance. In addition to natural areas such as Asarağaç Hill, Gölalan Waterfalls and Kabaceviz Waterfall, Çamgölü, Sarıgazel, Vezirköprü nature parks and Çakkır and Hasköy recreation areas have also been brought into tourism in recent years. The Çarşamba Plain and the Galeriç Floodplain, especially the Kızılırmak Delta is frequently visited by bird watchers.
May 25 Thermal Tourism Center in Havza, which has been given the status of a tourism center, is the most important health tourism point in Samsun, and the thermal springs in Havza and Ladik are also among the tourism centers of the city. The waters coming out of the hot springs, which are visited by 200 thousand people a year, have been used in the treatment of diseases such as rheumatic diseases, gynecological diseases, nervous diseases, joint diseases and calcification for two thousand years.

==Culture==
===The Atatürk Culture Center===

Atatürk Kültür Sarayı (AKM – Palace of Culture). Concerts and other performances are held at the Kultur Sarayi, which is shaped much like a ski jump. &quot;Samsun State Opera and Ballet&quot; performs in The Atatürk Culture Center. Founded in 2009 it is one of the six state opera houses in Turkey. The Samsun Opera have performed &quot;Die Entführung&quot; (W. A. Mozart) in the annual Istanbul Opera Festival. In collaboration with The Pekin Opera, The Samsun Opera performed Puccini&#x27;s &quot;Madama Butterfly&quot; in the Aspendos International Opera and Ballet Festival in 2012. Other performances include &quot;La bohème, La traviata, Don Quijote, Giselle.&quot; The current musical director is Lorenzo Castriota Skanderbeg.

===Museums===

* Archaeological and Atatürk Museum. The archaeological part of the museum displays ancient artifacts found in the Samsun area, including the Amisos treasure. The Atatürk section includes photographs of his life and some personal belongings. 
* Atatürk (Gazi) Museum. It houses Atatürk&#x27;s bedroom, his study and conference room as well as some personal belongings.
* Samsun City Museum. A new museum.
* Surgical Instruments and Health Museum, opened in 2021.

===Folk dancing===
There is an annual international festival.

==Education==

There are two universities in Samsun: the state run Ondokuz Mayıs University and the private sector Samsun University. There is also a police training college and many small private colleges.

==Parks, nature reserves and other greenspace==

; Parks
* Batı Park (West Park) is a large park on land reclaimed from the sea
* Doğu Park (East Park)
* Atatürk Park contains his statue by Austrian sculptor Heinrich Krippel, which was completed in 1931. The statue was depicted on the obverse of the Turkish 100,000 lira banknotes of 1991–2001.

; Nature reserves
* Çakırlar Korusu

; Other greenspace

There are several army bases in the city (Esentepe Kışlası, Gökberk Kışlası, 19 Mayis Kışlası and others). Should they become surplus to military requirements in future, for example due to reduced conscription in Turkey, it is currently unclear whether they would become urban open space or be further built on.

==Sports==

In ancient Roman times gladiator sword fighting apparently took place in Amisos, as depicted on a tombstone dating from the 2nd or 3rd century CE.

Tekkeköy Yaşar Doğu Arena opened in 2013.

Football is the most popular sport: in the older districts above the city center children often kick balls around in the evenings in the smallest streets. The city&#x27;s main club is Samsunspor, which plays its games at the Samsun 19 Mayıs Stadium.

Basketball, volleyball, tennis, swimming, cable skiing (in summer), horse riding, go karting, paintballing, martial arts and many other sports are played. Cycling and jogging are only common along the sea front, where recreational fishing is also popular.

==International relations==
===Twin towns—Sister cities===
Samsun is twinned with:

* North Little Rock, Arkansas, United States (2006)
* Gorgan, Iran (2006)
* İskele, Northern Cyprus (2006)
* Novorossiysk, Russia (2007)
* Dar es Salaam, Tanzania (2007)
* Kalmar, Sweden (2008)
* Bordeaux, France (2010)
* Kiel, Germany (2010)
* Brčko, Bosnia and Herzegovina (2012)
* Bizerte, Tunisia
* Donetsk, Ukraine
* Accra, Ghana
* Bishkek, Kyrgyzstan 

== Notable people from Samsun ==
=== Footballers who played for Samsunspor or were born in Samsun ===
* Mete Adanır (1961–1989), Turkish Cypriot football forward
* Nuri Asan (1940–1989), football player and manager
* Serkan Aykut (born 1975), former football forward
* Müslüm Can (born 1975), retired footballer
* Tanju Çolak (born 1963), Samsun-born former football forward
* Cenk İşler (born 1974), former football striker and manager
* Mehmet Nas (born 1979), former footballer
* Mehmet Özdilek (born 1966), retired footballer born in Samsun

=== Others ===
* A. I. Bezzerides, (1908–2007), Greek-American novelist and screenwriter
* Ahmet Demircan (born 1954), Turkish doctor, politician and former Minister of Health of Turkey
* Orhan Gencebay (born 1944), Arabesque music artist
* Levent Kırca (1950–2015), comedian, actor, newspaper columnist and politician
* Yasar Dogu, Wrestler
* Ali Baba, Armenian American professional wrestler and World Heavyweight Champion

== Mayors of Samsun Metropolitan Municipality ==
* 1968-1980 and 1984-1987 Kemal Vehbi Gül AP, ANAP
* 1987-1989 Ruhat Çetinkaya ANAP
* 1989-1999 Muazffer Önder SHP, CHP
* 1999-2018 Yusuf Ziya Yılmaz ANAP, AK Party
* 2018-2019 Zihni Şahin AK Party
* 2019-2024 Mustafa Demir AK Party
* 2024-present Halit Doğan AK Party

==See also==

* Anatolian Tigers
* Beyliks of Canik
* State road D010 (Turkey)
* Samsun Castle
* :Category:Tourist attractions in Samsun

==References==
==External links==
* Samsun Governor&#x27;s Office 
* Samsun Metropolitan Municipality 
* Official Tourist Information

* Samsun News </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q160450" start="0" end="6" title="Samsun" label="Samsun"/>
<link wikidata="Q160450" start="30" end="40" title="Samsun" label="Sampsounta"/>
<link wikidata="Q160450" start="48" end="54" title="Samsun" label="Amisos"/>
<link wikidata="Q35497" start="56" end="69" title="Ancient Greek" label="Ancient Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q106247" start="85" end="89" title="List of largest cities and towns in Turkey" label="city"/>
<link wikidata="Q43" start="112" end="118" title="Turkey" label="Turkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q166" start="131" end="140" title="Black Sea" label="Black Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q44782" start="141" end="145" title="port" label="port"/>
<link wikidata="Q483040" start="212" end="227" title="Samsun Province" label="Samsun Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q7092215" start="290" end="314" title="Ondokuz Mayıs University" label="Ondokuz Mayıs University"/>
<link wikidata="Q430107" start="363" end="373" title="Samsunspor" label="Samsunspor"/>
<link wikidata="Q5152" start="493" end="514" title="Mustafa Kemal Atatürk" label="Mustafa Kemal Atatürk"/>
<link wikidata="Q234738" start="525" end="552" title="Turkish War of Independence" label="Turkish War of Independence"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="664" end="680" title="Rebracketing#In Greek" label="reinterpretation"/>
<link wikidata="Q242270" start="806" end="815" title="Hecataeus of Miletus" label="Hecataeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3725317" start="860" end="865" title="Paphlagonian Eneti" label="Enete"/>
<link wikidata="Q8275" start="915" end="920" title="Iliad" label="Iliad"/>
<link wikidata="Q622032" start="998" end="1009" title="Paphlagonia" label="Paphlagonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q166" start="1039" end="1048" title="Black Sea" label="Black Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q42937" start="1068" end="1078" title="Trojan War" label="Trojan War"/>
<link wikidata="Q22647" start="1146" end="1153" title="Troy" label="Trojans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1241841" start="1183" end="1193" title="Pylaemenes" label="Pylaemenes"/>
<link wikidata="Q3623694" start="1206" end="1215" title="Harpalion" label="Harpalion"/>
<link wikidata="Q45936" start="1226" end="1232" title="Strabo" label="Strabo"/>
<link wikidata="Q125414" start="1415" end="1437" title="Pompey" label="Gnaeus Pompeius Magnus"/>
<link wikidata="Q174306" start="1487" end="1494" title="Republic of Genoa" label="Genoese"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="1514" end="1528" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q2530261" start="1748" end="1756" title="Tekkeköy" label="Tekkeköy"/>
<link wikidata="Q755017" start="1842" end="1847" title="Tell (archaeology)" label="höyük"/>
<link wikidata="Q130253" start="1873" end="1885" title="Chalcolithic" label="Chalcolithic"/>
<link wikidata="Q11761" start="1904" end="1914" title="Bronze Age" label="Bronze Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q5406" start="1919" end="1926" title="Hittites" label="Hittite"/>
<link wikidata="Q169460" start="2112" end="2119" title="Miletus" label="Miletus"/>
<link wikidata="Q51614" start="2198" end="2206" title="Anatolia" label="Anatolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q169460" start="2341" end="2350" title="Milesians (Greek)" label="Milesians"/>
<link wikidata="Q3973535" start="2618" end="2633" title="Wild Goat style" label="Wild Goat style"/>
<link wikidata="Q3657298" start="2753" end="2773" title="Cappadocia (satrapy)" label="Cappadocia (satrapy)"/>
<link wikidata="Q193235" start="2855" end="2868" title="Delian League" label="Delian League"/>
<link wikidata="Q1524" start="2880" end="2889" title="Athenians" label="Athenians"/>
<link wikidata="Q80398" start="2926" end="2934" title="Pericles" label="Pericles"/>
<link wikidata="Q4318" start="2964" end="2974" title="Theopompus" label="Theopompus"/>
<link wikidata="Q45936" start="2985" end="2991" title="Strabo" label="Strabo"/>
<link wikidata="Q130342531" start="3067" end="3077" title="Athenocles of Athens" label="Athenocles"/>
<link wikidata="Q7380487" start="3182" end="3199" title="Kingdom of Pontus" label="Kingdom of Pontus"/>
<link wikidata="Q15926468" start="3205" end="3220" title="Amisos treasure" label="Amisos treasure"/>
<link wikidata="Q1764124" start="3517" end="3538" title="Third Mithridatic War" label="Third Mithridatic War"/>
<link wikidata="Q913382" start="3566" end="3584" title="Bithynia et Pontus" label="Bithynia et Pontus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2280204" start="3812" end="3833" title="Pythodorida of Pontus" label="Pythodorida of Pontus"/>
<link wikidata="Q168707" start="3972" end="3989" title="Pliny the Younger" label="Pliny the Younger"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425" start="4012" end="4026" title="Emperor Trajan" label="Emperor Trajan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1032335" start="4145" end="4162" title="John Boyle, 5th Earl of Cork" label="John Boyle Orrery"/>
<link wikidata="Q599416" start="4543" end="4549" title="Sinop, Turkey" label="Sinope"/>
<link wikidata="Q217050" start="4629" end="4643" title="Late Antiquity" label="Late Antiquity"/>
<link wikidata="Q3329856" start="4673" end="4690" title="Diocese of Pontus" label="Dioecesis Pontica"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277" start="4710" end="4722" title="Roman Empire" label="Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q682167" start="4755" end="4769" title="Armeniac Theme" label="Armeniac Theme"/>
<link wikidata="Q6100078" start="4772" end="4785" title="Samsun Castle" label="Samsun Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q428995" start="4923" end="4934" title="Hellenistic" label="Hellenistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q51614" start="5055" end="5065" title="Asia Minor" label="Asia Minor"/>
<link wikidata="Q134461" start="5278" end="5286" title="Josephus" label="Josephus"/>
<link wikidata="Q133004" start="5311" end="5319" title="diaspora" label="diaspora"/>
<link wikidata="Q373069" start="5356" end="5377" title="Evangelism" label="evangelist Christians"/>
<link wikidata="Q168707" start="6082" end="6099" title="Pliny the Younger" label="Pliny the Younger"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425" start="6251" end="6265" title="Emperor Trajan" label="Emperor Trajan"/>
<link wikidata="Q10439273" start="6541" end="6556" title="Caesarea Mazaca" label="Caesarea Mazaca"/>
<link wikidata="Q309953" start="6558" end="6581" title="Gregory the Illuminator" label="Gregory the Illuminator"/>
<link wikidata="Q44258" start="6652" end="6667" title="Basil the Great" label="Basil the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q170531" start="6769" end="6789" title="Council of Chalcedon" label="Council of Chalcedon"/>
<link wikidata="Q183776" start="6886" end="6904" title="Leo I the Thracian" label="Leo I the Thracian"/>
<link wikidata="Q367341" start="6936" end="6959" title="Proterius of Alexandria" label="Proterius of Alexandria"/>
<link wikidata="Q46127" start="7031" end="7041" title="menologion" label="menologion"/>
<link wikidata="Q208037" start="7074" end="7105" title="Third Council of Constantinople" label="Third Council of Constantinople"/>
<link wikidata="Q187201" start="7122" end="7146" title="Second Council of Nicaea" label="Second Council of Nicaea"/>
<link wikidata="Q862543" start="7172" end="7204" title="Fourth Council of Constantinople (Eastern Orthodox)" label="Council of Constantinople of 879"/>
<link wikidata="Q3878797" start="7254" end="7275" title="Notitiae Episcopatuum" label="Notitiae Episcopatuum"/>
<link wikidata="Q170532" start="7357" end="7363" title="Bishop of Amasea" label="Amasea"/>
<link wikidata="Q948657" start="7452" end="7466" title="titular bishop" label="titular bishop"/>
<link wikidata="Q165005" start="7493" end="7504" title="Franciscans" label="Franciscans"/>
<link wikidata="Q597526" start="7545" end="7550" title="Latin Church" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1379299" start="7657" end="7663" title="Smyrna" label="Smyrna"/>
<link wikidata="Q131479" start="7688" end="7697" title="Order of Preachers" label="Dominican"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="7822" end="7837" title="Catholic Church" label="Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q15217609" start="7843" end="7854" title="titular see" label="titular see"/>
<link wikidata="Q3708094" start="7904" end="7917" title="Seljuk Empire" label="Seljuk Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q975405" start="7923" end="7939" title="Sultanate of Rum" label="Sultanate of Rum"/>
<link wikidata="Q178913" start="7945" end="7964" title="Empire of Trebizond" label="Empire of Trebizond"/>
<link wikidata="Q1502702" start="7985" end="8001" title="Genoese colonies" label="Genoese colonies"/>
<link wikidata="Q853309" start="8047" end="8077" title="Anatolian beyliks" label="small principalities (beyliks)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2096678" start="8143" end="8156" title="Isfendiyarids" label="Isfendiyarids"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="8267" end="8281" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q128358" start="8296" end="8305" title="Bayezid I" label="Bayezid I"/>
<link wikidata="Q330425" start="8482" end="8488" title="Sanjak" label="Sanjak"/>
<link wikidata="Q2634212" start="8492" end="8497" title="Canik" label="Canik"/>
<link wikidata="Q487574" start="8533" end="8543" title="Rûm Eyalet" label="Rûm Eyalet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1566" start="8586" end="8593" title="tobacco" label="tobacco"/>
<link wikidata="Q5152" start="9084" end="9105" title="Mustafa Kemal Atatürk" label="Mustafa Kemal Atatürk"/>
<link wikidata="Q6302107" start="9122" end="9147" title="Turkish national movement" label="Turkish national movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q215669" start="9160" end="9166" title="Allies of World War I" label="Allies"/>
<link wikidata="Q234738" start="9250" end="9277" title="Turkish War of Independence" label="Turkish War of Independence"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9344" end="9374" title="Ninth Army (Ottoman Empire)#After Mudros" label="Ninth Army Troops Inspectorate"/>
<link wikidata="Q51614" start="9400" end="9408" title="Anatolia" label="Anatolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1973141" start="9814" end="9830" title="Near East Foundation" label="Near East Relief"/>
<link wikidata="Q36811935" start="9983" end="9994" title="Samsun deportations (1921-1922)" label="deportation"/>
<link wikidata="Q4940512" start="10247" end="10256" title="Bombardment of Samsun" label="bombarded"/>
<link wikidata="Q131017" start="10471" end="10490" title="Population exchange between Greece and Turkey" label="Population Exchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q7780449" start="10537" end="10544" title="Preveza (regional unit)" label="Preveza"/>
<link wikidata="Q41" start="10546" end="10552" title="Greece" label="Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q799805" start="10647" end="10652" title="Bafra" label="Bafra"/>
<link wikidata="Q272649" start="10654" end="10662" title="Çarşamba" label="Çarşamba"/>
<link wikidata="Q2671132" start="10664" end="10669" title="Havza" label="Havza"/>
<link wikidata="Q669752" start="10671" end="10676" title="Terme" label="Terme"/>
<link wikidata="Q2086353" start="10681" end="10691" title="Vezirköprü" label="Vezirköprü"/>
<link wikidata="Q2279679" start="10752" end="10757" title="Ladik" label="Ladik"/>
<link wikidata="Q1179834" start="10811" end="10816" title="Kavak, Samsun" label="Kavak"/>
<link wikidata="Q1947471" start="10845" end="10851" title="Alaçam" label="Alaçam"/>
<link wikidata="Q483040" start="10901" end="10916" title="Samsun Province" label="Samsun Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q2671116" start="10976" end="10986" title="Salıpazarı" label="Salıpazarı"/>
<link wikidata="Q2262525" start="10988" end="10995" title="Asarcık" label="Asarcık"/>
<link wikidata="Q644699" start="10997" end="11009" title="Ondokuzmayıs" label="Ondokuzmayıs"/>
<link wikidata="Q2530261" start="11014" end="11022" title="Tekkeköy" label="Tekkeköy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2181540" start="11099" end="11106" title="Ayvacık, Samsun" label="Ayvacık"/>
<link wikidata="Q1858384" start="11111" end="11119" title="Yakakent" label="Yakakent"/>
<link wikidata="Q166" start="11318" end="11327" title="Black Sea" label="Black Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q43" start="11416" end="11434" title="Republic of Turkey" label="Republic of Turkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q107401" start="11586" end="11591" title="Sivas" label="Sivas"/>
<link wikidata="Q3640" start="11596" end="11602" title="Ankara" label="Ankara"/>
<link wikidata="Q7092215" start="11711" end="11735" title="Ondokuz Mayıs University" label="Ondokuz Mayıs University"/>
<link wikidata="Q4812671" start="11767" end="11773" title="Atakum" label="Atakum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1432694" start="12009" end="12032" title="Samsun-Çarşamba Airport" label="Samsun-Çarşamba Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q4548" start="12101" end="12117" title="Turkish Airlines" label="Turkish Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q3661908" start="12134" end="12150" title="Istanbul Airport" label="Istanbul Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q430490" start="12155" end="12178" title="Ankara Esenboğa Airport" label="Ankara Esenboğa Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="12217" end="12224" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q796" start="12229" end="12233" title="Iraq" label="Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q402101" start="12293" end="12304" title="Samsun Tram" label="Samsun Tram"/>
<link wikidata="Q7092215" start="12328" end="12352" title="Ondokuz Mayıs University" label="Ondokuz Mayıs University"/>
<link wikidata="Q6099597" start="12356" end="12379" title="Samsun 19 Mayıs Stadium" label="Samsun 19 Mayıs Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q6024226" start="12419" end="12444" title="metropolitan municipality" label="metropolitan municipality"/>
<link wikidata="Q3640" start="12485" end="12491" title="Ankara" label="Ankara"/>
<link wikidata="Q4812671" start="12820" end="12826" title="Atakum" label="Atakum"/>
<link wikidata="Q56307531" start="13227" end="13248" title="Sheraton Hotel Samsun" label="Sheraton Hotel Samsun"/>
<link wikidata="Q430107" start="13402" end="13412" title="Samsunspor" label="Samsunspor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2530261" start="13451" end="13459" title="Tekkeköy" label="Tekkeköy"/>
<link wikidata="Q112958056" start="13461" end="13476" title="Gökdelen Towers" label="Gökdelen Towers"/>
<link wikidata="Q12810978" start="13646" end="13659" title="Mustafa Demir" label="Mustafa Demir"/>
<link wikidata="Q6015416" start="13948" end="13970" title="Samsun Saathane Square" label="Samsun Saathane Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q166" start="14083" end="14092" title="Black Sea" label="Black Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q217265" start="14144" end="14154" title="Cappadocia" label="Cappadocia"/>
<link wikidata="Q257785" start="14542" end="14552" title="Kızıl River" label="Kızılırmak"/>
<link wikidata="Q51614" start="14643" end="14651" title="Anatolia" label="Anatolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145293" start="14696" end="14706" title="Yeşil River" label="Yeşilırmak"/>
<link wikidata="Q6077754" start="14787" end="14797" title="River Mert" label="River Mert"/>
<link wikidata="Q864320" start="14855" end="14880" title="humid subtropical climate" label="humid subtropical climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q124095" start="14882" end="14888" title="Köppen climate classification" label="Köppen"/>
<link wikidata="Q17174435" start="14907" end="14916" title="Trewartha climate classification" label="Trewartha"/>
<link wikidata="Q330961" start="15559" end="15567" title="Tanzimat" label="Tanzimat"/>
<link wikidata="Q23522" start="15637" end="15644" title="Balkans" label="Balkans"/>
<link wikidata="Q15763" start="15649" end="15660" title="Circassians" label="Circassians"/>
<link wikidata="Q2578778" start="15661" end="15674" title="Ethnic cleansing of Circassians" label="were expelled"/>
<link wikidata="Q18869" start="15684" end="15692" title="Caucasus" label="Caucasus"/>
<link wikidata="Q432" start="15843" end="15849" title="Islam" label="Muslim"/>
<link wikidata="Q43" start="16332" end="16350" title="Republic of Turkey" label="Republic of Turkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q274918" start="17160" end="17191" title="Turkish Grand National Assembly" label="Turkish Grand National Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q4812671" start="17259" end="17265" title="Atakum" label="Atakum"/>
<link wikidata="Q12810978" start="17310" end="17323" title="Mustafa Demir" label="Mustafa Demir"/>
<link wikidata="Q19077" start="17343" end="17372" title="Justice and Development Party (Turkey)" label="Justice and Development Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q19077" start="17512" end="17541" title="Justice and Development Party (Turkey)" label="Justice and Development Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q19079" start="17566" end="17596" title="Republican People&amp;#x27;s Party" label="Republican People&amp;#x27;s Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q42313794" start="17607" end="17617" title="Good Party" label="Good Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q251077" start="17635" end="17661" title="Nationalist Movement Party" label="Nationalist Movement Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q63115406" start="17682" end="17695" title="Air pollution in Turkey" label="Air pollution"/>
<link wikidata="Q57580187" start="17767" end="17771" title="Coal in Turkey" label="coal"/>
<link wikidata="Q104867952" start="17787" end="17791" title="Poverty in Turkey" label="poor"/>
<link wikidata="Q20962970" start="17820" end="17823" title="NOx" label="NOx"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="17940" end="17954" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q2142647" start="18168" end="18184" title="yali (residence)" label="yali (residence)"/>
<link wikidata="Q571341" start="18617" end="18626" title="gecekondu" label="gecekondu"/>
<link wikidata="Q571341" start="18759" end="18768" title="gecekondu" label="gecekondu"/>
<link wikidata="Q6063551" start="18811" end="18815" title="TOKİ" label="TOKİ"/>
<link wikidata="Q178084" start="19084" end="19101" title="Ilkhanate" label="Ilkhanate Mongols"/>
<link wikidata="Q112980277" start="19125" end="19154" title="Central Great Mosque (Samsun)" label="Central Great Mosque (Samsun)"/>
<link wikidata="Q754089" start="19240" end="19246" title="Valide sultan" label="mother"/>
<link wikidata="Q203910" start="19250" end="19264" title="Ottoman Sultan" label="Ottoman Sultan"/>
<link wikidata="Q151500" start="19265" end="19274" title="Abdülaziz" label="Abdulaziz"/>
<link wikidata="Q4812671" start="19369" end="19375" title="Atakum" label="Atakum"/>
<link wikidata="Q3906369" start="19414" end="19421" title="Ilkadim" label="Ilkadim"/>
<link wikidata="Q234738" start="19541" end="19568" title="Turkish War of Independence" label="Turkish War of Independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q6030301" start="19602" end="19626" title="Republic Square (Samsun)" label="Republic Square (Samsun)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6015416" start="19629" end="19651" title="Samsun Saathane Square" label="Samsun Saathane Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q112958056" start="19723" end="19738" title="Gökdelen Towers" label="Gökdelen Towers"/>
<link wikidata="Q56307531" start="19772" end="19793" title="Sheraton Hotel Samsun" label="Sheraton Hotel Samsun"/>
<link wikidata="Q107401" start="20131" end="20136" title="Sivas" label="Sivas"/>
<link wikidata="Q170532" start="20141" end="20147" title="Amasya" label="Amasya"/>
<link wikidata="Q2104749" start="20239" end="20245" title="Port Kavkaz" label="Kavkaz"/>
<link wikidata="Q402101" start="20343" end="20354" title="Samsun Tram" label="Samsun Tram"/>
<link wikidata="Q2530261" start="20396" end="20404" title="Tekkeköy" label="Tekkeköy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7092215" start="20409" end="20433" title="Ondokuz Mayıs University" label="Ondokuz Mayıs University"/>
<link wikidata="Q2878855" start="20479" end="20496" title="bus rapid transit" label="bus rapid transit"/>
<link wikidata="Q2530261" start="20529" end="20537" title="Tekkekoy" label="Tekkekoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1236014" start="20575" end="20581" title="Dolmuş" label="Dolmuş"/>
<link wikidata="Q15939508" start="20675" end="20701" title="Samsun Amisos Hill Gondola" label="Samsun Amisos Hill Gondola"/>
<link wikidata="Q34023" start="20790" end="20796" title="tumulus" label="tumuli"/>
<link wikidata="Q1432694" start="20815" end="20838" title="Samsun-Çarşamba Airport" label="Samsun-Çarşamba Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q580829" start="21320" end="21358" title="Central Bank of the Republic of Turkey" label="Central Bank of the Republic of Turkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q107401" start="21569" end="21574" title="Sivas" label="Sivas"/>
<link wikidata="Q473932" start="21656" end="21660" title="RORO" label="RORO"/>
<link wikidata="Q15760" start="21672" end="21684" title="Novorossiysk" label="Novorossiysk"/>
<link wikidata="Q605714" start="22075" end="22081" title="Donbas" label="Donbas"/>
<link wikidata="Q182458" start="22082" end="22092" title="anthracite" label="anthracite"/>
<link wikidata="Q102762" start="22128" end="22132" title="Azov" label="Azov"/>
<link wikidata="Q170513" start="22137" end="22145" title="Taganrog" label="Taganrog"/>
<link wikidata="Q4469097" start="22180" end="22194" title="Coal in Ukraine" label="Ukrainian coal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2634212" start="23246" end="23251" title="Canik" label="Canik"/>
<link wikidata="Q130949" start="23397" end="23403" title="skiing" label="skiing"/>
<link wikidata="Q192520" start="23408" end="23415" title="sailing" label="sailing"/>
<link wikidata="Q6388" start="23441" end="23449" title="swimming" label="swimming"/>
<link wikidata="Q4812671" start="23925" end="23931" title="Atakum" label="Atakum"/>
<link wikidata="Q458651" start="23949" end="23964" title="Blue Flag beach" label="Blue Flag beach"/>
<link wikidata="Q178380" start="24291" end="24302" title="paragliding" label="paragliding"/>
<link wikidata="Q36908" start="24304" end="24318" title="mountaineering" label="mountaineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q6096886" start="24701" end="24715" title="Çarşamba Plain" label="Çarşamba Plain"/>
<link wikidata="Q6005979" start="24759" end="24775" title="Kızılırmak Delta" label="Kızılırmak Delta"/>
<link wikidata="Q4807866" start="25892" end="25940" title="Aspendos International Opera and Ballet Festival" label="Aspendos International Opera and Ballet Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q15926468" start="26255" end="26270" title="Amisos treasure" label="Amisos treasure"/>
<link wikidata="Q65219305" start="26520" end="26558" title="Surgical Instruments and Health Museum" label="Surgical Instruments and Health Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q7092215" start="26707" end="26731" title="Ondokuz Mayıs University" label="Ondokuz Mayıs University"/>
<link wikidata="Q52236662" start="26755" end="26772" title="Samsun University" label="Samsun University"/>
<link wikidata="Q6074122" start="27028" end="27034" title="Statue of Honor" label="statue"/>
<link wikidata="Q1514755" start="27056" end="27072" title="Heinrich Krippel" label="Heinrich Krippel"/>
<link wikidata="Q20725526" start="27134" end="27141" title="Obverse and reverse" label="obverse"/>
<link wikidata="Q172872" start="27165" end="27169" title="Turkish lira" label="lira"/>
<link wikidata="Q5162772" start="27449" end="27471" title="conscription in Turkey" label="conscription in Turkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q22652" start="27523" end="27539" title="urban open space" label="urban open space"/>
<link wikidata="Q208141" start="27720" end="27722" title="Common Era" label="CE"/>
<link wikidata="Q16632528" start="27725" end="27750" title="Tekkeköy Yaşar Doğu Arena" label="Tekkeköy Yaşar Doğu Arena"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736" start="27768" end="27776" title="Association football" label="Football"/>
<link wikidata="Q430107" start="27952" end="27962" title="Samsunspor" label="Samsunspor"/>
<link wikidata="Q6099597" start="27993" end="28016" title="Samsun 19 Mayıs Stadium" label="Samsun 19 Mayıs Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q70622588" start="28019" end="28029" title="Samsunspor (basketball)" label="Basketball"/>
<link wikidata="Q1755019" start="28061" end="28073" title="cable skiing" label="cable skiing"/>
<link wikidata="Q184711" start="28345" end="28352" title="Twin towns and sister cities" label="twinned"/>
<link wikidata="Q79902" start="28362" end="28389" title="North Little Rock, Arkansas" label="North Little Rock, Arkansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q188155" start="28414" end="28420" title="Gorgan" label="Gorgan"/>
<link wikidata="Q344055" start="28436" end="28442" title="Trikomo, Cyprus" label="İskele"/>
<link wikidata="Q15760" start="28469" end="28481" title="Novorossiysk" label="Novorossiysk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1960" start="28499" end="28512" title="Dar es Salaam" label="Dar es Salaam"/>
<link wikidata="Q26345" start="28532" end="28538" title="Kalmar" label="Kalmar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1479" start="28556" end="28564" title="Bordeaux" label="Bordeaux"/>
<link wikidata="Q1707" start="28582" end="28586" title="Kiel" label="Kiel"/>
<link wikidata="Q322828" start="28605" end="28610" title="Brčko" label="Brčko"/>
<link wikidata="Q189546" start="28644" end="28651" title="Bizerte" label="Bizerte"/>
<link wikidata="Q43070" start="28663" end="28670" title="Donetsk" label="Donetsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q3761" start="28682" end="28687" title="Accra" label="Accra"/>
<link wikidata="Q9361" start="28697" end="28704" title="Bishkek" label="Bishkek"/>
<link wikidata="Q6823377" start="28823" end="28834" title="Mete Adanır" label="Mete Adanır"/>
<link wikidata="Q6090984" start="28883" end="28892" title="Nuri Asan" label="Nuri Asan"/>
<link wikidata="Q942041" start="28936" end="28948" title="Serkan Aykut" label="Serkan Aykut"/>
<link wikidata="Q6950588" start="28988" end="28998" title="Müslüm Can" label="Müslüm Can"/>
<link wikidata="Q539734" start="29033" end="29044" title="Tanju Çolak" label="Tanju Çolak"/>
<link wikidata="Q824590" start="29096" end="29106" title="Cenk İşler" label="Cenk İşler"/>
<link wikidata="Q277944" start="29158" end="29168" title="Mehmet Nas" label="Mehmet Nas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1388954" start="29202" end="29216" title="Mehmet Özdilek" label="Mehmet Özdilek"/>
<link wikidata="Q1786639" start="29282" end="29298" title="A. I. Bezzerides" label="A. I. Bezzerides"/>
<link wikidata="Q6029399" start="29356" end="29370" title="Ahmet Demircan" label="Ahmet Demircan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1382418" start="29453" end="29467" title="Orhan Gencebay" label="Orhan Gencebay"/>
<link wikidata="Q623824" start="29481" end="29496" title="Arabesque (Turkish music)" label="Arabesque music"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129591" start="29506" end="29518" title="Levent Kırca" label="Levent Kırca"/>
<link wikidata="Q280422" start="29586" end="29596" title="Yaşar Doğu" label="Yasar Dogu"/>
<link wikidata="Q29033780" start="29609" end="29617" title="Ali Baba (wrestler)" label="Ali Baba"/>
<link wikidata="Q6024226" start="29711" end="29736" title="Metropolitan Municipality" label="Metropolitan Municipality"/>
<link wikidata="Q7855366" start="29742" end="29746" title="1968 Turkish local elections" label="1968"/>
<link wikidata="Q1758028" start="29747" end="29751" title="1980 Turkish coup d&amp;#x27;état" label="1980"/>
<link wikidata="Q7855369" start="29756" end="29760" title="1984 Turkish local elections" label="1984"/>
<link wikidata="Q1583327" start="29761" end="29765" title="1987 Turkish general election" label="1987"/>
<link wikidata="" start="29766" end="29781" title=":tr:Kemal Vehbi Gül" label="Kemal Vehbi Gül"/>
<link wikidata="Q348125" start="29782" end="29784" title="Justice Party (Turkey)" label="AP"/>
<link wikidata="Q488511" start="29786" end="29790" title="Motherland Party (Turkey)" label="ANAP"/>
<link wikidata="Q1583327" start="29793" end="29797" title="1987 Turkish general election" label="1987"/>
<link wikidata="Q7855371" start="29798" end="29802" title="1989 Turkish local elections" label="1989"/>
<link wikidata="" start="29803" end="29818" title=":tr:Ruhat Çetinkaya" label="Ruhat Çetinkaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q31192992" start="29819" end="29823" title="Motherland Party (Turkey, 2011)" label="ANAP"/>
<link wikidata="Q7855371" start="29826" end="29830" title="1989 Turkish local elections" label="1989"/>
<link wikidata="Q7855373" start="29831" end="29835" title="1999 Turkish local elections" label="1999"/>
<link wikidata="" start="29836" end="29850" title=":tr:Muzaffer Önder" label="Muazffer Önder"/>
<link wikidata="Q1521975" start="29851" end="29854" title="Social Democratic People&amp;#x27;s Party (Turkey)" label="SHP"/>
<link wikidata="Q19079" start="29856" end="29859" title="Republican People&amp;#x27;s Party" label="CHP"/>
<link wikidata="Q7855373" start="29862" end="29866" title="1999 Turkish local elections" label="1999"/>
<link wikidata="Q30588330" start="29867" end="29871" title="2018 Turkish general election" label="2018"/>
<link wikidata="Q6100353" start="29872" end="29889" title="Yusuf Ziya Yılmaz" label="Yusuf Ziya Yılmaz"/>
<link wikidata="Q488511" start="29890" end="29894" title="Motherland Party (Turkey)" label="ANAP"/>
<link wikidata="Q19077" start="29896" end="29904" title="AK Party" label="AK Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q30588330" start="29907" end="29911" title="2018 Turkish general election" label="2018"/>
<link wikidata="Q28219941" start="29912" end="29916" title="2019 Turkish local elections" label="2019"/>
<link wikidata="" start="29917" end="29928" title=":tr:Zihni Şahin" label="Zihni Şahin"/>
<link wikidata="Q19077" start="29929" end="29937" title="AK Party" label="AK Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q28219941" start="29940" end="29944" title="2019 Turkish local elections" label="2019"/>
<link wikidata="Q113648279" start="29945" end="29949" title="2024 Turkish local elections" label="2024"/>
<link wikidata="Q12810978" start="29950" end="29963" title="Mustafa Demir" label="Mustafa Demir"/>
<link wikidata="Q19077" start="29964" end="29972" title="AK Party" label="AK Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q113648279" start="29975" end="29979" title="2024 Turkish local elections" label="2024"/>
<link wikidata="Q193168" start="29980" end="29987" title="present" label="present"/>
<link wikidata="" start="29988" end="29999" title=":tr:Halit Doğan" label="Halit Doğan"/>
<link wikidata="Q19077" start="30000" end="30008" title="AK Party" label="AK Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q754347" start="30026" end="30042" title="Anatolian Tigers" label="Anatolian Tigers"/>
<link wikidata="Q6046351" start="30045" end="30061" title="Beyliks of Canik" label="Beyliks of Canik"/>
<link wikidata="Q7603863" start="30064" end="30088" title="State road D010 (Turkey)" label="State road D010 (Turkey)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6100078" start="30091" end="30104" title="Samsun Castle" label="Samsun Castle"/>
<link wikidata="" start="30107" end="30146" title=":Category:Tourist attractions in Samsun" label=":Category:Tourist attractions in Samsun"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="655680" wikidata="Q2099828" url="?curid=655680" title="Ockendon railway station">
<text>Ockendon railway station is located on a passing loop on a single-track branch of the London, Tilbury and Southend line, serving the town of South Ockendon, Essex. It is down the line from London Fenchurch Street via ; the following station on the branch is . Its three-letter station code is OCK.

The station was opened in 1892 by the London, Tilbury and Southend Railway (LTSR). Today, all passenger train services are operated by c2c, which also manages the station. Although the station is outside the London fare zones 1 to 6, it became part of the Oyster card pay-as-you-go network in 2010.

==History==
The single-track line through the area was opened in 1892 by the LTSR as part of a branch from to via . By the late 20th century, service on the line had been reduced to a relatively infrequent shuttle between Upminster and Grays. However, service levels increased following the opening of a new station on the branch at Chafford Hundred and the shuttle train service was eventually extended beyond Upminster to in London and beyond Grays to in Southend-on-Sea.

==Services==
The station has two platforms. As of the June 2024 timetable the typical Monday to Friday off-peak service is:
* 2 tph (trains per hour) westbound to London Fenchurch Street 
* 2 tph eastbound to 

==Connections==
NIBS Buses route 269 and London Buses route 347 serve the station.

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2099828" start="0" end="24" title="Ockendon railway station" label="Ockendon railway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q784159" start="41" end="53" title="passing loop" label="passing loop"/>
<link wikidata="Q655677" start="72" end="78" title="branch line" label="branch"/>
<link wikidata="Q106104076" start="86" end="119" title="London, Tilbury and Southend line" label="London, Tilbury and Southend line"/>
<link wikidata="Q747456" start="141" end="155" title="South Ockendon" label="South Ockendon"/>
<link wikidata="Q800753" start="189" end="212" title="Fenchurch Street railway station" label="London Fenchurch Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q1868882" start="337" end="373" title="London, Tilbury and Southend Railway" label="London, Tilbury and Southend Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q286262" start="434" end="437" title="c2c" label="c2c"/>
<link wikidata="Q249400" start="555" end="566" title="Oyster card" label="Oyster card"/>
<link wikidata="Q2385653" start="932" end="948" title="Chafford Hundred railway station" label="Chafford Hundred"/>
<link wikidata="Q800753" start="1237" end="1260" title="Fenchurch Street railway station" label="London Fenchurch Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q66499993" start="1301" end="1311" title="NIBS Buses" label="NIBS Buses"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192411" start="1326" end="1338" title="London Buses" label="London Buses"/>
<link wikidata="Q61974821" start="1345" end="1348" title="London Buses route 347" label="347"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="655684" wikidata="Q2485762" url="?curid=655684" title="HiperMAN">
<text>HiperMAN (High Performance Radio Metropolitan Area Network) is a standard created by the European Telecommunications Standards Institute (ETSI) Broadband Radio Access Networks (BRAN) group to provide a wireless network communication in the 2–11 GHz bands across Europe and other countries which follow the ETSI standard. HiperMAN is a European alternative to WiMAX (or the IEEE 802.16 standard) and the Korean technology WiBro.

HiperMAN is aiming principally for providing broadband Wireless Internet access, while covering a large geographic area. The standardization focuses on broadband solutions optimized for access in frequency bands below 11 GHz (mainly in the 3.5 GHz band). HiperMAN is optimised for packet switched networks, and supports fixed and nomadic applications, primarily in the residential and small business user environments.

HiperMAN will be an interoperable broadband fixed wireless access system operating at radio frequencies between 2 GHz and 11 GHz. The HiperMAN standard is designed for Fixed Wireless Access provisioning to SMEs and residences using the basic MAC (DLC and CLs) of the IEEE 802.16-2001 standard. It has been developed in very close cooperation with IEEE 802.16, such that the HiperMAN standard and a subset of the IEEE 802.16a-2003 standard will interoperate seamlessly. HiperMAN is capable of supporting ATM, though the main focus is on IP traffic. It offers various service categories, full quality of service, fast connection control management, strong security, fast adaptation of coding, modulation and transmit power to propagation conditions and is capable of non-line-of-sight operation. HiperMAN enables both PTMP and Mesh network configurations. HiperMAN also supports both FDD and TDD frequency allocations and H-FDD terminals. All this is achieved with a minimum number of options to simplify implementation and interoperability.

==See also==
*HiperLAN

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2485762" start="0" end="8" title="HiperMAN" label="HiperMAN"/>
<link wikidata="Q2485762" start="10" end="58" title="HiperMAN" label="High Performance Radio Metropolitan Area Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q899383" start="89" end="136" title="European Telecommunications Standards Institute" label="European Telecommunications Standards Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q39369" start="245" end="248" title="Gigahertz" label="GHz"/>
<link wikidata="Q46" start="335" end="341" title="Europe" label="Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q133973" start="359" end="364" title="WiMAX" label="WiMAX"/>
<link wikidata="Q1149757" start="373" end="384" title="IEEE 802.16" label="IEEE 802.16"/>
<link wikidata="Q18097" start="403" end="408" title="Korea" label="Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144876" start="421" end="426" title="WiBro" label="WiBro"/>
<link wikidata="Q193446" start="710" end="725" title="packet switched" label="packet switched"/>
<link wikidata="Q1149757" start="1266" end="1278" title="IEEE 802.16" label="802.16a-2003"/>
<link wikidata="Q206047" start="1352" end="1355" title="Asynchronous Transfer Mode" label="ATM"/>
<link wikidata="Q81414" start="1385" end="1387" title="Internet protocol suite" label="IP"/>
<link wikidata="Q220501" start="1440" end="1458" title="quality of service" label="quality of service"/>
<link wikidata="Q1740982" start="1614" end="1641" title="Non-line-of-sight propagation" label="non-line-of-sight operation"/>
<link wikidata="Q6554265" start="1665" end="1669" title="Point-to-multipoint communication (telecommunications)" label="PTMP"/>
<link wikidata="Q25552104" start="1674" end="1686" title="Mesh network" label="Mesh network"/>
<link wikidata="Q1563708" start="1904" end="1912" title="HiperLAN" label="HiperLAN"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="655685" wikidata="Q2177253" url="?curid=655685" title="Emerson Park railway station">
<text>Emerson Park is a London Overground station in the Emerson Park neighbourhood of Hornchurch in the London Borough of Havering, east London. The station is on the Liberty line and is the only intermediate station on that single-track line, located between Romford and Upminster. The station was opened in 1909 by the London, Tilbury and Southend Railway on a branch line which had connected Romford with Upminster and since 1893. The station entrance is on Butts Green Road, with minimal station buildings other than a canopy over the single platform. Emerson Park is one of the least used stations in London and the least used London Overground station.

==History==
===Steam era===
The Romford–Upminster line was constructed in 1893 as a branch of the London, Tilbury and Southend Railway (LTSR). The branch connected at Upminster with the main line from London Fenchurch Street to Shoeburyness and the branch line to Grays that had opened in 1892. The new line passed mostly through fields and skirted the northern limits of the town of Hornchurch, which was already served by an LTSR station a similar distance to the south of the town. The LTSR was prompted to open a station at Emerson Park because of property development in the immediate area and in 1908 the Great Eastern Railway (GER) proposed a new railway station at Gidea Park, approximately 1 mile to the northwest on the line from Liverpool Street. The LTSR station opened on 1 October 1909 as Emerson Park Halt and the rival station at Gidea Park in 1910. A run-round loop was constructed 500 yards to the west to enable extra trains to run between Emerson Park and Upminster. When push-pull working began in 1934 the loop was no longer needed and taken out in .

In the April 1920 timetable there are 27 down (towards Tilbury) and 22 up (towards Romford) trains a day. Destinations varied with most services running between Romford and Upminster. There were six through trains to Grays, four to Tilbury and five short runs between Emerson Park and Upminster, with a similar number of return trains. On Sundays there were nine trains in each direction. By 1939 this had increased to 35 down trains and 27 up services on weekdays, still with nine in each direction on Sundays and a similar service pattern. Originally named Emerson Park Halt, and shown in some timetables and on some signage throughout its history as Emerson Park &amp; Great Nelmes, the station name was later simplified to &#x27;Emerson Park&#x27;, but the date of this change is not recorded. The London, Tilbury and Southend Railway was purchased by the Midland Railway in 1912 and was amalgamated into the London, Midland and Scottish Railway on 1 January 1923. The station and line became part of British Railways on 1 January 1948, initially as part of the London Midland Region and then the Eastern Region from 20 February 1949. The short workings between Emerson Park and Upminster were eliminated with all services at Emerson Park calling at both Romford and Upminster from the 1949 timetable.

===Diesel era===
Diesel multiple unit operation began on 15 September 1956 and the current service pattern was established when through service beyond Upminster ceased. The September 1957 timetable shows a regular half hourly service at the station with services to Romford and Upminster from 06:00 to 21:30 and no service on Sundays. The station became part of the London &amp; South Eastern sector in 1982 that became Network SouthEast in 1986. The last day of diesel multiple unit operation was on Saturday 10 May 1986.

===Electric era===
Electric train service began operating on Monday 12 May 1986. Following the privatisation of British Rail the station and train services were operated by First Great Eastern from 1997 to 2004, National Express East Anglia from 2004 to 2012 and Greater Anglia from 2012 to 2015. Oyster pay as you go has been available at the station since 2010. The station was taken over by London Overground, a subsidiary of Transport for London, on 31 May 2015 and a Sunday service was restored from 13 December 2015. The London Overground service through the station was rebranded as the Liberty line from November 2024.

==Design==

The station consists of a side platform located to the north of the single track. Access to the street is provided by a ramp. The station is of basic design and has no buildings other than a canopy covering part of the platform. The Havering Council local register of historic interest describes the building as &quot;Canopy over single platform. Simple iron ‘H’ posts holding up a steel frame, with corrugated sheeting forming a curved roof. Timber valances edging roofline.&quot; There are Oyster card validators and a ticket vending machine. Digital display boards and voice announcements provide departure information.

==Location==
The station is the only intermediate station on the Romford–Upminster line, located from and 1 mile 66 chains (2.9 km) from Upminster. It is named after the Emerson Park housing estate, located to the northeast. The entrance is situated at the southern end of Butts Green Road at the point it becomes North Street, north of Hornchurch town centre. Hornchurch is additionally served by Hornchurch and Upminster Bridge stations, both on the London Underground&#x27;s District line (though both significantly further away from Hornchurch town center). London Buses routes 165, 256 and 370 serve the station.

==Services==
The station is in London fare zone 6. Service from the station is two trains per hour to Upminster and two per hour to Romford. The timetabled journey time to Upminster is five minutes and to Romford is four minutes. Services run Monday to Saturday between approximately 06:15 and 22:00, and on Sundays from approximately 08:45 to 20:00. Emerson Park is one of the least used stations in London and the least used London Overground station. The most popular origin or destination for passengers at the station is Fenchurch Street.

The numbers of passenger entries and exits at the station have been recorded as follows:

Note: due to a change in methodology of counting entries/exits, the change from 2014–15 to 2015–16 may be overstated.

== Notes ==
==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2177253" start="0" end="12" title="Emerson Park railway station" label="Emerson Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q746021" start="18" end="35" title="London Overground" label="London Overground"/>
<link wikidata="Q1902832" start="51" end="63" title="Emerson Park" label="Emerson Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q1656021" start="81" end="91" title="Hornchurch" label="Hornchurch"/>
<link wikidata="Q215038" start="99" end="125" title="London Borough of Havering" label="London Borough of Havering"/>
<link wikidata="Q7363198" start="162" end="174" title="Liberty line" label="Liberty line"/>
<link wikidata="Q2299776" start="255" end="262" title="Romford railway station" label="Romford"/>
<link wikidata="Q801547" start="267" end="276" title="Upminster station" label="Upminster"/>
<link wikidata="Q1868882" start="316" end="352" title="London, Tilbury and Southend Railway" label="London, Tilbury and Southend Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q7363198" start="687" end="709" title="Romford–Upminster line" label="Romford–Upminster line"/>
<link wikidata="Q800753" start="856" end="879" title="Fenchurch Street railway station" label="London Fenchurch Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q1656021" start="1039" end="1049" title="Hornchurch" label="Hornchurch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1628404" start="1082" end="1094" title="Hornchurch railway station" label="LTSR station"/>
<link wikidata="Q1544279" start="1266" end="1287" title="Great Eastern Railway" label="Great Eastern Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q4997460" start="1328" end="1338" title="Gidea Park railway station" label="Gidea Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q7802076" start="1961" end="1968" title="Tilbury Riverside railway station" label="Tilbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q7502119" start="1978" end="1988" title="short turn" label="short runs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1932006" start="2589" end="2604" title="Midland Railway" label="Midland Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q629139" start="2642" end="2678" title="London, Midland and Scottish Railway" label="London, Midland and Scottish Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q605169" start="2734" end="2750" title="British Railways" label="British Railways"/>
<link wikidata="Q12859175" start="3456" end="3473" title="Network SouthEast" label="Network SouthEast"/>
<link wikidata="Q5453058" start="3733" end="3752" title="First Great Eastern" label="First Great Eastern"/>
<link wikidata="Q1967136" start="3772" end="3800" title="National Express East Anglia" label="National Express East Anglia"/>
<link wikidata="Q318679" start="3823" end="3837" title="Greater Anglia (train operating company)" label="Greater Anglia"/>
<link wikidata="Q249400" start="3857" end="3877" title="Oyster card (pay as you go) on National Rail" label="Oyster pay as you go"/>
<link wikidata="Q746021" start="3954" end="3971" title="London Overground" label="London Overground"/>
<link wikidata="Q7363198" start="4154" end="4166" title="Liberty line" label="Liberty line"/>
<link wikidata="Q2735706" start="4226" end="4239" title="side platform" label="side platform"/>
<link wikidata="Q249400" start="4692" end="4703" title="Oyster card" label="Oyster card"/>
<link wikidata="Q801547" start="4961" end="4970" title="Upminster station" label="Upminster"/>
<link wikidata="Q1628404" start="5222" end="5232" title="Hornchurch tube station" label="Hornchurch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1489665" start="5237" end="5253" title="Upminster Bridge tube station" label="Upminster Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q20075" start="5276" end="5294" title="London Underground" label="London Underground"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192411" start="5386" end="5398" title="London Buses" label="London Buses"/>
<link wikidata="Q6608454" start="5411" end="5414" title="London Buses route 256" label="256"/>
<link wikidata="Q6608454" start="5419" end="5422" title="London Buses route 370" label="370"/>
<link wikidata="Q41172241" start="5474" end="5492" title="List of stations in London fare zone 6" label="London fare zone 6"/>
<link wikidata="Q800753" start="5969" end="5985" title="Fenchurch Street railway station" label="Fenchurch Street"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="655688" wikidata="Q16248009" url="?curid=655688" title="International Academy of Digital Arts and Sciences">
<text>The International Academy of Digital Arts and Sciences (IADAS) is an organization that was founded in 1998 in New York City to recognize and acknowledge excellence in interactive content across emerging technologies. According to the organization, the academy was founded to help drive the creative, technical, and professional progress of the Internet and evolving forms of interactive and new media.

==History==
The academy selects the Nominees and Winners for the Webby Awards and the Lovie Awards, which have been described as the leading honors for websites and individual achievement in technology and creativity. The Webby Awards have been described as the &quot;Oscars of the Internet&quot; in the media, and popular television series such as the &quot;Masterpiece&quot; has won the Webby Awards in 2017. In 2021, the academy also introduced the Anthem Awards to honor the purpose and mission-driven work of people, companies and organizations worldwide.

According to the IADAS website, their purpose is:
* To recognize and acknowledge excellence in interactive content across emerging technologies 
* To connect a diverse group of luminaries to facilitate growth and development in the digital arts and sciences 
* To educate industry professionals and the public-at-large about what is relevant, making technology accessible and integrating it into the general culture 
In 2011, IADAS pinpointed five challenges the internet would face in the following five years in response to the exponential growth of the internet and its users. An article in Huffington Post described IADAS&#x27;s perspective on the five challenges stating that the organization believed that the next five years had to see improvements in privacy protection, copyright law, net neutrality, the open web and Internet security.&quot;

== Members ==
Membership in the academy is by invitation only. IADAS describes its members as &quot;Leading industry experts, evangelists, and visionaries working to advance the electronic medium&quot; and divides its members into four types - Associate, Executive, Europe, and Anthem.

Executive members include Richard Branson, Vint Cerf, Arianna Huffington, Julia Child, Luvvie Ajayi, among many others. 

Associate members include Sara Ackerman, Matthew Ball, Brian Edelman, Andrew Jackson, James Naleski, Mirko Pallera, among many others.

==Webby Awards==
Established in 1996 during the Web&#x27;s infancy, The Webbys is presented by the International Academy of Digital Arts and Sciences (IADAS)—a 2000+ member judging body. In 2006, The Webby Awards was described as the &quot;Internet&#x27;s Highest Honor&quot; by the New York Times following the 10th annual Webby Awards that was hosted in the heart of New York&#x27;s Financial District. This popular occasion had attendance from the executive director of UNICEF - Ann Veneman, Pop legend Prince among others.

Since then, the Webby awards have been honoring excellence on the internet in 8 major media types: Websites and Mobile Sites, Video, Advertising, Media &amp; PR, Social, Apps, dApps &amp; Software, Games, Podcasts, and Metaverse, Immersive &amp; Virtual. 

The Webby Awards presents two honors in every category—The Webby Award and The Webby People&#x27;s Voice Award. Members of the International Academy of Digital Arts and Sciences (IADAS) select the Nominees for both awards in each category, as well as the Winners of The Webby Awards. In the spirit of the open Web, The Webby People&#x27;s Voice is awarded by the voting public. Each year, The Webby People&#x27;s Voice Awards garners millions of votes from all over the world. In April 2022, NASA won 3 Webby Awards, 5 People&#x27;s Voice Awards with the awards being NASA&#x27;s 24th, 25th, and 26th Webby Awards since 1998.

==Lovie Awards==
In 2010, The Webby Awards launched its European sister award program, The Lovie Awards. The Lovie Awards recognizes the unique and resonant nature of the European Internet community – from Europe&#x27;s top web and creative networks and content publishers to cultural and political organizations and individual creators. The Lovie Awards is the European counterpart to the Webby&#x27;s, which honor contributions and contributors to the internet and digital media. The jury accepts work in many languages, including English, French, Spanish, Italian and German 

The Lovie award winners get press coverage from leading media such as the Huffington Post, BBC, The Sunday Times among many others. The 2022 winner list included social media fame Khaby Lame and Jaap Haartsen among others.

== Anthem Awards ==
In 2021, The Webby Awards launched the brand new Anthem Awards to celebrate purpose &amp; mission-driven work from people, companies and organizations worldwide, across seven core purposes: Diversity, Equity &amp; Inclusion; Education, Art &amp; Culture; Health; Human &amp; Civil Rights; Humanitarian Action &amp; Services; Responsible Technology; and Sustainability, Environment &amp; Climate.

The Inaugural Anthem Awards presented Special Achievement Awards to a group of individuals who have dedicated their lives, platform or work to bring attention to some of the most important issues of our time. This list included members such as Jane Goodall, professional tennis player Naomi Osaka, comedian and filmmaker Adam McKay and American Soccer player Megan Rapinoe.

== Notes==
== External links ==
* Academy&#x27;s website</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q16248009" start="4" end="54" title="International Academy of Digital Arts and Sciences" label="International Academy of Digital Arts and Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q16248009" start="56" end="61" title="International Academy of Digital Arts and Sciences" label="IADAS"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="110" end="123" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q75" start="344" end="352" title="Internet" label="Internet"/>
<link wikidata="Q683794" start="391" end="400" title="new media" label="new media"/>
<link wikidata="Q1411891" start="468" end="480" title="Webby Awards" label="Webby Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q16248009" start="489" end="501" title="Lovie Awards" label="Lovie Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q3297878" start="762" end="773" title="Masterpiece (TV series)" label="Masterpiece"/>
<link wikidata="Q18049522" start="1559" end="1574" title="HuffPost" label="Huffington Post"/>
<link wikidata="Q25052250" start="1724" end="1742" title="privacy protection" label="privacy protection"/>
<link wikidata="Q1297822" start="1744" end="1757" title="Copyright" label="copyright law"/>
<link wikidata="Q853467" start="1759" end="1773" title="net neutrality" label="net neutrality"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070427" start="1792" end="1809" title="Internet security" label="Internet security"/>
<link wikidata="Q194419" start="2131" end="2146" title="Richard Branson" label="Richard Branson"/>
<link wikidata="Q92743" start="2148" end="2157" title="Vint Cerf" label="Vint Cerf"/>
<link wikidata="Q233397" start="2159" end="2177" title="Arianna Huffington" label="Arianna Huffington"/>
<link wikidata="Q214477" start="2179" end="2190" title="Julia Child" label="Julia Child"/>
<link wikidata="Q27494203" start="2192" end="2204" title="Luvvie Ajayi" label="Luvvie Ajayi"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="2642" end="2660" title="the New York Times" label="the New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050048" start="2732" end="2766" title="Financial District, Manhattan" label="New York&amp;#x27;s Financial District"/>
<link wikidata="Q740308" start="2836" end="2842" title="UNICEF" label="UNICEF"/>
<link wikidata="Q292936" start="2845" end="2856" title="Ann Veneman" label="Ann Veneman"/>
<link wikidata="Q7542" start="2869" end="2875" title="Prince (musician)" label="Prince"/>
<link wikidata="Q18049522" start="4429" end="4444" title="HuffPost" label="Huffington Post"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="4446" end="4449" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q221986" start="4451" end="4467" title="The Sunday Times" label="The Sunday Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q106839925" start="4535" end="4545" title="Khaby Lame" label="Khaby Lame"/>
<link wikidata="Q2545457" start="4550" end="4563" title="Jaap Haartsen" label="Jaap Haartsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q184746" start="5240" end="5252" title="Jane Goodall" label="Jane Goodall"/>
<link wikidata="Q17466583" start="5281" end="5292" title="Naomi Osaka" label="Naomi Osaka"/>
<link wikidata="Q350405" start="5317" end="5327" title="Adam McKay" label="Adam McKay"/>
<link wikidata="Q260725" start="5355" end="5368" title="Megan Rapinoe" label="Megan Rapinoe"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="655694" wikidata="Q911952" url="?curid=655694" title="NX bit">
<text>The NX bit (no-execute) is a technology used in CPUs to segregate areas of a virtual address space to store either data or processor instructions. An operating system with support for the NX bit may mark certain areas of an address space as non-executable. The processor will then refuse to execute any code residing in these areas of the address space. The general technique, known as executable space protection, also called Write XOR Execute, is used to prevent certain types of malicious software from taking over computers by inserting their code into another program&#x27;s data storage area and running their own code from within this section; one class of such attacks is known as the buffer overflow attack.

The term NX bit originated with Advanced Micro Devices (AMD), as a marketing term. Intel markets the feature as the XD bit (execute disable). The MIPS architecture refers to the feature as XI bit (execute inhibit). The ARM architecture refers to the feature, which was introduced in ARMv6, as XN (execute never). The term &quot;NX bit&quot; itself is sometimes used to describe similar technologies in other processors.

==Architecture support==
=== x86 ===
x86 processors, since the 80286, included a similar capability implemented at the segment level. However, almost all operating systems for the 80386 and later x86 processors implement the flat memory model, so they cannot use this capability. There was no &quot;Executable&quot; flag in the page table entry (page descriptor) in those processors, until, to make this capability available to operating systems using the flat memory model, AMD added a &quot;no-execute&quot; or NX bit to the page table entry in its AMD64 architecture, providing a mechanism that can control execution per page rather than per whole segment.

Intel implemented a similar feature in its Itanium (&quot;Merced&quot;) processor—having IA-64 architecture—in 2001, but did not bring it to the more popular x86 processor families (Pentium, Celeron, Xeon, etc.). In the x86 architecture it was first implemented by AMD, as the &quot;NX bit&quot;, for use by its AMD64 line of processors, such as the Athlon 64 and Opteron.

After AMD&#x27;s decision to include this functionality in its AMD64 instruction set, Intel implemented the similar XD bit feature in x86 processors beginning with the Pentium 4 processors based on later iterations of the Prescott core. The NX bit specifically refers to bit number 63 (i.e. the most significant bit) of a 64-bit entry in the page table. If this bit is set to 0, then code can be executed from that page; if set to 1, code cannot be executed from that page, and anything residing there is assumed to be data. It is only available with the long mode (64-bit mode) or legacy Physical Address Extension (PAE) page-table formats, but not x86&#x27;s original 32-bit page table format because page table entries in that format lack the 64th bit used to disable and enable execution.

Windows XP SP2 and later support Data Execution Prevention (DEP).

===ARM===
In ARMv6, a new page table entry format was introduced; it includes an &quot;execute never&quot; bit. For ARMv8-A, VMSAv8-64 block and page descriptors, and VMSAv8-32 long-descriptor block and page descriptors, for stage 1 translations have &quot;execute never&quot; bits for both privileged and unprivileged modes, and block and page descriptors for stage 2 translations have a single &quot;execute never&quot; bit (two bits due to ARMv8.2-TTS2UXN feature); VMSAv8-32 short-descriptor translation table descriptors at level 1 have &quot;execute never&quot; bits for both privileged and unprivileged mode and at level 2 have a single &quot;execute never&quot; bit.

===Alpha===
As of the Fourth Edition of the Alpha Architecture manual, DEC (now HP) Alpha has a Fault on Execute bit in page table entries with the OpenVMS, Tru64 UNIX, and Alpha Linux PALcode.

===SPARC===
The SPARC Reference MMU for Sun SPARC version 8 has permission values of Read Only, Read/Write, Read/Execute, and Read/Write/Execute in page table entries, although not all SPARC processors have a SPARC Reference MMU.

A SPARC version 9 MMU may provide, but is not required to provide, any combination of read/write/execute permissions. A Translation Table Entry in a Translation Storage Buffer in Oracle SPARC Architecture 2011, Draft D1.0.0 has separate Executable and Writable bits.

===PowerPC/Power ISA===
Page table entries for IBM PowerPC&#x27;s hashed page tables have a no-execute page bit. Page table entries for radix-tree page tables in the Power ISA have separate permission bits granting read/write and execute access.

===PA-RISC===
Translation lookaside buffer (TLB) entries and page table entries in PA-RISC 1.1 and PA-RISC 2.0 support read-only, read/write, read/execute, and read/write/execute pages.

===Itanium===
TLB entries in Itanium support read-only, read/write, read/execute, and read/write/execute pages.

===z/Architecture===
As of the twelfth edition of the z/Architecture Principles of Operation, z/Architecture processors may support the Instruction-Execution Protection facility, which adds a bit in page table entries that controls whether instructions from a given region, segment, or page can be executed.

== See also ==

* Executable space protection

== References ==
== External links ==
* AMD, Intel put antivirus tech into chips
* Microsoft Interviewed on Trustworthy Computing and NX
* LKML NX Announcement
* &quot;Changes to Functionality in Microsoft Windows XP Service Pack 2&quot; Part 3: Memory Protection Technologies
* Microsoft Security Developer Center: Windows XP SP 2: Execution Protection</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q911952" start="4" end="10" title="NX bit" label="NX bit"/>
<link wikidata="Q5300" start="48" end="51" title="CPU" label="CPU"/>
<link wikidata="Q6451721" start="77" end="98" title="virtual address space" label="virtual address space"/>
<link wikidata="Q9135" start="150" end="166" title="operating system" label="operating system"/>
<link wikidata="Q3407921" start="386" end="413" title="executable space protection" label="executable space protection"/>
<link wikidata="Q3564885" start="427" end="444" title="Write XOR Execute" label="Write XOR Execute"/>
<link wikidata="Q19423" start="693" end="708" title="buffer overflow" label="buffer overflow"/>
<link wikidata="Q911952" start="727" end="733" title="NX bit" label="NX bit"/>
<link wikidata="Q128896" start="750" end="772" title="Advanced Micro Devices" label="Advanced Micro Devices"/>
<link wikidata="Q248" start="801" end="806" title="Intel" label="Intel"/>
<link wikidata="Q911952" start="834" end="840" title="NX bit" label="XD bit"/>
<link wikidata="Q527464" start="864" end="881" title="MIPS architecture" label="MIPS architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q911952" start="907" end="913" title="NX bit" label="XI bit"/>
<link wikidata="Q16980" start="937" end="953" title="ARM architecture" label="ARM architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q16980" start="1001" end="1006" title="ARMv6" label="ARMv6"/>
<link wikidata="Q911952" start="1011" end="1013" title="NX bit" label="XN"/>
<link wikidata="Q182933" start="1176" end="1179" title="x86" label="x86"/>
<link wikidata="Q622888" start="1202" end="1207" title="80286" label="80286"/>
<link wikidata="Q796829" start="1258" end="1265" title="memory segment" label="segment"/>
<link wikidata="Q237794" start="1319" end="1324" title="80386" label="80386"/>
<link wikidata="Q905488" start="1364" end="1381" title="flat memory model" label="flat memory model"/>
<link wikidata="Q272629" start="1690" end="1695" title="AMD64" label="AMD64"/>
<link wikidata="Q361698" start="1763" end="1767" title="page (computer memory)" label="page"/>
<link wikidata="Q390389" start="1843" end="1850" title="Itanium" label="Itanium"/>
<link wikidata="Q916994" start="1889" end="1894" title="IA-64" label="IA-64"/>
<link wikidata="Q214314" start="1982" end="1989" title="Pentium" label="Pentium"/>
<link wikidata="Q271868" start="1991" end="1998" title="Celeron" label="Celeron"/>
<link wikidata="Q656154" start="2000" end="2004" title="Xeon" label="Xeon"/>
<link wikidata="Q272629" start="2112" end="2117" title="AMD64" label="AMD64"/>
<link wikidata="Q294894" start="2150" end="2159" title="Athlon 64" label="Athlon 64"/>
<link wikidata="Q295060" start="2164" end="2171" title="Opteron" label="Opteron"/>
<link wikidata="Q237757" start="2342" end="2351" title="Pentium 4" label="Pentium 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195972" start="2516" end="2526" title="page table" label="page table"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062251" start="2763" end="2789" title="Physical Address Extension" label="Physical Address Extension"/>
<link wikidata="Q3407921" start="3001" end="3026" title="Data Execution Prevention" label="Data Execution Prevention"/>
<link wikidata="Q16980" start="3048" end="3053" title="ARMv6" label="ARMv6"/>
<link wikidata="Q16980" start="3151" end="3158" title="ARMv8-A" label="ARMv8-A"/>
<link wikidata="Q690079" start="3782" end="3785" title="Digital Equipment Corporation" label="DEC"/>
<link wikidata="Q858065" start="3795" end="3800" title="DEC Alpha" label="Alpha"/>
<link wikidata="Q479882" start="3859" end="3866" title="OpenVMS" label="OpenVMS"/>
<link wikidata="Q204214" start="3868" end="3878" title="Tru64 UNIX" label="Tru64 UNIX"/>
<link wikidata="Q4046152" start="3896" end="3903" title="PALcode" label="PALcode"/>
<link wikidata="Q14647" start="3946" end="3949" title="Sun Microsystems" label="Sun"/>
<link wikidata="Q273190" start="3950" end="3955" title="SPARC" label="SPARC"/>
<link wikidata="Q37156" start="4452" end="4455" title="IBM" label="IBM"/>
<link wikidata="Q209860" start="4456" end="4463" title="PowerPC" label="PowerPC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071403" start="4666" end="4694" title="Translation lookaside buffer" label="Translation lookaside buffer"/>
<link wikidata="Q113585" start="4735" end="4742" title="PA-RISC" label="PA-RISC"/>
<link wikidata="Q390389" start="4868" end="4875" title="Itanium" label="Itanium"/>
<link wikidata="Q8062893" start="5006" end="5020" title="z/Architecture" label="z/Architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q3407921" start="5279" end="5306" title="Executable space protection" label="Executable space protection"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="655695" wikidata="Q1347759" url="?curid=655695" title="Atira asteroid">
<text>Atira asteroids or Apohele asteroids, also known as interior-Earth objects (IEOs), are Near-Earth objects whose orbits are entirely confined within Earth&#x27;s orbit; that is, their orbit has an aphelion (farthest point from the Sun) smaller than Earth&#x27;s perihelion (nearest point to the Sun), which is 0.983 astronomical units (AU). Atira asteroids are by far the least numerous group of near-Earth objects, compared to the more populous Aten, Apollo and Amor asteroids.

==History==
===Naming===
There is no official name for the class commonly referred as Atira asteroids. The term &quot;Apohele asteroids&quot; was proposed by the discoverers of , after the Hawaiian word for orbit, from &quot;apo&quot; &#x27;circle&#x27; and &quot;hele&quot; &#x27;to go&#x27;. This was suggested partly because of its similarity to the words &quot;aphelion (apoapsis)&quot; and &quot;helios&quot;. Other authors adopted the designation &quot;Inner Earth Objects&quot; (IEOs). Following the general practice to name a new class of asteroids for the first recognized member of that class, which in this case was 163693 Atira, the designation of &quot;Atira asteroids&quot; was largely adopted by the scientific community, including by NASA.

===Discovery and observation===
Their location inside the Earth&#x27;s orbit makes Atiras very difficult to observe, as from Earth&#x27;s perspective they are close to the Sun and therefore &#x27;drowned out&#x27; by the Sun&#x27;s overpowering light. This means that Atiras can usually only be seen during twilight. The first documented twilight searches for asteroids inside Earth&#x27;s orbit were performed by astronomer Robert Trumpler over the early 20th century, but he failed to find any.

The first confirmed Atira asteroid was 163693 Atira in 2003, discovered by the Lincoln Laboratory Near Earth Asteroid Research Team. , there are 34 known Atiras, two of which are named, nine of which have received a numbered designation, and seven of which are potentially hazardous objects. An additional 127 objects have aphelia smaller than Earth&#x27;s aphelion (Q = 1.017 AU).

==Origins==
Most Atira asteroids originated in the asteroid belt and were driven to their current locations as a result of gravitational perturbation, as well as other causes such as the Yarkovsky effect. A number of known Atiras could be fragments or former moons of larger Atiras as they exhibit an unusually high level of orbital correlation.

==Orbits==

Atiras do not cross Earth&#x27;s orbit and are not immediate impact event threats, but their orbits may be perturbed outward by a close approach to either Mercury or Venus and become Earth-crossing asteroids in the future. The dynamics of many Atira asteroids resemble the one induced by the Kozai-Lidov mechanism, which contributes to enhanced long-term orbital stability, since there is no libration of the perihelion.

==Exploration==
A 2017 study published in the journal &quot;Advances in Space Research&quot; proposed a low-cost space probe be sent to study Atira asteroids, citing the difficulty in observing the group from Earth as a reason to undertake the mission. The study proposed that the mission would be powered by spacecraft electric propulsion and would follow a path designed to flyby as many Atira asteroids as possible. The probe would also attempt to discover new NEO&#x27;s that may pose a threat to Earth.

==Related asteroid groups==
===ꞌAylóꞌchaxnim asteroids===
ꞌAylóꞌchaxnim asteroids, which had been provisionally nicknamed &quot;Vatira&quot; asteroids before the first was discovered, are a subclass of Atiras that orbit entirely interior to the orbit of Venus, aka 0.718 AU. Despite their orbits placing them at a significant distance from Earth, they are still classified as near-Earth objects. Observations suggest that ꞌAylóꞌchaxnim asteroids frequently have their orbits altered into Atira asteroids and vice versa.

First formally theorised to exist by William F. Bottke and Gianluca Masi in 2002 and 2003, the first and to date only such asteroid found is 594913 ꞌAylóꞌchaxnim, which was discovered on 4 January 2020 by the Zwicky Transient Facility. As the archetype, it subsequently gave its name to the class. It has an aphelion of only 0.656 AU, the smallest of any known asteroid.

===Vulcanoids===

No asteroids have yet been discovered to orbit entirely inside the orbit of Mercury (q = 0.307 AU). Such hypothetical asteroids would likely be termed vulcanoids, although the term often refers to asteroids which more specifically have remained in the intra-Mercurian region over the age of the solar system.

== Members==
The following table lists the known and suspected Atiras . 594913 ꞌAylóꞌchaxnim, due to its unique classification, has been highlighted in pink. The interior planets Mercury and Venus have been included for comparison as grey rows.
:(A) All diameter estimates are based on an assumed albedo of 0.14 (except 163693 Atira, for which the size has been directly measured)
:(B) Binary asteroid

== See also ==
* List of minor planet groups
* List of minor planets

==Notes==
== References ==

== External links ==
* List Of Aten Minor Planets, Minor Planet Center</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1347759" start="0" end="15" title="Atira asteroid" label="Atira asteroids"/>
<link wikidata="Q1347759" start="19" end="36" title="Atira asteroid" label="Apohele asteroids"/>
<link wikidata="Q1347759" start="52" end="74" title="Atira asteroid" label="interior-Earth objects"/>
<link wikidata="Q1347759" start="76" end="80" title="Atira asteroid" label="IEOs"/>
<link wikidata="Q265392" start="87" end="105" title="Near-Earth objects" label="Near-Earth objects"/>
<link wikidata="Q2" start="148" end="153" title="Earth" label="Earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q83481" start="196" end="204" title="aphelion" label="aphelion"/>
<link wikidata="Q83481" start="261" end="271" title="perihelion" label="perihelion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1811" start="315" end="332" title="astronomical unit" label="astronomical unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q265392" start="395" end="412" title="near-Earth object" label="near-Earth object"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048390" start="445" end="449" title="Aten asteroid" label="Aten"/>
<link wikidata="Q207391" start="451" end="457" title="Apollo asteroid" label="Apollo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048303" start="462" end="466" title="Amor asteroid" label="Amor"/>
<link wikidata="Q33569" start="668" end="676" title="Hawaiian language" label="Hawaiian"/>
<link wikidata="Q4130" start="686" end="691" title="orbit" label="orbit"/>
<link wikidata="Q141774" start="1106" end="1118" title="163693 Atira" label="163693 Atira"/>
<link wikidata="Q23548" start="1229" end="1233" title="NASA" label="NASA"/>
<link wikidata="Q525" start="1408" end="1411" title="Sun" label="Sun"/>
<link wikidata="Q164160" start="1543" end="1551" title="twilight" label="twilight"/>
<link wikidata="Q123963" start="1661" end="1676" title="Robert Trumpler" label="Robert Trumpler"/>
<link wikidata="Q817125" start="1950" end="1970" title="minor planet designation" label="numbered designation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2014814" start="1995" end="2023" title="potentially hazardous object" label="potentially hazardous object"/>
<link wikidata="Q2179" start="2168" end="2181" title="asteroid belt" label="asteroid belt"/>
<link wikidata="Q803623" start="2240" end="2266" title="Perturbation (astronomy)" label="gravitational perturbation"/>
<link wikidata="Q139771" start="2304" end="2320" title="Yarkovsky effect" label="Yarkovsky effect"/>
<link wikidata="Q463796" start="2537" end="2549" title="impact event" label="impact event"/>
<link wikidata="Q803623" start="2583" end="2592" title="Perturbation (astronomy)" label="perturbed"/>
<link wikidata="Q938901" start="2768" end="2789" title="Kozai mechanism" label="Kozai-Lidov mechanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q218673" start="2868" end="2877" title="libration" label="libration"/>
<link wikidata="Q2493574" start="2958" end="2984" title="Advances in Space Research" label="Advances in Space Research"/>
<link wikidata="Q1528166" start="3011" end="3022" title="space probe" label="space probe"/>
<link wikidata="Q648588" start="3207" end="3237" title="spacecraft electric propulsion" label="spacecraft electric propulsion"/>
<link wikidata="Q60323459" start="3274" end="3279" title="Flyby (spaceflight)" label="flyby"/>
<link wikidata="Q313" start="3661" end="3666" title="Venus" label="Venus"/>
<link wikidata="Q81653535" start="4069" end="4089" title="594913 ꞌAylóꞌchaxnim" label="594913 ꞌAylóꞌchaxnim"/>
<link wikidata="Q43401707" start="4137" end="4162" title="Zwicky Transient Facility" label="Zwicky Transient Facility"/>
<link wikidata="Q308" start="4394" end="4401" title="Mercury (planet)" label="Mercury"/>
<link wikidata="Q830162" start="4469" end="4479" title="vulcanoid asteroid" label="vulcanoids"/>
<link wikidata="Q337768" start="4790" end="4806" title="Inferior and superior planets" label="interior planets"/>
<link wikidata="Q2832068" start="4925" end="4931" title="Geometric albedo" label="albedo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2332332" start="5048" end="5075" title="List of minor planet groups" label="List of minor planet groups"/>
<link wikidata="Q37651" start="5078" end="5099" title="List of minor planets" label="List of minor planets"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="655696" wikidata="Q137097" url="?curid=655696" title="Alevism">
<text>Alevism (; ; ) is a syncretic Islamic tradition, whose adherents follow the mystical Islamic teachings of Haji Bektash Veli, who taught the teachings of the Twelve Imams, whilst incorporating some traditions from Shamanism. Differing from Sunni Islam and Usuli Twelver Shia Islam, Alevis have no binding religious dogmas, and teachings are passed on by a spiritual leader as with Sufi orders. They acknowledge the six articles of faith of Islam, but may differ regarding their interpretation. They have faced significant institutional stigma from the Ottoman and later Turkish state and academia, being described as heterodox to contrast them with the &quot;orthodox&quot; Sunni majority.

The term “Alevi-Bektashi” is currently a widely and frequently used expression in the religious discourse of Turkey as an umbrella term for the two religious groups of Alevism and Bektashism. Adherents of Alevism are found primarily in Turkey and estimates of the percentage of Turkey&#x27;s population that are Alevi include between 4% and 15%.

== Beliefs ==
According to scholar Soner Çağaptay, Alevism is a &quot;relatively unstructured interpretation of Islam&quot;. Journalist Patrick Kingsley states that for some self-described Alevi, their religion is &quot;simply a cultural identity, rather than a form of worship&quot;.

The Alevi beliefs among Turkish Alevis and Kurdish Alevis diverge as Kurdish Alevis put more emphasis on Pir Sultan Abdal than Haji Bektash Veli, and Kurdish Alevism is rooted more in nature veneration.

=== God ===

In Alevi cosmology, God is also called Al-Haqq (the Truth) or referred to as Allah. God created life, so the created world can reflect His Being. Alevis believe in the unity of Allah, Muhammad, and Ali, but this is not a trinity composed of God and the historical figures of Muhammad and Ali. Rather, Muhammad and Ali are representations of Allah&#x27;s light (and not of Allah himself), being neither independent from God, nor separate characteristics of Him.

In Alevi writings are many references to the unity of Muhammad and Ali, such as:

=== Spirits and afterlife ===
Alevis believe in the immortality of the soul, the literal existence of supernatural beings, including good angels (&quot;melekler&quot;) and bad angels (&quot;şeytanlar&quot;), bad ones as encourager of human&#x27;s evil desires (&quot;nefs&quot;), and jinn (&quot;cinler&quot;), as well as the evil eye.

Angels feature in Alevi cosmogony. Although there is no fixed creation narrative among Alevis, it is generally accepted that God created five archangels, who have been invited to the chamber of God. Inside they found a light representing the light of Muhammad and Ali. A recount of the Quranic story, one of the archangels refused to prostrate before the light, arguing, that the light is a created body just like him and therefore inappropriate to worship. He remains at God&#x27;s service, but rejects the final test and turns back to darkness. From this primordial decline, the devil&#x27;s enmity towards Adam emerged. (The archangels constitute of the same four archangels as within orthodox Islam. The fifth archangel namely &quot;Azâzîl&quot; fell from grace, thus not included among the canonical archangels apart from this story).

Another story features the archangel Gabriel (&quot;Cebrail&quot;), who is asked by God, who they are. Gabriel answers: &quot;I am I and you are you&quot;. Gabriel gets punished for his haughty answer and is sent away, until Ali reveals a secret to him. When God asks him again, he answers: &quot;You are the creator and I am your creation&quot;. Afterwards, Gabriel was accepted and introduced to Muhammad and Ali.

=== Scriptures and prophets ===
Alevis acknowledge the four revealed scriptures also recognised in Islam: the Tawrat (Torah), the Zabur (Psalms), the Injil (Gospel), and the Quran. Additionally, Alevis are not opposed to looking to other religious books outside the four major ones as sources for their beliefs including Hadiths, Nahjul Balagha and Buyruks. Alevism also acknowledges the Islamic prophet Mohammed. Unlike the vast majority of Muslims, Alevis do not regard interpretations of the Quran today as binding or infallible, since the true meaning of the Quran is considered to be taken as a secret by Ali and must be taught by a teacher, who transmits the teachings of Ali (&quot;Buyruk&quot;) to his disciple.

=== Twelve Imams ===
The Twelve Imams are part of another common Alevi belief. Each Imam represents a different aspect of the world. They are realized as twelve services or &quot;On İki Hizmet&quot; which are performed by members of the Alevi community. Each Imam is believed to be a reflection of Ali ibn Abu Talib, the first Imam of the Shi&#x27;ites, and there are references to the &quot;First Ali&quot; &quot;(Birinci Ali)&quot;, Imam Hasan the &quot;Second &#x27;Ali&quot; &quot;(İkinci Ali)&quot;, and so on up to the &quot;Twelfth &#x27;Ali&quot; &quot;(Onikinci Ali)&quot;, Imam Mehdi. The Twelfth Imam is hidden and represents the Messianic Age.

=== Plurality ===
The plurality in nature is attributed to the infinite potential energy of Kull-i Nafs when it takes corporeal form as it descends into being from Allah. During the Cem ceremony, the cantor or &quot;aşık&quot; sings:

:&quot;All of us alive or lifeless are from one, this is ineffable, Sultan.
:For to love and to fall in love has been my fate from time immemorial.&quot;

This is sung as a reminder that the reason for creation is love, so that the followers may know themselves and each other and that they may love that which they know.

=== Creed and jurisprudence ===
Sources differ on how important formal doctrine is among contemporary Alevi. According to scholar Russell Powell, there is a tradition of informal &quot;Dede&quot; courts within the Alevi society, but regarding Islamic jurisprudence or &quot;fiqh&quot; there has been &quot;little scholarship on Alevi influences&quot; in it. &quot;Alevism&quot; has a unique belief system tracing back to Kaysanites and Khurramites.

== Practices ==

The Alevi spiritual path (&quot;yol&quot;) is commonly understood to take place through four major life-stages, or &quot;gates&quot;.
These may be further subdivided into &quot;four gates, forty levels&quot; (&quot;Dört Kapı Kırk Makam&quot;). The first gate (religious law) is considered elementary (and this may be perceived as subtle criticism of other Muslim traditions).

The following are major crimes that cause an Alevi to be declared &quot;düşkün&quot; (shunned):
* killing a person
* committing adultery
* divorcing one&#x27;s wife without a just reason
* stealing
* backbiting/gossiping

Most Alevi activity takes place in the context of the second gate &quot;(spiritual brotherhood)&quot;, during which one submits to a living spiritual guide &quot;(dede, pir, mürşid)&quot;. The existence of the third and fourth gates is mostly theoretical, though some older Alevis have apparently received initiation into the third.

=== Dede ===

A Dede (literally meaning grandfather) is a traditional leader that is claimed to be from the lineage of Muhammad that performs ritual baptisms for newborns, officiates at funerals, and organises weekly gatherings at cemevis.

=== Cem and Cemevi ===

Alevi religious, cultural and other social activities take place in assembly houses (&quot;Cemevi&quot;). The ceremony&#x27;s prototype is the Muhammad&#x27;s nocturnal ascent into heaven, where he beheld a gathering of forty saints (&quot;Kırklar Meclisi&quot;), and the Divine Reality made manifest in their leader, Ali.

The Cem ceremony features music, singing, and dancing (&quot;Samāh&quot;) in which both women and men participate. Rituals are performed in Turkish, Zazaki, Kurmanji and other local languages.

;Bağlama

During the &quot;Cem ceremony&quot; the &quot;Âşık&quot; plays the Bağlama whilst singing spiritual songs, some of which are centuries old and well known amongst Alevis. Every song, called a &quot;Nefes,&quot; has spiritual meaning and aims to teach the participants important lessons.

;Samāh
A family of ritual dances characterized by turning and swirling, is an inseparable part of any &quot;cem&quot;. &quot;Samāh&quot; is performed by men and women together, to the accompaniment of the Bağlama. The dances symbolise (for example) the revolution of the planets around the Sun (by man and woman turning in circles), and the putting off of one&#x27;s self and uniting with God.
;Görgü Cemi
The Rite of Integration &quot;(görgü cemi)&quot; is a complex ritual occasion in which a variety of tasks are allotted to incumbents bound together by extrafamilial brotherhood (&quot;müsahiplik&quot;), who undertake a dramatisation of unity and integration under the direction of the spiritual leader (&quot;dede&quot;).

;Dem
The love of the creator for the created and vice versa is symbolised in the &quot;Cem ceremony&quot; by the use of fruit juice and/or red wine &quot;[Dem]&quot; which represents the intoxication of the lover in the beloved. During the ceremony &quot;Dem&quot; is one of the twelve duties of the participants. (see above)

;Sohbet
At the closing of the cem ceremony the Dede who leads the ceremony engages the participants in a discussion (&quot;chat&quot;), this discussion is called a &quot;sohbet&quot;.

=== Twelve services ===
There are twelve services () performed by the twelve ministers of the cem.
# Dede: This is the leader of the Cem who represents Muhammad and Ali. The Dede receives confession from the attendees at the beginning of the ceremony. He also leads funerals, Müsahiplik, marriage ceremonies and circumcisions. The status of Dede is hereditary and he must be a descendant of Ali and Fatima.
# Rehber: This position represents Husayn. The Rehber is a guide to the faithful and works closely with the Dede in the community.
# Gözcü: This position represents Abu Dharr al-Ghifari. S/he is the assistant to the Rehber. S/he is the Cem keeper responsible for keeping the faithful calm.
# Çerağcı: This position represents Jabir ibn Abd-Allah and s/he is the light-keeper responsible for maintaining the light traditionally given by a lamp or candles.
# Zakir: This position represents Bilal ibn al-Harith. S/he plays the bağlama and recites songs and prayers.
# Süpürgeci: This position represents Salman the Persian. S/he is responsible for cleaning the Cemevi hall and symbolically sweeping the carpets during the Cem.
# Meydancı: This position represents Hudhayfah ibn al-Yaman.
# Niyazcı: this position represents Muhammad ibn Maslamah. S/he is responsible for distributing the sacred meal.
# İbrikçi: this position represents Kamber. S/he is responsible for washing the hands of the attendees.
# Kapıcı: this position represents Ghulam Kaysan. S/he is responsible for calling the faithful to the Cem.
# Peyikçi: this position represents Amri Ayyari.
# Sakacı: represents Ammar ibn Yasir. Responsible for the distribution of water, sherbet &quot;(sharbat)&quot;, milk etc..

=== Festivals ===
Alevis celebrate and commemorate the birth of Ali, his wedding with Fatima, the rescue of Yusuf from the well, and the creation of the world on this day. Various cem ceremonies and special programs are held.

==== Mourning of Muharram ====

The Muslim month of Muharram begins 20 days after Eid ul-Adha (). Alevis observe a fast for the first twelve days, known as the Mourning of Muharram (, , or ; or ). This culminates in the festival of Ashura (), which commemorates the martyrdom of Husayn at Karbala. The fast is broken with a special dish (also called &quot;aşure&quot;) prepared from a variety (often twelve) of fruits, nuts, and grains. Many events are associated with this celebration, including the salvation of Husayn&#x27;s son Ali ibn Husayn from the massacre at Karbala, thus allowing the bloodline of the family of Muhammad to continue.

==== Hıdırellez ====
Hıdırellez honors the mysterious figure Khidr () who is sometimes identified with Elijah (&quot;Ilyas&quot;), and is said to have drunk of the water of life. Some hold that Khidr comes to the rescue of those in distress on land, while Elijah helps those at sea; and that they meet at a rose tree in the evening of every 6 May. The festival is also celebrated in parts of the Balkans by the name of &quot;Erdelez,&quot; where it falls on the same day as George&#x27;s Day in Spring or Saint George&#x27;s Day.

Khidr is also honored with a three-day fast in mid-February called &quot;Hızır Orucu&quot;. In addition to avoiding any sort of comfort or enjoyment, Alevis also abstain from food and water for the entire day, though they do drink liquids other than water during the evening.

Note that the dates of the Khidr holidays can differ among Alevis, most of whom use a lunar calendar, but some a solar calendar.

==== Müsahiplik ====

&quot;Müsahiplik&quot; (roughly, &quot;Companionship&quot;) is a covenant relationship between two men of the same age, preferably along with their wives. In a ceremony in the presence of a dede the partners make a lifelong commitment to care for the spiritual, emotional, and physical needs of each other and their children. The ties between couples who have made this commitment is at least as strong as it is for blood relatives, so much so that müsahiplik is often called spiritual brotherhood &quot;(manevi kardeşlik).&quot; The children of covenanted couples may not marry.

Krisztina Kehl-Bodrogi reports that the identify &quot;müsahiplik&quot; with the first gate &quot;(şeriat),&quot; since they regard it as a precondition for the second &quot;(tarikat).&quot; Those who attain to the third gate &quot;(marifat&quot;, &quot;gnosis&quot;) must have been in a &quot;müsahiplik&quot; relationship for at least twelve years. Entry into the third gate dissolves the &quot;müsahiplik&quot; relationship (which otherwise persists unto death), in a ceremony called &quot;Öz Verme Âyini&quot; (&quot;ceremony of giving up the self&quot;).

The value corresponding to the second gate (and necessary to enter the third) is &quot;âşinalık&quot; (&quot;intimacy,&quot; perhaps with God). Its counterpart for the third gate is called &quot;peşinelik&quot;; for the fourth gate &quot;(hâkikat&quot;, Ultimate Truth), &quot;cıngıldaşlık&quot; or &quot;cengildeşlik&quot; (translations uncertain).

=== Folk practices ===

Many folk practices may be identified, though few of them are specific to the Alevis. In this connection, scholar Martin van Bruinessen notes a sign from Turkey&#x27;s Ministry of Religion, attached to Istanbul&#x27;s shrine of Eyüp Sultan, which presents...a long list of ‘superstitious’ practices that are emphatically declared to be non-Islamic and objectionable, such as lighting candles or placing ‘wishing stones’ on the tomb, tying pieces of cloth to the shrine or to the trees in front of it, throwing money on the tomb, asking the dead directly for help, circling seven times around the trees in the courtyard or pressing one’s face against the walls of the türbe in the hope of a supernatural cure, tying beads to the shrine and expecting supernatural support from them, sacrificing roosters or turkeys as a vow to the shrine. The list is probably an inventory of common local practices the authorities wish to prevent from re-emerging.Other, similar practices include kissing door frames of holy rooms; not stepping on the threshold of holy buildings; seeking prayers from reputed healers; and making &quot;lokma&quot; and sharing it with others. Also, Ashure is made and shared with friends and family during the month of Muharram in which the Day of Ashure takes place.

==== Ziyarat to sacred places ====

Performing ziyarat and du&#x27;a at the tombs of Alevi-Bektashi saints or pirs is quite common. Some of the most frequently visited sites are the shrines of Şahkulu and Karacaahmet (both in Istanbul), Abdal Musa (Antalya), Seyyid Battal Gazi Complex (Eskişehir), Hamza Baba (İzmir), Hasandede (Kırıkkale).

In contrast with the traditional secrecy of the &quot;Cem ceremony&quot; ritual, the events at these cultural centers and sites are open to the public. In the case of the Hacibektaş celebration, since 1990 the activities there have been taken over by Turkey&#x27;s Ministry of Culture in the interest of promoting tourism and Turkish patriotism rather than Alevi spirituality. The annual celebrations held at Hacıbektaş &quot;(16 August)&quot; and Sivas (the Pir Sultan Abdal Kültür Etkinlikleri, 23–24 June).

Some Alevis make pilgrimages to mountains and other natural sites believed to be imbued with holiness.

==== Almsgiving ====

Alevis are expected to give zakat, but there is no set formula or prescribed amount for annual charitable donation as there is in other forms of Islam (2.5% of possessions above a certain minimum). Rather, they are expected to give the &quot;excess&quot; according to Qur&#x27;an 2:219. A common method of Alevi almsgiving is through donating food (especially sacrificial animals) to be shared with worshippers and guests. Alevis also donate money to be used to help the poor, to support the religious, educational and cultural activities of Alevi centers and organizations (dargahs, awqaf, and meetings), and to provide scholarships for students.

== History ==
=== Seljuk period ===

During the great Turkish expansion from Central Asia into Iran and Anatolia in the Seljuk period (11–12th centuries), Turkmen tribes accepted a Sufi and pro-Ali form of Islam that co-existed with some of their pre-Islamic customs. Their conversion to Islam in this period was achieved largely through the efforts not of textual scholars (ulema) expounding the finer points of Koranic exegesis and shari‘a law, but by charismatic Sufi dervishes a belief whose cult of Muslim saint worship, mystical divination and millenarianism spoke more directly to the steppe mindset. These tribes dominated Anatolia for centuries with their religious warriors (ghazi) spearheading the drive against Byzantines and Crusaders.

=== Ottoman period ===
As in Khorasan and West Asia before, the Turkmens who spearheaded the Ottomans’ drive into the Balkans and West Asia were more inspired by a vaguely Shiite folk Islam than by formal religion. Many times, Ottoman campaigns were accompanied or guided by Bektaşi dervishes, spiritual heirs of the 13th century Sufi saint Haji Bektash Veli, himself a native of Khorasan. After the conquest of Constantinople in 1453, the Ottoman state became increasingly determined to assert its fiscal but also its juridical and political control over the farthest reaches of the Empire.

The resulting Alevi revolts, a series of millenarian anti-state uprisings by the non-Sunni Turkmen population of Anatolia that culminated in the establishment of a militantly Shiite rival state in neighbouring Iran. The Ottoman Empire later proclaimed themselves its defenders against the Safavid Shia state and related sects. This created a gap between the Sunni Ottoman ruling elite and the Alevi Anatolian population. Anatolia became a battlefield between Safavids and Ottomans, each determined to include it in their empire.

===Republic of Turkey===
According to Eren Sarı, Alevi saw Kemal Atatürk as a Mahdi &quot;savior sent to save them from the Sunni Ottoman yoke&quot;. However, pogroms against Alevi did not cease after the establishment of the Turkish Republic. In attacks against leftists in the 1970s, ultranationalists and reactionaries killed many Alevis. Malatya in 1978, Maraş in 1979, and Çorum in 1980 witnessed the murder of hundreds of Alevis, the torching of hundreds of homes, and lootings.

Alevis have been victims of pogroms during both Ottoman times and under the Turkish republic up until the 1993 Sivas massacre.
{| class=&quot;&quot; style=&quot;float:; margin: 2ex 0 0.6em 0.5em; width: 8em; line-height:111%;&quot; 
|-




















==Organization==

In contrast to the Bektashi order&quot;tariqa&quot;, which like other Sufi orders is based on a silsila &quot;initiatory chain or lineage&quot; of teachers and their students, Alevi leaders succeed to their role on the basis of family descent. Perhaps ten percent of Alevis belong to a religious elite called &quot;ocak&quot; &quot;hearth&quot;, indicating descent from Ali and/or various other saints and heroes. &quot;Ocak&quot; members are called &quot;ocakzade&quot;s or &quot;sons of the hearth&quot;. This system apparently originated in the Safavid state.

Alevi leaders are variously called &quot;murshid, pir, rehber&quot; or &quot;dede.&quot; Groups that conceive of these as ranks of a hierarchy (as in the Bektashi Order) disagree as to the order. The last of these, &quot;dede&quot; &quot;grandfather&quot;, is the term preferred by the scholarly literature. &quot;Ocakzade&quot;s may attain to the position of &quot;dede&quot; on the basis of selection (by a father from among several sons), character, and learning. In contrast to Alevi rhetoric on the equality of the sexes, it is generally assumed that only males may fill such leadership roles.

Traditionally, &quot;dedes&quot; did not merely lead rituals, but led their communities, often in conjunction with local notables such as the ağas (large landowners) of the Dersim Region. They also acted as judges or arbiters, presiding over village courts called &quot;Düşkünlük Meydanı&quot;.

Ordinary Alevi would owe allegiance to a particular &quot;dede&quot; lineage (but not others) on the basis of pre-existing family or village relations. Some fall instead under the authority of Bektashi dargahs.

In the wake of 20th century urbanization (which removed young laborers from the villages) and socialist influence (which looked upon the dedes with suspicion), the old hierarchy has largely broken down. Many dedes now receive salaries from Alevi cultural centers, which arguably subordinates their role. Such centers no longer feature community business or deliberation, such as the old ritual of reconciliation, but emphasize musical and dance performance to the exclusion of these. Dedes are now approached on a voluntary basis, and their role has become more circumscribed – limited to religious rituals, research, and giving advice.

According to John Shindeldecker &quot;Alevis are proud to point out that they are monogamous, Alevi women are encouraged to get the best education they can, and Alevi women are free to go into any occupation they choose.&quot;

=== Relationship with Shia Islam ===
Alevis are classified as a sect of Shia Islam, and Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini decreed Alevis to be part of the Shia fold in the 1970s. However, Alevi philosophies, customs, and rituals are appreciably different from those of mainstream, orthodox Usulis. According to Alevis, Ali and Muhammad are likened to the two sides of a coin, or the two halves of an apple.

====Relationship with Alawites====
Similarities with the Alawites of Syria exist. Both are viewed as heterodox, syncretic Islamic minorities, whose names both mean &quot;devoted to Ali,&quot; (the son-in-law and cousin of the Islamic Prophet Muhammad, and fourth caliph following Muhammad as leader of the Muslims), and are located primarily in the Eastern Mediterranean. Like mainstream Shia they are known as &quot;Twelvers&quot; as they both recognize the Twelve Imams.

How the two minorities relate is disputed. According to scholar Marianne Aringberg-Laanatza, &quot;the Turkish Alevis... do not relate themselves in any way to the Alawites in Syria.&quot; However journalist Jeffrey Gettlemand claims that both Alevi and the less than one million Alawite minority in Turkey &quot;seem to be solidly behind Syria’s embattled strongman, Bashar al-Assad&quot; and leery of Syrian Sunni rebels. &quot;Deutsche Welle&quot; journalist Dorian Jones states that Turkish Alevis are suspicious of the anti-Assad uprising in Syria. &quot;They are worried of the repercussions for Alawites there, as well as for themselves.&quot;

Some sources (Martin van Bruinessen and Jamal Shah) mistake Alawites living in Turkey to be Alevis (calling Alevis &quot;a blanket term for a large number of different heterodox communities&quot;), but others do not, giving a list of the differences between the two groups. These include their liturgical languages (Turkish or Kurdish for Alevi, Arabic for Alawites). Opposing political nationalism, with Alawites supporting their ruling dictatorship and considering Turks (including Alevis) an &quot;opponent&quot; of its Arab &quot;historic interests&quot;. (Even Kurdish and Balkan Alevi populations pray in Turkish.) 

Unlike Alevis, Alawites do not rely on musical instruments or mystical folklore to express their spiritual beliefs. Alevi &quot;possess an extensive and widely-read religious literature, mainly composed of spiritual songs, poems, and epic verse.&quot; Their origins are also different: The Alawite faith was founded in the ninth century by Abu Shuayb Muhammad ibn Nusayr. Alevism started in the 14th century by mystical Islamic dissenters in Central Asia, and represent more of a movement rather than a sect.

=== Relationship with Sunnis ===
The relationship between Alevis and Sunnis is one of mutual suspicion and prejudice dating back to the Ottoman period. Hundreds of Alevis were murdered in sectarian violence in the years that preceded the 1980 coup, and as late as the 1990s dozens were killed with impunity. While pogroms have not occurred since then, Erdogan has declared &quot;a cemevi is not a place of worship, it is a center for cultural activities. Muslims should only have one place of worship.&quot;

Alevis claim that they have been subject to intolerant Sunni &quot;nationalism&quot; that has been unwilling to recognize Alevi &quot;uniqueness&quot;.

== Demographics ==


Most Alevi live in Turkey, where they are a minority and Sunni Muslims the majority. The size of the Alevi population is likewise disputed, but most estimates place them somewhere between 5 and 10 million people or about 10% of the population. Estimates of the percentage of Turkey&#x27;s population that are Alevi range between 4% and 15%. Scattered minorities live in the Balkans, the Caucasus, Cyprus, Greece, Iran and the diaspora such as Germany and France. In the 2021 United Kingdom census, Alevism was discovered to be the eighth largest religion in England and Wales, after Christianity, Islam, Hinduism, Sikhism, Buddhism, Judaism and Paganism.

Different estimations exist on the ethnic composition of the Alevi population. Although Turks are probably the largest ethnic group among Alevis considering their historical towns and cities. While Dressler stated in 2008 that about a third of the Alevi population is Kurdish, Hamza Aksüt argued that the majority is Kurdish when all groups he considers as Alevis, such as the Yarsanis, are counted. 

Most Alevis are probably of Kizilbash or Bektashi origin. The Alevis (Kizilbash) are traditionally predominantly rural and acquire identity by parentage. Bektashis, however, are predominantly urban, and formally claim that membership is open to any Muslim. The groups are separately organized, but subscribe to &quot;virtually the same system of beliefs&quot;.

===Population estimates===
The Alevi population has been estimated as follows:
* Approximately 20 million according to Daily Sabah, a newspaper close to the government in 2021.
* 12,521,000 according to Sabahat Akkiraz, an MP from CHP.
* &quot;approx. 15 million...&quot;Krisztina Kehl-Bodrogi.
* 4% of total population of TurkeyKONDA Research (2021).
* In Turkey, 15% of Turkey&#x27;s population (approx. 10.6 million)Shankland (2006).
*20 to 25 million according to Minority Rights Group.
* There is a native 3,000 Alevi community in Western Thrace, Greece.

* The predominant religion of the Äynu people of western China is Alevism. There are estimated to be around 30–50 thousand Äynu, mostly located on the fringe of the Taklamakan Desert.
* 25,672 Alevi live in England and Wales.
* 600k to 700k Alevi live in Germany.
* 100k to 200k Alevi live in France.

=== Social groups ===

A Turkish scholar working in France has distinguished four main groups among contemporary Alevis in Turkey.

The first group, who form a majority of the Alevi population, regard themselves as true Muslims and are prepared to cooperate with the state. It adheres to the way of Jafar as-Sadiq, the Sixth Imam of Shia Islam. This group&#x27;s concept of &quot;God&quot; is the same as Orthodox Islam, and like their Shia counterparts they reject the first three chosen Caliphs, whom Sunni accept as legitimate, and accept only Ali as the actual and true Caliph.

The second group, which has the second most following among Alevis, are said to be under the active influence of the official Iranian Shia and to be confirmed adherents of the Twelver branch of Shia Islam and they reject the teachings of Bektashism Tariqa. They follow the Ja&#x27;fari jurisprudence and oppose secular state power.

The third group, a minority belief held by the Alevis, is mainly represented by people who belong to the political left and presumed &quot;the Aleviness&quot; as an outlook on life rather than a religious conviction by renouncing the ties of Alevism with Twelver Shia Islam. The followers of this congregation, who later turned out to support &quot;Erdoğan Çınar,&quot; hold ritual unions of a religious character and have established cultural associations named after Pir Sultan Abdal as well. According to their philosophy, the human being should enjoy a central role reminiscent of the doctrine of &quot;Khurramites,&quot; and as illustrated by Hurufi phrase of &quot;God is Man&quot; quoted above in the context of the Trinity.

The fourth who adopted some aspirations of &quot;Christian mysticism,&quot; is more directed towards heterodox mysticism and stands closer to the Hajji Bektashi Brotherhood. According to the philosophy developed by this congregation, Christian mystic St Francis of Assisi and Hindu Mahatma Gandhi are better believers of God than many Muslims.
== Influences of other beliefs and sects on Alevism ==


=== Sufi elements in Alevism ===

Despite this essentially Shi‘i orientation, much of Aleviness&#x27; mystical language is inspired by Sufi traditions. For example, the Alevi concept of God is derived from the philosophy of Ibn Arabi and involves a chain of emanation from God, to spiritual man, earthly man, animals, plants, and minerals. The goal of spiritual life is to follow this path in the reverse direction, to unity with God, or al-Haqq (Reality, Truth). From the highest perspective, all is God (see Sufi metaphysics). Alevis admire al-Hallaj, a 10th-century Sufi who was accused of blasphemy and subsequently executed in Baghdad for saying &quot;I am the Truth&quot; &quot;(Ana al-Haqq).&quot;

There is some tension between folk tradition Aleviness and the Bektashi Order, which is a Sufi order founded on Alevi beliefs. In certain Turkish communities other Sufi orders (the Halveti-Jerrahi and some of the Rifaʽi) have incorporated significant Alevi influence.

==== Wahdat al-Mawjud ====

Bektashism places much emphasis on the concept of Wahdat al-Mawjud وحدة الوجود, the &quot;Unity of Being&quot; that was formulated by Ibn Arabi. Bektashism is also heavily permeated with Shiite concepts, such as the marked veneration of Ali, the Twelve Imams, and the ritual commemoration of Ashurah marking the Battle of Karbala. The old Persian holiday of Nowruz is celebrated by Bektashis as Imam Ali&#x27;s birthday.
In keeping with the central belief of &quot;Wahdat Al-Mawjud&quot; the Bektashi see reality contained in Haqq-Muhammad-Ali, a single unified entity. Bektashi do not consider this a form of trinity. There are many other practices and ceremonies that share similarity with other faiths, such as a ritual meal (&quot;muhabbet&quot;) and yearly confession of sins to a &quot;baba&quot; (&quot;magfirat-i zunub&quot; مغفرة الذنوب). 

Bektashis base their practices and rituals on their non-orthodox and mystical interpretation and understanding of the Qur&#x27;an and the prophetic practice (Sunnah). They have no written doctrine specific to them, thus rules and rituals may differ depending on under whose influence one has been taught. Bektashis generally revere Sufi mystics outside of their own order, such as Ibn Arabi, Al-Ghazali and Jelalludin Rumi who are close in spirit to them.

=== Mysticism ===

Bektashism is initiatic and members must traverse various levels or ranks as they progress along the spiritual path to the Reality. First level members are called &quot;aşıks&quot; عاشق. They are those who, while not having taken initiation into the order, are nevertheless drawn to it. Following initiation (called &quot;nasip&quot;) one becomes a &quot;mühip&quot; محب. After some time as a &quot;mühip&quot;, one can take further vows and become a &quot;dervish&quot;. 

The next level above dervish is that of &quot;baba&quot;. The &quot;baba&quot; (lit. father) is considered to be the head of a &quot;tekke&quot; and qualified to give spiritual guidance (&quot;irshad&quot; إرشاد). Above the &quot;baba&quot; is the rank of &quot;halife-baba&quot; (or &quot;dede&quot;, grandfather). Traditionally there were twelve of these, the most senior being the &quot;dedebaba&quot; (&quot;great-grandfather&quot;)&quot;.&quot; 

The &quot;dedebaba&quot; was considered to be the highest ranking authority in the Bektashi Order. Traditionally the residence of the &quot;dedebaba&quot; was the Pir Evi (The Saint&#x27;s Home) which was located in the shrine of Hajji Bektash Wali in the central Anatolian town of Hacıbektaş &quot;(Solucakarahüyük)&quot;.

=== Non-Islamic elements ===

Alevism is indeed heavily influenced by shamanistic beliefs. Concepts such as Odjak, inclusive social roles for women, musical performances, various rituals celebrating the nature or the seasons (like Hıdırellez) and some customs like the cult of ancestors, trees and rocks are both observed in Alevism and Shamanism. It has been suggested that there is an influence of Kurdish culture in the practices of Kurdish Alevi groups. Beyond their exclusive use of Turkish as a ritual language and adoption of Turkish Alevi cultural practices, they also maintain their own unique pre-Islamic cultural traditions. These traditions often exhibit similarities to Yazidism.

==See also==
* Ashura
* Duzgin Bawo
* Religious humanism
* Shi&#x27;a view of Ali

== References ==
== Bibliography ==

;General introductions
* Engin, Ismail &amp; Franz, Erhard (2000). &quot;Aleviler / Alewiten. Cilt 1 Band: Kimlik ve Tarih / Identität und Geschichte.&quot; Hamburg: Deutsches Orient Institut (Mitteilungen Band 59/2000). 
* Engin, Ismail &amp; Franz, Erhard (2001). &quot;Aleviler / Alewiten. Cilt 2 Band: İnanç ve Gelenekler / Glaube und Traditionen.&quot; Hamburg: Deutsches Orient Institut (Mitteilungen Band 60/2001). 
* Engin, Ismail &amp; Franz, Erhard (2001). &quot;Aleviler / Alewiten. Cilt 3 Band: Siyaset ve Örgütler / Politik und Organisationen.&quot; Hamburg: Deutsches Orient Institut (Mitteilungen Band 61/2001). 
* Kehl-Bodrogi, Krisztina (1992). &quot;Die Kizilbas/Aleviten. Untersuchungen über eine esoterische Glaubensgemeinschaft in Anatolien. Die Welt des Islams,&quot; (New Series), Vol. 32, No. 1.
* Kitsikis, Dimitri (1999). Multiculturalism in the Ottoman Empire : The Alevi Religious and Cultural Community, in P. Savard &amp; B. Vigezzi eds. &quot;Multiculturalism and the History of International Relations&quot; Milano: Edizioni Unicopli.
* Kjeilen, Tore (undated). &quot;Alevism ,&quot; in the (online) &quot;Encyclopedia of the Orient.&quot;
* Shankland, David (2003). &quot;The Alevis in Turkey: The Emergence of a Secular Islamic Tradition.&quot; Curzon Press.
* Shindeldecker, John (1996). &quot;Turkish Alevis Today.&quot; Istanbul: Sahkulu.
* White, Paul J., &amp; Joost Jongerden (eds.) (2003). &quot;Turkey’s Alevi Enigma: A Comprehensive Overview.&quot; Leiden: Brill.
* Yaman, Ali &amp; Aykan Erdemir (2006). &quot;Alevism-Bektashism: A Brief Introduction&quot;, London: England Alevi Cultural Centre &amp; Cem Evi. 
* Zeidan, David (1999) &quot;The Alevi of Anatolia.&quot; Middle East Review of International Affairs 3/4.

;Kurdish Alevis
* Bumke, Peter (1979). &quot;Kizilbaş-Kurden in Dersim (Tunceli, Türkei). Marginalität und Häresie.&quot; &quot;Anthropos&quot; 74, 530–548.
* Gezik, Erdal (2000), Etnik Politik Dinsel Sorunlar Baglaminda Alevi Kurtler, Ankara.
* Van Bruinessen, Martin (1997). &quot;Aslını inkar eden haramzadedir! The Debate on the Kurdish Ethnic Identity of the Kurdish Alevis.&quot; In K. Kehl-Bodrogi, B. Kellner-Heinkele, &amp; A. Otter-Beaujean (eds), &quot;Syncretistic Religious Communities in the Near East&quot; (Leiden: Brill).
* Van Bruinessen, Martin (1996). Kurds, Turks, and the Alevi revival in Turkey. &quot;Middle East Report,&quot; No. 200, pp. 7–10. (NB: The online version is expanded from its original publication.)
* White, Paul J. (2003), &quot;The Debate on the Identity of ‘Alevi Kurds’.&quot; In: Paul J. White/Joost Jongerden (eds.) &quot;Turkey’s Alevi Enigma: A Comprehensive Overview.&quot; Leiden: Brill, pp. 17–32.

;Alevi / Bektashi history
* Birge, John Kingsley (1937). &quot;The Bektashi order of dervishes&quot;, London and Hartford.
* Brown, John P. (1868), &quot;The Dervishes; or, Oriental Spiritualism.&quot;
* Küçük, Hülya (2002) &quot;The Roles of the Bektashis in Turkey’s National Struggle.&quot; Leiden: Brill.
* Mélikoff, Irène (1998). &quot;Hadji Bektach: Un mythe et ses avatars. Genèse et évolution du soufisme populaire en Turquie.&quot; Leiden: Islamic History and Civilization, Studies and Texts, volume 20, .
* Shankland, David (1994). &quot;Social Change and Culture: Responses to Modernization in an Alevi Village in Anatolia.&quot;In C.N. Hann, ed., &quot;When History Accelerates: Essays on Rapid Social Change, Complexity, and Creativity.&quot; London: Athlone Press.
* Yaman, Ali (undated). &quot;Kizilbash Alevi Dedes.&quot; (Based on his MA thesis for Istanbul University.)

;Ghulat sects in general
* Halm, H. (1982). &quot;Die Islamische gnosis: Die extreme Schia und die Alawiten.&quot; Zürich.
* Krisztina Kehl-Bodrogi, Krisztina, &amp; Barbara Kellner-Heinkele, Anke Otter-Beaujean, eds. (1997) &quot;Syncretistic Religious Communities in the Near East.&quot; Leiden: Brill, pp. 11–18.
* Moosa, Matti (1988). &quot;Extremist Shiites: The Ghulat Sects,&quot; Syracuse University Press.
* Van Bruinessen, Martin (2005). &quot;Religious practices in the Turco-Iranian world: continuity and change.&quot; French translation published as: &quot;Les pratiques religieuses dans le monde turco-iranien: changements et continuités&quot;, &quot;Cahiers d&#x27;Études sur la Méditerranée Orientale et le Monde Turco-Iranien,&quot; no. 39–40, 101–121.

;Alevi Identity
* Erdemir, Aykan (2005). &quot;Tradition and Modernity: Alevis&#x27; Ambiguous Terms and Turkey&#x27;s Ambivalent Subjects&quot;, &quot;Middle Eastern Studies&quot;, 2005, vol.41, no.6, pp. 937–951.
* Greve, Martin and Ulas Özdemir and Raoul Motika, eds. 2020. &quot;Aesthetic and Performative Dimensions of Alevi Cultural Heritage&quot;. Ergon Verlag. 215 pages. 
* Koçan, Gürcan/Öncü, Ahmet (2004) &quot;Citizen Alevi in Turkey: Beyond Confirmation and Denial.&quot; &quot;Journal of Historical Sociology,&quot; 17/4, pp. 464–489.
* Olsson, Tord &amp; Elizabeth Özdalga/Catharina Raudvere, eds. (1998). &quot;Alevi Identity: Cultural, Religious and Social Perspectives.&quot; Istanbul: Swedish Research Institute.
* Stokes, Martin (1996). &quot;Ritual, Identity and the State: An Alevi (Shi’a) Cem Ceremony.&quot;In Kirsten E. Schulze et al. (eds.), &quot;Nationalism, Minorities and Diasporas: Identities and Rights in the Middle East,&quot;, pp. 194–196.
* Vorhoff, Karin (1995). &quot;Zwischen Glaube, Nation und neuer Gemeinschaft: Alevitische Identität in der Türkei der Gegenwart.&quot; Berlin.

;Alevism in Europe
* Geaves, Ron (2003) &quot;Religion and Ethnicity: Community Formation in the British Alevi Community.&quot; Koninklijke Brill NV 50, pp. 52– 70.
* Kosnick, Kira (2004) &quot;‘Speaking in One’s Own Voice’: Representational Strategies of Alevi Turkish Migrants on Open-Access Television in Berlin.&quot; &quot;Journal of Ethnic and Migration Studies,&quot; 30/5, pp. 979–994.
* Massicard, Elise (2003) &quot;Alevist Movements at Home and Abroad: Mobilization Spaces and Disjunction.&quot; &quot;New Perspective on Turkey,&quot; 28, pp. 163–188.
* Rigoni, Isabelle (2003) &quot;Alevis in Europe: A Narrow Path towards Visibility.&quot; In: Paul J. White/Joost Jongerden (eds.) Turkey&#x27;s Alevi Enigma: A Comprehensive Overview, Leiden: Brill, pp. 159–173.
* Sökefeld, Martin (2002) &quot;Alevi Dedes in the German Diaspora: The Transformation of a Religious Institution.&quot; &quot;Zeitschrift für Ethnologie,&quot; 127, pp. 163–189.
* Sökefeld, Martin (2004) &quot;Alevis in Germany and the Question of Integration&quot; paper presented at the Conference on the Integration of Immigrants from Turkey in Austria, Germany and Holland, Boğaziçi University, Istanbul, February 27–28, 2004.
* Sökefeld, Martin &amp; Suzanne Schwalgin (2000). &quot;Institutions and their Agents in Diaspora: A Comparison of Armenians in Athens and Alevis in Germany.&quot; Paper presented at the sixth European Association of Social Anthropologist Conference, Krakau.
* Thomä-Venske, Hanns (1990). &quot;The Religious Life of Muslim in Berlin.&quot; In: Thomas Gerholm/Yngve Georg Lithman (eds.) &quot;The New Islamic Presence in Western Europe,&quot; New York: Mansell, pp. 78–87.
* Wilpert, Czarina (1990) &quot;Religion and Ethnicity: Orientations, Perceptions and Strategies among Turkish Alevi and Sunni Migrants in Berlin.&quot; In: Thomas Gerholm/Yngve Georg Lithman (eds.) &quot;The New Islamic Presence in Western Europe.&quot; New York: Mansell, pp. 88–106.
* Zirh, Besim Can (2008) &quot;Euro-Alevis: From Gastarbeiter to Transnational Community.&quot; In: Anghel, Gerharz, Rescher and Salzbrunn (eds.) The Making of World Society: Perspectives from Transnational Research. Transcript; 103–130.

;Bibliographies
* Vorhoff, Karin. (1998), &quot;Academic and Journalistic Publications on the Alevi and Bektashi of Turkey.&quot; In: Tord Olsson/Elizabeth Özdalga/Catharina Raudvere (eds.) Alevi Identity: Cultural, Religious and Social Perspectives, Istanbul: Swedish Research Institute, pp. 23–50.

;Turkish-language works
* Ata, Kelime. (2007), Alevilerin İlk Siyasal Denemesi: (Türkiye Birlik Partisi) (1966–1980). Ankara: Kelime Yayınevi.
* Aydın, Ayhan. (2008), Abidin Özgünay: Yazar Yayıncı ve Cem Dergisi Kurucusu. İstanbul: Niyaz Yayınları.
* Balkız, Ali. (1999), Sivas’tan Sydney’e Pir Sultan. Ankara: İtalik.
* Balkız, Ali. (2002), Pir Sultan’da Birlik Mücadelesi (Hızır Paşalar’a Yanıt). Ankara: İtalik.
* Bilgöl, Hıdır Ali. (1996), Aleviler ve Canlı Fotoğraflar, Alev Yayınları.
* Coşkun, Zeki (1995) Aleviler, Sünniler ve ... Öteki Sivas, Istanbul: İletişim Yayınları.
* Dumont, Paul. (1997), &quot;Günümüz Türkiye’sinde Aleviliğin Önemi&quot; içinde Aynayı Yüzüme Ali Göründü Gözüme: Yabancı Araştırmacıların Gözüyle Alevilik, editör: İlhan Cem Erseven. İsntabul: Ant, 141–161.
* Engin, Havva ve Engin, Ismail (2004). Alevilik. Istanbul: Kitap Yayınevi.
* Gül, Zeynel. (1995), Yol muyuz Yolcu muyuz? İstanbul: Can Yayınları.
* Gül, Zeynel. (1999), Dernekten Partiye: Avrupa Alevi Örgütlenmesi. Ankara: İtalik.
* Güler, Sabır. (2008), Aleviliğin Siyasal Örgütlenmesi: Modernleşme, Çözülme ve Türkiye Birlik Partisi. Ankara: Dipnot.
* İrat, Ali Murat. (2008), Devletin Bektaşi Hırkası / Devlet, Aleviler ve Ötekiler. İstanbul: Chiviyazıları.
* Kaleli, Lütfü. (2000), &quot;1964–1997 Yılları Arasında Alevi Örgütleri&quot; içinde Aleviler/Alewiten: Kimlik ve Tarih/ Indentität und Geschichte, editörler: İsmail Engin ve Erhard Franz. Hamburg: Deutsches Orient-Institut, 223–241.
* Kaleli, Lütfü. (2000), Alevi Kimliği ve Alevi Örgütlenmeri. İstanbul: Can Yayınları.
* Kaplan, İsmail. (2000), &quot;Avrupa’daki Alevi Örgütlenmesine Bakış&quot; içinde Aleviler/Alewiten: Kimlik ve Tarih/ Indentität und Geschichte, editörler: İsmail Engin ve Erhard Franz. Hamburg: Deutsches Orient-Institut, 241–260.
* Kaplan, İsmail. (2009), Alevice: İnancımız ve Direncimiz. Köln: AABF Yayınları.
* Kocadağ, Burhan. (1996), Alevi Bektaşi Tarihi. İstanbul: Can Yayınları.
* Massicard, Elise. (2007), Alevi Hareketinin Siyasallaşması. İstanbul: İletişim.
* Melikoff, Irene. (1993), Uyur İdik Uyardılar. İstanbul: Cem Yayınevi.
* Okan, Murat. (2004), Türkiye’de Alevilik / Antropolojik Bir Yaklaşım. Ankara: İmge.
* Özerol, Süleyman. (2009), Hasan Nedim Şahhüseyinoğlu. Ankara: Ürün.
* Şahhüseyinoğlu, H. Nedim. (2001), Hızır Paşalar: Bir İhracın Perde Arkası. Ankara: İtalik.
* Şahhüseyinoğlu, Nedim. (1997), Pir Sultan Kültür Derneği’nin Demokrasi Laiklik ve Özgürlük Mücadelesi. Ankara: PSAKD Yayınları.
* Şahhüseyinoğlu, Nedim. (2001), Alevi Örgütlerinin Tarihsel Süreci. Ankara: İtalik.
* Salman, Meral. 2006, Müze Duvarlarına Sığmayan Dergah: Alevi – Bektaşi Kimliğinin Kuruluş Sürecinde Hacı Bektaş Veli Anma Görenleri. Ankara: Kalan.
* Saraç, Necdet. (2010), Alevilerin Siyasal Tarihi. İstanbul: Cem.
* Şener, Cemal ve Miyase İlknur. (1995), Şeriat ve Alevilik: Kırklar Meclisi’nden Günümüze Alevi Örgütlenmesi. İstanbul: Ant.
* Tosun, Halis. (2002), Alevi Kimliğiyle Yaşamak. İstanbul: Can Yayınları.
* Vergin, Nur (2000, [1981]), Din, Toplum ve Siyasal Sistem, İstanbul: Bağlam.
* Yaman, Ali (2000) &quot;Anadolu Aleviliği’nde Ocak Sistemi Ve Dedelik Kurumu.&quot; Alevi Bektaşi.
* Zırh, Besim Can. (2005), &quot;Avro-Aleviler: Ziyaretçi İşçilikten Ulus-aşırı Topluluğa&quot; Kırkbudak 2: 31–58.
* Zırh, Besim Can. (2006), &quot;Avrupa Alevi Konfederasyonu Turgut Öker ile Görüşme&quot; Kırkbudak 2: 51–71.
== External links ==

* Official Alevi-Bektashi Order of Derwishes website 
* A Sufi Metamorphosis: Imam Ali
* History of Sufism / Islamic Mysticism and the importance of Ali
* Alevis 
* Alevi Bektaşi Research Site 
* Semah from a TV show (YouTube)
* Semah – several samples (YouTube)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q137097" start="0" end="7" title="Alevism" label="Alevism"/>
<link wikidata="Q172904" start="20" end="29" title="syncretic" label="syncretic"/>
<link wikidata="Q432" start="30" end="35" title="Islam" label="Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q45996" start="76" end="84" title="mystical" label="mystical"/>
<link wikidata="Q469865" start="106" end="123" title="Haji Bektash Veli" label="Haji Bektash Veli"/>
<link wikidata="Q57560" start="157" end="169" title="Twelve Imams" label="Twelve Imams"/>
<link wikidata="Q42042" start="213" end="222" title="Shamanism" label="Shamanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q483654" start="239" end="250" title="Sunni Islam" label="Sunni Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1657009" start="255" end="260" title="Usuli" label="Usuli"/>
<link wikidata="Q269785" start="261" end="279" title="Twelver Shi&amp;#x27;ism" label="Twelver Shia Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q620749" start="314" end="319" title="dogma" label="dogma"/>
<link wikidata="Q1182135" start="355" end="371" title="dede (religious figure)" label="spiritual leader"/>
<link wikidata="Q816321" start="380" end="391" title="Sufi orders" label="Sufi orders"/>
<link wikidata="Q8245340" start="414" end="444" title="Iman (Islam)" label="six articles of faith of Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137326" start="535" end="541" title="Social stigma" label="stigma"/>
<link wikidata="Q162633" start="587" end="595" title="academia" label="academia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1992247" start="616" end="625" title="heterodox" label="heterodox"/>
<link wikidata="Q483654" start="673" end="678" title="Sunni Islam" label="Sunni"/>
<link wikidata="Q9174" start="776" end="785" title="religious" label="religious"/>
<link wikidata="Q190539" start="786" end="795" title="discourse" label="discourse"/>
<link wikidata="Q43201039" start="812" end="825" title="umbrella term" label="umbrella term"/>
<link wikidata="Q467692" start="870" end="880" title="Bektashism" label="Bektashism"/>
<link wikidata="Q20826540" start="1064" end="1071" title="scholar" label="scholar"/>
<link wikidata="Q461221" start="1072" end="1086" title="Soner Cagaptay" label="Soner Çağaptay"/>
<link wikidata="Q855395" start="1131" end="1145" title="Interpretation (philosophy)" label="interpretation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368367" start="1266" end="1283" title="cultural identity" label="cultural identity"/>
<link wikidata="Q557642" start="1428" end="1444" title="Pir Sultan Abdal" label="Pir Sultan Abdal"/>
<link wikidata="Q8189650" start="1507" end="1524" title="Nature worship" label="nature veneration"/>
<link wikidata="Q338" start="1549" end="1558" title="cosmology" label="cosmology"/>
<link wikidata="Q190" start="1560" end="1563" title="God" label="God"/>
<link wikidata="Q3783286" start="1579" end="1586" title="Al-Haqq" label="Al-Haqq"/>
<link wikidata="Q234801" start="1617" end="1622" title="Allah" label="Allah"/>
<link wikidata="Q4993926" start="1717" end="1741" title="Haqq–Muhammad–Ali" label="Allah, Muhammad, and Ali"/>
<link wikidata="Q37090" start="1761" end="1768" title="trinity" label="trinity"/>
<link wikidata="Q2095353" start="1781" end="1784" title="God in Islam" label="God"/>
<link wikidata="Q6932314" start="1841" end="1857" title="Muhammad-Ali" label="Muhammad and Ali"/>
<link wikidata="Q6932314" start="2043" end="2072" title="Muhammad-Ali" label="the unity of Muhammad and Ali"/>
<link wikidata="Q1266031" start="2217" end="2228" title="Angel in Islam" label="good angels"/>
<link wikidata="Q3959257" start="2256" end="2266" title="Shaitan" label="bad angels"/>
<link wikidata="Q1963451" start="2351" end="2355" title="Nafs" label="nefs"/>
<link wikidata="Q3465" start="2368" end="2372" title="jinn" label="jinn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1020115" start="2410" end="2418" title="evil eye" label="evil eye"/>
<link wikidata="Q178342" start="2563" end="2572" title="archangel" label="archangel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2514663" start="2870" end="2877" title="worship" label="worship"/>
<link wikidata="Q3460708" start="3158" end="3164" title="Azazil" label="Azâzîl"/>
<link wikidata="Q444936" start="3216" end="3225" title="canonical" label="canonical"/>
<link wikidata="Q81989" start="3299" end="3306" title="Gabriel" label="Gabriel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2383104" start="3789" end="3795" title="Torah in Islam" label="Tawrat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1369122" start="3809" end="3814" title="Zabur" label="Zabur"/>
<link wikidata="Q1762323" start="3829" end="3834" title="Injil" label="Injil"/>
<link wikidata="Q428" start="3853" end="3858" title="Quran" label="Quran"/>
<link wikidata="Q234343" start="4000" end="4006" title="Hadith" label="Hadith"/>
<link wikidata="Q125482" start="4432" end="4436" title="Imam" label="Imam"/>
<link wikidata="Q39619" start="4698" end="4715" title="Ali" label="Ali ibn Abu Talib"/>
<link wikidata="Q182914" start="4835" end="4845" title="Hassan ibn Ali" label="Imam Hasan"/>
<link wikidata="Q8917042" start="4983" end="4993" title="Muhammad al-Mahdi" label="Imam Mehdi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2072928" start="5041" end="5054" title="Messianic Age" label="Messianic Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q1202245" start="5129" end="5138" title="potential" label="potential"/>
<link wikidata="Q11379" start="5139" end="5145" title="energy" label="energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q484181" start="5889" end="5893" title="fiqh" label="fiqh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1270373" start="6036" end="6046" title="Kaysanites" label="Kaysanites"/>
<link wikidata="Q1089961" start="6051" end="6062" title="Khurramites" label="Khurramites"/>
<link wikidata="Q1271464" start="6259" end="6269" title="Four Doors" label="four gates"/>
<link wikidata="Q1271464" start="6297" end="6317" title="Four Doors" label="Dört Kapı Kırk Makam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1182135" start="6844" end="6848" title="dedes" label="dede"/>
<link wikidata="Q268385" start="6850" end="6853" title="Pir (Sufism)" label="pir"/>
<link wikidata="Q2369218" start="6855" end="6861" title="Murshid" label="mürşid"/>
<link wikidata="Q189819" start="7157" end="7163" title="ritual" label="ritual"/>
<link wikidata="Q35856" start="7164" end="7172" title="baptisms" label="baptisms"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053332" start="7371" end="7377" title="Cemevi" label="Cemevi"/>
<link wikidata="Q207977" start="7406" end="7415" title="prototype" label="prototype"/>
<link wikidata="Q381240" start="7423" end="7467" title="Isra and Mi&amp;#x27;raj" label="Muhammad&amp;#x27;s nocturnal ascent into heaven"/>
<link wikidata="Q43115" start="7506" end="7511" title="saint" label="saint"/>
<link wikidata="Q1379405" start="7552" end="7558" title="Divine" label="Divine"/>
<link wikidata="Q9510" start="7559" end="7566" title="Reality" label="Reality"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053254" start="7608" end="7611" title="Jem (Alevism)" label="Cem"/>
<link wikidata="" start="7665" end="7670" title=":tr:Semah" label="Samāh"/>
<link wikidata="Q189819" start="7719" end="7725" title="Ritual" label="Ritual"/>
<link wikidata="Q256" start="7744" end="7751" title="Turkish language" label="Turkish"/>
<link wikidata="Q10199" start="7753" end="7759" title="Zazaki language" label="Zazaki"/>
<link wikidata="Q36163" start="7761" end="7769" title="Kurmanji language" label="Kurmanji"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053254" start="7819" end="7843" title="Jem (Alevism)" label="&amp;quot;Cem ceremony&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="" start="7854" end="7858" title=":tr:Halk ozanı" label="Âşık"/>
<link wikidata="Q717773" start="7875" end="7882" title="Bağlama" label="Bağlama"/>
<link wikidata="Q717773" start="8300" end="8307" title="Bağlama" label="Bağlama"/>
<link wikidata="Q10931" start="8348" end="8358" title="revolution" label="revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q634" start="8366" end="8373" title="planets" label="planets"/>
<link wikidata="Q525" start="8385" end="8388" title="Sun" label="Sun"/>
<link wikidata="Q3038928" start="8720" end="8733" title="dramatisation" label="dramatisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q177826" start="8786" end="8802" title="spiritual leader" label="spiritual leader"/>
<link wikidata="Q80071" start="8887" end="8893" title="symbol" label="symbol"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053254" start="8905" end="8929" title="Jem (Alevism)" label="&amp;quot;Cem ceremony&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q4837248" start="9198" end="9202" title="Baba (Alevism)" label="Dede"/>
<link wikidata="Q1164078" start="9778" end="9784" title="Husayn" label="Husayn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1029610" start="9908" end="9928" title="Abu Dharr al-Ghifari" label="Abu Dharr al-Ghifari"/>
<link wikidata="Q59706" start="10069" end="10088" title="Jabir ibn Abd-Allah" label="Jabir ibn Abd-Allah"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146115" start="10232" end="10251" title="Bilal ibn al-Harith" label="Bilal ibn al-Harith"/>
<link wikidata="Q717773" start="10268" end="10275" title="bağlama" label="bağlama"/>
<link wikidata="Q557378" start="10345" end="10363" title="Salman the Persian" label="Salman the Persian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145300" start="10505" end="10527" title="Hudhayfah ibn al-Yaman" label="Hudhayfah ibn al-Yaman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1108425" start="10565" end="10586" title="Muhammad ibn Maslamah" label="Muhammad ibn Maslamah"/>
<link wikidata="Q1110653" start="10923" end="10938" title="Ammar ibn Yasir" label="Ammar ibn Yasir"/>
<link wikidata="Q7206969" start="10983" end="11012" title="Sharbat (beverage)" label="sherbet &amp;quot;(sharbat)&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q563644" start="11134" end="11139" title="Joseph in Islam" label="Yusuf"/>
<link wikidata="Q1952053" start="11305" end="11313" title="Muharram" label="Muharram"/>
<link wikidata="Q514400" start="11335" end="11346" title="Eid ul-Adha" label="Eid ul-Adha"/>
<link wikidata="Q1641521" start="11413" end="11433" title="Mourning of Muharram" label="Mourning of Muharram"/>
<link wikidata="Q183283" start="11485" end="11491" title="Day of Ashura" label="Ashura"/>
<link wikidata="Q112128" start="11532" end="11538" title="Husayn ibn Ali" label="Husayn"/>
<link wikidata="Q199909" start="11542" end="11549" title="Karbala" label="Karbala"/>
<link wikidata="Q136922" start="11609" end="11614" title="Ashure" label="aşure"/>
<link wikidata="Q314978" start="11785" end="11799" title="Ali ibn Husayn" label="Ali ibn Husayn"/>
<link wikidata="Q2371750" start="11919" end="11929" title="Hıdırellez" label="Hıdırellez"/>
<link wikidata="Q311577" start="11959" end="11964" title="Khidr" label="Khidr"/>
<link wikidata="Q2090543" start="12001" end="12007" title="Elijah in Islam" label="Elijah"/>
<link wikidata="Q17098127" start="12372" end="12399" title="George&amp;#x27;s Day in Spring" label="George&amp;#x27;s Day in Spring"/>
<link wikidata="Q212829" start="12403" end="12426" title="Saint George&amp;#x27;s Day" label="Saint George&amp;#x27;s Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q421261" start="13693" end="13699" title="gnosis" label="gnosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q956677" start="14603" end="14614" title="Eyüp Sultan Mosque" label="Eyüp Sultan"/>
<link wikidata="Q586307" start="15493" end="15498" title="lokma" label="lokma"/>
<link wikidata="Q136922" start="15539" end="15545" title="Ashure" label="Ashure"/>
<link wikidata="Q1952053" start="15609" end="15617" title="Muharram" label="Muharram"/>
<link wikidata="Q183283" start="15631" end="15644" title="Ashura" label="Day of Ashure"/>
<link wikidata="Q2906076" start="15706" end="15713" title="ziyarat" label="ziyarat"/>
<link wikidata="Q879046" start="15718" end="15727" title="dua" label="du&amp;#x27;a"/>
<link wikidata="Q268385" start="15769" end="15773" title="Pir (Sufism)" label="pirs"/>
<link wikidata="Q6569289" start="15852" end="15859" title="Şahkulu Rebellion" label="Şahkulu"/>
<link wikidata="Q578506" start="15864" end="15875" title="Karacaahmet Cemetery" label="Karacaahmet"/>
<link wikidata="Q406" start="15885" end="15893" title="Istanbul" label="Istanbul"/>
<link wikidata="Q6487" start="15908" end="15915" title="Antalya" label="Antalya"/>
<link wikidata="Q6051954" start="15918" end="15944" title="Seyyid Battal Gazi Complex" label="Seyyid Battal Gazi Complex"/>
<link wikidata="Q168866" start="15946" end="15955" title="Eskişehir" label="Eskişehir"/>
<link wikidata="Q35997" start="15970" end="15975" title="İzmir" label="İzmir"/>
<link wikidata="Q206891" start="15989" end="15998" title="Kırıkkale" label="Kırıkkale"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053254" start="16050" end="16074" title="Jem (Alevism)" label="&amp;quot;Cem ceremony&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q736588" start="16173" end="16195" title="Hacıbektaş" label="Hacibektaş celebration"/>
<link wikidata="Q736588" start="16411" end="16421" title="Hacıbektaş" label="Hacıbektaş"/>
<link wikidata="Q107401" start="16450" end="16455" title="Sivas" label="Sivas"/>
<link wikidata="Q557642" start="16461" end="16471" title="Pir Sultan" label="Pir Sultan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1642917" start="16472" end="16477" title="Abdal" label="Abdal"/>
<link wikidata="Q124058" start="16667" end="16672" title="zakat" label="zakat"/>
<link wikidata="Q12214478" start="16690" end="16722" title="calculation of Zakāt" label="set formula or prescribed amount"/>
<link wikidata="Q2639699" start="17214" end="17220" title="dargah" label="dargah"/>
<link wikidata="Q815509" start="17223" end="17228" title="waqf" label="awqaf"/>
<link wikidata="Q9603" start="17754" end="17758" title="Sufi" label="Sufi"/>
<link wikidata="Q467687" start="17838" end="17852" title="millenarianism" label="millenarianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q469865" start="18379" end="18396" title="Haji Bektash Veli" label="Haji Bektash Veli"/>
<link wikidata="Q2352322" start="18418" end="18426" title="Greater Khorasan" label="Khorasan"/>
<link wikidata="Q484472" start="18722" end="18729" title="Turkmens" label="Turkmen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1448990" start="18920" end="18938" title="Safavid conversion of Iran to Shia Islam" label="Safavid Shia state"/>
<link wikidata="Q784387" start="19239" end="19244" title="Mahdi" label="Mahdi"/>
<link wikidata="Q97212005" start="19503" end="19518" title="Malatya massacre" label="Malatya in 1978"/>
<link wikidata="Q2096206" start="19520" end="19533" title="Maraş massacre" label="Maraş in 1979"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142820" start="19539" end="19552" title="Çorum massacre" label="Çorum in 1980"/>
<link wikidata="Q177716" start="19675" end="19682" title="pogroms" label="pogroms"/>
<link wikidata="Q897808" start="19753" end="19772" title="Sivas massacre" label="1993 Sivas massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q467692" start="19940" end="19954" title="Bektashi order" label="Bektashi order"/>
<link wikidata="Q20897533" start="20017" end="20024" title="silsila" label="silsila"/>
<link wikidata="Q2369218" start="20526" end="20533" title="murshid" label="murshid"/>
<link wikidata="Q268385" start="20535" end="20538" title="Pir (Sufism)" label="pir"/>
<link wikidata="Q613389" start="20540" end="20546" title="Rehber (Alevism)" label="rehber"/>
<link wikidata="Q1182135" start="20562" end="20566" title="Dede (religious figure)" label="dede"/>
<link wikidata="Q467692" start="20639" end="20653" title="Bektashi Order" label="Bektashi Order"/>
<link wikidata="Q393436" start="21227" end="21231" title="agha (title)" label="ağas"/>
<link wikidata="Q620742" start="21258" end="21271" title="Tunceli Province" label="Dersim Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q184211" start="22313" end="22323" title="monogamy" label="monogamous"/>
<link wikidata="Q38823" start="22557" end="22574" title="Ruhollah Khomeini" label="Ruhollah Khomeini"/>
<link wikidata="Q1657009" start="22743" end="22749" title="Usulism" label="Usulis"/>
<link wikidata="Q209496" start="22918" end="22926" title="Alawites" label="Alawites"/>
<link wikidata="Q858" start="22930" end="22935" title="Syria" label="Syria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1992247" start="22962" end="22971" title="heterodox" label="heterodox"/>
<link wikidata="Q172904" start="22973" end="22982" title="syncretic" label="syncretic"/>
<link wikidata="Q39619" start="23042" end="23045" title="Ali" label="Ali"/>
<link wikidata="Q131401" start="23124" end="23130" title="caliph" label="caliph"/>
<link wikidata="Q6176001" start="23543" end="23560" title="Jeffrey Gettleman" label="Jeffrey Gettleman"/>
<link wikidata="Q44329" start="23703" end="23718" title="Bashar al-Assad" label="Bashar al-Assad"/>
<link wikidata="Q153770" start="23765" end="23779" title="Deutsche Welle" label="Deutsche Welle"/>
<link wikidata="Q5984245" start="24970" end="24980" title="ibn Nusayr" label="ibn Nusayr"/>
<link wikidata="Q1758028" start="25358" end="25367" title="1980 Turkish coup d&amp;#x27;état" label="1980 coup"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053332" start="25501" end="25507" title="cemevi" label="cemevi"/>
<link wikidata="Q13408093" start="25673" end="25683" title="Religious intolerance" label="intolerant"/>
<link wikidata="Q23522" start="26177" end="26184" title="Balkans" label="Balkans"/>
<link wikidata="Q18869" start="26186" end="26198" title="the Caucasus" label="the Caucasus"/>
<link wikidata="Q229" start="26200" end="26206" title="Cyprus" label="Cyprus"/>
<link wikidata="Q41" start="26208" end="26214" title="Greece" label="Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q794" start="26216" end="26220" title="Iran" label="Iran"/>
<link wikidata="Q16970190" start="26273" end="26299" title="2021 United Kingdom census" label="2021 United Kingdom census"/>
<link wikidata="Q7485854" start="26836" end="26844" title="Yarsanism" label="Yarsanis"/>
<link wikidata="Q18639164" start="27342" end="27353" title="Daily Sabah" label="Daily Sabah"/>
<link wikidata="Q2209390" start="27426" end="27441" title="Sabahat Akkiraz" label="Sabahat Akkiraz"/>
<link wikidata="Q19079" start="27454" end="27457" title="Republican People&amp;#x27;s Party" label="CHP"/>
<link wikidata="Q24912694" start="27552" end="27566" title="KONDA Research and Consultancy" label="KONDA Research"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192701" start="27759" end="27773" title="Western Thrace" label="Western Thrace"/>
<link wikidata="Q307559" start="27818" end="27829" title="Äynu people" label="Äynu people"/>
<link wikidata="Q132956" start="27949" end="27966" title="Taklamakan Desert" label="Taklamakan Desert"/>
<link wikidata="Q170046" start="28385" end="28399" title="Jafar as-Sadiq" label="Jafar as-Sadiq"/>
<link wikidata="Q2095353" start="28466" end="28469" title="God in Islam" label="God"/>
<link wikidata="Q131401" start="28575" end="28581" title="Caliph" label="Caliph"/>
<link wikidata="Q39619" start="28633" end="28636" title="Ali" label="Ali"/>
<link wikidata="Q269785" start="28845" end="28852" title="Twelver" label="Twelver"/>
<link wikidata="Q685567" start="28942" end="28968" title="Ja&amp;#x27;fari jurisprudence" label="Ja&amp;#x27;fari jurisprudence"/>
<link wikidata="Q4822136" start="29351" end="29364" title="Ishikism" label="Erdoğan Çınar"/>
<link wikidata="Q557642" start="29471" end="29487" title="Pir Sultan Abdal" label="Pir Sultan Abdal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1089961" start="29609" end="29620" title="Khurramites" label="Khurramites"/>
<link wikidata="Q2418110" start="29650" end="29656" title="Hurufism" label="Hurufi"/>
<link wikidata="Q37090" start="29725" end="29732" title="Trinity" label="Trinity"/>
<link wikidata="Q655970" start="29784" end="29803" title="Christian mysticism" label="Christian mysticism"/>
<link wikidata="Q45996" start="29846" end="29855" title="mysticism" label="mysticism"/>
<link wikidata="Q469865" start="29881" end="29894" title="Hajji Bektash" label="Hajji Bektash"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043" start="29969" end="29978" title="Christianity" label="Christian"/>
<link wikidata="Q45996" start="29979" end="29985" title="mysticism" label="mystic"/>
<link wikidata="Q676555" start="29986" end="30006" title="St Francis of Assisi" label="St Francis of Assisi"/>
<link wikidata="Q10090" start="30011" end="30016" title="Hindu" label="Hindu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1001" start="30017" end="30031" title="Mahatma Gandhi" label="Mahatma Gandhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q190" start="30056" end="30059" title="God" label="God"/>
<link wikidata="Q47740" start="30070" end="30077" title="Muslims" label="Muslims"/>
<link wikidata="Q46420" start="30360" end="30369" title="Ibn Arabi" label="Ibn Arabi"/>
<link wikidata="Q846856" start="30394" end="30403" title="Emanationism" label="emanation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3783286" start="30574" end="30581" title="al-Haqq" label="al-Haqq"/>
<link wikidata="Q6638897" start="30646" end="30662" title="Sufi metaphysics" label="Sufi metaphysics"/>
<link wikidata="Q172862" start="30679" end="30688" title="al-Hallaj" label="al-Hallaj"/>
<link wikidata="Q1530" start="30768" end="30775" title="Baghdad" label="Baghdad"/>
<link wikidata="Q4750995" start="30821" end="30832" title="Anal Haq" label="Ana al-Haqq"/>
<link wikidata="Q1929278" start="31023" end="31030" title="Khalwati order" label="Halveti"/>
<link wikidata="Q355612" start="31031" end="31038" title="Jerrahi" label="Jerrahi"/>
<link wikidata="Q389821" start="31055" end="31061" title="Rifaʽi" label="Rifaʽi"/>
<link wikidata="Q6638897" start="31189" end="31205" title="Sufi metaphysics" label="Wahdat al-Mawjud"/>
<link wikidata="Q46420" start="31273" end="31282" title="Ibn Arabi" label="Ibn Arabi"/>
<link wikidata="Q183283" start="31431" end="31438" title="Day of Ashura" label="Ashurah"/>
<link wikidata="Q794" start="31478" end="31485" title="Iran" label="Persian"/>
<link wikidata="Q483236" start="31497" end="31503" title="Nowruz" label="Nowruz"/>
<link wikidata="Q19819982" start="31534" end="31538" title="Imamah (Shi&amp;#x27;a doctrine)" label="Imam"/>
<link wikidata="Q6638897" start="31604" end="31620" title="Wahdat al-mawjud" label="Wahdat Al-Mawjud"/>
<link wikidata="Q4993926" start="31665" end="31682" title="Haqq-Muhammad-Ali" label="Haqq-Muhammad-Ali"/>
<link wikidata="Q37090" start="31749" end="31756" title="trinity" label="trinity"/>
<link wikidata="Q4584408" start="32058" end="32081" title="Esoteric interpretation of the Quran" label="mystical interpretation"/>
<link wikidata="Q428" start="32107" end="32118" title="Qur&amp;#x27;an" label="Qur&amp;#x27;an"/>
<link wikidata="Q234764" start="32147" end="32153" title="Sunnah" label="Sunnah"/>
<link wikidata="Q46420" start="32370" end="32379" title="Ibn Arabi" label="Ibn Arabi"/>
<link wikidata="Q9546" start="32381" end="32391" title="Al-Ghazali" label="Al-Ghazali"/>
<link wikidata="Q43347" start="32396" end="32411" title="Rumi" label="Jelalludin Rumi"/>
<link wikidata="Q594939" start="32479" end="32488" title="Initiation" label="initiatic"/>
<link wikidata="Q9510" start="32588" end="32595" title="Reality" label="Reality"/>
<link wikidata="Q487865" start="32922" end="32929" title="dervish" label="dervish"/>
<link wikidata="Q833913" start="33072" end="33077" title="Sufi lodge" label="tekke"/>
<link wikidata="Q4837248" start="33169" end="33173" title="Baba (Alevism)" label="baba"/>
<link wikidata="Q1182135" start="33229" end="33233" title="Dedes" label="dede"/>
<link wikidata="" start="33329" end="33337" title=":tr:Dedebabalık" label="dedebaba"/>
<link wikidata="Q469865" start="33621" end="33639" title="Hajji Bektash Wali" label="Hajji Bektash Wali"/>
<link wikidata="Q736588" start="33673" end="33713" title="Hacıbektaş" label="Hacıbektaş &amp;quot;(Solucakarahüyük)&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q42042" start="33786" end="33797" title="shamanistic" label="shamanistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7004796" start="33824" end="33829" title="Ocak (Alevism)" label="Odjak"/>
<link wikidata="Q2371750" start="33947" end="33957" title="Hıdırellez" label="Hıdırellez"/>
<link wikidata="Q42042" start="34053" end="34062" title="Shamanism" label="Shamanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q5282291" start="34116" end="34131" title="Kurdish culture" label="Kurdish culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q106610911" start="34152" end="34165" title="Kurdish Alevism" label="Kurdish Alevi"/>
<link wikidata="Q256" start="34204" end="34211" title="Turkish language" label="Turkish"/>
<link wikidata="Q839470" start="34217" end="34232" title="ritual language" label="ritual language"/>
<link wikidata="Q18670106" start="34399" end="34407" title="Yazidism" label="Yazidism"/>
<link wikidata="Q183283" start="34425" end="34431" title="Ashura" label="Ashura"/>
<link wikidata="Q6078467" start="34434" end="34445" title="Duzgin Bawo" label="Duzgin Bawo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1454631" start="34448" end="34466" title="Religious humanism" label="Religious humanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7495972" start="34469" end="34491" title="Shi&amp;#x27;a view of Ali" label="Shi&amp;#x27;a view of Ali"/>
<link wikidata="Q939629" start="35352" end="35369" title="Dimitri Kitsikis" label="Kitsikis, Dimitri"/>
<link wikidata="Q192964" start="38109" end="38128" title="Istanbul University" label="Istanbul University"/>
<link wikidata="Q421261" start="38197" end="38203" title="gnosis" label="gnosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7663082" start="38520" end="38545" title="Syracuse University Press" label="Syracuse University Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q896267" start="41178" end="41197" title="Boğaziçi University" label="Boğaziçi University"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="655700" wikidata="Q347275" url="?curid=655700" title="Adalbert, Duke of Lorraine">
<text>Adalbert (c. 1000 – 11 November 1048) was the Duke of Upper Lorraine from 1047 until his death the next year. He was the first son of Gerhard IV, Count of Metz, and Gisela (Gisella), possibly a daughter of Theodoric I, Duke of Upper Lorraine. Gerard&#x27;s father Adalbert had inherited the county of Metz from his brother Gerhard of the Moselle.

Gothelo I, Duke of Lower Lorraine and Upper Lorraine, died in 1044 and was succeeded by his son Godfrey III in Upper Lorraine but was refused Lower Lorraine. Irritated, Godfrey rebelled in that same year and devastated his suzerain&#x27;s lands in Lower Lorraine. He was soon defeated and Adalbert named in his place in Upper Lorraine. Godfrey continued to fight for all Lorraine and Adalbert died in battle against him at Thuin on 11 November 1048. He had no known sons, and Henry III, Holy Roman Emperor immediately nominated his brother Gerhard to succeed him.

==See also==
* Dukes of Lorraine family tree

==Notes==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q347275" start="0" end="8" title="Adalbert, Duke of Lorraine" label="Adalbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q669958" start="46" end="68" title="Duke of Upper Lorraine" label="Duke of Upper Lorraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2638011" start="134" end="159" title="Gerhard IV of Metz" label="Gerhard IV, Count of Metz"/>
<link wikidata="Q576692" start="206" end="241" title="Theodoric I, Duke of Upper Lorraine" label="Theodoric I, Duke of Upper Lorraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q108114643" start="323" end="345" title="Gerhard of the Moselle, Count of Metz" label="Gerhard of the Moselle"/>
<link wikidata="Q714885" start="348" end="357" title="Gothelo I, Duke of Lotharingia" label="Gothelo I"/>
<link wikidata="Q669958" start="359" end="381" title="Duke of Lower Lorraine" label="Duke of Lower Lorraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q155019" start="386" end="400" title="Upper Lorraine" label="Upper Lorraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q552234" start="444" end="455" title="Godfrey III, Duke of Lower Lorraine" label="Godfrey III"/>
<link wikidata="Q153023" start="824" end="853" title="Henry III, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Henry III, Holy Roman Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q704183" start="888" end="895" title="Gerard, Duke of Lorraine" label="Gerhard"/>
<link wikidata="Q2638011" start="928" end="957" title="Dukes of Lorraine family tree" label="Dukes of Lorraine family tree"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="655701" wikidata="Q704183" url="?curid=655701" title="Gerard, Duke of Lorraine">
<text>Gerard ( 1030 – 14 April 1070), also known as Gerard the Wonderful, was a Lotharingian nobleman. He was the count of Metz and Châtenois from 1047 to 1048, when his brother Duke Adalbert resigned them to him upon his becoming the Duke of Upper Lorraine. On Adalbert&#x27;s death the next year, Gerard became duke, a position that he held until his death. In contemporary documents, he is called &quot;Gerard of Alsace&quot; (after the fact that he had some land in Alsace), &quot;Gerard of Chatenoy&quot; (after an ancestral castle near Neufchâteau), or &quot;Gerard of Flanders&quot; (after his wife&#x27;s homeland).

He was the second son of Gerhard IV of Metz, count of Metz, and Gisela who was possibly a daughter of Theodoric I, Duke of Upper Lorraine. Henry III, Holy Roman Emperor, invested Adalbert with Lorraine in 1047 after confiscating it from Godfrey III. Godfrey did not back down, however, and killed Adalbert in battle. Henry subsequently bestowed it on Gerard, but the deposed duke continued to stir. Godfrey had the support of a faction of the nobles who did not want a strong hand at the ducal helm and Gerard was imprisoned. Gerard, however, had the support of the chiefest of his bishops, that of Toul, Bruno of Eguisheim-Dagsburg (later the sainted Pope Leo IX), who procured his liberation in 1049. The emperor gave him troops to assist him in his fight, for the rebels had the support of some elements in the church. Gerard himself remained, as his brother had, faithful to the end to the imperial dynasty and his descendants would remain so as well even into the Hohenstaufen years.

His alliance with the church was regular but inconstant and he afforded his protection to Moyenmoutier Abbey, Saint-Mihiel Abbey, and Remiremont Abbey. The former was the abbey of Cardinal Humbert of Silva Candida, who excommunicated the patriarch of Constantinople, Michael I Cerularius, in 1054, thus precipitating the Great Schism, and the latter was his own final resting place.

On 18 June 1053, Gerard and Prince Rudolf of Benevento led papal and Swabian troops into battle on behalf of Pope Leo. This was the Battle of Civitate and it was a disastrous loss for the pope. His enemy, the Normans, under Humphrey of Hauteville and Richard of Aversa, defeated his allies and captured his person, taking him prisoner in Benevento. Gerard, however, returned to Lorraine.

Among his other construction projects, was that of the castle of Prény, in the centre of the duchy, the beginnings of the capital city, Nancy. He died at Remiremont while trying to kill a revolt. Poisoning was suspected. The date of his death is either 14 April or 11 August.

He was married to Hedwige of Namur (or of Flanders), daughter of Albert II, Count of Namur, and Regelindis of Lower Lorraine, daughter of Gothelo I, Duke of Lorraine. This marriage helped patch up relations with the baronage. They had the following issue:

*Theodoric II, Duke of Lorraine (c. 1055 – 1115), successor in Lorraine
*Gerard (1057–1108), count of Vaudémont
*Beatrice, married Stephen I, Count of Burgundy, Mâcon and Vienne
*Gisela, abbess of Remiremont

He was the patrilineal ancestor of the line of dukes which ruled Lorraine until 1737 and of the Habsburg-Lorraine dynasty that ruled Tuscany (1737–1859), the Holy Roman Empire (1745–1807), Austria-Hungary (1780–1918), the Duchy of Parma (1814–1847), Duchy of Modena (1815–1859) and Mexico (1864–1867).

==Ancestry==
==See also==
*House of Lorraine

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q704183" start="0" end="6" title="Gerard, Duke of Lorraine" label="Gerard"/>
<link wikidata="Q704183" start="46" end="66" title="Gerard, Duke of Lorraine" label="Gerard the Wonderful"/>
<link wikidata="Q6673921" start="74" end="85" title="Lotharingia" label="Lotharingia"/>
<link wikidata="Q22690" start="117" end="121" title="Metz" label="Metz"/>
<link wikidata="Q770509" start="126" end="135" title="Châtenois, Vosges" label="Châtenois"/>
<link wikidata="Q347275" start="172" end="185" title="Adalbert, Duke of Lorraine" label="Duke Adalbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q669958" start="229" end="251" title="Duke of Upper Lorraine" label="Duke of Upper Lorraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q131581675" start="536" end="547" title="Neufchâteau, Vosges" label="Neufchâteau"/>
<link wikidata="Q576692" start="721" end="756" title="Theodoric I, Duke of Upper Lorraine" label="Theodoric I, Duke of Upper Lorraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q153023" start="758" end="787" title="Henry III, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Henry III, Holy Roman Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q552234" start="856" end="867" title="Godfrey the Bearded" label="Godfrey III"/>
<link wikidata="Q29182" start="1201" end="1207" title="bishop" label="bishop"/>
<link wikidata="Q328001" start="1218" end="1222" title="Roman Catholic Diocese of Toul" label="Toul"/>
<link wikidata="Q58559" start="1271" end="1282" title="Pope Leo IX" label="Pope Leo IX"/>
<link wikidata="Q130875" start="1588" end="1600" title="Hohenstaufen" label="Hohenstaufen"/>
<link wikidata="Q211815" start="1699" end="1717" title="Moyenmoutier Abbey" label="Moyenmoutier Abbey"/>
<link wikidata="Q2820694" start="1719" end="1737" title="Saint Mihiel Abbey" label="Saint-Mihiel Abbey"/>
<link wikidata="Q334124" start="1743" end="1759" title="Remiremont Abbey" label="Remiremont Abbey"/>
<link wikidata="Q68335" start="1798" end="1822" title="Humbert of Silva Candida" label="Humbert of Silva Candida"/>
<link wikidata="Q60719" start="1847" end="1874" title="Ecumenical Patriarch of Constantinople" label="patriarch of Constantinople"/>
<link wikidata="Q68482" start="1876" end="1896" title="Michael I Cerularius" label="Michael I Cerularius"/>
<link wikidata="Q51648" start="1930" end="1942" title="East–West Schism" label="Great Schism"/>
<link wikidata="Q609856" start="2028" end="2047" title="Rudolf of Benevento" label="Rudolf of Benevento"/>
<link wikidata="Q11812551" start="2062" end="2068" title="Swabia" label="Swabia"/>
<link wikidata="Q61100" start="2125" end="2143" title="Battle of Civitate" label="Battle of Civitate"/>
<link wikidata="Q83418" start="2202" end="2209" title="Normans" label="Normans"/>
<link wikidata="Q982697" start="2217" end="2239" title="Humphrey of Hauteville" label="Humphrey of Hauteville"/>
<link wikidata="Q982684" start="2244" end="2261" title="Richard of Aversa" label="Richard of Aversa"/>
<link wikidata="Q213641" start="2447" end="2452" title="Prény" label="Prény"/>
<link wikidata="Q40898" start="2518" end="2523" title="Nancy, France" label="Nancy"/>
<link wikidata="Q262528" start="2724" end="2749" title="Albert II, Count of Namur" label="Albert II, Count of Namur"/>
<link wikidata="Q714885" start="2797" end="2824" title="Gothelo I, Duke of Lorraine" label="Gothelo I, Duke of Lorraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q700593" start="2917" end="2947" title="Theodoric II, Duke of Lorraine" label="Theodoric II, Duke of Lorraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q219773" start="3018" end="3027" title="Vaudémont" label="Vaudémont"/>
<link wikidata="Q22328248" start="3029" end="3037" title="Beatrice of Lorraine, Countess of Burgundy" label="Beatrice"/>
<link wikidata="Q1339109" start="3047" end="3075" title="Stephen I, Count of Burgundy" label="Stephen I, Count of Burgundy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1424981" start="3077" end="3082" title="List of counts of Mâcon" label="Mâcon"/>
<link wikidata="Q127606612" start="3087" end="3093" title="Count of Vienne" label="Vienne"/>
<link wikidata="Q334124" start="3103" end="3123" title="abbess of Remiremont" label="abbess of Remiremont"/>
<link wikidata="Q2638011" start="3455" end="3472" title="House of Lorraine" label="House of Lorraine"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="655702" wikidata="Q700593" url="?curid=655702" title="Theodoric II, Duke of Lorraine">
<text>Theodoric II (died 30 December 1115), called the Valiant, was the Duke of Lorraine from 1070 to his death. He was the son and successor of Gerhard and Hedwige of Namur. He is sometimes numbered &quot;Theodoric I&quot; if the Dukes of the House of Ardennes, who ruled in Upper Lorraine from 959 to 1033, are ignored in favour of the dukes of Lower Lorraine as predecessors of the later Dukes of Lorraine.

In fact, Sophia, the daughter of Duke Frederick II of the House of Ardennes, who had inherited the counties of Bar and Montbéliard, had a husband named Louis, who contested the succession. In order to receive the support of his brother, Theodoric gave his brother the County of Vaudémont and convened an assembly of nobles, who elected him duke over Louis. Soon Louis was dead, but his son, Theodoric II of Bar, claimed the succession anyway. However, Emperor Henry IV confirmed Theodoric the Valiant in the duchy. Probably, for this reason, Theodoric remained faithful to the emperors throughout his rule. He fought the Saxons while they were at war with the Emperor between 1070 and 1078 and he generally opposed the popes Gregory VII and Urban II when they were in conflict with the Emperor.

In 1095, he planned to take up the Cross (i.e., go on Crusade, specifically the First), but his ill health provoked him to drop out, nevertheless convincing his barons to go east. Thereafter, he took little part in imperial affairs, preferring not to intervene between Henry IV and his son Henry, or against Lothair of Supplinburg, duke of Saxony.

==Marriage and children==
His first wife was Hedwig (died 1085 or 1090), daughter of Frederick, count of Formbach. They married around 1075 and had the following issue:
* Simon (1076–1138), his successor as Duke of Lorraine, married to Adelaide of Leuven (d. 1158), daughter of his stepmother Gertrude and Henry III, Count of Leuven. 
* Gertrude (died 1144), married Floris II of Holland

His second wife was Gertrude of Flanders (c.1070–1117), daughter of Robert I of Flanders and Gertrude of Saxony. She was the widow of Henry III, Count of Leuven (d. 1095), with four daughters. They married in 1106 and had:
* Thierry of Alsace &quot;Theodoric&quot; ( – 1168), lord of Bitche and also Count of Flanders from 1128. Married to Sibylla of Anjou
* Henry I (died 1165), bishop of Toul
* Ida, married Sigefroy (died 1104), count of Burghausen
* Ermengarde, married Bernard de Brancion
* Gisela, married Frederick, count of Saarbrücken

==See also==
* House of Lorraine

==References==
==Sources==
*</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q700593" start="0" end="12" title="Theodoric II, Duke of Lorraine" label="Theodoric II"/>
<link wikidata="Q700593" start="45" end="56" title="Theodoric II, Duke of Lorraine" label="the Valiant"/>
<link wikidata="Q669958" start="66" end="82" title="Duke of Lorraine" label="Duke of Lorraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q704183" start="139" end="146" title="Gerard, Duke of Lorraine" label="Gerhard"/>
<link wikidata="Q151985" start="247" end="255" title="Ardennes" label="Ardennes"/>
<link wikidata="Q155019" start="270" end="284" title="Upper Lorraine" label="Upper Lorraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q669958" start="332" end="355" title="List of kings and dukes of Lorraine" label="dukes of Lower Lorraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q291762" start="414" end="420" title="Sophie, Countess of Bar" label="Sophia"/>
<link wikidata="Q700599" start="443" end="455" title="Frederick II, Duke of Upper Lorraine" label="Frederick II"/>
<link wikidata="Q706679" start="504" end="519" title="Duchy of Bar" label="counties of Bar"/>
<link wikidata="Q154715" start="524" end="535" title="Montbéliard" label="Montbéliard"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="557" end="562" title="Louis, Count of Montbéliard" label="Louis"/>
<link wikidata="Q22132151" start="673" end="692" title="Count of Vaudémont" label="County of Vaudémont"/>
<link wikidata="Q558299" start="796" end="815" title="Theodoric II of Bar" label="Theodoric II of Bar"/>
<link wikidata="Q60094" start="865" end="873" title="Henry IV, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Henry IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q101985" start="1026" end="1032" title="Saxons" label="Saxons"/>
<link wikidata="Q19546" start="1124" end="1128" title="pope" label="pope"/>
<link wikidata="Q133063" start="1130" end="1141" title="Pope Gregory VII" label="Gregory VII"/>
<link wikidata="Q30578" start="1146" end="1154" title="Urban II" label="Urban II"/>
<link wikidata="Q40843" start="1236" end="1241" title="Cross" label="Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q12546" start="1255" end="1262" title="Crusade" label="Crusade"/>
<link wikidata="Q51649" start="1281" end="1286" title="First Crusade" label="First"/>
<link wikidata="Q151707" start="1491" end="1496" title="Henry V, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Henry"/>
<link wikidata="Q77189" start="1509" end="1531" title="Lothair of Supplinburg" label="Lothair of Supplinburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q166759" start="1533" end="1547" title="duke of Saxony" label="duke of Saxony"/>
<link wikidata="Q2098190" start="1595" end="1601" title="Hedwig of Formbach" label="Hedwig"/>
<link wikidata="Q586543" start="1655" end="1663" title="Formbach" label="Formbach"/>
<link wikidata="Q252024" start="1721" end="1726" title="Simon I, Duke of Lorraine" label="Simon"/>
<link wikidata="Q669958" start="1757" end="1773" title="Duke of Lorraine" label="Duke of Lorraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q4681825" start="1786" end="1804" title="Adelaide of Leuven" label="Adelaide of Leuven"/>
<link wikidata="Q3104402" start="1843" end="1851" title="Gertrude of Flanders, Duchess of Lorraine" label="Gertrude"/>
<link wikidata="Q967088" start="1856" end="1882" title="Henry III, Count of Leuven" label="Henry III, Count of Leuven"/>
<link wikidata="Q467022" start="1887" end="1895" title="Petronilla of Lorraine" label="Gertrude"/>
<link wikidata="Q77250" start="1917" end="1937" title="Floris II, Count of Holland" label="Floris II of Holland"/>
<link wikidata="Q3104402" start="1959" end="1979" title="Gertrude of Flanders, Duchess of Lorraine" label="Gertrude of Flanders"/>
<link wikidata="Q333346" start="2007" end="2027" title="Robert I of Flanders" label="Robert I of Flanders"/>
<link wikidata="Q1884931" start="2032" end="2050" title="Gertrude of Saxony" label="Gertrude of Saxony"/>
<link wikidata="Q967088" start="2073" end="2099" title="Henry III, Count of Leuven" label="Henry III, Count of Leuven"/>
<link wikidata="Q224958" start="2164" end="2181" title="Thierry, Count of Flanders" label="Thierry of Alsace"/>
<link wikidata="Q22754" start="2223" end="2229" title="Bitche" label="Bitche"/>
<link wikidata="Q1824016" start="2239" end="2256" title="Count of Flanders" label="Count of Flanders"/>
<link wikidata="Q466230" start="2279" end="2295" title="Sibylla of Anjou" label="Sibylla of Anjou"/>
<link wikidata="Q328001" start="2319" end="2333" title="bishop of Toul" label="bishop of Toul"/>
<link wikidata="Q262669" start="2380" end="2390" title="Burghausen, Altötting" label="Burghausen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1724" start="2471" end="2482" title="Saarbrücken" label="Saarbrücken"/>
<link wikidata="Q2638011" start="2499" end="2516" title="House of Lorraine" label="House of Lorraine"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="655703" wikidata="Q252024" url="?curid=655703" title="Simon I, Duke of Lorraine">
<text>Simon I (1076 – 13 or 14 January 1139) was the duke of Lorraine from 1115 to his death, the eldest son and successor of Theodoric II and Hedwig of Formbach and a half-brother of Emperor Lothair III.

Continuing the policy of friendship with the Holy Roman Emperor, he accompanied the Emperor Henry V to the Diet of Worms of 1122, where the Investiture Controversy was resolved.

He had stormy relations with the episcopates of his realm: fighting with Stephen of Bar, bishop of Metz, and Adalberon, archbishop of Trier, both allies of the count of Bar, whose claim to Lorraine against Simon&#x27;s father had been quashed by Henry V&#x27;s father Henry IV. Though Adalberon excommunicated him, Pope Innocent II lifted it. He was a friend of Bernard of Clairvaux and he built many abbeys in his duchy, including that of Sturzelbronn in 1135. There was he interred after his original burial in Saint-Dié.

==Children of Simon and Adelaide==
Simon I of Lorraine married his step-sister, Adelaide, daughter of Henry III of Leuven. Their children were:
* Matthias, his successor in Lorraine
* Robert, lord of Floranges (near Thionville)
* Agatha of Lorraine, married Reginald III, Count of Burgundy (Renaud III), the first Free Count
* Hedwige, married Frederick III, count of Toul
* Bertha, married Margrave Hermann III of Baden
* Mathilde, married Gottfried I, Count of Sponheim
* Baldwin
* John

==See also==
* House of Lorraine
* Abbey de Sainte-Marie-au-Bois

== References ==
==Sources==
*

==External links==
* genealogie-mittelalter.de</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q252024" start="0" end="7" title="Simon I, Duke of Lorraine" label="Simon I"/>
<link wikidata="Q669958" start="47" end="63" title="duke of Lorraine" label="duke of Lorraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q700593" start="120" end="132" title="Theodoric II, Duke of Lorraine" label="Theodoric II"/>
<link wikidata="Q2098190" start="137" end="155" title="Hedwig of Formbach" label="Hedwig of Formbach"/>
<link wikidata="Q77189" start="186" end="197" title="Lothair III" label="Lothair III"/>
<link wikidata="Q181765" start="245" end="263" title="Holy Roman Emperor" label="Holy Roman Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q151707" start="284" end="299" title="Emperor Henry V" label="Emperor Henry V"/>
<link wikidata="Q154439" start="307" end="320" title="Concordat of Worms" label="Diet of Worms"/>
<link wikidata="Q154764" start="340" end="363" title="Investiture Controversy" label="Investiture Controversy"/>
<link wikidata="Q583909" start="452" end="466" title="Stephen of Bar" label="Stephen of Bar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1528432" start="468" end="482" title="bishop of Metz" label="bishop of Metz"/>
<link wikidata="Q2637416" start="488" end="497" title="Adalberon, Archbishop of Trier" label="Adalberon"/>
<link wikidata="Q708778" start="499" end="518" title="archbishop of Trier" label="archbishop of Trier"/>
<link wikidata="Q706679" start="539" end="551" title="count of Bar" label="count of Bar"/>
<link wikidata="Q60094" start="647" end="655" title="Emperor Henry IV" label="Henry IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q170386" start="694" end="710" title="Pope Innocent II" label="Pope Innocent II"/>
<link wikidata="Q188411" start="741" end="761" title="Bernard of Clairvaux" label="Bernard of Clairvaux"/>
<link wikidata="Q22332" start="819" end="831" title="Sturzelbronn" label="Sturzelbronn"/>
<link wikidata="Q34427" start="892" end="901" title="Saint-Dié" label="Saint-Dié"/>
<link wikidata="Q4681825" start="984" end="992" title="Adelaide of Leuven" label="Adelaide"/>
<link wikidata="Q967088" start="1006" end="1025" title="Henry III of Leuven" label="Henry III of Leuven"/>
<link wikidata="Q700607" start="1050" end="1058" title="Matthias I, Duke of Lorraine" label="Matthias"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1104" end="1113" title="Floranges" label="Floranges"/>
<link wikidata="Q22640" start="1120" end="1130" title="Thionville" label="Thionville"/>
<link wikidata="Q4691505" start="1134" end="1152" title="Agatha of Lorraine" label="Agatha of Lorraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q144473" start="1162" end="1193" title="Renaud III, Count of Burgundy" label="Reginald III, Count of Burgundy"/>
<link wikidata="Q154728" start="1272" end="1276" title="Toul" label="Toul"/>
<link wikidata="Q157802" start="1295" end="1303" title="Margrave" label="Margrave"/>
<link wikidata="Q69353" start="1304" end="1324" title="Hermann III of Baden" label="Hermann III of Baden"/>
<link wikidata="Q2638011" start="1409" end="1426" title="House of Lorraine" label="House of Lorraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2820717" start="1429" end="1458" title="Abbey de Sainte-Marie-au-Bois" label="Abbey de Sainte-Marie-au-Bois"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="655704" wikidata="Q700607" url="?curid=655704" title="Matthias I, Duke of Lorraine">
<text>Matthias I (c. 1119 – 13 May 1176) was the duke of Lorraine from 1138 to his death as the eldest son and successor of Simon I and Adelaide. Like his forefathers going back to Theodoric II and even to Adalbert, he was a stern supporter of the king of Germany and Holy Roman Emperor. He married Bertha (sometimes called Judith), daughter of Frederick II, Duke of Swabia, and therefore niece of the Hohenstaufen king Conrad III and sister of Frederick Barbarossa, future emperor.

He accompanied Barbarossa on a number of important occasions, including his imperial coronation by Pope Adrian IV in Rome, 1155. He assisted the emperor in his wars against Adrian and his successor Alexander III and the kings of France and Sicily. He extended his own ducal demesne at the expense of the bishop of Toul, but was an important donor to the Church and founder of abbeys.
He died in 1176 and was interred in his abbey of Clairlieu in Villers-lès-Nancy. By his Hohenstaufen marriage (1138), he had:

*Simon (died 1205), his successor in Lorraine
*Frederick (died 1206), count of Bitche and his nephew&#x27;s successor
*Judith (died 1173), married Stephen II, count of Auxonne (1170)
*Alice (died 1200), married Hugh III, Duke of Burgundy
*Theoderic (died 1181), bishop of Metz (1174–1179)
*Matthias (died 1208), count of Toul
*Unnamed daughter who died young

==See also==
*Dukes of Lorraine family tree

==References==
==Sources==
*</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q700607" start="0" end="10" title="Matthias I, Duke of Lorraine" label="Matthias I"/>
<link wikidata="Q669958" start="43" end="59" title="duke of Lorraine" label="duke of Lorraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q252024" start="118" end="125" title="Simon I, Duke of Lorraine" label="Simon I"/>
<link wikidata="Q4681825" start="130" end="138" title="Adelaide of Leuven" label="Adelaide"/>
<link wikidata="Q700593" start="175" end="187" title="Theodoric II, Duke of Lorraine" label="Theodoric II"/>
<link wikidata="Q347275" start="200" end="208" title="Adalbert, Duke of Lorraine" label="Adalbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q7883514" start="242" end="257" title="king of Germany" label="king of Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q181765" start="262" end="280" title="Holy Roman Emperor" label="Holy Roman Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q60650591" start="293" end="299" title="Bertha, duchess of Lorraine" label="Bertha"/>
<link wikidata="Q552414" start="339" end="367" title="Frederick II, Duke of Swabia" label="Frederick II, Duke of Swabia"/>
<link wikidata="Q130875" start="396" end="408" title="Hohenstaufen" label="Hohenstaufen"/>
<link wikidata="Q157133" start="414" end="424" title="Conrad III of Germany" label="Conrad III"/>
<link wikidata="Q79789" start="439" end="459" title="Frederick Barbarossa" label="Frederick Barbarossa"/>
<link wikidata="Q132845" start="577" end="591" title="Pope Adrian IV" label="Pope Adrian IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q220" start="595" end="599" title="Rome" label="Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q160116" start="676" end="689" title="Pope Alexander III" label="Alexander III"/>
<link wikidata="Q79868" start="698" end="713" title="kings of France" label="kings of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q1460" start="718" end="724" title="Sicily" label="Sicily"/>
<link wikidata="Q328001" start="782" end="796" title="bishop of Toul" label="bishop of Toul"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="911" end="920" title="Clairlieu" label="Clairlieu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414358" start="924" end="941" title="Villers-lès-Nancy" label="Villers-lès-Nancy"/>
<link wikidata="Q663023" start="990" end="995" title="Simon II, Duke of Lorraine" label="Simon"/>
<link wikidata="Q178007" start="1036" end="1045" title="Frederick I, Duke of Lorraine" label="Frederick"/>
<link wikidata="Q22754" start="1068" end="1074" title="Bitche" label="Bitche"/>
<link wikidata="Q11920998" start="1136" end="1164" title="Stephen II of Auxonne" label="Stephen II, count of Auxonne"/>
<link wikidata="Q464908" start="1200" end="1226" title="Hugh III, Duke of Burgundy" label="Hugh III, Duke of Burgundy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1528432" start="1251" end="1265" title="bishop of Metz" label="bishop of Metz"/>
<link wikidata="Q2638011" start="1363" end="1392" title="Dukes of Lorraine family tree" label="Dukes of Lorraine family tree"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="655705" wikidata="Q663023" url="?curid=655705" title="Simon II, Duke of Lorraine">
<text>Simon II (1140 – 4 January 1207) was the Duke of Lorraine from 1176 to 1205. He was the son and successor of Matthias I and Bertha (also called Judith), daughter of Frederick II, Duke of Swabia.

His mother wished for her second son, Frederick, to succeed and so Simon was forced to convene an assembly of the nobles to confirm his succession. He was in turn forced to recognise certain feudal privileges and create the Estates of Lorraine, a form of parliament. He also gave Bitche as an appanage to Frederick who was not satisfied and revolted against Simon. The war lasted three years until the Treaty of Ribemont, whereby Simon retained the southern, francophone, half of the duchy and Frederick took the northern, germanophone, portion.

He married Ida (died 1227), daughter of Gerard I, count of Mâcon and Vienne, and Maurette of Salins. They had no children. He designated his nephew, Frederick, son of Frederick, as his successor and ceded, in 1202, the suzerainty over the county of Vaudémont to Count Theobald I of Bar. Simon abdicated and retired to a monastery in 1205. He died two years later. He had no descendants and was succeeded by his brother.

==See also==
* House of Lorraine</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q663023" start="0" end="8" title="Simon II, Duke of Lorraine" label="Simon II"/>
<link wikidata="Q669958" start="41" end="57" title="Duke of Lorraine" label="Duke of Lorraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q700607" start="109" end="119" title="Matthias I, Duke of Lorraine" label="Matthias I"/>
<link wikidata="Q60650591" start="124" end="130" title="Bertha, duchess of Lorraine" label="Bertha"/>
<link wikidata="Q552414" start="165" end="193" title="Frederick II, Duke of Swabia" label="Frederick II, Duke of Swabia"/>
<link wikidata="Q178007" start="234" end="243" title="Frederick I, Duke of Lorraine" label="Frederick"/>
<link wikidata="Q22754" start="476" end="482" title="Bitche" label="Bitche"/>
<link wikidata="Q617593" start="489" end="497" title="appanage" label="appanage"/>
<link wikidata="Q15916193" start="598" end="616" title="Treaty of Ribemont (1179)" label="Treaty of Ribemont"/>
<link wikidata="Q1003588" start="655" end="666" title="francophone" label="francophone"/>
<link wikidata="Q188" start="719" end="731" title="germanophone" label="germanophone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1424981" start="793" end="807" title="count of Mâcon" label="count of Mâcon"/>
<link wikidata="Q26849" start="812" end="818" title="Vienne, Isère" label="Vienne"/>
<link wikidata="Q571529" start="892" end="901" title="Frederick II, Duke of Lorraine" label="Frederick"/>
<link wikidata="Q219773" start="992" end="1001" title="Vaudémont" label="Vaudémont"/>
<link wikidata="Q664188" start="1011" end="1028" title="Theobald I of Bar" label="Theobald I of Bar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2638011" start="1179" end="1196" title="House of Lorraine" label="House of Lorraine"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="655706" wikidata="Q178007" url="?curid=655706" title="Frederick I, Duke of Lorraine">
<text>Frederick I ( or ) (c. 1143 – 7 April 1206) was the duke of Lorraine from 1205 to his death. He was the second son of Matthias I and Bertha (also called Judith), daughter of Frederick II, Duke of Swabia. He succeeded his brother, Simon II, who had already given him the county of Bitche in 1176 and had recognised him over the northern, germanophone half of Lorraine by the Treaty of Ribemont of 1179. Judith had wanted him to succeed to all their father&#x27;s inheritance, but a three-year civil war only secured him Bitche and a half-portion.

Simon retired to a monastery in 1205, recognising Frederick&#x27;s son Frederick as heir. Frederick inherited it all nevertheless, but died a year later and it went to his son by Wierzchoslawa Ludmilla (1150–1223), daughter of Mieszko III the Old, duke of Greater Poland and high duke of all Poland. Their children were:

*Frederick, his successor in Lorraine
*Thierry the Devil (&quot;le Diable&quot;), lord of Autigny, married Gertrude de Montmorency, daughter of Mathieu II le Grand, Constable of France.
*Henry the Lombard, who built the castle of Bayon
*Philip (died 1243), lord of Gerbéviller
*Matthias (1170–1217), bishop of Toul
*Agatha (died 1242), abbess of Remiremont
*Judith, married Henry II, Count of Salm
*Hediwge (died 1228), married Henry I, Count of Zweibrücken
*Cunigunda (died 1214), married Waleran III of Limburg

==References==
==Sources==
* 142</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q178007" start="0" end="11" title="Frederick I, Duke of Lorraine" label="Frederick I"/>
<link wikidata="Q669958" start="52" end="68" title="duke of Lorraine" label="duke of Lorraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q700607" start="118" end="128" title="Matthias I, Duke of Lorraine" label="Matthias I"/>
<link wikidata="Q60650591" start="133" end="139" title="Bertha, duchess of Lorraine" label="Bertha"/>
<link wikidata="Q552414" start="174" end="202" title="Frederick II, Duke of Swabia" label="Frederick II, Duke of Swabia"/>
<link wikidata="Q663023" start="230" end="238" title="Simon II, Duke of Lorraine" label="Simon II"/>
<link wikidata="Q22754" start="280" end="286" title="Bitche" label="Bitche"/>
<link wikidata="Q188" start="337" end="349" title="germanophone" label="germanophone"/>
<link wikidata="Q15916193" start="374" end="400" title="Treaty of Ribemont (1179)" label="Treaty of Ribemont of 1179"/>
<link wikidata="Q8465" start="492" end="501" title="civil war" label="civil war"/>
<link wikidata="Q571529" start="618" end="627" title="Frederick II, Duke of Lorraine" label="Frederick"/>
<link wikidata="Q5464191" start="726" end="748" title="Wierzchoslawa Ludmilla of Greater Poland" label="Wierzchoslawa Ludmilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q54013" start="774" end="793" title="Mieszko III the Old" label="Mieszko III the Old"/>
<link wikidata="Q211371" start="803" end="817" title="Greater Poland" label="Greater Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q193360" start="822" end="845" title="King of Poland" label="high duke of all Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q571529" start="870" end="879" title="Frederick II, Duke of Lorraine" label="Frederick"/>
<link wikidata="Q1112839" start="959" end="966" title="Autigny, Seine-Maritime" label="Autigny"/>
<link wikidata="Q351610" start="1013" end="1032" title="Matthieu II of Montmorency" label="Mathieu II le Grand"/>
<link wikidata="Q346871" start="1034" end="1053" title="Constable of France" label="Constable of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q654024" start="1099" end="1104" title="Bayon" label="Bayon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2969312" start="1134" end="1145" title="Château de Gerbéviller" label="Gerbéviller"/>
<link wikidata="Q328001" start="1169" end="1183" title="bishop of Toul" label="bishop of Toul"/>
<link wikidata="Q504853" start="1215" end="1225" title="Remiremont" label="Remiremont"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1243" end="1266" title="Henry II, Count of Salm" label="Henry II, Count of Salm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1496040" start="1297" end="1326" title="Henry I, Count of Zweibrücken" label="Henry I, Count of Zweibrücken"/>
<link wikidata="Q83660" start="1359" end="1381" title="Waleran III of Limburg" label="Waleran III of Limburg"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="655707" wikidata="Q571529" url="?curid=655707" title="Frederick II, Duke of Lorraine">
<text>Frederick II ( – c. 1213) was the Duke of Lorraine from 7 April 1206 until his death in 1213. He was the son of Frederick I, Duke of Lorraine and Wierzchoslawa Ludmilla of Greater Poland. He succeeded his father as Duke of Lorraine upon his father&#x27;s death.

== Marriage and issue ==
Frederick married Agnes of Bar (or Thomassine, according to different genealogies) (d. 1226), daughter of Theobald I, Count of Bar. Their children were: 
* Theobald I, Duke of Lorraine (b. c. 1191, d. 17 February 1220), his successor
* Matthias II, Duke of Lorraine (b. c. 1193, d. 9 February 1251), who succeeded Theobald I
* Jacques, Bishop of Metz
* Renaut, Count of Castres
* Lorette, who married Simon II.

==See also==
*Dukes of Lorraine family tree

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q571529" start="0" end="12" title="Frederick II, Duke of Lorraine" label="Frederick II"/>
<link wikidata="Q669958" start="34" end="50" title="Duke of Lorraine" label="Duke of Lorraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q178007" start="112" end="141" title="Frederick I, Duke of Lorraine" label="Frederick I, Duke of Lorraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q5464191" start="146" end="186" title="Wierzchoslawa Ludmilla of Greater Poland" label="Wierzchoslawa Ludmilla of Greater Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q706679" start="315" end="318" title="Duchy of Bar" label="Bar"/>
<link wikidata="Q664188" start="394" end="418" title="Theobald I, Count of Bar" label="Theobald I, Count of Bar"/>
<link wikidata="Q571564" start="444" end="472" title="Theobald I, Duke of Lorraine" label="Theobald I, Duke of Lorraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q571439" start="524" end="553" title="Matthias II, Duke of Lorraine" label="Matthias II, Duke of Lorraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2638011" start="714" end="743" title="Dukes of Lorraine family tree" label="Dukes of Lorraine family tree"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="655708" wikidata="Q571564" url="?curid=655708" title="Theobald I, Duke of Lorraine">
<text>Theobald I ( or ) (c. 1191 – 17 February 1220) was the duke of Lorraine from 1213 to his death. He was the son and successor of Frederick II and Agnes of Bar.

== Battle of Bouvines ==
Theobald joined Otto IV, Holy Roman Emperor, on 4 July 1214 at the Battle of Bouvines, where he was taken in prisoner in the rout. He was quickly liberated.

== Vassals ==
As duke of Lorraine Theobald was a powerful lord, almost under the Holy Roman Empire and almost ruling independently. He had several important vassals but many of them strove for independence quite successfully. These vassals included the Bishops of Metz, the Bishops of Toul, the Bishops of Verdun, the County of Bar (though these counts were not de facto part of Lorraine at this point), the lord of Commercy, the Count of Vaudémont, and the Counts of Chiny (also lords of Montmédy). However the dukes suzerainty over these lordships was probably not much more than nominal.

== Other affairs ==
He was suggested by the abbot Gervase to be one of the leaders for the 5th crusade but he was probably already embroiled in the Champagne war of succession and had to decline.

== Champagne war of Succession ==
In 1216, in the Champagne War of Succession, he supported Erard I, Count of Brienne, in his quarrel with Theobald IV, Count of Champagne, who was supported by Philip II of France, Frederick II, Holy Roman Emperor, and Henry II of Bar. Frederick, the suzerain of Lorraine, considered it a felony to support a candidate he opposed and occupied the city of Rosheim, which he had given to Frederick II of Lorraine. Theobald responded in 1218, retaking Rosheim and ravaging Alsace. Frederick did not hesitate to counterattack and invaded Lorraine and took and burned Nancy, its capital. He then besieged and took the castle of Amance, where Theobald was taking refuge. He was imprisoned and constrained to recognize the suzerainty of the count of Champagne, the legitimacy of Erard of Brienne&#x27;s claim to Champagne, and relinquish several lordships to attain liberty again. He never recovered his lost land and prestige and died in 1220.

== Kinslayer ==
Between 3 and 10 April 1217 (during the Champagne war of Succession) he searched for his problematic paternal uncle the bishop of Toul Matthew de Lorraine, found him on the path Void Parupt in Saint-Michel-sur-Meurthe, and killed him with a spear (implying a fight rather than a murder). The weapon he used to kill the unruly bishop was apparently borrowed from Simon of Joinville, who was an ally during the Champagne war of Succession and probably also a friend.

== Lands and possible Hospitallier Association ==
As duke of Lorraine, his chief seat was at the city of Nancy. In 1212, through his wife Gertrude, he inherited the County of Dagsburg and its capital, the Chateau de Dabo and also Dorlisheim. Considering his ancestors&#x27; association with the Knights Hospitallier, it seems likely that the hospital was founded by him. Through a grant by the Emperor he also had Rosheim, but when he interfered in the War of the Succession of Champagne, it was taken away from him.

He also held the castles of Amance, Lunéville, Château des Ducs de Lorraine, and many more.

== Character/Personality ==
In accounts, the dukes of Lorraine are always referred to as extremely handsome and talented and, based on Theobald&#x27;s military adventures, it is not unlikely that he was brave. Despite this, he seems to have been either stubborn or loyal, after refusing to back down when his liege joined the opposing side of the Champagne War of Succession. Opposing his Liege cost him dearly and his violent reactions against his liege show that he was too proud to seek to smooth things over. The killing of his uncle Matthew, Bishop of Toul, does not reflect well on his personality, especially when such actions were considered particularly egregious in the Middle Ages.

== Marriage and Succession ==
He had married, in 1206, Gertrude, only child and heir of Albert II, count of Dagsburg and Metz. They had no children, and she was just 16 years old when her husband died. His successor was Matthias his brother; his widow remarried his old rival, Theobald of Champagne.

==See also==
* Dukes of Lorraine family tree

==References==
==Sources==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q571564" start="0" end="10" title="Theobald I, Duke of Lorraine" label="Theobald I"/>
<link wikidata="Q669958" start="55" end="71" title="duke of Lorraine" label="duke of Lorraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q571529" start="128" end="140" title="Frederick II, Duke of Lorraine" label="Frederick II"/>
<link wikidata="Q151457" start="201" end="228" title="Otto IV, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Otto IV, Holy Roman Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q830626" start="252" end="270" title="Battle of Bouvines" label="Battle of Bouvines"/>
<link wikidata="Q1528432" start="596" end="611" title="List of bishops of Metz" label="Bishops of Metz"/>
<link wikidata="Q328001" start="617" end="632" title="Roman Catholic Diocese of Toul" label="Bishops of Toul"/>
<link wikidata="Q877817" start="638" end="655" title="Roman Catholic Diocese of Verdun" label="Bishops of Verdun"/>
<link wikidata="Q706679" start="661" end="674" title="Duchy of Bar" label="County of Bar"/>
<link wikidata="Q212456" start="759" end="767" title="Commercy" label="Commercy"/>
<link wikidata="Q22132151" start="773" end="791" title="Count of Vaudémont" label="Count of Vaudémont"/>
<link wikidata="Q849833" start="801" end="816" title="Counts of Chiny" label="Counts of Chiny"/>
<link wikidata="Q229792" start="832" end="840" title="Montmédy" label="Montmédy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3119008" start="1182" end="1209" title="War of Succession (Champagne)" label="Champagne War of Succession"/>
<link wikidata="Q287646" start="1224" end="1249" title="Erard of Brienne-Ramerupt" label="Erard I, Count of Brienne"/>
<link wikidata="Q314562" start="1271" end="1302" title="Theobald I of Navarre" label="Theobald IV, Count of Champagne"/>
<link wikidata="Q34428" start="1325" end="1344" title="Philip II of France" label="Philip II of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q130221" start="1346" end="1378" title="Frederick II, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Frederick II, Holy Roman Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q573433" start="1384" end="1399" title="Henry II of Bar" label="Henry II of Bar"/>
<link wikidata="Q463573" start="1416" end="1424" title="suzerain" label="suzerain"/>
<link wikidata="Q178844" start="1454" end="1460" title="felony" label="felony"/>
<link wikidata="Q22990" start="1520" end="1527" title="Rosheim" label="Rosheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142" start="1635" end="1641" title="Alsace" label="Alsace"/>
<link wikidata="Q40898" start="1728" end="1733" title="Nancy, France" label="Nancy"/>
<link wikidata="Q453618" start="1788" end="1794" title="Amance, Meurthe-et-Moselle" label="Amance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1162289" start="2313" end="2337" title="Saint-Michel-sur-Meurthe" label="Saint-Michel-sur-Meurthe"/>
<link wikidata="Q2287351" start="2482" end="2500" title="Simon of Joinville" label="Simon of Joinville"/>
<link wikidata="Q40898" start="2691" end="2696" title="Nancy, France" label="Nancy"/>
<link wikidata="Q322763" start="2751" end="2769" title="County of Dagsburg" label="County of Dagsburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q22092" start="2802" end="2806" title="Dabo, Moselle" label="Dabo"/>
<link wikidata="Q22810" start="2816" end="2826" title="Dorlisheim" label="Dorlisheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q22990" start="3000" end="3007" title="Rosheim" label="Rosheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q3119008" start="3039" end="3073" title="War of the Succession of Champagne" label="War of the Succession of Champagne"/>
<link wikidata="Q996141" start="3132" end="3138" title="Amance, Aube" label="Amance"/>
<link wikidata="Q208794" start="3140" end="3149" title="Lunéville" label="Lunéville"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3151" end="3179" title="Château des Ducs de Lorraine" label="Château des Ducs de Lorraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1776973" start="3946" end="3954" title="Gertrude of Dagsburg" label="Gertrude"/>
<link wikidata="Q322763" start="3990" end="4007" title="count of Dagsburg" label="count of Dagsburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q22690" start="4012" end="4016" title="Metz" label="Metz"/>
<link wikidata="Q571439" start="4111" end="4119" title="Matthias II, Duke of Lorraine" label="Matthias"/>
<link wikidata="Q314562" start="4168" end="4189" title="Theobald I of Navarre" label="Theobald of Champagne"/>
<link wikidata="Q2638011" start="4207" end="4236" title="Dukes of Lorraine family tree" label="Dukes of Lorraine family tree"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="655709" wikidata="Q571439" url="?curid=655709" title="Matthias II, Duke of Lorraine">
<text>Matthias II ( 1193 – 9 February 1251) was Duke of Lorraine from 1220 to his death. He was the son of Duke Frederick II and Agnes of Bar and succeeded his brother, Theobald I.

He immediately had to give away Nancy to his brother&#x27;s widow, Gertrude of Dagsburg, who remarried to Theobald IV of Champagne, whose suzerainty Matthias had to recognize, due to the fruitless wars his brother had waged against an imperial coalition. Theobald had hoped to get his hands on the county of Metz, but failing that, he repudiated Gertrude. Gertrude had no children by a third marriage and Nancy reverted to the duchy on her death in 1225.

Matthias accompanied Emperor Frederick II on the Sixth Crusade in 1228 and into Italy in 1235. By this, he reinitiated the close alliance with the Holy Roman Emperors which his forefathers had had for over a century from the appointment of Adalbert until the war between his brother and Frederick, which had ruptured that long friendship.

Matthias faced several unruly barons, especially the Count of Lunéville, who had the discreet support of the Count of Bar. He was victorious and reattached Lunéville to the duchy in an exchange. However, peace was not achieved. In 1230, Henry II of Bar was at it again, with Hugh II of Vaudémont and the Bishop of Toul, ravaged his ducal territories and took a few castles.

In 1235, allied with Emperor Frederick II, Duke Matthias helped suppress the revolt of the emperor&#x27;s son Henry VII and in May 1240 was a signatory of a letter to Pope Gregory IX&#x27;s excommunication of the emperor, although he later swore in 1247 to help Pope Innocent IV against the emperor.

On Henry of Bar&#x27;s death in 1240, Matthias tried to retake those lost castles from Theobald II of Bar, the old count&#x27;s young son, but he failed and a peace was signed in 1245 which lasted several decades. That same year, the emperor was excommunicated for a third time and Matthias distanced himself from the Imperial camp before joining the papal party of Pope Innocent IV in 1247. He died only a few years thence after having negotiated the profitable marriage of his son with the daughter of the Count of Champagne.

==Family==
In 1225, he married Catherine of Limburg (died 1255), daughter of Waleran III of Limburg, Duke of Limburg and Count of Luxembourg, and Ermesinde of Luxembourg. They had the following issue:

*Ferry III (1240–1303), his successor in Lorraine
*Laure, married in 1250 to Jean de Dampierre (died 1258), viscount of Troyes, and then to Guillaume de Vergy, lord of Mirebeau and Autrey
*Isabella (1231–1266), married Guillaume de Vienne (died 1255), then, in 1256, Jean de Chalon (1243–1309)
*Catherine, married in 1255 to Richard de Montfaucon (died 1279), son of Thierry III, Count of Montbéliard
*Adeline (died c. 1278), married Louis of Savoy (died 1302), baron of Vaud

==See also==
*Dukes of Lorraine family tree</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q571439" start="0" end="11" title="Matthias II, Duke of Lorraine" label="Matthias II"/>
<link wikidata="Q669958" start="42" end="58" title="Duke of Lorraine" label="Duke of Lorraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q571529" start="106" end="118" title="Frederick II, Duke of Lorraine" label="Frederick II"/>
<link wikidata="Q432442" start="132" end="135" title="Barrois" label="Bar"/>
<link wikidata="Q571564" start="163" end="173" title="Theobald I, Duke of Lorraine" label="Theobald I"/>
<link wikidata="Q40898" start="208" end="213" title="Nancy, France" label="Nancy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1776973" start="243" end="263" title="Gertrude of Dagsburg" label="Gertrude of Dagsburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q314562" start="282" end="306" title="Theobald IV of Champagne" label="Theobald IV of Champagne"/>
<link wikidata="Q22690" start="484" end="488" title="Metz" label="Metz"/>
<link wikidata="Q130221" start="661" end="673" title="Frederick II, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Frederick II"/>
<link wikidata="Q51660" start="681" end="694" title="Sixth Crusade" label="Sixth Crusade"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="712" end="717" title="Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q347275" start="872" end="880" title="Adalbert, Duke of Lorraine" label="Adalbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q208794" start="1034" end="1043" title="Lunéville" label="Lunéville"/>
<link wikidata="Q706679" start="1081" end="1093" title="Count of Bar" label="Count of Bar"/>
<link wikidata="Q573433" start="1209" end="1224" title="Henry II of Bar" label="Henry II of Bar"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1247" end="1267" title="Hugh II of Vaudémont" label="Hugh II of Vaudémont"/>
<link wikidata="Q328001" start="1276" end="1290" title="Bishop of Toul" label="Bishop of Toul"/>
<link wikidata="Q163102" start="1457" end="1466" title="Henry (VII) of Germany" label="Henry VII"/>
<link wikidata="Q124831" start="1514" end="1536" title="Pope Gregory IX" label="Pope Gregory IX&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q160609" start="1609" end="1625" title="Pope Innocent IV" label="Pope Innocent IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q558318" start="1735" end="1753" title="Theobald II of Bar" label="Theobald II of Bar"/>
<link wikidata="Q160609" start="2014" end="2030" title="Pope Innocent IV" label="Pope Innocent IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q668079" start="2156" end="2174" title="Count of Champagne" label="Count of Champagne"/>
<link wikidata="Q83660" start="2254" end="2276" title="Waleran III of Limburg" label="Waleran III of Limburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q572810" start="2278" end="2293" title="Duke of Limburg" label="Duke of Limburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q878177" start="2298" end="2317" title="Count of Luxembourg" label="Count of Luxembourg"/>
<link wikidata="Q266160" start="2323" end="2346" title="Ermesinde of Luxembourg" label="Ermesinde of Luxembourg"/>
<link wikidata="Q574017" start="2380" end="2389" title="Frederick III, Duke of Lorraine" label="Ferry III"/>
<link wikidata="Q5489" start="2499" end="2505" title="Troyes" label="Troyes"/>
<link wikidata="Q154715" start="2768" end="2779" title="Montbéliard" label="Montbéliard"/>
<link wikidata="Q3262278" start="2813" end="2827" title="Louis I of Vaud" label="Louis of Savoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4863034" start="2841" end="2854" title="baron of Vaud" label="baron of Vaud"/>
<link wikidata="Q2638011" start="2870" end="2899" title="Dukes of Lorraine family tree" label="Dukes of Lorraine family tree"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="655710" wikidata="Q574017" url="?curid=655710" title="Frederick III, Duke of Lorraine">
<text>Frederick III () (1240 – 31 December 1303) was the Duke of Lorraine from 1251 to his death. He was the only son and successor of Matthias II and Catherine of Limburg.

He was not yet thirteen years of age when his father died, so his mother assumed the regency for a few years. In 1255, he married Margaret, the daughter of King Theobald I of Navarre and Margaret of Bourbon. Frederick&#x27;s father-in-law was the Count of Champagne as well, and the marriage of Margaret with Frederick signified the Gallicization of Lorraine and the beginnings of tension between French and German influences which characterises its later history. 

When Joan I of Navarre, Margaret&#x27;s niece, (the daughter of her brother, Henry I of Navarre), married Philip the Fair, the future king of France, in 1284, the ties to France grew. The long-held loyalty of the dukes of Lorraine to the Holy Roman Emperor had waned in the first half of the thirteenth century and French influence was pervasive, leading to its permanent attachment to France in 1766.

During Frederick&#x27;s reign, he fought the bishops of Metz until Pope Clement IV excommunicated him and put his duchy under an interdict.

In 1257, after the elections following the death of King William of Holland resulted in the contested election of both Richard, Earl of Cornwall and Alfonso X of Castile, Frederick of Lorraine sided with Alfonso, who through his mother Beatrix was the grandson of the Hohenstaufen Philip of Swabia. The rivalry between the two kings led to little actual combat and after Richard&#x27;s death the 1273 election of Rudolf of Habsburg and the subsequent withdrawal of Alfonso reestablished unity.

==Family==
By his marriage to Margaret, he had the following issue:

*Theobald (1263–1312), his successor in Lorraine
*Matthias (died 1282), lord of Beauregard
*Frederick (died 1299), bishop of Orléans (1297–1299)
*Frederick (died c. 1320), lord of Plombiéres, Romont, and Brémoncourt
*Gerard (known 1317)
*Isabelle (died 1335), married (1287) Louis III, Duke of Lower Bavaria, of the Royal House of Wittelsbach; then Lord Henry of Sully; and then (1306) Count (died 1348)
*Catherine, lady of Romont, married (1290) Conrad II (died 1350), count of Fribourg
*Agnes, married John II (died 1302), sire of Harcourt
*Margaret, married Eberhard I, Count of Württemberg, of the Royal House of Württemberg

==References==
==Sources==
*

==See also==
* Dukes of Lorraine family tree</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q574017" start="0" end="13" title="Frederick III, Duke of Lorraine" label="Frederick III"/>
<link wikidata="Q669958" start="51" end="67" title="List of rulers of Lorraine" label="Duke of Lorraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q571439" start="129" end="140" title="Matthias II, Duke of Lorraine" label="Matthias II"/>
<link wikidata="Q2942117" start="145" end="165" title="Catherine of Limburg" label="Catherine of Limburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q477406" start="253" end="260" title="Regent" label="regency"/>
<link wikidata="Q314562" start="329" end="350" title="Theobald I of Navarre" label="Theobald I of Navarre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1815122" start="355" end="374" title="Margaret of Bourbon (1211–1256)" label="Margaret of Bourbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q668079" start="415" end="433" title="Count of Champagne" label="Count of Champagne"/>
<link wikidata="Q229189" start="640" end="657" title="Joan I of Navarre" label="Joan I of Navarre"/>
<link wikidata="Q366919" start="712" end="730" title="Henry I of Navarre" label="Henry I of Navarre"/>
<link wikidata="Q130969" start="741" end="756" title="Philip IV of France" label="Philip the Fair"/>
<link wikidata="Q79868" start="769" end="783" title="List of French monarchs" label="king of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q181765" start="873" end="891" title="Holy Roman Emperor" label="Holy Roman Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q22690" start="1094" end="1098" title="Metz" label="Metz"/>
<link wikidata="Q172928" start="1105" end="1120" title="Pope Clement IV" label="Pope Clement IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q6291244" start="1167" end="1176" title="interdict" label="interdict"/>
<link wikidata="Q77255" start="1236" end="1254" title="William II of Holland" label="William of Holland"/>
<link wikidata="Q314527" start="1298" end="1323" title="Richard, Earl of Cornwall" label="Richard, Earl of Cornwall"/>
<link wikidata="Q47595" start="1328" end="1348" title="Alfonso X of Castile" label="Alfonso X of Castile"/>
<link wikidata="Q121130" start="1460" end="1476" title="Philip of Swabia" label="Philip of Swabia"/>
<link wikidata="Q76956" start="1592" end="1610" title="Rudolf I of Germany" label="Rudolf of Habsburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q571525" start="1744" end="1752" title="Theobald II, Duke of Lorraine" label="Theobald"/>
<link wikidata="Q838505" start="1823" end="1833" title="Beauregard, Ain" label="Beauregard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1885764" start="1858" end="1875" title="bishop of Orléans" label="bishop of Orléans"/>
<link wikidata="Q710606" start="1923" end="1933" title="Plombiéres" label="Plombiéres"/>
<link wikidata="Q67103" start="1935" end="1941" title="Romont" label="Romont"/>
<link wikidata="Q387879" start="1947" end="1958" title="Brémoncourt" label="Brémoncourt"/>
<link wikidata="Q64326" start="2018" end="2050" title="Louis III, Duke of Bavaria" label="Louis III, Duke of Lower Bavaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q131621" start="2065" end="2085" title="House of Wittelsbach" label="House of Wittelsbach"/>
<link wikidata="Q504924" start="2106" end="2111" title="Sully-sur-Loire" label="Sully"/>
<link wikidata="Q67103" start="2167" end="2173" title="Romont" label="Romont"/>
<link wikidata="Q36378" start="2222" end="2230" title="Fribourg" label="Fribourg"/>
<link wikidata="Q2353832" start="2276" end="2284" title="House of Harcourt" label="Harcourt"/>
<link wikidata="Q650606" start="2304" end="2336" title="Eberhard I, Count of Württemberg" label="Eberhard I, Count of Württemberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q699788" start="2351" end="2371" title="House of Württemberg" label="House of Württemberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q2638011" start="2418" end="2447" title="Dukes of Lorraine family tree" label="Dukes of Lorraine family tree"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="655711" wikidata="Q571525" url="?curid=655711" title="Theobald II, Duke of Lorraine">
<text>Theobald II ( or &quot;Thiébaut&quot;; 1263 – 13 May 1312) was the Duke of Lorraine from 1303 until his death in 1312. He was the son and successor of Frederick III and Margaret, daughter of King Theobald I of Navarre of the Royal House of Blois.

==Life==
In 1298, he took part in the Battle of Göllheim, near Speyer, in which the king of Germany, Adolph, was killed fighting his rival, Albert of Habsburg. Theobald was on Albert&#x27; side, despite the history of support for the legitimate emperors (which Adolph aspired to be) in the history of his family.

In 1302, Theobald and his son, Frederick, were supporting Philip IV of France, at the Battle of the Golden Spurs at Kortrijk, where the Flemings defeated the French chivalry under Robert II of Artois. He was present also at the Battle of Mons-en-Pévèle in 1304, where the French king personally led the army in a less decisive battle. He, along with John II, Duke of Brabant, and Amadeus V, Count of Savoy, were sent to negotiate peace with Flanders.

In 1305, he was at Lyon, at the crowning of Pope Clement V. When Clement imposed a tax, a tenth-part, on the clergy and charged the duke to collect it, Theobald successfully met the opposition of Renaud de Bar, bishop of Metz.

==Family==
A contract for the marriage of Theobald II, Duke of Lorraine and Isabel de Rumigny was signed in April 1270. On 23 May 1278, he married Isabelle, lady of Rumigny (b. 1263 – d. 1326), daughter of Hugh, lord of Rumigny, and Philippine d&#x27;Oulche. They had:

*Frederick (b. 15 April 1282 - d. 21 April 1329), his successor in Lorraine. 
*Matthias (died c. 1330), lord of Darney, Boves, Blainville, and Florennes, married Mathilde of Flanders.
*Hugh (d. after 20 March 1337), his successor in Rumigny, Martigny, and Aubenton. 
*Mary (d. after 1344), married (1324) Guy de Châtillon (died 1362), lord of Fère-en-Tardenois and had one child.
*Margaret (d. 1348), married (c. 1311) Guy de Dampierre, count of Zeeland and later married (1313) Louis IV, de Looz &amp; Chiny. 
*Isabella (died 1353), married Érard de Bar (died 1337), lord of Pierrepont and had six children.
*Philippine, nun

==See also==
*Dukes of Lorraine family tree

==References==
==Sources==
*</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q571525" start="0" end="11" title="Theobald II, Duke of Lorraine" label="Theobald II"/>
<link wikidata="Q669958" start="67" end="83" title="Duke of Lorraine" label="Duke of Lorraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q574017" start="151" end="164" title="Frederick III, Duke of Lorraine" label="Frederick III"/>
<link wikidata="Q314562" start="169" end="177" title="Margaret of Navarre, Duchess of Lorraine" label="Margaret"/>
<link wikidata="Q314562" start="196" end="217" title="Theobald I of Navarre" label="Theobald I of Navarre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1590002" start="231" end="245" title="House of Blois" label="House of Blois"/>
<link wikidata="Q534990" start="286" end="304" title="Battle of Göllheim" label="Battle of Göllheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q6829" start="311" end="317" title="Speyer" label="Speyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7883514" start="332" end="347" title="king of Germany" label="king of Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q160101" start="349" end="355" title="Adolf of Nassau-Weilburg" label="Adolph"/>
<link wikidata="Q153956" start="388" end="406" title="Albert I of Germany" label="Albert of Habsburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q130969" start="620" end="639" title="Philip IV of France" label="Philip IV of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q44732" start="648" end="674" title="Battle of the Golden Spurs" label="Battle of the Golden Spurs"/>
<link wikidata="Q12995" start="678" end="686" title="Kortrijk" label="Kortrijk"/>
<link wikidata="Q242485" start="698" end="706" title="Flemings" label="Flemings"/>
<link wikidata="Q1056721" start="727" end="735" title="chivalry" label="chivalry"/>
<link wikidata="Q262726" start="742" end="761" title="Robert II of Artois" label="Robert II of Artois"/>
<link wikidata="Q2007565" start="790" end="814" title="Battle of Mons-en-Pévèle" label="Battle of Mons-en-Pévèle"/>
<link wikidata="Q703470" start="912" end="936" title="John II, Duke of Brabant" label="John II, Duke of Brabant"/>
<link wikidata="Q451989" start="942" end="967" title="Amadeus V, Count of Savoy" label="Amadeus V, Count of Savoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q234" start="1003" end="1011" title="Flanders" label="Flanders"/>
<link wikidata="Q456" start="1033" end="1037" title="Lyon" label="Lyon"/>
<link wikidata="Q131463" start="1058" end="1072" title="Pope Clement V" label="Pope Clement V"/>
<link wikidata="Q2127902" start="1210" end="1223" title="Reginald, Bishop of Metz" label="Renaud de Bar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1528432" start="1225" end="1239" title="bishop of Metz" label="bishop of Metz"/>
<link wikidata="Q562051" start="1513" end="1522" title="Frederick IV, Duke of Lorraine" label="Frederick"/>
<link wikidata="Q816498" start="1624" end="1630" title="Darney" label="Darney"/>
<link wikidata="Q651369" start="1632" end="1637" title="Boves, Somme" label="Boves"/>
<link wikidata="Q319628" start="1639" end="1649" title="Blainville sur Orne" label="Blainville"/>
<link wikidata="Q720429" start="1655" end="1664" title="Florennes" label="Florennes"/>
<link wikidata="Q68956" start="1754" end="1762" title="Martigny" label="Martigny"/>
<link wikidata="Q274692" start="1768" end="1776" title="Aubenton" label="Aubenton"/>
<link wikidata="Q332026" start="1855" end="1872" title="Fère-en-Tardenois" label="Fère-en-Tardenois"/>
<link wikidata="Q328005" start="1931" end="1947" title="Guy of Namur" label="Guy de Dampierre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1945565" start="1949" end="1965" title="count of Zeeland" label="count of Zeeland"/>
<link wikidata="Q3262256" start="1991" end="2020" title="Louis IV, Count of Looz" label="Louis IV, de Looz &amp;amp; Chiny"/>
<link wikidata="Q24952291" start="2054" end="2066" title="Erard of Bar, Seigneur de Pierrepont et d&amp;#x27;Ancerville" label="Érard de Bar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2638011" start="2153" end="2182" title="Dukes of Lorraine family tree" label="Dukes of Lorraine family tree"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="655713" wikidata="Q562051" url="?curid=655713" title="Frederick IV, Duke of Lorraine">
<text>Frederick IV () (15 April 1282 – 23 August 1328), called the Fighter, was the Duke of Lorraine from 1312 to his death.

==Biography==
Frederick was born in Gondreville, the son and successor of Theobald II and Isabella of Rumigny.

On 18 October 1314, at the Diet of Frankfurt, the prince-electors of the Holy Roman Empire failed to elect as successor to Henry VII, Holy Roman Emperor, either the Habsburg claimant, Frederick the Handsome, the duke of Austria, or the Wittelsbach, Louis IV of Bavaria. By marriage to Elisabeth, daughter of Albert I of Germany, Frederick was the brother-in-law of Frederick the Handsome, called Frederick III of Germany by his supporters, of whom Frederick of Lorraine was one. On 28 September 1322, at the Battle of Mühldorf, both Fredericks were captured. This was an opportunity for Charles IV of France to strengthen the Lorrainer ties to France and he quickly procured the duke&#x27;s release on the promise that Lorraine would not interfere in imperial affairs.

In 1324, he participated in an expedition in Aquitaine against Edward II of England&#x27;s estates, for Charles IV had built a fortress illegally on Edward&#x27;s territory and had sent his uncle, Count Charles III of Valois, against the English possessions after Hugh le Despenser and the Younger Despenser imprisoned Isabella of France, Charles IV&#x27;s sister and Edward&#x27;s queen. He took part in the War of Metz in 1325 and 1326. He joined Philip VI of France, on his succession in 1328, and fought and died at the Battle of Cassel.

==Personal life==
In 1304, Frederick IV married Elisabeth of Austria (1285–1352), daughter of Albert I of Austria the Emperor. They had the following children:
*Rudolph (1320–1346), his successor in Lorraine
*Margaret, married Jean de Chalon, lord of Auberive (died 1350), then Conrad, count of Friburg, and lastly Ulrich (died 1377), lord of Rappoltstein
*Four children who died during childhood

==See also==
*Dukes of Lorraine family tree

==References==
==Sources==
*</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q562051" start="0" end="12" title="Frederick IV, Duke of Lorraine" label="Frederick IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q562051" start="57" end="68" title="Frederick IV, Duke of Lorraine" label="the Fighter"/>
<link wikidata="Q669958" start="78" end="94" title="Duke of Lorraine" label="Duke of Lorraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1060129" start="156" end="167" title="Gondreville, Meurthe-et-Moselle" label="Gondreville"/>
<link wikidata="Q571525" start="194" end="205" title="Theobald II, Duke of Lorraine" label="Theobald II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1794" start="267" end="276" title="Frankfurt" label="Frankfurt"/>
<link wikidata="Q22722" start="282" end="296" title="prince-elector" label="prince-elector"/>
<link wikidata="Q12548" start="305" end="322" title="Holy Roman Empire" label="Holy Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q152717" start="355" end="384" title="Henry VII, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Henry VII, Holy Roman Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q65968" start="397" end="405" title="Habsburg" label="Habsburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q124950" start="416" end="438" title="Frederick I of Austria (Habsburg)" label="Frederick the Handsome"/>
<link wikidata="Q701649" start="444" end="459" title="duke of Austria" label="duke of Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q131621" start="468" end="479" title="Wittelsbach" label="Wittelsbach"/>
<link wikidata="Q57161" start="481" end="500" title="Louis IV of Bavaria" label="Louis IV of Bavaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q153956" start="540" end="559" title="Albert I of Germany" label="Albert I of Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q688081" start="740" end="758" title="Battle of Mühldorf" label="Battle of Mühldorf"/>
<link wikidata="Q174964" start="819" end="839" title="Charles IV of France" label="Charles IV of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q1179" start="1047" end="1056" title="Aquitaine" label="Aquitaine"/>
<link wikidata="Q5236" start="1065" end="1085" title="Edward II of England" label="Edward II of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q270438" start="1205" end="1226" title="Charles of Valois" label="Charles III of Valois"/>
<link wikidata="Q2685455" start="1266" end="1283" title="Hugh le Despenser, 1st Earl of Winchester" label="Hugh le Despenser"/>
<link wikidata="Q711383" start="1292" end="1309" title="Hugh the younger Despenser" label="Younger Despenser"/>
<link wikidata="Q228642" start="1321" end="1339" title="Isabella of France" label="Isabella of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q320755" start="1411" end="1422" title="War of Metz" label="War of Metz"/>
<link wikidata="Q170586" start="1451" end="1470" title="Philip VI of France" label="Philip VI of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q2237467" start="1526" end="1542" title="Battle of Cassel 1328" label="Battle of Cassel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2537412" start="1593" end="1613" title="Elisabeth of Austria (d.1353)" label="Elisabeth of Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q153956" start="1639" end="1658" title="Albert I of Austria" label="Albert I of Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q571559" start="1706" end="1713" title="Rudolph, Duke of Lorraine" label="Rudolph"/>
<link wikidata="Q533993" start="1796" end="1804" title="Auberive" label="Auberive"/>
<link wikidata="Q2833" start="1840" end="1847" title="Freiburg im Breisgau" label="Friburg"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1888" end="1900" title="Rappoltstein" label="Rappoltstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q2638011" start="1957" end="1986" title="Dukes of Lorraine family tree" label="Dukes of Lorraine family tree"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="655714" wikidata="Q571559" url="?curid=655714" title="Rudolph, Duke of Lorraine">
<text>Rudolph (1320 – 26 August 1346), called the Valiant (&quot;le Vaillant&quot;), was the Duke of Lorraine from 1328 to his death. He was the son and successor of Frederick IV, Duke of Lorraine and Elisabeth of Austria, the daughter of King Albert I of Germany of the House of Habsburg. Though he was but nine years of age when his father died and he succeeded to the duchy under the regency of his mother (until 1334), he was a warrior prince, taking part in four separate wars in Lorraine, France, Brittany, and Iberia. He was killed at the Battle of Crécy.

==Life==

In 1337, Count Henry IV of Bar refused to do homage for a few seignories he held of the duke. Rudolph was forced to devastate Pont-à-Mousson and its environs. In a series of reprisals, Henry ravaged the west of Lorraine and Rudolph attacked the Barrois. Only by the intervention of King Philip VI of France was the war ended. By that time, the ties of Lorraine to France had become very strong. They were to become stronger under the half-Habsburg Rudolph for his second marriage was to the daughter of a French lord, Guy I of Châtillon, Count of Blois and Margaret of Valois (a sister of the king of France), thus making his wife the niece of the king. He also assisted King Philip VI with troops to lift King Edward III of England&#x27;s Siege of Tournai (1340) in the opening phase of the Hundred Years&#x27; War.

During a brief Anglo-French peace, he journeyed to the Iberian Peninsula to aid King Alfonso XI of Castile in the Reconquista. He battled the Moors of Granada and shone in the Battle of Gibraltar on 3 November 1340.

On his return to France, he came to the aid of his French brother-in-law, Charles, Duke of Brittany, in the War of the Breton Succession. He returned to King Philip&#x27;s side at the Battle of Crécy and was killed there, along with many illustrious French cavaliers on 26 August 1346.

==Family==
His first wife was Eleanor (&quot;Aliénor&quot;), daughter of Edward I, Count of Bar and Mary of Burgundy. Their marriage took place at Pont-à-Mousson in 1329, but they had no children before Eleanor&#x27;s death in 1332. He then remarried to Marie of Blois (1323–1380), the daughter of the aforementioned Guy of Blois and Margaret of Valois, sister of King Philip VI. They had three children:

*twins (died before 31 July 1343)
*John I, Duke of Lorraine (1346–1390), his successor

==See also==
* House of Lorraine

==References==
==Sources==
*</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q571559" start="0" end="7" title="Rudolph, Duke of Lorraine" label="Rudolph"/>
<link wikidata="Q571559" start="40" end="51" title="Rudolph, Duke of Lorraine" label="the Valiant"/>
<link wikidata="Q669958" start="87" end="103" title="Duke of Lorraine" label="Duke of Lorraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q562051" start="160" end="190" title="Frederick IV, Duke of Lorraine" label="Frederick IV, Duke of Lorraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2537412" start="195" end="215" title="Elisabeth of Austria (d.1353)" label="Elisabeth of Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q153956" start="238" end="257" title="Albert I of Germany" label="Albert I of Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q65968" start="265" end="282" title="House of Habsburg" label="House of Habsburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q477406" start="381" end="388" title="Regent" label="regency"/>
<link wikidata="Q155019" start="479" end="487" title="Lorraine (province)" label="Lorraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="489" end="495" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q327" start="497" end="505" title="Brittany" label="Brittany"/>
<link wikidata="Q12837" start="511" end="517" title="Iberian Peninsula" label="Iberia"/>
<link wikidata="Q27759" start="540" end="555" title="Battle of Crécy" label="Battle of Crécy"/>
<link wikidata="Q573424" start="583" end="598" title="Henry IV of Bar" label="Henry IV of Bar"/>
<link wikidata="Q461413" start="694" end="708" title="Pont-à-Mousson" label="Pont-à-Mousson"/>
<link wikidata="Q432442" start="813" end="820" title="Barrois" label="Barrois"/>
<link wikidata="Q170586" start="855" end="874" title="Philip VI of France" label="Philip VI of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q723663" start="1086" end="1120" title="Guy I, Count of Blois" label="Guy I of Châtillon, Count of Blois"/>
<link wikidata="Q1034017" start="1125" end="1143" title="Margaret of Valois, Countess of Blois" label="Margaret of Valois"/>
<link wikidata="Q129247" start="1279" end="1300" title="Edward III of England" label="Edward III of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q3486043" start="1308" end="1331" title="Siege of Tournai (1340)" label="Siege of Tournai (1340)"/>
<link wikidata="Q12551" start="1360" end="1383" title="Hundred Years&amp;#x27; War" label="Hundred Years&amp;#x27; War"/>
<link wikidata="Q298808" start="1471" end="1492" title="Alfonso XI of Castile" label="Alfonso XI of Castile"/>
<link wikidata="Q79791" start="1500" end="1511" title="Reconquista" label="Reconquista"/>
<link wikidata="Q169260" start="1528" end="1533" title="Moors" label="Moors"/>
<link wikidata="Q8810" start="1537" end="1544" title="Granada" label="Granada"/>
<link wikidata="Q454063" start="1677" end="1702" title="Charles, Duke of Brittany" label="Charles, Duke of Brittany"/>
<link wikidata="Q550172" start="1711" end="1739" title="War of the Breton Succession" label="War of the Breton Succession"/>
<link wikidata="Q27759" start="1787" end="1802" title="Battle of Crécy" label="Battle of Crécy"/>
<link wikidata="Q670516" start="1963" end="1985" title="Edward I, Count of Bar" label="Edward I, Count of Bar"/>
<link wikidata="Q3292886" start="2144" end="2158" title="Marie de Châtillon (1323-1363)" label="Marie of Blois"/>
<link wikidata="Q562106" start="2331" end="2355" title="John I, Duke of Lorraine" label="John I, Duke of Lorraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2638011" start="2399" end="2416" title="House of Lorraine" label="House of Lorraine"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="655715" wikidata="Q562106" url="?curid=655715" title="John I, Duke of Lorraine">
<text>John I (February 1346 – 23 September 1390) was the Duke of Lorraine from 1346 to his death. As an infant of six months, he succeeded his father, Rudolph, who was killed in the Battle of Crécy. His mother was Marie of Blois.

==Life==
During John&#x27;s long minority, the regency was in the hands of his mother and Eberhard III of Württemberg. In December 1353, he did homage for the duchy to Charles IV, Holy Roman Emperor, who made him lieutenant-general of the Empire in the Moselle country. In 1354, John II of France granted John a dispensation which allowed him to govern the duchy despite not yet being of age.

John participated in the Lithuanian Crusade at the sides of the Teutonic Knights against Lithuania in 1356 and again in 1365.

On 19 September 1356, John fought in the Battle of Poitiers, where thousands of French soldiers were mowed down by English longbowmen. He survived, however, unlike his father, to fight again, although he was taken prisoner by the English. John later fought on the side of the Dauphin Charles in putting down the Parisian rebellion of Étienne Marcel. He attended Charles&#x27; coronation on 19 May 1364 in Rheims, strengthening the ties to France which had steadily been building in Lorraine for the past century.

John entered the War of the Breton Succession to aid his uncle Charles of Blois against John of Montfort. At the Battle of Auray on 29 September 1364 with Montfort as undisputed duke and Charles dead on the field, he was taken prisoner.

John continued to aid Charles V and Charles VI to reconquer the provinces lost by the Treaty of Brétigny, but in his latter years, he distanced himself from the French court. This was due, in part, to the free companies ravaging his lands and the royal officials who tried to litigate the relationship between John (an Imperial vassal) and his vassals. In the end, he entered into &quot;rapprochement&quot; with Philip II, Duke of Burgundy. Nonetheless, John died in Paris on 22 September 1390, defending himself against a charge of abuse of power by the people of Neufchâteau.

==Family==
John married Sophie of Württemberg (1343–1369), daughter of Eberhard II, Count of Württemberg and Elizabeth von Henneberg-Schleusingen, in 1361.They had issue:

*Charles II, Duke of Lorraine (1365–1431)
*Frederick of Lorraine, Count of Vaudémont (1369–1415)
*Isabelle of Lorraine (d.1423), married Enguerrand VII, Lord of Coucy.

John later married Marguerite de Chini (d. 1372), who is interred at Orval Abbey.

==References==
==Sources==
*

==See also==
*Dukes of Lorraine family tree</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q562106" start="0" end="6" title="John I, Duke of Lorraine" label="John I"/>
<link wikidata="Q669958" start="51" end="67" title="Duke of Lorraine" label="Duke of Lorraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q571559" start="145" end="152" title="Rudolph, Duke of Lorraine" label="Rudolph"/>
<link wikidata="Q27759" start="176" end="191" title="Battle of Crécy" label="Battle of Crécy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3292886" start="208" end="222" title="Marie de Châtillon (1323-1363)" label="Marie of Blois"/>
<link wikidata="Q477406" start="272" end="279" title="Regent" label="regency"/>
<link wikidata="Q159626" start="331" end="342" title="Württemberg" label="Württemberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q155669" start="393" end="423" title="Charles IV, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Charles IV, Holy Roman Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q152951" start="438" end="456" title="lieutenant-general" label="lieutenant-general"/>
<link wikidata="Q1667" start="478" end="485" title="Moselle" label="Moselle"/>
<link wikidata="Q169992" start="504" end="521" title="John II of France" label="John II of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q16362506" start="644" end="662" title="Lithuanian Crusade" label="Lithuanian Crusade"/>
<link wikidata="Q48189" start="683" end="699" title="Teutonic Knights" label="Teutonic Knights"/>
<link wikidata="Q37" start="708" end="717" title="Lithuania" label="Lithuania"/>
<link wikidata="Q201692" start="787" end="805" title="Battle of Poitiers (1356)" label="Battle of Poitiers"/>
<link wikidata="Q10729167" start="869" end="879" title="longbowmen" label="longbowmen"/>
<link wikidata="Q192883" start="1022" end="1029" title="Dauphin of France" label="Dauphin"/>
<link wikidata="Q167782" start="1030" end="1037" title="Charles V of France" label="Charles"/>
<link wikidata="Q143046" start="1080" end="1094" title="Étienne Marcel" label="Étienne Marcel"/>
<link wikidata="Q41876" start="1151" end="1157" title="Rheims" label="Rheims"/>
<link wikidata="Q550172" start="1277" end="1305" title="War of the Breton Succession" label="War of the Breton Succession"/>
<link wikidata="Q454063" start="1323" end="1339" title="Charles, Duke of Brittany" label="Charles of Blois"/>
<link wikidata="Q454013" start="1348" end="1364" title="John V, Duke of Brittany" label="John of Montfort"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062615" start="1373" end="1388" title="Battle of Auray" label="Battle of Auray"/>
<link wikidata="Q160349" start="1534" end="1544" title="Charles VI of France" label="Charles VI"/>
<link wikidata="Q1334924" start="1584" end="1602" title="Treaty of Brétigny" label="Treaty of Brétigny"/>
<link wikidata="Q1543015" start="1703" end="1717" title="Free company" label="free companies"/>
<link wikidata="Q298892" start="1910" end="1937" title="Philip II, Duke of Burgundy" label="Philip II, Duke of Burgundy"/>
<link wikidata="Q131581675" start="2063" end="2074" title="Neufchâteau, Vosges" label="Neufchâteau"/>
<link wikidata="Q69359" start="2148" end="2181" title="Eberhard II, Count of Württemberg" label="Eberhard II, Count of Württemberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q663073" start="2250" end="2278" title="Charles II, Duke of Lorraine" label="Charles II, Duke of Lorraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q506354" start="2292" end="2333" title="Frederick of Lorraine, Count of Vaudémont" label="Frederick of Lorraine, Count of Vaudémont"/>
<link wikidata="Q1342999" start="2386" end="2415" title="Enguerrand VII de Coucy" label="Enguerrand VII, Lord of Coucy"/>
<link wikidata="Q334099" start="2487" end="2498" title="Orval Abbey" label="Orval Abbey"/>
<link wikidata="Q2638011" start="2545" end="2574" title="Dukes of Lorraine family tree" label="Dukes of Lorraine family tree"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="655716" wikidata="Q506354" url="?curid=655716" title="Frederick I, Count of Vaudémont">
<text>Frederick I, or Ferry I of Lorraine (9 January 1369 – October 25, 1415 in the Battle of Agincourt) was a Count of Vaudémont.

He was the son of Duke John I of Lorraine (1346-1390) and Sophie of Württemberg (1343-1369). He was a younger brother of Charles II. In 1394, Frederick married Margaret, the heiress of Vaudémont and Joinville, and became Count of these lands in her right. He founded the House of Vaudémont, a junior branch of the House of Lorraine.

His children were:
*Antoine, who succeeded as Count of Vaudémont,
*Elisabeth, who married Philipp I of Nassau-Weilburg,
*Frederic, Lord of Rumigny,
*Charles, Lord of Bovines, and
*John, Lord of Fleurines

Dynastic problems in the senior line caused his great-grandson René of Vaudémont to become Duke of Lorraine as René II in 1473.

==See also==
*Dukes of Lorraine family tree

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q506354" start="0" end="11" title="Frederick I, Count of Vaudémont" label="Frederick I"/>
<link wikidata="Q506354" start="16" end="23" title="Frederick I, Count of Vaudémont" label="Ferry I"/>
<link wikidata="Q506354" start="24" end="35" title="Frederick I, Count of Vaudémont" label="of Lorraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q188495" start="78" end="97" title="Battle of Agincourt" label="Battle of Agincourt"/>
<link wikidata="Q22132151" start="105" end="123" title="Count of Vaudémont" label="Count of Vaudémont"/>
<link wikidata="Q562106" start="149" end="167" title="John I, Duke of Lorraine" label="John I of Lorraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q69359" start="184" end="205" title="Eberhard II, Count of Württemberg" label="Sophie of Württemberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q663073" start="247" end="257" title="Charles II, Duke of Lorraine" label="Charles II"/>
<link wikidata="Q274558" start="286" end="294" title="Margaret of Joinville" label="Margaret"/>
<link wikidata="Q728870" start="368" end="380" title="jure uxoris" label="in her right"/>
<link wikidata="Q2638011" start="397" end="415" title="House of Vaudémont" label="House of Vaudémont"/>
<link wikidata="Q2638011" start="440" end="457" title="House of Lorraine" label="House of Lorraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q562137" start="480" end="487" title="Antoine, Count of Vaudémont" label="Antoine"/>
<link wikidata="Q272715" start="527" end="536" title="Elisabeth of Lorraine-Vaudémont" label="Elisabeth"/>
<link wikidata="Q479437" start="550" end="578" title="Philipp I of Nassau-Weilburg" label="Philipp I of Nassau-Weilburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q441416" start="728" end="745" title="René II, Duke of Lorraine" label="René of Vaudémont"/>
<link wikidata="Q669958" start="756" end="772" title="Duke of Lorraine" label="Duke of Lorraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2638011" start="808" end="837" title="Dukes of Lorraine family tree" label="Dukes of Lorraine family tree"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="655718" wikidata="Q237263" url="?curid=655718" title="Isabella, Duchess of Lorraine">
<text>Isabella (1400 – 28 February 1453) was suo jure Duchess of Lorraine from 25 January 1431 to her death in 1453. She was also Queen of Naples by marriage to René of Anjou. Isabella ruled the Kingdom of Naples and her husband&#x27;s domains in France as regent during his imprisonment in Burgundy in 1435–1438.

==Life==
Isabella was the eldest daughter of Charles II, Duke of Lorraine and Margaret of the Palatinate. By the death of her brothers, it was made apparent in 1410 that she would be the successor of her father in Lorraine. She was given a careful education, and described as beautiful, witty, brave and with the ability to be careful and make hard decisions in difficult circumstances. 

On 24 October 1420, she married René of Anjou. In the marriage contract, it was specified that she would inherit Lorraine, as he would inherit Bar and Pont-à-Mousson, and that their child and heir would inherit all their domains, thereby uniting them. 

On 25 January 1431, Isabella inherited the duchy from her father upon his death, and ruled jointly with her husband as her co-ruler, as was customary for a female monarch at that time. Her right to rule was questioned by her cousin, Count Antoine de Vaudémont, who captured René in the Battle of Bulgnéville and had him imprisoned with his ally, the Duke of Burgundy. She led an army to rescue her husband from Philip III, Duke of Burgundy. She managed to secure a ceasefire, and the Emperor recognized her right to rule on 24 April 1434. 

On November 1434, her imprisoned spouse inherited the domains of Anjou, Provence and Maine from his brother as well as the position of heir to the throne of Naples, and on 2 February 1435, he inherited the throne of Naples. René appointed her to act as his general governor until his release, and a Napolese embassy asked her to come to Naples to assume the post of regent until her spouse could do so in person. She left with her son Louis and a fleet. The mid-16th century &quot;Chronicle of Gaspare Fuscolillo&quot; records that Isabella arrived in Naples on 15 October 1435. As regent of Naples, was to face the struggle with the other competitor to the throne of Naples, Alfonso of Aragon. She was given military support from the pope, but could not cooperate well with its commander, Jacopo Caldora.

René was released in 1437, and arrived in Naples to take over the rule from Isabella in May 1438. Isabella left with Louis to return to Lorraine in August 1440. In Lorraine, she finally defeated Antoine de Vaudémont 27 March 1441. When Charles VII of France visited in Nancy, they introduced Agnes Sorel to him, who was one of Isabella&#x27;s ladies-in-waiting. She soon afterwards became the king&#x27;s influential mistress. In July 1445, Isabella appointed her son John to be her governor general in Lorraine, and retired to her manor Launay in Saumur. 

Isabella died on 28 February 1453 at the age of 53. Her son John succeeded her as Duke of Lorraine. She was buried in Angers Cathedral. René then married, on 10 September 1454, Jeanne de Laval, but this marriage was childless.

==Issue==
René and Isabella had the following children:
#John II (2 August 1424 – 16 December 1470), Duke of Lorraine and King of Naples, married Marie de Bourbon, daughter of Charles I, Duke of Bourbon, by whom he had issue. He also had several illegitimate children.
#Louis (16 October 1427 – between 22 May and 16 October 1444), Marquis of Pont-à-Mousson and &quot;Lieutenant General of Lorraine&quot;. At the age of five, in 1432, he was sent as a hostage to Dijon with his brother John in exchange for their captive father. John was released, but Louis was not and died of pneumonia in prison.
#Nicholas (2 November 1428 – 1430), twin with Yolande.
#Yolande (2 November 1428 – 23 March 1483), married Frederick ΙΙ of Lorraine, count of Vaudemont; mother, among others, of duke René II of Lorraine.
#Margaret (23 March 1430 – 25 August 1482), married King Henry VI of England, by whom she had a son, Edward of Westminster, Prince of Wales.
#Charles (1431 – 1432), Count of Guise.
#Isabelle (died young).
#René (died young).
#Louise (1436 – 1438).
#Anne (1437 – 1450, buried in Gardanne).

==See also==
* Dukes of Lorraine family tree

==Sources==
* Bernhard Röse: Isabella (Herzogin von Lothringen). In: Johann Samuel Ersch, Johann Gottfried Gruber (Hrsg.): Allgemeine Encyclopädie der Wissenschaften und Künste. 2. Section: H – N. Band 24: Irland – Ismuc. Brockhaus, Leipzig 1845, S. 233–236.
* Auguste Vallet de Viriville: Isabelle de Lorraine. In: Nouvelle Biographie Générale. Band 26: Isaac – Joséphine. Didot, Paris 1858, Sp. 20–22.
* Detlev Schwennicke: Europäische Stammtafeln. Neue Folge Band 1, 2: Přemysliden, Askanier, Herzoge von Lothringen, die Häuser Hessen, Württemberg und Zähringen. Klostermann, Frankfurt am Main 1999, , Tafel 205.
* Henry Bogdan: La Lorraine des ducs. Sept siècles d&#x27;histoire. Perrin, Paris 2005, .</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q237263" start="0" end="8" title="Isabella, Duchess of Lorraine" label="Isabella"/>
<link wikidata="Q2699324" start="39" end="47" title="suo jure" label="suo jure"/>
<link wikidata="Q669958" start="48" end="67" title="List of rulers of Lorraine" label="Duchess of Lorraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q3490750" start="124" end="139" title="List of Neapolitan royal consorts" label="Queen of Naples"/>
<link wikidata="Q170353" start="155" end="168" title="René of Anjou" label="René of Anjou"/>
<link wikidata="Q173065" start="189" end="206" title="Kingdom of Naples" label="Kingdom of Naples"/>
<link wikidata="Q477406" start="251" end="257" title="regent" label="regent"/>
<link wikidata="Q663073" start="354" end="382" title="Charles II, Duke of Lorraine" label="Charles II, Duke of Lorraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q70936" start="387" end="413" title="Margaret of the Palatinate" label="Margaret of the Palatinate"/>
<link wikidata="Q239337" start="1363" end="1391" title="Philip III, Duke of Burgundy" label="Philip III, Duke of Burgundy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3805853" start="2283" end="2297" title="Jacopo Caldora" label="Jacopo Caldora"/>
<link wikidata="Q231834" start="2592" end="2603" title="Agnes Sorel" label="Agnes Sorel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191209" start="2976" end="2992" title="Angers Cathedral" label="Angers Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q459771" start="3035" end="3050" title="Jeanne de Laval" label="Jeanne de Laval"/>
<link wikidata="Q721244" start="3143" end="3150" title="John II, Duke of Lorraine" label="John II"/>
<link wikidata="Q692291" start="3262" end="3288" title="Charles I, Duke of Bourbon" label="Charles I, Duke of Bourbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3263348" start="3356" end="3361" title="Louis of Anjou, Marquis of Pont-à-Mousson" label="Louis"/>
<link wikidata="Q706679" start="3418" end="3443" title="Marquis of Pont-à-Mousson" label="Marquis of Pont-à-Mousson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7003" start="3549" end="3554" title="Dijon" label="Dijon"/>
<link wikidata="Q12192" start="3664" end="3673" title="pneumonia" label="pneumonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q269932" start="3741" end="3748" title="Yolande de Bar" label="Yolande"/>
<link wikidata="Q562056" start="3792" end="3816" title="Frederick II, Count of Vaudémont" label="Frederick ΙΙ of Lorraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q441416" start="3868" end="3887" title="René II, Duke of Lorraine" label="René II of Lorraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q231145" start="3890" end="3898" title="Margaret of Anjou" label="Margaret"/>
<link wikidata="Q160337" start="3946" end="3965" title="Henry VI of England" label="Henry VI of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q313262" start="3990" end="4028" title="Edward of Westminster, Prince of Wales" label="Edward of Westminster, Prince of Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q1615445" start="4054" end="4068" title="Count of Guise" label="Count of Guise"/>
<link wikidata="Q318085" start="4167" end="4175" title="Gardanne" label="Gardanne"/>
<link wikidata="Q2638011" start="4194" end="4223" title="Dukes of Lorraine family tree" label="Dukes of Lorraine family tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q2871430" start="4486" end="4513" title="Auguste Vallet de Viriville" label="Auguste Vallet de Viriville"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="655720" wikidata="Q27984" url="?curid=655720" title="Helichrysum arenarium">
<text>Helichrysum arenarium is also known as dwarf everlast, and as immortelle.

==Description==
As a perennial plant, it grows to be an average of 0.3 m tall.

The leaves are flat, the lower ones being elliptical in shape, while the upper ones are linear. They are wooly on both sides.

The flower heads are arranged in loosely, a cross between umbel and panicle. They are 3 to 4 mm wide of bright golden yellow florets.

It is found in Eastern France to Sweden as well as on the mountains of Uzbekistan on sandy grasslands, and heathland.
It is also widely spread on the Dalmatian coast in Croatia where locals regularly pick and sell it throughout the summer (local Mediterranean climate permitting even as late as September and October).

==Similar species==
&quot;Helichrysum stoechas&quot; is similar to the &quot;Helichrysum arenarium&quot; species, but the leaves are all linear, with rolled under edges. It is found in western France on dunes near the sea.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q27984" start="39" end="53" title="Helichrysum arenarium" label="dwarf everlast"/>
<link wikidata="Q27984" start="62" end="72" title="Helichrysum arenarium" label="immortelle"/>
<link wikidata="Q157957" start="96" end="111" title="perennial plant" label="perennial plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q125537257" start="197" end="207" title="Elliptic (leaf shape)" label="elliptical"/>
<link wikidata="Q207961" start="211" end="216" title="shape" label="shape"/>
<link wikidata="Q1753188" start="243" end="249" title="linear" label="linear"/>
<link wikidata="Q506" start="286" end="292" title="flower" label="flower"/>
<link wikidata="Q577430" start="340" end="345" title="umbel" label="umbel"/>
<link wikidata="Q148600" start="350" end="357" title="panicle" label="panicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="440" end="446" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q34" start="450" end="456" title="Sweden" label="Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q265" start="488" end="498" title="Uzbekistan" label="Uzbekistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1006733" start="508" end="517" title="grassland" label="grassland"/>
<link wikidata="Q27590" start="524" end="533" title="heathland" label="heathland"/>
<link wikidata="Q528042" start="567" end="575" title="Dalmatia" label="Dalmatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q224" start="586" end="593" title="Croatia" label="Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q13996" start="663" end="684" title="Mediterranean climate" label="Mediterranean climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1636806" start="763" end="783" title="Helichrysum stoechas" label="Helichrysum stoechas"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="655723" wikidata="Q721244" url="?curid=655723" title="John II, Duke of Lorraine">
<text>John II of Anjou (Nancy, August 2, 1426 – December 16, 1470, Barcelona) was Duke of Lorraine from 1453 to his death. He was the son of René of Anjou and Isabella, Duchess of Lorraine. He was married to Marie de Bourbon, daughter of Charles I, Duke of Bourbon.

==Duchy==
John inherited the duchy from his mother, Duchess Isabelle, during the life of his father, Duke René of Anjou, also Duke of Lorraine and titular king of Naples. As heir-apparent of Naples, he was styled the Duke of Calabria and spent most of his time engaging in plots for the Angevin recovery of Naples. In 1460, he decisively defeated the king of Naples Ferdinand at Nola, but was unable to prevent others from coming to his aid. He was defeated at Troia in 1462 and at Ischia in 1465. In 1466, the Catalans chose his father as King of Aragon, and he was created Prince of Girona, as heir-apparent. He went into Catalonia to press the family&#x27;s claims, but died, supposedly by poison, in Barcelona.

==Personal==

In 1444, he married Marie de Bourbon (1428–1448), daughter of Charles I, Duke of Bourbon and Agnes of Burgundy, Duchess of Bourbon (and granddaughter to John the Fearless, and niece to Philip the Good, both Dukes of Burgundy and enemies and allies to her father). Marie was from the House of Bourbon and was the only Duchess consort of Lorraine from the reign of Valois-Anjou. The marriage contract was signed in April 1437, however, the ceremony took place around 1444 when she was older and would be able to consummate the marriage.Marie and John had the following issue:
# Isabelle (1445–1445)
# Jean (1445–1471),
# René (1446–1446)
# Marie (1447–1447)
# Nicholas (1448–1473)

Marie died giving birth to her last and only surviving child Nicholas; she died on July 7, 1448, and was buried at Meurthe-et-Moselle Lorraine, France.

John also had several illegitimate children:
* John (d. 1504), Count of Briey, married Nancy St. Georges
* Albert, seigneur d&#x27;Essey
* Jeanne d&#x27;Abancourt, married Achille, Bastard of Beauveu
* a daughter named Marguerite
* another daughter, married Jean d&#x27;Ecosse

==See also==
* Dukes of Lorraine family tree

==References==
==Sources==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q721244" start="0" end="16" title="John II, Duke of Lorraine" label="John II of Anjou"/>
<link wikidata="Q40898" start="18" end="23" title="Nancy, France" label="Nancy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1492" start="61" end="70" title="Barcelona" label="Barcelona"/>
<link wikidata="Q669958" start="76" end="92" title="Duke of Lorraine" label="Duke of Lorraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q170353" start="135" end="148" title="René I of Naples" label="René of Anjou"/>
<link wikidata="Q237263" start="153" end="182" title="Isabella, Duchess of Lorraine" label="Isabella, Duchess of Lorraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q21096210" start="202" end="218" title="Marie de Bourbon, Duchess of Calabria" label="Marie de Bourbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q692291" start="232" end="258" title="Charles I, Duke of Bourbon" label="Charles I, Duke of Bourbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q237263" start="313" end="329" title="Isabella, Duchess of Lorraine" label="Duchess Isabelle"/>
<link wikidata="Q170353" start="367" end="380" title="René I of Naples" label="René of Anjou"/>
<link wikidata="Q2862798" start="416" end="430" title="king of Naples" label="king of Naples"/>
<link wikidata="Q2762318" start="435" end="448" title="heir-apparent" label="heir-apparent"/>
<link wikidata="Q1570744" start="478" end="494" title="Duke of Calabria" label="Duke of Calabria"/>
<link wikidata="Q2991084" start="548" end="555" title="County of Anjou" label="Angevin"/>
<link wikidata="Q25203614" start="588" end="607" title="Battle of Nola (1460)" label="decisively defeated"/>
<link wikidata="Q2862798" start="612" end="626" title="king of Naples" label="king of Naples"/>
<link wikidata="Q437838" start="627" end="636" title="Ferdinand I of Naples" label="Ferdinand"/>
<link wikidata="Q72288" start="640" end="644" title="Nola" label="Nola"/>
<link wikidata="Q51965" start="722" end="727" title="Troia, Apulia" label="Troia"/>
<link wikidata="Q72134" start="743" end="749" title="Ischia, Campania" label="Ischia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5705" start="772" end="780" title="Catalonia" label="Catalans"/>
<link wikidata="Q687246" start="836" end="852" title="Prince of Girona" label="Prince of Girona"/>
<link wikidata="Q2762318" start="857" end="870" title="heir-apparent" label="heir-apparent"/>
<link wikidata="Q1492" start="965" end="974" title="Barcelona" label="Barcelona"/>
<link wikidata="Q21096210" start="1011" end="1027" title="Marie de Bourbon, Duchess of Calabria" label="Marie de Bourbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q692291" start="1053" end="1079" title="Charles I, Duke of Bourbon" label="Charles I, Duke of Bourbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q269783" start="1084" end="1121" title="Agnes of Burgundy, Duchess of Bourbon" label="Agnes of Burgundy, Duchess of Bourbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q298901" start="1144" end="1161" title="John the Fearless" label="John the Fearless"/>
<link wikidata="Q239337" start="1176" end="1191" title="Philip the Good" label="Philip the Good"/>
<link wikidata="Q58389" start="1274" end="1290" title="House of Bourbon" label="House of Bourbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q6613330" start="1308" end="1335" title="List of consorts of Lorraine" label="Duchess consort of Lorraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1716871" start="1354" end="1366" title="House of Valois-Anjou" label="Valois-Anjou"/>
<link wikidata="Q704267" start="1649" end="1657" title="Nicholas I, Duke of Lorraine" label="Nicholas"/>
<link wikidata="Q704267" start="1732" end="1740" title="Nicholas I, Duke of Lorraine" label="Nicholas"/>
<link wikidata="Q12626" start="1786" end="1804" title="Meurthe-et-Moselle" label="Meurthe-et-Moselle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2638011" start="2117" end="2146" title="Dukes of Lorraine family tree" label="Dukes of Lorraine family tree"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="655724" wikidata="Q704267" url="?curid=655724" title="Nicholas I, Duke of Lorraine">
<text>Nicholas of Anjou (July 1448 – 27 July 1473) was the son of John II, Duke of Lorraine and Marie de Bourbon.

Nicholas was born and died in Nancy. He succeeded his father in 1470 as Duke of Lorraine, and assumed the titles of Marquis of Pont-à-Mousson, Duke of Calabria, and Prince of Girona, as heir apparent of Bar, Naples, and Aragon respectively.

He was engaged to Anne of France, Viscountess of Thouars, and used her title, but he did not marry her and had only one illegitimate daughter, Marguerite, wife of John IV of Chabannes, Count of Dammartin (d. 1503).

Some said he had been poisoned by agents of King Louis XI of France or John II of Aragon.

On his death the Duchy of Lorraine went to his aunt Yolande.

==See also==
* Dukes of Lorraine family tree</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q704267" start="0" end="17" title="Nicholas I, Duke of Lorraine" label="Nicholas of Anjou"/>
<link wikidata="Q721244" start="60" end="85" title="John II, Duke of Lorraine" label="John II, Duke of Lorraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q21096210" start="90" end="106" title="Marie de Bourbon, Duchess of Calabria" label="Marie de Bourbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q40898" start="139" end="144" title="Nancy, France" label="Nancy"/>
<link wikidata="Q669958" start="181" end="197" title="Duke of Lorraine" label="Duke of Lorraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q706679" start="225" end="250" title="Marquis of Pont-à-Mousson" label="Marquis of Pont-à-Mousson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1570744" start="252" end="268" title="Duke of Calabria" label="Duke of Calabria"/>
<link wikidata="Q687246" start="274" end="290" title="Prince of Girona" label="Prince of Girona"/>
<link wikidata="Q2762318" start="295" end="308" title="heir apparent" label="heir apparent"/>
<link wikidata="Q706679" start="312" end="315" title="Duke of Bar" label="Bar"/>
<link wikidata="Q173065" start="317" end="323" title="Kingdom of Naples" label="Naples"/>
<link wikidata="Q238179" start="329" end="335" title="King of Aragon" label="Aragon"/>
<link wikidata="Q232801" start="369" end="383" title="Anne of France" label="Anne of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q2592828" start="385" end="407" title="Viscountess of Thouars" label="Viscountess of Thouars"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="514" end="554" title="John IV of Chabannes, Count of Dammartin" label="John IV of Chabannes, Count of Dammartin"/>
<link wikidata="Q8058" start="616" end="624" title="Louis XI" label="Louis XI"/>
<link wikidata="Q312328" start="638" end="655" title="John II of Aragon" label="John II of Aragon"/>
<link wikidata="Q269932" start="710" end="717" title="Yolande, Duchess of Lorraine" label="Yolande"/>
<link wikidata="Q2638011" start="735" end="764" title="Dukes of Lorraine family tree" label="Dukes of Lorraine family tree"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="655725" wikidata="Q441416" url="?curid=655725" title="René II, Duke of Lorraine">
<text>René II (2 May 1451 – 10 December 1508) was Count of Vaudémont from 1470, Duke of Lorraine from 1473, and Duke of Bar from 1483 to 1508. He claimed the crown of the Kingdom of Naples and the County of Provence as the Duke of Calabria 1480–1493 and as King of Naples and Jerusalem 1493–1508. He succeeded his uncle John of Vaudémont as Count of Harcourt in 1473, exchanging it for the county of Aumale in 1495. He succeeded as Count of Guise in 1504.

==Life==
René was born in Angers, the son of Yolande of Lorraine and Frederick, Count of Vaudémont. He spent his youth in the court of his grandfather René I of Anjou between Angers and Provence. René succeeded his father in Vaudémont in 1470 and, three years later, his uncle as captain of Angers, seneschal and governor of Anjou. That same year he became Duke of Lorraine, which was at the time under the pressure of both Louis XI of France and Charles the Bold of Burgundy, with whom he initially allied. When the latter began to establish garrisons in Lorraine, however, René secretly allied with Louis (1474).

Charles invaded the duchy and René was forced to quit Nancy (30 November 1475). He regained the city on 5 October the following year and moved to Switzerland to hire an army of Swiss mercenaries. With this force René defeated and killed Charles at the Battle of Nancy (5 January 1477), ending the Burgundian Wars. In 1476, upon the death of his grandmother, he became sole Count of Harcourt and Baron of Elbeuf.

The alliance with Louis would not last, as Louis moved to acquire René&#x27;s lands. In June 1478, as compensation for the royal seizure of Anjou and Provence, Louis XI reaffirmed his rights to the formerly Burgundian possessions of the Duchy of Luxembourg and the County of Burgundy, and then transferred those rights to René and all of his descendants.

The transfer of the County of Burgundy to France in 1482 with the Treaty of Arras made realization of these rights possible, but the County was returned to the Habsburgs in 1493 with the Treaty of Senlis and René would not exercise control over the County again. Likewise, any authority over Luxembourg was merely theoretical outside of the seizure of Virton, as the Duchy remained in possession of the Habsburgs throughout René&#x27;s lifetime.

In 1480 René succeeded his grandfather as Duke of Bar while his mother was still living. In 1482 he conquered the &quot;prévôté&quot; of Virton, a part of the Duchy of Luxembourg, and annexed it to Bar. In 1484 Peter II, Duke of Bourbon, regent for the young King Charles VIII of France, formally installed him in the Duchy of Bar.

When his mother Yolande died in 1483, he succeeded her in her claims to the kingdoms of Naples and Jerusalem. In 1482, René traveled to Italy and defeated the Duke of Ferrara in the Battle of Adria as an ally of the Republic of Venice.

In 1485 René took part in the first phase of the so-called &quot;Mad War&quot;, but prudentially retired after a while. In 1488 the Neapolitans offered him the crown of the Kingdom of Naples, and René set an expedition to gain possession of the realm; he was however halted by the new French king, Charles VIII, who intended to claim the realm himself.

In 1495, to settle a dispute with his second cousin, Jean IV de Rieux, over their grandmothers&#x27; inheritance, he ceded to Jean the county of Harcourt and its appurtenances, retaining only Elbeuf and Brionne, and receiving the county of Aumale.

==Death==
René fell ill during a hunt in Fains, and died on 10 December 1508, aged 57.

==Family==

On his mother&#x27;s side, he was a grandson of Isabella, Duchess of Lorraine. His father was a member of the Vaudémont family, a junior branch of the Lorraine ducal family, descending from John I, Duke of Lorraine. He was thus both heir-general and heir-male to the Duchy when he succeeded on the death of his cousin Nicholas in 1473.

René married Philippa of Guelders, daughter of Adolf, Duke of Guelders, in Orléans on 1 September 1485 and had the following children:
* Charles (b. 17 August 1486, Nancy); died at birth
* Francis (5 July 1487, Pont-à-Mousson); died at birth
* Antoine, Duke of Lorraine (1489–1544)
* Nicholas (9 April 1493, Nancy); died at birth
* Claude, Duke of Guise (1496–1550); first Duke of Guise
* Jean, Cardinal of Lorraine and Bishop of Metz (1498–1550)
* Louis, Count of Vaudémont (1500–1528)
* François, Count of Lambesc (1506–1525)
* Anne (19 December 1490, Bar-le-Duc), died at birth
* Isabelle (2 November 1494, Lunéville died at birth
* Claude and Catherine (twins) (24 November 1502, Bar-le-Duc); died at birth

==Ancestors==
==See also==

* Dukes of Lorraine family tree

==Notes==
==Sources==
*
*
*






|-</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q441416" start="0" end="7" title="René II, Duke of Lorraine" label="René II"/>
<link wikidata="Q22132151" start="44" end="62" title="Count of Vaudémont" label="Count of Vaudémont"/>
<link wikidata="Q669958" start="74" end="90" title="Duke of Lorraine" label="Duke of Lorraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q706679" start="106" end="117" title="Counts and dukes of Bar" label="Duke of Bar"/>
<link wikidata="Q173065" start="165" end="182" title="Kingdom of Naples" label="Kingdom of Naples"/>
<link wikidata="Q2991382" start="191" end="209" title="County of Provence" label="County of Provence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1570744" start="217" end="233" title="Duke of Calabria" label="Duke of Calabria"/>
<link wikidata="Q842151" start="251" end="265" title="Monarchs of Naples and Sicily" label="King of Naples"/>
<link wikidata="Q693614" start="270" end="279" title="Kings of Jerusalem" label="Jerusalem"/>
<link wikidata="Q3089224" start="314" end="331" title="John of Vaudémont" label="John of Vaudémont"/>
<link wikidata="Q22093667" start="335" end="352" title="Count of Harcourt" label="Count of Harcourt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1615391" start="394" end="400" title="Count of Aumale" label="Aumale"/>
<link wikidata="Q1615445" start="426" end="440" title="Count of Guise" label="Count of Guise"/>
<link wikidata="Q38380" start="477" end="483" title="Angers" label="Angers"/>
<link wikidata="Q269932" start="496" end="515" title="Yolande of Lorraine" label="Yolande of Lorraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q562056" start="520" end="549" title="Frederick II of Vaudémont" label="Frederick, Count of Vaudémont"/>
<link wikidata="Q170353" start="602" end="617" title="René I of Naples" label="René I of Anjou"/>
<link wikidata="Q101081" start="637" end="645" title="Provence" label="Provence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138622" start="750" end="759" title="seneschal" label="seneschal"/>
<link wikidata="Q8058" start="875" end="893" title="Louis XI of France" label="Louis XI of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q151120" start="898" end="914" title="Charles the Bold" label="Charles the Bold"/>
<link wikidata="Q40898" start="1121" end="1126" title="Nancy, France" label="Nancy"/>
<link wikidata="Q661787" start="1244" end="1261" title="Swiss mercenaries" label="Swiss mercenaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q316877" start="1319" end="1334" title="Battle of Nancy" label="Battle of Nancy"/>
<link wikidata="Q315342" start="1364" end="1379" title="Burgundian Wars" label="Burgundian Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q22093667" start="1440" end="1457" title="Count of Harcourt" label="Count of Harcourt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1615417" start="1462" end="1477" title="Baron of Elbeuf" label="Baron of Elbeuf"/>
<link wikidata="Q700156" start="1902" end="1917" title="Treaty of Arras (1482)" label="Treaty of Arras"/>
<link wikidata="Q693070" start="2023" end="2039" title="Treaty of Senlis" label="Treaty of Senlis"/>
<link wikidata="Q706679" start="2325" end="2336" title="Counts and dukes of Bar" label="Duke of Bar"/>
<link wikidata="Q456495" start="2420" end="2426" title="Virton" label="Virton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2719360" start="2442" end="2461" title="Duchy of Luxembourg" label="Duchy of Luxembourg"/>
<link wikidata="Q721680" start="2494" end="2519" title="Peter II, Duke of Bourbon" label="Peter II, Duke of Bourbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q134452" start="2547" end="2569" title="Charles VIII of France" label="Charles VIII of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q4948" start="2832" end="2850" title="Republic of Venice" label="Republic of Venice"/>
<link wikidata="Q777345" start="2918" end="2925" title="Mad War" label="Mad War"/>
<link wikidata="Q173065" start="3026" end="3043" title="Kingdom of Naples" label="Kingdom of Naples"/>
<link wikidata="Q134452" start="3151" end="3163" title="Charles VIII of France" label="Charles VIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q227505" start="3369" end="3382" title="appurtenances" label="appurtenances"/>
<link wikidata="Q1615417" start="3399" end="3405" title="Lords, Marquesses and Dukes of Elbeuf" label="Elbeuf"/>
<link wikidata="Q474498" start="3410" end="3417" title="Brionne" label="Brionne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1615391" start="3437" end="3453" title="Count of Aumale" label="county of Aumale"/>
<link wikidata="Q475364" start="3497" end="3502" title="Fains" label="Fains"/>
<link wikidata="Q237263" start="3604" end="3633" title="Isabella, Duchess of Lorraine" label="Isabella, Duchess of Lorraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q562106" start="3746" end="3770" title="John I, Duke of Lorraine" label="John I, Duke of Lorraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q704267" start="3874" end="3882" title="Nicholas I, Duke of Lorraine" label="Nicholas"/>
<link wikidata="Q431221" start="3906" end="3926" title="Philippa of Guelders" label="Philippa of Guelders"/>
<link wikidata="Q153819" start="3940" end="3963" title="Adolf of Egmond" label="Adolf, Duke of Guelders"/>
<link wikidata="Q6548" start="3968" end="3975" title="Orléans" label="Orléans"/>
<link wikidata="Q40898" start="4058" end="4063" title="Nancy, France" label="Nancy"/>
<link wikidata="Q461413" start="4104" end="4118" title="Pont-à-Mousson" label="Pont-à-Mousson"/>
<link wikidata="Q590487" start="4137" end="4162" title="Antoine, Duke of Lorraine" label="Antoine, Duke of Lorraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q40898" start="4201" end="4206" title="Nancy, France" label="Nancy"/>
<link wikidata="Q366025" start="4225" end="4246" title="Claude, Duke of Guise" label="Claude, Duke of Guise"/>
<link wikidata="Q1615445" start="4266" end="4279" title="Duke of Guise" label="Duke of Guise"/>
<link wikidata="Q1563911" start="4282" end="4308" title="Jean, Cardinal of Lorraine" label="Jean, Cardinal of Lorraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1528432" start="4313" end="4327" title="Bishop of Metz" label="Bishop of Metz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1993565" start="4342" end="4367" title="Louis, Count of Vaudémont" label="Louis, Count of Vaudémont"/>
<link wikidata="Q3750872" start="4382" end="4390" title="François de Lorraine" label="François"/>
<link wikidata="Q185721" start="4447" end="4457" title="Bar-le-Duc" label="Bar-le-Duc"/>
<link wikidata="Q208794" start="4503" end="4512" title="Lunéville" label="Lunéville"/>
<link wikidata="Q185721" start="4577" end="4587" title="Bar-le-Duc" label="Bar-le-Duc"/>
<link wikidata="Q2638011" start="4635" end="4664" title="Dukes of Lorraine family tree" label="Dukes of Lorraine family tree"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="655727" wikidata="Q590487" url="?curid=655727" title="Antoine, Duke of Lorraine">
<text>Antoine (4 June 148914 June 1544), known as the Good, was Duke of Lorraine from 1508 until his death in 1544. Raised at the French court, Antoine would campaign in Italy twice: once under Louis XII and the other with Francis I. During the German Peasants&#x27; War, he would defeat two armies while retaking Saverne and Sélestat. Antoine succeeded in freeing Lorraine from the Holy Roman Empire with the Treaty of Nuremberg of 1542. In 1544, while Antoine suffered from an illness, the Duchy of Lorraine was invaded by Emperor Charles V&#x27;s army on their way to attack France. Fleeing the Imperial armies, Antoine was taken to Bar-le-Duc where he died.

==Biography==
Antoine was born on 4 June 1489 at Bar-le-Duc, the son of René II, Duke of Lorraine, and Philippa of Guelders. He spent seven years at the court of King Louis XII together with his brother Claude, and became friends with the Duke of Angoulême, the future King King Francis I. After the death of his father, Antoine succeeded him as duke of Lorraine in December 1508. In 1530, a transaction between Antoine and his brother, divided the family possessions, with Antoine getting the duchies of Lorraine and Bar while Claude would receive the duchy of Guise.

In 1509 Antoine entrusted the reins of the Duchy to his mother and Hugues des Hazards, bishop of Toul, and followed Louis XII in his campaign in northern Italy, where he took part in the Battle of Agnadello of that year. After Louis&#x27; death, he went back to Italy and under Francis I, participating in the battle of Marignano (13–14 September 1515). However, called back home by problems in Lorraine, he was absent at the decisive battle of Pavia (1525), in which Francis was taken prisoner and his brother François, count of Lambesc, was killed.

==Peasant war==
In Lorraine, Antoine had to face the spreading of Protestant Reformation, against which he published an edict on 26 December 1523. The situation worsened the following year, when a rebellion, known as German Peasants&#x27; War, broke out in Alsace. The insurrectionists captured Saverne and tried to conquer Saint-Dié, while the peasants of Bitscherland also rebelled in May 1525. Antoine launched an expedition in which he massacred a peasant army at Saverne on 16 May and on 20 May he decisively defeated another peasant army near Sélestat.

==Duchy legal status==
Despite remaining neutral in the wars between France and the Holy Roman Empire, Antoine sent his son Francis to the French court and by 1527 was attempting to marry him to Anne of Cleves. In an effort to improve his relations with German lords, Antoine sent a few hundred soldiers to fight against the Ottomans at the Siege of Vienna in 1529. Antoine dispatched legal envoys to the Imperial diet, in 1532, seeking clarification of the duchy of Lorraine&#x27;s legal status within the Holy Roman Empire to no avail.

In 1538, Antoine claimed the titles of Duke of Guelders and Count of Zutphen upon the death of Charles of Egmond, but was unable to gain possession of them. He married his heir, Francis to Christina of Denmark, niece of Charles V, in 1541, and with the Treaty of Nuremberg (26 August 1542), Antoine obtained from Charles V the independence of the Duchy of Lorraine. He interceded at the start of Francis and Charles&#x27; war in 1542 as a peace envoy, visiting Charles in person, but due to gout sent his heir to Francis. In fact, Antoine asked his niece, Mary of Guise, to send him a Scottish hackney horse which he hoped would be easier to ride with his gout.

==Death and aftermath==
In May 1544, Charles V&#x27;s army marched into Lorraine as part of a plan to invade France, while Henry VIII of England attacked northern France from Calais. Weakened by an illness, Antoine was unable to respond, and was taken to Bar-le-Duc where he died on 14 June 1544.

Antoine&#x27;s oldest son Francis succeeded him as Duke of Lorraine and ruled for only one year, dying in 1545. His son, Antoine&#x27;s grandson, Charles III of Lorraine became duke with his mother, Christina of Denmark, as regent. By 1552, King Henry II of France visited Charles and it was decided that Charles would be educated at the French court and that the regency of Lorraine would fall to his uncle, Nicolas, Duke of Mercœur. In 1559, the House of Guise, fearing the influence of the Holy Roman Empire over Lorraine, orchestrated Charles&#x27;s marriage to Claude of France, daughter of Henry II of France and Catherine de&#x27; Medici.

==Family==
On 26 June 1515, he married Renée of Bourbon, daughter of Gilbert de Bourbon, Count of Montpensier and Clara Gonzaga.

They had:

* Francis I, Duke of Lorraine (1517–1545), married Christina of Denmark
* Nicholas, Duke of Mercœur (1524–1577)
* Anna (1522–1568), married firstly René of Châlon, Prince of Orange, and secondly Philip II, Duke of Aerschot (1496–1549)

==See also==

* Dukes of Lorraine family tree

==References==
==Sources==
*
*
*
*
*
*
*</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q590487" start="0" end="7" title="Antoine, Duke of Lorraine" label="Antoine"/>
<link wikidata="Q590487" start="44" end="52" title="Antoine, Duke of Lorraine" label="the Good"/>
<link wikidata="Q669958" start="58" end="74" title="Duke of Lorraine" label="Duke of Lorraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q273348" start="152" end="169" title="Italian Wars" label="campaign in Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q58514" start="188" end="197" title="Louis XII" label="Louis XII"/>
<link wikidata="Q129857" start="217" end="226" title="Francis I of France" label="Francis I"/>
<link wikidata="Q154031" start="239" end="264" title="German Peasants&amp;#x27; War" label="German Peasants&amp;#x27; War"/>
<link wikidata="Q22741" start="308" end="315" title="Saverne" label="Saverne"/>
<link wikidata="Q22737" start="320" end="328" title="Sélestat" label="Sélestat"/>
<link wikidata="Q12548" start="377" end="394" title="Holy Roman Empire" label="Holy Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q32500" start="527" end="536" title="Charles V, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Charles V"/>
<link wikidata="Q185721" start="630" end="640" title="Bar-le-Duc" label="Bar-le-Duc"/>
<link wikidata="Q185721" start="706" end="716" title="Bar-le-Duc" label="Bar-le-Duc"/>
<link wikidata="Q441416" start="729" end="754" title="René II, Duke of Lorraine" label="René II, Duke of Lorraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q431221" start="760" end="780" title="Philippa of Guelders" label="Philippa of Guelders"/>
<link wikidata="Q58514" start="824" end="833" title="Louis XII" label="Louis XII"/>
<link wikidata="Q366025" start="860" end="866" title="Claude, Duke of Guise" label="Claude"/>
<link wikidata="Q1529781" start="896" end="913" title="Duke of Angoulême" label="Duke of Angoulême"/>
<link wikidata="Q129857" start="931" end="945" title="King Francis I" label="King Francis I"/>
<link wikidata="Q328001" start="1314" end="1328" title="bishop of Toul" label="bishop of Toul"/>
<link wikidata="Q636365" start="1356" end="1386" title="War of the League of Cambrai" label="his campaign in northern Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754732" start="1414" end="1433" title="Battle of Agnadello" label="Battle of Agnadello"/>
<link wikidata="Q330" start="1537" end="1556" title="battle of Marignano" label="battle of Marignano"/>
<link wikidata="Q63468" start="1662" end="1677" title="battle of Pavia" label="battle of Pavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q12562" start="1856" end="1867" title="Reformation" label="Reformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q154031" start="1996" end="2021" title="German Peasants&amp;#x27; War" label="German Peasants&amp;#x27; War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142" start="2036" end="2042" title="Alsace" label="Alsace"/>
<link wikidata="Q22741" start="2074" end="2081" title="Saverne" label="Saverne"/>
<link wikidata="Q34427" start="2103" end="2112" title="Saint-Dié" label="Saint-Dié"/>
<link wikidata="Q2065422" start="2136" end="2148" title="Bitscherland" label="Bitscherland"/>
<link wikidata="Q22737" start="2328" end="2336" title="Sélestat" label="Sélestat"/>
<link wikidata="Q57126" start="2534" end="2548" title="Anne of Cleves" label="Anne of Cleves"/>
<link wikidata="Q207576" start="2680" end="2695" title="Siege of Vienna (1529)" label="Siege of Vienna"/>
<link wikidata="Q3248555" start="2917" end="2933" title="Duke of Guelders" label="Duke of Guelders"/>
<link wikidata="Q1787007" start="2938" end="2954" title="Count of Zutphen" label="Count of Zutphen"/>
<link wikidata="Q832225" start="2973" end="2990" title="Charles of Egmond" label="Charles of Egmond"/>
<link wikidata="Q233821" start="3067" end="3087" title="Christina of Denmark" label="Christina of Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q32500" start="3098" end="3107" title="Charles V, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Charles V"/>
<link wikidata="Q15542964" start="3300" end="3311" title="Italian War of 1542–1546" label="war in 1542"/>
<link wikidata="Q133087" start="3369" end="3373" title="gout" label="gout"/>
<link wikidata="Q229846" start="3434" end="3447" title="Mary of Guise" label="Mary of Guise"/>
<link wikidata="Q635926" start="3472" end="3485" title="hackney horse" label="hackney horse"/>
<link wikidata="Q38370" start="3664" end="3674" title="Henry VIII" label="Henry VIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q6454" start="3716" end="3722" title="Calais" label="Calais"/>
<link wikidata="Q505040" start="3985" end="4008" title="Charles III of Lorraine" label="Charles III of Lorraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q233821" start="4038" end="4058" title="Christina of Denmark" label="Christina of Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q132545" start="4085" end="4103" title="Henry II of France" label="Henry II of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q1372471" start="4248" end="4272" title="Nicolas, Duke of Mercœur" label="Nicolas, Duke of Mercœur"/>
<link wikidata="Q1336538" start="4287" end="4301" title="House of Guise" label="House of Guise"/>
<link wikidata="Q12548" start="4332" end="4349" title="Holy Roman Empire" label="Holy Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q242336" start="4405" end="4421" title="Claude of France (1547–1575)" label="Claude of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q131552" start="4458" end="4483" title="Catherine de&amp;#x27; Medici" label="Catherine de&amp;#x27; Medici"/>
<link wikidata="Q3427187" start="4525" end="4541" title="Renée of Bourbon" label="Renée of Bourbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1379932" start="4555" end="4595" title="Gilbert, Count of Montpensier" label="Gilbert de Bourbon, Count of Montpensier"/>
<link wikidata="Q3667489" start="4600" end="4613" title="Clara Gonzaga" label="Clara Gonzaga"/>
<link wikidata="Q525683" start="4629" end="4656" title="Francis I, Duke of Lorraine" label="Francis I, Duke of Lorraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1372471" start="4701" end="4726" title="Nicholas, Duke of Mercœur" label="Nicholas, Duke of Mercœur"/>
<link wikidata="Q1993206" start="4741" end="4745" title="Anna of Lorraine" label="Anna"/>
<link wikidata="Q654855" start="4775" end="4789" title="René of Châlon" label="René of Châlon"/>
<link wikidata="Q549449" start="4791" end="4807" title="Prince of Orange" label="Prince of Orange"/>
<link wikidata="Q935822" start="4822" end="4849" title="Philip II, Duke of Aerschot" label="Philip II, Duke of Aerschot"/>
<link wikidata="Q2638011" start="4879" end="4908" title="Dukes of Lorraine family tree" label="Dukes of Lorraine family tree"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="655728" wikidata="Q525683" url="?curid=655728" title="Francis I, Duke of Lorraine">
<text>Francis I () (23 August 1517 – 12 June 1545) was Duke of Lorraine from 1544–1545.

==History==
Born in Nancy, Francis was the eldest son of Antoine, Duke of Lorraine and Renée de Bourbon, daughter of Gilbert de Bourbon, Count of Montpensier. He was briefly engaged in the mid-1530s to Anne of Cleves, who in 1540 would become the fourth wife of King Henry VIII of England. Their betrothal would be used by Henry to break his marriage to Anne after six short months.

On 10 July 1541, Francis married Christina of Denmark in Brussels. Christina was a daughter of King Christian II and Isabella of Austria. Francis died at Remiremont in 1545, leaving Duchess Christina as the regent of Lorraine and as the guardian of their young children.

==Children==
By Christina of Denmark (c.1521 – 1590; married in 1541)
==Ancestry==
==References==
==Sources==
*
*

==See also==

* Dukes of Lorraine family tree
* List of rulers of Lorraine</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q525683" start="0" end="9" title="Francis I, Duke of Lorraine" label="Francis I"/>
<link wikidata="Q669958" start="49" end="65" title="Duke of Lorraine" label="Duke of Lorraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q40898" start="103" end="108" title="Nancy, France" label="Nancy"/>
<link wikidata="Q590487" start="140" end="165" title="Antoine, Duke of Lorraine" label="Antoine, Duke of Lorraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q3427187" start="170" end="186" title="Renée of Bourbon" label="Renée de Bourbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1379932" start="200" end="240" title="Gilbert, Count of Montpensier" label="Gilbert de Bourbon, Count of Montpensier"/>
<link wikidata="Q57126" start="285" end="299" title="Anne of Cleves" label="Anne of Cleves"/>
<link wikidata="Q38370" start="350" end="360" title="Henry VIII" label="Henry VIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q233821" start="500" end="520" title="Christina of Denmark" label="Christina of Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q154460" start="562" end="579" title="Christian II of Denmark" label="King Christian II"/>
<link wikidata="Q157884" start="584" end="603" title="Isabella of Austria" label="Isabella of Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q504853" start="621" end="631" title="Remiremont" label="Remiremont"/>
<link wikidata="Q477406" start="674" end="680" title="regent" label="regent"/>
<link wikidata="Q233821" start="755" end="775" title="Christina of Denmark" label="Christina of Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q2638011" start="870" end="899" title="Dukes of Lorraine family tree" label="Dukes of Lorraine family tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q669958" start="902" end="928" title="List of rulers of Lorraine" label="List of rulers of Lorraine"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="655729" wikidata="Q663073" url="?curid=655729" title="Charles II, Duke of Lorraine">
<text>Charles II (11 September 1365 – 25 January 1431), called the Bold () was the Duke of Lorraine from 1390 to his death and Constable of France from 1418 to 1425. 

Charles joined the Barbary Crusade, fought at Nicopolis, and aided the Teutonic knights in Livonia. During the Hundred Years War, he sought closer ties to the French royal family, even being made Constable by Queen Isabella. Following an indecisive war against his nephew, he died in 1431.

==Biography==
Born 11 September 1365, Charles was the elder son of John I, Duke of Lorraine, and Sophie, daughter of Eberhard II, Count of Württemberg. During his youth, he had been close to Philip II, Duke of Burgundy, and they were comrades in arms on several occasions. This proximity to Burgundy was largely a result of his father&#x27;s moving away from the French court, the court to which the Lorrainer dukes had neared in the past century and a half as they withdrew from the Holy Roman Empire, within which their duchy was still technically a vassal state. Charles was defiant of Louis I, Duke of Orléans, who had supported the citizens of Neufchâteau against his father and the Emperor Wenceslaus when the latter was accused by his subjects of weakness. Wenceslaus was deposed in 1400 and replaced by Rupert III, Count Palatine of the Rhine, Charles&#x27;s father-in-law.

Charles was also a major participant in some late Crusading movements. He joined the Barbary Crusade in 1391 and was at the disastrous Battle of Nicopolis in 1396. There he accompanied John the Fearless, the count of Nevers and son of his friend Philip. In 1399, he assisted the Teutonic Knights in Livonia.

==Hundred Years War==
France broke down into two parties: the Armagnacs of Bernard VII, Count of Armagnac, the tutor of the young Charles of Orléans, and the Burgundians of John the Fearless, Philip&#x27;s successor, who was supported by Charles of Lorraine. Charles did not, however, enter the Anglo-French conflict then raging—the Hundred Years&#x27; War—but his brother, Frederick I, Count of Vaudémont, got involved and died in the Battle of Agincourt in 1415. Nevertheless, the queen, Isabeau of Bavaria, appointed Charles constable in 1418. In 1425, he asserted that the load was too large for him and renounced it.

Charles adopted a new stance vis-à-vis France after the assassination of John the Fearless in 1419. John&#x27;s successor, Philip III, had much territory in the Low Countries and only Lorraine and Champagne separated his Burgundian from his Belgian possessions. Fearing any warlike ambitions, Charles thought it prudent to reorient his fidelities and friendships away from such a possible adversary. Through his French connections, he obtained the assistance of Charles VII against Burgundy and married his daughter to the Angevin René, later king of Naples.

Charles&#x27;s final years were rife with conflict and unhappiness. His nephew, Anthony of Vaudémont demanded a part of the inheritance and Charles had to war against him in 1425, without much success. Early in 1429, Joan of Arc came on a pilgrimage to Saint-Nicolas-de-Port. She counselled the duke to abandon his mistress, Alison du May. Ignoring this advice, Charles gave her an escort and sent her on to Chinon. He died two years later at his capital of Nancy on 25 January.

==Family==
Charles married Margaret of the Palatinate (1376–1434), daughter of Rupert of Germany and Elisabeth of Nuremberg, in 1393, only two daughters survived childhood:
*Isabella (1400–1453), who became Duchess &quot;suo jure&quot; on his death and married René, later holder of many prestigious titles
*Louis, died young
*Ralph, died young
*Catherine (1407–1439), married Jacob, Margrave of Baden

With his mistress, the aforementioned Alison du May (murdered in Nancy, 25 January 1431), he had five children:
*Ferry d&#x27;Einvile (d. 1453/56), Lord of Billestein, Villacourt, Vaxoncourt, Pallegney and Zincourt. He had issue.
*John Pillelipille (d. 1460), Lord of Darnieulles, married Philippa de Marches. He had issue.
*Ferry de Lunéville (fl. c. 1425).
*Catherine (fl. c. 1425).
*Isabelle (d. after 9 August 1457), married in 1425 to Henry of Liocourt.

==See also==
* Dukes of Lorraine family tree

==Notes==
==References==
==Sources==
*
*
*</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q663073" start="0" end="10" title="Charles II, Duke of Lorraine" label="Charles II"/>
<link wikidata="Q663073" start="57" end="65" title="Charles II, Duke of Lorraine" label="the Bold"/>
<link wikidata="Q669958" start="77" end="93" title="Duke of Lorraine" label="Duke of Lorraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q346871" start="121" end="140" title="Constable of France" label="Constable of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q562106" start="520" end="544" title="John I, Duke of Lorraine" label="John I, Duke of Lorraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q69359" start="570" end="603" title="Eberhard II, Count of Württemberg" label="Eberhard II, Count of Württemberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q298892" start="644" end="671" title="Philip II, Duke of Burgundy" label="Philip II, Duke of Burgundy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4712" start="744" end="752" title="Duchy of Burgundy" label="Burgundy"/>
<link wikidata="Q12548" start="937" end="954" title="Holy Roman Empire" label="Holy Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q337057" start="1042" end="1066" title="Louis I, Duke of Orléans" label="Louis I, Duke of Orléans"/>
<link wikidata="Q131581675" start="1102" end="1113" title="Neufchâteau, Vosges" label="Neufchâteau"/>
<link wikidata="Q152148" start="1141" end="1159" title="Wenceslaus, King of the Romans" label="Emperor Wenceslaus"/>
<link wikidata="Q57326" start="1264" end="1303" title="Rupert of Germany" label="Rupert III, Count Palatine of the Rhine"/>
<link wikidata="Q12546" start="1386" end="1395" title="Crusade" label="Crusading"/>
<link wikidata="Q1788488" start="1421" end="1436" title="Barbary Crusade" label="Barbary Crusade"/>
<link wikidata="Q212220" start="1471" end="1490" title="Battle of Nicopolis" label="Battle of Nicopolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q298901" start="1521" end="1538" title="John the Fearless" label="John the Fearless"/>
<link wikidata="Q777511" start="1544" end="1559" title="count of Nevers" label="count of Nevers"/>
<link wikidata="Q48189" start="1615" end="1631" title="Teutonic Knights" label="Teutonic Knights"/>
<link wikidata="Q183464" start="1635" end="1642" title="Livonia" label="Livonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q301905" start="1707" end="1716" title="Armagnacs" label="Armagnacs"/>
<link wikidata="Q729206" start="1720" end="1750" title="Bernard VII, Count of Armagnac" label="Bernard VII, Count of Armagnac"/>
<link wikidata="Q310146" start="1775" end="1793" title="Charles, duc d&amp;#x27;Orléans" label="Charles of Orléans"/>
<link wikidata="Q12551" start="1978" end="2001" title="Hundred Years&amp;#x27; War" label="Hundred Years&amp;#x27; War"/>
<link wikidata="Q506354" start="2019" end="2050" title="Frederick I, Count of Vaudémont" label="Frederick I, Count of Vaudémont"/>
<link wikidata="Q188495" start="2081" end="2100" title="Battle of Agincourt" label="Battle of Agincourt"/>
<link wikidata="Q154064" start="2135" end="2153" title="Isabeau of Bavaria" label="Isabeau of Bavaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q298901" start="2341" end="2358" title="John the Fearless" label="John the Fearless"/>
<link wikidata="Q239337" start="2391" end="2401" title="Philip III, Duke of Burgundy" label="Philip III"/>
<link wikidata="Q476033" start="2429" end="2442" title="Low Countries" label="Low Countries"/>
<link wikidata="Q273827" start="2465" end="2474" title="Champagne (province)" label="Champagne"/>
<link wikidata="Q133372" start="2730" end="2741" title="Charles VII of France" label="Charles VII"/>
<link wikidata="Q1716871" start="2791" end="2798" title="House of Valois-Anjou" label="Angevin"/>
<link wikidata="Q170353" start="2799" end="2803" title="René I of Naples" label="René"/>
<link wikidata="Q2862798" start="2811" end="2825" title="king of Naples" label="king of Naples"/>
<link wikidata="Q562137" start="2908" end="2928" title="Anthony of Vaudémont" label="Anthony of Vaudémont"/>
<link wikidata="Q7226" start="3045" end="3056" title="Joan of Arc" label="Joan of Arc"/>
<link wikidata="Q125278" start="3081" end="3102" title="Saint-Nicolas-de-Port" label="Saint-Nicolas-de-Port"/>
<link wikidata="Q194138" start="3236" end="3242" title="Chinon" label="Chinon"/>
<link wikidata="Q40898" start="3286" end="3291" title="Nancy, France" label="Nancy"/>
<link wikidata="Q70936" start="3335" end="3361" title="Margaret of the Palatinate" label="Margaret of the Palatinate"/>
<link wikidata="Q57326" start="3387" end="3404" title="Rupert of Germany" label="Rupert of Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q69764" start="3409" end="3431" title="Elisabeth of Nuremberg" label="Elisabeth of Nuremberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q237263" start="3482" end="3490" title="Isabella, Duchess of Lorraine" label="Isabella"/>
<link wikidata="Q2699324" start="3529" end="3537" title="suo jure" label="suo jure"/>
<link wikidata="Q170353" start="3569" end="3573" title="René I of Naples" label="René"/>
<link wikidata="Q540767" start="3654" end="3663" title="Catherine de Lorraine (1407—1439)" label="Catherine"/>
<link wikidata="Q74019" start="3685" end="3709" title="Jacob, Margrave of Baden" label="Jacob, Margrave of Baden"/>
<link wikidata="Q198345" start="3979" end="3990" title="Darnieulles" label="Darnieulles"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4151" end="4168" title="Henry of Liocourt" label="Henry of Liocourt"/>
<link wikidata="Q2638011" start="4186" end="4215" title="Dukes of Lorraine family tree" label="Dukes of Lorraine family tree"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="655730" wikidata="Q704178" url="?curid=655730" title="Henry II, Duke of Lorraine">
<text>Henry II (French: &quot;Henri II&quot;; 8 November 1563 – 31 July 1624), known as &quot;the Good (&quot;le Bon&quot;)&quot;, was Duke of Lorraine from 1608 until his death. Leaving no sons, both of his daughters became Duchesses of Lorraine by marriage. He was a brother-in-law of Henry IV of France.

==History and family==
Henry was the son of Charles III, Duke of Lorraine, and Claude of Valois, daughter of Henry II of France and Catherine de&#x27; Medici. His paternal grandparents were Francis I, Duke of Lorraine, and Christina of Denmark. The splendour of his baptism in Bar-le-Duc was recalled by his aunt Margaret of Valois, who was ten at the time. 

Henry married, firstly, Catherine of Bourbon, Duchess of Albret, daughter Antoine of Navarre and Jeanne d&#x27;Albret, sister of King Henry IV of France. The couple were married at the Château de Saint Germain-en-Laye outside Paris on 31 January 1599. The bride was already 39 years of age and the union was merely to secure relations with the House of Bourbon which had previously been rivals with the House of Lorraine. As Catherine was a Protestant and Henry was a Catholic, a papal dispensation was needed for the two to marry. Pope Clement VIII refused to grant a dispensation, but Catherine&#x27;s brother, Henry, convinced their illegitimate half-brother, Charles, Archbishop of Rouen, to officiate at the wedding.

Catherine died childless in 1604, aged 45. With no issue from that union, Duke Henry married, secondly, Margherita Gonzaga on 24 April 1606 in Mantua. She was the eldest daughter of Vincenzo Gonzaga, Duke of Mantua and his wife Eleonora de&#x27; Medici. Margherita&#x27;s sister Eleonor Gonzaga was a future Holy Roman Empress.

Henry was succeeded by his younger brother as Francis II, Duke of Lorraine.

==Issue==
Henry and Margherita had four daughters, two of whom survived to adulthood:
* Stillborn daughter (February 1607).
* Nicole of Lorraine (3 October 1608 – 23 February 1657), married her cousin, Charles IV, Duke of Lorraine, separated in 1635.
* A daughter (10 February 1611 - 11 February 1611).
* Claude Françoise de Lorraine (6 October 1612 – 2 August 1648), married her cousin, Nicholas II, Duke of Lorraine,

==Ancestry==
==References==
==Sources==
*
*

==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q704178" start="0" end="8" title="Henry II, Duke of Lorraine" label="Henry II"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="10" end="16" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q669958" start="129" end="145" title="Duke of Lorraine" label="Duke of Lorraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q936976" start="281" end="299" title="Henry IV of France" label="Henry IV of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q505040" start="346" end="375" title="Charles III, Duke of Lorraine" label="Charles III, Duke of Lorraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q242336" start="381" end="397" title="Claude of Valois" label="Claude of Valois"/>
<link wikidata="Q132545" start="411" end="429" title="Henry II of France" label="Henry II of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q131552" start="434" end="459" title="Catherine de&amp;#x27; Medici" label="Catherine de&amp;#x27; Medici"/>
<link wikidata="Q525683" start="492" end="519" title="Francis I, Duke of Lorraine" label="Francis I, Duke of Lorraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q233821" start="525" end="545" title="Christina of Denmark" label="Christina of Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q185721" start="579" end="589" title="Bar-le-Duc" label="Bar-le-Duc"/>
<link wikidata="Q220845" start="615" end="633" title="Margaret of Valois" label="Margaret of Valois"/>
<link wikidata="Q268652" start="686" end="706" title="Catherine of Bourbon" label="Catherine of Bourbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2029503" start="708" end="725" title="Duke of Albret" label="Duchess of Albret"/>
<link wikidata="Q936976" start="791" end="814" title="Henry IV of France" label="King Henry IV of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q1520841" start="847" end="879" title="Château de Saint Germain-en-Laye" label="Château de Saint Germain-en-Laye"/>
<link wikidata="Q58389" start="1006" end="1022" title="House of Bourbon" label="House of Bourbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2638011" start="1065" end="1082" title="House of Lorraine" label="House of Lorraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q264361" start="1489" end="1507" title="Margherita Gonzaga, Duchess of Lorraine" label="Margherita Gonzaga"/>
<link wikidata="Q452580" start="1567" end="1599" title="Vincenzo I Gonzaga, Duke of Mantua" label="Vincenzo Gonzaga, Duke of Mantua"/>
<link wikidata="Q1991420" start="1613" end="1637" title="Eleonora de&amp;#x27; Medici" label="Eleonora de&amp;#x27; Medici"/>
<link wikidata="Q237940" start="1664" end="1679" title="Eleonor Gonzaga (1598–1655)" label="Eleonor Gonzaga"/>
<link wikidata="Q15727374" start="1693" end="1711" title="Holy Roman Empress" label="Holy Roman Empress"/>
<link wikidata="Q205797" start="1760" end="1788" title="Francis II, Duke of Lorraine" label="Francis II, Duke of Lorraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q267704" start="1917" end="1935" title="Nicole, Duchess of Lorraine" label="Nicole of Lorraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q505101" start="1993" end="2021" title="Charles IV, Duke of Lorraine" label="Charles IV, Duke of Lorraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2601958" start="2096" end="2124" title="Claude of Lorraine (1612-1648)" label="Claude Françoise de Lorraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q701583" start="2179" end="2208" title="Nicholas II, Duke of Lorraine" label="Nicholas II, Duke of Lorraine"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="655732" wikidata="Q205797" url="?curid=655732" title="Francis II, Duke of Lorraine">
<text>Francis II (François de Lorraine; 27 February 1572 – 14 October 1632) was the son of Charles III, Duke of Lorraine and Claude of Valois. He was Duke of Lorraine briefly in 1625, quickly abdicating in favour of his son.

==Biography==

The youngest son of Charles III, Duke of Lorraine, and his wife Claude of France, Francis was styled the Count of Vaudémont during his father&#x27;s reign (1545–1608) as well as during that of his older brother Henry II (1608–1624). His father appointed him as his deputy (Lieutenant General) of Lorraine, while in 1594 he was out of the country.

That same year he was Lieutenant General of the French king in Toul and Verdun. From September to October 1606 he was in his father&#x27;s diplomatic mission in England. Rowland Whyte mentioned him dancing at Hampton Court in the presence chamber of Anne of Denmark. He spent much of the time hunting with King James away from London, where there was plague. They returned to Hampton Court and James gave him a jewel worth 10,000 crowns. Anne of Denmark wrote to his father expressing her pleasure and mentioning King James&#x27;s nearest in blood to the family.

In 1621 he fell out with his brother Henry II, who had become duke in 1608, and went to Germany for the emperor to fight the Protestants. The reason for the rift was Henry&#x27;s intention to have Francis&#x27;s son Charles marry Henry II&#x27;s daughter Nicolette of Lorraine and to leave Lorraine to her, even though the will of Duke René II had provided for a strictly male succession. Henry and his wife Margherita Gonzaga had only had daughters. After negotiations, the issue was then resolved and the marriage took place but the couple did not have any children and the duchy was to revert to Francis&#x27; other son, the future Nicholas II, Duke of Lorraine. 

After Francis&#x27; brother died on 31 July 1624, the situation became complicated; Henry&#x27;s final rules specified that Charles could only be the Duke of Lorraine as Nicolette&#x27;s husband.

In November 1625, however, it was Francis himself who became the ruler of Lorraine. Having claimed the duchy for himself, he got it on 21 November 1625 from the duchy&#x27;s States General.

After he had paid the duchy&#x27;s debt out of its treasury five days later, he abdicated in favour of his son, who by then had pushed aside his wife and who then ruled in his own right.

In his will, Francis stated that he &quot;never had ambitions to wear a crown in this world&quot;. After his abdication, Francis II took on the management of the county of Vaudémont. He died less than a year later.

==Family==

He married Christina of Salm and had the following issue:

# Henri de Lorraine, Marquis of Hattonchâtel (3 March 1602 – 20 April 1611) died young;
# Charles de Lorraine, Duke of Lorraine (1604–1675) married Nicolette of Lorraine, no issue; married (bigamously) Béatrix de Cusance and had issue (he also remarried Beatrix after the death of Nicolette); married Marie Louise d&#x27;Aspremont, no issue;
# Henriette de Lorraine (7 April 1605 – 16 November 1660), married Louis de Lorraine, Prince of Lexin, son of Louis II, Cardinal of Guise, no issue;
# Nicolas, Duke of Lorraine (1609–1670), married Claude de Lorraine and had issue;
# Marguerite de Lorraine (1615–1672), married Gaston de France, Duke of Orléans and had issue;
# Christine de Lorraine (16 August 1621 – 19 December 1622) died in infancy.

==Ancestry==
==See also==
==References==
==Sources==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q205797" start="0" end="10" title="Francis II, Duke of Lorraine" label="Francis II"/>
<link wikidata="Q505040" start="85" end="114" title="Charles III, Duke of Lorraine" label="Charles III, Duke of Lorraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q242336" start="119" end="135" title="Claude of Valois" label="Claude of Valois"/>
<link wikidata="Q669958" start="144" end="160" title="List of rulers of Lorraine" label="Duke of Lorraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q207549" start="186" end="196" title="abdication" label="abdicating"/>
<link wikidata="Q505040" start="255" end="284" title="Charles III, Duke of Lorraine" label="Charles III, Duke of Lorraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q242336" start="299" end="315" title="Claude of France (1547–1575)" label="Claude of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q704178" start="446" end="454" title="Henry II, Duke of Lorraine" label="Henry II"/>
<link wikidata="Q154728" start="646" end="650" title="Toul" label="Toul"/>
<link wikidata="Q154748" start="655" end="661" title="Verdun" label="Verdun"/>
<link wikidata="Q7372201" start="753" end="766" title="Rowland Whyte" label="Rowland Whyte"/>
<link wikidata="Q205666" start="792" end="805" title="Hampton Court" label="Hampton Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q158248" start="833" end="848" title="Anne of Denmark" label="Anne of Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q79972" start="889" end="899" title="James VI and I" label="King James"/>
<link wikidata="Q273724" start="1013" end="1019" title="Écu" label="crowns"/>
<link wikidata="Q158248" start="1021" end="1036" title="Anne of Denmark" label="Anne of Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q267704" start="1402" end="1423" title="Nicole, Duchess of Lorraine" label="Nicolette of Lorraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q264361" start="1555" end="1573" title="Margherita Gonzaga, Duchess of Lorraine" label="Margherita Gonzaga"/>
<link wikidata="Q701583" start="1782" end="1811" title="Nicholas II, Duke of Lorraine" label="Nicholas II, Duke of Lorraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q3697572" start="2630" end="2647" title="Christina of Salm" label="Christina of Salm"/>
<link wikidata="Q505101" start="2768" end="2805" title="Charles IV, Duke of Lorraine" label="Charles de Lorraine, Duke of Lorraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q267704" start="2826" end="2847" title="Nicole, Duchess of Lorraine" label="Nicolette of Lorraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q660224" start="2880" end="2898" title="Béatrix de Cusance" label="Béatrix de Cusance"/>
<link wikidata="Q3292085" start="2979" end="3008" title="Marie Louise d&amp;#x27;Aspremont" label="Marie Louise d&amp;#x27;Aspremont"/>
<link wikidata="Q22282" start="3116" end="3121" title="Lixheim" label="Lexin"/>
<link wikidata="Q510693" start="3130" end="3157" title="Louis II, Cardinal of Guise" label="Louis II, Cardinal of Guise"/>
<link wikidata="Q701583" start="3171" end="3196" title="Nicholas Francis, Duke of Lorraine" label="Nicolas, Duke of Lorraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2601958" start="3218" end="3236" title="Claude Françoise de Lorraine" label="Claude de Lorraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1125417" start="3254" end="3276" title="Marguerite of Lorraine" label="Marguerite de Lorraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q644635" start="3298" end="3331" title="Gaston, Duke of Orléans" label="Gaston de France, Duke of Orléans"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="655733" wikidata="Q505040" url="?curid=655733" title="Charles III, Duke of Lorraine">
<text>Charles III (18 February 1543 – 14 May 1608), known as &quot;the Great&quot;, was Duke of Lorraine from 1545 until his death.

==Life==
He was the eldest surviving son of Francis I, Duke of Lorraine, and Christina of Denmark.

In 1545, his father died, and his mother served as the regent during his minority. During his childhood, his aged great-grandmother, Philippa of Gelderland, died in 1547, leaving also her inheritance to the young Charles. His dynasty claimed the Kingdom of Jerusalem and used also the title of Duke of Calabria as symbol of their claims to the Kingdom of Naples. Additionally, they had a claim to the Duchy of Gelderland, inherited from Charles of Egmont, Duke of Gelderland.

In 1552, Lorraine was invaded by France, his mother&#x27;s regency was terminated and Charles was removed from Lorraine to France, to be raised at the French royal court in accordance to the needs of French interests. According to Julio Alvarotto, envoy of Ercole II d&#x27;Este, Duke of Ferrara, Charles paid for a masque involving pageant ships with sails of silver cloth, designed by Bartolomeo Campi, at the wedding of Mary, Queen of Scots, and Francis, Dauphin of France, on 24 April 1558. During the pageant he danced with his future wife, Claude of France. In 1559, they were married and he was allowed to depart to Lorraine and take control of his domain.

The reign of Charles III is regarded as a great age of peace and prosperity for Lorraine. He pursued a policy of neutrality between France and The Holy Roman Empire, as well as during the French Wars of Religion. He founded the . He also expanded his realm by the incorporation of Pfalzburg from George John I, Count Palatine of Veldenz, in 1590, and tried to conquer also Lützelstein, though George John I&#x27;s widow, Anna of Sweden, managed to negotiate a truce.

In 1589, he broke his policy of neutrality and allied himself with the French Catholic League because he, as a Catholic, could not accept Henry of Navarre as king of France. In his peace with Henry in 1594, he married his son to Henry&#x27;s sister Catherine de Bourbon.

==Family==
He married Claude of Valois, princess of France, daughter of king Henry II and Catherine de&#x27; Medici. They had the following children:

*Henry II, Duke of Lorraine (1563–1624) married Catherine de Bourbon and Margerita Gonzaga
*Christine (1565–1637), married Ferdinando I de&#x27; Medici, Grand Duke of Tuscany
*Charles (1567–1607), Cardinal of Lorraine and Bishop of Metz (1578–1607), Bishop of Strasbourg (1604–1607)
*Antoinette (1568–1610), married John William, Duke of Jülich-Cleves-Berg.
*Anne (10 October 1569 – 8 August 1576), died in early childhood.
*Francis II, Duke of Lorraine (1572–1632) married Christina of Salm
*Catherine (1573 † 1648), Abess de Remiremont
*Elisabeth Renata (1574–1635), married Maximilian I, Elector of Bavaria
* Claude, (20 February 1575 – 2 October 1576), died in early childhood.

==Ancestors==
==See also==
* Dukes of Lorraine family tree

==References==
==Sources==
*</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q505040" start="0" end="11" title="Charles III, Duke of Lorraine" label="Charles III"/>
<link wikidata="Q669958" start="82" end="98" title="Duke of Lorraine" label="Duke of Lorraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q525683" start="171" end="198" title="Francis I, Duke of Lorraine" label="Francis I, Duke of Lorraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q233821" start="204" end="224" title="Christina of Denmark" label="Christina of Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q431221" start="360" end="382" title="Philippa of Gelderland" label="Philippa of Gelderland"/>
<link wikidata="Q55502" start="473" end="493" title="Kingdom of Jerusalem" label="Kingdom of Jerusalem"/>
<link wikidata="Q1570744" start="521" end="537" title="Duke of Calabria" label="Duke of Calabria"/>
<link wikidata="Q173065" start="571" end="588" title="Kingdom of Naples" label="Kingdom of Naples"/>
<link wikidata="Q152420" start="628" end="647" title="Duchy of Gelderland" label="Duchy of Gelderland"/>
<link wikidata="Q832225" start="664" end="701" title="Charles of Egmont, Duke of Gelderland" label="Charles of Egmont, Duke of Gelderland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348702" start="961" end="999" title="Ercole II d&amp;#x27;Este, Duke of Ferrara" label="Ercole II d&amp;#x27;Este, Duke of Ferrara"/>
<link wikidata="Q2207959" start="1020" end="1026" title="masque" label="masque"/>
<link wikidata="Q100741584" start="1091" end="1107" title="Bartolomeo Campi" label="Bartolomeo Campi"/>
<link wikidata="Q123593181" start="1116" end="1179" title="wedding of Mary, Queen of Scots, and Francis, Dauphin of France" label="wedding of Mary, Queen of Scots, and Francis, Dauphin of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q242336" start="1250" end="1266" title="Claude of France (1547–1575)" label="Claude of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q22160" start="1650" end="1659" title="Phalsbourg" label="Pfalzburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q68699" start="1665" end="1705" title="George John I, Count Palatine of Veldenz" label="George John I, Count Palatine of Veldenz"/>
<link wikidata="Q890742" start="1790" end="1804" title="Anna of Sweden (1545–1610)" label="Anna of Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q268652" start="2086" end="2106" title="Catherine de Bourbon" label="Catherine de Bourbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q242336" start="2131" end="2147" title="Claude of Valois" label="Claude of Valois"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="2161" end="2167" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q132545" start="2186" end="2194" title="Henry II of France" label="Henry II"/>
<link wikidata="Q131552" start="2199" end="2224" title="Catherine de&amp;#x27; Medici" label="Catherine de&amp;#x27; Medici"/>
<link wikidata="Q704178" start="2261" end="2287" title="Henry II, Duke of Lorraine" label="Henry II, Duke of Lorraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q268652" start="2308" end="2328" title="Catherine de Bourbon" label="Catherine de Bourbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q264361" start="2333" end="2350" title="Margerita Gonzaga" label="Margerita Gonzaga"/>
<link wikidata="Q257579" start="2352" end="2361" title="Christina, Grand Duchess of Tuscany" label="Christine"/>
<link wikidata="Q297483" start="2383" end="2411" title="Ferdinando I de Medici" label="Ferdinando I de&amp;#x27; Medici"/>
<link wikidata="Q321546" start="2436" end="2443" title="Charles of Lorraine (bishop of Metz and Strasbourg)" label="Charles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1528432" start="2482" end="2496" title="Bishop of Metz" label="Bishop of Metz"/>
<link wikidata="Q257553" start="2510" end="2530" title="Bishop of Strasbourg" label="Bishop of Strasbourg"/>
<link wikidata="Q546620" start="2544" end="2554" title="Antonia of Lorraine" label="Antoinette"/>
<link wikidata="Q67345" start="2576" end="2616" title="John William, Duke of Jülich-Cleves-Berg" label="John William, Duke of Jülich-Cleves-Berg"/>
<link wikidata="Q205797" start="2685" end="2713" title="Francis II, Duke of Lorraine" label="Francis II, Duke of Lorraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q3697572" start="2734" end="2751" title="Christina of Salm" label="Christina of Salm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1992197" start="2753" end="2762" title="Catherine of Lorraine (1573–1648)" label="Catherine"/>
<link wikidata="Q69922" start="2799" end="2815" title="Elisabeth of Lorraine" label="Elisabeth Renata"/>
<link wikidata="Q57206" start="2837" end="2869" title="Maximilian I, Elector of Bavaria" label="Maximilian I, Elector of Bavaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q2638011" start="2972" end="3001" title="Dukes of Lorraine family tree" label="Dukes of Lorraine family tree"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="655734" wikidata="Q701583" url="?curid=655734" title="Nicholas Francis, Duke of Lorraine">
<text>Nicholas Francis (; 6 December 1609 – 25 January 1670), also known as Nicholas II, was briefly Duke of Lorraine and Duke of Bar for a few months in 1634, spanning the time between the abdication of his older brother and his own resignation. He was therefore duke during the invasion of Lorraine by the French in the Thirty Years War.

He is the direct male ancestor of all rulers of the Habsburg-Lorraine dynasty, including all Emperors of Austria.

==Biography==

Nicholas Francis was the youngest son of Duke Francis II of Lorraine and his wife, Christina of Salm. Born on the feast of Saint Nicholas, he was named in his honour.

As it appeared unlikely that he would succeed to the duchy, he was destined for the church. He was made coadjutor bishop of Toul, in spite of his youth, in 1619 and succeeded to the see in 1624, but never actually received any sacred orders. He studied philosophy and theology at the University of Pont-à-Mousson, 1622–1629. He returned to Nancy in June 1629. The thesis he prepared on the sacrament of penance was printed in Holland in 1627 with a dedication to Pope Urban VIII. After his promotion to the cardinalate, he received private lessons from two Jesuit priests.

Nicholas Francis was named abbot &quot;in commendam&quot; – a lucrative sinecure – of several abbeys and was sent on several embassies by his brother, Charles IV, Duke of Lorraine, and by Louis XIII of France.

On 19 January 1626 he was created cardinal &quot;in pectore&quot; (secretly). The appointment was not proclaimed publicly until 30 August 1627. He never received the cardinal&#x27;s red hat nor was he assigned a cardinal-deaconry. When in 1634 his brother Charles was pressured into resigning in his favor, he became sovereign Duke of Lorraine. He wrote to Pope Urban VIII, 4 March 1634, resigning as cardinal to marry his cousin Claude of Lorraine, the second daughter of Henry II, on 17–18 February. On 8 March 1634, the pope declared him &quot;in nullo e sacris ordinis constitutum&quot;, depriving him of the title of cardinal and the diocese of Toul. In the consistory of 22 March 1634, the pope communicated this to the College of Cardinals.

Immediately following Nicholas&#x27;s accession to the dukedom, the French invaded the duchy and forced the new duke to sign a treaty recognizing their right to occupy it. In April 1634, Nicholas himself fled into exile, and soon after abdicated himself, returning the claim to the duchy to his older brother, Charles. With one brief exception, Charles would not, however, be able to return to his duchy until 1661.

==Marriage and issue==
He married his first cousin Claude Françoise of Lorraine who died in childbirth:

* Ferdinand Philippe, Hereditary Prince of Lorraine, jure matris Duke of Bar (29 December 1639 – 1 April 1659), died unmarried and without issue.
* Charles Léopold, Duke of Lorraine (3 April 1643 – 18 April 1690); married Eleonora Maria of Austria and had issue.
* Anne Eléanore (12 May 1645 – 28 February 1646); died in infancy, buried in the Ducal Crypt, Vienna.
* Anne Marie Thérèse (30 July 1648 – 17 June 1661); Abbess of Remiremont, no issue.
==See also==

* Dukes of Bar

==External links==
*The Cardinals of the Holy Roman Church:

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q701583" start="0" end="16" title="Nicholas Francis, Duke of Lorraine" label="Nicholas Francis"/>
<link wikidata="Q701583" start="70" end="81" title="Nicholas Francis, Duke of Lorraine" label="Nicholas II"/>
<link wikidata="Q669958" start="95" end="111" title="Duke of Lorraine" label="Duke of Lorraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q706679" start="116" end="127" title="Duke of Bar" label="Duke of Bar"/>
<link wikidata="Q155019" start="286" end="294" title="Lorraine (duchy)" label="Lorraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2487" start="316" end="332" title="Thirty Years War" label="Thirty Years War"/>
<link wikidata="Q131964" start="428" end="447" title="Austrian Empire" label="Emperors of Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q205797" start="511" end="533" title="Francis II, Duke of Lorraine" label="Francis II of Lorraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q3697572" start="548" end="565" title="Christina of Salm" label="Christina of Salm"/>
<link wikidata="Q44269" start="588" end="602" title="Saint Nicholas" label="Saint Nicholas"/>
<link wikidata="Q328001" start="747" end="761" title="bishop of Toul" label="bishop of Toul"/>
<link wikidata="Q461413" start="931" end="945" title="Pont-à-Mousson" label="Pont-à-Mousson"/>
<link wikidata="Q40898" start="973" end="978" title="Nancy, France" label="Nancy"/>
<link wikidata="Q131579" start="1096" end="1111" title="Pope Urban VIII" label="Pope Urban VIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q1149783" start="1246" end="1258" title="in commendam" label="in commendam"/>
<link wikidata="Q923724" start="1279" end="1287" title="sinecure" label="sinecure"/>
<link wikidata="Q505101" start="1358" end="1386" title="Charles IV, Duke of Lorraine" label="Charles IV, Duke of Lorraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q737533" start="1395" end="1415" title="Louis XIII of France" label="Louis XIII of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q1319909" start="1467" end="1477" title="in pectore" label="in pectore"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153745" start="1600" end="1607" title="red hat (Catholic)" label="red hat"/>
<link wikidata="Q131579" start="1780" end="1790" title="Urban VIII" label="Urban VIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q2601958" start="1848" end="1866" title="Claude of Lorraine (1612–1648)" label="Claude of Lorraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q704178" start="1891" end="1899" title="Henry II, Duke of Lorraine" label="Henry II"/>
<link wikidata="Q841535" start="2081" end="2091" title="Papal consistory" label="consistory"/>
<link wikidata="Q505101" start="2477" end="2484" title="Charles IV, Duke of Lorraine" label="Charles"/>
<link wikidata="Q2601958" start="2635" end="2663" title="Claude Françoise of Lorraine" label="Claude Françoise of Lorraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q6315029" start="2742" end="2753" title="jure matris" label="jure matris"/>
<link wikidata="Q706679" start="2754" end="2765" title="Duke of Bar" label="Duke of Bar"/>
<link wikidata="Q156949" start="2837" end="2870" title="Charles V, Duke of Lorraine" label="Charles Léopold, Duke of Lorraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q26724" start="2911" end="2936" title="Eleonora Maria of Austria" label="Eleonora Maria of Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q5311218" start="3033" end="3052" title="Ducal Crypt, Vienna" label="Ducal Crypt, Vienna"/>
<link wikidata="Q4768616" start="3056" end="3074" title="Anne Marie Thérèse of Lorraine" label="Anne Marie Thérèse"/>
<link wikidata="Q334124" start="3106" end="3126" title="Abbess of Remiremont" label="Abbess of Remiremont"/>
<link wikidata="Q706679" start="3154" end="3166" title="Dukes of Bar" label="Dukes of Bar"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="655735" wikidata="Q505101" url="?curid=655735" title="Charles IV, Duke of Lorraine">
<text>Charles IV (5 April 1604 – 18 September 1675) was Duke of Lorraine from 1624 until his death in 1675, with a brief interruption in 1634, when he abdicated under French pressure in favor of his younger brother, Nicholas Francis.

==Life==
He came to lose his duchy because of his notionally anti-French policy; in 1633, French troops invaded Lorraine in retaliation for Charles&#x27;s support of Gaston d&#x27;Orléans—who repeatedly plotted against Richelieu&#x27;s governance of France under the childless Louis XIII and treated dangerously with its enemies as a young heir presumptive—and Richelieu&#x27;s policies were always anti-Habsburg so as to increase the strength and prestige of France at the expense of the two dynasties. Gaston d&#x27;Orléans, frequently sided with either branch of the Habsburg family against Richelieu, who was &quot;de facto&quot; ruler of France as its Chief Minister, and had to flee several times to avoid charges and trial for treason. His allies and confederates generally bore the price of these escapades by the young and impetuous heir and Charles IV was one such. On one visit to the ducal court at Nancy, the widowed Gaston fell in love with Charles&#x27;s 15-year-old sister and married her secretly, which so infuriated the king that he convened the clergy of France and the Parlement of Paris to void the marriage, giving consent only on his death bed. 

In that circumstance and sense, Charles was a casualty of the fierce factional infighting in the French court between the King&#x27;s brother Gaston d&#x27;Orléans, and Cardinal Richelieu, even though technically, Lorraine was subject to the Holy Roman Empire and the Emperor Ferdinand II of Austria. Forced to make humiliating concessions to France, he abdicated under the French pressure and invasion in 1634 in favor of his brother, Nicholas Francis, and entered the imperial service in the Thirty Years&#x27; War and was victorious at the Battle of Nördlingen. Shortly thereafter, Nicholas Francis too fled into exile and abdicated his claims, which were now taken up once again by Charles, who remained Duke of Lorraine in exile for the next quarter century.

In 1635, he tried in vain to recapture his duchy together with an Imperial army under Matthias Gallas. The aggressive Charles and the defensive-minded Gallas did not go along well; while Charles urged to recapture his capital Nancy, Gallas preferred to entrench his troops at the Seille to give them some rest after a long march from the Rhine. An outbreak of plague ended all hopes of further approaching Nancy. The next year, the Imperials sent Charles to the Spanish Franche-Comté, where he lifted the French siege of Dole and advanced as far as Dijon. Appointed captain general of the troops in Burgundy, Charles defended the core area of the Franche-Comté around Besançon, Dole and Salins against the French over the next few years. He also made repeated forays into the French heartland or into Lorraine to attack French garrisons. In May 1638, he advanced into Bassigny, moved from there to Lorraine, recaptured Épinal in August and besieged Lunéville in September. Since in the meantime Bernard of Saxe-Weimar was besieging the fortress Breisach on the Upper Rhine, Charles was called upon to relieve it and attack the besiegers from two sides at the same time, together with the Imperial and Bavarian troops on the right bank of the Rhine. Bernard, however, used the advantage of the inner line and was able to repulse Charles at Thann on 15 October as well as Johann von Götzen&#x27;s attack on the siege positions around Breisach a few days later. The fall of Breisach on 17 December largely cut off Franche-Comté from the Empire and the rest of the Habsburg territories. Charles gave up the post of captain general in January 1639, relieved the besieged castle of his second wife in Belvoir and went to Brussels, where he hoped for a new command.

After Charles fought in the Spanish Netherlands in 1640, where he took part in the relief attempt of the Spanish army for Arras, he re-entered negotiations with France in early 1641, which returned his duchy to him as a French protectorate in the Treaty of Saint-Germain-en-Laye of 2 April 1641, on condition that he refrain from alliances detrimental to France. Charles&#x27;s confidant Johann Wilhelm von Hunolstein, who was serving in the Bavarian military, announced the Lorraine negotiations with France to Emperor Ferdinand III and the Bavarian Elector at the Regensburg Imperial Diet. However, as Charles continued to work against Richelieu and cover up the conspiracy of the Count of Soissons, he should be arrested after the Cardinal caught the conspirators. In July 1641, he managed to evade this by fleeing. He re-entered military service, fighting first on the side of the Spanish in Flanders, later in the south-west of the empire, where he took part in the Battle of Tuttlingen in November 1643, in which he defeated the French together with Franz von Mercy and Johann von Werth.

In 1651 Charles IV was approached by an Irish delegation who were seeking his support to defend Ireland from the invasion of the Parliamentarian army of England. Traditional accounts of the Cromwellian wars often dismiss the appeal to Lorraine as an act of desperation, but recently one historian has argued that the stateless Duke was in fact seriously interested in becoming the Protector of Ireland. In the summer of 1652, a number of ships sent by Charles arrived at Inishbofin island with supplies, one of the last strongholds of the Irish. Unfortunately Charles faced great opposition by the Irish Leaders Clanricarde and Ormonde, both of whom were arch-royalists loyal to Charles II of England. Lorraine eventually concluded that Ireland had been destroyed &quot;by the jealousy of those who desired the loss of it, than they should be obliged for its recovery to the protection of his said Highness&quot;.

In 1661, the French withdrew from Lorraine, and Charles was able to return to the Duchy for the first time. In 1670, the duchy was again occupied by the French under King Louis XIV. Charles served in the Imperial armies in both the Thirty Years&#x27; War and the Franco-Dutch War (1672–1678), both of which secured French dominance on the Continent.

In 1675 he defeated François de Créquy at Konzer Brucke, and died the same year in Austrian service. The duchy was not restored to his family until more than twenty years later.

He is sometimes numbered as &quot;Charles III of Lorraine&quot;.

==Issue==

Charles married first Nicolette of Lorraine, whom he deposed and replaced as monarch of Lorraine in 1625. They had no children and Charles abandoned her.

On 2 April 1637, he married Béatrice de Cusance, Princess de Cantecroix (1614–1663), daughter and heiress of Claude-François de Cusance, Baron de Belvoir, (1590–1633) and of Ernestine de Witthem, Countess van Walhain (before 1588–1649), who had become the widow of Eugene Perrenot de Granvelle &quot;dit&quot; d&#x27;Oiselet, Prince de Cantecroix (1615-1637), earlier that year; and had three children;
*Francis de Lorraine (23 August 1637 – 12 June 1638); died in infancy
*Anne de Lorraine (23 August 1639 – 19 February 1720), married her cousin François Marie de Lorraine (1624–1694), Prince de Lillebonne in 1660, had issue;
*Charles Henri de Lorraine (1649–1723), Prince of Vaudémont and of Commercy.

His marriage to Béatrice de Cusance was not deemed valid by the Roman Catholic church, which had not authorised his divorce from Nicole. The couple separated in April 1642 following his excommunication, which was the consequence of his second marriage; it was also the month in which she bore a son whom Charles recognised. More than 20 years later, on 20 May 1663, Charles married Béatrice de Cusance a second time, to allow legitimation of their children. She died two weeks after this second marriage.

Charles married a fourth time at the age of 61. The bride was Countess Marie Louise of Aspremont-Lynden (1652–1692), the 18-year-old daughter of Charles of Aspremont-Lynden, Count of Reckheim (1590-1671) and his wife, Marie Françoise de Mailly (1625-1702). They had no children and in 1679, a widow, she married Count Heinrich Franz von Mansfeld, Prince di Fondi, by whom she had two daughters.

==See also==

*Dukes of Lorraine family tree

==References==
==Sources==

* The Columbia Encyclopedia, Sixth Edition 
* Michael O Siochru, God&#x27;s Executioner: Oliver Cromwell and the Conquest of Ireland, Faber &amp; Faber Ltd, London, 2008</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q505101" start="0" end="10" title="Charles IV, Duke of Lorraine" label="Charles IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q669958" start="50" end="66" title="Duke of Lorraine" label="Duke of Lorraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q207549" start="145" end="154" title="Abdication" label="abdicated"/>
<link wikidata="Q701583" start="210" end="226" title="Nicholas Francis, Duke of Lorraine" label="Nicholas Francis"/>
<link wikidata="Q155019" start="341" end="349" title="Lorraine (province)" label="Lorraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q644635" start="395" end="416" title="Gaston, Duke of Orléans" label="Gaston d&amp;#x27;Orléans"/>
<link wikidata="Q737533" start="506" end="516" title="Louis XIII" label="Louis XIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370385" start="569" end="585" title="heir presumptive" label="heir presumptive"/>
<link wikidata="Q712144" start="848" end="856" title="de facto" label="de facto"/>
<link wikidata="Q1393724" start="1469" end="1478" title="Political factions" label="factional"/>
<link wikidata="Q26702" start="1569" end="1587" title="Cardinal Richelieu" label="Cardinal Richelieu"/>
<link wikidata="Q12548" start="1642" end="1659" title="Holy Roman Empire" label="Holy Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q313426" start="1676" end="1699" title="Ferdinand II of Austria" label="Ferdinand II of Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q701583" start="1836" end="1852" title="Nicholas Francis, Duke of Lorraine" label="Nicholas Francis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1721681" start="1870" end="1886" title="Imperial Army of the Holy Roman Emperor" label="imperial service"/>
<link wikidata="Q2487" start="1894" end="1916" title="Thirty Years&amp;#x27; War" label="Thirty Years&amp;#x27; War"/>
<link wikidata="Q312212" start="1943" end="1963" title="Battle of Nördlingen (1634)" label="Battle of Nördlingen"/>
<link wikidata="Q553849" start="2251" end="2266" title="Matthias Gallas" label="Matthias Gallas"/>
<link wikidata="Q599492" start="2445" end="2451" title="Seille (Moselle)" label="Seille"/>
<link wikidata="Q16394" start="2635" end="2648" title="Franche-Comté" label="Franche-Comté"/>
<link wikidata="Q205586" start="2686" end="2690" title="Dole, Jura" label="Dole"/>
<link wikidata="Q7003" start="2714" end="2719" title="Dijon" label="Dijon"/>
<link wikidata="Q37776" start="2833" end="2841" title="Besançon" label="Besançon"/>
<link wikidata="Q820042" start="2852" end="2858" title="Salins-les-Bains" label="Salins"/>
<link wikidata="Q701396" start="3033" end="3041" title="Bassigny" label="Bassigny"/>
<link wikidata="Q173695" start="3084" end="3090" title="Épinal" label="Épinal"/>
<link wikidata="Q208794" start="3114" end="3123" title="Lunéville" label="Lunéville"/>
<link wikidata="Q61118" start="3160" end="3182" title="Bernard of Saxe-Weimar" label="Bernard of Saxe-Weimar"/>
<link wikidata="Q489911" start="3210" end="3218" title="Breisach" label="Breisach"/>
<link wikidata="Q207570" start="3504" end="3509" title="Thann, Haut-Rhin" label="Thann"/>
<link wikidata="Q89836" start="3535" end="3552" title="Johann von Götzen" label="Johann von Götzen"/>
<link wikidata="Q816302" start="3860" end="3867" title="Belvoir, Doubs" label="Belvoir"/>
<link wikidata="Q240" start="3880" end="3888" title="Brussels" label="Brussels"/>
<link wikidata="Q622783" start="3953" end="3972" title="Spanish Netherlands" label="Spanish Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q815115" start="4008" end="4022" title="Siege of Arras (1640)" label="relief attempt"/>
<link wikidata="Q131329" start="4047" end="4052" title="Arras" label="Arras"/>
<link wikidata="Q55191209" start="4313" end="4342" title="Johann Wilhelm von Hunolstein" label="Johann Wilhelm von Hunolstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q150575" start="4445" end="4458" title="Ferdinand III, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Ferdinand III"/>
<link wikidata="Q57206" start="4467" end="4483" title="Maximilian I, Elector of Bavaria" label="Bavarian Elector"/>
<link wikidata="Q2978" start="4491" end="4501" title="Regensburg" label="Regensburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1334778" start="4608" end="4625" title="Louis, Count of Soissons" label="Count of Soissons"/>
<link wikidata="Q1436705" start="4896" end="4916" title="Battle of Tuttlingen" label="Battle of Tuttlingen"/>
<link wikidata="Q644425" start="4981" end="4996" title="Franz von Mercy" label="Franz von Mercy"/>
<link wikidata="Q63850" start="5001" end="5017" title="Johann von Werth" label="Johann von Werth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860257" start="5133" end="5141" title="Cromwellian invasion of Ireland" label="invasion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1432954" start="5149" end="5164" title="New Model Army" label="Parliamentarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501256" start="5491" end="5501" title="Inishbofin, Galway" label="Inishbofin"/>
<link wikidata="Q556274" start="5632" end="5643" title="Ulick Burke, 1st Marquess of Clanricarde" label="Clanricarde"/>
<link wikidata="Q948569" start="5648" end="5655" title="James Butler, 1st Duke of Ormonde" label="Ormonde"/>
<link wikidata="Q122553" start="5699" end="5720" title="Charles II of England" label="Charles II of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q7742" start="6106" end="6115" title="Louis XIV" label="Louis XIV"/>
<link wikidata="Q646322" start="6198" end="6214" title="Franco-Dutch War" label="Franco-Dutch War"/>
<link wikidata="Q945474" start="6306" end="6324" title="François de Créquy" label="François de Créquy"/>
<link wikidata="Q542191" start="6328" end="6341" title="Battle of Konzer Brucke" label="Konzer Brucke"/>
<link wikidata="Q267704" start="6564" end="6585" title="Nicolette of Lorraine" label="Nicolette of Lorraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q660224" start="6725" end="6768" title="Béatrice de Cusance" label="Béatrice de Cusance, Princess de Cantecroix"/>
<link wikidata="Q1279599" start="7244" end="7270" title="François Marie de Lorraine" label="François Marie de Lorraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2351059" start="7326" end="7351" title="Charles Henri, Prince of Vaudémont" label="Charles Henri de Lorraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q212456" start="7392" end="7400" title="Commercy" label="Commercy"/>
<link wikidata="Q49822" start="7589" end="7604" title="excommunication" label="excommunication"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7829" end="7841" title="legitimation#Family law" label="legitimation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3292085" start="7980" end="8012" title="Marie Louise d&amp;#x27;Aspremont" label="Marie Louise of Aspremont-Lynden"/>
<link wikidata="Q4993844" start="8065" end="8081" title="Aspremont-Lynden" label="Aspremont-Lynden"/>
<link wikidata="Q18655285" start="8092" end="8100" title="Oud-Rekem" label="Reckheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q30669135" start="8146" end="8152" title="De Mailly" label="Mailly"/>
<link wikidata="Q1597257" start="8227" end="8254" title="Heinrich Franz von Mansfeld" label="Heinrich Franz von Mansfeld"/>
<link wikidata="Q128084" start="8266" end="8271" title="Fondi" label="Fondi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2638011" start="8320" end="8349" title="Dukes of Lorraine family tree" label="Dukes of Lorraine family tree"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="655736" wikidata="Q319954" url="?curid=655736" title="Leopold, Duke of Lorraine">
<text>Leopold the Good (11 September 1679 – 27 March 1729) was Duke of Lorraine and Bar from 1690 to his death. Through his son Francis Stephen, he is the direct male ancestor of all rulers of the Habsburg-Lorraine dynasty, including all Emperors of Austria.

==Early life==

Leopold Joseph Charles Dominique Agapet Hyacinthe was the son of Charles V, Duke of Lorraine, and his wife Eleonora Maria Josefa of Austria, a half-sister of Leopold I, Holy Roman Emperor.

At the time of Leopold&#x27;s birth, Lorraine and Bar had been occupied by Louis XIV of France, forcing his parents to move into exile to Austria, where they lived under the protection of the Emperor. Therefore, Leopold was born in the palace of Innsbruck and received his first name in honour of the Emperor. Leopold grew up in Innsbruck, while his father would be engaged in defending Vienna against the Turks.

In 1690, his father died and eleven-year-old Leopold inherited the still occupied Duchies. His mother, trying to fulfil her husband&#x27;s last wishes of returning her children to their patrimony, appealed to the Reichstag in Regensburg to restore her son to Lorraine. Leopold was sent to Vienna to receive a military education under the supervision of the Emperor. In Vienna, he grew up with his cousins, the Archdukes Joseph and Charles, both future Emperors. Leopold was also created a Knight of the Order of the Golden Fleece that year.

Like his father before him, he entered the Imperial Army and, aged eighteen, took part in the Siege of Timișoara in 1694. Three years later, he received the command of the Army of the Rhine.

==Duke of Lorraine==

On 30 October 1697, the Nine Years&#x27; War (aka, War of the League of Augsburg) ended with the signing of the Treaty of Ryswick.

The treaty restored the duchies of Lorraine and Bar to the House of Lorraine, as Leopold&#x27;s mother had hoped; she died four days later in Vienna. On 17 August 1698, Duke Leopold made a triumphant entry into his capital Nancy. He reconstructed and repopulated his war-stricken duchy, encouraging immigration. At the end of his reign the duchy was safe and prosperous.
In his foreign policy, Leopold tried to further good relations with France and to appease his powerful neighbor. On 13 October 1698 at the Palace of Fontainebleau, Leopold married Élisabeth Charlotte d&#x27;Orléans, the niece of Louis XIV, who had offered a dowry of 900,000 livres to the penniless Duke. Élisabeth Charlotte turned out to be a caring mother and gave birth to fourteen children, of whom only five survived into adulthood. Three of them died within a week in May 1711 due to a smallpox outbreak at the Château de Lunéville, the country seat of the dukes of Lorraine.

Despite Leopold&#x27;s diplomatic attempts, his capital, Nancy, was occupied by foreign troops during the War of the Spanish Succession (1700–1713). Fearing for his family, Leopold relocated the court to the Château de Lunéville, where Leopold rebuilt the castle as the &quot;Versailles of Lorraine&quot;. It was here that his first child Leopold was born in 1700.

In 1703, the Duke introduced the &quot;Code Léopold&quot; regulating the government of the Duchy. A number of crimes were punishable with death by burning, such as witchcraft, coin forgery, arson, and sexual acts &quot;contrary to nature&quot;. Also, those guilty of aggravated theft of sacred objects from a church could be condemned to be burnt alive. He tried to install his eldest daughter, Élisabeth Charlotte Gabrièle of Lorraine, as Abbess of Remiremont but failed due to the opposition of Pope Clement XI.

Leopold&#x27;s marital life was troubled in 1708, when he took Anne-Marguerite de Lignéville, Princess of Beauvau-Craon as his mistress. Élisabeth Charlotte however, following her mother&#x27;s advice, remained silent and continued to give her husband children.

In 1708, Leopold had claimed the Duchy of Montferrat as the closest relative of his cousin, Charles III Gonzaga, erstwhile Duke of Mantua, who had been deposed and then died without male issue. However, the Emperor had already promised Montferrat to the Dukes of Savoy but wishing to compensate the House of Lorraine, he gave the Duchy of Teschen in Silesia to Leopold.

In 1710, Leopold and his wife visited Paris to attend the marriage of Élisabeth Charlotte&#x27;s niece Marie Louise Elisabeth to the Duke of Berry, and were among the guests of the lavish banquet at the Palais du Luxembourg. During the visit, Leopold, as a &quot;foreign prince&quot;, received the style of &quot;Royal Highness&quot;.

In 1719, Leopold bought the County of Ligny-en-Barrois from his cousin, Charles Henry of Vaudemont. During his reign a new security system was put in place all around Lorraine.
He tried to abolish serfdom but the redemption payments were too high for the peasantry, even when Leopold halved it. On New Year&#x27;s Eve 1719 he freed his own serfs without redemption, hoping in vain the nobility would follow his example.


In 1721, Leopold arranged for his son and heir, Leopold Clement, to receive an education at Vienna. He also intended to forge relations with Archduchess Maria Theresa, the heiress of Emperor Charles VI. However, Leopold Clement died shortly afterwards at Lunéville and in his stead, the younger son Francis Stephen went to Vienna, where he married Maria Theresa. Francis would become Emperor and his descendants, the House of Habsburg-Lorraine, would rule Austria until 1918.

In 1725, Leopold tried to arrange his daughter Anne Charlotte to marry the young King Louis XV, but Louis Henry, Duke of Bourbon, then prime minister, prevented a union with a descendant of the rival House of Orléans. Then, Élisabeth Charlotte tried to arrange her daughter&#x27;s marriage to her first cousin, the recently widowed Louis, Duke of Orléans, but Louis refused. All proposals of marriage being either ignored or declined, Anne Charlotte later became Abbess of the monasteries Remiremont and Essen.

In March 1729, Leopold caught a fever while walking at the Château at Ménil near Lunéville. He returned to Lunéville where he died on 27 March, aged 49.

==Ancestry==
==Issue==
Leopold and Élisabeth Charlotte had 14 children in just 16 years:
* Léopold (26 Aug 1699 - 2 April 1700) died in infancy.
* Élisabeth Charlotte Gabrièle (21 Oct 1700 - 4 May 1711) 
* Louise Christine (13 Nov 1701 - 18 Nov 1701) died in infancy.
* Marie Gabrièle Charlotte (30 Dec 1702 - 11 May 1711) died in childhood. 
* Louis (28 Jan 1704 - 10 May 1711) 
* Josepha Gabrièle (16 Feb 1705 - 25 Mar 1708) died in early childhood.
* Gabrièle Louise (4 Mar 1706 - 13 June 1710) died in early childhood.
* Léopold Clement Charles (25 April 1707 - 4 June 1723) 
* Francis Stephen (8 Dec 1708 - 18 Aug 1765), his successor, married Maria Theresa of Austria and became Holy Roman Emperor.
* Eléonore (4 June 1710 - 28 July 1710) died in infancy.
* Elisabeth Therese (15 Oct 1711 - 3 July 1741), married in 1737 Charles Emmanuel III of Sardinia.
* Charles Alexander Emmanuel (12 Dec 1712 - 4 July 1780), governor of the Austrian Netherlands and army commander.
* Anne Charlotte (1714 - 1773), abbess at Essen.
* Stillborn daughter (28 November 1715).

==See also==

* Dukes of Lorraine family tree

==References==

Jérémy Filet, “The networks of Francis Taaffe, 3rd Earl of Carlingford and Irish Jacobite émigrés in the Duchy of Lorraine” in &quot;Eighteenth-Century Ireland&quot; 36, 2021.

Stephen Griffin and Jérémy Filet, &#x27;Duke Leopold’s Irish subjects and Jacobitism in Lorraine, 1698–1727&#x27;, &quot;History Ireland&quot; (May 2018), Volume 26. Retrieved 4 November 2022.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q319954" start="0" end="16" title="Leopold, Duke of Lorraine" label="Leopold the Good"/>
<link wikidata="Q669958" start="57" end="73" title="Duke of Lorraine" label="Duke of Lorraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q706679" start="78" end="81" title="Duke of Bar" label="Bar"/>
<link wikidata="Q151075" start="122" end="137" title="Francis I, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Francis Stephen"/>
<link wikidata="Q645719" start="191" end="216" title="House of Habsburg-Lorraine" label="Habsburg-Lorraine dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q131964" start="232" end="251" title="Austrian Empire" label="Emperors of Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q156949" start="335" end="362" title="Charles V, Duke of Lorraine" label="Charles V, Duke of Lorraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q26724" start="377" end="409" title="Eleonora Maria Josefa of Austria" label="Eleonora Maria Josefa of Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q150494" start="428" end="457" title="Leopold I, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Leopold I, Holy Roman Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q7742" start="535" end="554" title="Louis XIV of France" label="Louis XIV of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q1735" start="706" end="715" title="Innsbruck" label="Innsbruck"/>
<link wikidata="Q1741" start="1163" end="1169" title="Vienna" label="Vienna"/>
<link wikidata="Q152480" start="1294" end="1300" title="Joseph I, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Joseph"/>
<link wikidata="Q150665" start="1305" end="1312" title="Charles VI, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Charles"/>
<link wikidata="Q465774" start="1377" end="1403" title="Order of the Golden Fleece" label="Order of the Golden Fleece"/>
<link wikidata="Q83404" start="1519" end="1528" title="Timișoara" label="Timișoara"/>
<link wikidata="Q584" start="1600" end="1605" title="Rhine" label="Rhine"/>
<link wikidata="Q152218" start="1654" end="1674" title="Nine Years&amp;#x27; War" label="Nine Years&amp;#x27; War"/>
<link wikidata="Q164393" start="1742" end="1759" title="Treaty of Ryswick" label="Treaty of Ryswick"/>
<link wikidata="Q2638011" start="1821" end="1838" title="House of Lorraine" label="House of Lorraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q40898" start="1985" end="1990" title="Nancy, France" label="Nancy"/>
<link wikidata="Q201428" start="2272" end="2295" title="Palace of Fontainebleau" label="Palace of Fontainebleau"/>
<link wikidata="Q233610" start="2313" end="2347" title="Élisabeth Charlotte d&amp;#x27;Orléans" label="Élisabeth Charlotte d&amp;#x27;Orléans"/>
<link wikidata="Q607248" start="2408" end="2414" title="French livres" label="livres"/>
<link wikidata="Q205659" start="2650" end="2670" title="Château de Lunéville" label="Château de Lunéville"/>
<link wikidata="Q150701" start="2822" end="2851" title="War of the Spanish Succession" label="War of the Spanish Succession"/>
<link wikidata="Q205659" start="2924" end="2944" title="Château de Lunéville" label="Château de Lunéville"/>
<link wikidata="Q504853" start="3532" end="3542" title="Remiremont" label="Remiremont"/>
<link wikidata="Q129967" start="3579" end="3594" title="Pope Clement XI" label="Pope Clement XI"/>
<link wikidata="Q19868" start="3902" end="3912" title="Montferrat" label="Montferrat"/>
<link wikidata="Q714792" start="3952" end="3971" title="Ferdinando Carlo Gonzaga, Duke of Mantua and Montferrat" label="Charles III Gonzaga"/>
<link wikidata="Q1164727" start="3983" end="3997" title="Duke of Mantua" label="Duke of Mantua"/>
<link wikidata="Q671899" start="4190" end="4206" title="Duchy of Teschen" label="Duchy of Teschen"/>
<link wikidata="Q81720" start="4210" end="4217" title="Silesia" label="Silesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q263540" start="4334" end="4356" title="Marie Louise Élisabeth d&amp;#x27;Orléans" label="Marie Louise Elisabeth"/>
<link wikidata="Q329852" start="4434" end="4454" title="Luxembourg Palace" label="Palais du Luxembourg"/>
<link wikidata="Q164803" start="4494" end="4508" title="Foreign Prince" label="foreign prince"/>
<link wikidata="Q917765" start="4605" end="4621" title="Ligny-en-Barrois" label="Ligny-en-Barrois"/>
<link wikidata="Q2351059" start="4639" end="4665" title="Prince Charles Henry de Lorraine-Vaudemont" label="Charles Henry of Vaudemont"/>
<link wikidata="Q103350" start="4764" end="4771" title="serfdom" label="serfdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q134737" start="4952" end="4960" title="nobility" label="nobility"/>
<link wikidata="Q131706" start="5130" end="5155" title="Maria Theresa of Austria" label="Archduchess Maria Theresa"/>
<link wikidata="Q151075" start="5288" end="5303" title="Francis I, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Francis Stephen"/>
<link wikidata="Q645719" start="5415" end="5432" title="Habsburg-Lorraine" label="Habsburg-Lorraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q738953" start="5513" end="5527" title="Princess Anne Charlotte of Lorraine" label="Anne Charlotte"/>
<link wikidata="Q455392" start="5566" end="5594" title="Louis Henri, Duke of Bourbon" label="Louis Henry, Duke of Bourbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1347533" start="5666" end="5682" title="House of Orléans" label="House of Orléans"/>
<link wikidata="Q363992" start="5798" end="5820" title="Louis, Duke of Orléans (1703–1752)" label="Louis, Duke of Orléans"/>
<link wikidata="Q3723212" start="6279" end="6307" title="Princess Élisabeth Charlotte of Lorraine" label="Élisabeth Charlotte Gabrièle"/>
<link wikidata="Q5482688" start="6477" end="6482" title="Louis, Hereditary Prince of Lorraine" label="Louis"/>
<link wikidata="Q29711" start="6657" end="6680" title="Léopold Clément, Hereditary Prince of Lorraine" label="Léopold Clement Charles"/>
<link wikidata="Q151075" start="6714" end="6729" title="Francis I, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Francis Stephen"/>
<link wikidata="Q131706" start="6781" end="6805" title="Maria Theresa of Austria" label="Maria Theresa of Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q242947" start="6896" end="6913" title="Elisabeth Teresa of Lorraine" label="Elisabeth Therese"/>
<link wikidata="Q312670" start="6959" end="6991" title="Charles Emmanuel III of Sardinia" label="Charles Emmanuel III of Sardinia"/>
<link wikidata="Q158232" start="6995" end="7021" title="Prince Charles Alexander of Lorraine" label="Charles Alexander Emmanuel"/>
<link wikidata="Q700283" start="7067" end="7087" title="Austrian Netherlands" label="Austrian Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q738953" start="7110" end="7124" title="Princess Anne Charlotte of Lorraine" label="Anne Charlotte"/>
<link wikidata="Q2638011" start="7215" end="7244" title="Dukes of Lorraine family tree" label="Dukes of Lorraine family tree"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="655741" wikidata="Q42915592" url="?curid=655741" title="Concealment device">
<text>Concealment devices or diversion safes are used to hide things for the purpose of secrecy or security. They are made from an ordinary household object such as a book, a soda can, a candle, a can, or something as small as a coin. The idea is that such an inconspicuous object would not be expected to contain anything of worth.

Examples in espionage include dead drop spikes for transferring items to other people, and hollowed-out coins or hollowed out teeth for concealing something - such as microfilm or a suicide pill. Examples in smuggling include suitcases with false bottoms for hiding contraband.

During World War II MI9 was responsible for creating many concealment devices for &quot;escape aids&quot; to assist prisoners of war to escape.

==Examples==
===Ammunition===
Starting in the First World War and still continuing today, military personnel use ammunition casings to hide small amounts of critical information e.g. encryption/recognition codes or navigational grid references etc. The hiding place is very easy to prepare: the bullet is removed from the cartridge and the propellant powder poured away. A small piece of paper with writing on it can be stored inside. Given that ammunition can be found everywhere in a combat zone, it is very easy to hide or discard such items because they blend in easily. Similarly, if a soldier is captured, the enemy expects that soldiers will have ammunition in their pockets, so little attention is paid, beyond confiscating and discarding it.

===Books===

Books are possibly the most common concealment devices in usage. They are easily made and can contain quite large objects. They are also very difficult for outsiders to spot but easy to recognize for those that are looking for a specific book on a shelf.

===Candles===
A new type, the hollow candle looks like a large scented candle but is mostly hollow. The bottom comes off and rolled papers or small objects can be placed and hidden inside. Some of the most clever of these contraptions looked like large, ordinary black candles with a felt base concealing the opening. To open them, two metal needles are poked through the felt at certain points and an electric current passed through, causing them to open. 

=== Car ===
&quot;Trap&quot; is a colloquial term for a secret compartment in an automobile. It can be intended to hide legal items, such as handguns or valuables, from thieves. But it can also be used to hide contraband, such as illegal drugs, from searches by authorities.

Until the 1980s, drugs trafficked in cars in the U.S. tended to be hidden in obvious places such as wheel wells or spare tires. In the early 1980s, the first magnetically or hydraulically actuated secret compartments, dubbed &quot;urban traps&quot; by the Drug Enforcement Administration, started to appear – often in door panels, dashboards, seats and roofs. By the early 1990s, however, police had learned to detect such traps by looking for suspicious buttons and switches. More recent traps have no visible controls, are electronically controlled and may require complicated procedures for access. For example, one trap found in the airbag compartment of a U.S. car in 2012 would only open if a driver was in the seat, all doors were closed (to prevent the trap from opening during a roadside police search), the defroster was turned on and a magnetic card was swiped over a sensor hidden in an air-conditioning vent.

The legality of traps is dependent on the jurisdiction in which they are used. In 2012, Alfred Anaya, famous among rich clients in California for his skill in installing sophisticated traps, was sentenced to more than 24 years in prison under U.S. federal law as a co-conspirator in a drug-trafficking operation. The conviction relied on testimony that Anaya had seen one of his clients stash some $800,000 in cash in a trap. The prosecution successfully argued that Anaya must have deduced from this that the trap was to be used for drug trafficking.

===Cans and jars===
Also a new form of concealment device, mock cans of various household chemicals or food and drinks can be purchased. A wide variety of commonly used personal care, household products and food containers with removable tops and bottoms are available. Valuables can be discreetly stored inside these lookalike containers and kept in their seemingly rightful places. Each of these diversion safes are indistinguishable from the genuine product, and can thus avoid detection, and they may even be weighted to feel full.

===Coins===

A hollow container, fashioned to look like an Eisenhower dollar, is still used today to hide and send messages or film without being detected. Because it resembles ordinary pocket change, it is virtually undetectable as a concealment device. If a hollow coin is suspected, it sometimes can be easily confirmed by weighing against a normal coin on a simple balance. However, more sophisticated hollow coins have had their weight adjusted to match an unaltered coin by including a ring of a dense metal such as lead inside the coin. Typically coins that have no gold or silver content are used so as to further avoid suspicion.

Such hollow coins were created from two ordinary coins, by milling out one face and the interior of both coins (to create a cavity), and the edges of one (so it could slide into the other). The half coin with intact edges would also have a pin-prick size hole drilled through its face, so the device could be opened by inserting a pin. A scratch may be added to help line up the faces while closing it—although it is very difficult to detect a slight misalignment by casual inspection. A device of this nature was famously discovered by a paper boy in the &quot;Hollow Nickel Case&quot;. U-2 pilot Francis Gary Powers was issued with a hollow silver dollar containing a tiny, saxitoxin-impregnated needle, to be used to commit suicide in case of capture by enemy forces.

===Diversion safe===
A device whereby a safe-looking safe is left open but has a hidden compartment (e.g., in the door) where small valuable articles can be hidden. As an alternative variant, a safe may be &quot;stocked&quot; with some lesser valuables, with the expectation that it will be burgled, but that the real safe or hiding place for the important valuables will be missed.

=== Electrical outlet ===
A fake electrical outlet, which can be pulled out from the wall and which contains a hidden compartment for storage.

=== Furniture ===
Concealment furniture is furniture that has been specially designed to hide guns and other weapons. The furniture can be made of different materials, but the most popular ones are wood, plastic, and metal. The first concealment furniture was invented in 1939 by John Browning Jr., who was a well-known gun designer. He invented a gun cabinet that could be used as a desk or armoire. It was made with an upper section that could be easily removed to access the hidden compartment for guns and ammunition.

Some concealment furniture pieces are designed for handguns, while others hold shotguns and rifles as well.

=== Painting ===
Thin objects such as papers/money can be concealed in or behind the frame of a painting.

=== Computers and consumer electronics ===
Computer equipment and consumer electronics can easily be used for concealing goods and information. Usually the only tool required is a screwdriver, the device can be opened up, have the majority of the electronic and mechanical components removed and replaced with the goods to be concealed. Some of the more common devices used for this purpose are video players such as VHS, CD, DVD and Blu-ray players, computer accessories such as DVD-ROM drives and hard disk drives, battery packs or even a laptop computer itself. More often than not, the majority of the components will be removed to allow more space to conceal an item, but that will render the device inoperable and may arouse suspicion, and it may be of more benefit to preserve the operation of the device at the sacrifice of space. Additionally, the electronic device itself may be subject to theft, thereby defeating the purpose of such a concealment device. In other cases, items may be stored in parts of the machine without having to render it unusable - free space in the form of caddies that would normally be occupied by secondary and tertiary hard drives or disk drives can be large enough to store small items such as money and other valuables.

== See also ==
*Hidden compartment
*Rudolf Abel

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q42915592" start="0" end="19" title="Concealment device" label="Concealment devices"/>
<link wikidata="Q42915592" start="23" end="38" title="Concealment device" label="diversion safes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1503443" start="82" end="89" title="secrecy" label="secrecy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2526135" start="93" end="101" title="security" label="security"/>
<link wikidata="Q165950" start="340" end="349" title="espionage" label="espionage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1638770" start="358" end="367" title="dead drop" label="dead drop"/>
<link wikidata="Q10737" start="510" end="517" title="suicide" label="suicide"/>
<link wikidata="Q184840" start="536" end="545" title="smuggling" label="smuggling"/>
<link wikidata="Q200814" start="554" end="562" title="suitcase" label="suitcase"/>
<link wikidata="Q5432683" start="569" end="581" title="false bottom" label="false bottom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1758553" start="594" end="604" title="contraband" label="contraband"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="614" end="626" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q2570501" start="627" end="630" title="MI9" label="MI9"/>
<link wikidata="Q179637" start="723" end="739" title="prisoner of war" label="prisoners of war"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="798" end="813" title="First World War" label="First World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q185785" start="865" end="875" title="ammunition" label="ammunition"/>
<link wikidata="Q37144" start="1074" end="1083" title="Cartridge (firearms)" label="cartridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q571" start="1517" end="1521" title="Book" label="Book"/>
<link wikidata="Q12888135" start="1844" end="1850" title="candle" label="candle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1758553" start="2442" end="2452" title="contraband" label="contraband"/>
<link wikidata="Q622899" start="2764" end="2795" title="Drug Enforcement Administration" label="Drug Enforcement Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q1312952" start="4580" end="4597" title="Eisenhower dollar" label="Eisenhower dollar"/>
<link wikidata="Q656950" start="5220" end="5227" title="Milling machine" label="milling"/>
<link wikidata="Q3661858" start="5723" end="5741" title="Hollow Nickel Case" label="Hollow Nickel Case"/>
<link wikidata="Q189064" start="5749" end="5752" title="Lockheed_U-2" label="U-2"/>
<link wikidata="Q309840" start="5759" end="5778" title="Francis Gary Powers" label="Francis Gary Powers"/>
<link wikidata="Q412694" start="5837" end="5846" title="saxitoxin" label="saxitoxin"/>
<link wikidata="Q6518556" start="5881" end="5895" title="suicide pill" label="commit suicide"/>
<link wikidata="Q15946701" start="6014" end="6032" title="hidden compartment" label="hidden compartment"/>
<link wikidata="Q220520" start="6741" end="6754" title="John Browning" label="John Browning"/>
<link wikidata="Q860792" start="7178" end="7183" title="Picture frame" label="frame"/>
<link wikidata="Q11629" start="7189" end="7197" title="painting" label="painting"/>
<link wikidata="Q581105" start="7266" end="7286" title="consumer electronics" label="consumer electronics"/>
<link wikidata="Q15946701" start="8478" end="8496" title="Hidden compartment" label="Hidden compartment"/>
<link wikidata="Q181538" start="8498" end="8509" title="Rudolf Abel" label="Rudolf Abel"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="655742" wikidata="Q1060028" url="?curid=655742" title="CDC 7600">
<text>The CDC 7600 was designed by Seymour Cray to be the successor to the CDC 6600, extending Control Data&#x27;s dominance of the supercomputer field into the 1970s. The 7600 ran at 36.4 MHz (27.5 ns clock cycle) and had a 65 Kword primary memory (with a 60-bit word size) using magnetic core and variable-size (up to 512 Kword) secondary memory (depending on site). It was generally about ten times as fast as the CDC 6600 and could deliver about 10 MFLOPS on hand-compiled code, with a peak of 36 MFLOPS. In addition, in benchmark tests in early 1970 it was shown to be slightly faster than its IBM rival, the IBM System/360, Model 195. When the system was released in 1967, it sold for around $5 million in base configurations, and considerably more as options and features were added.

Among the 7600&#x27;s notable state-of-the-art contributions, beyond extensive pipelining, was the physical C-shape, which both reduced floor space and dramatically increased performance by reducing the distance that signals needed to travel.

==Design==

As the 6600 neared production quality, Cray lost interest in it and turned to designing its replacement. Making a machine &quot;somewhat&quot; faster would not be too difficult in the late 1960s; the introduction of integrated circuits allowed denser packing of components and, in turn, a higher clock speed. Transistors in general were also getting somewhat faster as the production processes and quality improved. These sorts of improvements might be expected to make a machine twice as fast, perhaps as much as five times. However, as with the 6600 design, Cray set himself the goal of producing a machine with ten times the performance.

One of the reasons the 6600 was so much faster than its contemporaries is that it had multiple functional units that could operate in parallel. For instance, the machine could perform an addition of two numbers while simultaneously multiplying two others. However, any given instruction had to complete its trip through the unit before the next could be fed into it, which caused a bottleneck when the scheduler system ran out of instructions. Adding more functional units would not improve performance unless the scheduler was also greatly improved, especially in terms of allowing it to have more memory, so it could look through more instructions for ones that could be fed into the parallel units. That appeared to be a major problem.

In order to solve this problem, Cray turned to the concept of an instruction pipeline. Each functional unit consisted of several sections that operated in turn, for instance, an addition unit might have circuitry dedicated to retrieving the operands from memory, then the actual math unit, and finally another to send the results back to memory. At any given instance only one part of the unit was active, while the rest waited their turn. A pipeline improves on this by feeding in the next instruction before the first has completed, using up that idle time. For instance, while one instruction is being added together, the operands for the next add instruction can be fetched. That way, as soon as the current instruction completes and moves to the output circuitry, the operands for the next addition are already waiting to be added. In this way each functional unit works in &quot;parallel&quot;, as well as the machine as a whole. The improvement in performance generally depends on the number of steps the unit takes to complete. For instance, the 6600&#x27;s multiply unit took 10 cycles to complete an instruction, so by pipelining the units it could be expected to gain about 10 times the speed.

Things are never that simple, however. Pipelining requires that the unit&#x27;s internals can be effectively separated to the point where each step of the operation is running on completely separate circuitry. This is rarely achievable in the real world. Nevertheless, the use of pipelining on the 7600 improved performance over the 6600 by a factor of about 3. To achieve the rest of the goal, the machine would have to run at a faster speed, now possible using new transistor designs. However, there is a physical limit to performance because of the time it takes signals to move between parts of the machine, which in turn is defined by its physical size. As always, Cray&#x27;s design work spent considerable effort on this problem and thus allow higher operating frequencies. For the 7600, each circuit module actually consisted of up to six printed circuit boards, each one stuffed with subminiature resistors, diodes, and transistors. The six boards were stacked up and then interconnected along their edges, making a very compact, but basically unrepairable module.

However the same dense packing also led to the machine&#x27;s biggest problemheat. For the 7600, Cray once again turned to his refrigeration engineer, Dean Roush, formerly of the Amana company. Roush added an aluminum plate to the back of each side of the cordwood stack, which were in turn cooled by a liquid-freon system running through the core of the machine. Since this system was mechanical, and therefore prone to failure, the 7600 was redesigned into a large &quot;C&quot; shape to allow access to the modules on either side of the cooling piping by walking into the inside of the &quot;C&quot; and opening the cabinet.

==Architecture==

The 7600 was an architectural landmark, and most of its features are still standard parts of computer design. It is a load-store computer with a 15-bit instruction word containing a 6-bit operation code. There are only 64 machine codes, including a no-operation code, with no fixed-point multiply or divide operations in the central processor.

The 7600 has two main core memories. Small core memory holds the instructions currently being executed and the data currently being processed. It has an access time of 10 of the 27.5-ns minor cycles and a 60-bit word length. Large core memory holds data ready to transfer to small core memory. It has an access time of 60 of the 27.5-ns minor cycles and a word length of 480 bits (512 bits with parity). Accesses are fully pipelined and buffered, so the two have the same sequential transfer rate of 60 bits every 27.5 ns. The two work in parallel, so the sequential transfer rate from one to the other is 60 bits per 27.5 ns minor-cycle. On an operating system call, the contents of the small core memory are swapped out and replaced from the large core memory by the operating system, and restored afterward.

There is a 12-word instruction pipeline, called instruction word stack in CDC documentation. All addresses in the stack are fetched, without waiting for the instruction field to be processed. Therefore, the fetch of the target instruction of a conditional branch precedes evaluation of the branch condition. During the execution of a 10-word (up to 40 instruction) loop, all the needed instructions remain in the stack, so no instructions are fetched, leaving small core memory free for data transfers.

There are eight 60-bit registers, each with an address register. Moving an address to an address register starts a small core memory read or write. Arithmetic and logic instructions have these registers as sources and destinations. The programmer or compiler tries to fetch data in time to be used and store data before more data needs the same register, but if it is not ready, the processor goes into a wait state until it is. It also waits if one of the four floating-point arithmetic units is not ready when requested, but due to pipelining, this does not usually happen.

==Relationship with the CDC 6600==
The CDC 7600 &quot;was designed to be machine code upward compatible with the 6600, but to provide a substantial increase in performance&quot;. One user said: &quot;Most users could run on either system without changes.&quot;

Although the 7600 shared many features of the 6600, including hardware, instructions, and its 60-bit word size, it was not object-code compatible with the CDC 6600. In addition, it was not entirely source-code (COMPASS) compatible, as some instructions in the 7600 did not exist in the 6600, and vice versa. It had originally been named the CDC 6800, but was changed to 7600 when Cray decided that it could not be completely compatible. However, due to the 7600&#x27;s operating system design, the 6600 and 7600 shared a &quot;uniform software environment&quot; despite the low-level differences.

In fact, from a high-level perspective, the 7600 was quite similar to the 6600. At the time computer memory could be arranged in blocks with independent access paths, and Cray&#x27;s designs used this to their advantage. While most machines would use a single CPU to run all the functionality of the system, Cray realized that this meant each memory block spent a considerable amount of time idle while the CPU was processing instructions and accessing other blocks. In order to take advantage of this, the 6600 and 7600 left mundane housekeeping tasks, printing output or reading punched cards, for instance, to a series of ten smaller 12-bit machines based on the CDC 160-A known as &quot;Peripheral Processor Units&quot;, or PPUs. For any given cycle of the machine one of the PPUs was in control, feeding data into the memory while the main processor was crunching numbers. When the cycle completed, the next PPU was given control. In this way the memory always held up-to-date information for the main processor to work on (barring delays in the external devices themselves), eliminating delays on data, as well as allowing the CPU to be built for mathematical performance and nothing else. The PPU could have been called a very smart &quot;communications channel&quot;.

Like the 6600, the 7600 used 60-bit words with instructions that were generally 15 bits in length, although there were also 30-bit instructions. The instructions were packed into the 60-bit words, but a 30-bit instruction could not straddle two words, and control could only be transferred to the first instruction in a word. However, the instruction set itself had changed to reflect the new internal memory layout, thereby rendering it incompatible with the earlier 6600. The machines were similar enough to make porting of compilers and operating systems possible without too much trouble. The machine initially did not come with software; sites had to be willing to write their own operating system, like LTSS, NCAROS, and others; and compilers like LRLTRAN (Livermore&#x27;s version of Fortran with dynamic memory management and other non-standard features).

CDC also manufactured two multi-processor computers based on the 7600, with the model number 7700. They consisted of two 7600 machines in an asymmetric configuration: a central and an adjunct machine. They were used for missile launch and inbound tracking of USSR ICBMs. The radar simulator was a real-time simulator with a CDC 6400 for input/output front-end. These systems were to be used in the Pacific Missile Range. One computer was installed at TRW in Redondo Beach CA (later moved to Kwajalein Atoll, South Pacific), and the second one was installed at McDonnell Douglas in Huntington Beach, California. They were actual 7600s connected by chassis 25 to make them a 7600 MP.

==Reception and usage==
From about 1969 to 1975, the CDC 7600 was generally regarded as the fastest computer in the world, except for specialized units. However, even with the advanced mechanicals and cooling, the 7600 was prone to failure. Both LLNL and NCAR reported that the machine would break down at least once a day, and often four or five times. Acceptance at installation sites took years while the bugs were worked out, and while the machine generally sold well enough given its &quot;high end&quot; niche, it is unlikely the machine generated any sort of real profits for CDC. The successor CDC 8600 was never completed, and Seymour Cray went on to form his own company, Cray Research.

One surviving 7600 is partially on display at the Computer History Museum. Its sheer size allows only two corner units to be shown. The rest are in storage. Another 7600 is on display at the Chippewa Falls Museum of Industry and Technology, along with its console and a tape controller.

==References==
==External links==
*Neil R. Lincoln with 18 Control Data Corporation (CDC) engineers on computer architecture and design, Charles Babbage Institute, University of Minnesota. Engineers include Robert Moe, Wayne Specker, Dennis Grinna, Tom Rowan, Maurice Hutson, Curt Alexander, Don Pagelkopf, Maris Bergmanis, Dolan Toth, Chuck Hawley, Larry Krueger, Mike Pavlov, Dave Resnick, Howard Krohn, Bill Bhend, Kent Steiner, Raymon Kort, and Neil R. Lincoln. Discussion topics include CDC 1604, CDC 6600, CDC 7600, CDC 8600, CDC STAR-100 and Seymour Cray.
*Presentation of the CDC 7600 and other machines designed by Seymour Crayby C. Gordon Bell of Microsoft Research (formerly of DEC)
*SCD Computer Gallery
*Computer History Museum
*Chippewa Falls Museum of Industry and Technology
*Lot of links about CDC 7600

==Photos==
* Inside the 7600</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1060028" start="4" end="12" title="CDC 7600" label="CDC 7600"/>
<link wikidata="Q92765" start="29" end="41" title="Seymour Cray" label="Seymour Cray"/>
<link wikidata="Q683851" start="69" end="77" title="CDC 6600" label="CDC 6600"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129191" start="89" end="101" title="Control Data Corporation" label="Control Data"/>
<link wikidata="Q121117" start="126" end="139" title="supercomputer" label="supercomputer"/>
<link wikidata="Q839647" start="275" end="288" title="Magnetic-core memory" label="magnetic core"/>
<link wikidata="Q188768" start="447" end="453" title="MFLOPS" label="MFLOPS"/>
<link wikidata="Q37156" start="593" end="596" title="IBM" label="IBM"/>
<link wikidata="Q609843" start="608" end="622" title="IBM System/360" label="IBM System/360"/>
<link wikidata="Q2490641" start="865" end="875" title="Instruction pipeline" label="pipelining"/>
<link wikidata="Q80831" start="1258" end="1276" title="integrated circuit" label="integrated circuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q5339" start="1351" end="1361" title="Transistor" label="Transistor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2490641" start="2489" end="2509" title="instruction pipeline" label="instruction pipeline"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4430" end="4444" title="circuit module" label="circuit module"/>
<link wikidata="Q173350" start="4477" end="4498" title="printed circuit board" label="printed circuit board"/>
<link wikidata="Q2904929" start="4884" end="4889" title="Amana Corporation" label="Amana"/>
<link wikidata="Q663" start="4914" end="4922" title="aluminum" label="aluminum"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4961" end="4969" title="Printed circuit board#Cordwood construction" label="cordwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q6663274" start="5470" end="5489" title="Load–store architecture" label="load-store computer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1791410" start="5601" end="5618" title="NOP (code)" label="no-operation code"/>
<link wikidata="Q649900" start="5628" end="5658" title="fixed-point arithmetic" label="fixed-point multiply or divide"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192648" start="7987" end="7997" title="Forward compatibility" label="compatible"/>
<link wikidata="Q5013363" start="8063" end="8070" title="COMPASS" label="COMPASS"/>
<link wikidata="Q183414" start="9031" end="9043" title="punched card" label="punched card"/>
<link wikidata="Q3648620" start="9116" end="9125" title="CDC 160 series" label="CDC 160-A"/>
<link wikidata="Q47506" start="10253" end="10261" title="compiler" label="compiler"/>
<link wikidata="Q9135" start="10267" end="10283" title="operating system" label="operating system"/>
<link wikidata="Q177471" start="10856" end="10860" title="ICBM" label="ICBM"/>
<link wikidata="Q10860388" start="10990" end="11011" title="Pacific Missile Range Facility" label="Pacific Missile Range"/>
<link wikidata="Q967620" start="11043" end="11046" title="TRW Inc." label="TRW"/>
<link wikidata="Q201815" start="11152" end="11169" title="McDonnell Douglas" label="McDonnell Douglas"/>
<link wikidata="Q5917" start="11173" end="11201" title="Huntington Beach, California" label="Huntington Beach, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q519826" start="11521" end="11525" title="Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory" label="LLNL"/>
<link wikidata="Q934589" start="11530" end="11534" title="National Center for Atmospheric Research" label="NCAR"/>
<link wikidata="Q1091100" start="11877" end="11885" title="CDC 8600" label="CDC 8600"/>
<link wikidata="Q144060" start="11957" end="11970" title="Cray Research" label="Cray Research"/>
<link wikidata="Q964035" start="12023" end="12046" title="Computer History Museum" label="Computer History Museum"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12164" end="12212" title="Chippewa Falls Museum of Industry and Technology" label="Chippewa Falls Museum of Industry and Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q5975167" start="12398" end="12423" title="Charles Babbage Institute" label="Charles Babbage Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q3648618" start="12753" end="12761" title="CDC 1604" label="CDC 1604"/>
<link wikidata="Q683851" start="12763" end="12771" title="CDC 6600" label="CDC 6600"/>
<link wikidata="Q1091100" start="12783" end="12791" title="CDC 8600" label="CDC 8600"/>
<link wikidata="Q3648629" start="12793" end="12805" title="CDC STAR-100" label="CDC STAR-100"/>
<link wikidata="Q92765" start="12810" end="12822" title="Seymour Cray" label="Seymour Cray"/>
<link wikidata="Q92875" start="12903" end="12914" title="Gordon Bell" label="Gordon Bell"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="655747" wikidata="Q835474" url="?curid=655747" title="Freak Out!">
<text>Freak Out! is the debut studio album by the American rock band the Mothers of Invention, released on June 27, 1966, by Verve Records. Often cited as one of rock music&#x27;s first concept albums, it is a satirical expression of guitarist/bandleader Frank Zappa&#x27;s perception of American pop culture and the nascent freak scene of Los Angeles. It was the second rock music double album ever released, following Bob Dylan&#x27;s &quot;Blonde on Blonde&quot; just one week earlier, as well as the first double debut album by a rock artist. In the UK, the album was originally released as an edited single disc.

The album was produced by Tom Wilson, who signed the Mothers, formerly a bar band called the Soul Giants. Zappa said many years later that Wilson signed the band to a record deal under the impression that they were a white blues band. The album features Zappa on vocals and guitar, along with lead vocalist/tambourine player Ray Collins, bass player/vocalist Roy Estrada, drummer/vocalist Jimmy Carl Black and guitar player Elliot Ingber (later of Captain Beefheart&#x27;s Magic Band, performing there under the pseudonym &quot;Winged Eel Fingerling&quot;).

The band&#x27;s original repertoire consisted of rhythm and blues covers, but after Zappa joined the band, he encouraged them to play his own original material, and their name was changed to the Mothers. The musical content of &quot;Freak Out!&quot; ranges from rhythm and blues, doo-wop, and standard blues-influenced rock to orchestral arrangements and avant-garde sound collages. Although the album was initially poorly received in the United States, it was a success in Europe. It gained a cult following in America, where it continued to sell in substantial quantities until it was discontinued in the early 1970s. The album went back in print in 1985, as part of Zappa&#x27;s &quot;Old Masters Box One&quot; box set, with the first CD release of the album following in 1987.

In 1999, the album was honored with the Grammy Hall of Fame Award, and in 2003, &quot;Rolling Stone&quot; ranked it among the &quot;500 Greatest Albums of All Time&quot;. In 2006, &quot;The MOFO Project/Object&quot;, an audio documentary on the making of the album, was released in honor of its 40th anniversary.

==Background==
In the early 1960s, Zappa met Ray Collins. Collins supported himself by working as a carpenter, and on weekends sang with a group called the Soul Giants. In April 1965, Collins got into a fight with their guitar player, who quit, leaving the band in need of a substitute, and Zappa filled in. The Soul Giants&#x27; repertoire originally consisted of R&amp;B covers. After Zappa joined the band he encouraged them to play his own original material and try to get a record contract. While most of the band members liked the idea, then-leader and saxophone player Davy Coronado felt that performing original material would cost them bookings, and quit the band. Zappa took over leadership of the band, who officially changed their name to the Mothers on May 10, 1965.

The group moved to Los Angeles in the summer of 1965 after Zappa got them a management contract with Herb Cohen. They gained steady work at clubs along the Sunset Strip. MGM staff producer Tom Wilson offered the band a record deal with the Verve Records division in early 1966. He had heard of their growing reputation but had seen them perform only one song, &quot;Trouble Every Day&quot;, which concerned the Watts riots. According to Zappa, this led Wilson to believe that they were a &quot;white blues band&quot;.

== Recording ==
The first two songs recorded for the album were &quot;Any Way the Wind Blows&quot; and &quot;Who Are the Brain Police?&quot; When Tom Wilson heard the latter, he realized that the Mothers were not merely a blues band. Zappa remembered &quot;I could see through the window that he was scrambling toward the phone to call his boss—probably saying: &#x27;Well, uh, not exactly a &#x27;white blues band&#x27;, but ... sort of.&#x27;&quot; In a 1968 article written for &quot;Hit Parader&quot; magazine, Zappa wrote that when Wilson heard these songs, &quot;he was so impressed he got on the phone and called New York, and as a result I got a more or less unlimited budget to do this monstrosity.&quot; &quot;Freak Out!&quot; is an early example of the concept album, a sardonic farce about rock music and America. &quot;All the songs on it were about something&quot;, Zappa wrote in &quot;The Real Frank Zappa Book&quot;. &quot;It wasn&#x27;t as if we had a hit single and we needed to build some filler around it. Each tune had a function within an overall satirical concept.&quot;

The album was recorded at TTG Studios in Hollywood, California, between March 9 and March 12, 1966. Some songs, such as &quot;Motherly Love&quot; and &quot;I Ain&#x27;t Got No Heart&quot;, had already been recorded in earlier versions prior to the &quot;Freak Out!&quot; sessions. These recordings, said to have been made around 1965, were not officially released until 2004, when they appeared on the posthumous Zappa album &quot;Joe&#x27;s Corsage&quot;. An early version of the song &quot;Any Way the Wind Blows&quot;, recorded in 1963, appears on another posthumous release, &quot;The Lost Episodes&quot;, and was originally written when Zappa considered divorcing first wife Kay Sherman. In the liner notes for &quot;Freak Out!&quot;, Zappa wrote, &quot;If I had never gotten divorced, this piece of trivial nonsense would never have been recorded.&quot; &quot;Hungry Freaks, Daddy&quot; is an attack on the American school system that musically quotes a Rolling Stones song, &quot;(I Can&#x27;t Get No) Satisfaction&quot;, in its opening measures, and contains a guitar solo between the first and second verses that itself briefly quotes Richard Berry&#x27;s 1959 song &quot;Have Love, Will Travel&quot;.

Tom Wilson became more enthusiastic as the sessions continued. In the middle of the week of recording, Zappa told him, &quot;I would like to rent $500 [] worth of percussion equipment for a session that starts at midnight on Friday and I want to bring all the freaks from Sunset Boulevard into the studio to do something special.&quot; Wilson agreed. The material was worked into &quot;Cream Cheese&quot;, a &quot;ballet in two tableaux&quot; that was eventually retitled &quot;The Return of the Son of Monster Magnet&quot;. In a November 1967 radio interview (posthumously included as part of the 2006 &quot;MOFO&quot; album), Zappa is heard complaining that the version of &quot;Monster Magnet&quot; released on &quot;Freak Out!&quot; was in fact an unfinished piece; the percussion track was intended to serve as the foundation for an even more complex piece, but MGM refused to approve the studio time needed to record the intended overdubs that would have completed the composition, and so it was released (to Zappa&#x27;s great dissatisfaction) in this unfinished form. In addition to the Mothers, some tracks featured a &quot;Mothers&#x27; Auxiliary&quot; that consisted of additional session players, including noted &quot;Wrecking Crew&quot; members Gene Estes, Carol Kaye and Mac Rebennack (aka Dr. John), guitarist Neil Levang, and jazz-soul pianists Eugene DiNovi and Les McCann, with vocal contributions by Paul Butterfield, Kim Fowley, Jeannie Vassoir and future Mother Jim Sherwood. Several orchestral musicians, who were also mostly credited as members of the Auxiliary (including their contractor, Benjamin Barrett), also made contributions to several songs at certain sessions, chiefly in the form of backing tracks on those songs.

Zappa later found out that when the material was recorded, Wilson had taken LSD. &quot;I&#x27;ve tried to imagine what [Wilson] must have been thinking&quot;, Zappa recounted, &quot;sitting in that control room, listening to all that weird shit coming out of the speakers, and being responsible for telling the engineer, Ami Hadani (who was not on acid), what to do.&quot; By the time &quot;Freak Out!&quot; was edited and shaped into an album, Wilson had spent $25–35,000 of MGM&#x27;s money (). In &quot;Hit Parader&quot; magazine, Zappa wrote that &quot;Wilson was sticking his neck out. He laid his job on the line by producing the album. MGM felt that they had spent too much money on the album.&quot;

An early version of the album was done in April, with a different track order from the final sequence completed two months later: for instance, &quot;Wowie Zowie&quot; (which would eventually begin side two of the finalized sequence instead, and was described by Zappa as &quot;harmless&quot;, &quot;cheerful&quot; and apparently liked by Little Richard) was the original planned lead-off track rather than &quot;Hungry Freaks, Daddy&quot;, &quot;Trouble Comin&#x27; Every Day&quot; (which was inspired by the Watts Riots that took place the previous year) was included on side one rather than side three, and &quot;Who Are the Brain Police?&quot; (acknowledged by Zappa himself as one of the scariest songs on the album) took up the middle of side two rather than the middle of side one, with only &quot;Help, I&#x27;m a Rock&quot; (a song dedicated to Elvis Presley) and &quot;Cream Cheese&quot; (later retitled &quot;The Return of the Son of Monster Magnet&quot;) taking up the same concluding places on the early sequence that they eventually would on the finalized sequence. &quot;Wowie Zowie&quot; itself originally contained a &quot;musique concrète&quot; section between the bridge and third verse that would eventually be edited out of the song as it appeared on the finalized sequence, while the third section of &quot;Help, I&#x27;m a Rock&quot;, called &quot;It Can&#x27;t Happen Here&quot;, contained two additional lines consisting of the word &quot;psychedelic&quot; during the self-pleasure sequence and of the words &quot;...since you first took the shots&quot; immediately following the &quot;we&#x27;ve been very interested in your development&quot; line. Tapes of the early sequence were eventually leaked to European collectors and bootlegged on vinyl as &quot;The Alternate Freak Out!&quot; in 2010, with long-time Zappa associate Scott Parker later describing the early sequence&#x27;s track order as having more conceptual &quot;integrat[ion]&quot; and &quot;a greater amount of weirdness sprinkled throughout&quot; than that of the finalized sequence during a 2011 podcast.

The label eventually requested that the two lines in question be removed from the &quot;It Can&#x27;t Happen Here&quot; section of &quot;Help, I&#x27;m a Rock&quot;, both of which had been interpreted by MGM executives to be drug references. However, the label either had no objections to, or else did not notice, a sped-up recording of Zappa shouting the word &quot;fuck&quot; after accidentally smashing his finger, occurring at 11 minutes and 36 seconds into &quot;The Return of the Son of Monster Magnet&quot;. From the 1995 CD reissue of the album onwards, the formerly three-part &quot;Help, I&#x27;m a Rock&quot; was reindexed as two separate tracks, with only the first two parts (&quot;Okay To Tap Dance&quot; and &quot;In Memoriam, Edgard Varèse&quot;) remaining under the &quot;Help, I&#x27;m a Rock&quot; title but with &quot;It Can&#x27;t Happen Here&quot; becoming its own track, as &quot;It Can&#x27;t Happen Here&quot; had been included by itself on the 1969 vinyl compilation &quot;Mothermania&quot;, where the two normally censored lines were also reinstated.

MGM also told Zappa that the band would have to change their name, claiming that no DJ would play a record on the air by a group called &quot;the Mothers&quot;.

==Release==

Verve released &quot;Freak Out!&quot; on June 27, 1966. The band&#x27;s name was changed to the Mothers of Invention, a name Zappa chose in favor of MGM&#x27;s original suggested name, &quot;The Mothers Auxiliary&quot;. The album&#x27;s back cover included a &quot;letter&quot; from Zappa-created fictional character Suzy Creamcheese (who also appears on the album itself), which read:

Because the text was printed in a typeface resembling typewriter lettering, some people thought that Suzy Creamcheese was real, and many listeners expected to see her in concert performances. Because of this, it was decided that &quot;it would be best to bring along a Suzy Creamcheese replica who would demonstrate once and for all the veracity of such a beast.&quot; Because the original voice of Suzy Creamcheese, Jeannie Vassoir, was unavailable, Pamela Zarubica took over the part.

Early pressings of the album in the United States included a blurb for a &quot;Freak Out Hot Spots!&quot; map. Inside the gatefold jacket the small ad was aimed at people coming to visit Los Angeles and it listed several famous restaurants and clubs including Canter&#x27;s and The Whisky a Go Go. The ad also claimed information concerning police arrests. It states: &quot;Also shows where the heat has been busting frequently, with tips on safety in police terror situations&quot;. Those interested in the map were instructed to send $1.00 (US$ in dollars) to MGM Records c/o 1540 Broadway NY. NY. address. The map was only available for a limited time, since the blurb was not included on later pressings and the space was left blank. It was eventually reprinted and included with &quot;The MOFO Project/Object&quot;, a four-disc audio documentary on the making of the album, released posthumously by the Zappa Family Trust in 2006.

==Reception==
 &quot;Freak Out!&quot; reached No. 130 on the &quot;Billboard&quot; chart, and was not a critical success when it was first released in the United States. Many listeners were convinced that the album was drug-inspired, and interpreted the album&#x27;s title as slang for a bad LSD trip. The album made the Mothers of Invention immediate underground darlings with a strong counter-cultural following. In &quot;The Real Frank Zappa Book&quot;, Zappa quotes a negative review of the album by Pete Johnson of the &quot;Los Angeles Times&quot;, who wrote:

The album developed a major cult following in the United States by the time MGM/Verve had been merged into a division of PolyGram in 1972. At that time many MGM/Verve releases including &quot;Freak Out!&quot; were prematurely deleted in an attempt to keep the struggling company financially solvent. Zappa had already moved on to his own companies Bizarre Records and Straight Records, which were distributed by Warner Bros. Records. &quot;Freak Out!&quot; was initially more successful in Europe and quickly influenced many English rock musicians. According to David Fricke, the album was a major influence on the Beatles&#x27; &quot;Sgt. Pepper&#x27;s Lonely Hearts Club Band&quot;. Paul McCartney regarded &quot;Sgt. Pepper&#x27;s Lonely Hearts Club Band&quot; as the Beatles&#x27; &quot;Freak Out! &quot; Zappa criticized the Beatles, as he felt they were &quot;only in it for the money&quot;.

&quot;Freak Out!&quot; was honored with the Grammy Hall of Fame Award in 1999, ranked at number 243 on &quot;Rolling Stone&quot; magazine&#x27;s list of the 500 Greatest Albums of All Time in 2003, and 246 in a 2012 revised list. It was also featured in the 2006 book &quot;1001 Albums You Must Hear Before You Die&quot;. The album was named as one of &quot;Classic Rock&quot; magazine&#x27;s &quot;50 Albums That Built Prog Rock&quot;. It was voted number 315 in the third edition of Colin Larkin&#x27;s &quot;All Time Top 1000 Albums&quot; (2000).

== Track listing ==


On the 1995 and 2012 CD releases, &quot;Help, I&#x27;m a Rock&quot; is credited as two tracks: &quot;Help, I&#x27;m a Rock&quot; (4:43) and &quot;It Can&#x27;t Happen Here&quot; (3:57). On the Side 3 label of original vinyl copies, &quot;Trouble Every Day&quot; is listed as &quot;Trouble Comin&#x27; Every Day&quot;.

==Personnel==
The Mothers of Invention
*Frank Zappa – guitar, conductor, vocals
*Jimmy Carl Black – percussion, drums, vocals
*Ray Collins – vocals, harmonica, cymbals, sound effects, tambourine, finger cymbals, bobby pin &amp; tweezers
*Roy Estrada – bass &amp; guitarrón, boy soprano
*Elliot Ingber – alternate lead &amp; rhythm guitar with clear white light

The Mothers&#x27; Auxiliary

*Gene Estes – percussion
*Eugene Di Novi – piano
*Neil Levang – guitar
*John Rotella – clarinet, bass saxophone
*Carol Kaye – 12-string guitar
*Kurt Reher – cello
*Raymond Kelley – cello
*Paul Bergstrom – cello
*Emmet Sargeant – cello
*Joseph Saxon – cello
*Edwin V. Beach – cello
*Arthur Maebe – French horn
*George Price – French horn
*Roy Caton – trumpet
*Virgil Evans – trumpet
*David Wells – trombone
*Motorhead Sherwood – noises
*Kim Fowley – hypophone
*Mac Rebennack – piano
*Paul Butterfield – vocals
*Les McCann – piano
*Jeannie Vassoir – voice of Suzy Creamcheese
Production credits
*Musical director, orchestrator, and arranger: Frank Zappa
*Producer: Tom Wilson
*Engineering director: Val Valentin
*Engineers: Ami Hadani, Tom Wilson, Val Valentin
*Assistants: Eugene Dinovi, Neil Levang, Vito, Ken Watson
*Cover design: Jack Anesh
*Hair stylist: Ray Collins

==Charts==
; Album
==References==
==External links==
*&quot;Freak Out!&quot;, full album at YouTube</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q482994" start="24" end="36" title="studio album" label="studio album"/>
<link wikidata="Q11399" start="53" end="57" title="Rock music" label="rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q530362" start="63" end="87" title="the Mothers of Invention" label="the Mothers of Invention"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124849" start="119" end="132" title="Verve Records" label="Verve Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q207393" start="180" end="193" title="concept album" label="concept album"/>
<link wikidata="Q127330" start="249" end="260" title="Frank Zappa" label="Frank Zappa"/>
<link wikidata="Q131265" start="291" end="302" title="pop culture" label="pop culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q3492410" start="319" end="330" title="freak scene" label="freak scene"/>
<link wikidata="Q1242743" start="376" end="388" title="double album" label="double album"/>
<link wikidata="Q392" start="414" end="423" title="Bob Dylan" label="Bob Dylan"/>
<link wikidata="Q598116" start="437" end="453" title="Blonde on Blonde" label="Blonde on Blonde"/>
<link wikidata="Q2007168" start="639" end="649" title="Tom Wilson (record producer)" label="Tom Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q9759" start="836" end="841" title="blues" label="blues"/>
<link wikidata="Q1756191" start="938" end="949" title="Ray Collins (musician)" label="Ray Collins"/>
<link wikidata="Q46185" start="951" end="955" title="bass guitar" label="bass"/>
<link wikidata="Q1393149" start="972" end="983" title="Roy Estrada" label="Roy Estrada"/>
<link wikidata="Q598894" start="1002" end="1018" title="Jimmy Carl Black" label="Jimmy Carl Black"/>
<link wikidata="Q2616750" start="1037" end="1050" title="Elliot Ingber" label="Elliot Ingber"/>
<link wikidata="Q312264" start="1061" end="1078" title="Captain Beefheart" label="Captain Beefheart"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1086" end="1096" title="Captain Beefheart#The Magic Band" label="Magic Band"/>
<link wikidata="Q45981" start="1221" end="1237" title="rhythm and blues" label="rhythm and blues"/>
<link wikidata="Q546359" start="1452" end="1459" title="doo-wop" label="doo-wop"/>
<link wikidata="Q9759" start="1474" end="1479" title="blues" label="blues"/>
<link wikidata="Q102932" start="1527" end="1538" title="avant-garde" label="avant-garde"/>
<link wikidata="Q1744304" start="1539" end="1552" title="sound collage" label="sound collage"/>
<link wikidata="Q2271670" start="1860" end="1879" title="Old Masters (box set)" label="Old Masters Box One"/>
<link wikidata="Q34467" start="1910" end="1912" title="compact disc" label="CD"/>
<link wikidata="Q81180" start="1994" end="2019" title="Grammy Hall of Fame" label="Grammy Hall of Fame Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q33511" start="2040" end="2053" title="Rolling Stone" label="Rolling Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q240550" start="2086" end="2117" title="Rolling Stone&amp;#x27;s 500 Greatest Albums of All Time" label="500 Greatest Albums of All Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q3445533" start="2140" end="2163" title="The MOFO Project/Object" label="The MOFO Project/Object"/>
<link wikidata="Q371743" start="3150" end="3160" title="Herb Cohen" label="Herb Cohen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1881437" start="3219" end="3222" title="MGM Records" label="MGM"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124849" start="3289" end="3302" title="Verve Records" label="Verve Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q7846415" start="3415" end="3432" title="Trouble Every Day (song)" label="Trouble Every Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q377682" start="3460" end="3471" title="Watts riots" label="Watts riots"/>
<link wikidata="Q15053890" start="3677" end="3702" title="Who Are the Brain Police?" label="Who Are the Brain Police?"/>
<link wikidata="Q207393" start="4332" end="4345" title="concept album" label="concept album"/>
<link wikidata="Q785387" start="4469" end="4494" title="The Real Frank Zappa Book" label="The Real Frank Zappa Book"/>
<link wikidata="Q1274865" start="4690" end="4701" title="TTG Studios" label="TTG Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q34006" start="4705" end="4714" title="Hollywood, Los Angeles" label="Hollywood"/>
<link wikidata="Q99" start="4716" end="4726" title="California" label="California"/>
<link wikidata="Q3434085" start="5095" end="5113" title="Joe&amp;#x27;s Corsage" label="Joe&amp;#x27;s Corsage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1060965" start="5249" end="5266" title="The Lost Episodes" label="The Lost Episodes"/>
<link wikidata="Q861654" start="5577" end="5599" title="American school system" label="American school system"/>
<link wikidata="Q11036" start="5624" end="5638" title="The Rolling Stones" label="Rolling Stones"/>
<link wikidata="Q158553" start="5651" end="5685" title="(I Can&amp;#x27;t Get No) Satisfaction" label="(I Can&amp;#x27;t Get No) Satisfaction"/>
<link wikidata="Q362625" start="5808" end="5821" title="Richard Berry (musician)" label="Richard Berry"/>
<link wikidata="Q3783695" start="5845" end="5867" title="Have Love, Will Travel" label="Have Love, Will Travel"/>
<link wikidata="Q860442" start="6148" end="6164" title="Sunset Boulevard" label="Sunset Boulevard"/>
<link wikidata="Q7760464" start="6354" end="6393" title="The Return of the Son of Monster Magnet" label="The Return of the Son of Monster Magnet"/>
<link wikidata="Q2594426" start="7107" end="7120" title="The Wrecking Crew (music)" label="Wrecking Crew"/>
<link wikidata="Q2594426" start="7135" end="7145" title="Gene Estes" label="Gene Estes"/>
<link wikidata="Q433273" start="7147" end="7157" title="Carol Kaye" label="Carol Kaye"/>
<link wikidata="Q511074" start="7181" end="7189" title="Dr. John" label="Dr. John"/>
<link wikidata="Q1974742" start="7202" end="7213" title="Neil Levang" label="Neil Levang"/>
<link wikidata="Q562912" start="7256" end="7266" title="Les McCann" label="Les McCann"/>
<link wikidata="Q918576" start="7296" end="7312" title="Paul Butterfield" label="Paul Butterfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q1378199" start="7314" end="7324" title="Kim Fowley" label="Kim Fowley"/>
<link wikidata="Q127330" start="7326" end="7341" title="Jeannie Vassoir" label="Jeannie Vassoir"/>
<link wikidata="Q539257" start="7360" end="7372" title="Jim Sherwood" label="Jim Sherwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q23118" start="7703" end="7706" title="Lysergic acid diethylamide" label="LSD"/>
<link wikidata="Q2262054" start="8133" end="8144" title="Hit Parader" label="Hit Parader"/>
<link wikidata="Q82222" start="8674" end="8688" title="Little Richard" label="Little Richard"/>
<link wikidata="Q7846415" start="8782" end="8811" title="Trouble Every Day (song)" label="Trouble Comin&amp;#x27; Every Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q377682" start="8845" end="8856" title="Watts Riots" label="Watts Riots"/>
<link wikidata="Q24964440" start="9140" end="9161" title="Help, I&amp;#x27;m a Rock" label="Help, I&amp;#x27;m a Rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q303" start="9189" end="9202" title="Elvis Presley" label="Elvis Presley"/>
<link wikidata="Q823560" start="9475" end="9491" title="musique concrète" label="musique concrète"/>
<link wikidata="Q1109478" start="9518" end="9524" title="bridge (music)" label="bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q207393" start="10271" end="10281" title="concept album" label="conceptual"/>
<link wikidata="Q57247" start="11177" end="11190" title="Edgard Varèse" label="Edgard Varèse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1261269" start="11434" end="11445" title="Mothermania" label="Mothermania"/>
<link wikidata="Q3445533" start="13354" end="13377" title="The MOFO Project/Object" label="The MOFO Project/Object"/>
<link wikidata="Q485240" start="13568" end="13577" title="Billboard (magazine)" label="Billboard"/>
<link wikidata="Q16730368" start="14005" end="14017" title="Pete Johnson (rock critic)" label="Pete Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q188515" start="14031" end="14048" title="Los Angeles Times" label="Los Angeles Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q700359" start="14189" end="14197" title="PolyGram" label="PolyGram"/>
<link wikidata="Q879244" start="14416" end="14431" title="Bizarre Records" label="Bizarre Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q1712125" start="14436" end="14452" title="Straight Records" label="Straight Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q67030918" start="14480" end="14500" title="Warner Bros. Records" label="Warner Bros. Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q3492894" start="14630" end="14642" title="David Fricke" label="David Fricke"/>
<link wikidata="Q1299" start="14679" end="14690" title="the Beatles" label="the Beatles"/>
<link wikidata="Q169226" start="14703" end="14745" title="Sgt. Pepper&amp;#x27;s Lonely Hearts Club Band" label="Sgt. Pepper&amp;#x27;s Lonely Hearts Club Band"/>
<link wikidata="Q2599" start="14753" end="14767" title="Paul McCartney" label="Paul McCartney"/>
<link wikidata="Q901620" start="14934" end="14958" title="We&amp;#x27;re Only in It for the Money" label="only in it for the money"/>
<link wikidata="Q81180" start="15011" end="15036" title="Grammy Hall of Fame Award" label="Grammy Hall of Fame Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q33511" start="15076" end="15089" title="Rolling Stone" label="Rolling Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q240550" start="15124" end="15155" title="Rolling Stone&amp;#x27;s 500 Greatest Albums of All Time" label="500 Greatest Albums of All Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q164932" start="15241" end="15281" title="1001 Albums You Must Hear Before You Die" label="1001 Albums You Must Hear Before You Die"/>
<link wikidata="Q509854" start="15325" end="15337" title="Classic Rock (magazine)" label="Classic Rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q5145275" start="15452" end="15464" title="Colin Larkin" label="Colin Larkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q4729825" start="15478" end="15502" title="All Time Top 1000 Albums" label="All Time Top 1000 Albums"/>
<link wikidata="Q127330" start="15899" end="15910" title="Frank Zappa" label="Frank Zappa"/>
<link wikidata="Q6607" start="15913" end="15919" title="guitar" label="guitar"/>
<link wikidata="Q27939" start="15932" end="15938" title="Singing" label="vocals"/>
<link wikidata="Q598894" start="15940" end="15956" title="Jimmy Carl Black" label="Jimmy Carl Black"/>
<link wikidata="Q133163" start="15959" end="15969" title="percussion instrument" label="percussion"/>
<link wikidata="Q128309" start="15971" end="15976" title="Drum kit" label="drums"/>
<link wikidata="Q1756191" start="15986" end="15997" title="Ray Collins (musician)" label="Ray Collins"/>
<link wikidata="Q51290" start="16008" end="16017" title="harmonica" label="harmonica"/>
<link wikidata="Q190172" start="16019" end="16026" title="Cymbal" label="cymbals"/>
<link wikidata="Q768807" start="16028" end="16041" title="Sound effect" label="sound effects"/>
<link wikidata="Q193666" start="16043" end="16053" title="tambourine" label="tambourine"/>
<link wikidata="Q203449" start="16055" end="16069" title="Zill" label="finger cymbals"/>
<link wikidata="Q3251519" start="16071" end="16080" title="bobby pin" label="bobby pin"/>
<link wikidata="Q192504" start="16087" end="16095" title="tweezers" label="tweezers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1393149" start="16097" end="16108" title="Roy Estrada" label="Roy Estrada"/>
<link wikidata="Q46185" start="16111" end="16115" title="bass guitar" label="bass"/>
<link wikidata="Q64166239" start="16122" end="16131" title="Guitarrón mexicano" label="guitarrón"/>
<link wikidata="Q2616750" start="16146" end="16159" title="Elliot Ingber" label="Elliot Ingber"/>
<link wikidata="Q27939" start="16162" end="16176" title="Singing" label="alternate lead"/>
<link wikidata="Q6607" start="16183" end="16196" title="Guitar" label="rhythm guitar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2594426" start="16251" end="16261" title="Gene Estes" label="Gene Estes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1974742" start="16300" end="16311" title="Neil Levang" label="Neil Levang"/>
<link wikidata="Q433273" start="16363" end="16373" title="Carol Kaye" label="Carol Kaye"/>
<link wikidata="Q7298922" start="16414" end="16428" title="Raymond Kelley" label="Raymond Kelley"/>
<link wikidata="Q539257" start="16657" end="16675" title="Euclid James Sherwood" label="Motorhead Sherwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q1378199" start="16686" end="16696" title="Kim Fowley" label="Kim Fowley"/>
<link wikidata="Q511074" start="16710" end="16723" title="Mac Rebennack" label="Mac Rebennack"/>
<link wikidata="Q918576" start="16733" end="16749" title="Paul Butterfield" label="Paul Butterfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q562912" start="16760" end="16770" title="Les McCann" label="Les McCann"/>
<link wikidata="Q127330" start="16780" end="16795" title="Jeannie Vassoir" label="Jeannie Vassoir"/>
<link wikidata="Q866" start="17213" end="17220" title="YouTube" label="YouTube"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="655749" wikidata="Q56539730" url="?curid=655749" title="Mallarmé">
<text>Mallarmé is a surname. Notable people with the surname include:

* André Mallarmé (1877–1956), French politician
* Stéphane Mallarmé (1842–1898), French poet and critic
* François-René-Auguste Mallarmé (1755–1835), politician during the French Revolution</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2511312" start="67" end="81" title="André Mallarmé" label="André Mallarmé"/>
<link wikidata="Q767" start="115" end="132" title="Stéphane Mallarmé" label="Stéphane Mallarmé"/>
<link wikidata="Q285791" start="171" end="201" title="François-René-Auguste Mallarmé" label="François-René-Auguste Mallarmé"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="655750" wikidata="Q4038462" url="?curid=655750" title="Extent File System">
<text>Extent File System (EFS) is an older extent-based file system used in IRIX releases prior to version 5.3. It has been superseded by XFS.

== External links ==
* EFS support for Linux
* EFS support for NetBSD</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q4038462" start="0" end="18" title="Extent File System" label="Extent File System"/>
<link wikidata="Q4038462" start="20" end="23" title="Extent File System" label="EFS"/>
<link wikidata="Q174989" start="50" end="61" title="file system" label="file system"/>
<link wikidata="Q627611" start="70" end="74" title="IRIX" label="IRIX"/>
<link wikidata="Q394011" start="132" end="135" title="XFS" label="XFS"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="655756" wikidata="Q2638011" url="?curid=655756" title="House of Lorraine">
<text>The House of Lorraine () originated as a cadet branch of the House of Metz. It inherited the Duchy of Lorraine in 1473 after the death without a male heir of Nicholas I, Duke of Lorraine. By the marriage of Francis of Lorraine to Maria Theresa of Austria in 1736, and with the success in the ensuing War of the Austrian Succession (1740–1748), the House of Lorraine was joined to the House of Habsburg and became known as the House of Habsburg-Lorraine (). Francis, his sons Joseph II and Leopold II, and his grandson Francis II were the last four Holy Roman emperors from 1745 until the dissolution of the empire in 1806. The House of Habsburg-Lorraine inherited the Habsburg Empire, ruling the Austrian Empire and then Austria-Hungary until the dissolution of the monarchy in 1918.

Although its senior agnates are the dukes of Hohenberg, the house is currently headed by Karl von Habsburg (born 1961), grandson of the last emperor Charles I.

==Ancestry==

=== A controversial origin ===
The main two theories of the House&#x27;s origin are:

* the theory of Etichonid ancestry, which claims that Adalbert of Metz and his brother Gerard were descendants of the Nordgau branch of the Etichonid Dynasty, the same branch from which the House of Habsburg and the House of Zähringen could possibly descend;
* the theory of Gerardide ancestry, which claims that Adalbert and Gerard descended from the Matfridings which are thought to have been a branch of the Gerardides.

The Etichonid origin was unanimously recognized from the 18th until the 20th century. For this reason, the marriage between Maria Theresa of Austria and Francis of Lorraine was seen at the time as the reunion of the two branches of the dynasty. The main proponents of this theory have been: Dom Calmet (1672 † 1757), Nicolas Viton de Saint-Allais (1773 † 1842) and more recently Michel Dugast Rouillé (1919 † 1987) and Henry Bogdan.

The main proponents of the Gerardide-Matfriding theory are: Eduard Hlawitschka, George Poull and partially the &quot;Europäische Stammtafeln&quot; (which however does not take into account the kinship with the Girardides).

The Renaissance dukes of Lorraine tended to arrogate to themselves claims to Carolingian ancestry, as illustrated by Alexandre Dumas, père in the novel &quot;La Dame de Monsoreau&quot; (1846); in fact, so little documentation survives on the early generations that the reconstruction of a family tree for progenitors of the House of Alsace involves a good deal of guesswork.

What is more securely demonstrated is that in 1048 Emperor Henry III gave the Duchy of Upper Lorraine first to Adalbert of Metz and then to his brother Gerard whose successors (collectively known as the House of Alsace or the House of Châtenois) retained the duchy until the death of Charles the Bold in 1431.

===Houses of Vaudémont and Guise===
After a brief interlude of 1453–1473, when the duchy passed in right of Charles&#x27;s daughter to her husband John of Calabria, a Capetian, Lorraine reverted to the House of Vaudémont, a junior branch of House of Lorraine, in the person of René II who later added to his titles that of Duke of Bar.

The French Wars of Religion saw the rise of a junior branch of the Lorraine family, the House of Guise, which became a dominant force in French politics and, during the later years of Henry III&#x27;s reign, was on the verge of succeeding to the throne of France. Mary of Guise, mother of Mary, Queen of Scots, also came from this family.

Under the Bourbon monarchy the remaining branch of the House of Guise, headed by the duc d&#x27;Elbeuf, remained part of the highest ranks of French aristocracy, while the senior branch of the House of Vaudémont continued to rule the independent duchies of Lorraine and Bar. Louis XIV&#x27;s imperialist ambitions (which involved the occupation of Lorraine in 1669–97) forced the dukes into a permanent alliance with his archenemies, the Holy Roman Emperors from the House of Habsburg.

== House of Habsburg‑Lorraine ==

After Emperor Joseph I and Emperor Charles VI failed to produce a son and heir, the Pragmatic Sanction of 1713 left the throne to the latter&#x27;s yet unborn daughter, Maria Theresa. In 1736 Emperor Charles arranged her marriage to Francis of Lorraine who agreed to exchange his hereditary lands for the Grand Duchy of Tuscany (as well as the Duchy of Teschen from the Emperor).

At Charles&#x27;s death in 1740 the Habsburg holdings passed to Maria Theresa and Francis, who was later elected (in 1745) Holy Roman Emperor as Francis I. The Habsburg-Lorraine nuptials and dynastic union precipitated, and survived, the War of the Austrian Succession. Francis and Maria Theresa&#x27;s daughters Marie Antoinette and Maria Carolina of Austria became Queens of France and Naples-Sicily, respectively, while their sons Joseph II and Leopold II succeeded to the imperial title.

Apart from the core Habsburg dominions, including the triple crowns of Austria, Hungary and Bohemia, several junior branches of the House of Habsburg-Lorraine reigned in the Italian duchies of Tuscany (until 1737-1796, 1814-1860), Parma (1814-1847) and Modena (1814-1859). Another member of the house, Archduke Maximilian of Austria, was Emperor of Mexico (1863–67).

In 1900, Archduke Franz Ferdinand of Austria (then heir presumptive to the Austro-Hungarian throne) contracted a morganatic marriage with Countess Sophie Chotek. Their descendants, known as the House of Hohenberg, have been excluded from succession to the Austro-Hungarian crown, but not that of Lorraine, where morganatic marriage has never been outlawed. Nevertheless, Otto von Habsburg, the eldest grandson of Franz Ferdinand&#x27;s younger brother, was universally regarded as the head of the house until his death in 2011. It was at Nancy, the former capital of the House of Vaudémont, that the former crown prince married Princess Regina of Saxe-Meiningen in 1951.

==List of heads==
The following is a list of ruling heads (after 1918 pretenders) of the house of Ardennes-Metz and its successor houses of Lorraine and Habsburg-Lorraine, from the start of securely documented genealogical history in the 11th century.

*Gerhard III, Count of Metz, 990–1045
*Adalbert, Duke of Upper Lorraine r. 1047/8
*Gérard, Duke of Lorraine, r. 1048–1070
*Theodoric (Thierry) II r. 1070–1115
*Simon I, r. 1115–1138
*Matthias I, r. 1138–1176
*Simon II, r. 1176–1215
*Frederick I, r. 1205/6
*Frederick II, r. 1206–1213
*Theobald I, r. 1213–1220
*Matthias II, r. 1220–1251
*Frederick III, c. 1251–1303
*Theobald II, r. 1303–1312
*Frederick IV, r. 1312–1328
*Rudolph, r. 1328–1346 (killed in the Battle of Crécy)
*John I, r. 1346–1390
*Charles II, r. 1390–1431

Charles II died without male heir, the duchy passing to Isabella, Duchess of Lorraine, consort of Naples by marriage to Duke René of Anjou. The duchy passed to their son John II (r. 1453–1470), whose son Nicholas I (r. 1470–1473) died without heir. The title now went to Nicholas&#x27; aunt (sister of John II) Yolande.

===House of Lorraine===
The House of Lorraine was formed by Yolande&#x27;s marriage to Frederick II, Count of Vaudémont (1428–1470), who was descended from John I (Yolande&#x27;s great-grandfather) via his younger son Frederick I, Count of Vaudémont (1346–1390), Antoine, Count of Vaudémont (c. 1395–1431) and Frederick II, Count of Vaudémont (1417–1470). René inherited the title of Duke of Lorraine upon his marriage in 1473.

*René II, Duke of Lorraine, r. 1473–1508
*Antoine, r. 1508–1544
*Francis I, r. 1544/5
*Charles III, r. 1545–1608 (his mother Christina of Denmark served as his regent during his minority)
*Henry II (I), r. 1608–1624 (leaving no sons, both of his daughters became Duchesses of Lorraine by marriage)
**Nicole (m. Charles IV)
**Claude (m. Nicholas II)
*Francis II, (son of Charles III, duke for six days in 1625, abdicated in favour of his son)
*Charles IV, Duke of Lorraine r. 1624–1675 (briefly abdicated in favour of his brother in 1634)
**Nicholas Francis (Nicholas II) (briefly made duke during the French invasion of Lorraine in 1634)
*Charles V, r. 1675–1690 (son of Nicholas Francis)
*Leopold, r. 1690–1729
*Francis (III) Stephen, Duke of Lorraine, r. 1728–1737, Holy Roman Emperor (as Francis I) r. 1745–1765

===House of Habsburg–Lorraine===
*Joseph II, Holy Roman Emperor (1741–1790), r. 1765–1790
*Leopold II, Holy Roman Emperor (1747–1792), r. 1790–1792
*Francis II (IV) (1768–1835), Holy Roman Emperor 1792–1806, Emperor of Austria 1804–1835
*Ferdinand I (V), Emperor of Austria (1793–1875), r. 1835–1848 (abdicated in 1848, succeeded by his nephew)
*Franz Joseph I of Austria (1830–1916), r. 1848–1916, son of Archduke Franz Karl of Austria (1802–1878), a younger son of Francis II

The heir of Franz Joseph, Rudolf, Crown Prince of Austria, committed suicide in 1889. Franz Joseph was succeeded by his grandnephew, Charles I, son of Archduke Otto Francis, the son of Archduke Karl Ludwig, a younger brother of Franz Joseph.

*Blessed Charles of Austria (Charles I and IV) (1887–1922), r. 1916–1919 (dissolution of the monarchy)
*Otto von Habsburg (1912–2011)
*Karl von Habsburg (b. 1961)
**Heir apparent: Ferdinand Zvonimir von Habsburg (b. 1997)

== Family tree ==
==Male-line family tree==
Male, male-line, legitimate, non-morganatic members of the house who either lived to adulthood, or who held a title as a child, are included. Heads of the house are in bold.

*Gerard, Duke of Lorraine, 1030-1070
**Theodoric II, Duke of Lorraine, d. 1115
***Simon I, Duke of Lorraine, 1076-1139
****Matthias I, Duke of Lorraine, 1119-1176
*****Simon II, Duke of Lorraine, 1140-1207
*****Frederick I, Duke of Lorraine, 1143-1206
******Frederick II, Duke of Lorraine, 1165-1213
*******Theobald I, Duke of Lorraine, 1191-1220
*******Matthias II, Duke of Lorraine, 1193-1251
********Frederick III, Duke of Lorraine, 1240-1302
*********Theobald II, Duke of Lorraine, 1263-1312
**********Frederick IV, Duke of Lorraine, 1282-1326
***********Rudolph, Duke of Lorraine, 1320-1346
************John I, Duke of Lorraine, 1346-1390
*************Charles II, Duke of Lorraine, 1365-1431
*************Frederick I, Count of Vaudémont, 1369-1415
**************Anthony, Count of Vaudémont, 1400-1458
***************Frederick II, Count of Vaudémont, 1428-1470
****************René II, Duke of Lorraine, 1451-1508
*****************Anthony, Duke of Lorraine, 1489-1544
******************Francis I, Duke of Lorraine, 1517-1545
*******************Charles III, Duke of Lorraine, 1543-1608
********************Henry II, Duke of Lorraine, 1563-1624
********************Charles of Lorraine (bishop of Metz and Strasbourg), 1567-1607
********************Francis II, Duke of Lorraine, 1572-1632
*********************Charles IV, Duke of Lorraine, 1604-1675
**********************&quot;Charles Henry, Prince of Commercy, 1649-1723&quot;
***********************&quot;Charles Thomas, Prince of Vaudémont, 1670-1704&quot;
*********************Nicholas Francis, Duke of Lorraine, 1609-1670
**********************Ferdinand Philip, Hereditary Prince of Lorraine, 1639–1659
**********************Charles V, Duke of Lorraine, 1643-1690
***********************Leopold, Duke of Lorraine, 1679-1729
************************Leopold Clement, Hereditary Prince of Lorraine, 1707-1723
************************Francis I, Holy Roman Emperor, 1708-1765
*************************Joseph II, Holy Roman Emperor, 1741-1790
*************************Archduke Charles Joseph of Austria, 1745-1761
*************************Leopold II, Holy Roman Emperor, 1747-1792
**************************Francis II, Holy Roman Emperor, 1768-1835
***************************Ferdinand I of Austria, 1793-1875
***************************Archduke Francis Charles of Austria, 1802-1878
****************************Francis Joseph I of Austria, 1830-1916
*****************************Rudolph, Crown Prince of Austria, 1858-1889
****************************Maximilian I of Mexico, 1832-1867
****************************Archduke Charles Louis of Austria, 1833-1896
*****************************Archduke Francis Ferdinand of Austria, 1863-1914
*****************************Archduke Otto of Austria, 1865-1906
******************************Charles I of Austria, 1887-1922
*******************************Otto von Habsburg, 1912-2011
********************************Charles von Habsburg, b. 1961
*********************************Ferdinand Habsburg, b. 1997
********************************George von Habsburg, b. 1964
*********************************Charles Constantine Habsburg, b. 2004
*******************************Robert, Archduke of Austria-Este, 1915-1996
********************************Prince Laurence of Belgium, b. 1955
*********************************Prince Amadeus of Belgium, b. 1986
**********************************Archduke Maximilian of Austria-Este, b. 2019
*********************************Prince Joachim of Belgium, b. 1991
********************************Archduke Gerard of Austria, b. 1957
********************************Archduke Martin of Austria, b. 1959
*********************************Archduke Bartholomew of Austria, b. 2006
*********************************Archduke Emmanuel of Austria, b. 2008
*********************************Archduke Luigi of Austria, b. 2011
*******************************Archduke Felix of Austria, 1916-2011
********************************Archduke Charles Philip of Austria, b. 1954
*********************************Julian-Laurence Habsburg, b. 1994
*********************************Louis-Damian Habsburg, b. 1998
********************************Archduke Raymond of Austria, 1958-2008
*********************************1 son
********************************Archduke Stephen of Austria, b. 1961
*********************************2 sons
*******************************Archduke Charles Louis of Austria, 1918–2007
********************************Archduke Rudolph of Austria, b. 1950
*********************************Archduke Charles Christian of Austria, b. 1977
*********************************Archduke John of Austria, b. 1981
*********************************Archduke Thomas of Austria, b. 1983
*********************************Archduke Francis-Louis of Austria, b. 1988
*********************************Archduke Michael of Austria, b. 1990
*********************************Archduke Joseph of Austria, b. 1991
********************************Archduke Charles Christian of Austria, b. 1954
*********************************Archduke Imre of Austria, b. 1985
**********************************Archduke Charles of Austria, b. 2023
*********************************Archduke Christopher of Austria, b. 1988
**********************************Archduke Joseph of Austria, b. 2020
*********************************Archduke Alexander of Austria, b. 1990
*******************************Archduke Rudolph of Austria, 1919–2010
********************************Archduke Charles of Austria, b. 1955
*********************************2 children
********************************Simeon of Austria, b. 1958
*********************************John Habsburg, b. 1997
*********************************Louis Habsburg, b. 1998
*********************************Philip Habsburg, b. 2007
******************************Archduke Maximilian of Austria, 1895-1952
*******************************Ferdinand, 1918-2004
********************************Maximilian, b. 1961
*******************************Henry, 1925-2014
********************************Philip, b. 1961
********************************Ferdinand Charles, b. 1965
********************************Conrad, b. 1971
*****************************Archduke Ferdinand Charles of Austria, 1868-1915
****************************Archduke Louis Victor of Austria, 1842-1919
**************************Ferdinand III, Grand Duke of Tuscany, 1769-1824
***************************Leopold II, Grand Duke of Tuscany, 1797-1870
****************************Ferdinand IV, Grand Duke of Tuscany, 1835-1908
*****************************Archduke Leopold Ferdinand of Austria, 1868-1935
*****************************Archduke Joseph Ferdinand of Austria, 1872-1942
******************************Maximilian Habsburg, 1932-2024
*****************************Archduke Peter Ferdinand of Austria, 1874-1948
******************************Archduke Godfrey of Austria, 1902-1984
*******************************Archduke Leopold of Austria, b. 1942
********************************2 sons
******************************Archduke George of Austria, 1905-1952
*******************************Archduke Radbot, b. 1938
********************************Archduke Leopold, b. 1973
*********************************Archduke Felix, b. 2007
*********************************Archduke George, b. 2009
********************************Archduke Maximilian, b. 1976
*******************************Archduke George, b. 1952
*****************************Archduke Henry Ferdinand, 1878–1969
****************************Archduke Charles Salvator of Austria, 1839-1892
*****************************Archduke Leopold Salvator of Austria, 1863-1931
******************************Archduke Rainer of Austria, 1895-1930
******************************Archduke Leopold of Austria, Prince of Tuscany, 1897-1958
******************************Archduke Anthony of Austria, 1901-1987
*******************************Archduke Stephen of Austria, Prince of Tuscany, 1932-1998
*******************************Archduke Dominic of Austria, b. 1937
********************************Alexander Habsburg, b. 1965
*********************************Constantine Habsburg, b. 2000
********************************Gregory Habsburg, b. 1968
******************************Archduke Francis Joseph of Austria, Prince of Tuscany, 1905-1975
******************************Archduke Karl Pius of Austria, Prince of Tuscany, 1909-1953
*****************************Archduke Francis Salvator of Austria, 1866-1939
******************************Archduke Francis Charles Salvator of Austria, 1893-1918
******************************Archduke Hubert Salvator of Austria, 1894-1971
*******************************Archduke Frederick Salvator of Austria, 1927–1999
********************************Archduke Leopold Salvator of Austria, b. 1956
********************************Archduke Alexander Salvator of Austria, b. 1959
*********************************Archduke Constantine of Austria, b. 2002
*********************************Archduke Paul Salvator of Austria, b. 2003
*******************************Archduke Andrew Salvator of Austria, b. 1936
********************************Archduke Thaddaeus Salvator of Austria, b. 2001
********************************Archduke Casimir Salvator of Austria, b. 2003
*******************************Archduke Mark of Austria, b. 1946
*******************************Archduke John Maximilian of Austria, b. 1947
*******************************Archduke Michael Salvator of Austria, b. 1949
******************************Theodore Salvator, 1899–1978
*******************************&quot;issue&quot;
******************************Clement Salvator, 1904-1974
*******************************&quot;issue&quot;
*****************************Archduke Albert Salvator, 1871–1896
****************************Archduke Louis Salvator of Austria, 1847-1915
****************************Archduke John Salvator of Austria, 1852-1890
**************************Archduke Charles, Duke of Teschen, 1771-1847
***************************Archduke Albert, Duke of Teschen, 1817-1895
***************************Archduke Charles Ferdinand of Austria, 1818-1874
****************************Archduke Frederick, Duke of Teschen, 1856-1936
*****************************Archduke Albert Francis, Duke of Teschen, 1897-1955
****************************Archduke Charles Stephen of Austria, 1860-1933
*****************************Archduke Charles Albert of Austria, 1888-1951
*****************************Archduke Leo Charles of Austria, 1893-1939
*****************************Archduke William of Austria, 1895-1948
****************************Archduke Eugene of Austria, 1863-1954
***************************Archduke Frederick of Austria, 1821–1847
***************************Archduke William Francis of Austria, 1827-1894
**************************Archduke Alexander Leopold of Austria, 1772-1795
**************************Archduke Joseph of Austria (Palatine of Hungary), 1776-1847
***************************Archduke Stephen of Austria (Palatine of Hungary), 1817-1867
***************************Archduke Joseph Charles of Austria, 1833-1905
****************************Archduke Joseph Augustus of Austria, 1872-1962
*****************************Archduke Joseph Francis of Austria, 1895-1957
******************************Archduke Joseph Arpad of Austria, 1933-2017
*******************************Archduke Joseph Charles of Austria, b. 1960
********************************2 sons
*******************************Archduke Andrew-Augustine of Austria, b. 1965
********************************6 children
*******************************Archduke Nicholas Francis of Austria, b. 1973
********************************4 children
*******************************Archduke John James of Austria, b. 1975
********************************3 sons
******************************Archduke Stephen Dominic of Austria, 1934-2011
******************************Archduke Geza of Austria, b. 1940
******************************Archduke Michael of Austria, b. 1942
*******************************Archduke Edward of Austria, b. 1967
*****************************Archduke Ladislaus Luitpold, 1901-1946
****************************Archduke Ladislaus Philip of Austria, 1875-1895
**************************Archduke Anthony Victor of Austria, 1779-1835
**************************Archduke John of Austria, 1782-1859
**************************Archduke Rainer Joseph of Austria, 1783-1853
***************************Archduke Leopold Louis of Austria, 1823-1898
***************************Archduke Ernest of Austria, 1824-1899
***************************Archduke Sigismund of Austria, 1826-1891
***************************Archduke Rainer Ferdinand of Austria, 1827-1913
***************************Archduke Henry Anthony of Austria, 1828-1891
**************************Archduke Louis of Austria, 1784-1864
**************************Archduke Rudolph of Austria, 1788-1831
*************************Ferdinand Charles, Archduke of Austria-Este, 1754-1806
**************************Francis IV, Duke of Modena, 1779-1846
***************************Francis V, Duke of Modena, 1819-1875
***************************Archduke Ferdinand Charles Victor of Austria-Este, 1821-1849
**************************Archduke Ferdinand Charles Joseph of Austria-Este, 1781-1850
**************************Archduke Maximilian of Austria-Este, 1782-1863
**************************Archduke Charles Ambrose of Austria-Este, 1785-1809
*************************Archduke Maximilian Francis of Austria, 1756-1801
************************Prince Charles Alexander of Lorraine, 1712-1780
***********************Charles Joseph of Lorraine, 1680-1715
***********************Joseph Emmanuel, 1685–1705
***********************Francis Anthony, 1689–1715
******************Nicholas, Duke of Mercœur, 1524-1577
*******************Philip Emmanuel, Duke of Mercœur, 1558-1602
*******************Cardinal Charles de Lorraine de Vaudémont, 1561-1587
*******************Francis of Lorraine, Marquis of Chaussin, 1567–1596
*******************Henry, Count of Chaligny, 1570-1600
********************Prince Charles of Lorraine, Bishop of Verdun, 1592–1631
********************Prince Henry of Lorraine, Count of Chaligny, 1596–1672
********************Prince Francis of Lorraine, Bishop of Verdun, 1599–1671
*******************Eric of Lorraine, Count of Vaudémont, 1576-1623
*****************Claude, Duke of Guise, 1496-1550, founder of the House of Guise
******************Francis, Duke of Guise, 1519-1563
*******************Henry I, Duke of Guise, 1550-1588
********************Charles, Duke of Guise, 1571-1640
*********************Francis, Prince of Joinville, 1612-1639
*********************Henry II, Duke of Guise, 1614-1664
*********************Charles Louis, Duke of Joyeuse, 1618–1637
*********************Louis, Duke of Joyeuse, 1622-1654
**********************Louis Joseph, Duke of Guise, 1650-1671
***********************Francis Joseph, Duke of Guise, 1670-1675
*********************Roger, a knight, 1624–1653
********************Louis III, Cardinal of Guise, 1575-1621
********************Claude, Duke of Chevreuse, 1578-1657
********************Francis Alexander, a knight, 1589–1614
*******************Charles, Duke of Mayenne, 1554-1611
********************Henry of Lorraine, Duke of Mayenne, 1578-1621
********************Charles Emmanuel of Lorraine, Count of Sommerive, 1581–1609
*******************Louis II of Lorraine, Cardinal of Guise, 1555-1588
******************Charles, Cardinal of Lorraine, 1524-1574
******************Claude, Duke of Aumale, 1526-1573
*******************Charles, Duke of Aumale, 1555-1631
*******************Claude of Lorraine, knight of Aumale, 1564-1591
******************Louis I of Lorraine, Cardinal of Guise, 1527-1578
******************Francis of Lorraine, Grand Prior, 1534-1563
******************René II of Lorraine, Marquis of Elbeuf, 1536-1566
*******************Charles I, Duke of Elbeuf, 1556-1605
********************Charles II, Duke of Elbeuf, 1596-1657
*********************Charles III, Duke of Elbeuf, 1620-1692
**********************Charles of Lorraine, knight of Elboeuf, 1650–1690
**********************Henry, Duke of Elbeuf, 1661-1748
***********************Philip of Lorraine, Prince of Elbeuf, 1678-1705
***********************Charles of Lorraine, 1685-1705
**********************Louis of Lorraine, Abbot of Orcamp, 1662–1693
**********************Emmanuel Maurice, Duke of Elbeuf, 1677-1763
*********************Henry, Abbot of Hombieres, 1622–1648
*********************Francis Louis, Count of Harcourt, 1623-1694
**********************Alphonse Henri, Count of Harcourt, 1648-1718
***********************Francis-Mary of Lorraine, Count of Maubec, 1686–1706
***********************Francis of Lorraine, Prince of Montlaur, 1684-1705
**********************Cesar of Lorraine, Prince of Montlaur, 1650–1675
**********************Charles of Lorraine, Abbé of Harcourt, 1661–1683
*********************Francis-Mary, Prince of Lillebonne, 1624-1694
**********************Charles, Prince of Commercy, 1661-1702
**********************John Paul of Lorraine, 1672-1693
********************Henry, Count of Harcourt, 1601-1666
*********************Louis, Count of Armagnac, 1641-1718
**********************Henry, Count of Brionne, 1661-1713
***********************Louis, Prince of Lambesc, 1692-1743
************************Louis, Prince of Brionne, 1725-1761
*************************Charles Eugene, Prince of Lambesc, 1751-1825
*************************Joseph Louis, Prince of Lorraine-Vaudémont, 1759-1812
**********************Francis Armand of Lorraine, Abbot of Royaumont, 1665–1728
**********************Camille of Lorraine, Count of Chamilly, 1666–1715
**********************Louis Alphonse of Lorraine, bailiff of Armagnac, 1675–1704
**********************Charles of Lorraine, Count of Armagnac, 1684-1751
*********************Philip, Knight of Lorraine, 1643-1702
*********************Alphonse Louis of Lorraine, Abbot of Royaumont, 1644–1689
*********************Raymond Berenger of Lorraine, Abbot of Faron de Meaux, 1647–1686
*********************Charles, Count of Marsan, 1648-1708
**********************Charles Louis, Count of Marsan, 1696-1755
***********************Gaston, Count of Marsan, 1721-1743
***********************Camille, Prince of Marsan, 1725-1780
**********************James Henry of Lorraine, Knight of Lorraine, 1698–1734 
*****************John, Cardinal of Lorraine, 1498-1550
*****************Louis, Count of Vaudémont, 1500-1528
*****************Francis of Lorraine, Lord of Lambesc, 1506-1525
****************Nicholas, Lord of Joinville and Bauffremont, d. c. 1476
***************Henry of Lorraine-Vaudémont, Bishop of Metz, c. 1432-1505
***************John, Count of Harcourt, d. 1473
**************Frederick, Lord of Rumigny
**************Charles, Lord of Bovines
**************John, Lord of Fleurines
**********Matthias, Lord of Darney, Boves, Blainville and Florennes, d. c. 1330
**********Hugh, Lord of Rumigny, Martigny, and Aubenton, d. after 1337
*********Matthias, Lord of Beauregard, d. 1282
*********Frederick, Bishop of Orléans, d. 1299
*********Frederick, Lord of Plombiéres, Romont, and Brémoncourt, d. c. 1320
*********Gerard, fl. 1317
*******James, Bishop of Metz
*******Reynold, Count of Castres
******Theoderic the Devil, Lord of Autigny
******Henry the Lombard
******Philip, Lord of Gerbéviller, d. 1243
******Matthias, Bishop of Toul, 1170–1217
*****Theoderic, bishop of Metz, d. 1181
*****Matthias, Count of Toul, d. 1208
****Robert, lord of Floranges
****Baldwin
****John
**Gerard, Count of Vaudémont, 1057–1108

== Notes and references ==
* 

==External links==

|-
|-
|-
|-
|-
|-


|-</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2638011" start="4" end="21" title="House of Lorraine" label="House of Lorraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2057658" start="41" end="53" title="cadet branch" label="cadet branch"/>
<link wikidata="Q669958" start="61" end="74" title="House of Metz" label="House of Metz"/>
<link wikidata="Q155019" start="93" end="110" title="Duchy of Lorraine" label="Duchy of Lorraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q704267" start="158" end="186" title="Nicholas I, Duke of Lorraine" label="Nicholas I, Duke of Lorraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q151075" start="207" end="226" title="Francis I, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Francis of Lorraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q131706" start="230" end="243" title="Maria Theresa" label="Maria Theresa"/>
<link wikidata="Q32929" start="300" end="330" title="War of the Austrian Succession" label="War of the Austrian Succession"/>
<link wikidata="Q65968" start="384" end="401" title="House of Habsburg" label="House of Habsburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q645719" start="426" end="452" title="House of Habsburg-Lorraine" label="House of Habsburg-Lorraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q76555" start="475" end="484" title="Joseph II, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Joseph II"/>
<link wikidata="Q151321" start="489" end="499" title="Leopold II, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Leopold II"/>
<link wikidata="Q130834" start="518" end="528" title="Francis II, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Francis II"/>
<link wikidata="Q181765" start="548" end="566" title="Holy Roman emperor" label="Holy Roman emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q19902208" start="588" end="613" title="dissolution of the Holy Roman Empire" label="dissolution of the empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q153136" start="668" end="683" title="Habsburg monarchy" label="Habsburg Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q131964" start="696" end="711" title="Austrian Empire" label="Austrian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q28513" start="721" end="736" title="Austria-Hungary" label="Austria-Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="747" end="774" title="Austria-Hungary#Dissolution" label="dissolution of the monarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q223375" start="805" end="812" title="agnates" label="agnates"/>
<link wikidata="Q1623645" start="821" end="839" title="Hohenberg family" label="dukes of Hohenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q78515" start="874" end="891" title="Karl von Habsburg" label="Karl von Habsburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q51068" start="934" end="943" title="Charles I of Austria" label="Charles I"/>
<link wikidata="Q73966" start="1062" end="1071" title="Etichonids" label="Etichonid"/>
<link wikidata="Q347275" start="1100" end="1116" title="Adalbert, Duke of Lorraine" label="Adalbert of Metz"/>
<link wikidata="Q704183" start="1133" end="1139" title="Gerard, Duke of Lorraine" label="Gerard"/>
<link wikidata="Q65968" start="1236" end="1253" title="House of Habsburg" label="House of Habsburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q247331" start="1262" end="1280" title="House of Zähringen" label="House of Zähringen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1989266" start="1321" end="1330" title="Gerard I of Paris" label="Gerardide"/>
<link wikidata="Q347367" start="1398" end="1408" title="Matfriding" label="Matfriding"/>
<link wikidata="Q1989266" start="1457" end="1467" title="Gerard I of Paris" label="Gerardides"/>
<link wikidata="Q767668" start="1761" end="1771" title="Antoine Augustin Calmet" label="Dom Calmet"/>
<link wikidata="Q3340860" start="1787" end="1816" title="Nicolas Viton de Saint-Allais" label="Nicolas Viton de Saint-Allais"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1849" end="1870" title="Michel Dugast Rouillé" label="Michel Dugast Rouillé"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377533" start="2021" end="2044" title="Europäische Stammtafeln" label="Europäische Stammtafeln"/>
<link wikidata="Q4692" start="2132" end="2143" title="Renaissance" label="Renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q133602" start="2205" end="2216" title="Carolingian" label="Carolingian"/>
<link wikidata="Q38337" start="2245" end="2266" title="Alexandre Dumas, père" label="Alexandre Dumas, père"/>
<link wikidata="Q2664833" start="2286" end="2306" title="La Dame de Monsoreau" label="La Dame de Monsoreau"/>
<link wikidata="Q153023" start="2555" end="2572" title="Emperor Henry III" label="Emperor Henry III"/>
<link wikidata="Q155019" start="2591" end="2605" title="Upper Lorraine" label="Upper Lorraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q347275" start="2615" end="2631" title="Adalbert, Duke of Lorraine" label="Adalbert of Metz"/>
<link wikidata="Q704183" start="2656" end="2662" title="Gerard, Duke of Lorraine" label="Gerard"/>
<link wikidata="Q663073" start="2788" end="2804" title="Charles II, Duke of Lorraine" label="Charles the Bold"/>
<link wikidata="Q721244" start="2962" end="2978" title="John II, Duke of Lorraine" label="John of Calabria"/>
<link wikidata="Q179544" start="2982" end="2990" title="Capetian dynasty" label="Capetian"/>
<link wikidata="Q441416" start="3092" end="3099" title="René II, Duke of Lorraine" label="René II"/>
<link wikidata="Q706679" start="3138" end="3149" title="Duke of Bar" label="Duke of Bar"/>
<link wikidata="Q673175" start="3156" end="3179" title="French Wars of Religion" label="French Wars of Religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1336538" start="3240" end="3254" title="House of Guise" label="House of Guise"/>
<link wikidata="Q53448" start="3336" end="3345" title="Henry III of France" label="Henry III"/>
<link wikidata="Q229846" start="3416" end="3429" title="Mary of Guise" label="Mary of Guise"/>
<link wikidata="Q131412" start="3441" end="3461" title="Mary, Queen of Scots" label="Mary, Queen of Scots"/>
<link wikidata="Q58389" start="3502" end="3509" title="House of Bourbon" label="Bourbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1615417" start="3577" end="3594" title="Lords, Marquesses and Dukes of Elbeuf" label="duc d&amp;#x27;Elbeuf"/>
<link wikidata="Q7742" start="3767" end="3776" title="Louis XIV" label="Louis XIV"/>
<link wikidata="Q181765" start="3930" end="3949" title="Holy Roman Emperors" label="Holy Roman Emperors"/>
<link wikidata="Q65968" start="3959" end="3976" title="House of Habsburg" label="House of Habsburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q152480" start="4019" end="4035" title="Emperor Joseph I" label="Emperor Joseph I"/>
<link wikidata="Q150665" start="4040" end="4058" title="Emperor Charles VI" label="Emperor Charles VI"/>
<link wikidata="Q313102" start="4097" end="4123" title="Pragmatic Sanction of 1713" label="Pragmatic Sanction of 1713"/>
<link wikidata="Q131706" start="4182" end="4195" title="Maria Theresa" label="Maria Theresa"/>
<link wikidata="Q151075" start="4246" end="4265" title="Francis of Lorraine" label="Francis of Lorraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q154849" start="4318" end="4340" title="Grand Duchy of Tuscany" label="Grand Duchy of Tuscany"/>
<link wikidata="Q671899" start="4357" end="4373" title="Duchy of Teschen" label="Duchy of Teschen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1102202" start="4585" end="4599" title="dynastic union" label="dynastic union"/>
<link wikidata="Q32929" start="4632" end="4662" title="War of the Austrian Succession" label="War of the Austrian Succession"/>
<link wikidata="Q47365" start="4707" end="4723" title="Marie Antoinette" label="Marie Antoinette"/>
<link wikidata="Q158229" start="4728" end="4753" title="Maria Carolina of Austria" label="Maria Carolina of Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q188586" start="4782" end="4795" title="Kingdom of Sicily" label="Naples-Sicily"/>
<link wikidata="Q76555" start="4828" end="4837" title="Joseph II, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Joseph II"/>
<link wikidata="Q151321" start="4842" end="4852" title="Leopold II, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Leopold II"/>
<link wikidata="Q131964" start="4958" end="4965" title="Austrian Empire" label="Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q253094" start="4967" end="4974" title="Kingdom of Hungary (1526–1867)" label="Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q42585" start="4979" end="4986" title="Kingdom of Bohemia" label="Bohemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q165040" start="5118" end="5123" title="Duchy of Parma and Piacenza" label="Parma"/>
<link wikidata="Q252580" start="5140" end="5146" title="Duchy of Modena and Reggio" label="Modena"/>
<link wikidata="Q84192" start="5198" end="5219" title="Maximilian I of Mexico" label="Maximilian of Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q890052" start="5225" end="5242" title="Emperor of Mexico" label="Emperor of Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q43063" start="5264" end="5299" title="Archduke Franz Ferdinand of Austria" label="Archduke Franz Ferdinand of Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370385" start="5306" end="5322" title="heir presumptive" label="heir presumptive"/>
<link wikidata="Q28513" start="5330" end="5346" title="Austria-Hungary" label="Austro-Hungarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q210761" start="5368" end="5387" title="morganatic marriage" label="morganatic marriage"/>
<link wikidata="Q153099" start="5402" end="5415" title="Sophie, Duchess of Hohenberg" label="Sophie Chotek"/>
<link wikidata="Q1623645" start="5449" end="5467" title="House of Hohenberg" label="House of Hohenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q76343" start="5626" end="5643" title="Otto von Habsburg" label="Otto von Habsburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q84470" start="5691" end="5706" title="Archduke Otto Francis of Austria" label="younger brother"/>
<link wikidata="Q40898" start="5793" end="5798" title="Nancy, France" label="Nancy"/>
<link wikidata="Q77335" start="5883" end="5916" title="Princess Regina of Saxe-Meiningen" label="Princess Regina of Saxe-Meiningen"/>
<link wikidata="Q347275" start="6219" end="6227" title="Adalbert, Duke of Lorraine" label="Adalbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q155019" start="6237" end="6251" title="Upper Lorraine" label="Upper Lorraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q704183" start="6263" end="6287" title="Gérard, Duke of Lorraine" label="Gérard, Duke of Lorraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q700593" start="6303" end="6325" title="Theodoric II, Duke of Lorraine" label="Theodoric (Thierry) II"/>
<link wikidata="Q252024" start="6340" end="6347" title="Simon I, Duke of Lorraine" label="Simon I"/>
<link wikidata="Q700607" start="6363" end="6373" title="Matthias I, Duke of Lorraine" label="Matthias I"/>
<link wikidata="Q663023" start="6389" end="6397" title="Simon II, Duke of Lorraine" label="Simon II"/>
<link wikidata="Q178007" start="6413" end="6424" title="Frederick I, Duke of Lorraine" label="Frederick I"/>
<link wikidata="Q571529" start="6437" end="6449" title="Frederick II, Duke of Lorraine" label="Frederick II"/>
<link wikidata="Q571564" start="6465" end="6475" title="Theobald I, Duke of Lorraine" label="Theobald I"/>
<link wikidata="Q571439" start="6491" end="6502" title="Matthias II, Duke of Lorraine" label="Matthias II"/>
<link wikidata="Q574017" start="6518" end="6531" title="Frederick III, Duke of Lorraine" label="Frederick III"/>
<link wikidata="Q571525" start="6547" end="6558" title="Theobald II, Duke of Lorraine" label="Theobald II"/>
<link wikidata="Q562051" start="6574" end="6586" title="Frederick IV, Duke of Lorraine" label="Frederick IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q571559" start="6602" end="6609" title="Rudolph, Duke of Lorraine" label="Rudolph"/>
<link wikidata="Q27759" start="6639" end="6654" title="Battle of Crécy" label="Battle of Crécy"/>
<link wikidata="Q562106" start="6657" end="6663" title="John I, Duke of Lorraine" label="John I"/>
<link wikidata="Q663073" start="6679" end="6689" title="Charles II, Duke of Lorraine" label="Charles II"/>
<link wikidata="Q237263" start="6761" end="6790" title="Isabella, Duchess of Lorraine" label="Isabella, Duchess of Lorraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q170353" start="6830" end="6843" title="René of Anjou" label="René of Anjou"/>
<link wikidata="Q721244" start="6875" end="6882" title="John II, Duke of Lorraine" label="John II"/>
<link wikidata="Q704267" start="6909" end="6919" title="Nicholas I, Duke of Lorraine" label="Nicholas I"/>
<link wikidata="Q269932" start="7016" end="7023" title="Yolande, Duchess of Lorraine" label="Yolande"/>
<link wikidata="Q562056" start="7113" end="7145" title="Frederick II, Count of Vaudémont" label="Frederick II, Count of Vaudémont"/>
<link wikidata="Q562106" start="7182" end="7188" title="John I, Duke of Lorraine" label="John I"/>
<link wikidata="Q506354" start="7244" end="7275" title="Frederick I, Count of Vaudémont" label="Frederick I, Count of Vaudémont"/>
<link wikidata="Q562137" start="7289" end="7316" title="Antoine, Count of Vaudémont" label="Antoine, Count of Vaudémont"/>
<link wikidata="Q562056" start="7336" end="7368" title="Frederick II, Count of Vaudémont" label="Frederick II, Count of Vaudémont"/>
<link wikidata="Q441416" start="7456" end="7481" title="René II, Duke of Lorraine" label="René II, Duke of Lorraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q590487" start="7497" end="7504" title="Antoine, Duke of Lorraine" label="Antoine"/>
<link wikidata="Q525683" start="7520" end="7529" title="Francis I, Duke of Lorraine" label="Francis I"/>
<link wikidata="Q505040" start="7542" end="7553" title="Charles III, Duke of Lorraine" label="Charles III"/>
<link wikidata="Q233821" start="7580" end="7600" title="Christina of Denmark" label="Christina of Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q704178" start="7644" end="7656" title="Henry II, Duke of Lorraine" label="Henry II (I)"/>
<link wikidata="Q267704" start="7755" end="7761" title="Nicole, Duchess of Lorraine" label="Nicole"/>
<link wikidata="Q2601958" start="7780" end="7786" title="Claude Françoise de Lorraine" label="Claude"/>
<link wikidata="Q205797" start="7805" end="7815" title="Francis II, Duke of Lorraine" label="Francis II"/>
<link wikidata="Q505101" start="7898" end="7926" title="Charles IV, Duke of Lorraine" label="Charles IV, Duke of Lorraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q701583" start="7995" end="8025" title="Nicholas Francis, Duke of Lorraine" label="Nicholas Francis (Nicholas II)"/>
<link wikidata="Q156949" start="8094" end="8103" title="Charles V, Duke of Lorraine" label="Charles V"/>
<link wikidata="Q319954" start="8145" end="8152" title="Leopold, Duke of Lorraine" label="Leopold"/>
<link wikidata="Q151075" start="8168" end="8207" title="Francis I, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Francis (III) Stephen, Duke of Lorraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q181765" start="8223" end="8241" title="Holy Roman Emperor" label="Holy Roman Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q76555" start="8305" end="8334" title="Joseph II, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Joseph II, Holy Roman Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q151321" start="8362" end="8392" title="Leopold II, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Leopold II, Holy Roman Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q130834" start="8420" end="8430" title="Francis II, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Francis II"/>
<link wikidata="Q181765" start="8449" end="8467" title="Holy Roman Emperor" label="Holy Roman Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q166877" start="8479" end="8497" title="Emperor of Austria" label="Emperor of Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q183579" start="8509" end="8524" title="Ferdinand I of Austria" label="Ferdinand I (V)"/>
<link wikidata="Q166877" start="8526" end="8544" title="Emperor of Austria" label="Emperor of Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q51056" start="8617" end="8642" title="Franz Joseph I of Austria" label="Franz Joseph I of Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q156659" start="8677" end="8707" title="Archduke Franz Karl of Austria" label="Archduke Franz Karl of Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q152923" start="8776" end="8807" title="Rudolf, Crown Prince of Austria" label="Rudolf, Crown Prince of Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q51068" start="8883" end="8892" title="Charles I of Austria" label="Charles I"/>
<link wikidata="Q84470" start="8901" end="8922" title="Archduke Otto Francis of Austria" label="Archduke Otto Francis"/>
<link wikidata="Q78519" start="8935" end="8955" title="Archduke Karl Ludwig of Austria" label="Archduke Karl Ludwig"/>
<link wikidata="Q51068" start="8994" end="9039" title="Charles I of Austria" label="Blessed Charles of Austria (Charles I and IV)"/>
<link wikidata="Q76343" start="9097" end="9114" title="Otto von Habsburg" label="Otto von Habsburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q78515" start="9128" end="9145" title="Karl von Habsburg" label="Karl von Habsburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1032270" start="9173" end="9204" title="Ferdinand Zvonimir von Habsburg" label="Ferdinand Zvonimir von Habsburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q704183" start="9436" end="9460" title="Gerard, Duke of Lorraine" label="Gerard, Duke of Lorraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q700593" start="9474" end="9504" title="Theodoric II, Duke of Lorraine" label="Theodoric II, Duke of Lorraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q252024" start="9517" end="9542" title="Simon I, Duke of Lorraine" label="Simon I, Duke of Lorraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q700607" start="9558" end="9586" title="Matthias I, Duke of Lorraine" label="Matthias I, Duke of Lorraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q663023" start="9603" end="9629" title="Simon II, Duke of Lorraine" label="Simon II, Duke of Lorraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q178007" start="9646" end="9675" title="Frederick I, Duke of Lorraine" label="Frederick I, Duke of Lorraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q571529" start="9693" end="9723" title="Frederick II, Duke of Lorraine" label="Frederick II, Duke of Lorraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q571564" start="9742" end="9770" title="Theobald I, Duke of Lorraine" label="Theobald I, Duke of Lorraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q571439" start="9789" end="9818" title="Matthias II, Duke of Lorraine" label="Matthias II, Duke of Lorraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q574017" start="9838" end="9869" title="Frederick III, Duke of Lorraine" label="Frederick III, Duke of Lorraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q571525" start="9890" end="9919" title="Theobald II, Duke of Lorraine" label="Theobald II, Duke of Lorraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q562051" start="9941" end="9971" title="Frederick IV, Duke of Lorraine" label="Frederick IV, Duke of Lorraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q571559" start="9994" end="10019" title="Rudolph, Duke of Lorraine" label="Rudolph, Duke of Lorraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q562106" start="10043" end="10067" title="John I, Duke of Lorraine" label="John I, Duke of Lorraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q663073" start="10092" end="10120" title="Charles II, Duke of Lorraine" label="Charles II, Duke of Lorraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q506354" start="10145" end="10176" title="Frederick I, Count of Vaudémont" label="Frederick I, Count of Vaudémont"/>
<link wikidata="Q562137" start="10202" end="10229" title="Antoine, Count of Vaudémont" label="Anthony, Count of Vaudémont"/>
<link wikidata="Q562056" start="10256" end="10288" title="Frederick II, Count of Vaudémont" label="Frederick II, Count of Vaudémont"/>
<link wikidata="Q441416" start="10316" end="10341" title="René II, Duke of Lorraine" label="René II, Duke of Lorraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q590487" start="10370" end="10395" title="Antoine, Duke of Lorraine" label="Anthony, Duke of Lorraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q525683" start="10425" end="10452" title="Francis I, Duke of Lorraine" label="Francis I, Duke of Lorraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q505040" start="10483" end="10512" title="Charles III, Duke of Lorraine" label="Charles III, Duke of Lorraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q704178" start="10544" end="10570" title="Henry II, Duke of Lorraine" label="Henry II, Duke of Lorraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q321546" start="10602" end="10653" title="Charles of Lorraine (bishop of Metz and Strasbourg)" label="Charles of Lorraine (bishop of Metz and Strasbourg)"/>
<link wikidata="Q205797" start="10685" end="10713" title="Francis II, Duke of Lorraine" label="Francis II, Duke of Lorraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q505101" start="10746" end="10774" title="Charles IV, Duke of Lorraine" label="Charles IV, Duke of Lorraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2351059" start="10814" end="10847" title="Charles Henri, Prince of Commercy" label="Charles Henry, Prince of Commercy"/>
<link wikidata="Q473543" start="10894" end="10929" title="Charles Thomas, Prince of Vaudémont" label="Charles Thomas, Prince of Vaudémont"/>
<link wikidata="Q701583" start="10968" end="11002" title="Nicholas Francis, Duke of Lorraine" label="Nicholas Francis, Duke of Lorraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q156949" start="11117" end="11144" title="Charles V, Duke of Lorraine" label="Charles V, Duke of Lorraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q319954" start="11179" end="11204" title="Leopold, Duke of Lorraine" label="Leopold, Duke of Lorraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q29711" start="11240" end="11286" title="Léopold Clément, Hereditary Prince of Lorraine" label="Leopold Clement, Hereditary Prince of Lorraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q151075" start="11322" end="11351" title="Francis I, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Francis I, Holy Roman Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q76555" start="11388" end="11417" title="Joseph II, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Joseph II, Holy Roman Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q700564" start="11454" end="11488" title="Archduke Charles Joseph of Austria (born 1745)" label="Archduke Charles Joseph of Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q151321" start="11525" end="11555" title="Leopold II, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Leopold II, Holy Roman Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q130834" start="11593" end="11623" title="Francis II, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Francis II, Holy Roman Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q183579" start="11662" end="11684" title="Ferdinand I of Austria" label="Ferdinand I of Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q156659" start="11723" end="11758" title="Archduke Franz Karl of Austria" label="Archduke Francis Charles of Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q51056" start="11798" end="11825" title="Franz Joseph I of Austria" label="Francis Joseph I of Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q152923" start="11866" end="11898" title="Rudolf, Crown Prince of Austria" label="Rudolph, Crown Prince of Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q84192" start="11938" end="11960" title="Maximilian I of Mexico" label="Maximilian I of Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q78519" start="12000" end="12033" title="Archduke Karl Ludwig of Austria" label="Archduke Charles Louis of Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q43063" start="12074" end="12111" title="Archduke Franz Ferdinand of Austria" label="Archduke Francis Ferdinand of Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q84470" start="12152" end="12176" title="Archduke Otto of Austria (1865–1906)" label="Archduke Otto of Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q51068" start="12218" end="12238" title="Charles I of Austria" label="Charles I of Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q76343" start="12281" end="12298" title="Otto von Habsburg" label="Otto von Habsburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q78515" start="12342" end="12362" title="Karl von Habsburg" label="Charles von Habsburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1032270" start="12405" end="12423" title="Ferdinand Habsburg (racing driver)" label="Ferdinand Habsburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q112096" start="12465" end="12484" title="Georg von Habsburg" label="George von Habsburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q112108" start="12596" end="12628" title="Robert, Archduke of Austria-Este" label="Robert, Archduke of Austria-Este"/>
<link wikidata="Q379479" start="12672" end="12698" title="Prince Lorenz of Belgium" label="Prince Laurence of Belgium"/>
<link wikidata="Q2071496" start="12741" end="12766" title="Prince Amedeo of Belgium" label="Prince Amadeus of Belgium"/>
<link wikidata="Q78635" start="13303" end="13328" title="Archduke Felix of Austria" label="Archduke Felix of Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q30331247" start="13372" end="13406" title="Carlos Felipe de Habsburgo" label="Archduke Charles Philip of Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q112870" start="13797" end="13830" title="Archduke Carl Ludwig of Austria (1918–2007)" label="Archduke Charles Louis of Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q112866" start="14806" end="14833" title="Archduke Rudolf of Austria (1919–2010)" label="Archduke Rudolph of Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q4785880" start="14990" end="15007" title="Simeon von Habsburg" label="Simeon of Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q78591" start="15218" end="15248" title="Archduke Maximilian of Austria (1895–1952)" label="Archduke Maximilian of Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q78636" start="15596" end="15633" title="Archduke Ferdinand Karl of Austria" label="Archduke Ferdinand Charles of Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q93377" start="15673" end="15705" title="Archduke Ludwig Viktor of Austria" label="Archduke Louis Victor of Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q309605" start="15743" end="15779" title="Ferdinand III, Grand Duke of Tuscany" label="Ferdinand III, Grand Duke of Tuscany"/>
<link wikidata="Q313169" start="15818" end="15851" title="Leopold II, Grand Duke of Tuscany" label="Leopold II, Grand Duke of Tuscany"/>
<link wikidata="Q313167" start="15891" end="15926" title="Ferdinand IV, Grand Duke of Tuscany" label="Ferdinand IV, Grand Duke of Tuscany"/>
<link wikidata="Q78637" start="15967" end="16004" title="Archduke Leopold Ferdinand of Austria" label="Archduke Leopold Ferdinand of Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q78633" start="16045" end="16081" title="Archduke Joseph Ferdinand of Austria" label="Archduke Joseph Ferdinand of Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q670121" start="16183" end="16218" title="Archduke Peter Ferdinand of Austria" label="Archduke Peter Ferdinand of Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q2679087" start="16260" end="16287" title="Archduke Gottfried of Austria" label="Archduke Godfrey of Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q503177" start="16913" end="16949" title="Archduke Karl Salvator of Austria" label="Archduke Charles Salvator of Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q698051" start="16990" end="17026" title="Archduke Leopold Salvator of Austria" label="Archduke Leopold Salvator of Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q16030095" start="17068" end="17094" title="Archduke Rainer of Austria (1895–1930)" label="Archduke Rainer of Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q4785876" start="17136" end="17182" title="Archduke Leopold of Austria, Prince of Tuscany" label="Archduke Leopold of Austria, Prince of Tuscany"/>
<link wikidata="Q369516" start="17224" end="17251" title="Archduke Anton of Austria" label="Archduke Anthony of Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q8561594" start="17383" end="17410" title="Dominic von Habsburg" label="Archduke Dominic of Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1447541" start="17631" end="17684" title="Archduke Franz Josef of Austria, Prince of Tuscany" label="Archduke Francis Joseph of Austria, Prince of Tuscany"/>
<link wikidata="Q570491" start="17726" end="17774" title="Archduke Karl Pius of Austria, Prince of Tuscany" label="Archduke Karl Pius of Austria, Prince of Tuscany"/>
<link wikidata="Q78536" start="17815" end="17851" title="Archduke Franz Salvator of Austria" label="Archduke Francis Salvator of Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q115131" start="17893" end="17937" title="Archduke Franz Karl Salvator of Austria" label="Archduke Francis Charles Salvator of Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q79080" start="17979" end="18014" title="Archduke Hubert Salvator of Austria" label="Archduke Hubert Salvator of Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q55065297" start="19175" end="19209" title="Archduke Ludwig Salvator of Austria" label="Archduke Louis Salvator of Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q657873" start="19249" end="19282" title="Archduke Johann Salvator of Austria" label="Archduke John Salvator of Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q84201" start="19320" end="19353" title="Archduke Charles, Duke of Teschen" label="Archduke Charles, Duke of Teschen"/>
<link wikidata="Q310807" start="19392" end="19424" title="Archduke Albrecht, Duke of Teschen" label="Archduke Albert, Duke of Teschen"/>
<link wikidata="Q447448" start="19463" end="19500" title="Archduke Karl Ferdinand of Austria" label="Archduke Charles Ferdinand of Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q446711" start="19540" end="19575" title="Archduke Friedrich, Duke of Teschen" label="Archduke Frederick, Duke of Teschen"/>
<link wikidata="Q841145" start="19616" end="19656" title="Archduke Albrecht Franz, Duke of Teschen" label="Archduke Albert Francis, Duke of Teschen"/>
<link wikidata="Q78541" start="19696" end="19731" title="Archduke Charles Stephen of Austria" label="Archduke Charles Stephen of Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q79054" start="19772" end="19806" title="Archduke Karl Albrecht of Austria" label="Archduke Charles Albert of Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q78787" start="19847" end="19878" title="Archduke Leo Karl of Austria" label="Archduke Leo Charles of Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q112081" start="19919" end="19946" title="Archduke Wilhelm of Austria" label="Archduke William of Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q78578" start="19986" end="20012" title="Archduke Eugen of Austria" label="Archduke Eugene of Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q78784" start="20051" end="20080" title="Archduke Friedrich of Austria (1821–1847)" label="Archduke Frederick of Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q702090" start="20119" end="20154" title="Archduke Wilhelm Franz of Austria" label="Archduke William Francis of Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q701087" start="20192" end="20229" title="Archduke Alexander Leopold of Austria" label="Archduke Alexander Leopold of Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q319764" start="20267" end="20315" title="Archduke Joseph of Austria (Palatine of Hungary)" label="Archduke Joseph of Austria (Palatine of Hungary)"/>
<link wikidata="Q701103" start="20354" end="20403" title="Archduke Stephen of Austria (Palatine of Hungary)" label="Archduke Stephen of Austria (Palatine of Hungary)"/>
<link wikidata="Q369973" start="20442" end="20476" title="Archduke Joseph Karl of Austria" label="Archduke Joseph Charles of Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q78535" start="20516" end="20551" title="Archduke Joseph August of Austria" label="Archduke Joseph Augustus of Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q944012" start="20592" end="20626" title="Archduke Joseph Francis of Austria" label="Archduke Joseph Francis of Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q727398" start="20668" end="20700" title="Archduke Joseph Árpád of Austria" label="Archduke Joseph Arpad of Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q3124507" start="21283" end="21307" title="Géza von Habsburg" label="Archduke Geza of Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1288562" start="21415" end="21441" title="Eduard Habsburg-Lothringen" label="Archduke Edward of Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1032312" start="21547" end="21583" title="Archduke Ladislaus Philipp of Austria" label="Archduke Ladislaus Philip of Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q595088" start="21621" end="21655" title="Archduke Anton Victor of Austria" label="Archduke Anthony Victor of Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q93427" start="21693" end="21717" title="Archduke John of Austria" label="Archduke John of Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q442756" start="21755" end="21788" title="Archduke Rainer Joseph of Austria" label="Archduke Rainer Joseph of Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q638678" start="21827" end="21860" title="Archduke Leopold Ludwig of Austria" label="Archduke Leopold Louis of Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q86974" start="21899" end="21925" title="Archduke Ernest of Austria (1824–1899)" label="Archduke Ernest of Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q86987" start="21964" end="21993" title="Archduke Sigismund of Austria (1826–1891)" label="Archduke Sigismund of Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q111971" start="22032" end="22068" title="Archduke Rainer Ferdinand of Austria" label="Archduke Rainer Ferdinand of Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q85296" start="22107" end="22140" title="Archduke Heinrich Anton of Austria" label="Archduke Henry Anthony of Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q111975" start="22178" end="22203" title="Archduke Louis of Austria" label="Archduke Louis of Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q93373" start="22241" end="22268" title="Archduke Rudolf of Austria" label="Archduke Rudolph of Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q328233" start="22305" end="22348" title="Ferdinand Karl, Archduke of Austria-Este" label="Ferdinand Charles, Archduke of Austria-Este"/>
<link wikidata="Q502919" start="22386" end="22412" title="Francis IV, Duke of Modena" label="Francis IV, Duke of Modena"/>
<link wikidata="Q434061" start="22451" end="22476" title="Francis V, Duke of Modena" label="Francis V, Duke of Modena"/>
<link wikidata="Q552625" start="22515" end="22564" title="Archduke Ferdinand Karl Viktor of Austria-Este" label="Archduke Ferdinand Charles Victor of Austria-Este"/>
<link wikidata="Q78542" start="22602" end="22651" title="Archduke Ferdinand Karl Joseph of Austria-Este" label="Archduke Ferdinand Charles Joseph of Austria-Este"/>
<link wikidata="Q78549" start="22689" end="22724" title="Archduke Maximilian of Austria-Este" label="Archduke Maximilian of Austria-Este"/>
<link wikidata="Q697660" start="22762" end="22802" title="Archduke Karl Ambrosius of Austria-Este" label="Archduke Charles Ambrose of Austria-Este"/>
<link wikidata="Q93362" start="22839" end="22877" title="Archduke Maximilian Francis of Austria" label="Archduke Maximilian Francis of Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q158232" start="22913" end="22949" title="Prince Charles Alexander of Lorraine" label="Prince Charles Alexander of Lorraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q651883" start="22984" end="23010" title="Charles Joseph of Lorraine" label="Charles Joseph of Lorraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1372471" start="23140" end="23165" title="Nicolas, Duke of Mercœur" label="Nicholas, Duke of Mercœur"/>
<link wikidata="Q592965" start="23196" end="23228" title="Philippe Emmanuel, Duke of Mercœur" label="Philip Emmanuel, Duke of Mercœur"/>
<link wikidata="Q517843" start="23268" end="23300" title="Charles de Lorraine de Vaudémont" label="Charles de Lorraine de Vaudémont"/>
<link wikidata="Q3132312" start="23402" end="23426" title="Henri, Count of Chaligny" label="Henry, Count of Chaligny"/>
<link wikidata="Q3591417" start="23684" end="23700" title="Eric of Lorraine" label="Eric of Lorraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q366025" start="23749" end="23770" title="Claude, Duke of Guise" label="Claude, Duke of Guise"/>
<link wikidata="Q1336538" start="23798" end="23812" title="House of Guise" label="House of Guise"/>
<link wikidata="Q28495" start="23831" end="23853" title="Francis, Duke of Guise" label="Francis, Duke of Guise"/>
<link wikidata="Q313700" start="23884" end="23906" title="Henry I, Duke of Guise" label="Henry I, Duke of Guise"/>
<link wikidata="Q1965530" start="23938" end="23960" title="Charles, Duke of Guise" label="Charles, Duke of Guise"/>
<link wikidata="Q732579" start="24054" end="24077" title="Henry II, Duke of Guise" label="Henry II, Duke of Guise"/>
<link wikidata="Q472308" start="24173" end="24195" title="Louis, Duke of Joyeuse" label="Louis, Duke of Joyeuse"/>
<link wikidata="Q2297336" start="24229" end="24256" title="Louis Joseph, Duke of Guise" label="Louis Joseph, Duke of Guise"/>
<link wikidata="Q2134709" start="24291" end="24320" title="François Joseph, Duke of Guise" label="Francis Joseph, Duke of Guise"/>
<link wikidata="Q284941" start="24400" end="24428" title="Louis III, Cardinal of Guise" label="Louis III, Cardinal of Guise"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747977" start="24460" end="24485" title="Claude, Duke of Chevreuse" label="Claude, Duke of Chevreuse"/>
<link wikidata="Q524562" start="24575" end="24599" title="Charles, Duke of Mayenne" label="Charles, Duke of Mayenne"/>
<link wikidata="Q2209392" start="24631" end="24665" title="Henry of Lorraine, Duke of Mayenne" label="Henry of Lorraine, Duke of Mayenne"/>
<link wikidata="Q510693" start="24776" end="24815" title="Louis II de Lorraine, cardinal de Guise" label="Louis II of Lorraine, Cardinal of Guise"/>
<link wikidata="Q712264" start="24845" end="24874" title="Charles, Cardinal of Lorraine" label="Charles, Cardinal of Lorraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q784784" start="24904" end="24926" title="Claude, Duke of Aumale" label="Claude, Duke of Aumale"/>
<link wikidata="Q2548200" start="24957" end="24980" title="Charles, Duke of Aumale" label="Charles, Duke of Aumale"/>
<link wikidata="Q2978295" start="25011" end="25047" title="Claude de Lorraine, chevalier d&amp;#x27;Aumale" label="Claude of Lorraine, knight of Aumale"/>
<link wikidata="Q898203" start="25077" end="25115" title="Louis I de Lorraine, Cardinal de Guise" label="Louis I of Lorraine, Cardinal of Guise"/>
<link wikidata="Q115949894" start="25145" end="25177" title="François de Lorraine, Grand Prior" label="Francis of Lorraine, Grand Prior"/>
<link wikidata="Q2297325" start="25207" end="25245" title="René II de Lorraine, Marquis d&amp;#x27;Elbeuf" label="René II of Lorraine, Marquis of Elbeuf"/>
<link wikidata="Q282712" start="25276" end="25301" title="Charles I, Duke of Elbeuf" label="Charles I, Duke of Elbeuf"/>
<link wikidata="Q2021651" start="25333" end="25359" title="Charles II, Duke of Elbeuf" label="Charles II, Duke of Elbeuf"/>
<link wikidata="Q1281245" start="25392" end="25419" title="Charles III, Duke of Elbeuf" label="Charles III, Duke of Elbeuf"/>
<link wikidata="Q6973621" start="25525" end="25546" title="Henri, Duke of Elbeuf" label="Henry, Duke of Elbeuf"/>
<link wikidata="Q1279152" start="25773" end="25805" title="Emmanuel Maurice, Duke of Elbeuf" label="Emmanuel Maurice, Duke of Elbeuf"/>
<link wikidata="Q3750181" start="25896" end="25928" title="François Louis, Count of Harcourt" label="Francis Louis, Count of Harcourt"/>
<link wikidata="Q3611162" start="25962" end="25995" title="Alphonse Henri, Count of Harcourt" label="Alphonse Henri, Count of Harcourt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1279599" start="26320" end="26354" title="François Marie, Prince of Lillebonne" label="Francis-Mary, Prince of Lillebonne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1200579" start="26388" end="26415" title="Charles, Prince of Commercy" label="Charles, Prince of Commercy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1280318" start="26502" end="26526" title="Henri, Count of Harcourt" label="Henry, Count of Harcourt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1280342" start="26559" end="26583" title="Louis, Count of Armagnac" label="Louis, Count of Armagnac"/>
<link wikidata="Q644456" start="26617" end="26640" title="Henri, Count of Brionne" label="Henry, Count of Brionne"/>
<link wikidata="Q3840295" start="26675" end="26699" title="Louis, Prince of Lambesc" label="Louis, Prince of Lambesc"/>
<link wikidata="Q3840294" start="26735" end="26759" title="Louis, Prince of Brionne" label="Louis, Prince of Brionne"/>
<link wikidata="Q2958020" start="26796" end="26829" title="Charles Eugene, Prince of Lambesc" label="Charles Eugene, Prince of Lambesc"/>
<link wikidata="Q125725212" start="26866" end="26908" title="Joseph Louis, Prince of Lorraine-Vaudémont" label="Joseph Louis, Prince of Lorraine-Vaudémont"/>
<link wikidata="Q3659993" start="27175" end="27213" title="Charles de Lorraine, Count of Armagnac" label="Charles of Lorraine, Count of Armagnac"/>
<link wikidata="Q916954" start="27246" end="27272" title="Philippe, Chevalier de Lorraine" label="Philip, Knight of Lorraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q924947" start="27470" end="27494" title="Charles, Count of Marsan" label="Charles, Count of Marsan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3659548" start="27528" end="27558" title="Charles Louis, Count of Marsan" label="Charles Louis, Count of Marsan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5526700" start="27593" end="27616" title="Gaston, Count of Marsan" label="Gaston, Count of Marsan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5026607" start="27651" end="27676" title="Camille, Prince of Marsan" label="Camille, Prince of Marsan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1563911" start="27783" end="27809" title="Jean, Cardinal of Lorraine" label="John, Cardinal of Lorraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1993565" start="27838" end="27863" title="Louis, Count of Vaudémont" label="Louis, Count of Vaudémont"/>
<link wikidata="Q3750872" start="27892" end="27928" title="François de Lorraine" label="Francis of Lorraine, Lord of Lambesc"/>
<link wikidata="Q455277" start="28027" end="28054" title="Henri of Lorraine-Vaudémont" label="Henry of Lorraine-Vaudémont"/>
<link wikidata="Q3089224" start="28100" end="28123" title="Jean, Count of Harcourt" label="John, Count of Harcourt"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="655757" wikidata="Q468072" url="?curid=655757" title="Marlain Angelides">
<text>Marlain Angelides (Greek: Μαρλέν Αγγελίδου) is a Cypriot singer. She was a member of the Greek girl group Hi-5, and represented Cyprus in the Eurovision Song Contest 1999 with the &quot;Tha &#x27;Ne Erotas&quot; song. Angelidou, her mother, and her siblings all have dual nationality (Greek Cypriot and British).

== Life ==
Marlain Angelides was born in Nicosia, Cyprus on 6 September 1978 to a Cypriot-born father of mainland Greek origin and a mother of half-Scottish and half-Cypriot descent. She emigrated to Venezuela at the age of 5, learning fluent Spanish (which she has since forgotten). She then moved to Belgium, and later back to Cyprus, where she lived during her teenage years on her father&#x27;s request to return home. Angelidou is currently based in New York, although her mother, father, and brother remain in Cyprus.

Marlain Angelides completed a BS in Biochemistry with Management at Imperial College London before studying at Boston Conservatory in the US. She also obtained a Postgraduate Diploma in Musical Theatre from London&#x27;s Royal Academy of Music.

== Career ==
She made her professional debut as the lead in the Stavros Sideras musical Pygmalion, The True Story (Aphrodite/Galatea) opposite Peter Polycarpou. Her professional career started in 1999–2000 with the production of Aznavour&#x27;s Lautrec in London&#x27;s West End. During 2000–2002 she starred in lead roles in musicals such as Hair (Dionne), and Elegies (Judith), toured the UK with Living La Vida Loca (Fantasia), Legends of Swing (singing Ella Fitzgerald songs) and toured Europe with Flower Power Musical Story (Lainer) and Broadway Musical Gala (Principal Soloist) where she had the opportunity to sing solo in front of 11,000 at La Scala in Milan. At the same time, she appeared in performances at the Berklee Performance Centre, in Boston, USA, Festival Rose D’Or in Juan-les-Pins, France, some charity events in Basel, Switzerland, and Dublin, Ireland and in concerts with the Cyprus State Orchestra as a soloist.

At the end of 2002, at the BBC Radio 2 Voice of Musical Theatre International Competition in Cardiff, Wales, she was the semi-final winner and one of only six finalists.

===Eurovision===
Angelides has taken part in a number of Cypriot pre-selections to the Eurovision Song Contest, namely in 1998, 1999, 2008, and 2009 and was successful in winning and representing Cyprus in 1999.

In her first attempt in 1998, she came second with the song &quot;Fterougisma&quot;, which was performed by Marlain and Alex Panayi.

In 1999, she was more successful with her song &quot;Tha &#x27;Ne Erotas&quot; winning the Cypriot pre-selection event and represented Cyprus in the Eurovision Song Contest 1999.

In 2008, Angelides participated in the Cypriot pre-selection for the third time, this time with the song &quot;Rejection (Set Me Free)&quot;, which placed third in the pre-selection.

Her last participation in the Cypriot pre-selection for the Eurovision was in 2009 when her hard rock titled &quot;Mr Do Right One Night Stand&quot; performed by Marlain and The Diesel Sisters placed seventh.

===In Hi-5===

In 2003, she took part in the Greek television contest &quot;Pop Stars&quot;, winning one of the five spots in a teen girl&#x27;s group that was to be formed on the basis of the show&#x27;s outcome. The group was named Hi-5 and released a self-titled album in 2003 that went gold in Greece. The band has had hit songs such as &quot;Xero Ti Zitao&quot;, &quot;To Tyhero Asteri&quot;, and &quot;Yennithika Xana&quot;. Hi-5 released three studio albums, the self-titled &quot;Hi-5 and&quot; &quot;Mia Nichta San ki Afti&quot; both in 2003 and &quot;Makria Apo Afti ti Gi&quot; in 2004. The group parted quietly off-screen in 2005 on good terms after two years together to pursue solo careers.

===After Hi-5===
From 2005 to 2008, Marlain then continued singing rock with various bands in clubs and festivals around Greece, namely Volume (Christophoros Chrokides, Stephanos Demetriou, Dimitris Frosinis) and Dickens’ Zoo. With N.U.R.V. she played the popular European Music Day at Syntagma Square in Athens and the River Party in Kastoria.

She also played the leading role in the West End Athens version of the musical &quot;Saturday Night Fever&quot; (Stephanie Mangano).

She has collaborated with major artists in Greece, namely Greek rock star Vassilis Papakonstantinou in his concert tours of Greece and is currently touring Greece, Cyprus, USA, Europe and Africa with pop artist Michalis Hadzigiannis.

Being a fan of cartoons, Marlain also lends her voice regularly to cartoon voice-over translations for Disney and DreamWorks playing a variety of characters from Mulan in Mulan II, to Lady Bug in James and the Giant Peach, the Soul Singer in Kronk&#x27;s New Groove, Rita the Dog in Oliver &amp; Company, the country-western singer Dixie dubbing the voice of Reba McEntire in Fox and the Hound 2, and many others.

She created a collection of songs entitled &quot;Bedroom Rock.&quot; Her first performance as a solo act is live in various clubs at the moment in Athens.

Her CD single &quot;Being Blonde Today&quot; was released in January 2011.

==References==
==External links==
* Official website</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q468072" start="0" end="17" title="Marlain Angelides" label="Marlain Angelides"/>
<link wikidata="Q240170" start="106" end="110" title="Hi-5 (Greek group)" label="Hi-5"/>
<link wikidata="Q5200523" start="128" end="170" title="Cyprus in the Eurovision Song Contest 1999" label="Cyprus in the Eurovision Song Contest 1999"/>
<link wikidata="Q5200523" start="186" end="205" title="Tha &amp;#x27;Ne Erotas" label="Tha &amp;#x27;Ne Erotas"/>
<link wikidata="Q3856" start="355" end="362" title="Nicosia" label="Nicosia"/>
<link wikidata="Q229" start="364" end="370" title="Cyprus" label="Cyprus"/>
<link wikidata="Q229" start="396" end="408" title="Cyprus" label="Cypriot-born"/>
<link wikidata="Q132203" start="428" end="440" title="Greek diaspora" label="Greek origin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2341965" start="480" end="487" title="Cypriot people" label="Cypriot"/>
<link wikidata="Q717" start="514" end="523" title="Venezuela" label="Venezuela"/>
<link wikidata="Q31" start="616" end="623" title="Belgium" label="Belgium"/>
<link wikidata="Q189022" start="907" end="930" title="Imperial College London" label="Imperial College London"/>
<link wikidata="Q2303621" start="950" end="969" title="Boston Conservatory" label="Boston Conservatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144673" start="1060" end="1082" title="Royal Academy of Music" label="Royal Academy of Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q7176418" start="1228" end="1244" title="Peter Polycarpou" label="Peter Polycarpou"/>
<link wikidata="Q1785" start="1314" end="1322" title="Charles Aznavour" label="Aznavour"/>
<link wikidata="Q1359589" start="1355" end="1363" title="West End theatre" label="West End"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165499" start="1428" end="1432" title="Hair (musical)" label="Hair"/>
<link wikidata="Q1768" start="1542" end="1557" title="Ella Fitzgerald" label="Ella Fitzgerald"/>
<link wikidata="Q5471" start="1735" end="1743" title="La Scala" label="La Scala"/>
<link wikidata="Q490" start="1747" end="1752" title="Milan" label="Milan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4892165" start="1808" end="1834" title="Berklee Performance Center" label="Berklee Performance Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q684965" start="1852" end="1870" title="Festival Rose d&amp;#x27;Or" label="Festival Rose D’Or"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026520" start="1874" end="1887" title="Juan-les-Pins" label="Juan-les-Pins"/>
<link wikidata="Q78" start="1920" end="1925" title="Basel" label="Basel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1761" start="1944" end="1950" title="Dublin" label="Dublin"/>
<link wikidata="Q795578" start="2050" end="2061" title="BBC Radio 2" label="BBC Radio 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q10690" start="2116" end="2123" title="Cardiff" label="Cardiff"/>
<link wikidata="Q25" start="2125" end="2130" title="Wales" label="Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q276" start="2281" end="2304" title="Eurovision Song Contest" label="Eurovision Song Contest"/>
<link wikidata="Q2622616" start="2527" end="2538" title="Alex Panayi" label="Alex Panayi"/>
<link wikidata="Q11117" start="2690" end="2718" title="Eurovision Song Contest 1999" label="Eurovision Song Contest 1999"/>
<link wikidata="Q569376" start="3191" end="3200" title="Pop Stars" label="Pop Stars"/>
<link wikidata="Q240170" start="3349" end="3353" title="Hi-5 (Greek band)" label="Hi-5"/>
<link wikidata="Q241365" start="3405" end="3409" title="gold album" label="gold"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137997" start="4107" end="4122" title="Syntagma Square" label="Syntagma Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q206954" start="4156" end="4164" title="Kastoria" label="Kastoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q47654" start="4252" end="4272" title="Saturday Night Fever" label="Saturday Night Fever"/>
<link wikidata="Q3566969" start="4375" end="4400" title="Vasilis Papakonstantinou" label="Vassilis Papakonstantinou"/>
<link wikidata="Q720993" start="4512" end="4533" title="Michalis Hatzigiannis" label="Michalis Hadzigiannis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7414" start="4639" end="4645" title="Disney" label="Disney"/>
<link wikidata="Q500088" start="4650" end="4660" title="DreamWorks Animation" label="DreamWorks"/>
<link wikidata="Q837847" start="4707" end="4715" title="Mulan II" label="Mulan II"/>
<link wikidata="Q937486" start="4778" end="4801" title="Kronk&amp;#x27;s New Groove" label="Kronk&amp;#x27;s New Groove"/>
<link wikidata="Q216929" start="4819" end="4839" title="Oliver &amp;amp; Company" label="Oliver &amp;amp; Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q40302" start="4912" end="4931" title="The Fox and the Hound" label="Fox and the Hound 2"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="655758" wikidata="Q7376089" url="?curid=655758" title="Rubicon River (New Zealand)">
<text>The Rubicon River is a minor river in the South Island of New Zealand. It starts on the southeast flanks of the Torlesse Range and feeds into the Kowai River.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q120755" start="42" end="54" title="South Island" label="South Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q664" start="58" end="69" title="New Zealand" label="New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="112" end="126" title="Torlesse Range" label="Torlesse Range"/>
<link wikidata="Q6434918" start="146" end="157" title="Kowai River" label="Kowai River"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="655759" wikidata="Q858449" url="?curid=655759" title="Carina">
<text>Carina may refer to:
==Places==

=== Australia ===
* Carina, Queensland, a suburb in Brisbane
* Carina Heights, Queensland, a suburb in Brisbane
* Carina, Victoria, a locality in Mildura

=== Serbia ===
* Carina, Osečina, a village in the Kolubara District

==People==
* Carina (name), a given name (including a list of people with the name)
* Carina, a pet form of the given name Cara
* Carina, a Latinization of Cairenn, said to be the mother of Niall of the Nine Hostages

== Anatomy ==
* Keel (bird anatomy), or carina, an extension of the sternum in some birds
* Carina of trachea, the point at which the trachea branches to form the two mainstem bronchi
* Carinae, in dinosaur anatomy, enameled ridges on the cutting edges of the teeth

==Astronomy==
* Carina (Chinese astronomy)
* Carina (constellation), a constellation
* Carina Dwarf, a dwarf galaxy orbiting the Milky Way
* Carina Nebula (NGC 3372)

==Arts, entertainment, and media==
* &quot;Carina&quot; (Corrado Lojacono song), a 1958 song covered by Sophia Loren, Dean Martin and Cliff Richard
* &quot;Carina&quot; (Larz-Kristerz song), a 2008 song by Swedish band Larz-Kristerz
* Carina Press, the digital-only publishing house from Harlequin Enterprises
* Carina (Marvel Cinematic Universe), a character in the Marvel Cinematic Universe

==Storms==
* Cyclone Carina, in the 2005–2006 South-West Indian Ocean cyclone season
* Severe Tropical Storm Talim (2012), in the 2012 Pacific typhoon season, known in the Philippines as Severe Tropical Storm Carina
* Typhoon Nida (2016), a 2016 Pacific typhoon known as Severe Tropical Storm Carina in the Philippines
* Typhoon Gaemi, a 2024 Pacific typhoon that became a Category 4-equivalent typhoon, known as Super Typhoon Carina in the Philippines

==Other uses==
* Carina, a Latin word for the keel of a ship or for its entire hull
* Carina Rugby League Football Club
* Toyota Carina, an automobile
* USS &quot;Carina&quot; (AK-74), a 1942 United States Navy cargo ship used in World War II
* Sailing yacht Carina, which disappeared off the Dublin coast in 1944
* Sailing yacht Carina II, which won the 1955 and 1957 Fastnet Races skippered by USA sailor Richard Nye

==See also==
*Cairina, a genus of duck
*Cariña, a variant of Carib language
*Carinae, an area of ancient Rome
*Carine (disambiguation)
*Karina (disambiguation)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q858449" start="0" end="6" title="Carina" label="Carina"/>
<link wikidata="Q5039589" start="53" end="71" title="Carina, Queensland" label="Carina, Queensland"/>
<link wikidata="Q5039596" start="96" end="122" title="Carina Heights, Queensland" label="Carina Heights, Queensland"/>
<link wikidata="Q5039588" start="147" end="163" title="Carina, Victoria" label="Carina, Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q2102250" start="205" end="220" title="Carina, Osečina" label="Carina, Osečina"/>
<link wikidata="Q362403" start="271" end="284" title="Carina (name)" label="Carina (name)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1035258" start="381" end="385" title="Cara (given name)" label="Cara"/>
<link wikidata="Q645857" start="448" end="474" title="Niall of the Nine Hostages" label="Niall of the Nine Hostages"/>
<link wikidata="Q641692" start="492" end="511" title="Keel (bird anatomy)" label="Keel (bird anatomy)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2298243" start="568" end="585" title="Carina of trachea" label="Carina of trachea"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="674" end="690" title="Glossary of dinosaur anatomy#carinae" label="dinosaur anatomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5039587" start="759" end="785" title="Carina (Chinese astronomy)" label="Carina (Chinese astronomy)"/>
<link wikidata="Q10470" start="788" end="810" title="Carina (constellation)" label="Carina (constellation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q35821" start="830" end="842" title="Carina Dwarf" label="Carina Dwarf"/>
<link wikidata="Q50042" start="884" end="897" title="Carina Nebula" label="Carina Nebula"/>
<link wikidata="Q28452672" start="947" end="989" title="Carina (Corrado Lojacono song)" label="&amp;quot;Carina&amp;quot; (Corrado Lojacono song)"/>
<link wikidata="Q10442855" start="1060" end="1099" title="Carina (Larz-Kristerz song)" label="&amp;quot;Carina&amp;quot; (Larz-Kristerz song)"/>
<link wikidata="Q612938" start="1145" end="1157" title="Carina Press" label="Carina Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q112122179" start="1222" end="1256" title="Carina (Marvel Cinematic Universe)" label="Carina (Marvel Cinematic Universe)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4605539" start="1317" end="1331" title="Cyclone Carina" label="Cyclone Carina"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1391" end="1425" title="2012 Pacific typhoon season#Severe Tropical Storm Talim (Carina)" label="Severe Tropical Storm Talim (2012)"/>
<link wikidata="Q26196907" start="1522" end="1541" title="Typhoon Nida (2016)" label="Typhoon Nida (2016)"/>
<link wikidata="Q127608821" start="1625" end="1638" title="Typhoon Gaemi" label="Typhoon Gaemi"/>
<link wikidata="Q582062" start="1804" end="1808" title="keel" label="keel"/>
<link wikidata="Q18754830" start="1844" end="1877" title="Carina Rugby League Football Club" label="Carina Rugby League Football Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068992" start="1880" end="1893" title="Toyota Carina" label="Toyota Carina"/>
<link wikidata="Q7868082" start="1911" end="1941" title="USS Carina (AK-74)" label="USS &amp;quot;Carina&amp;quot; (AK-74)"/>
<link wikidata="Q116007037" start="2017" end="2023" title="Carina (yacht)" label="Carina"/>
<link wikidata="Q5273240" start="2165" end="2176" title="Dick Nye" label="Richard Nye"/>
<link wikidata="Q242851" start="2192" end="2199" title="Cairina" label="Cairina"/>
<link wikidata="Q56611" start="2218" end="2224" title="Cariña" label="Cariña"/>
<link wikidata="Q14914985" start="2255" end="2262" title="Carinae" label="Carinae"/>
<link wikidata="Q11073987" start="2289" end="2312" title="Carine (disambiguation)" label="Carine (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1104740" start="2314" end="2337" title="Karina (disambiguation)" label="Karina (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="655762" wikidata="Q3030366" url="?curid=655762" title="Jon Toogood">
<text>Jonathan Charles Toogood (born 9 August 1971) is a New Zealand musician who is the frontman (lead vocals and guitar) of the rock band Shihad. He started playing guitar when he was &quot;8 or 9&quot; and became friends with Tom Larkin while at Wellington High School. Toogood and Larkin were fans of AC/DC and Metallica and started Shihad in 1988.

== Non-Shihad projects ==
=== SML (mid-1990s) ===
After their respective bands were established on Wildside Records Toogood, Larkin, and Nigel Reagan (Head Like a Hole) had a side project called SML. They recorded two albums in The Stench Room studio, releasing &quot;Is That It?&quot; and &quot;Mixdown&quot; in 1995 and 1996.

=== The Adults (2009–2012 and 2014–2018) ===

In 2009, Toogood revealed he had been travelling around New Zealand to collaborate with other New Zealand artists for a project that is &quot;extra-curricular&quot; to Shihad&#x27;s music. Collaborators included Tiki Taane, Ruban and Kody Neilson from the Mint Chicks, Julia Deans from Fur Patrol, Anika Moa, Shayne Carter of Dimmer/Straitjacket Fits fame and Ladi 6. &quot;The Adults&quot; was released as a full-length album in New Zealand in June 2011. Toogood subsequently toured New Zealand and Australia under this banner, joined onstage by Deans and Carter.

A second Adults album featured entirely different (musicians other than Toogood). &quot;Haja&quot; combined New Zealand hip hop and Aghani Al-Banat music from Sudan. Toogood encountered Aghani Al-Banat, which translates as &quot;women&#x27;s music&quot;, in 2014 as part of his wedding ceremony in his wife&#x27;s home country. &quot;Haja&quot; was released in 2018 and reached #14 on the national album charts. Toogood&#x27;s main musical contribution is on bass guitar, and he also sings on two songs. He hadn&#x27;t originally intended for it to be released as &quot;The Adults&quot;, but his record company offered more support for the project if it carried this name.

In 2018, Toogood completed a master of fine arts degree at Massey University, with a thesis on Aghani Al-Banat music. In 2020 Toogood was inducted into Massey University&#x27;s College of Creative Arts&#x27; hall of fame.
===2020–2024: Come Together and &quot;Last of the Lonely Gods&quot;===
Toogood is a key player in Come Together, a changing New Zealand supergroup that covers classic rock in live shows around the country. The group has recreated eight albums in their entirety:
*&quot;Abbey Road&quot; by The Beatles (2020)
* &quot;Brothers in Arms&quot; by Dire Straits (2020)
* &quot;Making Movies&quot; by Dire Straits (2023)
* &quot;Rumours&quot; by Fleetwood Mac (2023)
* &quot;Goodbye Yellow Brick Road&quot; by Elton John (2021)
* &quot;Damn the Torpedoes&quot; by Tom Petty and the Heartbreakers
* &quot;Harvest&quot; by Neil Young (2023)
* &quot;Live Rust&quot; by Neil Young (2020)

Come Together&#x27;s &quot;End of Year Bash&quot; tours of 2023 and 2024 did away with full album play-throughs and instead are celebrations of what Toogood calls &quot;the greatest rock songs&quot;.
Toogood&#x27;s debut solo album, &quot;Last of the Lonely Gods&quot;, was released in 2024. Played on acoustic guitar, the songs were inspired by years of what he called &quot;personal carnage&quot;. This included a 2021 COVID-19 lockdown in Melbourne preventing him from seeing his mother before she died, a later lockdown in Wellington stranding him away from his wife and children while he lived with his sister and dying brother-in-law, and then a COVID infection leaving him with severe tinnitus that prevented him from sleeping and led to panic attacks.

The album&#x27;s songwriting began after a cognitive behavioural therapist suggested that Toogood play guitar as a mindfulness exercise, which helped alleviate his tinnitus symptoms and anxiety. It was released in October 2024.

== Personal life ==
Toogood&#x27;s parents migrated from England to New Zealand in the 1950s. His mother comes from an Ashkenazi Jewish family that changed its name during World War II. He has described his parents as &quot;very egalitarian&quot;.

Toogood was a keen cricket player in high school, and at one stage captained the Wellington secondary schools&#x27; representative cricket team.

As of April 2005 Toogood was married to Ronise Paul, with whom he had a stepdaughter. In 2008 they moved to Melbourne where the rest of Shihad already lived. The marriage, which Toogood later described as making him &quot;miserable&quot;, lasted until his step-daughter was 18. 

In 2014 Toogood married second wife Dana Salih, who is a Sudanese Muslim, in Sudan. Toogood had converted to Islam prior to the wedding but only spoke publicly about his religion after 2019&#x27;s Christchurch mosque shootings. They have two children.

He is not related to broadcasting icon Selwyn Toogood.

== Awards ==
=== Aotearoa Music Awards ===
The Aotearoa Music Awards (previously known as &quot;New Zealand Music Awards&quot; (NZMA)) are an annual awards night celebrating excellence in New Zealand music and have been presented annually since 1965.
! 
| 1992 || Jon Toogood – Shihad || Most Promising Male || ||rowspan=&quot;8&quot;| 
| 1994 || Jon Toogood – Shihad || Male Vocalist of the Year|| 
| 1996 || Jon Toogood – Shihad || Male Vocalist of the Year|| 
|rowspan=&quot;2&quot;| 1997 || Karl Kippenberger &amp; Jon Toogood for &quot;Shihad&quot; || Album Cover of the Year || 
| Jon Toogood – Shihad || Male Vocalist of the Year|| 
| 1998 || Jon Toogood – Shihad || Male Vocalist of the Year|| 
| 2000 || Jon Toogood – Shihad || Male Vocalist of the Year|| 
| 2001 || Jon Toogood – Shihad || Male Vocalist of the Year|| 
| 2010 || Jon Toogood (as part of Shihad) || New Zealand Music Hall of Fame || || 


== References ==
== External links ==
*Shihad&#x27;s official site
*The Adults official site</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3030366" start="0" end="24" title="Jon Toogood" label="Jonathan Charles Toogood"/>
<link wikidata="Q2758792" start="134" end="140" title="Shihad" label="Shihad"/>
<link wikidata="Q3530769" start="223" end="233" title="Tom Larkin (musician)" label="Tom Larkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7981412" start="243" end="265" title="Wellington High School, New Zealand" label="Wellington High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q27593" start="299" end="304" title="AC/DC" label="AC/DC"/>
<link wikidata="Q15920" start="309" end="318" title="Metallica" label="Metallica"/>
<link wikidata="Q8001507" start="447" end="463" title="Wildside Records" label="Wildside Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q5630197" start="499" end="515" title="Head Like a Hole (band)" label="Head Like a Hole"/>
<link wikidata="Q3991315" start="935" end="945" title="Tiki Taane" label="Tiki Taane"/>
<link wikidata="Q7751606" start="975" end="990" title="the Mint Chicks" label="the Mint Chicks"/>
<link wikidata="Q5509460" start="1009" end="1019" title="Fur Patrol" label="Fur Patrol"/>
<link wikidata="Q153823" start="1021" end="1030" title="Anika Moa" label="Anika Moa"/>
<link wikidata="Q7491700" start="1032" end="1045" title="Shayne Carter" label="Shayne Carter"/>
<link wikidata="Q5277709" start="1049" end="1055" title="Dimmer (band)" label="Dimmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7621157" start="1056" end="1073" title="Straitjacket Fits" label="Straitjacket Fits"/>
<link wikidata="Q6469415" start="1083" end="1089" title="Ladi 6" label="Ladi 6"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134606" start="2022" end="2039" title="Massey University" label="Massey University"/>
<link wikidata="Q173643" start="2454" end="2464" title="Abbey Road (album)" label="Abbey Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q1299" start="2474" end="2485" title="The Beatles" label="The Beatles"/>
<link wikidata="Q258609" start="2501" end="2517" title="Brothers in Arms (album)" label="Brothers in Arms"/>
<link wikidata="Q50040" start="2527" end="2539" title="Dire Straits" label="Dire Straits"/>
<link wikidata="Q840272" start="2555" end="2568" title="Making Movies" label="Making Movies"/>
<link wikidata="Q50040" start="2578" end="2590" title="Dire Straits" label="Dire Straits"/>
<link wikidata="Q695405" start="2606" end="2613" title="Rumours (album)" label="Rumours"/>
<link wikidata="Q106648" start="2623" end="2636" title="Fleetwood Mac" label="Fleetwood Mac"/>
<link wikidata="Q827363" start="2652" end="2677" title="Goodbye Yellow Brick Road" label="Goodbye Yellow Brick Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q2808" start="2687" end="2697" title="Elton John" label="Elton John"/>
<link wikidata="Q45032" start="2713" end="2731" title="Damn the Torpedoes (album)" label="Damn the Torpedoes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2117272" start="2741" end="2772" title="Tom Petty and the Heartbreakers" label="Tom Petty and the Heartbreakers"/>
<link wikidata="Q537983" start="2781" end="2788" title="Harvest (Neil Young album)" label="Harvest"/>
<link wikidata="Q633" start="2798" end="2808" title="Neil Young" label="Neil Young"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754120" start="2824" end="2833" title="Live Rust" label="Live Rust"/>
<link wikidata="Q633" start="2843" end="2853" title="Neil Young" label="Neil Young"/>
<link wikidata="Q131325094" start="3101" end="3124" title="Last of the Lonely Gods" label="Last of the Lonely Gods"/>
<link wikidata="Q104719769" start="3283" end="3313" title="COVID-19 pandemic in Victoria" label="COVID-19 lockdown in Melbourne"/>
<link wikidata="Q87250803" start="3377" end="3399" title="COVID-19 pandemic in New Zealand" label="lockdown in Wellington"/>
<link wikidata="Q192309" start="3554" end="3562" title="tinnitus" label="tinnitus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147152" start="3666" end="3697" title="cognitive behavioural therapy" label="cognitive behavioural therapist"/>
<link wikidata="Q34069" start="3971" end="3987" title="Ashkenazi Jews" label="Ashkenazi Jewish"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="4024" end="4036" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q5375" start="4120" end="4127" title="cricket" label="cricket"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049" start="4604" end="4609" title="Sudan" label="Sudan"/>
<link wikidata="Q62066211" start="4724" end="4753" title="Christchurch mosque shootings" label="Christchurch mosque shootings"/>
<link wikidata="Q6213150" start="4819" end="4833" title="Selwyn Toogood" label="Selwyn Toogood"/>
<link wikidata="Q7015517" start="4883" end="4904" title="Aotearoa Music Awards" label="Aotearoa Music Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q6942216" start="5024" end="5041" title="music in New Zealand" label="New Zealand music"/>
<link wikidata="Q16957469" start="5710" end="5740" title="New Zealand Music Hall of Fame" label="New Zealand Music Hall of Fame"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="655789" wikidata="Q1366447" url="?curid=655789" title="Makarora">
<text>Makarora is a small community within the Queenstown-Lakes District of the Otago region of the South Island of New Zealand.

It is situated on on the eastern side of the Haast Pass and adjacent to the Makarora River.

Local tourism operators offer scenic plane flights and jetboating tours on the Makarora River, which is the border of the Mount Aspiring National Park. The 2022 film &quot;Nude Tuesday&quot; was shot at the Wonderland Lodge in Makarora.

==Demographics==
Makarora is part of the Outer Wānaka statistical area, which covers and had an estimated population of as of with a population density of people per km2.
Outer Wānaka had a population of 399 at the 2018 New Zealand census, an increase of 21 people (5.6%) since the 2013 census, and an increase of 63 people (18.8%) since the 2006 census. There were 162 households, comprising 204 males and 192 females, giving a sex ratio of 1.06 males per female. The median age was 45.1 years (compared with 37.4 years nationally), with 72 people (18.0%) aged under 15 years, 57 (14.3%) aged 15 to 29, 228 (57.1%) aged 30 to 64, and 36 (9.0%) aged 65 or older.

Ethnicities were 96.2% European/Pākehā, 10.5% Māori, 0.8% Asian, and 0.8% other ethnicities. People may identify with more than one ethnicity.

The percentage of people born overseas was 18.8, compared with 27.1% nationally.

Although some people chose not to answer the census&#x27;s question about religious affiliation, 64.7% had no religion, and 29.3% were Christian.

Of those at least 15 years old, 87 (26.6%) people had a bachelor&#x27;s or higher degree, and 21 (6.4%) people had no formal qualifications. The median income was $32,800, compared with $31,800 nationally. 63 people (19.3%) earned over $70,000 compared to 17.2% nationally. The employment status of those at least 15 was that 183 (56.0%) people were employed full-time, 78 (23.9%) were part-time, and 3 (0.9%) were unemployed.

==Education==

Makarora Primary School is a co-educational state primary school for Year 1 to 8 students, with a roll of as of . The school was first established in 1895.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1366447" start="0" end="8" title="Makarora" label="Makarora"/>
<link wikidata="Q613684" start="41" end="66" title="Queenstown-Lakes District" label="Queenstown-Lakes District"/>
<link wikidata="Q692912" start="74" end="79" title="Otago" label="Otago"/>
<link wikidata="Q120755" start="94" end="106" title="South Island" label="South Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q498788" start="169" end="179" title="Haast Pass" label="Haast Pass"/>
<link wikidata="Q1886259" start="200" end="214" title="Makarora River" label="Makarora River"/>
<link wikidata="Q49389" start="223" end="230" title="tourism" label="tourism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1355094" start="272" end="279" title="jetboat" label="jetboat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070905" start="339" end="367" title="Mount Aspiring National Park" label="Mount Aspiring National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q112608062" start="389" end="401" title="Nude Tuesday" label="Nude Tuesday"/>
<link wikidata="Q30637539" start="670" end="693" title="2018 New Zealand census" label="2018 New Zealand census"/>
<link wikidata="Q24189861" start="737" end="748" title="2013 New Zealand census" label="2013 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q7015254" start="797" end="808" title="2006 New Zealand census" label="2006 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q1250849" start="1151" end="1157" title="Pākehā" label="Pākehā"/>
<link wikidata="Q6122670" start="1165" end="1170" title="Māori people" label="Māori"/>
<link wikidata="Q29467330" start="1177" end="1182" title="Asian New Zealanders" label="Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q4116486" start="1480" end="1489" title="Christianity in New Zealand" label="Christian"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="655813" wikidata="Q3193410" url="?curid=655813" title="Karl Kippenberger">
<text>Karl Brenton Jamie Kippenberger (born 26 August 1973) is a New Zealand musician, best known as the bass guitarist for the rock band Shihad.

==Biography==
He is the grandson of Captain E.T Kippenberger, great nephew of Major-General Sir Howard Kippenberger.

Kippenberger grew up in Pukerua Bay just north of Wellington and attended Kāpiti College (formerly Raumati District High School). Kāpiti College is also the same high school that produced film director Peter Jackson, former All Black Christian Cullen as well as several other well-known Kiwi musicians, including Ara Adams-Tamatea of Katchafire and Danny Rodda.

After his 6th Form (year 12) year, he left to attend Aotea College for his final high school year.

== Awards and nomination ==
=== Aotearoa Music Awards ===
The Aotearoa Music Awards (previously known as &quot;New Zealand Music Awards&quot; (NZMA)) are an annual awards night celebrating excellence in New Zealand music and have been presented annually since 1965.
! 
| 1997 || Karl Kippenberger &amp; Jon Toogood for Shihad || Album Cover of the Year || ||rowspan=&quot;2&quot;| 
| 2000 || Karl Kippenberger for &quot;The General Electric&quot; || Album Cover of the Year|| 
| 2010 || Karl Kippenberger (as part of Shihad) || New Zealand Music Hall of Fame || || 


== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3193410" start="0" end="31" title="Karl Kippenberger" label="Karl Brenton Jamie Kippenberger"/>
<link wikidata="Q2758792" start="132" end="138" title="Shihad" label="Shihad"/>
<link wikidata="Q4576851" start="237" end="256" title="Howard Kippenberger" label="Howard Kippenberger"/>
<link wikidata="Q1638452" start="283" end="294" title="Pukerua Bay" label="Pukerua Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q6366755" start="333" end="347" title="Kāpiti College" label="Kāpiti College"/>
<link wikidata="Q4465" start="461" end="474" title="Peter Jackson" label="Peter Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1846819" start="593" end="603" title="Katchafire" label="Katchafire"/>
<link wikidata="Q15182898" start="675" end="688" title="Aotea College" label="Aotea College"/>
<link wikidata="Q7015517" start="784" end="805" title="Aotearoa Music Awards" label="Aotearoa Music Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q6942216" start="925" end="942" title="music in New Zealand" label="New Zealand music"/>
<link wikidata="Q16957469" start="1250" end="1280" title="New Zealand Music Hall of Fame" label="New Zealand Music Hall of Fame"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="655822" wikidata="Q1067263" url="?curid=655822" title="Information appliance">
<text>An information appliance (IA) is an appliance that is designed to easily perform a specific electronic function such as playing music, photography, or editing text.

Typical examples are smartphones and personal digital assistants (PDAs). Information appliances partially overlap in definition with, or are sometimes referred to as, smart devices, embedded systems, mobile devices or wireless devices.

== Appliance vs computer ==
The term &quot;information appliance&quot; was coined by Jef Raskin around 1979. As later explained by Donald Norman in his influential &quot;The Invisible Computer&quot;, the main characteristics of IA, as opposed to any normal computer, were:
* designed and pre-configured for a single application (like a toaster appliance, which is designed only to make toast),
* so easy to use for untrained people, that it effectively becomes unnoticeable, &quot;invisible&quot; to them,
* able to automatically share information with any other IAs.

This definition of IA was different from today&#x27;s. Jef Raskin initially tried to include such features in the Apple Macintosh, which he designed, but eventually the project went a quite different way. For a short while during the mid- and late 1980s, there were a few models of simple electronic typewriters with screens and some form of memory storage. These dedicated word processor machines had some of the attributes of an information appliance, and Raskin designed one of them, the Canon Cat. He described some properties of his definition of information appliance in his book &quot;The Humane Interface&quot;.

Larry Ellison, Oracle Corporation CEO, predicted that information appliances and network computers would supersede personal computers (PCs).

== See also ==
* Archy
* Computer appliance
* Embedded system
* Internet appliance
* Mobile web
* Technological convergence
* Ubiquitous computing
* Smart speaker

== References ==
== External links ==

* Compact HTML for Small Information Appliances — W3C NOTE (9 February 1998)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1067263" start="3" end="24" title="Information appliance" label="information appliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067263" start="26" end="28" title="Information appliance" label="IA"/>
<link wikidata="Q10872571" start="120" end="133" title="Digital audio player" label="playing music"/>
<link wikidata="Q11633" start="135" end="146" title="photography" label="photography"/>
<link wikidata="Q131212" start="151" end="163" title="text editor" label="editing text"/>
<link wikidata="Q22645" start="187" end="197" title="smartphone" label="smartphone"/>
<link wikidata="Q162768" start="203" end="229" title="personal digital assistant" label="personal digital assistant"/>
<link wikidata="Q193040" start="348" end="363" title="embedded system" label="embedded system"/>
<link wikidata="Q5082128" start="366" end="379" title="mobile device" label="mobile device"/>
<link wikidata="Q92740" start="488" end="498" title="Jef Raskin" label="Jef Raskin"/>
<link wikidata="Q92804" start="534" end="547" title="Donald Norman" label="Donald Norman"/>
<link wikidata="Q68" start="660" end="668" title="computer" label="computer"/>
<link wikidata="Q75687" start="1086" end="1101" title="Apple Macintosh" label="Apple Macintosh"/>
<link wikidata="Q46335" start="1272" end="1282" title="typewriter" label="typewriter"/>
<link wikidata="Q54277" start="1346" end="1360" title="word processor" label="word processor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1033523" start="1463" end="1472" title="Canon Cat" label="Canon Cat"/>
<link wikidata="Q7740893" start="1564" end="1584" title="The Humane Interface" label="The Humane Interface"/>
<link wikidata="Q92759" start="1593" end="1606" title="Larry Ellison" label="Larry Ellison"/>
<link wikidata="Q19900" start="1608" end="1626" title="Oracle Corporation" label="Oracle Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q918090" start="1674" end="1690" title="network computer" label="network computer"/>
<link wikidata="Q4787378" start="1752" end="1757" title="Archy (software)" label="Archy"/>
<link wikidata="Q621580" start="1760" end="1778" title="Computer appliance" label="Computer appliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q193040" start="1781" end="1796" title="Embedded system" label="Embedded system"/>
<link wikidata="Q2084051" start="1799" end="1817" title="Internet appliance" label="Internet appliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1043805" start="1820" end="1830" title="Mobile web" label="Mobile web"/>
<link wikidata="Q2207328" start="1833" end="1858" title="Technological convergence" label="Technological convergence"/>
<link wikidata="Q541265" start="1861" end="1881" title="Ubiquitous computing" label="Ubiquitous computing"/>
<link wikidata="Q26884850" start="1884" end="1897" title="Smart speaker" label="Smart speaker"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="655823" wikidata="Q237516" url="?curid=655823" title="Martigues">
<text>Martigues ( in classical norm, &quot;Lou Martegue&quot; in Mistralian norm) is a commune northwest of Marseille. It is part of the Bouches-du-Rhône department in the Provence-Alpes-Côte d&#x27;Azur region on the eastern end of the Canal de Caronte.

A direct translation from the Martigues Tourisme website states the following about Martigues:

Nicknamed the &quot;Provençale Venice&quot;, Martigues is a point of passage between the Mediterranean Sea and the Sea of Martigues (now Etang de Berre), close to the Côte d&#x27;Azur. The charm of its canals, its docks and bridges made it &quot;The Venice of Provence&quot;. Martigues possesses also its cooperative winery &quot;La Venise provençale&quot;: Coteaux d&#x27;Aix en Provence, rosé, red and white wines, fruit juices and natural oils in the region. Main varietals: Grenache, Syrah, Cinsault, Carignan, Clairette.

==History==
Martigues was founded by Ramon Berenguer IV, count of Provence in 1232 on the likely site of the Roman camp Maritima Avaticorum.

==Population==

==Transport==
The Gare de Martigues railway station is served by regional trains between Miramas and Marseille.

The nearest airport is Marseille Provence Airport (MRS), which is 14.52 km (9 miles) away.

CroisiEurope runs river cruises between Martigues (dock near Avenue Louis Sammut, behind City Hall) and either Lyon or Chalon-sur-Saône.

==People ==
*Gerard Thom (Frère Gérard), founder of the Knights Hospitaller
*Etienne Auteman / Authement, City Attorney 1700
*Étienne Richaud (1841-1889), Principal private secretary (Gambetta&#x27;s Ministry), Governor of La Réunion, Governor General for Inde française
*Charles Maurras (1868-1952), poet and political theorist
*Éric Bernard, Formula-1 driver
*Jimmy Abdou, footballer
*Ali Ahamada, footballer
*Barket Bekrar. footballer
*Maurice Dalé, footballer
*Rod Fanni, footballer
*Foued Kadir, footballer
*André-Pierre Gignac, footballer
*Clara Luciani, singer
*Amor Kehiha, footballer
*Imany, singer
*Giacomo and Gilles Coustellier, both multiple mountainbike trials world champions
*Yusuf Sari, footballer
*Philippe Didier Prout, firefighter

==Sport==
The 1st stage of the 2024 Tour de la Provence finished at Martigues on the 9th of Feb.

==See also==
*FC Martigues - Local football club.
*Étang de Berre
*Communes of the Bouches-du-Rhône department
*Maison du chemin de Paradis
==References==
==External links==

*Official website</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q237516" start="0" end="9" title="Martigues" label="Martigues"/>
<link wikidata="Q484170" start="81" end="88" title="Communes of France" label="commune"/>
<link wikidata="Q23482" start="102" end="111" title="Marseille" label="Marseille"/>
<link wikidata="Q3240" start="131" end="147" title="Bouches-du-Rhône" label="Bouches-du-Rhône"/>
<link wikidata="Q6465" start="148" end="158" title="Departments of France" label="department"/>
<link wikidata="Q15104" start="166" end="197" title="Provence-Alpes-Côte d&amp;#x27;Azur" label="Provence-Alpes-Côte d&amp;#x27;Azur"/>
<link wikidata="Q36784" start="198" end="204" title="Regions of France" label="region"/>
<link wikidata="Q381837" start="910" end="928" title="Ramon Berenguer IV, Count of Provence" label="Ramon Berenguer IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q641160" start="930" end="947" title="Counts of Provence" label="count of Provence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747689" start="982" end="987" title="Ancient Rome" label="Roman"/>
<link wikidata="Q2203403" start="1049" end="1066" title="Gare de Martigues" label="Gare de Martigues"/>
<link wikidata="Q651190" start="1167" end="1193" title="Marseille Provence Airport" label="Marseille Provence Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147111" start="1236" end="1248" title="CroisiEurope" label="CroisiEurope"/>
<link wikidata="Q456" start="1347" end="1351" title="Lyon" label="Lyon"/>
<link wikidata="Q203645" start="1355" end="1371" title="Chalon-sur-Saône" label="Chalon-sur-Saône"/>
<link wikidata="Q559527" start="1387" end="1413" title="Gerard Thom" label="Gerard Thom (Frère Gérard)"/>
<link wikidata="Q187549" start="1430" end="1449" title="Knights Hospitaller" label="Knights Hospitaller"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1451" end="1478" title="Etienne Auteman / Authement" label="Etienne Auteman / Authement"/>
<link wikidata="Q3592353" start="1500" end="1515" title="Étienne Richaud" label="Étienne Richaud"/>
<link wikidata="" start="1529" end="1556" title=":fr:Chef de cabinet" label="Principal private secretary"/>
<link wikidata="Q295090" start="1558" end="1582" title="Léon Gambetta" label="Gambetta&amp;#x27;s Ministry"/>
<link wikidata="Q3112711" start="1585" end="1607" title="List of governors of La Réunion" label="Governor of La Réunion"/>
<link wikidata="Q382844" start="1609" end="1625" title="Governor General" label="Governor General"/>
<link wikidata="Q646374" start="1630" end="1644" title="Inde française" label="Inde française"/>
<link wikidata="Q3048" start="1646" end="1661" title="Charles Maurras" label="Charles Maurras"/>
<link wikidata="Q171546" start="1704" end="1716" title="Éric Bernard" label="Éric Bernard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1952433" start="1736" end="1747" title="Jimmy Abdou" label="Jimmy Abdou"/>
<link wikidata="Q60540" start="1761" end="1772" title="Ali Ahamada" label="Ali Ahamada"/>
<link wikidata="Q4860993" start="1786" end="1799" title="Barket Bekrar" label="Barket Bekrar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2552488" start="1813" end="1825" title="Maurice Dalé" label="Maurice Dalé"/>
<link wikidata="Q357860" start="1839" end="1848" title="Rod Fanni" label="Rod Fanni"/>
<link wikidata="Q116997" start="1862" end="1873" title="Foued Kadir" label="Foued Kadir"/>
<link wikidata="Q1940" start="1887" end="1906" title="André-Pierre Gignac" label="André-Pierre Gignac"/>
<link wikidata="Q55128479" start="1920" end="1933" title="Clara Luciani" label="Clara Luciani"/>
<link wikidata="Q607360" start="1943" end="1954" title="Amor Kehiha" label="Amor Kehiha"/>
<link wikidata="Q115206" start="1968" end="1973" title="Imany" label="Imany"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1983" end="1990" title="Giacomo Coustellier" label="Giacomo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3106171" start="1995" end="2013" title="Gilles Coustellier" label="Gilles Coustellier"/>
<link wikidata="Q40952365" start="2066" end="2076" title="Yusuf Sari" label="Yusuf Sari"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2090" end="2111" title="Philippe Didier Prout" label="Philippe Didier Prout"/>
<link wikidata="Q22677272" start="2162" end="2181" title="Tour de la Provence" label="Tour de la Provence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132418" start="2238" end="2250" title="FC Martigues" label="FC Martigues"/>
<link wikidata="Q288912" start="2275" end="2289" title="Étang de Berre" label="Étang de Berre"/>
<link wikidata="Q236440" start="2291" end="2334" title="Communes of the Bouches-du-Rhône department" label="Communes of the Bouches-du-Rhône department"/>
<link wikidata="Q22986400" start="2336" end="2363" title="Maison du chemin de Paradis" label="Maison du chemin de Paradis"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="655824" wikidata="Q1886259" url="?curid=655824" title="Makarora River">
<text>The Makarora River is in the Otago region of the South Island of New Zealand.

==Name==
The Kāi Tahu name for the river is Makarore. ( in the Kāi Tahu dialect) means stream. However the meaning of in this context is unknown.

==Geography==
The headwaters are in Mount Aspiring National Park, on the eastern flanks of the Southern Alps near Haast Pass, which is the saddle between the Makarora and Haast River valleys. The Makarora River flows south into the northern end of Lake Wānaka after passing the small community of Makarora. The river attracts some recreational fishing, jetboating and kayaking. Rainbow and brown trout migrate from Lake Wānaka up the river and its tributaries to spawn, mainly in autumn and winter.

==Landslide==
In September 2007 a landslide in the Young River valley blocked off the corresponding stream. Young River is a tributary to Makarora River. The landslide created a new lake which appears to be permanent.

== Tourism ==
 follows the Makarora River for the majority of its course from just south of Haast Pass. A popular short walk leads to its confluence with the Blue River, at the aptly named Blue Pools. Cameron Flat Campground is a convenient campsite with a cooking shelter and bathrooms directly off State Highway 6. 

==Gallery==
==See also==
*List of rivers of New Zealand

==References==
==External links==

* https://web.archive.org/web/20100105121020/http://www.geonet.org.nz/landslide/young-river-landslide/index.html
* https://web.archive.org/web/20100522172420/http://www.geonet.org.nz/docs/landslide/reports/Young-River-poster-A3.pdf</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1886259" start="4" end="18" title="Makarora River" label="Makarora River"/>
<link wikidata="Q692912" start="29" end="34" title="Otago" label="Otago"/>
<link wikidata="Q120755" start="49" end="61" title="South Island" label="South Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q371230" start="92" end="100" title="Kāi Tahu" label="Kāi Tahu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070905" start="262" end="290" title="Mount Aspiring National Park" label="Mount Aspiring National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q206650" start="321" end="334" title="Southern Alps" label="Southern Alps"/>
<link wikidata="Q498788" start="340" end="350" title="Haast Pass" label="Haast Pass"/>
<link wikidata="Q917275" start="397" end="408" title="Haast River" label="Haast River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192728" start="474" end="485" title="Lake Wānaka" label="Lake Wānaka"/>
<link wikidata="Q14373" start="570" end="577" title="fishing" label="fishing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1355094" start="579" end="586" title="jetboat" label="jetboat"/>
<link wikidata="Q179246" start="594" end="599" title="kayak" label="kayak"/>
<link wikidata="Q187986" start="604" end="611" title="Rainbow trout" label="Rainbow"/>
<link wikidata="Q2857311" start="616" end="627" title="brown trout" label="brown trout"/>
<link wikidata="Q8058391" start="777" end="788" title="Young River, New Zealand" label="Young River"/>
<link wikidata="Q885857" start="1103" end="1113" title="Blue River (New Zealand)" label="Blue River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371038" start="1290" end="1319" title="List of rivers of New Zealand" label="List of rivers of New Zealand"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="655825" wikidata="Q1431232" url="?curid=655825" title="Naumachia">
<text>A naumachia (in Latin , from the Ancient Greek /, literally &quot;naval combat&quot;) was a mock naval battle staged as mass entertainment by the Ancient Romans. The staging would typically occur in a specially-dug basin, also known as a naumachia.

== Early ==
The first known was given by Julius Caesar in Rome in 46 BC on occasion of his quadruple triumph. After having a basin dug near the Tiber, capable of holding actual biremes, triremes and quinqueremes, he made 2,000 combatants and 4,000 rowers, all prisoners of war, fight. In 2 BC for the inauguration of the Temple of Mars Ultor (&quot;Mars the Avenger&quot;), Augustus gave a grander based on Caesar&#x27;s model. This naumachia depicted a battle between the Greeks and the Persians and required a basin that was 400 by 600 yards, which was created straddling the Tiber. &quot;Res Gestæ&quot; (§ 23) claimed that 3000 men, not counting rowers, fought in 30 vessels with rams and several smaller boats.

In 52 AD, Claudius gave what was possibly the most &quot;epic&quot; of these on a natural body of water, Fucine Lake, to celebrate the completion of drainage work and tunneling on the site. It included one hundred ships and 19,000 combatants, all of whom were prisoners who had been condemned to death. Suetonius&#x27; account, written many years after the event, has them salute the emperor with the phrase &quot;morituri te salutant&quot; (&quot;those who are about to die salute you&quot;). There is no evidence that this form of address was used on any occasion other than this single .

The was thus a bloodier show than gladiatorial combat, which consisted of smaller engagements and where the combat did not necessarily end with the death of the losers. More exactly, the appearance of is closely tied and only slightly earlier than that other spectacle, &quot;group combat&quot;, which did not pit single combatants against one another, but rather used two small armies. There again, the combatants were frequently those sentenced to death and lacked the specialized training of true gladiators. Caesar, creator of the , simply had to transpose the same principle to another environment.

Through the choreography of the combat, the had the ability to represent historical or pseudo-historical themes. Each of the fleets participating represented a maritime power of Ancient Greece or the Hellenistic east: Egyptians and the Tyrians for Caesar&#x27;s , Persians and Athenians for that of Augustus, Sicilians and Rhodeans for that of Claudius. It required significantly greater resources than other such entertainments, and as such these spectacles were reserved for exceptional occasions, closely tied to celebrations of the emperor, his victories and his monuments. The specific nature of the spectacle as well as the historical themes borrowed from the Greek world are closely tied to the term . This word, a phonetic transcription of the Greek word for a naval battle (/), has since come to also refer to the large artificial basins created for them.

== building==
Caesar&#x27;s was probably a simple basin dug into the low-lying ground on the northern or southern banks of the Tiber, and fed by its waters; the exact location is unknown; most likely Trastevere or the Campus Martius. The of Augustus is better known: in his Res Gestæ (23) Augustus himself indicates that the basin measured 1800 × 1200 Roman feet (approximately 533 × 355 meters). Pliny the Elder (&quot;Natural History&quot;, 16, 200), describes an island formed in the center, probably rectangular and connected to the shore by a bridge where the privileged spectators likely sat.

Taking into consideration the size of the basin and the dimensions of a trireme (approximately 35 × 4.90 meters), the thirty vessels used would hardly be able to manoeuvre. Knowing that the crew of a Roman trireme was approximately 170 rowers and 50 to 60 soldiers, a simple calculation allows us to see that to achieve the number of 3000 men the vessels of Augustus&#x27; fleet would have to have held more combatants than an actual fleet. The spectacle thus focused less on the movement of the vessels, and more on their actual presence in the artificial basin and the hand-to-hand combat which developed.

It was different for Claudius&#x27; . The two fleets each consisted of 50 vessels, which corresponds to the number of vessels in each of the two military fleets based at Misenum and at Ravenna. Lake Fucino was large enough that only part of it was needed, surrounded by pontoons, and there was room enough for the vessels to manoeuvre and ram each other. The of Claudius therefore truly reproduced naval combat.

According to Sextus Julius Frontinus in &quot;De aquaeductu&quot; (, 11, 1–2: ), the water supply for the of Augustus was specially constructed, with the surplus used to water neighbouring gardens in the Trans Tiberim. This was the Aqua Alsietina aqueduct, remains of which have been found on the slopes of Janiculum (the &quot;8th hill of Rome&quot;) below the monastery of San Cosimato. There are several theories as to the precise location of the site; the latest of which places it between Via Aurelia in the north and the church of San Francesco a Ripa in the southeast, in the loop of the Tiber. The republican viaduct discovered in the Via Aurelia near San Crisogono may also have served as a conduit for the basin.

The basin did not last very long. During the reign of Augustus it was partly replaced (Suetonius, &quot;Augustus&quot;, 43, 1) by the (sacred forest of the Caesars), later renamed &quot;forest of Gaius and Lucius&quot; for the grandsons of Augustus (Dion Cassius, 66, 25, 3). This vast area was probably built upon by the end of the 1st century.

== in amphitheatres==
A new development occurred during the reign of Nero: a in an amphitheatre. Suetonius (&quot;Nero&quot;, XII, 1) and Dio Cassius (&quot;Roman History&quot;, LXI, 9, 5) speak of such a spectacle in 57 AD in a wooden amphitheatre inaugurated by the last of the Julio-Claudian dynasty. Nothing is known of the site other than that it was built on the Campus Martius. Nero presented another in 64 AD. This was preceded by hunts and followed by gladiatorial combat and a great banquet (Dio Cassius, LXII, 15, 1). It is unknown what form these games took. It was probably the same wooden amphitheatre, given that there is no mention of its destruction before the great fire of Rome which happened shortly afterwards.

For the inauguration of the Colosseum in 80 AD, Titus gave two , one in the Augustinian basin, again using several thousand men, and the other in the new amphitheatre (Dio Cassius, LXVI, 25, 1–4). According to Suetonius (&quot;Domitian&quot;, IV, 6–7), Domitian organised a inside the Colosseum, undoubtedly circa 85 AD, and another one in the year 89 AD in a new basin dug beyond the Tiber; with the stone removed serving to repair the Circus Maximus, which had burnt on two sides. It was probably in the time between these two that Domitian completed the network of rooms underneath the Colosseum that are visible today, at the same time precluding such spectacles in the arena.

The arena at the Colosseum only measured 79.35 × 47.20 meters, far removed from the dimensions of the Augustinian basin. A in the Colosseum could therefore not have been as grand as the previous ones. One can imagine a confrontation between the crews of several reproductions of warships, potentially life-size or reasonably close to it, but actual maneuvers or even floating seems doubtful. It is known that stage-props were used to represent ships, sometimes with mechanisms to simulate shipwrecks, both on stage and in the arena (Tacitus, , XIV, 6, 1; Dio Cassius LXI, 12,2).

==Water in the amphitheatres==
The use of enough water to float vessels in amphitheatres raises technical questions. Amphitheatres were not exclusively used for ; they would have been filled and drained rapidly enough for use in gladiatorial combats and other spectacles. The rapid transition between water shows and earth-based shows seems to have been one of the great attractions. Dio Cassius underscores this as it relates to Nero&#x27;s (LXI, 9, 5); Martial does as well speaking of Titus&#x27; in the Colosseum (&quot;Book of Spectacles&quot;, XXIV). The only surviving written sources offer no descriptions of the mechanisms or engineering involved. Archaeology provides no clues: the basement of the Colosseum has since been modified. Only two provincial amphitheatres, those at Verona and Mérida, Spain, provide any technical evidence.

The central pit of the Verona amphitheatre was deeper than the rooms normally found underneath the arena, and served as a basin. It was connected to two axial conduits. One, circulating under the West gallery of the arena, was not connected to the drainage system and had to be connected to an aqueduct in order to fill the basin. The East conduit was deeper and designed to drain water into the Adige River. The basin at the Mérida amphitheatre, at only 1.5 meters, was shallower than that at Verona. Because it is so shallow—less than the height of a standing man—it cannot be confused with an underground service room. This basin was equipped with access stairs and covered with material similar to that used for swimming pools and Roman baths. It was also served by two conduits, the western one of which connected to the nearby San Lazaro aqueduct.

The dimensions of these basins rule out any but the most basic of : the one at Mérida measures a mere 18.5 × 3.7 meters. Only the most modest of water spectacles could have taken place here. This leads one to conclude that, even assuming that the Colosseum had a similar basin before construction of the &quot;hypogeum&quot; (underground complex), would have been performed on only a shallow layer of water covering the surface of the arena, the minimum required to float the ships.

== Decline of Roman ==
The introduction of new technologies initially led to an increased number of . The first three were spaced about 50 years apart; the following six, most of which took place in amphitheatres, occurred in a space of 30 years. Less costly in material and human terms, they could afford to be staged more frequently. Less grandiose, they became a feature of the games, but could not be considered exceptional. The iconography bears witness to this. Of some twenty representations of a in Roman art, nearly all are of the Fourth Style, of the time of Nero and the Flavian dynasty.
After the Flavian period, disappear from the texts almost completely. Apart from a mention in the &quot;Augustan History&quot;, a late source of limited reliability, only the town records () of Ostia tells us that in 109 Trajan inaugurated a basin. This site was discovered in the 18th century on the grounds of the Vatican City, northwest of the Castel Sant&#x27;Angelos. It is now referred to as the Naumachia Vaticana, with some sources erroneously calling it the Circus of Hadrian due to the similarities of its shape to that of other excavated circuses, along with the site&#x27;s proximity to the Mausoleum of Hadrian. Subsequent digs have revealed the complete site plan. It had bleachers (tiered stands for spectators) and the surface was about one sixth the size of the Augustan . In the absence of any texts, it has to be assumed that it was only used at the time of Trajan.

Nevertheless, if late Roman Empire sources and persistence into the Middle Ages in terms of the toponymy of and at the site are taken into consideration, it still existed into the 5th century. Moreover, the presence of bleachers on its perimeter is a strong indicator of regular shows. According to the Ostia municipal records, the inauguration involved 127 pairs of gladiators; leading one to believe that as in the amphitheatre, the restrictive space at Trajan&#x27;s basin was not conducive to large combats involving many untrained prisoners, or would have required over-simplification of naval combats, leading to a preference for single combat. In this form, and with a dedicated site, could easily have continued (though likely at a reducing frequency) for several centuries without mention in sources, as they would not have been particularly worthy of mention: they simply lost their grandeur and impressive character.

In the provinces, the influence of Roman is easily discernible, but limited and reduced to local and innocuous naval games and re-enactments. A competition which went under the name of was part of the Panathenaic Games between the Athenian Ephebos from the Flavian period onward. It replaced the regattas which had taken place at these games earlier. If Ausonius is to be believed, (Moselle, 200–2,29), a was held on the Moselle River between local youth.

== Post-Roman ==

A was performed for Henry II of France in Rouen in 1550.

A was part of the festivities of Wedding of Grand Duke Ferdinando I de&#x27; Medici and Christina of Lorraine held in the courtyard of the Palazzo Pitti in Florence in 1589. There is an etching of the event that was part of an album created by Orazio Scarabelli to document the wedding festivities.

A was held in Valencia between the Bridges of the Turia river, on the occasion of the centenary of the canonization of Saint Vincent Ferrer in 1755. Another was held in Milan for Napoleon in 1807.

Parc Monceau in Paris features a water feature, surrounded by a colonnade. In 18th and 19th century England, several parks featured mock naval battles with model ships, which were also referred to as . Peasholm Park in Scarborough, England, still stages such an event. Smaller, theatre-based aqua dramas were also popular.

New York artist Duke Riley staged a in 2009 at the Queens Museum of Art.

===In Scotland and England===
In Scotland were staged on a loch in Holyrood park in 1562 for the wedding of Lord Fleming and on the Water of Leith in 1581 for the wedding of James Stewart, 2nd Earl of Moray and Elizabeth Stewart.

A was staged on the Thames at the wedding of Princess Elizabeth and Frederick V of the Palatinate in February 1613. In June 1613 Anne of Denmark visited Bristol. A seat was built for her at Canon&#x27;s Marsh near the Bristol Cathedral, where on 7 June she watched a staged battle at the confluence of the Avon and Frome rivers, fought between an English ship and two Turkish galleys. After the victory, some Turkish captives (played by actors) were presented to her and she laughed at this, saying both the actors&#x27; costumes and their &quot;countenances&quot; were like the Turks. The entertainment at Bristol was described in verse by Robert Naile, who mentions the Turks were played by sailors, &quot;worthy brutes, who oft have seen their habit, form and guise&quot;. They were made to kneel before Anne of Denmark and beg for mercy as the final act of the pageant.

In Georgian-era Britain, were staged in private parks and gardens, consciously recreating them based on the Roman pattern, though on a smaller scale. Francis Dashwood, 11th Baron le Despencer constructed an artificial lake at West Wycombe in the shape of a swan, and staged several on the lake with small ships; he also ordered a construction of a fort on the lake&#x27;s edge to participate in the mock battles himself.

==See also==
*Naval warfare
*Water jousting
*Spectacles in ancient Rome

==References==

* F. Coarelli, &quot;Aedes Fortis Fortunae, Naumachia Augusti, Castra Ravennatium : la Via Campana Portuensis e alcuni edifici nella Pianta Marmorea Severiana&quot;, &quot;Ostraka&quot; 1, 1992, 39–54.
* L. Cordischi, &quot;Note in margine di topografia romana : &quot;Codeta, minor Codeta&quot; e &quot;Naumachia Caesaris&quot;, &quot;Bullettino della Commissione Acheologica comunale di Roma&quot;, 1999, 100, 53–62.
* K. M. Coleman, &quot;Launching into history: aquatic displays in the Early Empire&quot;, &quot;Journal of Roman Studies&quot; 83 (1993), pp. 48–74.
* J.-Cl. Golvin, &quot;L&#x27;amphithéâtre romain. Essai sur la théorisation de sa forme et de ses fonctions&quot;, Paris, 1988, 50–51, 59–61.
* J.-Cl. Golvin, Ch. Landes, &quot;Amphithéâtres et gladiateurs&quot;, Paris, 1990, 96.
* A. M. Liberati, s. v. &quot;Naumachia Augusti&quot;, in E. Steinby (ed.), &quot;Lexicon Topographicum Urbis Romae&quot;, III, 1996, 337.
*L. Richardson, &quot;A New Topographical Dictionary of Ancient Rome&quot;, Baltimore-London, 1992, pp. 265–266, 292.
* L. Haselberger (dir.), &quot;Mapping Augustan Rome&quot;, &quot;Journal of Roman Archaeology Supplementary Series&quot; 50 (2002), p. 179.
* R. Taylor, &quot;Torrent or trickle? The Aqua Alsietina, the Naumachia Augusti, and the Transtiberim&quot;, &quot;American Journal of Archaeology&quot; 101 (1997), pp. 465–492.

==External links==

* Naumachia on the Seine for the entry of Henri II into Rouen in 1550.
* Text from Smith (1870) online</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1431232" start="2" end="11" title="Naumachia" label="naumachia"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="16" end="21" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q35497" start="33" end="46" title="Ancient Greek" label="Ancient Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747689" start="146" end="160" title="Ancient Rome" label="Ancient Romans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048" start="291" end="304" title="Julius Caesar" label="Julius Caesar"/>
<link wikidata="Q657438" start="351" end="358" title="Roman triumph" label="triumph"/>
<link wikidata="Q13712" start="394" end="399" title="Tiber" label="Tiber"/>
<link wikidata="Q629990" start="427" end="433" title="bireme" label="bireme"/>
<link wikidata="Q208420" start="436" end="443" title="trireme" label="trireme"/>
<link wikidata="Q15249389" start="449" end="460" title="quinquereme" label="quinquereme"/>
<link wikidata="Q770797" start="571" end="591" title="Forum of Augustus" label="Temple of Mars Ultor"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="599" end="615" title="Mars (mythology)#Mars Ultor" label="Mars the Avenger"/>
<link wikidata="Q734095" start="841" end="850" title="Res Gestae Divi Augusti" label="Res Gestæ"/>
<link wikidata="Q1411" start="977" end="985" title="Claudius" label="Claudius"/>
<link wikidata="Q914789" start="1072" end="1083" title="Fucine Lake" label="Fucine Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q930415" start="1381" end="1401" title="Ave Imperator, morituri te salutant" label="morituri te salutant"/>
<link wikidata="Q482999" start="2059" end="2068" title="gladiator" label="gladiator"/>
<link wikidata="Q11772" start="2342" end="2356" title="Ancient Greece" label="Ancient Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q428995" start="2364" end="2375" title="Hellenistic" label="Hellenistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q11768" start="2382" end="2391" title="Ancient Egypt" label="Egyptians"/>
<link wikidata="Q82070" start="2400" end="2407" title="Tyre, Lebanon" label="Tyrians"/>
<link wikidata="Q389688" start="2428" end="2436" title="Persian Empire" label="Persians"/>
<link wikidata="Q193235" start="2441" end="2450" title="Athenian Empire" label="Athenians"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195487" start="2473" end="2482" title="History of Sicily" label="Sicilians"/>
<link wikidata="Q43048" start="2487" end="2495" title="Rhodes" label="Rhodeans"/>
<link wikidata="Q914255" start="3230" end="3240" title="Trastevere" label="Trastevere"/>
<link wikidata="Q242839" start="3248" end="3262" title="Campus Martius" label="Campus Martius"/>
<link wikidata="Q734095" start="3304" end="3318" title="Res Gestae Divi Augusti" label="Res Gestæ (23)"/>
<link wikidata="Q82778" start="3427" end="3442" title="Pliny the Elder" label="Pliny the Elder"/>
<link wikidata="Q442" start="3450" end="3465" title="Natural History (Pliny)" label="Natural History"/>
<link wikidata="Q401231" start="4409" end="4416" title="Misenum" label="Misenum"/>
<link wikidata="Q13364" start="4424" end="4431" title="Ravenna" label="Ravenna"/>
<link wikidata="Q297377" start="4665" end="4688" title="Sextus Julius Frontinus" label="Sextus Julius Frontinus"/>
<link wikidata="Q5244884" start="4698" end="4711" title="De aquaeductu" label="De aquaeductu"/>
<link wikidata="Q536769" start="4884" end="4898" title="Aqua Alsietina" label="Aqua Alsietina"/>
<link wikidata="Q13218676" start="4899" end="4907" title="Roman aqueduct" label="aqueduct"/>
<link wikidata="Q303001" start="4959" end="4968" title="Janiculum" label="Janiculum"/>
<link wikidata="Q3669802" start="5027" end="5039" title="San Cosimato" label="San Cosimato"/>
<link wikidata="Q756816" start="5146" end="5157" title="Via Aurelia" label="Via Aurelia"/>
<link wikidata="Q571088" start="5189" end="5209" title="San Francesco a Ripa" label="San Francesco a Ripa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1631638" start="5312" end="5325" title="San Crisogono" label="San Crisogono"/>
<link wikidata="Q1413" start="5792" end="5796" title="Nero" label="Nero"/>
<link wikidata="Q54831" start="5806" end="5818" title="amphitheatre" label="amphitheatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q185223" start="5861" end="5872" title="Cassius Dio" label="Dio Cassius"/>
<link wikidata="Q192841" start="6003" end="6025" title="Julio-Claudian dynasty" label="Julio-Claudian dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q242839" start="6092" end="6106" title="Campus Martius" label="Campus Martius"/>
<link wikidata="Q215231" start="6401" end="6419" title="great fire of Rome" label="great fire of Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q10285" start="6484" end="6493" title="Colosseum" label="Colosseum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1421" start="6504" end="6509" title="Titus" label="Titus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1423" start="6709" end="6717" title="Domitian" label="Domitian"/>
<link wikidata="Q207808" start="6893" end="6907" title="Circus Maximus" label="Circus Maximus"/>
<link wikidata="Q214528" start="7240" end="7251" title="Augustinians" label="Augustinian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2161" start="7671" end="7678" title="Tacitus" label="Tacitus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2098" start="8173" end="8180" title="Martial" label="Martial"/>
<link wikidata="Q2028" start="8505" end="8511" title="Verona" label="Verona"/>
<link wikidata="Q2360379" start="8516" end="8529" title="Amphitheatre of Mérida" label="Mérida, Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q474" start="8858" end="8866" title="aqueduct (water supply)" label="aqueduct"/>
<link wikidata="Q13696" start="8960" end="8971" title="Adige River" label="Adige River"/>
<link wikidata="Q6581615" start="9299" end="9310" title="Roman baths" label="Roman baths"/>
<link wikidata="Q665247" start="9729" end="9737" title="hypogeum" label="hypogeum"/>
<link wikidata="Q208145" start="10336" end="10347" title="iconography" label="iconography"/>
<link wikidata="Q3354732" start="10410" end="10419" title="Roman art" label="Roman art"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10443" end="10455" title="Pompeian Styles#Fourth Style" label="Fourth Style"/>
<link wikidata="Q1413" start="10472" end="10476" title="Nero" label="Nero"/>
<link wikidata="Q200565" start="10485" end="10500" title="Flavian dynasty" label="Flavian dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q722678" start="10606" end="10622" title="Augustan History" label="Augustan History"/>
<link wikidata="Q1012797" start="10696" end="10701" title="Ostia Antica (archaeological site)" label="Ostia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425" start="10723" end="10729" title="Trajan" label="Trajan"/>
<link wikidata="Q237" start="10818" end="10830" title="Vatican City" label="Vatican City"/>
<link wikidata="Q486382" start="10849" end="10872" title="Castel Sant&amp;#x27;Angelo" label="Castel Sant&amp;#x27;Angelo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2312823" start="10904" end="10922" title="Naumachia Vaticana" label="Naumachia Vaticana"/>
<link wikidata="Q2067349" start="11188" end="11196" title="bleacher" label="bleacher"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="11456" end="11467" title="Middle Ages" label="Middle Ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q485762" start="11484" end="11492" title="toponymy" label="toponymy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1162701" start="12518" end="12535" title="Panathenaic Games" label="Panathenaic Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q1524" start="12548" end="12556" title="Athens" label="Athenian"/>
<link wikidata="Q546690" start="12557" end="12564" title="Ephebos" label="Ephebos"/>
<link wikidata="Q11344830" start="12613" end="12620" title="regatta" label="regatta"/>
<link wikidata="Q234593" start="12671" end="12679" title="Ausonius" label="Ausonius"/>
<link wikidata="Q1667" start="12738" end="12751" title="Moselle River" label="Moselle River"/>
<link wikidata="Q132545" start="12812" end="12830" title="Henry II of France" label="Henry II of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q30974" start="12834" end="12839" title="Rouen" label="Rouen"/>
<link wikidata="Q297483" start="12905" end="12933" title="Ferdinando I de&amp;#x27; Medici" label="Ferdinando I de&amp;#x27; Medici"/>
<link wikidata="Q257579" start="12938" end="12959" title="Christina of Lorraine" label="Christina of Lorraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q29286" start="12989" end="13002" title="Palazzo Pitti" label="Palazzo Pitti"/>
<link wikidata="Q2044" start="13006" end="13014" title="Florence" label="Florence"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13094" end="13111" title="Orazio Scarabelli" label="Orazio Scarabelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q8818" start="13164" end="13172" title="Valencia" label="Valencia"/>
<link wikidata="Q20118" start="13200" end="13205" title="Turia (river)" label="Turia"/>
<link wikidata="Q317131" start="13269" end="13289" title="Saint Vincent Ferrer" label="Saint Vincent Ferrer"/>
<link wikidata="Q490" start="13319" end="13324" title="Milan" label="Milan"/>
<link wikidata="Q517" start="13329" end="13337" title="Napoleon" label="Napoleon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414059" start="13348" end="13360" title="Parc Monceau" label="Parc Monceau"/>
<link wikidata="Q90" start="13364" end="13369" title="Paris" label="Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q7158443" start="13550" end="13563" title="Peasholm Park" label="Peasholm Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q743521" start="13567" end="13578" title="Scarborough, North Yorkshire" label="Scarborough"/>
<link wikidata="Q4782621" start="13640" end="13650" title="aqua drama" label="aqua drama"/>
<link wikidata="Q3041090" start="13688" end="13698" title="Duke Riley (artist)" label="Duke Riley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1320229" start="13723" end="13743" title="Queens Museum of Art" label="Queens Museum of Art"/>
<link wikidata="Q6233415" start="13854" end="13866" title="John Fleming, 5th Lord Fleming" label="Lord Fleming"/>
<link wikidata="Q3566668" start="13878" end="13892" title="Water of Leith" label="Water of Leith"/>
<link wikidata="Q6143627" start="13920" end="13952" title="James Stewart, 2nd Earl of Moray" label="James Stewart, 2nd Earl of Moray"/>
<link wikidata="Q5363584" start="13957" end="13974" title="Elizabeth Stuart, 2nd Countess of Moray" label="Elizabeth Stewart"/>
<link wikidata="Q19686" start="13997" end="14003" title="River Thames" label="Thames"/>
<link wikidata="Q108397889" start="14011" end="14074" title="wedding of Princess Elizabeth and Frederick V of the Palatinate" label="wedding of Princess Elizabeth and Frederick V of the Palatinate"/>
<link wikidata="Q158248" start="14106" end="14121" title="Anne of Denmark" label="Anne of Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q23154" start="14130" end="14137" title="Bristol" label="Bristol"/>
<link wikidata="Q129305618" start="14167" end="14185" title="Canon&amp;#x27;s Marsh" label="Canon&amp;#x27;s Marsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q917917" start="14195" end="14212" title="Bristol Cathedral" label="Bristol Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q19711" start="14283" end="14287" title="River Avon, Bristol" label="Avon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2155471" start="14292" end="14297" title="River Frome, Bristol" label="Frome"/>
<link wikidata="Q2006877" start="14855" end="14867" title="Georgian era" label="Georgian-era"/>
<link wikidata="Q1388908" start="15002" end="15043" title="Francis Dashwood, 11th Baron le Despencer" label="Francis Dashwood, 11th Baron le Despencer"/>
<link wikidata="Q23397" start="15059" end="15074" title="artificial lake" label="artificial lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q2366839" start="15078" end="15090" title="West Wycombe" label="West Wycombe"/>
<link wikidata="Q876274" start="15288" end="15301" title="Naval warfare" label="Naval warfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q896777" start="15303" end="15317" title="Water jousting" label="Water jousting"/>
<link wikidata="Q3966554" start="15319" end="15345" title="Spectacles in ancient Rome" label="Spectacles in ancient Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q4010571" start="15450" end="15472" title="Via Campana" label="Via Campana Portuensis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1333505" start="15879" end="15903" title="Journal of Roman Studies" label="Journal of Roman Studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q6537729" start="16245" end="16278" title="Lexicon Topographicum Urbis Romae" label="Lexicon Topographicum Urbis Romae"/>
<link wikidata="Q465332" start="16677" end="16708" title="American Journal of Archaeology" label="American Journal of Archaeology"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="655826" wikidata="Q16775470" url="?curid=655826" title="Elfstone">
<text>Elfstone can refer to:

== Novel ==
*&quot;The Elfstones of Shannara&quot; - an epic fantasy novel from the &quot;Shannara&quot; series of novels by Terry Brooks.

== Objects ==
*Elfstones - in the &quot;Shannara&quot; series by Terry Brooks, &quot;elfstones&quot; are magical stones from the Age of Faerie that hold great power.
*Elfstone - in J. R. R. Tolkien&#x27;s fantasy writings, the Elfstone is a famous green jewel that Galadriel gives as a gift to Aragorn; it is also known as the &quot;Elessar&quot; or the &quot;Stone of Eärendil&quot;.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q16775470" start="0" end="8" title="Elfstone" label="Elfstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q3234684" start="43" end="68" title="The Elfstones of Shannara" label="The Elfstones of Shannara"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="179" end="188" title="Shannara artifacts#Elfstones" label="Elfstones"/>
<link wikidata="Q180322" start="458" end="465" title="Aragorn" label="Aragorn"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="655829" wikidata="Q5262289" url="?curid=655829" title="Derek Quigley">
<text>Derek Francis Quigley (born 31 January 1932) is a New Zealand former politician. He was a prominent member of the National Party during the late 1970s and early 1980s, and was known for his support of free-market economics and trade liberalisation. Quigley left the National Party after clashing with its leadership, and later co-founded the ACT New Zealand party.

==Early life==

Quigley was born on 31 January 1932 in Waikari, a small town in the northern Canterbury Region, the son of Francis John Quigley. He attended Waipara Primary school before continuing with education in Christchurch; first at Medbury School, then Christ&#x27;s College, followed by the University of Canterbury. He later donated his personal parliamentary library, which covers his political career until 1984, to Canterbury University&#x27;s Macmillan Brown Library.

He farmed at Waipara from 1949. He gained one of two scholarships for young farmers from the Meat and Wool Board and used it to study farming in Britain and the United States. He completed a law degree while farming and joined a Christchurch law firm, where he became a senior partner and practised as a lawyer.

In 1956, Quigley married Judith Ann Dickson, and the couple had four children. He later married Susan McAffer.

==Member of Parliament==
Quigley was National&#x27;s electorate chairman for the Rangiora electorate. In the Canterbury-Westland division, he was deputy chairman. He was a member of the Dominion Council and served on its executive committee.

He also stood in the safe Labour seat of against cabinet minister Mabel Howard in the and elections. He also sought the National nomination for the safe National seat of at a 1961 by-election, but was unsuccessful. As a 30-year-old, Quigley stood as the National Party&#x27;s candidate in the in the electorate, but was beaten by Labour&#x27;s candidate Sir Basil Arthur.

Quigley stood in the electorate in the . The electorate had been taken from National by Kerry Burke of the Labour Party at the previous election, but was won back by Quigley.

===Cabinet Minister===



After three years as a backbencher, Quigley was appointed to Cabinet, and held a number of ministerial roles. He was Minister of Housing (1978–1982), Minister of Tourism (1981), Minister of Works and Development (1981–1982), and Associate Minister of Finance (1978–1981). He held further minor ministerial posts as Minister of Earthquake and War Damage (1978–1982), Minister of Government Life Insurance (1978–1982), Minister of Public Trust (1978–1981), and Minister for State Insurance (1978–1982).

Quigley rapidly earned the hostility of senior National Party figures, however, with his criticism of the government&#x27;s economic policies. The Prime Minister of the day, Robert Muldoon, favoured decidedly interventionist policies, but Quigley preferred a more laissez-faire approach, and considered Muldoon&#x27;s interventionism to be contrary to the traditional spirit of the National Party. In February 1981, Quigley contested the deputy leadership of the party, despite Muldoon openly saying that he could not work with him. Quigley&#x27;s main opponent (and Muldoon&#x27;s strong favourite) was Duncan MacIntyre, a long-serving Muldoon loyalist. Bill Birch retired from the contest in favour of MacIntyre, and Jim Bolger was eliminated first. Quigley was narrowly defeated by MacIntyre.

A week after Quigley lost the deputy leadership race, he was dismissed by Muldoon as Associate Finance Minister, reducing his ability to criticise Muldoon&#x27;s economic policies effectively; Warren Cooper succeeded him. This was also related to a preceding event in December 1980 when Quigley spoke of releasing an &quot;alternative economic manifesto&quot; and Muldoon threatened to sack him from the Cabinet. Muldoon eventually relieved Quigley not only of the finance associate portfolio but removed him from the Cabinet expenditure committee as well.

Quigley nevertheless continued his attacks. In June the following year, he made a public denunciation of the government&#x27;s policies, saying that the state should have a passive role in the economy while giving a speech to the Young Nationals in which he raised doubts about the government&#x27;s Think Big growth strategy, which aimed to overcome crippling foreign exchange losses by using cheap power in the manufacture of steel, aluminium and timber products to export. Subsequently, Muldoon told Quigley to attempt to prevent the editor of &quot;The Dominion&quot; from publishing the full transcript of the speech. Quigley declined, saying such an approach might be misinterpreted. Muldoon also told him that if he went through with his scheduled appearance on the &quot;Newsmakers&quot; current affairs programme that it would require his subsequent resignation. Yet again Quigley defied Muldoon and went on the show where he made no attempt at retracting his criticisms of government economic policy. Muldoon and his allies reacted furiously to this continued public criticism with Muldoon saying that Quigley had &quot;offended, embarrassed and angered his parliamentary colleagues&quot; and that his speech had gone beyond what was acceptable from a cabinet minister. Quigley was given the choice of either giving a public apology or resigning from Cabinet; he chose to resign.

After quitting the cabinet Quigley said he was considering leaving from Parliament altogether. This would have forced a by-election which could bring down the Muldoon Government, which only had a one-seat working majority. Ultimately he did not resign his seat, to the relief of the National Party who were nervous at the prospect of defending it at a by-election.

At the , he resigned from politics altogether, becoming a business consultant.

==ACT New Zealand==
After leaving Parliament, his consultancy firm Strategos carried out some major consultancy jobs for the Lange government reviews of multiple government departments including Ministry of Defence, Treasury, Ministry of Justice and Police. When National won power in 1990, curiously, the government consultancy jobs his firm were being offered ceased.

In 1994, Quigley re-entered the political arena, joining forces with Roger Douglas to form the ACT New Zealand party. The new MMP electoral system, which made it easier for smaller parties to win seats, convinced Quigley that a strongly free-market party could indeed be successful. In the 1996 election, the first conducted under MMP, Quigley was returned to Parliament as an ACT list MP. He unsuccessfully sought to be Speaker of the House, and was instead appointed the chair of the Foreign Affairs, Defence and Trade Select Committee. Under Quigley&#x27;s chairmanship, the select committee produced &quot;The Defence Beyond 2000 Report&quot;, which became the blueprint for the Clark government&#x27;s radical restructuring of the New Zealand Defence Force.

Quigley did not stand for re-election in 1999 election and was immediately appointed by the incoming Prime Minister, Helen Clark, to review the contract the previous government had signed with the United States for New Zealand to acquire 28 near new F-16 fighter aircraft. Quigley advised the government to renegotiate the contract and acquire a lesser number of aircraft. One of his reasons for this recommendation was that cancellation of the contract would result in the abandonment of the RNZAF&#x27;s air combat capability. The government disputed this and cancelled the contract. Two years later, it disbanded the RNZAF&#x27;s air combat capability, just as predicted.

In early 2004 Quigley moved to Canberra to take up a position as a visiting fellow at ANU&#x27;s Strategic &amp; Defence Studies Centre. He researched and wrote on trans-Tasman and regional security issues and on the ongoing situation between the United States and New Zealand over the latter&#x27;s anti-nuclear policy.

==Honours and awards==
In 1977, Quigley was awarded the Queen Elizabeth II Silver Jubilee Medal, and in 1990 he received the New Zealand 1990 Commemoration Medal. In the 2004 New Year Honours, he was appointed a Companion of the Queen&#x27;s Service Order for public services.

==Notes==
==References==
* 
* 

==Further reading==
* &quot;Quigley&#x27;s contribution is a paper entitled&quot;: &quot;Should the state play a role as an insurer?&quot;
* &quot;Quigley&#x27;s contribution is a statement of the policy of the&quot; ACT Party.
** 
* &quot;This report is known better as either the&quot; Quigley Report &quot;or the&quot; Strategos Report.
** 
** 
** 
** 
** 
** </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5262289" start="0" end="21" title="Derek Quigley" label="Derek Francis Quigley"/>
<link wikidata="Q204716" start="114" end="128" title="New Zealand National Party" label="National Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q46607" start="201" end="222" title="free-market economics" label="free-market economics"/>
<link wikidata="Q200435" start="227" end="247" title="trade liberalisation" label="trade liberalisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q288838" start="342" end="357" title="ACT New Zealand" label="ACT New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q2540639" start="421" end="428" title="Waikari" label="Waikari"/>
<link wikidata="Q657004" start="459" end="476" title="Canterbury Region" label="Canterbury Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q985544" start="523" end="530" title="Waipara" label="Waipara"/>
<link wikidata="Q79990" start="582" end="594" title="Christchurch" label="Christchurch"/>
<link wikidata="Q6805177" start="605" end="619" title="Medbury School" label="Medbury School"/>
<link wikidata="Q5108634" start="626" end="647" title="Christ&amp;#x27;s College, Christchurch" label="Christ&amp;#x27;s College"/>
<link wikidata="Q432475" start="665" end="689" title="University of Canterbury" label="University of Canterbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q7292843" start="1354" end="1373" title="Rangiora (New Zealand electorate)" label="Rangiora electorate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1882350" start="1582" end="1594" title="Mabel Howard" label="Mabel Howard"/>
<link wikidata="Q4867099" start="1874" end="1886" title="Basil Arthur" label="Basil Arthur"/>
<link wikidata="Q6394481" start="1977" end="1988" title="Kerry Burke" label="Kerry Burke"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048192" start="1996" end="2008" title="New Zealand Labour Party" label="Labour Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q731591" start="2114" end="2125" title="backbencher" label="backbencher"/>
<link wikidata="Q2932373" start="2152" end="2159" title="Cabinet of New Zealand" label="Cabinet"/>
<link wikidata="Q40889194" start="2208" end="2227" title="Minister of Housing (New Zealand)" label="Minister of Housing"/>
<link wikidata="Q48769875" start="2241" end="2260" title="Minister of Tourism (New Zealand)" label="Minister of Tourism"/>
<link wikidata="Q48767677" start="2269" end="2302" title="Minister of Works (New Zealand)" label="Minister of Works and Development"/>
<link wikidata="Q6866129" start="2320" end="2349" title="Associate Minister of Finance (New Zealand)" label="Associate Minister of Finance"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2406" end="2443" title="Earthquake Commission#List of ministers" label="Minister of Earthquake and War Damage"/>
<link wikidata="Q110363183" start="2550" end="2578" title="Minister for State Insurance" label="Minister for State Insurance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071117" start="2740" end="2754" title="Prime Minister of New Zealand" label="Prime Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q737739" start="2767" end="2781" title="Robert Muldoon" label="Robert Muldoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q11480083" start="2802" end="2817" title="economic interventionism" label="interventionist"/>
<link wikidata="Q171990" start="2857" end="2870" title="laissez-faire" label="laissez-faire"/>
<link wikidata="Q5314460" start="3197" end="3213" title="Duncan MacIntyre (New Zealand politician)" label="Duncan MacIntyre"/>
<link wikidata="Q737739" start="3230" end="3237" title="Robert Muldoon" label="Muldoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q4908149" start="3248" end="3258" title="Bill Birch" label="Bill Birch"/>
<link wikidata="Q139785" start="3312" end="3322" title="Jim Bolger" label="Jim Bolger"/>
<link wikidata="Q2549675" start="3583" end="3596" title="Warren Cooper" label="Warren Cooper"/>
<link wikidata="Q7015833" start="4178" end="4193" title="New Zealand Young Nationals" label="Young Nationals"/>
<link wikidata="Q1756305" start="4248" end="4257" title="Think Big" label="Think Big"/>
<link wikidata="Q7730604" start="4501" end="4513" title="The Dominion (Wellington)" label="The Dominion"/>
<link wikidata="Q2932373" start="5309" end="5316" title="New Zealand Cabinet" label="Cabinet"/>
<link wikidata="Q5476119" start="5910" end="5926" title="Fourth Labour Government of New Zealand" label="Lange government"/>
<link wikidata="Q6866750" start="5980" end="5999" title="Ministry of Defence (New Zealand)" label="Ministry of Defence"/>
<link wikidata="Q7015808" start="6001" end="6009" title="New Zealand Treasury" label="Treasury"/>
<link wikidata="Q7015504" start="6011" end="6030" title="Ministry of Justice (New Zealand)" label="Ministry of Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q12063956" start="6035" end="6041" title="New Zealand Police" label="Police"/>
<link wikidata="Q352998" start="6225" end="6238" title="Roger Douglas" label="Roger Douglas"/>
<link wikidata="Q288838" start="6251" end="6266" title="ACT New Zealand" label="ACT New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q133" start="6282" end="6285" title="Mixed-member proportional representation" label="MMP"/>
<link wikidata="Q17055270" start="6446" end="6459" title="1996 New Zealand general election" label="1996 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q133" start="6487" end="6490" title="Mixed-member proportional representation" label="MMP"/>
<link wikidata="Q288838" start="6533" end="6536" title="ACT New Zealand" label="ACT"/>
<link wikidata="Q31764" start="6537" end="6544" title="party list proportional representation" label="list MP"/>
<link wikidata="Q7574301" start="6577" end="6597" title="Speaker of the New Zealand House of Representatives" label="Speaker of the House"/>
<link wikidata="Q5447531" start="6839" end="6855" title="Fifth Labour Government of New Zealand" label="Clark government"/>
<link wikidata="Q7016166" start="6961" end="6974" title="1999 New Zealand general election" label="1999 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q180383" start="7037" end="7048" title="Helen Clark" label="Helen Clark"/>
<link wikidata="Q100026" start="7170" end="7174" title="F-16 Fighting Falcon" label="F-16"/>
<link wikidata="Q542164" start="7413" end="7418" title="Royal New Zealand Air Force" label="RNZAF"/>
<link wikidata="Q542164" start="7540" end="7545" title="Royal New Zealand Air Force" label="RNZAF"/>
<link wikidata="Q3114" start="7627" end="7635" title="Canberra" label="Canberra"/>
<link wikidata="Q127990" start="7682" end="7685" title="Australian National University" label="ANU"/>
<link wikidata="Q2059227" start="7974" end="8013" title="Queen Elizabeth II Silver Jubilee Medal" label="Queen Elizabeth II Silver Jubilee Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q16933211" start="8043" end="8079" title="New Zealand 1990 Commemoration Medal" label="New Zealand 1990 Commemoration Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q60538527" start="8088" end="8109" title="2004 New Year Honours (New Zealand)" label="2004 New Year Honours"/>
<link wikidata="Q658976" start="8130" end="8173" title="Companion of the Queen&amp;#x27;s Service Order" label="Companion of the Queen&amp;#x27;s Service Order"/>
<link wikidata="Q288838" start="8445" end="8448" title="ACT New Zealand" label="ACT"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="655832" wikidata="Q3530769" url="?curid=655832" title="Tom Larkin (musician)">
<text>Tom Larkin (born 18 September 1971) is a New Zealand musician and record producer. He is the drummer, backing vocalist and a founding member of the alternative rock band Shihad. He grew up in Wellington, New Zealand but now lives in Melbourne in Australia.

== Early life and family ==
Larkin was born in Wellington, New Zealand, to Thomas Cedric Larkin and Sarah Marianne Williams. As a kid, he often played the drums so loud in his parents big Kelburn house in Wellington, that the neighbours sometimes complained. While at school at Wellington High in the late 1980s he met Jon Toogood and together they former Shihad back in 1988. The first gig was at the Clarendon Tavern in Courtenay Place which was the first of thousands of live gigs performed by the band over many years.

Shihad&#x27;s first release was back in 1990 with the single &#x27;Devolve&#x27; which went to number 13 on the New Zealand charts.

Tom Larkin is the son of former New Zealand cricketer (he played for Taranaki and Wellington) and New Zealand diplomat Thomas Cedric Larkin who died at the age of 103 in 2021. He has a sister Daisy and a brother Adam who tried his hand at making films in the early 2000s but was not successful.

== Career ==
In addition to being one of the founders, Larkin was Shihad&#x27;s manager and tour manager during the band&#x27;s early era. As of 2022, Shihad have released 12 albums and 8 EPs over 30 years. Shihad&#x27;s most recent studio album &quot;Old Gods&quot; was released in 2021 after a seven-year break and reached number one on the New Zealand charts.

In addition to his involvement with Shihad, Larkin runs a recording studio in Melbourne called Homesurgery Recordings. As of August 2014, Homesurgery represents the bands The Butterfly Effect, Cairo Knife Fight, Calling All Cars, The Sinking Teeth, Strangers and Villainy. The recording facility is located in the Melbourne suburb of Brunswick.

In the role of producer, Larkin has worked with bands such as Bodyjar, Alien Weaponry, Young and Restless, The Galvatrons, Calling All Cars, The Getaway Plan, Rook, Reptiles, Red Ink, Fur Patrol, Villainy, Strangers, High Tension, Shihad, King Cannons, Arts Martial, Young Heretics and Ceres.

=== Aotearoa Music Awards ===
The Aotearoa Music Awards (previously known as &quot;New Zealand Music Awards&quot; (NZMA)) are an annual awards night celebrating excellence in New Zealand music and have been presented annually since 1965.
! 
| 2010 || Tom Larkin (as part of Shihad) || New Zealand Music Hall of Fame || || 
|rowspan=&quot;2&quot;| 2018 || Simon Gooding, Tom Larkin, Hammerhead for &quot;Tū&quot; (album by Alien Weaponry) || Producer of the Year || ||rowspan=&quot;2&quot;| 
| Simon Gooding, Tom Larkin, Scott Seabright &amp; Samuel Sproull for &quot;Tū&quot; (album by Alien Weaponry) || Engineer of the Year || 


== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3530769" start="0" end="10" title="Tom Larkin (musician)" label="Tom Larkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q11366" start="148" end="164" title="alternative rock" label="alternative rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q2758792" start="170" end="176" title="Shihad" label="Shihad"/>
<link wikidata="Q23661" start="305" end="315" title="Wellington" label="Wellington"/>
<link wikidata="Q108263399" start="333" end="353" title="Tom Larkin (diplomat)" label="Thomas Cedric Larkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3030366" start="577" end="588" title="Jon Toogood" label="Jon Toogood"/>
<link wikidata="Q5178473" start="680" end="695" title="Courtenay Place, Wellington" label="Courtenay Place"/>
<link wikidata="Q108263399" start="1034" end="1054" title="Tom Larkin (diplomat)" label="Thomas Cedric Larkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q116814680" start="1463" end="1471" title="Old Gods" label="Old Gods"/>
<link wikidata="Q27817000" start="1768" end="1785" title="Cairo Knife Fight" label="Cairo Knife Fight"/>
<link wikidata="Q2934198" start="1787" end="1803" title="Calling All Cars (band)" label="Calling All Cars"/>
<link wikidata="Q7930834" start="1838" end="1846" title="Villainy (band)" label="Villainy"/>
<link wikidata="Q994135" start="1909" end="1918" title="Brunswick, Victoria" label="Brunswick"/>
<link wikidata="Q600519" start="1983" end="1990" title="Bodyjar" label="Bodyjar"/>
<link wikidata="Q24914793" start="1992" end="2006" title="Alien Weaponry" label="Alien Weaponry"/>
<link wikidata="Q8058524" start="2008" end="2026" title="Young and Restless (Australian band)" label="Young and Restless"/>
<link wikidata="Q7735657" start="2028" end="2042" title="The Galvatrons" label="The Galvatrons"/>
<link wikidata="Q961049" start="2062" end="2078" title="The Getaway Plan" label="The Getaway Plan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5509460" start="2105" end="2115" title="Fur Patrol" label="Fur Patrol"/>
<link wikidata="Q65050390" start="2207" end="2212" title="Ceres (band)" label="Ceres"/>
<link wikidata="Q7015517" start="2249" end="2270" title="Aotearoa Music Awards" label="Aotearoa Music Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q6942216" start="2390" end="2407" title="music in New Zealand" label="New Zealand music"/>
<link wikidata="Q16957469" start="2500" end="2530" title="New Zealand Music Hall of Fame" label="New Zealand Music Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q24914793" start="2637" end="2651" title="Alien Weaponry" label="Alien Weaponry"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="655833" wikidata="Q366025" url="?curid=655833" title="Claude, Duke of Guise">
<text>Claude de Lorraine, Duke of Guise (20 October 1496 – 12 April 1550) was a French aristocrat and general. He became the first Duke of Guise in 1528.

He was a highly effective general for the French crown. His children and grandchildren were to lead the Catholic party in the French Wars of Religion.

==Biography==
Claude was born at the Château de Condé-sur-Moselle, the second son of René II, Duke of Lorraine, and Philippa of Guelders. He was educated at the French court of Francis I. On 9 June 1513, at the age of sixteen, Claude married Antoinette de Bourbon (1493–1583), daughter of François, Count of Vendôme.

==Military service==
Claude distinguished himself at the Battle of Marignano (1515), and was long in recovering from the twenty-two wounds he received in the battle. In 1521, he fought at Fuenterrabia, and Louise of Savoy ascribed the capture of the place to his efforts. In 1522, he forced the English to raise the siege of Hesdin. In 1523, he became governor of Champagne and Burgundy, after defeating at Neufchâteau the imperial troops who had invaded this province. In 1525, Claude defeated a peasant army near Saverne (Zabern). Following Francis I&#x27;s return from captivity, Claude was made Duke of Guise in 1527. The Guises, as cadets of the sovereign House of Lorraine and descendants of the Capetian House of Anjou, claimed precedence over the Bourbon, princes of Condé, and Conti.

==Marriage and issue==
Claude married Antoinette de Bourbon, daughter of François, Count of Vendôme and Marie de Luxembourg, on 9 June 1513; they had:

* Mary of Guise (1515–1560); married firstly Louis II d&#x27;Orléans, Duke of Longueville and secondly king James V of Scotland and had issue, including Mary, Queen of Scots
* Francis, Duke of Guise (1519–1563)
* Louise of Guise (10 January 1520, Bar-le-Duc – 18 October 1542); married Charles I, Duke of Arschot on 20 February 1541.
* Renée of Guise (2 September 1522 – 3 April 1602), Abbess of St. Pierre, Reims
* Charles of Guise (1524–1574), Duke of Chevreuse, Archbishop of Reims, and Cardinal of Lorraine.
* Claude, Duke of Aumale (1526–1573)
* Louis I, Cardinal of Guise (1527–1578)
* Philip of Guise (3 September 1529, Joinville – 24 September 1529, Joinville) died in early childhood.
* Peter of Guise (b. 3 April 1530, Joinville); died at birth.
* Antoinette of Guise (31 August 1531, Joinville – 6 March 1561, Joinville), Abbess of Faremoutiers
* François de Lorraine, Grand Prior (18 April 1534, Joinville – 6 March 1563)
* René, Marquis of Elbeuf (1536–1566)

By an unnamed mistress, Claude had:
*son

==Death==
Claude fell ill in 1550, and despite being under the care of five doctors, died on 12 April.

==Ancestry==
==See also==
*Duke of Lorraine
*Dukes of Lorraine family tree

==Notes==
==References==
*45
*
*
*</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q366025" start="0" end="33" title="Claude, Duke of Guise" label="Claude de Lorraine, Duke of Guise"/>
<link wikidata="Q1615445" start="125" end="138" title="Duke of Guise" label="Duke of Guise"/>
<link wikidata="Q673175" start="275" end="298" title="French Wars of Religion" label="French Wars of Religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q229484" start="349" end="366" title="Condé-sur-Moselle" label="Condé-sur-Moselle"/>
<link wikidata="Q441416" start="386" end="393" title="René II, Duke of Lorraine" label="René II"/>
<link wikidata="Q669958" start="395" end="411" title="Duke of Lorraine" label="Duke of Lorraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q431221" start="417" end="437" title="Philippa of Guelders" label="Philippa of Guelders"/>
<link wikidata="Q129857" start="478" end="487" title="Francis I of France" label="Francis I"/>
<link wikidata="Q269239" start="543" end="564" title="Antoinette de Bourbon" label="Antoinette de Bourbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q518684" start="590" end="616" title="François, Count of Vendôme" label="François, Count of Vendôme"/>
<link wikidata="Q330" start="676" end="695" title="Battle of Marignano" label="Battle of Marignano"/>
<link wikidata="Q492312" start="807" end="819" title="Fuenterrabia" label="Fuenterrabia"/>
<link wikidata="Q233192" start="825" end="840" title="Louise of Savoy" label="Louise of Savoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q467366" start="944" end="950" title="Hesdin" label="Hesdin"/>
<link wikidata="Q273827" start="983" end="992" title="Champagne (province)" label="Champagne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1173" start="997" end="1005" title="Burgundy (region)" label="Burgundy"/>
<link wikidata="Q131581675" start="1026" end="1037" title="Neufchâteau, Vosges" label="Neufchâteau"/>
<link wikidata="Q12548" start="1042" end="1050" title="Holy Roman Empire" label="imperial"/>
<link wikidata="Q154031" start="1116" end="1128" title="German Peasants&amp;#x27; War" label="peasant army"/>
<link wikidata="Q22741" start="1134" end="1141" title="Saverne" label="Saverne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1615445" start="1218" end="1231" title="Duke of Guise" label="Duke of Guise"/>
<link wikidata="Q2638011" start="1280" end="1297" title="House of Lorraine" label="House of Lorraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q939200" start="1321" end="1344" title="Capetian House of Anjou" label="Capetian House of Anjou"/>
<link wikidata="Q58389" start="1374" end="1381" title="House of Bourbon" label="Bourbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q895184" start="1394" end="1399" title="Prince of Condé" label="Condé"/>
<link wikidata="Q895182" start="1405" end="1410" title="Prince of Conti" label="Conti"/>
<link wikidata="Q269239" start="1451" end="1472" title="Antoinette de Bourbon" label="Antoinette de Bourbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q518684" start="1486" end="1512" title="Francis, Count of Vendôme" label="François, Count of Vendôme"/>
<link wikidata="Q1962578" start="1517" end="1536" title="Marie de Luxembourg" label="Marie de Luxembourg"/>
<link wikidata="Q229846" start="1567" end="1580" title="Mary of Guise" label="Mary of Guise"/>
<link wikidata="Q2741378" start="1610" end="1654" title="Louis II d&amp;#x27;Orléans, Duke of Longueville" label="Louis II d&amp;#x27;Orléans, Duke of Longueville"/>
<link wikidata="Q137814" start="1673" end="1692" title="James V of Scotland" label="James V of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q131412" start="1718" end="1738" title="Mary, Queen of Scots" label="Mary, Queen of Scots"/>
<link wikidata="Q28495" start="1741" end="1763" title="Francis, Duke of Guise" label="Francis, Duke of Guise"/>
<link wikidata="Q185721" start="1812" end="1822" title="Bar-le-Duc" label="Bar-le-Duc"/>
<link wikidata="Q4723" start="1851" end="1877" title="Charles I, Duke of Arschot" label="Charles I, Duke of Arschot"/>
<link wikidata="Q41876" start="1973" end="1978" title="Reims" label="Reims"/>
<link wikidata="Q712264" start="1981" end="1997" title="Charles of Guise" label="Charles of Guise"/>
<link wikidata="Q22083534" start="2011" end="2028" title="Duke of Chevreuse" label="Duke of Chevreuse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365421" start="2030" end="2049" title="Archbishop of Reims" label="Archbishop of Reims"/>
<link wikidata="Q784784" start="2079" end="2101" title="Claude, Duke of Aumale" label="Claude, Duke of Aumale"/>
<link wikidata="Q898203" start="2116" end="2142" title="Louis I, Cardinal of Guise" label="Louis I, Cardinal of Guise"/>
<link wikidata="Q817418" start="2192" end="2201" title="Joinville, Haute-Marne" label="Joinville"/>
<link wikidata="Q333901" start="2408" end="2420" title="Faremoutiers Abbey" label="Faremoutiers"/>
<link wikidata="Q115949894" start="2423" end="2456" title="François de Lorraine, Grand Prior" label="François de Lorraine, Grand Prior"/>
<link wikidata="Q2297325" start="2501" end="2524" title="René, Marquis of Elbeuf" label="René, Marquis of Elbeuf"/>
<link wikidata="Q669958" start="2711" end="2727" title="Duke of Lorraine" label="Duke of Lorraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2638011" start="2729" end="2758" title="Dukes of Lorraine family tree" label="Dukes of Lorraine family tree"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="655838" wikidata="Q2530127" url="?curid=655838" title="Scolymus">
<text>Scolymus is a genus of annual, biennial or perennial, herbaceous plants that is assigned to the family Asteraceae, and can be found in Macaronesia, around the Mediterranean, and in the Middle East. All species are spiny, thistle-like in appearance, with flowerheads that consist of yellow (rarely orange or white) ligulate florets, and canals that contain latex. It is sometimes called golden thistle or oyster thistle, and is known as سكوليمس (skwlyms) in Arabic and scolyme in French.

== Description ==
The species of &quot;Scolymus&quot; are spiny herbaceous annuals, biennials or perennials of up to 1¾ m high, that contain a milky latex. These have twenty chromosomes (2n=20).

=== Root, stem and leaves ===
Biannual and perennial plants produce a stout taproot of up to 8 cm in diameter and 60 cm long. Young plants consist of a rosette of leaves, which may be variegated, once-pinnately spiny-lobed, to 30 cm long, and having short, fleshy stalks. The stems can be simple or carry many branches, and carry spiny wings along their lengths. The wavy leaves with prominent veins are pinnately divided and are alternately set along the stems. The leaf margin has prominent pale green or yellow veins and large teeth which are topped by fierce spines. The leaf surface may initially be covered in soft, felty hairs, which quickly clear away, most slowly on the veins.

=== Inflorescence, flowers and fruits ===
The flowerheads are seated at the end of the stem or in the limbs of the higher leaves, are arranged in a spike or a globose cluster and are subtended by two to more than five leaflike bracts. Each flowerhead is circled by an involucre that consists of many spine-tipped bracts in several rows, the outer papery and shorter than the inner ones, which are leaflike in consistency. These surround the common floral base (or receptacle), which is conical in shape and is set with ovate papery bracts called chaff or paleae. Inplanted are dorsally compressed cypselas, each enclosed by a palea, the outer rows higher than the inner ones. On top of the cypselas there may be two to five stiff scabrous bristles, which are equivalent to sepals (and are called pappus). Also, on top of the cypsela and within the pappus is a yellow, orange or white strap-like corolla which ends in five teeth, together comprising a ligulate floret.

=== Characters common to all Asteraceae ===
Like in all Asteraceae, the pentameric flowers have anthers that are fused together forming a tube through which the style grows. The style picks up the pollen on hairs along its length and splits into two style branches at its tip. These parts sit on an inferior ovary that grows into an indehiscent fruit in which only one seed develops (a so-called cypsela). All florets are set on a common base (the receptacle), and are surrounded by several rows of bracts, that form an involucre.

=== Characters common to Cichorieae ===
Golden thistles are assigned to the Cichorieae tribe that shares anastomosing latex canals in both root, stem and leaves, and has flower heads only consisting of one type of floret. In &quot;Scolymus&quot; these are ligulate florets, common to the group except for &quot;Warionia&quot; and &quot;Gundelia&quot;, which only have disk florets. A unique character setting &quot;Scolymus&quot; apart from the other Cichorieae are the dorsally compressed cypsellas which are surrounded by scales (or paleae).

=== Differences between the species ===
&quot;S. maculatus&quot; is an annual of up to 1½ m high, there are more than five leaflike bracts subtending each globose cluster of flowerheads, and these bracts are pinnately divided. The yellow florets carry some black hairs. The cypselas do not have pappus at their top (but are encased by the paleae). The spined wings along the stems are uninterrupted. Leaves have a whitish vein along their margin.

&quot;S. grandiflorus&quot; is an annual or biennial of up to ¾ m high with one, two or three leaflike bracts subtending each cluster of flowerheads and these are spiny dentate. The yellow to orange florets do not have black hairs. The cypselas are topped by three to seven bristles of smooth pappus hairs (and are encased by the paleae). The spined wings along the stems are uninterrupted.

&quot;S. hispanicus&quot; is an annual, biennial or perennial of up to 1¾ m high and it also has one, two or three spiny dentate leaflike bracts subtending each cluster of flowerheads and the yellow, orange or white florets also lack black hairs. The cypselas however are topped by two to five bristles of scabrous pappus hairs (and are encased by the paleae). In this species the spined wings along the stems are interrupted.

== Taxonomy ==

=== Taxonomic history ===
In 1576 Carolus Clusius describes &quot;Scolimus Theophrasti&quot; (= &quot;S. hispanicus&quot;). In 1601 he extends the genus to three taxa, &quot;Scolymus Theophrasti Hispan.&quot; (= &quot;S. hispanicus&quot; subsp. &quot;hispanicus&quot;), &quot;S. Theophrasti Narbonensis&quot; (= &quot;S. maculatus&quot;), and &quot;Scolymus Dioscor. Castos Theophrasti&quot; (= &quot;S. grandiflorus&quot;). Rembert Dodoens in 1583 and Francesco Cupani in 1713 introduce the name &quot;Carduus Chrysanthemus&quot; (for &quot;S. maculatus&quot;), while in Johann Bauhin’s posthumously published great work, &quot;Historia plantarum universalis&quot; (1650-51), it is called &quot;Spina lutea&quot;, and Robert Morison in 1699 referred to &quot;S. hispanicus&quot; as &quot;Cichorium luteum&quot;. Since all of these names predate the start of the Linnean nomenclature in 1753, neither of these were valid. In 1753 Carl Linnaeus referred to the description Joseph Pitton de Tournefort made in 1700, providing the valid scientific name &quot;Scolymus&quot;.

=== Subdivisions ===
Generally two sections are recognised. 
* &quot;Scolymus&quot;, containing one species:
** &quot;S. maculatus&quot; is a species showing very little variability, and no hybrids occur where it grows together with &quot;S. hispanicus&quot;.
* &quot;Myscolus&quot;, containing two species
** &quot;S. grandiflorus&quot; has some variability, particularly in the presence of soft hairs on the back of the leaves, but this is not regarded sufficient to distinguish between subtaxa.
** &quot;S. hispanicus&quot; has quite some variability, and two subspecies have been distinguished. 
*** subsp. &quot;occidentalis&quot;
*** subsp. &quot;hispanicum&quot;, which could be subdivided
**** var. &quot;aggregatus&quot;
**** var. &quot;aurantiacus&quot; 
**** var. &quot;hispanicus&quot; 

=== Phylogeny ===
According to recent genetic analyses, the genus &quot;Scolymus&quot; is related to the genera &quot;Hymenonema&quot;, &quot;Catananche&quot; and &quot;Gundelia&quot;. This results in the following relationship tree.

=== Etymology ===
The genus name &quot;Scolymus&quot; derives from the Greek σχόλυμος (skolymus) meaning &quot;artichoke&quot;. Pliny used this name for &quot;Scolymus hispanicus&quot;. The species name &quot;hispanicus&quot; is Latin and means &quot;from Spain&quot;, while &quot;maculatus&quot; is Latin and means &quot;spotted&quot;, and &quot;grandiflorus&quot; is also Latin and means &quot;large-flowered&quot;.

== Distribution ==
* &quot;Scolymus grandiflorus&quot; occurs in Spain including the Balearic Islands and the Canary Islands, southern France including Corsica, Italy including Sardinia, Turkey, Lebanon, Libya, Algeria, Tunisia and Morocco.
* &quot;Scolymus hispanicus&quot; can be found from northwestern France southwards to Morocco, and in the east from Ukraine to Iran. It is also naturalized in Australia, United States, Argentina and Chile.
* &quot;Scolymus maculatus&quot; grows from Britain to the Canary Islands, throughout the Mediterranean eastwards to Iran. This species is naturalized in Australia and in North Carolina.

== Ecology ==
&quot;Scolymus hispanicus&quot; it said to grow in the centre of Spain along roads and paths, particularly in unstable, loose and poor soils. The also grow in arable lands, both cultivated and fallowed, and in pastures. The florets are pollinated by insects.

== Use ==

Around the Mediterranean, such as in Portugal, Spain, Morocco, Italy, Greece, Cyprus and Turkey, the midveins of the rosette leaves of &quot;S. hispanicus&quot;, known in Spain as cardillo or tagarnina, are used as a popular wild food. It is generally gathered in April and May. These midveins are preboiled and lightly fried with garlic in olive oil. These serve as garnish for cocido. Fried cardillo is further combined with garlic, cured ham, and hard-boiled or scrambled eggs. Midveins are also used raw in salads. The roots are cooked and eaten, and compare in taste to salsify. Roasted roots have been used as a coffee substitute. Florets have been used as imitation saffron.

The root bark of &quot;S. hispanicus&quot; has been shown to contain the triterpenoid taraxasteryl acetate, and this substance is effective in suppressing spasms. In Turkey it is a component of a herbal elixir called lityazol çemil.

Studies have indicated that &quot;Scolymus&quot; might be used for the bio-removal of cadmium, with the highest concentration measured over 50 μg/g dry weight, and of methylene blue and Eriochrome Black T.

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q192691" start="23" end="29" title="Annual plant" label="annual"/>
<link wikidata="Q189774" start="31" end="39" title="Biennial plant" label="biennial"/>
<link wikidata="Q157957" start="43" end="52" title="Perennial plant" label="perennial"/>
<link wikidata="Q190903" start="54" end="70" title="herbaceous plant" label="herbaceous plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q25400" start="103" end="113" title="Asteraceae" label="Asteraceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q105472" start="135" end="146" title="Macaronesia" label="Macaronesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4918" start="159" end="172" title="Mediterranean" label="Mediterranean"/>
<link wikidata="Q7204" start="185" end="196" title="Middle East" label="Middle East"/>
<link wikidata="Q2530127" start="386" end="400" title="Scolymus" label="golden thistle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2530127" start="404" end="418" title="Scolymus" label="oyster thistle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2530127" start="436" end="443" title="Scolymus" label="سكوليمس"/>
<link wikidata="Q13955" start="457" end="463" title="Arabic" label="Arabic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2530127" start="468" end="475" title="Scolymus" label="scolyme"/>
<link wikidata="Q753457" start="836" end="843" title="Rosette (botany)" label="rosette"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1088" end="1105" title="Pinnation#Depth of divisions" label="pinnately divided"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1640" end="1649" title="Bract#Involucral bracts" label="involucre"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1836" end="1846" title="Asteraceae#Floral heads" label="receptacle"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1927" end="1933" title="Palea (botany)#Asteraceae" label="paleae"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1969" end="1977" title="Asteraceae#Fruits and seeds" label="cypselas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146306" start="2168" end="2174" title="Pappus (flower structure)" label="pappus"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2323" end="2338" title="Asteraceae#Floral heads" label="ligulate floret"/>
<link wikidata="Q3395661" start="2413" end="2423" title="Merosity" label="pentameric"/>
<link wikidata="Q103129" start="2437" end="2444" title="anthers" label="anthers"/>
<link wikidata="Q79932" start="2538" end="2544" title="pollen" label="pollen"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2640" end="2654" title="Ovary (botany)#Inferior ovary" label="inferior ovary"/>
<link wikidata="Q3704821" start="2674" end="2685" title="indehiscent" label="indehiscent"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2737" end="2744" title="Asteraceae#Fruits and seeds" label="cypsela"/>
<link wikidata="Q497512" start="2789" end="2799" title="Receptacle (botany)" label="receptacle"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2861" end="2870" title="Bract#Involucral bracts" label="involucre"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3079" end="3093" title="Asteraceae#Floral heads" label="type of floret"/>
<link wikidata="Q7969447" start="3184" end="3192" title="Warionia" label="Warionia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5560059" start="3209" end="3217" title="Gundelia" label="Gundelia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3408" end="3414" title="Asteraceae#Floral structures" label="paleae"/>
<link wikidata="Q310455" start="3464" end="3476" title="Scolymus maculatus" label="S. maculatus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2260465" start="3872" end="3887" title="Scolymus grandiflorus" label="S. grandiflorus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1403748" start="4264" end="4277" title="Scolymus hispanicus" label="S. hispanicus"/>
<link wikidata="Q333372" start="4736" end="4751" title="Carolus Clusius" label="Carolus Clusius"/>
<link wikidata="Q437466" start="5127" end="5142" title="Rembert Dodoens" label="Rembert Dodoens"/>
<link wikidata="Q1304260" start="5155" end="5171" title="Francesco Cupani" label="Francesco Cupani"/>
<link wikidata="Q123660" start="5274" end="5287" title="Johann Bauhin" label="Johann Bauhin"/>
<link wikidata="Q281661" start="5421" end="5435" title="Robert Morison" label="Robert Morison"/>
<link wikidata="Q36642" start="5565" end="5585" title="Linnean nomenclature" label="Linnean nomenclature"/>
<link wikidata="Q17134993" start="5617" end="5622" title="Validly published name" label="valid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1043" start="5632" end="5645" title="Carl Linnaeus" label="Carl Linnaeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q312959" start="5674" end="5701" title="Joseph Pitton de Tournefort" label="Joseph Pitton de Tournefort"/>
<link wikidata="Q310455" start="5893" end="5905" title="Scolymus maculatus" label="S. maculatus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2260465" start="6091" end="6106" title="Scolymus grandiflorus" label="S. grandiflorus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1403748" start="6282" end="6295" title="Scolymus hispanicus" label="S. hispanicus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046605" start="6693" end="6703" title="Hymenonema" label="Hymenonema"/>
<link wikidata="Q2520391" start="6717" end="6727" title="Catananche" label="Catananche"/>
<link wikidata="Q5560059" start="6744" end="6752" title="Gundelia" label="Gundelia"/>
<link wikidata="Q82778" start="6938" end="6943" title="Pliny the Elder" label="Pliny"/>
<link wikidata="Q2260465" start="7256" end="7277" title="Scolymus grandiflorus" label="Scolymus grandiflorus"/>
<link wikidata="Q5765" start="7314" end="7330" title="Balearic Islands" label="Balearic Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q5813" start="7339" end="7353" title="Canary Islands" label="Canary Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q14112" start="7381" end="7388" title="Corsica" label="Corsica"/>
<link wikidata="Q1462" start="7406" end="7414" title="Sardinia" label="Sardinia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1403748" start="7478" end="7497" title="Scolymus hispanicus" label="Scolymus hispanicus"/>
<link wikidata="Q310455" start="7684" end="7702" title="Scolymus maculatus" label="Scolymus maculatus"/>
<link wikidata="Q23666" start="7720" end="7727" title="Great Britain" label="Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q12372136" start="8250" end="8258" title="Midvein" label="midveins"/>
<link wikidata="Q868158" start="8528" end="8534" title="cocido" label="cocido"/>
<link wikidata="Q2915788" start="8905" end="8917" title="triterpenoid" label="triterpenoid"/>
<link wikidata="Q93978" start="8975" end="8993" title="Antispasmodic" label="suppressing spasms"/>
<link wikidata="Q422134" start="9233" end="9247" title="methylene blue" label="methylene blue"/>
<link wikidata="Q414854" start="9252" end="9270" title="Eriochrome Black T" label="Eriochrome Black T"/>
</links>
</doc>
