<doc id="253340" wikidata="Q45931" url="?curid=253340" title="Peking Man">
<text>Peking Man (Homo erectus pekinensis) is a subspecies of &quot;H. erectus&quot; which inhabited what is now northern China during the Middle Pleistocene. Its fossils have been found in a cave some southwest of Beijing (then referred to in the West as Peking), known as the Zhoukoudian Peking Man Site. The first fossil, a tooth, was discovered in 1921, and Zhoukoudian has since become the most productive &quot;H. erectus&quot; site in the world. Peking Man was instrumental in the foundation of Chinese anthropology, and fostered an important dialogue between Western and Eastern science. Peking Man became the centre of anthropological discussion, and was classified as a direct human ancestor, propping up the Out of Asia theory that humans evolved in Asia.

Peking Man also played a vital role in the restructuring of the Chinese identity following the Chinese Communist Revolution, and was intensively communicated to the general populace to introduce them to Marxism and science. Early models of Peking Man society strongly leaned towards communist or nationalist ideals, leading to discussions on primitive communism and polygenism. This produced a strong schism between Western and Eastern interpretations, especially as the West adopted the Out of Africa theory in the late 20th century, and Peking Man&#x27;s role in human evolution diminished as merely an offshoot of the human line. Though Out of Africa is now the consensus, Peking Man interbreeding with human ancestors is discussed especially in Chinese circles.

Peking Man characterises the &quot;classic&quot; &quot;H. erectus&quot; anatomy. The skull is long and heavily fortified, featuring an inflated bar of bone circumscribing the crown, crossing along the brow ridge, over the ears, and connecting at the back of the skull, as well as a sagittal keel running across the midline. The bone of the skull and long bones is exorbitantly thickened. The face is protrusive (midfacial prognathism), the eye sockets are wide, the jaws are robust and chinless, the teeth are large, and the incisors are shovel-shaped. Brain volume ranged from 850 to 1,225 cc, for an average of just over 1,000 cc (within the range of variation for modern humans). The limbs are broadly anatomically comparable to those of modern humans. &quot;H. erectus&quot; in such northerly latitudes may have averaged roughly in height, compared to for more tropical populations.

Peking Man lived in a cool, predominantly steppe, partially forested environment, alongside deer, rhinos, elephants, bison, buffalo, bears, wolves, big cats, and other animals. Peking Man intermittently inhabited Zhoukoudian from potentially as far back as 800,000 years ago to as recent as 230,000 years ago, but the precise chronology is unclear. This spans several cold glacial and warm interglacial periods. The cultural complexity of Peking Man is fiercely debated. If Peking Man was capable of hunting (as opposed to predominantly scavenging), making clothes, and controlling fire, the population would have been well-equipped to survive frigid glacial periods. If not, the population would have had to retreat southward and return later. It is further disputed if Peking Man inhabited the cave, or was killed by giant hyenas (&quot;Pachycrocuta&quot;) and dumped there, in addition to other natural processes. Over 100,000 pieces of stone tools were recovered from Zhoukoudian, mainly wastage; but also many simple choppers and flakes, and a few retouched tools such as scrapers and possibly burins.

==Taxonomy==
===Research history===
====Discovery====

To aid the China Geological Survey map out economically relevant deposits, the Geological Survey of Sweden sent Swedish economic geologist Johan Gunnar Andersson to China in 1914. Andersson soon also began collecting archaeological finds and &quot;dragon bones&quot;, as well as documenting Chinese mythology. In 1918, while in Beijing (then referred to in the West as Peking), he was pointed by American chemistry teacher John McGregor Gibb towards a potentially interesting fossil deposit in the mining town of Zhoukoudian in the Fangshan District, about southwest. When he visited a month later, he was directed towards an old limestone quarry which the locals called Chi Ku Shan (&quot;Chicken Bone Hill&quot;), because they believed the many rodent fossils found there belonged to chickens stolen by a malevolent group of foxes which turned into evil trickster spirits and drove a man insane.

Andersson had to leave China to work on other projects, but returned in 1921 with prominent American palaeontologist Walter W. Granger and Austrian palaeontologist Otto Zdansky, a recent graduate of the Palaeontological Museum of Uppsala University. Andersson decided the Chi Ku Shan locality would be an excellent training ground for Zdansky before moving onto the Henan Province to excavate &quot;Hipparion&quot; (horse) fossils. They were advised by a local that more interesting &quot;dragon bones&quot; could be found at a nearby fissure in a limestone cliff, later named Longgushan (&quot;Dragon Bone Hill&quot;) locality. Zdansky found the first fossil human tooth in the site that year, specimen PMU M3550, but he did not report it to Andersson. While studying the Zhoukoudian material in Uppsala, Zdansky identified another human tooth, and reported his find (which he cautiously labelled as &quot;Homo&quot; sp.?) to his mentor Professor Carl Wiman. News of this reached Andersson in 1926 after corresponding with Wiman.

As part of his world tour, the crown prince of Sweden (and the chairman of the Swedish China Research Committee, Andersson&#x27;s benefactor) Gustaf VI Adolf visited Beijing on 22 October 1926. In a meeting planned for the prince, Andersson presented lantern slides of Zdansky&#x27;s fossil teeth, and was able to convince his friend Canadian palaeanthropologist Davidson Black (who worked for the Peking Union Medical College funded by the Rockefeller Foundation), Chinese geologist Weng Wenhao (the head of the China Geological Survey), and prominent French palaeoanthropologist Pierre Teilhard de Chardin to jointly take over study of Zhoukoudian. Andersson returned to Sweden to become the founding director of the Museum of Far Eastern Antiquities, Stockholm. In the press coverage immediately after the meeting, German-American geologist Amadeus William Grabau for the first time publicly used the phrase &quot;Peking Man&quot; to refer to Zdansky&#x27;s fossil teeth.

In 1927, with Black too preoccupied with his duties to the college, Andersson and Wiman sent one of Wiman&#x27;s students, Anders Birger Bohlin, to oversee excavation beginning on 16 April. On 16 October, Bohlin extracted another fossil human tooth, specimen K11337, which Black made the holotype of a new genus and species a few weeks later, &quot;Sinanthropus pekinensis&quot; (accrediting the authority to both himself and Zdansky). His decision to so quickly name a new genus may have been politically motivated, to secure further funding of the site after nearly a year of no anthropologically relevant finds, especially since Teilhard questioned whether Peking Man was actually a human or some carnivore. That year, Weng drafted an agreement with all Zhoukoudian scientists at the time that the Zhoukoudian remains remain in China. In 1928, the Chinese government similarly clamped down on the exportation of Chinese artefacts and other archaeologically relevant materials to the West for study, viewing it as archaeological looting; foreign scientists were instead encouraged to research these materials within China. In 1929, Black persuaded the Peking Union Medical College, the Geological Survey of China, and the Rockefeller Foundation to found and fund the Cenozoic Research Laboratory and ensure further study of Zhoukoudian.
On 2 December 1929, Chinese anthropologist Pei Wenzhong discovered a surprisingly complete skullcap, and Zhoukoudian proved to be a valuable archaeological site, with a preponderance of human fossils, stone tools, and potential evidence of early fire use, becoming the most productive &quot;Homo erectus&quot; site in the world. An additional four rather complete skullcaps were discovered by 1936, three of which were unearthed over an 11-day period in November 1936, overseen by Chinese palaeoanthropologist Jia Lanpo. Excavation employed 10 to over 100 local labourers depending on the stage, who were paid five or six jiao per day, in contrast to local coal miners who received a pittance of 40 to 50 yuan annually. Zhoukoudian also employed some of the biggest names in Western and Chinese geology, palaeontology, palaeoanthropology, and archaeology, and facilitated an important discourse and collaboration between these two civilisations. After Black&#x27;s sudden death in 1934 from his congenital heart defect, Jewish anatomist Franz Weidenreich, who fled Nazi Germany, was selected by the Rockefeller Foundation to continue Black&#x27;s work.

====Loss of specimens====
Excavation of Zhoukoudian began to stall after the Marco Polo Bridge incident on 7 July 1937, and the outbreak of the Second Sino-Japanese War. Weidenreich had two crates made to store the Peking Man fossils, and transferred them from the Peking Union Medical College to an American bank vault to safeguard them from Imperial Japanese forces. They were soon returned to the college and stored in a safe in Weidenreich&#x27;s office, where Weidenreich worked with technicians and artists to make plaster casts and detailed illustrations for his monograph describing the fossils. As the war progressed, Weng and Weidenreich unfruitfully tried to convince the head of the college, Henry S. Houghton, to authorise a transfer of the Peking Man fossils to the United States for safekeeping. Houghton dismissed Weidenreich in 1941, who took the casts and research notes with him to the American Museum of Natural History in New York City with funding by the Rockefeller Foundation.

By September 1941, Weng and the president of the Rockefeller Foundation Raymond B. Fosdick had persuaded the U.S. embassy to authorise the transfer of the Peking Man fossils. Representing at least 40 different individuals, the fossils were put into two wooden footlockers and were to be transported by the United States Marine Corps from the Peking Union Medical College to the SS &quot;President Harrison&quot; which was to dock at Qinhuangdao Port (near the Marine basecamp Camp Holcomb), and eventually arrive at the American Museum of Natural History. En route to Qinhuangdao, the ship was attacked by Japanese warships, and ran aground. Though there have been many attempts to locate the footlockers—including offering large cash rewards—it is unknown what happened to them after they left the college on 4 December 1941.

Rumours about the fate of the fossils range from being onboard a sunken ship (such as the Japanese &quot;Awa Maru&quot;) to being ground up for traditional Chinese medicine. The affair also provoked allegations of robbery against Japanese or American groups, especially during the Resist America, Aid Korea Campaign in 1950 and 1951 to promote anti-American sentiment during the Korean War. US Marine Corporal Richard Bowen recalled finding a box filled with bones while digging a foxhole one night next to some stone barracks in Qinhuangdao. This happened in 1947 while the city was under siege by the CCP Eighth Route Army, who were under fire from Nationalist gunboats (a conflict of the Chinese Civil War). According to Mr. Wang Qingpu who had written a report for the Chinese government on the history of the port, if Bowen&#x27;s story is accurate, the most probable location of the fossils is underneath roads, a warehouse, or a parking lot.

Excavation of the Zhoukoudian was so well documented that the loss of the original specimens did not greatly impact their study.


Four of the teeth from the original excavation period are still in the possession of the Palaeontological Museum of Uppsala University.

====Mao and post-Mao eras====

Excavation of Zhoukoudian halted from 1941 until the conclusion of the Chinese Civil War in 1949. Field work took place in 1949, 1951, 1958–1960, 1966, and 1978–1981. Given the meticulousness of the dig teams, going so far as to sieve out unidentifiable fragments as small as long, excavation of Zhoukoudian is generally considered to be more or less complete.


Through the Mao era, but especially in 1950 and 1951, Peking Man took on a central role in the restructuring of the Chinese identity under the new government, specifically to link the ideology of the Chinese Communist Party with human evolution. Peking Man was taught in educational books for all levels, pop science magazines and articles, museums, and lectures given in workspaces, including factories. This campaign was primarily to introduce the general populace (including those without advanced education) to Marxism, as well as to overturn widespread superstitions, traditions, and creation myths. Nonetheless, research was constricted as scientists were compelled to fit new discoveries within the frame of communism. In 1960, the Cenozoic Research Laboratory was converted into an independent organisation as the Institute of Vertebrate Paleontology and Paleoanthropology (IVPP), a division of the Chinese Academy of Sciences, to better support excavation of Zhoukoudian. It was headed by Pei, Jia, and Chinese palaeoanthropologist Yang Zhongjian.

During the Cultural Revolution from 1966 to 1976, all intellectuals, including scientists, came under much persecution, and among other things were conscripted into manual labour as part of a campaign to turn &quot;intellectuals into labourers and labourers into intellectuals&quot;, which impeded research. Though palaeoanthropology was still able to continue, the field became much less important to the Chinese government with its new resolve to become economically independent, and popular science topics switched from human evolution to production-related matters.

As the Revolution&#x27;s policies relaxed, palaeoanthropology and academia resurged, especially with the rise of Deng Xiaoping in 1978 (renowned as a &quot;springtime for science&quot;). Zhoukoudian had been threatened several times by nearby mining operations or acid rain from air pollution, but the post-Mao China also witnessed a budding environmentalism movement. To this extent, the United Nations declared Zhoukoudian to be a World Heritage Site in 1987, and custody of the site was handed over from the IVPP to the city of Beijing (which has greater resources) in 2002.
The productivity of Zhoukoudian elicited strong palaeoanthropological interest in China, and 14 other &quot;H. erectus&quot; sites have since been discovered across the country as of 2016 in the Yuanmou, Tiandong, Jianshi, Yunxian, Lantian, Luonan, Yiyuan, Nanzhao, Nanjing, Hexian, and Dongzhi counties.

===Age and stratigraphy===
The Zhoukoudian Peking Man Site currently sits above sea level. The fossil-bearing sediments are divided into 27 localities, and Peking Man is known from Locality 1 (&quot;Dragon Bone Hill&quot;). This deep locality is further divided into 17 layers, of which fossils are found above Layer 13, and Peking Man from Layers 10–3. The fossil-bearing regions can also be organised into Loci A–O. Major stone tool accumulations occur in Layers 3 and 4, and the tops of Layers 8 and 10. The animal fossils in the locality suggest it dates to the Middle Pleistocene.

There have been many attempts to more finely tune the date of each layer, starting in the late 1970s. In 1985, Chinese scientist Zhao Shusen proposed the chronology: 700,000 years ago for Layer 13; 500,000 years ago for Layer 10; and 230,000 years ago for Layers 3. Though these general timeframes are normally agreed upon, the exact date of each layer is subject to intense discussion. In 2004, Shen Chengde and colleagues argued Layer 3 was deposited 400 to 500 thousand years ago, and Layer 10 as far back as about 600 to 800 thousand year ago, during a mild glacial period.

The earliest &quot;H. erectus&quot; fossils in all of China, Yuanmou Man, may date to 1.7 million years ago, though stone tools from the Shangchen site in Lantian, central China, could extend the occupation of the region to as far back as 2.12 million years ago.

===Classification===
====Background====

Despite what Charles Darwin had hypothesised in his 1871 &quot;Descent of Man&quot;, many late-19th century evolutionary naturalists postulated that Asia (instead of Africa) was the birthplace of humankind as it is midway between all continents via land routes or short sea crossings, providing optimal dispersal routes throughout the world. Among these was Ernst Haeckel who argued that the first human species (which he proactively named &quot;Homo primigenius&quot;) evolved on the now-disproven hypothetical continent &quot;Lemuria&quot; in what is now Southeast Asia, from a genus he termed &quot;Pithecanthropus&quot; (&quot;ape-man&quot;). &quot;Lemuria&quot; had supposedly sunk below the Indian Ocean, so no fossils could be found to prove this. Nevertheless, Haeckel&#x27;s model inspired Dutch scientist Eugène Dubois to join the Royal Netherlands East Indies Army and search for the &quot;missing link&quot; in Java. He found a skullcap and a femur (Java Man) which he named &quot;P. erectus&quot; (using Haeckel&#x27;s hypothetical genus name) and unfruitfully attempted to convince the European scientific community that he had found an upright-walking ape-man; they dismissed his findings as some kind of malformed non-human ape.

In regard to the ancestry of Far Eastern peoples, racial anthropologists had long placed the origin of Chinese civilisation in the Near East, namely Babylon (Sino-Babylonianism) as suggested by French archaeologist Terrien de Lacouperie in 1894, whereby (abiding by historical race concepts) the Chinese peoples regressed compared to the superior races of Europe (degeneration theory). This came under fire by the time Peking Man was discovered, when China was in the midst of the New Culture Movement and surging nationalism subsequent to the fall of the Qing dynasty and the establishment of the Republic of China. These ideologies not only aimed to remove imperialistic influences, but also to replace ancient Chinese traditions and superstitions with western science to modernise the country, and lift its standing on the world stage to that of Europe.

====&quot;Out of Asia&quot; theory====
Unlike previously discovered extinct human species, notably the Neanderthal and Java Man, the Peking Man was readily accepted into the human family tree. In the West, this was aided by a popularising hypothesis for the origin of humanity in Central Asia, championed primarily by American palaeontologist Henry Fairfield Osborn and his apprentice William Diller Matthew. They believed that Asia was the &quot;mother of continents&quot; and the rising of the Himalayas and Tibet and subsequent drying of the region forced human ancestors to become terrestrial and bipedal. They also believed that populations which retreated to the tropics – namely Dubois&#x27; Java Man and the &quot;Negroid race&quot; — substantially regressed (again, degeneration theory). This required them to reject Sir Raymond Dart&#x27;s far more ancient South African Taung child (&quot;Australopithecus africanus&quot;) as a human ancestor when he described it in 1925, favouring Charles Dawson&#x27;s 1912 hoax &quot;Piltdown Man&quot; from Britain.
The Peking Man, with a brain volume much larger than living apes, was used to further invalidate African or European origin models. Peking Man&#x27;s importance in human evolution was championed by Grabau in the 1930s, who (much like Osborn) pushed that the lifting of the Himalayas caused the emergence of proto-humans (&quot;&quot;Protanthropus&quot;) in the Miocene, who then dispersed during the Pliocene into the Tarim Basin in Northwest China where they learned to control fire and make stone tools, and then went out to colonise the rest of the Old World where they evolved into &quot;Pithecanthropus&quot; in Southeast Asia, &quot;Sinanthropus&quot; in China, &quot;Eoanthropus&quot; (Piltdown Man) in Europe, and &quot;Homo&quot;&quot; in Africa (again abiding by degeneration theory). To explain the paucity of stone tools in Asia compared to Europe (an apparent contradiction if humans had occupied Asia for longer), he also stated that Pleistocene Central Asia was too cold to permit back-migration by early modern humans or Neanderthals until the Neolithic. The Central Asia model was the leading consensus of the time.

Peking Man became an important matter of national pride, and was used to extend the antiquity of the Chinese people and the occupation of the region to 500,000 years ago, with discussions of human evolution becoming progressively Sinocentric even in Europe. In the 1930s, Weidenreich already began arguing that Peking Man was ancestral to the &quot;Mongoloid race&quot;, forwarding his polycentric hypothesis where local populations of archaic humans evolved into the local modern humans, as opposed to every modern population sharing an anatomically modern ancestor (polygenism). Other scientists working on the site made no such claims. The sentiment that all Chinese ethnic groups—including the Han, Tibetans, and Mongols—were indigenous to the area for such a long time became more popular during the Second Sino-Japanese War and the occupation of China by Japan. By the Mao era, Peking Man was ubiquitously heralded as a human ancestor in China.

====&quot;&quot;Sinanthropus&quot;====
Black hastily classified the Peking Man material in 1927 as a new genus and species as &quot;Sinanthropus pekinensis&quot;&quot; based on only three teeth. Initially, palaeoanthropologists assumed that expansion of the braincase was the first major innovation in human evolution away from apes. Consequently, because he characterised Peking Man as a human ancestor, Black initially believed that Peking Man would be more similar to Piltdown Man (with a big brain and modern skullcap but an apelike jaw) than Java Man (which at the time was characterised as a giant gibbon by Dubois). When the first Peking Man skullcap was discovered in 1929, Black and his mentor Sir Grafton Elliot Smith noted &quot;a curious blend of characters&quot; between Peking Man, Java Man, and Piltdown Man. They were unsure how to resolve these relationships.
Weidenreich, on the other hand, (correctly) dismissed Piltdown Man as a chimaera of a modern human skull and an orangutan jaw in 1923, and also began arguing that Java Man was an ancient human instead of a gibbon. Already in 1935, he claimed the differences between Peking Man and Java Man, &quot;can be due at most to racial variation&quot;. Following German-Dutch palaeontologist Gustav Heinrich Ralph von Koenigswald&#x27;s further Java Man discoveries in Mojokerto and Sangiran, von Koenigswald and Weidenreich declared in a 1939 paper that Java Man and Peking Man are, &quot;related to each other in the same way as two different races of present mankind, which may also display certain variations in the degree of their advancement.&quot;

To this end, in 1940 Weidenreich also suggested that, if Peking Man (&quot;&quot;Sinanthropus pekinensis&quot;) and Java Man (&quot;Pithecanthropus erectus&quot;) are ancestral to different modern human populations (classified into several subspecies of &quot;Homo sapiens&quot;), then they should be subsumed under &quot;Homo&quot; as subspecies of the same pre-modern species as &quot;H. erectus pekinensis&quot; and &quot;H. e. javanensis&quot;, respectively. Nonetheless, Weidenreich continued using &quot;Sinanthropus&quot; (and &quot;Pithecanthropus&quot;&quot;) until his death in 1948 because he saw it, &quot;just as a name without any &#x27;generic&#x27; or &#x27;specific&#x27; meaning, or in other words, as a &#x27;latinization&#x27; of Peking Man.&quot; In 1945, British anatomist Sir Wilfrid Le Gros Clark argued that, per nomenclature codes, the correct name should be &quot;Pithecanthropus pekinensis&quot;. Still, especially after The Holocaust, Weidenreich and many of his colleagues desired to reform anthropology away from its fixation on racial distinctness and purity. Weidenreich discussed the application of the burgeoning field of genetics in physical anthropology with namely Theodosius Dobzhansky and Sherwood Washburn as modern evolutionary synthesis was being formulated.

In 1950, German-American evolutionary biologist Ernst Mayr had entered the field of anthropology, and, surveying a &quot;bewildering diversity of names,&quot; decided to subsume human fossils into three species of &quot;Homo&quot;: &quot;&quot;H. transvaalensis&quot; (the australopithecines), &quot;H. erectus&quot; (including &quot;Sinanthropus&quot;, &quot;Pithecanthropus&quot;&quot;, and various other Asian, African, and European taxa), and &quot;H. sapiens&quot; (including anything younger than &quot;H. erectus&quot;, such as modern humans and Neanderthals), as had been broadly recommended by various priors. He classified Peking Man as &quot;H. e. pekinensis&quot;. Mayr defined these species as a sequential lineage, with each species evolving into the next (chronospecies). Though later Mayr changed his opinion on the australopithecines (recognising &quot;Australopithecus&quot;), his more conservative view of archaic human diversity became widely adopted in the subsequent decades. Thus, Peking Man was considered a human ancestor in both Western and Eastern thought. Nonetheless, Chinese and Soviet scientists wholly denounced polygenism, viewing it as scientific racism propagated by Western capitalist scholars (racial capitalism). They instead argued all modern human races are closely related to each other.

====&quot;Out of Africa&quot; theory====
The contributions of Chinese scientists during the Mao era were under much suspicion in the West for fears of propagandic contamination. In the 60s and 70s, the position of the more ancient &quot;Australopithecus&quot; in human evolution once again became a centre of debate; in China, Wu Rukang argued that &quot;Australopithecus&quot; was the &quot;missing link&quot; between apes and humans, but was met with much derision from Chinese peers. Following the &quot;opening&quot; of China with the rise of Deng in 1978, Western works contradictory to Maoist ideology disseminated through China, radically altering Eastern anthropological discussions. In the late 20th century, human evolution had become Afrocentric with the gradual acceptance of &quot;Australopithecus&quot; as human ancestors, and consequent marginalisation of Peking Man, especially as older fossils of &quot;H. erectus&quot; were being unearthed in Africa, first by Kenyan archaeologist Louis Leakey in 1960 with Olduvai Hominin 9. &quot;H. erectus&quot; is now largely considered to have evolved in Africa and later spread to other continents.

To counter the declining interest in Eastern palaeoanthropology, many Chinese scientists commonly pushed Sinocentric and often polygenic arguments, forwarding the antiquity of racial distinctness before the evolution and dispersal of modern humans, and racial continuity between local &quot;H. erectus&quot; and modern descendent races (for example, &quot;typically &#x27;Mongoloid&#x27; features&quot; such as shovel-shaped incisors carried over from Peking Man to modern Chinese). They often cited the 2 million year old Wushan Man from central China, which is no longer classified as a human, and asserted several Chinese apes millions of years old were human ancestors. Jia proposed the earliest human species evolved on the Tibetan Plateau, and the adjacent Guizhou Province was another popularly proposed genesis point. Various late Middle Pleistocene Chinese specimens have been argued, namely by Chinese palaeoanthropologist Wu Xinzhi, to represent hybrid populations between Peking Man and the ancestors of modern humans, such as the Dali Man or the Jinniushan Man. In the 1970s, the travelling museum exhibit &quot;The Exhibition of Archaeological Finds of the People’s Republic of China&quot; — organised by the CCP to tour around Western Europe, the US, and Canada — painted Peking Man and Lantian Man as the &quot;forefathers of the Chinese people&quot;, playing a central role in the story of human evolution, and emphasising the antiquity of the Chinese people. Additionally, at least since the mid-1990s, the CCP has utilised Peking Man as an instrument of its racial nationalist discourse.

Peking Man&#x27;s ancestral position is still widely maintained among especially Chinese scientists using the assimilation model, wherein archaic humans such as Peking Man interbred with and were effectively absorbed into modern human populations in their respective locations (so according to this, Peking Man has lent some ancestry to modern Chinese populations). On this matter, palaeogenetic analyses — the first in 2010 — have reported that all humans whose ancestry lies beyond Sub-Saharan Africa contain genes from the archaic Neanderthals and Denisovans indicating early modern humans interbred with archaic humans. The common ancestor of Neanderthals and Denisovans in turn interbred with another archaic species even farther removed from modern humans. Still, East Asian &quot;H. erectus&quot; from China and Indonesia are now usually characterised as relict populations which had little interaction with Western &quot;H. erectus&quot; or later &quot;Homo&quot; species.

===Phylogeny===
Many Chinese &quot;H. erectus&quot; fossils were given a unique subspecies name based on minute anatomical differences, at a time when different modern human races were classified into different subspecies for similar reasons. As the definition of &quot;subspecies&quot; tightened in the late 20th century, it became impossible to justify all of these names. In general, subspecies names for &quot;H. erectus&quot; are now used for convenience to indicate time and region rather than specific anatomical trends. The name &quot;H. e. pekinensis&quot; may extend to all Chinese &quot;H. erectus&quot; but is usually used to refer only to Zhoukoudian.
The anatomy of Chinese &quot;H. erectus&quot; specimens varies regionally and over time, but this variation is subtle and difficult to assess given how fragmentary &quot;H. erectus&quot; remains are both in and out of China. Northern Chinese specimens (namely Peking Man and Nanjing Man) are distinct in the narrowness of the skull, but &quot;H. erectus&quot; skull shape is poorly documented elsewhere in China. Some authors suggested that the anatomical peculiarities of the Zhoukoudian specimens indicate speciation rather than a geographic cline, and consider Peking Man as a separate species, &quot;H. pekinensis&quot;.

&quot;H. erectus&quot; may have made multiple different dispersals out of Africa to the Far East, with the population represented by the Indonesian Sangiran site possibly being more closely related to Western &quot;H. erectus&quot; than to Peking Man. A population related to Peking Man may have later interbred with Southeast Asian &quot;H. erectus&quot;, since the younger teeth at Sangiran are much smaller than the older ones — more like those of Peking Man&#x27;s — but tooth reduction could have happened for other reasons.

A 2021 phylogeny of &quot;H. erectus&quot; using tip dating:

==Anatomy==
Peking Man is known from 13 skull and cranial fragments, 15 mandibles (lower jawbone), 157 isolated and &quot;in situ&quot; teeth, an atlas (the first neck vertebra), a clavicle, 3 humeri (upper arm bones), potentially 2 iliac fragments (the hip), 7 femora, a tibia (shinbone), and a lunate bone (a wrist bone). The material may represent as many as 40 individuals.

Peking Man and anatomically similar East Asian contemporaries are sometimes referred to as &quot;classic&quot; &quot;H. erectus&quot;.

===Skull===

In 1937, Weidenreich and his assistant, the sculptor Lucile Swan, attempted to reconstruct a complete skull, but only considered a skullcap (Skull XI), a left maxillary (upper jaw) fragment (Skull XII/III), and a right mandibular fragment, which are presumably specimens of females based on their smaller size. Though larger, presumably male specimens are much more numerous, they probably chose female specimens because a male maxilla would not be discovered until 1943. Swan also made a lifelike bust of Peking Man based on this skull, nicknamed &quot;Nellie&quot;.

In 1996, anthropologists Ian Tattersall and Gary Sawyer revised the skull with high-quality casts of six presumed-male specimens and three isolated teeth (as the original fossils were lost). With this extended sample, virtually the entire skull could be more accurately restored, except the bottom margin of the piriform aperture (the nose hole). They deflated the cheeks and inflated the lateral margins of the brow ridge, which caused the nose to project out even farther (increased midfacial prognathism), though they reduced subnasal prognathism. Overall, compared to that of Weidenreich and Swan, their reconstruction is less apomorphic (specialised) than other Asian or African &quot;H. erectus&quot; specimens.

====Cranial vault====

Weidenreich characterised the Peking Man skull as relatively low, ellipsoid, and long. The breadth is greatest at the ears but decreases frontwards, especially at the forehead. There is marked post-orbital constriction, and the skull is circumscribed by a bony torus which is strongest at the brow ridge (supraorbital torus) and at the back of the skull (occipital torus). All specimens have an eminence projecting just above the supraorbital torus, developed to varying degrees, which is not found in any other &quot;H. erectus&quot; population. The frontal sinuses are restricted to the nasal area below the brows, and consequently the supraorbital torus is completely solid, unlike that of Java Man. The eye sockets are wide. The superior orbital fissure in the eye socket was probably a small opening like in non-human apes rather than a long slit like in modern humans. The nasal bones between the eyes are double the width of those of the average modern human, though not as wide as those of Neanderthals. Weidenreich suggested Peking Man had a short, broad nose.

Peking Man also features a sagittal keel running across the midline, highest when it intersects the coronal suture halfway across, and recedes around the obelion (near the base of the parietal bones). All skulls feature an equally developed keel (proportionally), including subadult and presumed-female specimens (there are no infant specimens). The keel produces a depression on either side, which accentuates the parietal eminence. The temporal lines, which arc in pairs across either side of the skull, often merge into a single ridge near the skull midline. The squamous part of temporal bone (the flat region) is positioned quite low, and the temporal fossa (the depression between the temporal lines and cheek) is relatively narrow. The mastoid part of the temporal bone features a high crest above which overhangs the ear canal. The crest accentuates the mastoid process, which bends inwards as opposed to the modern human condition of being vertical; bending is much more pronounced in presumed-male specimens. Peking Man lacks a true postglenoid process (a bony projection behind the jaw hinge); instead of being elongated, it is merely a low, triangular projection with a broad base. The zygomatic bones (cheekbones) project far off the face, and would have been visible when viewing the skull from the top. They project as far as , whereas modern humans do not exceed .

At the back of the skull, the occipital torus extends in a relatively straight line, but curves downward at the sides of the skull. The occipital torus can be bordered by furrows (sulci) on the top and bottom margins (for muscle attachment), and the bottom margin of the torus gradually fades. The midpoint of the torus features an additional prominence, the occipital bun.
====Brain====
The brain capacities of the seven Peking Man skulls for which the metric is measurable range from 850 to 1,225 cc, with an average of about 1,029 cc. This is within the range of variation for modern humans. Asian &quot;H. erectus&quot; overall are rather big-brained, averaging roughly 1,000 cc.

The endocast (the cast of the inside of the braincase) is ovoid in top-view. Due to post-orbital constriction, the frontal lobe is narrowed like in other &quot;H. erectus&quot;. The parietal lobes are depressed unlike Javan and African &quot;H. erectus&quot; or modern humans, though this seems to be somewhat variable among the Peking Man material. The temporal lobes are narrow and slender unlike most other human species. The occipital lobes are flattened dorsoventrally (from top to bottom) and strongly project backwards which is a rather variable trait among archaic human populations. The cerebellum, compared to that of modern humans, is not as globular, and the lobes diverge more strongly from the midline like other archaic humans.

====Mouth====

Peking Man has remarkably defined canine juga (a bony ridge corresponding to the tooth root). There is subnasal prognathism (the upper jaw juts out). The upper jaw commonly features exostoses (bony lumps) in the molar region, which infrequently occurs in modern humans (&gt;6%). Like modern humans and Neanderthals but unlike Java Man, Peking Man has a long, rugose palate (roof of the mouth). The mandible is rather big and, like other archaic humans, lacks a chin. The extramolar sulci bordering the cheek side of the molars are broad. Some mandibles feature a torus on the tongue side, or multiple mental foramina.

The dental arches (tooth rows) are U-shaped. The incisors feature an eminence at the base, finger-like ridges on the tongue-side, and for the upper ones marked shovelling (the tooth strongly bends in). The mandibular incisors are narrow. Weidenreich originally restored the teeth as peg-like, but Tattersall and Sawyer found the teeth to be much larger and obtrusive. Like other &quot;H. erectus&quot;, the premolars are ellipse-shaped and asymmetrical, but the first premolar (P3) frequently has three roots instead of the more common two. The molar crowns exhibit several extraneous ridges in addition to the essential cusps, which produced a dendritic (branching) enamel-dentine junction, which has only been documented in Chinese &quot;H. erectus&quot;. M1 is rather long, and M2 is round.
The upper incisors of Peking Man and other Chinese &quot;H. erectus&quot; feature marked shovelling, more prominent than in other &quot;H. erectus&quot; populations. Shovelling also usually occurs in Neanderthals and less intensely in many early modern human specimens across Europe, Africa, and Asia.

===Postcranium===
Because the archaeological record of East Asia is comparatively poor, the post-cranial anatomy of &quot;H. erectus&quot; is largely based on the adolescent African specimen Turkana Boy, as well as a few other isolated skeletons from Africa and Western Eurasia.

Externally, the Peking Man humerus is like that of modern humans, and exhibits exceptionally developed muscle attachments, but the shaft is more slender. The lunate bone (in the wrist) is modern humanlike, though proportionally small and broad. 

Compared to an average modern human, the femur is much stouter, flatter, slenderer, and straighter (and maximum curvature occurs nearer the knee joint instead of at the mid-shaft). The anteposterior (from front to back) diameter is smaller than the transverse (from left to right) diameter. The femoral neck was probably truncated like in other archaic humans and non-human apes. The subtrochanteric crest terminates up at the greater trochanter with a bony growth, commonly exhibited in Neanderthals. These traits are not outside the range of variation for modern humans, though are quite rare.
===Body size===
The torso is poorly known, but because the limbs and clavicle are proportionally like those of modern humans, it is typically assumed the rest of the body was as well. Working under this assumption, living body dimension reconstructions include:

*In 1938, Weidenreich reconstructed a presumed-female femur to be in length in life, which would equate to a female height of . He speculated males averaged .
*In 1944, Weidenreich reconstructed a presumed-male femur to be long, equating to a male height of . He speculated an average female height of .
*In 2018, Chinese palaeoanthropologist Song Xing estimated the living weight for Humeri II and III as about , Femur I , Femur IV , and Femur VI . Weidenreich assumed all these represent males.
Overall, northerly &quot;H. erectus&quot; populations tend to be shorter than tropical populations, with colder climate populations including Zhoukoudian and Dmanisi averaging roughly , and hotter climate populations including African and Javan &quot;H. erectus&quot; .

===Bone thickness===
The strongly developed tori and crests greatly fortify the skull, and the braincase is extremely thickened like in other &quot;H. erectus&quot;. Similar thickening can also rarely occur in modern humans when the diploë (the spongy cancellous layer between the two hard cortical layers of bone in the skull) abnormally expands, but for Peking Man, all three layers of cranial bone have equally thickened.
The long bones of all &quot;H. erectus&quot; have thickened cortical bone and consequently narrowed medullary cavities (where the bone marrow is stored). Peking Man has much thicker humeri than African &quot;H. erectus&quot;. At maximum constriction at the mid-shaft, the femoral walls of Peking Man take up about 90% of the interior space, as opposed to only 75% in modern humans. For the lateral walls (towards the sides), the exorbitant thickness sharply reduces above the greater trochanter, whereas the medial walls (towards the middle) are three times as thick as those of modern humans at that point. In modern humans, the femoral head features two main strips of cancellous bone (spongy interior bone) that converge into a triangle (Ward&#x27;s triangle), which is absent in Peking Man, likely due to the intense thickening of the cortical bone.

In 1946, Weidenreich forwarded an unpopular hypothesis that Peking Man (and Java Man) inherited the thick bones from gigantic ancestors (plesiomorphy), evidenced by von Koenigswald&#x27;s enormous &quot;Meganthropus&quot; and &quot;Gigantopithecus&quot;, which at the time were classified as ancient human ancestors. Other explanations include a far more violent and impact-prone lifestyle than other &quot;Homo&quot;, or pathological nutrient deficiencies causing hypoparathyroidism. The supraorbital torus thickens with age, and may be a response to bending stresses from habitual loading of the front teeth.

===Gallery===
==Culture==
===Palaeoenvironment===

The mammal assemblage indicates three major environmental units: Layers 11–10 a cold and dry, predominantly grassland environment; Layers 9–5 a warm, predominantly forested environment; and Layers 4–1 another cold and dry, predominantly grassland environment.

The mammal assemblage includes macaques, the Zhoukoudian wolf, the Asian black bear, brown bear, the rhino &quot;Dicerorhinus choukoutienensis&quot;, the woolly rhinoceros, the horse &quot;Equus sanmeniensis&quot;, the Siberian musk deer, the giant deer &quot;Sinomegaceros pachyosteus&quot;, sheep, bison, the Asian straight-tusked elephant, bats, pika, rodents, and shrews. The mammal assemblage of Layers 4–3 is broadly similar to that of Layers 9–8, in addition to several warm-to-mild climate steppe and forest creatures, including the raccoon dog &quot;Nyctereutes sinensis&quot;, the dhole &quot;Cuon antiquus&quot;, the corsac fox, the Asian badger, wolverines, the giant hyena &quot;Pachycrocuta&quot;, the saber-toothed cat &quot;Machairodus inexpectatus&quot;, the tiger, the leopard, sika deer, the antelope &quot;Spirocerus peii&quot;, and the water buffalo &quot;Bubalus teilhardi&quot;. The Zhoukoudian fauna are not entirely exclusive to either glacial or interglacial periods.

&quot;H. erectus&quot; seems to have typically favoured open environments. It is debated if Peking Man occupied the region during colder glacial periods or only took residence during warmer interglacials, tied to the uncertain chronology of Zhoukoudian, as well as arguments regarding fire usage, clothing technology, and hunting ability. Given the abundance of deer remains, it was quite early on assumed Peking Man was a prolific deer hunter, but since the establishment of non-human carnivores as a major depositional agent, the dependence on hunting has become a controversial topic. Indeed, most of the Peking Man fossils were at least fed upon by likely hyenas. Nonetheless, some of the animal fossils seem to have been modified by humans. In 1986, American archaeologist Lewis Binford and colleagues reported a few horse fossils with cutmarks left by stone tools, and two upper premolars from Layer 4 appearing to him to have been burned while still fresh, which he ascribed to horse-head roasting. Binford believed that Peking Man was simply scavenging from hyenas because all tool cuts he analysed were always overlapping hyena gnaw marks, instead of vice versa. Zhoukoudian also preserves the remains of edible plants, nuts, and seeds which Peking Man may have been eating: Chinese hackberry, walnut, hazelnut, pine, elm, and rambler rose.

&quot;H. erectus&quot;, a specialist in woodland and savannah biomes, likely went extinct with the takeover of tropical rainforests. From Marine Isotope Stages 12–10, (roughly 500 to 340 thousand years ago), the Chinese archaeological record becomes dominated by &quot;late-archaic&quot; non-&quot;erectus&quot; fossils, potentially representing multiple species including the Denisovans, &quot;H. longi&quot;, and &quot;H. juluensis&quot;. Peking Man&#x27;s final stay at Zhoukoudian may have taken place sometime between 400,000 and 230,000 years ago, though a more exact time interval is difficult to arrive at.

===Occupation of the cave===
Because human remains (encompassing males, females, and children), tools, and potential evidence of fire were found in so many layers, it has often been assumed Peking Man lived in the cave for hundreds of thousands of years.

In 1929, French archaeologist Henri Breuil suggested the overabundance of skulls compared to body remains is conspicuous, and hypothesised the remains represent the trophies of cannibalistic headhunters, either a band of &quot;H. erectus&quot; or a more &quot;advanced&quot; species of human. In 1937, French palaeoanthropologist Marcellin Boule believed the Peking Man brain was insufficiently evolved for such behaviour, based on the brain size, and suggested the skulls belonged to a primitive species and the limbs to a more evolved one, the latter manufacturing stone tools and cannibalising the former. Weidenreich did not believe brain size could be a dependable measure of cultural complexity, but, in 1939, he detailed the pathology of the Peking Man fossils and came to the conclusion of cannibalism or headhunting. The majority of the remains bear evidence of scars or injuries which he ascribed to attacks from clubs or stone tools; all the skulls have broken-in bases which he believed was done to extract the brain; and the femora have lengthwise splits, which he supposed was done to harvest the bone marrow.

Weidenreich&#x27;s sentiments became widely popular. Another school of thought, proposed by Pei in 1929, held that individuals were dragged in by hyenas. In 1939, pioneering the field of taphonomy (the study of fossilisation), German palaeontologist highlighted parallels between the Zhoukoudian fossils and cow bones gnawed by hyenas he studied at Vienna Zoo. Weidenreich subsequently conceded in 1941 that the breaking-off of the epiphyses of long bones is most likely due to hyena activity, but he was unconvinced that hyenas broke open the skull base or were capable of creating the long splits in the robust femora, still ascribing those to stone-tool-wielding cannibals. In addition to carnivore damage, Skull V bears a lesion on the right brow consistent with non-fatal blunt force trauma, which could have been caused by a human attack, or some accidental bump or fall.
By the mid-20th century, the hypothesis that Peking Man inhabited the cave once again became the mainstay, modeled around Jia&#x27;s 1975 book &quot;The Cave Home of Peking Man&quot;. In 1985, Binford and Chinese palaeoanthropologist Ho Chuan Kun instead hypothesised that Zhoukoudian was a &quot;trap&quot; which humans and animals fell into. They further proposed that deer remains, earlier assumed to have been Peking Man&#x27;s prey, were instead predominantly carried in by the giant hyena &quot;Pachycrocuta&quot;; and ash was deposited by naturally occurring wildfires fueled by bat guano, as they did not believe any human species had yet mastered hunting or fire at this time. In 2001, American geologist Paul Goldberg, Israeli archaeologist Steve Weiner, and colleagues determined that there is no evidence of any fire or ash at all at Zhoukoudian.

In 2000, American anthropologist Noel T. Boaz and colleagues argued the state of the bones is consistent with general hyena biting, gnawing, and bone-crunching, and suggested that &quot;Pachycrocuta&quot; — the largest known hyena to have ever lived — was more than capable of splitting robust bones, contrary to Weidenreich. They identified bite marks on 67% of the Peking Man fossils (28 specimens), and attributed this and all other perimortem (around the time of death) damage to hyenas. Boaz and colleagues conceded that stone tools must indicate human activity in (or at least near) the cave, but, with few exceptions, tools were randomly scattered across the layers (as mentioned by several previous scientists), which Goldberg and colleagues ascribed to bioturbation. This means that the distribution of the tools gives no indication of the duration of human habitation. In 2016, Shuangquan Zhang and colleagues were unable to detect significant evidence of animal, human, or water damage to the few deer bones collected from Layer 3, and concluded they simply fell into the cave from above. They noted taphonomic debates are nonetheless still ongoing. Indeed, the fire debate is still heated, with Chinese palaeoanthropologist Xing Gao and colleagues declaring &quot;clear-cut evidence for intentional fire use&quot; in Layer 4 in 2017, echoed by Chinese palaeoanthropologist Chao Huang and colleagues in 2022.

===Society===

During the Mao era, the dissemination of communist ideology among the general populace was imperative. The prospect of &quot;labour created humanity&quot; by prominent communist Friedrich Engels in his 1876 essay &quot;The Part Played by Labour in the Transition from Ape to Man&quot; became central to Chinese anthropology, and was included in almost any discussion regarding human evolution — including educational media for laypersons. Engels supposed that walking upright instead of on all-fours as other apes do freed the hands for labour, facilitating the evolution of all characteristically human traits, such as language, cooperation, and most importantly the growth of brain size to &quot;perfection,&quot; stating, &quot;the hand is not only the organ of labour, it is also the product of labour.&quot; Therefore, labour stimulates intelligence, detected in the archaeological record with stone tools.

As for the society of these ancient humans, including Peking Man, Engel&#x27;s 1884 book &quot;The Origin of the Family, Private Property and the State&quot; and his concept of primitive communism became the mainstay. Engels had largely based it on American ethnologist Lewis H. Morgan&#x27;s 1877 book &quot;Ancient Society&quot; detailing Morgan&#x27;s studies on &quot;primitive&quot; hunter-gatherer societies, namely the Iroquois. In the Mao era, Peking Man was consequently often painted as leading a dangerous life in the struggle against nature, organised into simple, peaceful tribes which foraged, hunted, and made stone tools in cooperative groups. As for gender roles, Peking Man society was most often described as &quot;men hunt and women gather.&quot;

To the West, emphasis was usually placed on intelligence rather than labour, especially after English primatologist Jane Goodall discovered chimpanzees could make tools in 1960 (i.e., the labour of tool manufacturing is not unique to humans). Nonetheless, popular Western and Eastern interpretations of ancient humans at this time converged greatly. In China, the influence of &quot;labour created humanity&quot; as well as Engel&#x27;s rhetoric waned after the rise of Deng with the dissemination throughout China of Western research and theories contradictory to Maoist ideology, particularly after 1985, though labour was still regarded as an important adaption. By this time, the concept of labour had expanded from purely manual to also intellectual work; a sense of aesthetics was instead heralded as a uniquely human trait.

Consistent with other prehistoric human populations, Peking Man had a rather short average lifespan. Out of a sample of 38 individuals, 15 died under the age of 14 years (39.5%), 3 died around 30 years (7%), 3 died from 40 to 50 years (7%), and 1 at 50 to 60 years (2.6%). The ages of the remaining 16 individuals (43%) could not be determined.

===Stone tools===

Despite Zhoukoudian being one of the most productive sites for East Asian stone tools, the IVPP prioritised human and animal fossils. Archaeological research stalled. This strongly contrasts with the rest of the world, especially Europe, where tools and manufacturing techniques have been categorised even on regional levels. Consequently, China&#x27;s Lower Palaeolithic record has generally been viewed as stagnant. Nonetheless, markers of broader periods in the West are conspicuously rare in the East, most notably hand axes characteristic of the Acheulean culture (typically associated with western &quot;H. erectus&quot; and &quot;H. heidelbergensis&quot;) or the Levallois technique of the Mousterian culture (typically Neanderthals). The apparent technological divide inspired American archaeologist Hallam L. Movius to draw the &quot;Movius Line&quot; in 1948, dividing the East into a &quot;chopping-tool culture&quot; and the West into a &quot;hand axe culture&quot;.

Though this is not well supported anymore with the discovery of some hand axe technology in Middle Pleistocene East Asia, hand axes are still conspicuously rare and crude compared to western contemporaries. This has been variously explained as:
*the Acheulean was invented in Africa after human dispersal through East Asia, but this would require that the two populations remained separated for nearly two million years;
*East Asia had poorer quality raw materials — namely quartz and quartzite — but hand axes made of these materials have been found in some Chinese localities, and East Asia is not completely void of higher-quality rock;
*East Asian &quot;H. erectus&quot; used biodegradable bamboo instead of stone for chopping tools, but this is difficult to test;
*or East Asia had a lower population density, leaving few tools behind in general, but demography is difficult to approximate in the fossil record.
Locality 1 at Zhoukoudian has produced more than 100,000 lithic pieces. A great chunk of these pieces appears to be wastage.

The tool assemblage is otherwise characterised by mainly large, dull choppers and simple, sharp flakes. Similarly, modified animal fossils at Zhoukoudian usually exhibit battering or cutting. Peking Man also rarely manufactured scrapers and (towards the later end of occupation) retouched tools such as points and potentially burins, as suggested by Breuil, but Pei and Movius believed his supposed burins were too crude to have been produced intentionally. Brueil also postulated that Peking Man predominantly relied on bone tools made of prey animals&#x27; antlers, jaws, and isolated teeth, but this idea did not receive wide support. Many of his supposed bone flakes could easily be ascribed to hyena activity.

In 1979, to highlight technological evolution, Pei and Zhang partitioned the Zhoukoudian industry into three stages:
*the early stage typified by the simple hammer and anvil technique (slamming the core against a rock) which produced large flakes namely from soft materials such as sandstone, weighing up to and measuring from Layer 11;
*the middle stage typified by the bipolar technique (smashing the core into several flakes with a hammerstone, out of which at least a few should be the correct size and shape) which made smaller flakes up to in weight and in length;
*and the late stage above Layer 5 typified by even smaller flakes made with harder and higher quality quartz and flint among other cobble. Quartz had to be collected some distance from the cave from local granite outcrops by the hills and riverbed.
These techniques produced unstandardised tools, and Binford was skeptical of any evidence of cultural evolution at all.

The debate as to whether Peking Man was the first human species to manufacture tools fleshed out in the early 1960s in the period of relative stability between the Great Leap Forward and the Cultural Revolution. The argument centred around whether Zhoukoudian tools were the most primitive and therefore the earliest tools (i. e., Peking Man is the most ancient human) championed by Pei, or if there were even more primitive and as of yet undiscovered tools (i. e., Peking Man is not the most ancient human) championed by Jia. In Western circles, Leakey had already reported an apparent pebble industry in Olduvai Gorge, Tanzania, in 1931, the first hard (albeit, controversial) evidence of a culture more primitive than the Acheulean. Radiometric dating in the 1960s established the Oldowan as the oldest known culture at 1.8 million years old.

Productive contemporaneous Chinese stone tool sites include Xiaochangliang (similar to Zhoukoudian), Mount Jigong, Bose Basin (which produced large tools often in excess of 10 cm, or 4 in), Jinniushan, Dingcun, and Panxian Dadong.

===Fire===
In 1929, Pei oversaw the excavation of Quartz Horizon 2 (Layer 7, Locus G) of Zhoukoudian, and reported burned bones and stones, ash, and redbud charcoal, which was interpreted as evidence of early fire usage by Peking Man. The evidence was widely accepted. Further excavation in 1935 of Layers 4–5 revealed more burned stones, ash, and hackberry seeds. Ash was deposited in horizontal and vertical patches, reminiscent of hearths.

In 1985, Binford and Ho doubted Peking Man actually inhabited Zhoukoudian, and asserted the material was burned by naturally occurring fires fueled by guano; though, the next year, Binford interpreted burned horse teeth as evidence of horse-head roasting. In 1998, Weiner, Goldberg, and colleagues found no evidence of hearths or siliceous aggregates (silicon particles, which form during combustion) in Layers 1 or 10; they therefore concluded the burned material was simply washed into the cave rather than being burned in the cave. The IVPP immediately responded, and, in 1999, Wu Xinzhi argued Weiner&#x27;s data was too limited to reach such conclusions. In 2001, Goldberg, Weiner, and colleagues concluded the ash layers are reworked loessic silts, and blackened carbon-rich sediments traditionally interpreted as charcoal are instead deposits of organic matter left to decompose in standing water. That is, there is no evidence of ash or fire at all.

Nonetheless, in 2004, Shen and colleagues reported evidence of a massive fire at Layer 10 — ostensibly as old as 770,000 years ago, during a glacial period — and asserted Peking Man needed to control fire so far back in time in order to survive such cold conditions. In 2014, Chinese anthropologist Maohua Zhong and colleagues reported elements associated with siliceous aggregates in Layers 4 and 6, and they also doubted the validity of Weiner&#x27;s analysis of Layer 10. Similarly, in 2017, Gao and colleagues reported &quot;clear-cut evidence of fire usage&quot; in Layer 4 with some evidence of manmade hearths which, based on magnetic susceptibility and colour, may have been heated to over . In 2022, Huang and colleagues also determined that at least 15 bones from Layer 4 (based on colour) were heated to above inside the cave, consistent with a campfire (or a prolonged wildfire, which they considered less likely inside a cave).

Elsewhere, evidence of fire usage is scarce in the archaeological record until 400 to 300 thousand years ago, which is generally interpreted as fire not being an integral part of life until this time, either because they could not create or well-maintain it.

==See also==
* &quot;Gigantopithecus&quot;
* &quot;Homo longi&quot;
* Peopling of China
* Prehistory of China
* Solo Man

==Notes==
==References==
==Further reading==
* 
* 
* 


==External links==

* UNESCO Peking Man Site at Zhoukoudian
* Human Timeline (Interactive) – Smithsonian, National Museum of Natural History (August 2016).</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q45931" start="0" end="10" title="Peking Man" label="Peking Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q68947" start="42" end="52" title="subspecies" label="subspecies"/>
<link wikidata="Q101362" start="62" end="72" title="Homo erectus" label="H. erectus"/>
<link wikidata="Q492596" start="133" end="151" title="Chibanian" label="Middle Pleistocene"/>
<link wikidata="Q40614" start="157" end="163" title="fossil" label="fossil"/>
<link wikidata="Q956" start="209" end="216" title="Beijing" label="Beijing"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="250" end="256" title="names of Beijing#Peking" label="Peking"/>
<link wikidata="Q499552" start="272" end="299" title="Zhoukoudian Peking Man Site" label="Zhoukoudian Peking Man Site"/>
<link wikidata="Q32993" start="857" end="885" title="Chinese Communist Revolution" label="Chinese Communist Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q7264" start="965" end="972" title="Marxism" label="Marxism"/>
<link wikidata="Q5868791" start="977" end="984" title="history of science and technology in the People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China" label="science"/>
<link wikidata="Q6186" start="1045" end="1054" title="communist" label="communist"/>
<link wikidata="Q3058841" start="1058" end="1069" title="Chinese nationalism" label="nationalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129401" start="1104" end="1123" title="primitive communism" label="primitive communism"/>
<link wikidata="Q323800" start="1128" end="1138" title="polygenism" label="polygenism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7478419" start="1250" end="1270" title="recent African origin of modern humans" label="Out of Africa theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q4785541" start="1449" end="1483" title="interbreeding between archaic and modern humans" label="interbreeding with human ancestors"/>
<link wikidata="Q2940726" start="1811" end="1824" title="sagittal keel" label="sagittal keel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1512017" start="1879" end="1888" title="long bone" label="long bone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1968264" start="1951" end="1962" title="prognathism" label="prognathism"/>
<link wikidata="Q273543" start="2054" end="2061" title="incisor" label="incisor"/>
<link wikidata="Q7502854" start="2067" end="2080" title="shovel-shaped incisors" label="shovel-shaped"/>
<link wikidata="Q602963" start="2790" end="2797" title="glacial period" label="glacial"/>
<link wikidata="Q487294" start="2807" end="2819" title="interglacial" label="interglacial"/>
<link wikidata="Q111955050" start="2967" end="2981" title="prehistory of nakedness and clothing" label="making clothes"/>
<link wikidata="Q912205" start="2987" end="3003" title="control of fire by early humans" label="controlling fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q135094" start="3256" end="3268" title="Pachycrocuta" label="Pachycrocuta"/>
<link wikidata="Q479257" start="3357" end="3367" title="stone tool" label="stone tool"/>
<link wikidata="Q11728731" start="3439" end="3447" title="chopper (archaeology)" label="choppers"/>
<link wikidata="Q332028" start="3452" end="3458" title="lithic flake" label="flakes"/>
<link wikidata="Q127233" start="3470" end="3479" title="retouch (lithics)" label="retouched"/>
<link wikidata="Q2605626" start="3494" end="3502" title="scraper (archaeology)" label="scrapers"/>
<link wikidata="Q10859027" start="3516" end="3522" title="burin (lithic flake)" label="burins"/>
<link wikidata="Q5099694" start="3591" end="3614" title="China Geological Survey" label="China Geological Survey"/>
<link wikidata="Q474816" start="3659" end="3686" title="Geological Survey of Sweden" label="Geological Survey of Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q853915" start="3700" end="3718" title="economic geology" label="economic geologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q954811" start="3719" end="3741" title="Johan Gunnar Andersson" label="Johan Gunnar Andersson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1254283" start="3828" end="3840" title="Long gu" label="dragon bones"/>
<link wikidata="Q210677" start="3871" end="3888" title="Chinese mythology" label="Chinese mythology"/>
<link wikidata="Q956" start="3908" end="3915" title="Beijing" label="Beijing"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3949" end="3955" title="names of Beijing#Peking" label="Peking"/>
<link wikidata="Q13659137" start="4093" end="4104" title="Zhoukoudian" label="Zhoukoudian"/>
<link wikidata="Q393462" start="4112" end="4129" title="Fangshan District" label="Fangshan District"/>
<link wikidata="Q23757" start="4210" end="4219" title="limestone" label="limestone"/>
<link wikidata="Q10850" start="4327" end="4333" title="rodent" label="rodent"/>
<link wikidata="Q8331" start="4407" end="4410" title="fox" label="fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q902180" start="4436" end="4445" title="trickster" label="trickster"/>
<link wikidata="Q2546681" start="4596" end="4613" title="Walter W. Granger" label="Walter W. Granger"/>
<link wikidata="Q78948" start="4643" end="4655" title="Otto Zdansky" label="Otto Zdansky"/>
<link wikidata="Q10492852" start="4682" end="4727" title="Paleontological Museum of Uppsala University" label="Palaeontological Museum of Uppsala University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1973416" start="4763" end="4771" title="locality (geology)" label="locality"/>
<link wikidata="Q43684" start="4845" end="4850" title="Henan" label="Henan"/>
<link wikidata="Q971275" start="4878" end="4887" title="Hipparion" label="Hipparion"/>
<link wikidata="Q530435" start="5427" end="5437" title="Carl Wiman" label="Carl Wiman"/>
<link wikidata="Q26796319" start="5542" end="5564" title="monarchy of Sweden" label="crown prince of Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q52878" start="5653" end="5668" title="Gustaf VI Adolf" label="Gustaf VI Adolf"/>
<link wikidata="Q654393" start="5762" end="5776" title="magic lantern" label="lantern slides"/>
<link wikidata="Q1177683" start="5874" end="5888" title="Davidson Black" label="Davidson Black"/>
<link wikidata="Q3372325" start="5909" end="5937" title="Peking Union Medical College" label="Peking Union Medical College"/>
<link wikidata="Q862034" start="5952" end="5974" title="Rockefeller Foundation" label="Rockefeller Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q6123787" start="5995" end="6006" title="Weng Wenhao" label="Weng Wenhao"/>
<link wikidata="Q189564" start="6092" end="6118" title="Pierre Teilhard de Chardin" label="Pierre Teilhard de Chardin"/>
<link wikidata="Q298289" start="6230" end="6274" title="Museum of Far Eastern Antiquities, Stockholm" label="Museum of Far Eastern Antiquities, Stockholm"/>
<link wikidata="Q374265" start="6355" end="6377" title="Amadeus William Grabau" label="Amadeus William Grabau"/>
<link wikidata="Q663021" start="6610" end="6630" title="Birger Bohlin" label="Anders Birger Bohlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061403" start="6775" end="6783" title="holotype" label="holotype"/>
<link wikidata="Q34740" start="6793" end="6798" title="genus" label="genus"/>
<link wikidata="Q7432" start="6803" end="6810" title="species" label="species"/>
<link wikidata="Q788451" start="6883" end="6892" title="author citation (zoology)" label="authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q15624851" start="7503" end="7525" title="archaeological looting" label="archaeological looting"/>
<link wikidata="Q5058895" start="7756" end="7784" title="Cenozoic Research Laboratory" label="Cenozoic Research Laboratory"/>
<link wikidata="Q704575" start="7869" end="7881" title="Pei Wenzhong" label="Pei Wenzhong"/>
<link wikidata="Q479257" start="8027" end="8037" title="stone tool" label="stone tool"/>
<link wikidata="Q912205" start="8066" end="8080" title="control of fire by early humans" label="early fire use"/>
<link wikidata="Q101362" start="8117" end="8129" title="Homo erectus" label="Homo erectus"/>
<link wikidata="Q713241" start="8336" end="8345" title="Jia Lanpo" label="Jia Lanpo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2582418" start="8448" end="8452" title="jiao (currency)" label="jiao"/>
<link wikidata="Q3150588" start="8483" end="8494" title="Coal in China" label="coal miners"/>
<link wikidata="Q25530138" start="8531" end="8535" title="yuan (currency)" label="yuan"/>
<link wikidata="Q939364" start="8821" end="8844" title="congenital heart defect" label="congenital heart defect"/>
<link wikidata="Q63344" start="8863" end="8880" title="Franz Weidenreich" label="Franz Weidenreich"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="8891" end="8903" title="Nazi Germany" label="Nazi Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q219230" start="9057" end="9083" title="Marco Polo Bridge incident" label="Marco Polo Bridge incident"/>
<link wikidata="Q170314" start="9124" end="9148" title="Second Sino-Japanese War" label="Second Sino-Japanese War"/>
<link wikidata="Q188712" start="9323" end="9337" title="Imperial Japan" label="Imperial Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3325510" start="9501" end="9513" title="plaster cast" label="plaster cast"/>
<link wikidata="Q217717" start="9885" end="9919" title="American Museum of Natural History" label="American Museum of Natural History"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="9923" end="9936" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q15982732" start="10054" end="10072" title="Raymond B. Fosdick" label="Raymond B. Fosdick"/>
<link wikidata="Q5466528" start="10242" end="10253" title="footlocker (luggage)" label="footlockers"/>
<link wikidata="Q11218" start="10288" end="10314" title="United States Marine Corps" label="United States Marine Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q11400543" start="10360" end="10393" title="SS President Harrison" label="SS &amp;quot;President Harrison&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q978403" start="10415" end="10431" title="Qinhuangdao Port" label="Qinhuangdao Port"/>
<link wikidata="Q5027261" start="10458" end="10470" title="Camp Holcomb" label="Camp Holcomb"/>
<link wikidata="Q195720" start="10915" end="10923" title="MV Awa Maru (1942)" label="Awa Maru"/>
<link wikidata="Q200253" start="10954" end="10982" title="traditional Chinese medicine" label="traditional Chinese medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q488945" start="11091" end="11116" title="Resist America, Aid Korea" label="Resist America, Aid Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q574827" start="11154" end="11167" title="Anti-Americanism" label="anti-American"/>
<link wikidata="Q8663" start="11189" end="11199" title="Korean War" label="Korean War"/>
<link wikidata="Q91764" start="11291" end="11298" title="defensive fighting position" label="foxhole"/>
<link wikidata="Q17427" start="11413" end="11416" title="Chinese Communist Party" label="CCP"/>
<link wikidata="Q712870" start="11417" end="11434" title="Eighth Route Army" label="Eighth Route Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q31113" start="11461" end="11472" title="Kuomintang" label="Nationalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q179975" start="11501" end="11518" title="Chinese Civil War" label="Chinese Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q16924561" start="12606" end="12645" title="ideology of the Chinese Communist Party" label="ideology of the Chinese Communist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q7264" start="12937" end="12944" title="Marxism" label="Marxism"/>
<link wikidata="Q133182" start="12980" end="12992" title="superstition" label="superstition"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074275" start="12995" end="13005" title="Chinese folk religion" label="traditions"/>
<link wikidata="Q909230" start="13011" end="13025" title="Chinese creation myths" label="creation myths"/>
<link wikidata="Q6186" start="13137" end="13146" title="communism" label="communism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1504916" start="13244" end="13302" title="Institute of Vertebrate Paleontology and Paleoanthropology" label="Institute of Vertebrate Paleontology and Paleoanthropology"/>
<link wikidata="Q530471" start="13329" end="13356" title="Chinese Academy of Sciences" label="Chinese Academy of Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q699428" start="13463" end="13477" title="Yang Zhongjian" label="Yang Zhongjian"/>
<link wikidata="Q8690" start="13491" end="13510" title="Cultural Revolution" label="Cultural Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q16977" start="14164" end="14177" title="Deng Xiaoping" label="Deng Xiaoping"/>
<link wikidata="Q40178" start="14315" end="14324" title="acid rain" label="acid rain"/>
<link wikidata="Q112274547" start="14393" end="14409" title="environmentalism in China" label="environmentalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="14440" end="14454" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q9259" start="14484" end="14503" title="World Heritage Site" label="World Heritage Site"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195256" start="14824" end="14831" title="Yuanmou Man" label="Yuanmou"/>
<link wikidata="Q1342081" start="14833" end="14841" title="Tiandong County" label="Tiandong"/>
<link wikidata="Q959160" start="14843" end="14850" title="Jianshi County" label="Jianshi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1199133" start="14852" end="14859" title="Yun County, Hubei" label="Yunxian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067903" start="14861" end="14868" title="Lantian Man" label="Lantian"/>
<link wikidata="Q263072" start="14870" end="14876" title="Luonan County" label="Luonan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1198343" start="14878" end="14884" title="Yiyuan County" label="Yiyuan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1198984" start="14886" end="14893" title="Nanzhao County" label="Nanzhao"/>
<link wikidata="Q977192" start="14895" end="14902" title="Nanjing Man" label="Nanjing"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14904" end="14910" title="He County#Archaeology" label="Hexian"/>
<link wikidata="Q85767600" start="14916" end="14923" title="Hualong Cave" label="Dongzhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q492596" start="15501" end="15519" title="Chibanian" label="Middle Pleistocene"/>
<link wikidata="Q602963" start="16084" end="16098" title="glacial period" label="glacial period"/>
<link wikidata="Q55501994" start="16238" end="16247" title="Shangchen" label="Shangchen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1035" start="16419" end="16433" title="Charles Darwin" label="Charles Darwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165434" start="16469" end="16483" title="Descent of Man" label="Descent of Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q48246" start="16764" end="16777" title="Ernst Haeckel" label="Ernst Haeckel"/>
<link wikidata="Q470970" start="16934" end="16941" title="Lemuria (continent)" label="Lemuria"/>
<link wikidata="Q34740" start="16986" end="16991" title="genus" label="genus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2853061" start="17008" end="17023" title="Pithecanthropus" label="Pithecanthropus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1239" start="17103" end="17115" title="Indian Ocean" label="Indian Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q317176" start="17221" end="17234" title="Eugène Dubois" label="Eugène Dubois"/>
<link wikidata="Q523553" start="17247" end="17281" title="Royal Netherlands East Indies Army" label="Royal Netherlands East Indies Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q23450149" start="17307" end="17319" title="missing link (human evolution)" label="missing link"/>
<link wikidata="Q3757" start="17329" end="17333" title="Java" label="Java"/>
<link wikidata="Q176503" start="17361" end="17366" title="femur" label="femur"/>
<link wikidata="Q192993" start="17368" end="17376" title="Java Man" label="Java Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q82972" start="17755" end="17775" title="History of China" label="Chinese civilisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5684" start="17801" end="17808" title="Babylon" label="Babylon"/>
<link wikidata="Q42309911" start="17810" end="17828" title="Sino-Babylonianism" label="Sino-Babylonianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q15627210" start="17867" end="17888" title="Terrien de Lacouperie" label="Terrien de Lacouperie"/>
<link wikidata="Q2042898" start="17918" end="17942" title="historical race concepts" label="historical race concepts"/>
<link wikidata="Q559003" start="18016" end="18035" title="degeneration theory" label="degeneration theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q852377" start="18133" end="18153" title="New Culture Movement" label="New Culture Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q190517" start="18192" end="18200" title="1911 Revolution" label="the fall"/>
<link wikidata="Q8733" start="18208" end="18220" title="Qing dynasty" label="Qing dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q13426199" start="18250" end="18267" title="Republic of China (1912–1949)" label="Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q3234208" start="18311" end="18335" title="Western imperialism in Asia" label="imperialistic influences"/>
<link wikidata="Q40171" start="18613" end="18624" title="Neanderthal" label="Neanderthal"/>
<link wikidata="Q312069" start="18853" end="18875" title="Henry Fairfield Osborn" label="Henry Fairfield Osborn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088748" start="18895" end="18917" title="William Diller Matthew" label="William Diller Matthew"/>
<link wikidata="Q5451" start="19006" end="19015" title="Himalayas" label="Himalayas"/>
<link wikidata="Q17252" start="19020" end="19025" title="Tibet" label="Tibet"/>
<link wikidata="Q372949" start="19111" end="19118" title="bipedal" label="bipedal"/>
<link wikidata="Q338460" start="19232" end="19244" title="Negroid race" label="Negroid race"/>
<link wikidata="Q379590" start="19340" end="19352" title="Raymond Dart" label="Raymond Dart"/>
<link wikidata="Q762810" start="19391" end="19402" title="Taung child" label="Taung child"/>
<link wikidata="Q239272" start="19410" end="19436" title="Australopithecus africanus" label="Australopithecus africanus"/>
<link wikidata="Q722050" start="19504" end="19518" title="Charles Dawson" label="Charles Dawson"/>
<link wikidata="Q244937" start="19542" end="19554" title="Piltdown Man" label="Piltdown Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q102470" start="19635" end="19638" title="ape" label="ape"/>
<link wikidata="Q76267" start="19936" end="19943" title="Miocene" label="Miocene"/>
<link wikidata="Q76259" start="19975" end="19983" title="Pliocene" label="Pliocene"/>
<link wikidata="Q216622" start="19993" end="20004" title="Tarim Basin" label="Tarim Basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153001" start="20008" end="20023" title="Northwest China" label="Northwest China"/>
<link wikidata="Q171283" start="20303" end="20307" title="Homo" label="Homo"/>
<link wikidata="Q25546" start="20523" end="20534" title="Pleistocene" label="Pleistocene"/>
<link wikidata="Q115690473" start="20589" end="20607" title="early modern human" label="early modern human"/>
<link wikidata="Q36422" start="20635" end="20644" title="Neolithic" label="Neolithic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370788" start="20939" end="20950" title="Sinocentrism" label="Sinocentric"/>
<link wikidata="Q207912" start="21058" end="21072" title="Mongoloid race" label="Mongoloid race"/>
<link wikidata="Q1509795" start="21095" end="21117" title="multiregional origin of modern humans" label="polycentric hypothesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q323800" start="21277" end="21287" title="polygenism" label="polygenism"/>
<link wikidata="Q187985" start="21412" end="21420" title="Tibetan people" label="Tibetans"/>
<link wikidata="Q41975" start="21426" end="21432" title="Mongol" label="Mongol"/>
<link wikidata="Q3313758" start="21584" end="21591" title="History of the People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China (1949–1976)" label="Mao era"/>
<link wikidata="Q185939" start="22265" end="22271" title="gibbon" label="gibbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q733942" start="22368" end="22388" title="Grafton Elliot Smith" label="Grafton Elliot Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q606196" start="22610" end="22618" title="chimera (paleontology)" label="chimaera"/>
<link wikidata="Q41050" start="22650" end="22659" title="orangutan" label="orangutan"/>
<link wikidata="Q76750" start="22920" end="22957" title="Gustav Heinrich Ralph von Koenigswald" label="Gustav Heinrich Ralph von Koenigswald"/>
<link wikidata="Q18390905" start="22997" end="23006" title="Mojokerto child" label="Mojokerto"/>
<link wikidata="Q842328" start="23011" end="23019" title="Sangiran" label="Sangiran"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="23524" end="23562" title="human taxonomy#Homo sapiens subspecies" label="subspecies of &amp;quot;Homo sapiens&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q3468429" start="24083" end="24104" title="Wilfrid Le Gros Clark" label="Wilfrid Le Gros Clark"/>
<link wikidata="Q2673092" start="24122" end="24140" title="nomenclature codes" label="nomenclature codes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2763" start="24233" end="24246" title="The Holocaust" label="The Holocaust"/>
<link wikidata="Q717939" start="24368" end="24374" title="racial hygiene" label="purity"/>
<link wikidata="Q7162" start="24441" end="24449" title="genetics" label="genetics"/>
<link wikidata="Q246731" start="24487" end="24508" title="Theodosius Dobzhansky" label="Theodosius Dobzhansky"/>
<link wikidata="Q2278483" start="24513" end="24530" title="Sherwood Washburn" label="Sherwood Washburn"/>
<link wikidata="Q337897" start="24534" end="24563" title="modern synthesis (20th century)" label="modern evolutionary synthesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5354" start="24635" end="24645" title="Ernst Mayr" label="Ernst Mayr"/>
<link wikidata="Q511893" start="24860" end="24877" title="australopithecine" label="australopithecine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088349" start="25358" end="25371" title="chronospecies" label="chronospecies"/>
<link wikidata="Q103237" start="25457" end="25473" title="Australopithecus" label="Australopithecus"/>
<link wikidata="Q171283" start="25512" end="25525" title="archaic human" label="archaic human"/>
<link wikidata="Q1772910" start="25757" end="25774" title="scientific racism" label="scientific racism"/>
<link wikidata="Q6206" start="25797" end="25807" title="capitalism" label="capitalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q97356625" start="25818" end="25835" title="racial capitalism" label="racial capitalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1205521" start="26424" end="26431" title="Chinese economic reform" label="opening"/>
<link wikidata="Q167651" start="26509" end="26515" title="Maoism" label="Maoist"/>
<link wikidata="Q14837" start="26916" end="26928" title="Louis Leakey" label="Louis Leakey"/>
<link wikidata="Q3880129" start="26942" end="26959" title="Chellean Man" label="Olduvai Hominin 9"/>
<link wikidata="Q7502854" start="27486" end="27508" title="shovel-shaped incisors" label="shovel-shaped incisors"/>
<link wikidata="Q1202639" start="27598" end="27608" title="Wushan Man" label="Wushan Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q179842" start="27804" end="27819" title="Tibetan Plateau" label="Tibetan Plateau"/>
<link wikidata="Q47097" start="27838" end="27845" title="Guizhou" label="Guizhou"/>
<link wikidata="Q2594669" start="28008" end="28017" title="Wu Xinzhi" label="Wu Xinzhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q834098" start="28118" end="28126" title="Dali Man" label="Dali Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q13473465" start="28134" end="28148" title="Jinniushan" label="Jinniushan Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q25047638" start="28652" end="28670" title="Racial nationalism" label="racial nationalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q543491" start="29065" end="29078" title="paleogenetics" label="palaeogenetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q151055" start="29234" end="29243" title="Denisovan" label="Denisovan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4785541" start="29256" end="29305" title="Archaic human admixture with modern humans" label="early modern humans interbred with archaic humans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1248233" start="29545" end="29551" title="relict (biology)" label="relict"/>
<link wikidata="Q39350" start="30838" end="30848" title="speciation" label="speciation"/>
<link wikidata="Q966735" start="30874" end="30879" title="cline (biology)" label="cline"/>
<link wikidata="Q65045088" start="31536" end="31546" title="tip dating" label="tip dating"/>
<link wikidata="Q16370" start="31621" end="31629" title="mandible" label="mandible"/>
<link wikidata="Q655357" start="31695" end="31700" title="atlas (anatomy)" label="atlas"/>
<link wikidata="Q900457" start="31712" end="31725" title="cervical vertebrae" label="neck vertebra"/>
<link wikidata="Q16343" start="31730" end="31738" title="clavicle" label="clavicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q162595" start="31742" end="31748" title="humerus" label="humeri"/>
<link wikidata="Q728889" start="31782" end="31787" title="ilium (bone)" label="iliac"/>
<link wikidata="Q178366" start="31821" end="31826" title="tibia" label="tibia"/>
<link wikidata="Q13141" start="31845" end="31856" title="lunate bone" label="lunate bone"/>
<link wikidata="Q3265814" start="32130" end="32141" title="Lucile Swan" label="Lucile Swan"/>
<link wikidata="Q182895" start="32236" end="32243" title="maxilla" label="maxilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q385418" start="32671" end="32685" title="Ian Tattersall" label="Ian Tattersall"/>
<link wikidata="Q4771383" start="32958" end="32975" title="piriform aperture" label="piriform aperture"/>
<link wikidata="Q488415" start="33035" end="33042" title="anatomical terms of location" label="lateral"/>
<link wikidata="Q1968264" start="33141" end="33152" title="prognathism" label="prognathism"/>
<link wikidata="Q962872" start="33277" end="33287" title="apomorphy and synapomorphy" label="apomorphic"/>
<link wikidata="Q190046" start="33454" end="33463" title="ellipsoid" label="ellipsoid"/>
<link wikidata="Q7233568" start="33581" end="33606" title="post-orbital constriction" label="post-orbital constriction"/>
<link wikidata="Q12510" start="33649" end="33654" title="torus" label="torus"/>
<link wikidata="Q918118" start="33939" end="33952" title="frontal sinus" label="frontal sinus"/>
<link wikidata="Q156075" start="34095" end="34106" title="orbit (anatomy)" label="eye sockets"/>
<link wikidata="Q265092" start="34121" end="34145" title="superior orbital fissure" label="superior orbital fissure"/>
<link wikidata="Q38155" start="34267" end="34277" title="nasal bone" label="nasal bone"/>
<link wikidata="Q2940726" start="34486" end="34499" title="sagittal keel" label="sagittal keel"/>
<link wikidata="Q775497" start="34559" end="34573" title="coronal suture" label="coronal suture"/>
<link wikidata="Q7074696" start="34613" end="34620" title="obelion" label="obelion"/>
<link wikidata="Q16298" start="34643" end="34656" title="parietal bone" label="parietal bone"/>
<link wikidata="Q4115124" start="34874" end="34891" title="parietal eminence" label="parietal eminence"/>
<link wikidata="Q16298" start="34897" end="34910" title="temporal line" label="temporal line"/>
<link wikidata="Q4175787" start="35025" end="35055" title="squamous part of temporal bone" label="squamous part of temporal bone"/>
<link wikidata="Q833434" start="35107" end="35121" title="temporal fossa" label="temporal fossa"/>
<link wikidata="Q3543924" start="35202" end="35235" title="mastoid part of the temporal bone" label="mastoid part of the temporal bone"/>
<link wikidata="Q258328" start="35284" end="35293" title="ear canal" label="ear canal"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="35321" end="35336" title="Mastoid part of the temporal bone#Mastoid process" label="mastoid process"/>
<link wikidata="Q827134" start="35552" end="35561" title="temporomandibular joint" label="jaw hinge"/>
<link wikidata="Q186102" start="35657" end="35671" title="zygomatic bone" label="zygomatic bone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1983003" start="36021" end="36026" title="sulcus (morphology)" label="sulci"/>
<link wikidata="Q7075698" start="36200" end="36213" title="occipital bun" label="occipital bun"/>
<link wikidata="Q2258192" start="36530" end="36538" title="endocast" label="endocast"/>
<link wikidata="Q7233568" start="36610" end="36635" title="post-orbital constriction" label="post-orbital constriction"/>
<link wikidata="Q749520" start="36641" end="36653" title="frontal lobe" label="frontal lobe"/>
<link wikidata="Q815334" start="36708" end="36721" title="parietal lobe" label="parietal lobe"/>
<link wikidata="Q744385" start="36880" end="36893" title="temporal lobe" label="temporal lobe"/>
<link wikidata="Q848340" start="36955" end="36969" title="occipital lobe" label="occipital lobe"/>
<link wikidata="Q130983" start="37122" end="37132" title="cerebellum" label="cerebellum"/>
<link wikidata="Q19625" start="37319" end="37325" title="canine (tooth)" label="canine"/>
<link wikidata="Q5259398" start="37366" end="37376" title="tooth root" label="tooth root"/>
<link wikidata="Q1968264" start="37397" end="37408" title="prognathism" label="prognathism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384176" start="37467" end="37476" title="exostosis" label="exostoses"/>
<link wikidata="Q189218" start="37497" end="37502" title="molar (tooth)" label="molar"/>
<link wikidata="Q172605" start="37651" end="37657" title="palate" label="palate"/>
<link wikidata="Q833871" start="37886" end="37901" title="mental foramen" label="mental foramina"/>
<link wikidata="Q143480" start="37908" end="37919" title="dental arch" label="dental arch"/>
<link wikidata="Q273543" start="37953" end="37960" title="incisor" label="incisor"/>
<link wikidata="Q940147" start="38455" end="38461" title="crown (tooth)" label="crowns"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046513" start="38525" end="38530" title="cusp (anatomy)" label="cusps"/>
<link wikidata="Q553" start="38571" end="38577" title="tooth" label="enamel"/>
<link wikidata="Q189637" start="38578" end="38585" title="dentine" label="dentine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1418632" start="39192" end="39203" title="Turkana Boy" label="Turkana Boy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2353265" start="39412" end="39417" title="diaphysis" label="shaft"/>
<link wikidata="Q4844892" start="39823" end="39835" title="femoral neck" label="femoral neck"/>
<link wikidata="Q218815" start="41042" end="41049" title="Dmanisi hominins" label="Dmanisi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2567282" start="41388" end="41394" title="diploë" label="diploë"/>
<link wikidata="Q265868" start="41407" end="41417" title="cancellous bone" label="cancellous"/>
<link wikidata="Q265868" start="41445" end="41453" title="cortical bone" label="cortical"/>
<link wikidata="Q1512017" start="41584" end="41593" title="long bone" label="long bone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131385" start="41680" end="41698" title="medullary cavity" label="medullary cavities"/>
<link wikidata="Q546523" start="41710" end="41721" title="bone marrow" label="bone marrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q5600920" start="42056" end="42074" title="greater trochanter" label="greater trochanter"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="42321" end="42341" title="Ward&amp;#x27;s triangle" label="Ward&amp;#x27;s triangle"/>
<link wikidata="Q932223" start="42572" end="42584" title="plesiomorphy and symplesiomorphy" label="plesiomorphy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348449" start="42638" end="42650" title="Meganthropus" label="Meganthropus"/>
<link wikidata="Q310434" start="42667" end="42682" title="Gigantopithecus" label="Gigantopithecus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1586088" start="42900" end="42918" title="hypoparathyroidism" label="hypoparathyroidism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072476" start="42987" end="42994" title="bending" label="bending"/>
<link wikidata="Q177601" start="43390" end="43397" title="macaque" label="macaque"/>
<link wikidata="Q20644616" start="43404" end="43420" title="Zhoukoudian wolf" label="Zhoukoudian wolf"/>
<link wikidata="Q124410" start="43426" end="43442" title="Asian black bear" label="Asian black bear"/>
<link wikidata="Q36341" start="43444" end="43454" title="brown bear" label="brown bear"/>
<link wikidata="Q534913" start="43472" end="43501" title="Dicerorhinus" label="Dicerorhinus choukoutienensis"/>
<link wikidata="Q188949" start="43513" end="43530" title="woolly rhinoceros" label="woolly rhinoceros"/>
<link wikidata="Q27022" start="43548" end="43566" title="Equus (genus)" label="Equus sanmeniensis"/>
<link wikidata="Q190508" start="43578" end="43596" title="Siberian musk deer" label="Siberian musk deer"/>
<link wikidata="Q57081337" start="43619" end="43644" title="Sinomegaceros" label="Sinomegaceros pachyosteus"/>
<link wikidata="Q7368" start="43652" end="43657" title="sheep" label="sheep"/>
<link wikidata="Q18099" start="43659" end="43664" title="bison" label="bison"/>
<link wikidata="Q7126427" start="43670" end="43700" title="Palaeoloxodon namadicus" label="Asian straight-tusked elephant"/>
<link wikidata="Q28425" start="43702" end="43705" title="bat" label="bat"/>
<link wikidata="Q184067" start="43708" end="43712" title="pika" label="pika"/>
<link wikidata="Q10850" start="43714" end="43720" title="rodent" label="rodent"/>
<link wikidata="Q41631" start="43727" end="43732" title="shrew" label="shrew"/>
<link wikidata="Q2900104" start="43918" end="43938" title="Nyctereutes" label="Nyctereutes sinensis"/>
<link wikidata="Q132585" start="43962" end="43975" title="dhole" label="Cuon antiquus"/>
<link wikidata="Q187024" start="43987" end="43997" title="corsac fox" label="corsac fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q728454" start="44003" end="44015" title="Asian badger" label="Asian badger"/>
<link wikidata="Q16894566" start="44017" end="44027" title="Gulo" label="wolverines"/>
<link wikidata="Q135094" start="44051" end="44063" title="Pachycrocuta" label="Pachycrocuta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1274400" start="44099" end="44123" title="Machairodus" label="Machairodus inexpectatus"/>
<link wikidata="Q19939" start="44135" end="44140" title="tiger" label="tiger"/>
<link wikidata="Q34706" start="44146" end="44153" title="leopard" label="leopard"/>
<link wikidata="Q190516" start="44155" end="44164" title="sika deer" label="sika deer"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="44185" end="44200" title="Spirocerus" label="Spirocerus peii"/>
<link wikidata="Q83521" start="44236" end="44253" title="Bubalus" label="Bubalus teilhardi"/>
<link wikidata="Q487294" start="44331" end="44343" title="interglacial" label="interglacial"/>
<link wikidata="Q111955050" start="44651" end="44670" title="prehistory of nakedness and clothing" label="clothing technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q381783" start="45132" end="45145" title="Lewis Binford" label="Lewis Binford"/>
<link wikidata="Q706339" start="45638" end="45655" title="Celtis sinensis" label="Chinese hackberry"/>
<link wikidata="Q208021" start="45657" end="45663" title="walnut" label="walnut"/>
<link wikidata="Q578307" start="45665" end="45673" title="hazelnut" label="hazelnut"/>
<link wikidata="Q12024" start="45675" end="45679" title="pine" label="pine"/>
<link wikidata="Q131113" start="45681" end="45684" title="elm" label="elm"/>
<link wikidata="Q133617" start="45690" end="45702" title="Rosa multiflora" label="rambler rose"/>
<link wikidata="Q2166215" start="45843" end="45863" title="Marine Isotope Stage" label="Marine Isotope Stage"/>
<link wikidata="Q107344401" start="46100" end="46108" title="Homo longi" label="H. longi"/>
<link wikidata="Q130969853" start="46126" end="46138" title="Homo juluensis" label="H. juluensis"/>
<link wikidata="Q366786" start="46607" end="46619" title="Henri Breuil" label="Henri Breuil"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345851" start="46768" end="46779" title="headhunting" label="headhunters"/>
<link wikidata="Q543912" start="46907" end="46922" title="Marcellin Boule" label="Marcellin Boule"/>
<link wikidata="Q7208" start="47309" end="47318" title="pathology" label="pathology"/>
<link wikidata="Q596086" start="47889" end="47898" title="taphonomy" label="taphonomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q830" start="48010" end="48013" title="cow" label="cow"/>
<link wikidata="Q752283" start="48051" end="48061" title="Vienna Zoo" label="Vienna Zoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1801229" start="48134" end="48143" title="epiphyses" label="epiphyses"/>
<link wikidata="Q169950" start="49146" end="49154" title="wildfire" label="wildfire"/>
<link wikidata="Q170185" start="49170" end="49175" title="guano" label="guano"/>
<link wikidata="Q7150931" start="49294" end="49307" title="Paul Goldberg (geologist)" label="Paul Goldberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q17517271" start="49473" end="49485" title="Noel T. Boaz" label="Noel T. Boaz"/>
<link wikidata="Q864907" start="50202" end="50214" title="bioturbation" label="bioturbation"/>
<link wikidata="Q34787" start="51054" end="51070" title="Friedrich Engels" label="Friedrich Engels"/>
<link wikidata="Q17061951" start="51095" end="51154" title="The Part Played by Labour in the Transition from Ape to Man" label="The Part Played by Labour in the Transition from Ape to Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q21907045" start="51366" end="51375" title="quadrupedalism" label="all-fours"/>
<link wikidata="Q1197765" start="51884" end="51940" title="The Origin of the Family, Private Property and the State" label="The Origin of the Family, Private Property and the State"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129401" start="51966" end="51985" title="primitive communism" label="primitive communism"/>
<link wikidata="Q313458" start="52059" end="52074" title="Lewis H. Morgan" label="Lewis H. Morgan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4752923" start="52098" end="52113" title="Ancient Society" label="Ancient Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q68518" start="52215" end="52223" title="Iroquois" label="Iroquois"/>
<link wikidata="Q184746" start="52673" end="52685" title="Jane Goodall" label="Jane Goodall"/>
<link wikidata="Q4126704" start="52697" end="52707" title="chimpanzee" label="chimpanzee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1109139" start="52777" end="52797" title="tool use by animals" label="not unique to humans"/>
<link wikidata="Q35986" start="53329" end="53338" title="aesthetic" label="aesthetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7463501" start="54107" end="54125" title="Lower Paleolithic" label="Lower Palaeolithic"/>
<link wikidata="Q479448" start="54273" end="54281" title="hand axe" label="hand axe"/>
<link wikidata="Q210774" start="54305" end="54314" title="Acheulean" label="Acheulean"/>
<link wikidata="Q105784" start="54391" end="54409" title="Homo heidelbergensis" label="H. heidelbergensis"/>
<link wikidata="Q841321" start="54424" end="54443" title="Levallois technique" label="Levallois technique"/>
<link wikidata="Q259118" start="54451" end="54461" title="Mousterian" label="Mousterian"/>
<link wikidata="Q22007064" start="54562" end="54578" title="Hallam L. Movius" label="Hallam L. Movius"/>
<link wikidata="Q740206" start="54597" end="54608" title="Movius Line" label="Movius Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q11728731" start="54655" end="54668" title="chopper (archaeology)" label="chopping-tool"/>
<link wikidata="Q43010" start="55208" end="55214" title="quartz" label="quartz"/>
<link wikidata="Q237883" start="55219" end="55228" title="quartzite" label="quartzite"/>
<link wikidata="Q332028" start="55873" end="55879" title="lithic flake" label="flakes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2605626" start="56005" end="56013" title="scraper (archaeology)" label="scrapers"/>
<link wikidata="Q127233" start="56056" end="56065" title="retouch (lithics)" label="retouched"/>
<link wikidata="Q10859027" start="56103" end="56109" title="burin (lithic flake)" label="burins"/>
<link wikidata="Q4941588" start="56298" end="56307" title="bone tool" label="bone tool"/>
<link wikidata="Q834007" start="56336" end="56342" title="antler" label="antler"/>
<link wikidata="Q13085" start="56775" end="56784" title="sandstone" label="sandstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1669978" start="56896" end="56900" title="lithic core" label="core"/>
<link wikidata="Q2915181" start="56928" end="56939" title="hammerstone" label="hammerstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q41177" start="57269" end="57276" title="granite" label="granite"/>
<link wikidata="Q58715" start="57598" end="57616" title="Great Leap Forward" label="Great Leap Forward"/>
<link wikidata="Q645143" start="58028" end="58036" title="industry (archaeology)" label="industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q217043" start="58040" end="58053" title="Olduvai Gorge" label="Olduvai Gorge"/>
<link wikidata="Q214753" start="58170" end="58188" title="Radiometric dating" label="Radiometric dating"/>
<link wikidata="Q746287" start="58218" end="58225" title="Oldowan" label="Oldowan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1125132" start="58341" end="58355" title="Xiaochangliang" label="Xiaochangliang"/>
<link wikidata="Q834052" start="58382" end="58394" title="Mount Jigong" label="Mount Jigong"/>
<link wikidata="Q18359115" start="58396" end="58406" title="Bose Basin" label="Bose Basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5278181" start="58483" end="58490" title="Dingcun" label="Dingcun"/>
<link wikidata="Q29033" start="58662" end="58668" title="Cercis" label="redbud"/>
<link wikidata="Q248582" start="58861" end="58870" title="Celtis" label="hackberry"/>
<link wikidata="Q585473" start="58947" end="58953" title="hearth" label="hearth"/>
<link wikidata="Q670" start="59287" end="59296" title="silicon" label="siliceous"/>
<link wikidata="Q30602076" start="59297" end="59307" title="aggregate (geology)" label="aggregates"/>
<link wikidata="Q133235" start="59346" end="59356" title="combustion" label="combustion"/>
<link wikidata="Q270699" start="59705" end="59709" title="silt" label="silt"/>
<link wikidata="Q623" start="59726" end="59732" title="carbon" label="carbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1783121" start="59810" end="59824" title="organic matter" label="organic matter"/>
<link wikidata="Q3046751" start="59846" end="59860" title="standing water" label="standing water"/>
<link wikidata="Q691463" start="60549" end="60572" title="magnetic susceptibility" label="magnetic susceptibility"/>
<link wikidata="Q310434" start="61139" end="61154" title="Gigantopithecus" label="Gigantopithecus"/>
<link wikidata="Q107344401" start="61169" end="61179" title="Homo longi" label="Homo longi"/>
<link wikidata="Q7166093" start="61188" end="61205" title="Peopling of China" label="Peopling of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q932396" start="61208" end="61227" title="Prehistory of China" label="Prehistory of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142896" start="61230" end="61238" title="Solo Man" label="Solo Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q131626" start="61389" end="61400" title="Smithsonian Institution" label="Smithsonian"/>
<link wikidata="Q148554" start="61402" end="61436" title="National Museum of Natural History" label="National Museum of Natural History"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="253341" wikidata="Q76376294" url="?curid=253341" title="List of industrial engineers">
<text>This is a list of notable industrial engineers, people who were trained in or practiced industrial engineering who have established prominence in their profession.

== A ==
* Bud Adams – oil tycoon and owner of the Tennessee Titans.
* Ravindra K. Ahuja – editor of journals &quot;Operations Research&quot;, &quot;Transportation Science&quot;, and &quot;Networks&quot;
* Horace Lucian Arnold – American engineer, inventor, engineering journalist, and early writer on management

== B ==
* Ali Babacan – State Minister for Economy of Republic of Turkey (Middle East Technical University)
* Carl Georg Barth – Norwegian-American mathematician and mechanical engineer who improved and popularized the industrial use of compound slide rules
* Leslie Benmark – known for work in engineering education, specifically accreditation
* Karen Bursic – American professor and undergraduate program director at University of Pittsburgh

== C ==
* Alexander Hamilton Church – English efficiency engineer, accountant and early writer on accountancy and management
* Richard W. Conway – Emerson Electric Company Professor of Manufacturing Management, Emeritus, at Cornell University
* Tim Cook – Chief Executive Officer of Apple Inc. (Auburn University) aug 2011
* Roger Corman – American film producer and director (Stanford University)
* Nancy Currie – astronaut

== D ==
* John Dasburg – former CEO of Northwest Airlines and Burger King (University of Florida)
* John Z. DeLorean – former General Motors executive; founder of DeLorean Motors
* W. Edwards Deming – forerunner of Total Quality Management (TQC)
* Mike Duke – President and CEO of Wal-Mart Stores USA (Georgia Institute of Technology)

== E ==
* Harrington Emerson – American efficiency engineer and early management theorist
* A. K. Erlang – communications, queueing (University of Copenhagen)
* Michael Eskew – CEO of United Parcel Service (Purdue University)

==F==
* Adel Fakeih – Saudi Arabian politician
* Giacomo Ferrari – Italian politician and mayor of Parma
* Henry Ford – founder of the Ford Motor Company; revolutionized industrial production by being the first to apply assembly line manufacturing to a production process
* Joe Forehand – Chairman of the board and former CEO of Accenture (Auburn University)

== G ==
* Henry Gantt – inventor of the Gantt chart
*Frank Gilbreth – time and motion studies
* Lillian Gilbreth – time and motion studies (University of California, Berkeley)
* Samuel Ginn – wireless communications pioneer; former chairman of Vodafone (Auburn University)
* Joe Girardi – manager, Florida Marlins and New York Yankees (Northwestern University)
* Eliyahu M. Goldratt – inventor of the theory of constraints
* Carlos Ghosn – former CEO of Nissan, Mitsubishi, Renault

== H ==
* Joe Hardy – founder and CEO of 84 Lumber (University of Pittsburgh)
* Homer Hickam – NASA engineer; author of &quot;The Coalwood Way, Rocket Boys, October Sky, Torpedo Junction and Back to the Moon&quot; (Virginia Tech)
* Charles O. Holliday – CEO of DuPont (University of Tennessee)
* Linda Hudson – President and CEO of BAE Systems Inc. (University of Florida)

== I ==
* Lee Iacocca – former CEO of Chrysler (Lehigh University)

== K ==
* Shahid Khan – owner of automotive parts manufacturer Flex-N-Gate and the Jacksonville Jaguars 
* Charles Edward Knoeppel – American organizational theorist, consultant, and early management author
* Dick Kovacevich – CEO of Wells Fargo

== L ==
* Lars Lallerstedt – pioneer of Swedish industrial design.
* Tom Landry – former Dallas Cowboys Coach (University of Houston).
* Manny Lawson – active Buffalo Bills player (North Carolina State University).
* J. Slater Lewis – British engineer, inventor, business manager, and early author on management and accounting.

==M==
* William L. Maxwell – Andrew Schultz Jr. Emeritus Professor of Industrial Engineering at Cornell University
* Lydia Meredith – CEO of the Renaissance Learning Center
* Francesco Merloni – Italian industrialist and politician 
* Captain Henry Metcalfe – American Army ordnance officer, inventor and early organizational theorist
* Edwin Moses – world record hurdler
* John Muir – founder of Sierra Club
* Alphonse Munchen – Luxembourgian engineer and Mayor of Luxembourg City
* Richard Muther – consultant; author of several influential books on plant layout and material handling

== N ==
* Shimon Y. Nof – Professor of Industrial Engineering at Purdue University; creator and Head of the PRISM (Production and Robotics Software for Manufacturing and Management) lab

== O ==
* Taiichi Ohno – &quot;father of the Toyota Production System&quot;, also known as Just In Time

== P ==
* R.K. Pachauri – Chairman of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change and Director, Tata Energy Research Institute
* Oscar E. Perrigo – American mechanical engineer, inventor, and early technical and management author
* Guy Primus – COO of Overbrook Entertainment (Georgia Institute of Technology)
* A. Alan Pritsker – industrial engineer and teacher, pioneer of computer simulation languages (Purdue University)

== Q ==
* Jorge Quiroga – former president of Bolivia (Texas A&amp;M University)

== R ==
* Jacob Rubinovitz – developer of instructional computer-integrated manufacturing and the robotics lab at the Faculty of Industrial Engineering and Management of the Technion

== S ==
* Jorge Serrano – former president of Guatemala
* Shigeo Shingo – creator of SMED (Single Minute Exchange of Die) technique and Poka-Yoke (fail-safe) devices
* William H. Swanson – President and CEO of Raytheon Co. (California Polytechnic State University, San Luis Obispo)

== T ==
* Frederick Winslow Taylor – leader of the Efficiency Movement and a champion of standardisation and division of tasks
* Henry R. Towne – American mechanical engineer and businessman, known as an early systematizer of management
* John Tregoning (1840s–1920s) – American mechanical engineer; wrote the first books on factory management
*Laura Tremosa – first Catalan woman to qualify as an industrial engineer
*Tim Cook – CEO of Apple

== W ==
* Edward Whitacre, Jr. – Chairman of General Motors; former Chairman and CEO of AT&amp;T Inc. (Texas Tech University)
* Clinton Edgar Woods – American electrical and mechanical engineer, inventor, manufacturer of automobiles, and early management

== See also ==
* Institute of Industrial and Systems Engineers

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q76376294" start="10" end="46" title="List of industrial engineers" label="list of notable industrial engineers"/>
<link wikidata="Q4489420" start="88" end="110" title="industrial engineering" label="industrial engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q4983763" start="175" end="184" title="Bud Adams" label="Bud Adams"/>
<link wikidata="Q320484" start="215" end="231" title="Tennessee Titans" label="Tennessee Titans"/>
<link wikidata="Q7296729" start="235" end="252" title="Ravindra K. Ahuja" label="Ravindra K. Ahuja"/>
<link wikidata="Q194292" start="280" end="299" title="Operations Research" label="Operations Research"/>
<link wikidata="Q7835183" start="313" end="335" title="Transportation Science" label="Transportation Science"/>
<link wikidata="Q16058975" start="370" end="390" title="Horace Lucian Arnold" label="Horace Lucian Arnold"/>
<link wikidata="Q714518" start="488" end="499" title="Ali Babacan" label="Ali Babacan"/>
<link wikidata="Q43" start="532" end="550" title="Turkey" label="Republic of Turkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q756126" start="552" end="584" title="Middle East Technical University" label="Middle East Technical University"/>
<link wikidata="Q703882" start="588" end="604" title="Carl Georg Barth" label="Carl Georg Barth"/>
<link wikidata="Q22003365" start="738" end="752" title="Leslie Benmark" label="Leslie Benmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q124800038" start="825" end="837" title="Karen Bursic" label="Karen Bursic"/>
<link wikidata="Q235034" start="897" end="921" title="University of Pittsburgh" label="University of Pittsburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q4719065" start="933" end="958" title="Alexander Hamilton Church" label="Alexander Hamilton Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q102078067" start="1050" end="1067" title="Richard W. Conway" label="Richard W. Conway"/>
<link wikidata="Q265852" start="1168" end="1176" title="Tim Cook" label="Tim Cook"/>
<link wikidata="Q312" start="1206" end="1216" title="Apple Inc." label="Apple Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q540672" start="1218" end="1235" title="Auburn University" label="Auburn University"/>
<link wikidata="Q318292" start="1248" end="1260" title="Roger Corman" label="Roger Corman"/>
<link wikidata="Q41506" start="1300" end="1319" title="Stanford University" label="Stanford University"/>
<link wikidata="Q29515" start="1323" end="1335" title="Nancy Currie" label="Nancy Currie"/>
<link wikidata="Q16106231" start="1359" end="1371" title="John Dasburg" label="John Dasburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q501758" start="1424" end="1445" title="University of Florida" label="University of Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q558510" start="1449" end="1465" title="John Z. DeLorean" label="John Z. DeLorean"/>
<link wikidata="Q311472" start="1530" end="1547" title="W. Edwards Deming" label="W. Edwards Deming"/>
<link wikidata="Q381001" start="1564" end="1588" title="Total Quality Management" label="Total Quality Management"/>
<link wikidata="Q1933118" start="1597" end="1606" title="Mike Duke" label="Mike Duke"/>
<link wikidata="Q864855" start="1651" end="1682" title="Georgia Institute of Technology" label="Georgia Institute of Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1586174" start="1695" end="1713" title="Harrington Emerson" label="Harrington Emerson"/>
<link wikidata="Q394423" start="1777" end="1789" title="Agner Krarup Erlang" label="A. K. Erlang"/>
<link wikidata="Q186285" start="1818" end="1842" title="University of Copenhagen" label="University of Copenhagen"/>
<link wikidata="Q6832018" start="1846" end="1859" title="Michael Eskew" label="Michael Eskew"/>
<link wikidata="Q217741" start="1892" end="1909" title="Purdue University" label="Purdue University"/>
<link wikidata="Q12222219" start="1920" end="1931" title="Adel Fakeih" label="Adel Fakeih"/>
<link wikidata="Q3762092" start="1961" end="1976" title="Giacomo Ferrari (politician)" label="Giacomo Ferrari"/>
<link wikidata="Q8768" start="2019" end="2029" title="Henry Ford" label="Henry Ford"/>
<link wikidata="Q44294" start="2047" end="2065" title="Ford Motor Company" label="Ford Motor Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q455037" start="2132" end="2145" title="assembly line" label="assembly line"/>
<link wikidata="Q6209878" start="2186" end="2198" title="Joe Forehand" label="Joe Forehand"/>
<link wikidata="Q338825" start="2241" end="2250" title="Accenture" label="Accenture"/>
<link wikidata="Q540672" start="2252" end="2269" title="Auburn University" label="Auburn University"/>
<link wikidata="Q313947" start="2282" end="2293" title="Henry Gantt" label="Henry Gantt"/>
<link wikidata="Q192847" start="2312" end="2323" title="Gantt chart" label="Gantt chart"/>
<link wikidata="Q463793" start="2325" end="2339" title="Frank Gilbreth" label="Frank Gilbreth"/>
<link wikidata="Q40197" start="2368" end="2384" title="Lillian Gilbreth" label="Lillian Gilbreth"/>
<link wikidata="Q168756" start="2412" end="2446" title="University of California, Berkeley" label="University of California, Berkeley"/>
<link wikidata="Q7411490" start="2450" end="2461" title="Samuel Ginn" label="Samuel Ginn"/>
<link wikidata="Q122141" start="2516" end="2524" title="Vodafone" label="Vodafone"/>
<link wikidata="Q540672" start="2526" end="2543" title="Auburn University" label="Auburn University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186457" start="2547" end="2558" title="Joe Girardi" label="Joe Girardi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186921" start="2561" end="2568" title="manager (baseball)" label="manager"/>
<link wikidata="Q652879" start="2570" end="2585" title="Florida Marlins" label="Florida Marlins"/>
<link wikidata="Q213417" start="2590" end="2606" title="New York Yankees" label="New York Yankees"/>
<link wikidata="Q309350" start="2608" end="2631" title="Northwestern University" label="Northwestern University"/>
<link wikidata="Q368732" start="2635" end="2654" title="Eliyahu M. Goldratt" label="Eliyahu M. Goldratt"/>
<link wikidata="Q956095" start="2673" end="2694" title="theory of constraints" label="theory of constraints"/>
<link wikidata="Q356719" start="2697" end="2709" title="Carlos Ghosn" label="Carlos Ghosn"/>
<link wikidata="Q20165" start="2726" end="2732" title="Nissan" label="Nissan"/>
<link wikidata="Q183275" start="2734" end="2744" title="Mitsubishi" label="Mitsubishi"/>
<link wikidata="Q6686" start="2746" end="2753" title="Renault" label="Renault"/>
<link wikidata="Q6280804" start="2765" end="2774" title="Joseph A. Hardy III" label="Joe Hardy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4644779" start="2796" end="2805" title="84 Lumber" label="84 Lumber"/>
<link wikidata="Q235034" start="2807" end="2831" title="University of Pittsburgh" label="University of Pittsburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1626025" start="2835" end="2847" title="Homer Hickam" label="Homer Hickam"/>
<link wikidata="Q23548" start="2850" end="2854" title="NASA" label="NASA"/>
<link wikidata="Q65379" start="2970" end="2983" title="Virginia Tech" label="Virginia Tech"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065665" start="2987" end="3006" title="Charles O. Holliday" label="Charles O. Holliday"/>
<link wikidata="Q221062" start="3016" end="3022" title="DuPont" label="DuPont"/>
<link wikidata="Q1150105" start="3024" end="3047" title="University of Tennessee" label="University of Tennessee"/>
<link wikidata="Q6551659" start="3051" end="3063" title="Linda Hudson" label="Linda Hudson"/>
<link wikidata="Q4834524" start="3087" end="3103" title="BAE Systems Inc." label="BAE Systems Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q501758" start="3105" end="3126" title="University of Florida" label="University of Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q281847" start="3139" end="3150" title="Lee Iacocca" label="Lee Iacocca"/>
<link wikidata="Q181114" start="3167" end="3175" title="Chrysler" label="Chrysler"/>
<link wikidata="Q622137" start="3177" end="3194" title="Lehigh University" label="Lehigh University"/>
<link wikidata="Q2276408" start="3207" end="3218" title="Shahid Khan" label="Shahid Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q272223" start="3280" end="3300" title="Jacksonville Jaguars" label="Jacksonville Jaguars"/>
<link wikidata="Q18324519" start="3304" end="3327" title="Charles Edward Knoeppel" label="Charles Edward Knoeppel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7327134" start="3406" end="3421" title="Dick Kovacevich" label="Dick Kovacevich"/>
<link wikidata="Q5932423" start="3454" end="3470" title="Lars Lallerstedt" label="Lars Lallerstedt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1374361" start="3513" end="3523" title="Tom Landry" label="Tom Landry"/>
<link wikidata="Q204862" start="3533" end="3547" title="Dallas Cowboys" label="Dallas Cowboys"/>
<link wikidata="Q1472358" start="3555" end="3576" title="University of Houston" label="University of Houston"/>
<link wikidata="Q6751011" start="3581" end="3593" title="Manny Lawson" label="Manny Lawson"/>
<link wikidata="Q221626" start="3603" end="3616" title="Buffalo Bills" label="Buffalo Bills"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132346" start="3625" end="3656" title="North Carolina State University" label="North Carolina State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q19862855" start="3661" end="3676" title="J. Slater Lewis" label="J. Slater Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q102078066" start="3781" end="3799" title="William L. Maxwell" label="William L. Maxwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q29589035" start="3890" end="3904" title="Lydia Meredith" label="Lydia Meredith"/>
<link wikidata="Q3750290" start="3948" end="3965" title="Francesco Merloni" label="Francesco Merloni"/>
<link wikidata="Q16030648" start="4008" end="4030" title="Captain Henry Metcalfe" label="Captain Henry Metcalfe"/>
<link wikidata="Q52620" start="4110" end="4121" title="Edwin Moses" label="Edwin Moses"/>
<link wikidata="Q379580" start="4147" end="4156" title="John Muir" label="John Muir"/>
<link wikidata="Q508775" start="4170" end="4181" title="Sierra Club" label="Sierra Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q4735379" start="4184" end="4200" title="Alphonse Munchen" label="Alphonse Munchen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1472194" start="4230" end="4254" title="Mayor of Luxembourg City" label="Mayor of Luxembourg City"/>
<link wikidata="Q7327969" start="4257" end="4271" title="Richard Muther (industrial engineer)" label="Richard Muther"/>
<link wikidata="Q7497002" start="4371" end="4384" title="Shimon Y. Nof" label="Shimon Y. Nof"/>
<link wikidata="Q4489420" start="4400" end="4422" title="Industrial Engineering" label="Industrial Engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q217741" start="4426" end="4443" title="Purdue University" label="Purdue University"/>
<link wikidata="Q504100" start="4558" end="4570" title="Taiichi Ohno" label="Taiichi Ohno"/>
<link wikidata="Q1553383" start="4593" end="4617" title="Toyota Production System" label="Toyota Production System"/>
<link wikidata="Q380772" start="4639" end="4651" title="Just In Time (business)" label="Just In Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q377861" start="4663" end="4676" title="R.K. Pachauri" label="R.K. Pachauri"/>
<link wikidata="Q16031606" start="4784" end="4800" title="Oscar E. Perrigo" label="Oscar E. Perrigo"/>
<link wikidata="Q21062486" start="4887" end="4897" title="Guy Primus" label="Guy Primus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2326925" start="4907" end="4930" title="Overbrook Entertainment" label="Overbrook Entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q864855" start="4932" end="4963" title="Georgia Institute of Technology" label="Georgia Institute of Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q4707557" start="4967" end="4983" title="Alan Pritsker" label="A. Alan Pritsker"/>
<link wikidata="Q217741" start="5061" end="5078" title="Purdue University" label="Purdue University"/>
<link wikidata="Q468805" start="5091" end="5104" title="Jorge Quiroga" label="Jorge Quiroga"/>
<link wikidata="Q750" start="5127" end="5134" title="Bolivia" label="Bolivia"/>
<link wikidata="Q49212" start="5136" end="5160" title="Texas A&amp;amp;M University" label="Texas A&amp;amp;M University"/>
<link wikidata="Q5410844" start="5173" end="5189" title="Jacob Rubinovitz" label="Jacob Rubinovitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1122190" start="5219" end="5252" title="computer-integrated manufacturing" label="computer-integrated manufacturing"/>
<link wikidata="Q170978" start="5261" end="5269" title="robotics" label="robotics"/>
<link wikidata="Q333705" start="5337" end="5345" title="Technion" label="Technion"/>
<link wikidata="Q880037" start="5357" end="5370" title="Jorge Serrano Elías" label="Jorge Serrano"/>
<link wikidata="Q774" start="5393" end="5402" title="Guatemala" label="Guatemala"/>
<link wikidata="Q504330" start="5405" end="5418" title="Shigeo Shingo" label="Shigeo Shingo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1475962" start="5438" end="5467" title="Single Minute Exchange of Die" label="Single Minute Exchange of Die"/>
<link wikidata="Q750060" start="5483" end="5492" title="Poka-Yoke" label="Poka-Yoke"/>
<link wikidata="Q8010611" start="5515" end="5533" title="William H. Swanson" label="William H. Swanson"/>
<link wikidata="Q156644" start="5557" end="5569" title="Raytheon Co." label="Raytheon Co."/>
<link wikidata="Q1026846" start="5571" end="5627" title="California Polytechnic State University, San Luis Obispo" label="California Polytechnic State University, San Luis Obispo"/>
<link wikidata="Q203906" start="5640" end="5664" title="Frederick Winslow Taylor" label="Frederick Winslow Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q3372721" start="5681" end="5700" title="Efficiency Movement" label="Efficiency Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q4210149" start="5759" end="5773" title="Henry R. Towne" label="Henry R. Towne"/>
<link wikidata="Q19564465" start="5869" end="5883" title="John Tregoning" label="John Tregoning"/>
<link wikidata="Q16589684" start="5975" end="5988" title="Laura Tremosa" label="Laura Tremosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q5705" start="5997" end="6004" title="Catalonia" label="Catalan"/>
<link wikidata="Q265852" start="6049" end="6057" title="Tim Cook" label="Tim Cook"/>
<link wikidata="Q1294060" start="6084" end="6104" title="Edward Whitacre, Jr." label="Edward Whitacre, Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q81965" start="6119" end="6133" title="General Motors" label="General Motors"/>
<link wikidata="Q35476" start="6162" end="6175" title="AT&amp;amp;T Inc." label="AT&amp;amp;T Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q1423756" start="6177" end="6198" title="Texas Tech University" label="Texas Tech University"/>
<link wikidata="Q16066638" start="6202" end="6221" title="Clinton Edgar Woods" label="Clinton Edgar Woods"/>
<link wikidata="Q15995185" start="6347" end="6392" title="Institute of Industrial and Systems Engineers" label="Institute of Industrial and Systems Engineers"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="253346" wikidata="Q1481597" url="?curid=253346" title="Shadow of the Beast (1989 video game)">
<text>Shadow of the Beast is a platform game developed by Reflections and published by Psygnosis in 1989. The original version was released for the Amiga, and was later ported to several other systems. The game was known for its graphics, with many colours on screen and up to twelve levels of parallax scrolling backdrops, and for its atmospheric score composed by David Whittaker that used high-quality instrument samples.

It was followed by two sequels, &quot;Shadow of the Beast II&quot; in 1990 and &quot;Shadow of the Beast III&quot; in 1992. A remake was released for the PlayStation 4 in May 2016, and included the Amiga original.

==Gameplay==

The core gameplay of &quot;Shadow of the Beast&quot; is that of a basic action side-scroller. The player guides Aarbron through the world, fighting monsters of varying frequency with a small variety of attacks, which is slowly improved over the course of the game. Aarbron starts the game by punching enemies, eventually using attacks like fireballs and even a laser gun, each with their own set of basic pros and cons. The gameplay alternates between traversing vast expanses of mostly flat terrain accompanied by a wide range of scenery, and fighting groups of hostile monsters, similar to a beat-em-up game. At spaced-out, fixed points in the world, the player will encounter a boss, which must be defeated to proceed further.

==Plot==
A man named Aarbron is kidnapped as a child and corrupted through magic into a monstrous warrior-servant for the evil beast lord Maletoth. The creature&#x27;s memory of his human life returns when he watches a man being executed, whom he later recognizes as his father. This prompts Aarbron to seek revenge on Maletoth. A long arduous journey ensues, with Aarbron forced to battle his way through both hostile terrain and Maletoth&#x27;s forces. He eventually confronts one of Maletoth&#x27;s minions, a gargantuan creature whose only visible body parts are its hand and foot. Defeating the creature, Aarbron is freed from his curse, the eponymous &quot;Shadow of the Beast&quot;, and returned to a more humanoid form.

==Development==
&quot;Shadow of the Beast&quot; was designed by Martin Edmondson and Paul Howarth of Reflections over the course of nine months, and it was their second 16-bit game after their previous game, &quot;Ballistix&quot;. Edmondson and Howarth described it as their &quot;most ambitious project to date&quot;, and stated that they wanted the game to push both the Amiga and Atari ST to their technical limits. To achieve this, the Amiga version was written first, so that they would take advantage of all of the computer&#x27;s advanced hardware capabilities. The developers made use of the hardware sprites and scrolling rather than using the blitter, which they felt that the blitter &quot;does not run quite as fast as some people would believe.&quot; To get the speed they wanted, the developers employed difficult techniques such as the sprite multiplexing. The game uses up to twelve levels of parallax scrolling, and up to a maximum of 128 colours on screen.

The game was also designed to be as difficult as possible; Edmondson remarked that he liked difficult games at the time and he &quot;used to get frustrated if the game was too easy.&quot; The game&#x27;s cover art was designed by British artist Roger Dean, who has also done cover artwork for other Psygnosis-published games. The music for &quot;Shadow of the Beast&quot; was composed by David Whittaker. Whittaker wrote six main pieces of music, with each piece containing its own sub-theme, to &quot;fit the changing scenes in the game.&quot; The instruments were made using the Korg M1 synthesiser and then sampled at 20 kHz. Ruben Monteiro&#x27;s arrangement of the game&#x27;s music was released in 1999, on an Amiga music compilation album &quot;Immortal&quot;.

In an interview with &quot;The One&quot; regarding &quot;Shadow of the Beast III&#x27;s&quot; development, the team behind &quot;Beast III&quot; noted the original &quot;Shadow of the Beast&#x27;s&quot; selling point was its graphics, and Edmondson stated that &quot;It was definitely a case of being in the right place at the right time. Apart from how many colours and layers of parallax and monsters we could squeeze on screen, no thought went into it whatsoever&quot;, and furthermore called &quot;Shadow of the Beast&quot; a &quot;graphics showcase&quot;. In regards to &quot;Beast I&#x27;s&quot; parallax scrolling, Edmondson expressed &quot;In &quot;Beast I&quot;, we chose the most obvious and the easiest way of doing it, but the problem with that was you couldn&#x27;t have monsters running over the foreground at the same time. They had to be very spaced out and nowhere near interesting parts of the map.&quot; &quot;Beast III&quot; reused no assets from the first two games, with Edmondson stating in regards to &quot;Beast I&quot; that &quot;the original code for &quot;Beast I&quot; was so bad. It was the first thing we really did seriously and when you look back on it, it&#x27;s very slow and inefficient and could have been done 10 times better.&quot;

&quot;Shadow of the Beast&quot; was released in 1989 by Psygnosis. It was initially retailed for £35, and was bundled with a T-shirt. It has been ported to various other platforms since its original release. It was ported to the Atari ST by Eldritch the Cat. It was ported to the ZX Spectrum and the Amstrad CPC by Gremlin Graphics, to the TurboGrafx-16&#x27;s Super CD-ROM² System and the Commodore 64 by DMA Design, to the Mega Drive by WJS Design, to the Atari Lynx by Digital Developments, to the Master System by TecMagik, and to the FM Towns by Tim Ansell of Creative Assembly. An Atari 8-bit version was in development in 1990 to be published by Harlequin, but it was never finished due to collapse of the company. A port for the Super Nintendo Entertainment System titled &quot;Super Shadow of the Beast&quot; was shown at the 1992 Summer Consumer Electronics Show, and it was planned to be released by Information Global Service, however it never materialised; a prototype was later leaked. The Mega Drive and Super CD-ROM² versions of &quot;Shadow of the Beast&quot; were released in Japan by Victor Musical Industries on 27 March 1992. The FM Towns and Super CD-ROM² versions feature a soundtrack arranged by Chris Howlett and Ian Henderson of DC Productions.

==Reception==
&quot;Shadow of the Beast&quot; and &quot;Shadow of the Beast II&quot; were reviewed in 1991 in &quot;Dragon&quot; where both games got 5 out of 5 stars. &quot;Sega Pro&quot; praised the Master System version for its graphics and sound, but criticised the &quot;awkward&quot; controls method.

In a retrospective article for &quot;Digital Spy&quot;, Mark Langshaw remarked that &quot;Shadow of the Beast&quot; &quot;will always be remembered as one of many jewels in the crown of Studio Liverpool.&quot; Langshaw however said that the Mega Drive version was considered inferior to other versions, and because of its poor conversion rate, the game ran faster than intended on the North American Genesis console and &quot;went from unforgiving to near impossible.&quot; Travis Fahs of IGN considered the FM Towns port a superior version of the game.

In 1996, &quot;Computer Gaming World&quot; declared &quot;Shadow of the Beast&quot; the 76th-best computer game ever released.

== Remake ==
A re-imagined version of &quot;Shadow of the Beast&quot; was revealed at Gamescom 2013, developed by Heavy Spectrum Entertainment Labs and released by Sony Interactive Entertainment for the PlayStation 4 in May 2016. The original Amiga version is included along with the remake.

== References in other games ==
Graphics from &quot;Shadow of the Beast&quot; and &quot;Shadow of the Beast II&quot; were featured in two special levels in the original &quot;Lemmings&quot; game (Amiga, Mega Drive, PC, Super NES, and Atari ST versions), called &quot;A Beast of a Level&quot; and &quot;A Beast II of a Level&quot;. These references were supported by cameo versions of the title music from each version, in this case both pieces were arranged by Tim Wright.

== References ==

;Additional references

== External links ==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q828322" start="25" end="38" title="platform game" label="platform game"/>
<link wikidata="Q945060" start="52" end="63" title="Ubisoft Reflections" label="Reflections"/>
<link wikidata="Q1933462" start="81" end="90" title="Psygnosis" label="Psygnosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q100047" start="142" end="147" title="Amiga" label="Amiga"/>
<link wikidata="Q119906" start="288" end="306" title="parallax scrolling" label="parallax scrolling"/>
<link wikidata="Q3019000" start="360" end="375" title="David Whittaker (video game composer)" label="David Whittaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q7888614" start="458" end="480" title="Shadow of the Beast II" label="Shadow of the Beast II"/>
<link wikidata="Q3481169" start="505" end="528" title="Shadow of the Beast III" label="Shadow of the Beast III"/>
<link wikidata="Q18357365" start="544" end="552" title="Shadow of the Beast (2016 video game)" label="A remake"/>
<link wikidata="Q5014725" start="574" end="587" title="PlayStation 4" label="PlayStation 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q2074906" start="1010" end="1019" title="Laser-gun" label="laser gun"/>
<link wikidata="Q401831" start="1243" end="1258" title="Beat &amp;#x27;em up" label="beat-em-up game"/>
<link wikidata="Q468388" start="1330" end="1334" title="Boss (video games)" label="boss"/>
<link wikidata="Q945060" start="2210" end="2221" title="Ubisoft Reflections" label="Reflections"/>
<link wikidata="Q2881306" start="2323" end="2332" title="Ballistix" label="Ballistix"/>
<link wikidata="Q2584276" start="2762" end="2769" title="blitter" label="blitter"/>
<link wikidata="Q7581328" start="2960" end="2979" title="sprite multiplexing" label="sprite multiplexing"/>
<link wikidata="Q119906" start="3018" end="3036" title="parallax scrolling" label="parallax scrolling"/>
<link wikidata="Q444399" start="3330" end="3340" title="Roger Dean (artist)" label="Roger Dean"/>
<link wikidata="Q1933462" start="3384" end="3393" title="Psygnosis" label="Psygnosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3019000" start="3473" end="3488" title="David Whittaker (video game composer)" label="David Whittaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q954204" start="3666" end="3673" title="Korg M1" label="Korg M1"/>
<link wikidata="Q379755" start="3736" end="3747" title="arrangement" label="arrangement"/>
<link wikidata="Q3522087" start="3881" end="3888" title="The One (magazine)" label="The One"/>
<link wikidata="Q3481169" start="3911" end="3934" title="Shadow of the Beast III" label="Shadow of the Beast III"/>
<link wikidata="Q627302" start="5355" end="5363" title="Atari ST" label="Atari ST"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5367" end="5383" title="Eldritch the Cat" label="Eldritch the Cat"/>
<link wikidata="Q23882" start="5406" end="5417" title="ZX Spectrum" label="ZX Spectrum"/>
<link wikidata="Q478829" start="5426" end="5437" title="Amstrad CPC" label="Amstrad CPC"/>
<link wikidata="Q2274654" start="5441" end="5457" title="Gremlin Graphics" label="Gremlin Graphics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057377" start="5466" end="5479" title="TurboGrafx-16" label="TurboGrafx-16"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057377" start="5487" end="5507" title="Super CD-ROM² System" label="Super CD-ROM² System"/>
<link wikidata="Q99775" start="5516" end="5528" title="Commodore 64" label="Commodore 64"/>
<link wikidata="Q94893" start="5532" end="5542" title="DMA Design" label="DMA Design"/>
<link wikidata="Q10676" start="5551" end="5561" title="Mega Drive" label="Mega Drive"/>
<link wikidata="Q753657" start="5584" end="5594" title="Atari Lynx" label="Atari Lynx"/>
<link wikidata="Q209868" start="5627" end="5640" title="Master System" label="Master System"/>
<link wikidata="Q7692095" start="5644" end="5652" title="TecMagik" label="TecMagik"/>
<link wikidata="Q531896" start="5665" end="5673" title="FM Towns" label="FM Towns"/>
<link wikidata="Q611508" start="5691" end="5708" title="Creative Assembly" label="Creative Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q249075" start="5713" end="5724" title="Atari 8-bit" label="Atari 8-bit"/>
<link wikidata="Q183259" start="5863" end="5898" title="Super Nintendo Entertainment System" label="Super Nintendo Entertainment System"/>
<link wikidata="Q646089" start="5966" end="5998" title="Summer Consumer Electronics Show" label="Summer Consumer Electronics Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q6030727" start="6037" end="6063" title="Information Global Service" label="Information Global Service"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6229" end="6254" title="JVCKenwood Victor Entertainment#Video games" label="Victor Musical Industries"/>
<link wikidata="Q2405201" start="6514" end="6520" title="Dragon (magazine)" label="Dragon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7446156" start="6572" end="6580" title="Sega Pro" label="Sega Pro"/>
<link wikidata="Q1111380" start="6743" end="6754" title="Digital Spy" label="Digital Spy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1933462" start="6892" end="6908" title="Psygnosis" label="Studio Liverpool"/>
<link wikidata="Q207708" start="7195" end="7198" title="IGN" label="IGN"/>
<link wikidata="Q531896" start="7214" end="7222" title="FM Towns" label="FM Towns"/>
<link wikidata="Q707182" start="7276" end="7297" title="Computer Gaming World" label="Computer Gaming World"/>
<link wikidata="Q18357365" start="7404" end="7458" title="Shadow of the Beast (2016 video game)" label="re-imagined version of &amp;quot;Shadow of the Beast&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q265567" start="7475" end="7483" title="Gamescom" label="Gamescom"/>
<link wikidata="Q18594" start="7553" end="7583" title="Sony Interactive Entertainment" label="Sony Interactive Entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q5014725" start="7592" end="7605" title="PlayStation 4" label="PlayStation 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q864177" start="7857" end="7865" title="Lemmings (video game)" label="Lemmings"/>
<link wikidata="Q1757629" start="8143" end="8153" title="Tim Wright (Welsh musician)" label="Tim Wright"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="253350" wikidata="Q302006" url="?curid=253350" title="Old World porcupine">
<text>The Old World porcupines, or Hystricidae, are large terrestrial rodents, distinguished by the spiny covering from which they take their name. They range over the south of Europe and the Levant, most of Africa, India, and Southeast Asia as far east as Flores. Although both the Old World and New World porcupine families belong to the infraorder Hystricognathi of the vast order Rodentia, they are quite different and are not particularly closely related.

== Characteristics ==
Old World porcupines are stout, heavily built animals, with blunt, rounded heads, fleshy, mobile snouts, and coats of thick cylindrical or flattened spines, which form the whole covering of their bodies, and are not intermingled with ordinary hairs. The habits of most species are strictly terrestrial. They vary in size from the relatively small long–tailed porcupine with body lengths of , and a weight of , to the much larger crested porcupines, which are long, discounting the tail, and weigh from .

The various species are typically herbivorous, eating fruit, roots, and bulbs. Some species also gnaw on dry bones, perhaps as a source of calcium. Like other rodents, they have powerful gnawing incisors, and no canine teeth. Their dental formula is . The prominent diastema allows the lips to be drawn inwards while gnawing. Similar to other hystricomorphs, their chewing muscles are unique. Through an arm of the masseter muscles, passing through the infraorbital foramen, chewing movements are very efficient.

One or two (or, rarely, three) young are born after a gestation period between 90 and 112 days, depending on the species. Females typically give birth only once a year, in a grass-lined underground chamber within a burrow system. The young are born more or less fully developed, and the spines, which are initially soft, harden within a few hours of birth. Although they begin to take solid food within two weeks, they are not fully weaned until 13 to 19 weeks after birth. The young remain with the colony until they reach sexual maturity at around two years of age, and share the burrow system with their parents and siblings from other litters. Males, in particular, help defend the colony from intruders, although both sexes are aggressive towards unrelated porcupines.

These rodents are also characterized by the imperfectly rooted cheek-teeth, imperfect clavicles or collar-bones, cleft upper lip, rudimentary first front-toes, smooth soles, six teats arranged on the side of the body, and many cranial characters.

== Species ==
Of the three genera, &quot;Hystrix&quot; is characterized by an inflated skull, in which the nasal cavity is often considerably larger than the brain case, and a short tail, tipped with numerous slender-stalked open quills, which make a rattling noise whenever the animal moves. When threatened, most porcupines will wag their tails, making a louder rattling noise to scare off predators. The African brush-tailed porcupine (&quot;A. africanus&quot;) will simultaneously raise sharp quills, 40 cm (16 inches) in length, on its back and sides.

The crested porcupine (&quot;Hystrix cristata&quot;), a typical representative of the Old World porcupines, occurs throughout the south of Europe and North and West Africa. It is replaced in southern and central Africa by the Cape porcupine, &quot;H. africaeaustralis&quot;, and in India by the Malayan porcupine (&quot;H. brachyura&quot;) and Indian (crested) porcupine (&quot;H. indica&quot;). The latter also lives throughout the Middle East.

Besides these large-crested species, several smaller species without crests occur in northeast India, and the Malay region from Nepal to Borneo.

The genus &quot;Atherurus&quot; includes the brush-tailed porcupines which are much smaller animals, with long tails tipped with bundles of flattened spines. One species is found in the Malay region and one in Central and West Africa. The latter species, the African brush-tailed porcupine, is often hunted for its meat.

&quot;Trichys&quot;, the last genus, contains one species, the long-tailed porcupine (&quot;T. fasciculata&quot;) of Borneo. This species is externally very similar to &quot;Atherurus&quot;, but differs from the members of that genus in many cranial characteristics.

Fossil species are also known from Africa and Eurasia, with one of the oldest being &quot;Sivacanthion&quot; from the Miocene of present-day Pakistan. However, it was probably not a direct ancestor of modern porcupines.

=== Species list ===
The extant species and fossil genera are:
*Family Hystricidae
**&quot;Hystrix&quot;
***Subgenus &quot;Acanthion&quot;
****Malayan porcupine (&quot;H. brachyura&quot;)
****Sunda porcupine (&quot;H. javanica&quot;)
***Subgenus &quot;Hystrix&quot;
****Cape porcupine (&quot;H. africaeaustralis&quot;)
****Crested porcupine (&quot;H. cristata&quot;)
****Indian porcupine (&quot;H. indica&quot;)
***Subgenus &quot;Thecurus&quot;
****Thick-spined porcupine (&quot;H. crassispinis&quot;)
****Philippine porcupine (&quot;H. pumila&quot;)
****Sumatran porcupine (&quot;H. sumatrae&quot;)
***†&quot;Hystrix arayanensis&quot; 
***†&quot;Hystrix depereti&quot; 
***†&quot;Hystrix paukensis&quot; 
***†&quot;Hystrix primigenia&quot;
***†&quot;Hystrix refossa&quot; 
**†&quot;Miohystrix&quot;
**†&quot;Xenohystrix&quot;
**†&quot;Sivacanthion&quot;
**&quot;Atherurus&quot;
***African brush-tailed porcupine (&quot;A. africanus&quot;)
***Asiatic brush-tailed porcupine (&quot;A. macrourus&quot;)
**&quot;Trichys&quot;
***Long-tailed porcupine (&quot;T. fasciculata&quot;)

== See also ==
* Porcupine

== References ==
== External links ==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q302006" start="4" end="24" title="Old World porcupine" label="Old World porcupines"/>
<link wikidata="Q302006" start="29" end="40" title="Old World porcupine" label="Hystricidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q10850" start="64" end="70" title="rodent" label="rodent"/>
<link wikidata="Q2707058" start="94" end="99" title="Spine (zoology)" label="spiny"/>
<link wikidata="Q46" start="171" end="177" title="Europe" label="Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q81483" start="186" end="192" title="Levant" label="Levant"/>
<link wikidata="Q15" start="202" end="208" title="Africa" label="Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="210" end="215" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q11708" start="221" end="235" title="Southeast Asia" label="Southeast Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q148440" start="251" end="257" title="Flores" label="Flores"/>
<link wikidata="Q811633" start="291" end="310" title="New World porcupine" label="New World porcupine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063601" start="345" end="359" title="Hystricognathi" label="Hystricognathi"/>
<link wikidata="Q36602" start="372" end="377" title="order (biology)" label="order"/>
<link wikidata="Q59099" start="1017" end="1028" title="herbivore" label="herbivorous"/>
<link wikidata="Q273543" start="1178" end="1185" title="incisor" label="incisor"/>
<link wikidata="Q19625" start="1195" end="1207" title="canine (tooth)" label="canine teeth"/>
<link wikidata="Q641973" start="1215" end="1229" title="dentition" label="dental formula"/>
<link wikidata="Q1174313" start="1249" end="1257" title="diastema" label="diastema"/>
<link wikidata="Q532250" start="1326" end="1340" title="Hystricomorpha" label="hystricomorphs"/>
<link wikidata="Q725408" start="1398" end="1413" title="masseter muscle" label="masseter muscle"/>
<link wikidata="Q899158" start="1436" end="1456" title="infraorbital foramen" label="infraorbital foramen"/>
<link wikidata="Q28627" start="1551" end="1560" title="gestation" label="gestation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1410542" start="1712" end="1718" title="burrow" label="burrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q333203" start="1930" end="1936" title="weaning" label="weaned"/>
<link wikidata="Q16343" start="2358" end="2366" title="clavicle" label="clavicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q156104" start="2627" end="2639" title="nasal cavity" label="nasal cavity"/>
<link wikidata="Q13147" start="2678" end="2688" title="skull" label="brain case"/>
<link wikidata="Q787416" start="2927" end="2957" title="African brush-tailed porcupine" label="African brush-tailed porcupine"/>
<link wikidata="Q262307" start="3082" end="3099" title="crested porcupine" label="crested porcupine"/>
<link wikidata="Q844420" start="3304" end="3318" title="Cape porcupine" label="Cape porcupine"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="3360" end="3365" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q7204" start="3511" end="3522" title="Middle East" label="Middle East"/>
<link wikidata="Q837" start="3653" end="3658" title="Nepal" label="Nepal"/>
<link wikidata="Q36117" start="3662" end="3668" title="Borneo" label="Borneo"/>
<link wikidata="Q780143" start="3687" end="3696" title="Atherurus" label="Atherurus"/>
<link wikidata="Q649978" start="3986" end="3990" title="bushmeat" label="meat"/>
<link wikidata="Q949010" start="3999" end="4006" title="Trichys" label="Trichys"/>
<link wikidata="Q949010" start="4056" end="4077" title="long-tailed porcupine" label="long-tailed porcupine"/>
<link wikidata="Q40614" start="4261" end="4267" title="Fossil" label="Fossil"/>
<link wikidata="Q16976450" start="4351" end="4363" title="Sivacanthion" label="Sivacanthion"/>
<link wikidata="Q76267" start="4379" end="4386" title="Miocene" label="Miocene"/>
<link wikidata="Q843" start="4402" end="4410" title="Pakistan" label="Pakistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q650703" start="4573" end="4580" title="Hystrix (porcupine)" label="Hystrix"/>
<link wikidata="Q4671879" start="4605" end="4614" title="Acanthion" label="Acanthion"/>
<link wikidata="Q549826" start="4625" end="4642" title="Malayan porcupine" label="Malayan porcupine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1080880" start="4674" end="4689" title="Sunda porcupine" label="Sunda porcupine"/>
<link wikidata="Q844420" start="4752" end="4766" title="Cape porcupine" label="Cape porcupine"/>
<link wikidata="Q262307" start="4805" end="4822" title="Crested porcupine" label="Crested porcupine"/>
<link wikidata="Q741524" start="4853" end="4869" title="Indian porcupine" label="Indian porcupine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1763804" start="4931" end="4953" title="Thick-spined porcupine" label="Thick-spined porcupine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1767321" start="4988" end="5008" title="Philippine porcupine" label="Philippine porcupine"/>
<link wikidata="Q257082" start="5037" end="5055" title="Sumatran porcupine" label="Sumatran porcupine"/>
<link wikidata="Q16753916" start="5163" end="5180" title="Hystrix paukensis" label="Hystrix paukensis"/>
<link wikidata="Q108083787" start="5198" end="5216" title="Hystrix primigenia" label="Hystrix primigenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q108084083" start="5233" end="5248" title="Hystrix refossa" label="Hystrix refossa"/>
<link wikidata="Q16976450" start="5318" end="5330" title="Sivacanthion" label="Sivacanthion"/>
<link wikidata="Q780143" start="5345" end="5354" title="Atherurus" label="Atherurus"/>
<link wikidata="Q787416" start="5364" end="5394" title="African brush-tailed porcupine" label="African brush-tailed porcupine"/>
<link wikidata="Q301888" start="5425" end="5455" title="Asiatic brush-tailed porcupine" label="Asiatic brush-tailed porcupine"/>
<link wikidata="Q949010" start="5491" end="5498" title="Trichys" label="Trichys"/>
<link wikidata="Q949010" start="5508" end="5529" title="Long-tailed porcupine" label="Long-tailed porcupine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1223829" start="5577" end="5586" title="Porcupine" label="Porcupine"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="253353" wikidata="Q7765300" url="?curid=253353" title="The Sons of Hercules">
<text>The Sons of Hercules is a syndicated Embassy Pictures television show that aired in the United States in the 1960s. The series repackaged 13 Italian sword-and-sandal films by giving them a standardized theme song for the opening and closing titles, as well as a standard introductory narration attempting to relate the lead character in each film to the Greek demigod Hercules. These films however were not all originally made as &quot;Hercules&quot; films in Italy. Although two of them did originally feature Hercules (and not his sons), four of the films were originally Maciste movies in Italy, and the others were just isolated gladiator or mythological hero movies not released theatrically in the US.

==Films in the series==
There were 13 films in the Sons of Hercules syndication package. The first title listed for each film was its American television title, followed by the translated original Italian title in parentheses: 
&quot;(Note* - The films were also offered in a 26 one-hour episodes format package, breaking each film into two parts, which allowed them to be shown in weekly one-hour time slots as a TV series, also under the &quot;Sons of Hercules&quot; format.)&quot;

* &quot;Mole Men vs the Son of Hercules&quot; (&quot;Maciste, the Strongest Man in the World&quot;) 1961, starring Mark Forest
* &quot;Triumph of the Son of Hercules&quot; (&quot;The Triumph of Maciste&quot;) 1961, starring Kirk Morris
* &quot;Fire Monsters Against the Son of Hercules&quot; (&quot;Maciste vs the Monsters&quot;) 1962, starring Reg Lewis
* &quot;Venus Against the Son of Hercules&quot; (&quot;Mars, God Of War&quot;) 1962, starring Roger Browne
* &quot;Ulysses Against the Son of Hercules&quot; (&quot;Ulysses against Hercules&quot;) 1962, starring Mike Lane
* &quot;Medusa Against the Son of Hercules&quot; (&quot;Perseus the Invincible&quot;) 1962, starring Richard Harrison
* &quot;Son of Hercules in the Land of Fire&quot; (&quot;Ursus In The Land Of Fire&quot;) 1963, starring Ed Fury
* &quot;Tyrant of Lydia Against The Son of Hercules&quot; (&quot;Goliath and the Rebel Slave&quot;) 1963, starring Gordon Scott
* &quot;Messalina Against the Son of Hercules&quot; (&quot;The Last Gladiator&quot;) 1963, starring Richard Harrison
* &quot;The Beast of Babylon Against the Son of Hercules&quot; (&quot;Hero Of Babylon&quot;) 1963, a.k.a. &quot;Goliath, King of the Slaves&quot;, starring Gordon Scott
* &quot;Terror of Rome Against the Son of Hercules&quot; (&quot;Maciste, Gladiator of Sparta&quot;) 1964, starring Mark Forest
* &quot;Son of Hercules in the Land of Darkness&quot; (&quot;Hercules the Invincible&quot;) 1964, starring Dan Vadis
* &quot;Devil of the Desert Against the Son of Hercules&quot; (&quot;Anthar the Invincible&quot;) 1964, (a.k.a. &quot;The Slave Merchants&quot;, a.k.a. &quot;Soraya, Queen of the Desert&quot;) starring Kirk Morris, directed by Antonio Margheriti

==See also==
* Samson
* Steve Reeves
* Sword-and-sandal</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1572845" start="26" end="36" title="television syndication" label="syndicated"/>
<link wikidata="Q5369517" start="37" end="53" title="Embassy Pictures" label="Embassy Pictures"/>
<link wikidata="Q289" start="54" end="64" title="television" label="television"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="88" end="101" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="141" end="148" title="Italy" label="Italian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1433443" start="149" end="165" title="sword-and-sandal" label="sword-and-sandal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193470" start="202" end="212" title="theme song" label="theme song"/>
<link wikidata="Q240679" start="511" end="519" title="Hercules" label="Hercules"/>
<link wikidata="Q332436" start="574" end="581" title="Maciste" label="Maciste"/>
<link wikidata="Q482999" start="633" end="642" title="gladiator" label="gladiator"/>
<link wikidata="Q12827256" start="646" end="650" title="Mythology" label="myth"/>
<link wikidata="Q162244" start="659" end="663" title="hero" label="hero"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138839" start="1202" end="1233" title="Mole Men vs the Son of Hercules" label="Mole Men vs the Son of Hercules"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138839" start="1247" end="1286" title="Maciste, the Strongest Man in the World" label="Maciste, the Strongest Man in the World"/>
<link wikidata="Q1882853" start="1329" end="1359" title="Triumph of the Son of Hercules" label="Triumph of the Son of Hercules"/>
<link wikidata="Q1514161" start="1438" end="1479" title="Fire Monsters Against the Son of Hercules" label="Fire Monsters Against the Son of Hercules"/>
<link wikidata="Q3849973" start="1557" end="1590" title="Venus Against the Son of Hercules" label="Venus Against the Son of Hercules"/>
<link wikidata="Q1610068" start="1664" end="1699" title="Ulysses Against the Son of Hercules" label="Ulysses Against the Son of Hercules"/>
<link wikidata="Q1610068" start="1713" end="1737" title="Ulysses against Hercules" label="Ulysses against Hercules"/>
<link wikidata="Q2071931" start="1778" end="1812" title="Medusa Against the Son of Hercules" label="Medusa Against the Son of Hercules"/>
<link wikidata="Q539442" start="1896" end="1931" title="Son of Hercules in the Land of Fire" label="Son of Hercules in the Land of Fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q3773181" start="2009" end="2052" title="Tyrant of Lydia Against The Son of Hercules" label="Tyrant of Lydia Against The Son of Hercules"/>
<link wikidata="Q3773181" start="2066" end="2093" title="Goliath and the Rebel Slave" label="Goliath and the Rebel Slave"/>
<link wikidata="Q3819880" start="2137" end="2174" title="Messalina Against the Son of Hercules" label="Messalina Against the Son of Hercules"/>
<link wikidata="Q734281" start="2254" end="2302" title="The Beast of Babylon Against the Son of Hercules" label="The Beast of Babylon Against the Son of Hercules"/>
<link wikidata="Q1430246" start="2423" end="2465" title="Terror of Rome Against the Son of Hercules" label="Terror of Rome Against the Son of Hercules"/>
<link wikidata="Q779761" start="2550" end="2589" title="Son of Hercules in the Land of Darkness" label="Son of Hercules in the Land of Darkness"/>
<link wikidata="Q779761" start="2603" end="2626" title="Hercules the Invincible" label="Hercules the Invincible"/>
<link wikidata="Q3618447" start="2667" end="2714" title="Devil of the Desert Against the Son of Hercules" label="Devil of the Desert Against the Son of Hercules"/>
<link wikidata="Q3618447" start="2728" end="2749" title="Anthar the Invincible" label="Anthar the Invincible"/>
<link wikidata="Q214648" start="2921" end="2927" title="Samson" label="Samson"/>
<link wikidata="Q358193" start="2930" end="2942" title="Steve Reeves" label="Steve Reeves"/>
<link wikidata="Q1433443" start="2945" end="2961" title="Sword-and-sandal" label="Sword-and-sandal"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="253354" wikidata="Q3482630" url="?curid=253354" title="Shufflepuck Café">
<text>Shufflepuck Café is an air hockey video game developed by Christopher Gross, Gene Portwood and Lauren Elliott for Broderbund (not a table shuffleboard video game, as the name would suggest—though that was the intention when the name was first coined by Christopher Gross). Originally developed for the Macintosh, it was later adapted by Broderbund for the Amiga, Atari ST, Amstrad CPC, Famicom, X68000, PC-98, and MS-DOS.

==Gameplay==

There are two game modes. The player can compete in a tournament, playing against opponents who visit the Café, or can practice against each opponent to find out their weakness in a single-player match.

The game is controlled via the computer&#x27;s mouse. The bat on the playing field bounces a hockey puck between the player and the opponent. When one of the players manages to knock the hockey puck past the opponent&#x27;s bat, the player scores. The first player to score a set number of points (usually 15) wins the match.

&quot;Shufflepuck Café&quot; includes nine opponents:
*Skip Feeney: A short male human in his early 20s, wearing glasses. Has just started in shufflepuck and thus is very nervous and slow to react, making him easy to beat.
*Visine Orb: A green-coloured alien with huge eyes, who is only about 1.5 metres tall and can barely see over his end of the table. He jitters his paddle all over his end of the table, so that his serves often bounce back and forth on their way to the player.
*Vinnie the Dweeb: A veteran shufflepuck player who keeps his calm and is not easily surprised. While not particularly strong, his playing style is consistent and is a slight step up in difficulty from the two previous opponents.
*Lexan Smythe-Worthington: A lizard-like alien, a filthy rich playboy who gets 30,000 credits per year to keep away from his home world. He begins playing fiercely and hard to beat, but as play progresses, he sips his champagne, making him inebriated and less focused on the game, thus easier to beat. When defeated, he hiccups and passes out.
*The General (also known as Eneg Doowtrop - &quot;Gene Portwood&quot; spelled backwards): A pig-like alien who pretends to be a military general, although he really is just a militaristic gung-ho enthusiast. Recently divorced, he is addicted to shufflepuck, which he plays with fierceness and devotion.
*Nerual Ttoille (&quot;Lauren Elliott&quot; spelled backwards): A non-corporeal alien. Mimics the player&#x27;s own shot power and angle. He occasionally opens his robe to expose a one-eyed alien at chest level, who either smirks or snarls at the player depending on whether he has just won or lost a point.
*Princess Bejin: A woman with supernatural powers. When it is her turn to serve the puck, she uses telekinesis to float it out to the center of the table and drift it to one side before sending it toward the player. One of two different sound effects accompanies each serve, indicating whether the puck will move in the same or opposite direction. When defeated, she reveals a little bit of her cleavage.
*Biff Raunch: The reigning champion. A tough, street-hardened biker dude who plays a mean game. He has no weaknesses and only the best players will be able to beat him.
*DC3: A robot waiter. DC3 serves as a training partner, who can be customised to be as easy or as difficult as the player wishes. He does not play in the main championship.

In some versions, during gameplay there is a cheat option, which gives the player the option of winning or losing the game, winning or losing the tournament or gaining or losing five points.

Subsequent releases include Shufflepuck Revolution (an OS X version, now discontinued) and Shufflepuck (from the same developer).

==Plot==
There is a general storyline behind the Amiga and Famicom versions of the game in which the player is an inter-galactic salesman whose spaceship has broken down. He needs to find a telephone to call the breakdown service and get the spaceship fixed. Shufflepuck Café is the nearest place for miles, so he goes in to use their telephone. The main eight Shufflepuck players are standing in his way and will not let him get to the phone until he has beaten them all. Once all are defeated, the player gets in his spaceship and flies off into the distance.

==Reception==
The game was reviewed in 1989 in &quot;Dragon&quot; #142 by Hartley, Patricia, and Kirk Lesser in &quot;The Role of Computers&quot; column. The reviewers gave the game 4 out of 5 stars. On release, &quot;Famitsu&quot; magazine scored the Famicom version of the game a 23 out of 40. A retrospective review for Retrogamer from 2008 said the game was a &quot;forgotten gem&quot; although unfortunately lacking a 2 player mode.

==Reviews==
*&quot;Zero&quot; (Nov, 1989)
*&quot;Amiga Power&quot; (Oct, 1991)
*&quot;Computer and Video Games&quot; (Oct, 1989)
*&quot;Commodore User&quot; (Oct, 1989)
*&quot;Amiga Joker&quot; (Dec, 1989)
*&quot;ACE (Advanced Computer Entertainment)&quot; (Oct, 1989)

==References==
==External links==
*</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q165302" start="23" end="33" title="air hockey" label="air hockey"/>
<link wikidata="Q995863" start="114" end="124" title="Broderbund" label="Broderbund"/>
<link wikidata="Q1678863" start="132" end="150" title="table shuffleboard" label="table shuffleboard"/>
<link wikidata="Q13522376" start="302" end="311" title="Classic Mac OS" label="Macintosh"/>
<link wikidata="Q995863" start="337" end="347" title="Broderbund" label="Broderbund"/>
<link wikidata="Q100047" start="356" end="361" title="Amiga" label="Amiga"/>
<link wikidata="Q627302" start="363" end="371" title="Atari ST" label="Atari ST"/>
<link wikidata="Q478829" start="373" end="384" title="Amstrad CPC" label="Amstrad CPC"/>
<link wikidata="Q172742" start="386" end="393" title="Nintendo Entertainment System" label="Famicom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1758277" start="395" end="401" title="X68000" label="X68000"/>
<link wikidata="Q183505" start="403" end="408" title="PC-98" label="PC-98"/>
<link wikidata="Q47604" start="414" end="420" title="MS-DOS" label="MS-DOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q500834" start="491" end="501" title="tournament" label="tournament"/>
<link wikidata="Q508918" start="734" end="745" title="hockey puck" label="hockey puck"/>
<link wikidata="Q134862" start="1899" end="1908" title="champagne" label="champagne"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2075" end="2088" title="Gene Portwood" label="Gene Portwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q8473" start="2153" end="2161" title="military" label="military"/>
<link wikidata="Q871690" start="2213" end="2220" title="gung-ho" label="gung-ho"/>
<link wikidata="Q6500198" start="2351" end="2365" title="Lauren Elliott" label="Lauren Elliott"/>
<link wikidata="Q186446" start="2735" end="2746" title="telekinesis" label="telekinesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q11012" start="3218" end="3223" title="robot" label="robot"/>
<link wikidata="Q157195" start="3224" end="3230" title="waiter" label="waiter"/>
<link wikidata="Q2405201" start="4323" end="4329" title="Dragon (magazine)" label="Dragon"/>
<link wikidata="Q591573" start="4488" end="4495" title="Famitsu" label="Famitsu"/>
<link wikidata="Q8069492" start="4728" end="4732" title="Zero (video game magazine)" label="Zero"/>
<link wikidata="Q2843320" start="4758" end="4769" title="Amiga Power" label="Amiga Power"/>
<link wikidata="Q277666" start="4795" end="4819" title="Computer and Video Games" label="Computer and Video Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q2986814" start="4845" end="4859" title="Commodore User" label="Commodore User"/>
<link wikidata="Q430533" start="4922" end="4959" title="ACE (magazine)" label="ACE (Advanced Computer Entertainment)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="253360" wikidata="Q1778040" url="?curid=253360" title="The Great Giana Sisters">
<text>The Great Giana Sisters is a platform game developed by the West German company Time Warp and published by Rainbow Arts in 1987 for home computers such as the Commodore 64, Amiga, and Atari ST. Players control Giana (or her sister Maria in the multiplayer mode) to explore a magical world inside their dreams and must find a giant diamond to wake up. They traverse side-scrolling stages while avoiding hazards such as monsters and other enemies. These can be defeated by using power-ups, which grant the player abilities such as firing projectiles and making enemies fall asleep.

The game was designed by Armin Gessert and Manfred Trenz. They were tasked with developing the game after Marc Ulrich of Rainbow Arts had seen the popular Nintendo video game &quot;Super Mario Bros.&quot; (1985). Gessert and Trenz were told to create a game clearly similar to &quot;Super Mario Bros.&quot; but still legally distinct. Following its release in West Germany, the game was released in the United Kingdom and received praise from publications such as &quot;Zzap!64&quot; and &quot;Computer and Video Games&quot; for its gameplay and secret levels, despite taking significant inspiration from &quot;Mario&quot;.

Following its UK release, the game was pulled from shops after Rainbow Arts received a notice from Nintendo. Despite being commercially unavailable, &quot;The Great Giana Sisters&quot; eventually became one of the most popular home computer games of its era via pirated and emulated versions of the game. A sequel for the Commodore 64, titled &quot;Hard&#x27;n&#x27;Heavy&quot;, was made&quot;,&quot; which downplayed its Nintendo inspiration. Various new &quot;Giana Sisters&quot; games were released in the early 2000s. The game&#x27;s music, by Chris Huelsbeck, grew popular among video game music fans and has been used in later games and performed by symphony orchestras decades after the game&#x27;s release.

==Plot and gameplay==
&quot;The Great Giana Sisters&quot; is set in the dream of a girl, Giana. She dreams about a world of deserted castles filled with monsters and can only wake up when she finds a large diamond. It is a platform game, where the player can either control Giana in single-player mode, or switch between Giana and her sister Maria in two-player mode. The player controls either sister via a joystick, where they can walk and jump through 33 levels of horizontally scrolling platforms, while avoiding holes and other dangerous objects such as nails and fire. Each player starts with five lives. Each level has a 100-second time limit. If time runs out, the player loses a life.

Most enemies can be defeated by having Giana jump on top of them. Power-ups granting enhancements can be collected. These include projectiles such as lightning and strawberry power-ups, clocks which cause all enemies onscreen to fall asleep, magic bombs that vanish all enemies on screen, and lollis which give the player an extra life.

==Background and development==
&quot;The Great Giana Sisters&quot; was published by Rainbow Arts. Rainbow Arts was founded in 1984 and purchased by the game licensing company Soft-Gold in 1985. The game&#x27;s developer, Time Warp, was a label for an in-house production team for Rainbow Arts.

In the 1970s and early 1980s, video game clones of popular arcades were rampant, and this growth of clones was followed on home computers. These clones often copied gameplay and had similar names to their original influences, with titles like &quot;Munch Man&quot; (1982) or &quot;Snapper&quot; (1982) being derivatives of Namco&#x27;s &quot;Pac-Man&quot; (1980). The trend continued for &quot;The Great Giana Sisters.&quot; Manfred Trenz and Armin Gessert were assigned to make a game similar to Nintendo&#x27;s popular &quot;Super Mario Bros.&quot; after Marc Ulrich, the CEO of publisher Rainbow Arts, saw the game. Trenz recalled that Ulrich grew excited by the potential to be the first to offer a similar game for home computers. In 1983, the Commodore 64 home computer was introduced in West Germany and quickly became the popular home computer in the country. Trenz initially got into computers through a VIC-20 in 1984 and was so impressed that he purchased a Commodore 64 and began developing his own games in BASIC and assembly language. After coming third in a 1986 graphics contest for a German magazine called &quot;&quot;, Rainbow Arts was impressed with his entry and asked him to work on graphics for their games. He joined the company on a permanent basis in 1987, and &quot;The Great Giana Sisters&quot; was his first in-house project.
The developers of the game included Trenz, who created the game&#x27;s visuals and high score programming, Gessert, who developed the rest of the code, and Chris Huelsbeck, who wrote the score. Trenz was not a big fan of &quot;Super Mario Bros.&quot;, having seen the PlayChoice arcade version of the game and &quot;Donkey Kong&quot; (1981) before, but was &quot;more interested in games like &quot;Defender&quot; (1981)&quot;. Trenz and Gessert received a Nintendo Entertainment System and a copy of &quot;Super Mario Bros.&quot; and played it intensively to discover the game&#x27;s secrets. Trenz expressed difficulty with creating the game, stating that it had to be immediately recognizable to players as &quot;Super Mario Bros.&quot;, but legally distinct as to avoid legal issues for Rainbow Arts with Nintendo.

To do so, Trenz changed the mushroom and turtle-like enemies of the original game to owls, disembodied eyes, wasps and giant ants. He recollected that &quot;it would be incredibly cheeky to simply copy the enemies as they were in &quot;Super Mario Bros.&quot;, so I decided to invent as many new and funny ones as possible&quot;. He opted to create a style that borrowed the visual sense but had its own design, simpler and shorter than &quot;Super Mario Bros.&quot;, allowing them to make many different levels within their short development time.

Trenz found the Giana sisters&#x27; character design difficult, thinking each draft had &quot;something missing&quot;. In contrast to Mario, who grows in size when getting a mushroom, the Giani sisters grow spiky hair when collecting a power-up. Trenz&#x27;s decision was technical, as he thought creating a larger sprite would have been too close to &quot;Super Mario Bros.&quot; He also commented that he found working with the upper management difficult, who continuously wanted updates on the development of the game. Trenz said that the title screen also came under scrutiny, going through a few drafts with the first being deemed &quot;too cute&quot;, the second being &quot;far too gloomy&quot; and the third being the final choice for the game. The game took about six to seven months to complete.

Huelsbeck began work with Rainbow Arts by calling them, playing music he had made on his Commodore 64, and asking if they had work for him. The company offered him an in-house position where he produced music for several of the company&#x27;s games. His music for &quot;The Great Giana Sisters&quot; differs from &quot;Super Mario Bros.&quot; It features unique music for the title screen and two for the main game: one for overworld stages and one for boss stages.

==Release==
 &quot;The Great Giana Sisters&quot; was released in Europe on May 6, 1987. Versions of the game were released for home computers including the Commodore 64, Amstrad CPC, Atari ST, Amiga and MSX. A version was announced for the ZX Spectrum, but went unreleased. The games were all generally the same across the Atari ST and Amiga as they were for the Commodore 64, with the Atari ST version lacking a scrolling screen.

Soft-Gold founder Jürgen Goeldner said the game was initially available for months and was selling well in Germany. The game was initially set for a July 1988 release in the United Kingdom. It was distributed through U.S. Gold&#x27;s Go! Media division. Following the British release of the game, Rainbow Arts received what Huelsbeck described as a &quot;nasty letter&quot; from Nintendo, without formal legal action, but including a warning to take the game off the market. Goeldner said the letter from Nintendo went into deep detail on the similarities of the level designs of &quot;The Great Giana Sisters&quot; and &quot;Super Mario Bros.&quot; The British distributor for the game withdrew the game from sale in 1988. Publications, such as &quot;Your Sinclair&quot; in 1988, suggested that Nintendo had taken legal action against the distributor. Trenz later claimed that he was not sure who or what caused the game being pulled from distribution, later suggesting that &quot;placing the slogan &#x27;The Brothers are History!&#x27; on the box certainly couldn&#x27;t have helped&quot;. Goeldner echoed the statement about the text on the UK box art, and said that they had reached an out-of-court settlement with Nintendo, which led to them paying the company and removing the game from distribution. Darran Jones wrote in &quot;Retro Gamer&quot; that the game only grew in popularity after being pulled from store shelves, while Trenz said that the game only received a wider audience after it became commercially unavailable.

Trenz was happy with the German box art for the game but disliked the United Kingdom version, stating it made the characters look strange, and that the Giana sisters resembled Miss Piggy from the Muppets. Jones echoed this, criticizing the Amstrad CPC port of the game as &quot;gruesome art&quot;, which featured a title screen resembling the UK cover.

==Reception==
Darran Jones of &quot;Retro Gamer&quot; wrote in his overview of the game that &quot;The Great Giana Sisters&quot; received a &quot;fair amount of critical acclaim&quot; on its release for the Commodore 64. Reviews compared the game to contemporary platformer games. &quot;GBH&quot; of &quot;Your Commodore&quot; compared the game to earlier attempts at platforming games on home computers, writing that players no longer need &quot;to make pixel perfect leaps or time every move down to the last split second&quot;. &quot;Dunc&quot; of &quot;Your Sinclair&quot; found the game similar to &quot;Wonder Boy&quot;, stating that &quot;The Great Giana Sisters&quot; was superior to the game for its addictive gameplay. A &quot;Zzap!64&quot; reviewer went as far as to say it was &quot;the best game of its kind since &quot;Bubble Bobble&quot;, and there can&#x27;t be many higher recommendations than that&quot;. Reviews from several publications including &quot;ACE&quot;, &quot;&quot;, &quot;Zzap!64&quot; and &quot;Computer and Video Games&quot; all compared the game to &quot;Super Mario Bros.&quot; Matt Bielby of &quot;Computer and Video Games&quot; went as far as to call it &quot;as straight a rip-off as they come&quot;. Reviewers of &quot;Zzap!64&quot; and &quot;Power Play&quot; generally found it not as strong as Nintendo&#x27;s game.

Other reviews commented on the variety in the gameplay of &quot;The Great Giana Sisters&quot;, such as &quot;GBH&quot; and the &quot;Zzap!64&quot; reviewers who praised the game for its large number of secrets and power-ups. Both of the previous reviews found the game addictive, while Rod Lawton of &quot;ACE&quot; questioned whether players would feel compelled to complete the game. For the game&#x27;s music, Lawton wrote that it was &quot;appropriately jaunty&quot;, while the reviewers of &quot;Zzap!64&quot; found it a &quot;a bit twee&quot;, but ultimately excellent.

Jones of &quot;Retro Gamer&quot; described the version for the Amstrad CPC as a &quot;god-awful conversion&quot; with low-quality graphics and no sound. &quot;Crash&quot; reviewed the unreleased ZX Spectrum release, praising the variety of the game. It echoed comparisons to &quot;Super Mario Bros.&quot; stating that &quot;The Great Giana Sisters&quot; could not compare in terms of graphics to Nintendo&#x27;s game, but that &quot;in terms of gameplay (which is the most important thing after all), those &quot;Super Mario Bros&quot; have certainly met their match&quot;. The reviewers generally praised the game but found that the ZX Spectrum port lacked colour and ran slower than the Commodore 64 original. Tony Dillion of &quot;Sinclair User&quot; wrote positively about the game&#x27;s theme and graphics, but that the game performed far too slowly to be playable on the ZX Spectrum.

From retrospective reviews, Kristan Reed of &quot;Eurogamer&quot; stated that the game felt like a &quot;footnote in gaming history&quot;, saying &quot;to most teenage C64 owners of the late &#x27;80s, it was an essential release at the point when the best developers had already started to migrate to the 16-bit systems&quot;. In a 2021 overview, Stefano Castelli of &quot;IGN&quot; called it the best scrolling platform games on the Commodore 64, while still being a pale imitation to &quot;Super Mario Bros.&quot; He wrote that &quot;The Great Giana Sisters&quot; was lacking inspired level design in terms of variety, the control lacked the subtleties of Nintendo&#x27;s game, and that Huelsbeck&#x27;s music was less inspired than Koji Kondo&#x27;s &quot;Super Mario Bros.&quot; score.

==Legacy==

&quot;The Great Giana Sisters&quot; received a sequel in 1989, &quot;Hard&#x27;n&#x27;Heavy&quot;, for the Commodore 64, Atari ST, and Amiga. The characters in the game wore space suits and had an outer-space themed setting, a theme less connected to &quot;Super Mario Bros.&quot; By 2008, the rights to the &quot;Great Giana Sisters&quot; were held by Gessert&#x27;s Spellbound Entertainment. The company released an adaptation of the C64 version of the game for mobile phones in 2005. Further follow-ups to the game followed in the 21st century, such as &quot;Giana Sisters DS&quot; (2009), &quot;Giana Sisters: Twisted Dreams&quot; (2012), and &quot;Giana Sisters: Dream Runners&quot; (2015).

Andreas Lange and Michael Liebe wrote in &quot;Video Games Around the World&quot; (2015) that along with Trenz&#x27;s other Rainbow Arts game &quot;Turrican&quot; (1989), &quot;The Great Giana Sisters&quot; was the most popular action game from Germany, with both titles receiving international acclaim. Despite being removed from the market, the game grew in popularity via piracy and emulation. Gessert later reflected that &quot;I think it&#x27;s a great game, but it never reached the detail and class of &quot;Super Mario Bros&quot;&quot;.

Huelsbeck would go on to compose music for games in &quot;Star Wars: Rogue Squadron&quot; and the &quot;R-Type&quot; series. His music has been adapted to symphony orchestra music, such as at the concert titled &quot;Symphonic Shades&quot; in tribute to Huelsbeck&#x27;s career. &quot;Giana Sisters: Twisted Dreams&quot; also features Huelsbeck&#x27;s music, which features new arrangements and extensions from the original game&#x27;s music.

== Notes ==
==References==

=== Citations ===
=== Sources ===
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 


==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q828322" start="29" end="42" title="platform game" label="platform game"/>
<link wikidata="Q565073" start="107" end="119" title="Rainbow Arts" label="Rainbow Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q99775" start="159" end="171" title="Commodore 64" label="Commodore 64"/>
<link wikidata="Q100047" start="173" end="178" title="Amiga" label="Amiga"/>
<link wikidata="Q627302" start="184" end="192" title="Atari ST" label="Atari ST"/>
<link wikidata="Q1223895" start="365" end="379" title="side-scrolling" label="side-scrolling"/>
<link wikidata="Q2107094" start="477" end="485" title="power-up" label="power-up"/>
<link wikidata="Q92117" start="606" end="619" title="Armin Gessert" label="Armin Gessert"/>
<link wikidata="Q68998" start="624" end="637" title="Manfred Trenz" label="Manfred Trenz"/>
<link wikidata="Q8093" start="736" end="744" title="Nintendo" label="Nintendo"/>
<link wikidata="Q11168" start="762" end="779" title="Super Mario Bros." label="Super Mario Bros."/>
<link wikidata="Q1077297" start="1051" end="1058" title="Zzap!64" label="Zzap!64"/>
<link wikidata="Q277666" start="1075" end="1099" title="Computer and Video Games" label="Computer and Video Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q64712" start="1754" end="1769" title="Chris Huelsbeck" label="Chris Huelsbeck"/>
<link wikidata="Q828322" start="2145" end="2158" title="platform game" label="platform game"/>
<link wikidata="Q3557866" start="2526" end="2531" title="Life (video games)" label="lives"/>
<link wikidata="Q2107094" start="2683" end="2691" title="Power-up" label="Power-up"/>
<link wikidata="Q217446" start="2910" end="2916" title="lollipops" label="lollis"/>
<link wikidata="Q565073" start="3039" end="3051" title="Rainbow Arts" label="Rainbow Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q3288281" start="3280" end="3297" title="video game clones" label="video game clones"/>
<link wikidata="Q113726751" start="3309" end="3316" title="arcade game" label="arcades"/>
<link wikidata="Q473708" start="3373" end="3387" title="home computers" label="home computers"/>
<link wikidata="Q6935660" start="3499" end="3508" title="Munch Man" label="Munch Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q7547321" start="3531" end="3538" title="Snapper (video game)" label="Snapper"/>
<link wikidata="Q309996" start="3573" end="3578" title="Namco" label="Namco"/>
<link wikidata="Q173626" start="3592" end="3599" title="Pac-Man" label="Pac-Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q68998" start="3675" end="3688" title="Manfred Trenz" label="Manfred Trenz"/>
<link wikidata="Q92117" start="3693" end="3706" title="Armin Gessert" label="Armin Gessert"/>
<link wikidata="Q8093" start="3747" end="3755" title="Nintendo" label="Nintendo"/>
<link wikidata="Q11168" start="3777" end="3794" title="Super Mario Bros." label="Super Mario Bros."/>
<link wikidata="Q99775" start="3999" end="4011" title="Commodore 64" label="Commodore 64"/>
<link wikidata="Q918232" start="4163" end="4169" title="VIC-20" label="VIC-20"/>
<link wikidata="Q42979" start="4270" end="4275" title="BASIC" label="BASIC"/>
<link wikidata="Q165436" start="4280" end="4297" title="assembly language" label="assembly language"/>
<link wikidata="Q7600677" start="4328" end="4336" title="Computer graphics" label="graphics"/>
<link wikidata="Q64712" start="4761" end="4776" title="Chris Huelsbeck" label="Chris Huelsbeck"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4873" end="4883" title="Nintendo Entertainment System models#PlayChoice-10" label="PlayChoice"/>
<link wikidata="Q12384" start="4921" end="4932" title="Donkey Kong (1981 video game)" label="Donkey Kong"/>
<link wikidata="Q1182593" start="5004" end="5012" title="Defender (1981 video game)" label="Defender"/>
<link wikidata="Q172742" start="5062" end="5091" title="Nintendo Entertainment System" label="Nintendo Entertainment System"/>
<link wikidata="Q1333015" start="6290" end="6296" title="Sprite (computer graphics)" label="sprite"/>
<link wikidata="Q99775" start="7405" end="7417" title="Commodore 64" label="Commodore 64"/>
<link wikidata="Q478829" start="7419" end="7430" title="Amstrad CPC" label="Amstrad CPC"/>
<link wikidata="Q627302" start="7432" end="7440" title="Atari ST" label="Atari ST"/>
<link wikidata="Q100047" start="7442" end="7447" title="Amiga" label="Amiga"/>
<link wikidata="Q853547" start="7452" end="7455" title="MSX" label="MSX"/>
<link wikidata="Q23882" start="7489" end="7500" title="ZX Spectrum" label="ZX Spectrum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1930918" start="7898" end="7907" title="U.S. Gold" label="U.S. Gold"/>
<link wikidata="Q2464944" start="8433" end="8446" title="Your Sinclair" label="Your Sinclair"/>
<link wikidata="Q3021204" start="9017" end="9028" title="Retro Gamer" label="Retro Gamer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2267970" start="9393" end="9403" title="Miss Piggy" label="Miss Piggy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1953422" start="9409" end="9420" title="the Muppets" label="the Muppets"/>
<link wikidata="Q478829" start="9457" end="9468" title="Amstrad CPC" label="Amstrad CPC"/>
<link wikidata="Q3021204" start="9607" end="9618" title="Retro Gamer" label="Retro Gamer"/>
<link wikidata="Q99775" start="9778" end="9790" title="Commodore 64" label="Commodore 64"/>
<link wikidata="Q15863861" start="9877" end="9891" title="Your Commodore" label="Your Commodore"/>
<link wikidata="Q2464944" start="10128" end="10141" title="Your Sinclair" label="Your Sinclair"/>
<link wikidata="Q780496" start="10180" end="10190" title="Wonder Boy (video game)" label="Wonder Boy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1077297" start="10308" end="10315" title="Zzap!64" label="Zzap!64"/>
<link wikidata="Q88759" start="10404" end="10417" title="Bubble Bobble (video game)" label="Bubble Bobble"/>
<link wikidata="Q430533" start="10544" end="10547" title="ACE (magazine)" label="ACE"/>
<link wikidata="Q277666" start="10599" end="10623" title="Computer and Video Games" label="Computer and Video Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q11168" start="10661" end="10678" title="Super Mario Bros." label="Super Mario Bros."/>
<link wikidata="Q478829" start="11570" end="11581" title="Amstrad CPC" label="Amstrad CPC"/>
<link wikidata="Q753091" start="11666" end="11671" title="Crash (magazine)" label="Crash"/>
<link wikidata="Q23882" start="11702" end="11713" title="ZX Spectrum" label="ZX Spectrum"/>
<link wikidata="Q752796" start="12241" end="12254" title="Sinclair User" label="Sinclair User"/>
<link wikidata="Q281243" start="12449" end="12458" title="Eurogamer" label="Eurogamer"/>
<link wikidata="Q207708" start="12773" end="12776" title="IGN" label="IGN"/>
<link wikidata="Q356782" start="13135" end="13145" title="Koji Kondo" label="Koji Kondo"/>
<link wikidata="Q549221" start="13571" end="13595" title="Spellbound Entertainment" label="Spellbound Entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1522331" start="13765" end="13781" title="Giana Sisters DS" label="Giana Sisters DS"/>
<link wikidata="" start="13802" end="13831" title="Giana Sisters: Twisted Dreams" label="Giana Sisters: Twisted Dreams"/>
<link wikidata="" start="13856" end="13884" title="Giana Sisters: Dream Runners" label="Giana Sisters: Dream Runners"/>
<link wikidata="Q1929662" start="14048" end="14056" title="Turrican" label="Turrican"/>
<link wikidata="Q85813122" start="14275" end="14281" title="Video game piracy" label="piracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196126" start="14286" end="14295" title="Video game console emulator" label="emulation"/>
<link wikidata="" start="14504" end="14529" title="Star Wars: Rogue Squadron (series)" label="Star Wars: Rogue Squadron"/>
<link wikidata="Q7273276" start="14550" end="14556" title="List of R-Type video games" label="R-Type"/>
<link wikidata="Q9734" start="14601" end="14619" title="Symphony" label="symphony orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q7661419" start="14663" end="14679" title="Symphonic Shades" label="Symphonic Shades"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="253372" wikidata="Q60738771" url="?curid=253372" title="Divinization (Christian)">
<text>In Christian theology, divinization (&quot;divinization&quot; may also refer to &quot;apotheosis&quot;, lit. &quot;making divine&quot;), or theopoesis or theosis, is the transforming effect of divine grace, the spirit of God, or the atonement of Christ. Although it literally means to become divine, or to become God, most modern Christian denominations do not interpret the doctrine as implying an overcoming of a fundamental ontological difference between God and humanity; for example, John of the Cross (AD 1542–1591) indicated that while &quot;God communicates to it [the individual soul] His supernatural Being, in such wise that it appears to be God Himself, and has all that God Himself has&quot;, yet &quot;it is true that its natural being, though thus transformed, is as distinct from the Being of God as it was before&quot;.

== Patristic writings ==
The term &quot;theosis&quot; was originally used in Greco-Roman pagan society to venerate a ruler. It was inconceivable to Jewish piety. Yet it was adopted in Eastern Christianity by the Greek Fathers to describe the spiritual transformation of a Christian. The change of human nature was understood by them as a consequence of a baptized person being incorporated into the Church as the Body of Christ. Divinization was thus developed within the context of incarnational theology. 

The teaching about deification of a Christian can be found as early as in the works of Irenaeus (c. 130–202), a Greek Father who is also known as the Father of Catholic theology, and who was bishop of the church of Lyons in France. For example, in the preface to his apologetic work &quot;Adversus Haereses&quot; (&quot;Against Heresies&quot;) vol. 5, Irenaeus states that &quot;[T]he Word of God, our Lord Jesus Christ ... did, through His transcendent love, become what we are, that He might bring us to be even what He is Himself&quot;.&quot; Athanasius of Alexandria was an author of the phrase about Jesus Christ which has become popular in Christmas homilies: &quot;He was made human so that he might make us sons of god&quot; (&quot;De incarnatione&quot; 54,3, cf. &quot;Contra Arianos&quot; 1.39). Divinization in the context of the Eucharist was taught by Gregory of Nyssa and Cyril of Alexandria. The term never meant for them breaching the absolute ontological distinction between God and his creation.

There were many different references to divinization in the writings of the Church Fathers.

As previously noted, in the second century, Irenaeus, bishop of Lyons (c. 130–202) said that the Word Jesus Christ had &quot;become what we are, that He might bring us to be even what He is Himself.&quot; He added:
Do we cast blame on him [God] because we were not made gods from the beginning, but were at first created merely as men, and then later as gods? Although God has adopted this course out of his pure benevolence, that no one may charge him with discrimination or stinginess, he declares, &quot;I have said, Ye are gods; and all of you are sons of the Most High.&quot; ... For it was necessary at first that nature be exhibited, then after that what was mortal would be conquered and swallowed up in immortality.

At about the same time, Clement of Alexandria (c. 150–215), wrote: &quot;Yea, I say, the Word of God became a man so that you might learn from a man how to become a god.&quot; Clement further stated that &quot;[i]f one knows himself, he will know God, and knowing God will become like God. . . . His is beauty, true beauty, for it is God, and that man becomes a god, since God wills it. So Heraclitus was right when he said, &#x27;Men are gods, and gods are men.&#x27;&quot; Clement of Alexandria also stated that &quot;he who obeys the Lord and follows the prophecy given through him ... becomes a god while still moving about in the flesh.&quot;

Justin Martyr (c. 100–165) insisted that in the beginning men &quot;were made like God, free from suffering and death,&quot; and that they are thus &quot;deemed worthy of becoming gods and of having power to become sons of the highest.&quot;

Athanasius, bishop of Alexandria (c. 296–373), stated his belief in literal deification: &quot;The Word was made flesh in order that we might be made gods. ... Just as the Lord, putting on the body, became a man, so also we men are both deified through his flesh, and henceforth inherit everlasting life.&quot; Athanasius also observed: &quot;For the Son of God became man so that we might become God.&quot;

Augustine of Hippo (354–430) said: &quot;But he himself that justifies also deifies, for by justifying he makes sons of God. &#x27;For he has given them power to become the sons of God&#x27; [referring to John 1:12]. If then we have been made sons of god, we have also been made gods.&quot; &quot;To make human beings gods,&quot; Augustine said, &quot;He was made man who was God&quot; (sermon 192.1.1). Augustine goes on to write that &quot;[they] are not born of His Substance, that they should be the same as He, but that by favour they should come to Him... (Ibid)&quot;.

Other references to divinization in the writings of the Church Fathers include the following:
* Irenaeus (c. 130-200)
** &quot;[T]he Word of God, our Lord Jesus Christ, who did, through His transcendent love, become what we are, that He might bring us to be even what He is Himself.&quot;
** &quot;&#x27;For we cast blame upon [God], because we have not been made gods from the beginning, but at first merely men, then at length gods; although God has adopted this course out of His pure benevolence, that no one may impute to Him invidiousness or grudgingness he declares, &quot;I have said, Ye are gods; and all of you are sons of the Most High.&quot; &quot;
** &quot;For it was necessary, at first, that nature should be exhibited; then, after that, that what was mortal should be conquered and swallowed up by immortality, and the corruptible by incorruptibility, and that man should be made after the image and likeness of God.&quot;
* Clement of Alexandria (c. 150-215)
** &quot;[T]he Word of God became man, that thou mayest learn from man how man may become God.&quot;
** &quot;For if one knows himself, he will know God; and knowing God, he will be made like God&quot;
** &quot;[H]is is beauty, the true beauty, for it is God; and that man becomes God, since God so wills. Heraclitus, then, rightly said, &quot;Men are gods, and gods are men.&quot; For the Word Himself is the manifest mystery: God in man, and man God&quot;
** &quot;[H]e who listens to the Lord, and follows the prophecy given by Him, will be formed perfectly in the likeness of the teacher—made a god going about in flesh.&quot;
** &quot;And to be incorruptible is to participate in divinity...&quot;
* Justin Martyr (c. 100-165)
** &quot;[Men] were made like God, free from suffering and death, provided that they kept His commandments, and were deemed deserving of the name of His sons, and yet they, becoming like Adam and Eve, work out death for themselves; let the interpretation of the Psalm be held just as you wish, yet thereby it is demonstrated that all men are deemed worthy of becoming &quot;gods,&quot; and of having power to become sons of the Highest.&quot;
*Theophilus of Antioch (c. 120-190)
** &quot;For if He had made him immortal from the beginning, He would have made him God. Again, if He had made him mortal, God would seem to be the cause of his death. Neither, then, immortal nor yet mortal did He make him, but, as we have said above, capable of both; so that if he should incline to the things of immortality, keeping the commandment of God, he should receive as reward from Him immortality, and should become God...&quot;
* Hippolytus of Rome (c. 170-235)
** &quot;And you shall be a companion of the Deity, and a co-heir with Christ, no longer enslaved by lusts or passions, and never again wasted by disease. For you have become God: for whatever sufferings you underwent while being a man, these He gave to you, because you were of mortal mould, but whatever it is consistent with God to impart, these God has promised to bestow upon you, because you have been deified, and begotten unto immortality.&quot;
** &quot;If, therefore, man has become immortal, he will also be God. And if he is made God by water and the Holy Spirit after the regeneration of the laver he is found to be also joint-heir with Christ after the resurrection from the dead.&quot;
* Athanasius of Alexandria (c. 296-373)
** &quot;Therefore He was not man, and then became God, but He was God, and then became man, and that to deify us&quot;
** &quot;for as the Lord, putting on the body, became man, so we men are deified by the Word as being taken to Him through His flesh.&quot;
** &quot;For He was made man that we might be made God.&quot;
* Gregory of Nyssa (c. 335-395)
** &quot;Since the God who was manifested infused Himself into perishable humanity for this purpose, viz. that by this communion with Deity mankind might at the same time be deified, for this end it is that, by dispensation of His grace, He disseminated Himself in every believer.&quot;
** &quot;For just as He in Himself assimilated His own human nature to the power of the Godhead, being a part of the common nature, but not being subject to the inclination to sin which is in that nature (for it says: &quot;He did no sin, nor was deceit found in his mouth), so, also, will He lead each person to union with the Godhead if they do nothing unworthy of union with the Divine.&quot;
* Augustine of Hippo (c. 354-430)
** &quot;&#x27;For He hath given them power to become the sons of God.&#x27; If we have been made sons of God, we have also been made gods.&quot;
* Maximus the Confessor
** &quot;Nothing in theosis is the product of human nature, for nature cannot comprehend God. It is only the mercy of God that has the capacity to endow theosis unto the existing... In theosis, man (the image of God) becomes likened to God, he rejoices in all the plenitude that does not belong to him by nature, because the grace of the Spirit triumphs within him, and because God acts in him.&quot;
* Cyril of Alexandria 
** &quot;[H]e came down into our condition solely in order to lead us to his own divine state.&quot;
** &quot;It follows, therefore, that He Who Is, The One Who Exists, is necessarily born of the flesh, taking all that is ours into himself so that all that is born of the flesh, that is us corruptible and perishing human beings, might rest in him. In short, he took what was ours to be his very own so that we might have all that was his.&quot;
** &quot;For we too are sons and gods by grace, and we have surely been brought to this wonderful and supernatural dignity since we have the Only Begotten Word of God dwelling within us.&quot;
* Gregory of Nazianzus 
** implores humankind to &quot;become gods for (God&#x27;s) sake, since (God) became man for our sake.&quot;. 
** Likewise, he argues that the mediator &quot;pleads even now as Man for my salvation; for He continues to wear the Body which He assumed, until He make me God by the power of His Incarnation.&quot;
** &quot;Through the medium of the mind he had dealings with the flesh, being made that God on earth, which is Man: Man and God blended. They became a single whole, the stronger side predominating, in order that I might be made God to the same extent that he was made man.&quot;
* Basil of Caesarea stated that &quot;becoming a god is the highest goal of all&quot;

==Eastern Orthodox==

The teaching of deification or &quot;theosis&quot; in Eastern Orthodoxy refers to the attainment of &quot;likeness of God&quot;, &quot;union with God&quot; or &quot;reconciliation with God&quot;. Deification has three stages in its process of transformation: &quot;katharsis&quot;, &quot;theoria&quot;, &quot;theosis&quot;. &quot;Theosis&quot; as such is the goal, it is the purpose of life, and it is considered achievable only through a synergy (or cooperation) between humans&#x27; activities and God&#x27;s uncreated energies (or operations). &quot;Theosis&quot; is an important concept in Eastern Orthodox theology deriving from the fact that Eastern Orthodox theology is of an explicitly mystical character. Theology in the Eastern Orthodox Church is what is derived from saints or mystics of the tradition, and Eastern Orthodoxy considers that &quot;no one who does not follow the path of union with God can be a theologian.&quot; In Eastern Orthodoxy, theology is not treated as an academic pursuit, but it is based on revelation (see gnosiology), meaning that Eastern Orthodox theology and its theologians are validated by ascetic pursuits, rather than academic degrees (i.e. scholasticism).

According to the &quot;Westminster Dictionary of Christian Theology&quot;, as quoted by Millet and Reynolds:

=== Vision of God ===

According to Hierotheos Vlachos, divinization, also called &quot;theosis&quot;, &quot;is the participation in the Uncreated grace of God&quot; and &quot;is identified and connected with the &quot;theoria&quot; (vision) of the Uncreated Light&quot;. &quot;&quot;Theoria&quot; is the vision of the glory of God. &quot;Theoria&quot; is identified with the vision of the uncreated Light, the uncreated energy of God, with the union of man with God, with man&#x27;s &quot;theosis&quot;. This vision, by which faith is attained, is what saves: &quot;Faith comes by hearing the Word and by experiencing &quot;theoria&quot; (the vision of God). We accept faith at first by hearing in order to be healed, and then we attain to faith by &quot;theoria&quot;, which saves man.&quot; It is also one of the means by which Christians came to know the Trinity: &quot;The disciples of Christ acquired the knowledge of the Triune God in &quot;theoria&quot; (vision of God) and by revelation.&quot;

=== As a patristic and historical teaching ===

For many Church Fathers, &quot;theosis&quot; goes beyond simply restoring people to their state before the Fall of Adam and Eve, teaching that because Christ united the human and divine natures in Jesus&#x27; person, it is now possible for someone to experience closer fellowship with God than Adam and Eve initially experienced in the Garden of Eden, and that people can become more like God than Adam and Eve were at that time. Some Eastern Orthodox theologians go so far as to say that Jesus would have become incarnate for this reason alone, even if Adam and Eve had never sinned.

=== Ascetic practice ===

The journey toward theosis includes many forms of praxis. The most obvious form being Monasticism and Clergy. Of the Monastic tradition the practice of hesychasm is most important as a way to establish a direct relationship with God. Living in the community of the church and partaking regularly of the sacraments, and especially the Eucharist, is taken for granted. Also important is cultivating &quot;prayer of the heart&quot;, and prayer that never ceases, as Paul exhorts the Thessalonians (1 and 2). This unceasing prayer of the heart is a dominant theme in the writings of the Fathers, especially in those collected in the Philokalia. It is considered that no one can reach theosis without an impeccable Christian living, crowned by faithful, warm, and, ultimately, silent (hesychast), continuous Prayer of the Heart. The &quot;doer&quot; in deification is the Holy Spirit, with whom the human being joins his will to receive this transforming grace by praxis and prayer, and as Gregory Palamas teaches, the Christian mystics are deified as they become filled with the Light of Tabor of the Holy Spirit in the degree that they make themselves open to it by asceticism (divinization being not a one-sided act of God, but a loving cooperation between God and the advanced Christian, which Palamas considers a synergy). This synergy or co-operation between God and Man does not lead to mankind being absorbed into God as was taught in earlier pagan forms of deification like Henosis. Rather it expresses unity, in the complementary nature between the created and the creator. Acquisition of the Holy Spirit is key as the acquisition of the spirit leads to self-realization.

==Western Christianity==
In Western Christian theology, divinization is emphasized among Catholics, as well as among Quakers who emphasize the living presence of Christ within each person and Christ-centered community. Methodists, whose religious tradition has always placed strong emphasis on entire sanctification, and whose doctrine of sanctification has many similarities with the Eastern Orthodox concept of theosis or divinization, teach the doctrine.

Patristic scholar Donald Fairbairn has argued that theosis in the Greek Fathers is not an ontological exchange between the Son and the Christian. In general Fairbairn argues that the change that occurs in theosis is &quot;something more than mere status but less than the possession of God&#x27;s very substance.&quot; In his book, &quot;Life in the Trinity&quot;, he argues that through our relationship with the Son we are brought into the same kind of relationship with the Father (and Spirit) that the Son has. He supports this argument by identifying a distinction between the Son&#x27;s warm-fellowship with the Father, and his ontological union with the Father. He argues that the Greek Fathers, primarily Athanasius and Cyril of Alexandria were clear that we never share ontological union with God, but only this intimate fellowship.

=== Catholic theology (including Latin and Eastern Churches) ===

The term &quot;divinization&quot; is characteristic of Eastern Christian thought. Western Christianity, at least since Augustine of Hippo (354-430) named as the &quot;doctor of grace&quot;, has always preferred to speak about supernatural grace transforming a Christian according to the Image of Christ. One cannot say, though, that the action of God on human nature conveyed in the term &quot;divinization&quot; (&quot;theosis&quot;) is alien to the Roman Catholic teaching, as is evident in Augustine repeating the famous phrase of Athanasius of Alexandria: &quot;To make human beings gods, he was made man, who was God&quot; (&quot;Deos facturus qui homines erant, homo factus est qui Deus erat&quot; ). It is evident from what the &quot;Catechism of the Catholic Church&quot; says of Christians as partakers of the divine nature:

Medieval scholastic theologian Thomas Aquinas wrote:
 He also wrote of God&#x27;s &quot;special love, whereby He draws the rational creature above the condition of its nature to a participation of the Divine good&quot;. and he ultimately roots the purpose of the Incarnation in theosis. It is important to note, however, that the divinization taught by Aquinas, Augustine, and other Fathers is not ontological, meaning that souls do not take on the substance of God, but rather through grace, are gifted with the participation in the Divine Life.

Of a more modern Roman Catholic theologian it has been said: &quot;The theological vision of Karl Rahner, the German Jesuit whose thought has been so influential in the Roman Catholic Church and beyond over the last fifty years, has at its very core the symbol of &quot;theopoiesis&quot;. The process of divinization is the center of gravity around which move Rahner&#x27;s understanding of creation, anthropology, Christology, ecclesiology, liturgy, and eschatology. The importance of this process for Rahner is such that we are justified in describing his overall theological project to be largely a matter of giving a coherent and contemporary account of divinization.&quot; Joshua Bloor in his article reveals the rise in deification from an array of Western traditions, looking closely at the Catholic Theologian Catherine LaCugna, arguing that LaCugna sees deification as &quot;personal communion with God, which deifies the human in the process, conforming him/her into being Christ-like&quot;.

The Roman Rite liturgy expresses the doctrine of divinization or &quot;theosis&quot; in the prayer said by the deacon or priest when preparing the Eucharistic chalice: &quot;&quot; (&quot;By the mystery of this water and wine may we come to share in the divinity of Christ who humbled himself to share in our humanity.&quot;)

The Catholic Church teaches that God gives to some souls, even in the present life, a very special grace by which they can be mystically united to God even while yet alive: this is true mystical contemplation. This is seen as the culmination of the three states, or stages, of perfection through which the soul passes: the purgative way (that of cleansing or purification, the Greek term for which is , &quot;katharsis&quot;), the illuminative way (so called because in it the mind becomes more and more enlightened as to spiritual things and the practice of virtue, corresponding to what in Greek is called , &quot;theoria&quot;), and the unitive way (that of union with God by love and the actual experience and exercise of that love, a union that is called , &quot;theosis&quot;).

The writings attributed to Dionysius the Areopagite were highly influential in the West, and their theses and arguments were adopted by Peter Lombard, Alexander of Hales, Albert the Great, Thomas Aquinas and Bonaventure. According to these writings, mystical knowledge must be distinguished from the rational knowledge by which we know God, not in his nature, but through the wonderful order of the universe, which is a participation of the divine ideas. Through the more perfect knowledge of God that is mystical knowledge, a knowledge beyond the attainments of reason even enlightened by faith, the soul contemplates directly the mysteries of divine light. In the present life this contemplation is possible only to a few privileged souls, through a very special grace of God: it is the (theosis), (mystical union). Meister Eckhart too taught a deification of man and an assimilation of the creature into the Creator through contemplation.

Deification, to which, in spite of its presence in the liturgical prayers of the West, Western theologians have given less attention than Eastern, is nevertheless prominent in the writing of Western mystics.

Catherine of Siena stated God as saying: 

John of the Cross wrote: 

Orestes Brownson wrote: 

===Anabaptist theology===
The early Anabaptists wrote quite extensively on the idea of theosis. Hutterite leader Peter Riedemann wrote, for example: 

Among the Dutch Mennonites, Dirk Philips and Menno Simons wrote about the concept of theosis in many of their writings. Dirk Philips explained, for example, that although humans cannot become God, per se, they can become like Him in character: 

Among the South German Mystics that became Anabaptists, the concept of divinization was also taught. In his confession, Hans Hut explained that holding spiritual communion with Christ would deify a person: 

For the early Anabaptist Matthias Servaes, baptism signified a dying to the old nature and &quot;an incorporation into the unity of one mind, resulting in identical natures, patterned after God who is their Father, and becoming dead to the world, that is, to all unrighteousness and crucifying their flesh daily, no longer allowing sin to reign or have the upper hand in them, as Paul clearly tells the Romans (Chapter 6), with many clear words.&quot;

=== Lutheran theology ===
More recently, the Finnish school of Lutheran thought has drawn close associations between theosis and justification. Primarily spearheaded by Tuomo Mannermaa, this line of theological development grew out of talks between the Evangelical Lutheran Church of Finland and the Russian Orthodox Church between 1970 and 1986. Mannermaa argues in his book, &quot;Christ Present in Faith&quot;, that the real exchange between Christ and sinful humanity, a theme prevalent in Luther&#x27;s writing, is synonymous with Eastern views of theosis. It is in this real exchange which Mannermaa says &quot;the union between Christ and the believer makes the latter a ‘completely divine [person] .&quot; While this departure from traditional Lutheran thought is sometimes hailed as &quot;the threshold of a third Luther Renaissance,&quot; other Lutheran scholars disagree and argue that the idea of theosis violates Luther&#x27;s theology of the cross principles by ignoring the real distinction that is axiomatic for not only Luther, but for orthodox Christianity as a whole. One of the most prominent scholars is Robert Kolb, who primarily roots this critique in Luther&#x27;s use of marriage metaphors concerning the Christian&#x27;s relationship with God. Kolb writes &quot;This view ignores the nature of the ‘union’ of bride and bridegroom that Luther employed so far.&quot;

=== Reformed theology ===
Early during the Reformation, thought was given to the doctrine of union with Christ (&quot;unio cum Christo&quot;) as the precursor to the entire process of salvation and sanctification. This was especially so in the thought of John Calvin.

Henry Scougal&#x27;s work &quot;The Life of God in the Soul of Man&quot; is sometimes cited as important in keeping alive among Protestants the ideas central to the doctrine. In the introductory passages of his book, Scougal describes &quot;religion&quot; in terms that evoke the doctrine of theosis:

=== Anglican theology ===
Out of the English Reformation, an understanding of salvation in terms closely comparable to the Eastern Orthodox doctrine of theosis was recognized in the Anglican tradition, J. Bloor examines deification/theosis in the late Anglican Priest and theologian Canon A. M. (Donald) Allchin, but it is also explored in the writings of Lancelot Andrewes, who described salvation in terms vividly reminiscent of the early fathers:

C.S. Lewis, speaking on his personal belief in the subject of literal deification, stated as follows:

In a more complete statement on his beliefs in literal deification, C.S. Lewis stated in his book, &quot;Mere Christianity&quot; as follows:

=== Methodist theology ===
Theosis as a doctrine developed in a distinctive direction among Methodists, and elsewhere in the pietist movement which reawakened Protestant interest in the asceticism of the early Catholic Church, and some of the mystical traditions of the West. Distinctively, in Methodist (Wesleyan-Arminian) theology, the doctrine of &quot;entire sanctification&quot; teaches, in summary, that it is the Christian&#x27;s goal, in principle possible to achieve, to live without any (voluntary) sin (&quot;Christian perfection&quot;).

In 1311 the Catholic Council of Vienne declared this notion, &quot;that man in this present life can acquire so great and such a degree of perfection that he will be rendered inwardly sinless, and that he will not be able to advance farther in grace&quot; (Denzinger §471), to be a heresy. Thus this Methodist understanding of theosis is substantially different from that of the Catholic Church, as well as other Protestant Churches. The Wesleyan-Arminian doctrine of Christian perfection was sharply criticized by many in the Church of England during the ministry of John Wesley and outside the Methodist tradition, it continues to be controversial among to this day among other Christian denominations.

=== Quaker theology ===
Based on their spiritual experiences and tested against the testimony of scripture, George Fox and early Quakers believed that transformation by the Holy Spirit was a normal experience within the early church, where individuals and communities were led by the living presence of Christ dwelling within them. George Fox wrote:

&quot;The scriptures saith God will dwell in men, and walk in men … Doth not the Apostle say, the saints were partakers of the divine nature? And that God dwells in the saints, and Christ is in them, except they be reprobates? And do not the saints come to eat the flesh of Christ? And if they eat his flesh, is it not within them?&quot;

=== Christian universalist theology ===

There has been a modern revival of the concept of theosis (often called &quot;manifest sonship&quot; or &quot;Christedness&quot;) among Christians who hold to the doctrine of universal reconciliation or &quot;apocatastasis&quot;, especially those with a background in the charismatic Latter Rain Movement or even the New Age and New Thought movements. The statement of faith of the Christian Universalist Association includes theosis in one of its points.

A minority of charismatic Christian universalists believe that the &quot;return of Christ&quot; is a corporate body of perfected human beings who are the &quot;Manifested Sons of God&quot; instead of a literal return of the person of Jesus, and that these Sons will reign on the earth and transform all other human beings from sin to perfection during an age that is coming soon (a particularly &quot;universalistic&quot; approach to millennialism). Some liberal Christian universalists with New Age leanings share a similar eschatology.

=== Western views on hesychasm ===

The practice of ascetic prayer called hesychasm in the Eastern Orthodox Church is centered on the enlightenment or deification, theosis of man.

While Constantinople experienced a succession of councils alternately approving and condemning doctrine concerning hesychasm, the Western Church held no council in which to make a pronouncement on the issue, and the word &quot;hesychasm&quot; does not appear in the &quot;Enchiridion Symbolorum et Definitionum&quot; (Handbook of Creeds and Definitions), the collection of Roman Catholic teachings originally compiled by Heinrich Joseph Dominicus Denzinger.

Despite the fact that the hesychast doctrine of Gregory Palamas has never been officially condemned by the Catholic Church, Western theologians tended to reject it, often equating it with quietism. This identification may have been motivated in part by the fact that &quot;quietism&quot; is the literal translation of &quot;hesychasm&quot;. However, according to Kallistos Ware, &quot;To translate &#x27;hesychasm&#x27; as &#x27;quietism&#x27;, while perhaps etymologically defensible, is historically and theologically misleading.&quot; Ware asserts that &quot;the distinctive tenets of the seventeenth century Western Quietists are not characteristic of Greek hesychasm.&quot; Elsewhere too, Ware argues that it is important not to translate &quot;hesychasm&quot; as &quot;quietism&quot;.

For long, Palamism won almost no following in the West. and the distrustful attitude of Barlaam in its regard prevailed among Western theologians, surviving into the early 20th century, as shown in Adrian Fortescue&#x27;s article on hesychasm in the 1910 Catholic Encyclopedia. In the same period, Siméon Vailhé described some aspects of the teaching of Palamas as &quot;monstrous errors&quot;, &quot;heresies&quot; and &quot;a resurrection of polytheism&quot;, and called the hesychast method for arriving at perfect contemplation &quot;no more than a crude form of auto-suggestion&quot;

The 20th century saw a remarkable change in the attitude of Roman Catholic theologians to Palamas, a &quot;rehabilitation&quot; of him that has led to increasing parts of the Western Church considering him a saint, even if uncanonized. John Meyendorff describes the 20th-century rehabilitation of Palamas in the Western Church as a &quot;remarkable event in the history of scholarship.&quot; Andreas Andreopoulos cites the 1910 Catholic Encyclopedia article by Fortescue as an example of how Barlaam&#x27;s distrustful and hostile attitude regarding hesychasm survived until recently in the West, adding that now &quot;the Western world has started to rediscover what amounts to a lost tradition. Hesychasm, which was never anything close to a scholar&#x27;s pursuit, is now studied by Western theologians who are astounded by the profound thought and spirituality of late Byzantium.&quot;

Some Western scholars maintain that there is no conflict between Palamas&#x27;s teaching and Roman Catholic thought, and some have incorporated the essence-energies distinction into their own thinking. For example, G. Philips asserts that the essence-energies distinction as presented by Palamas is &quot;a typical example of a perfectly admissible theological pluralism&quot; that is compatible with the Roman Catholic magisterium.

Jeffrey D. Finch claims that &quot;the future of East-West rapprochement appears to be overcoming the modern polemics of neo-scholasticism and neo-Palamism&quot;.

Pope John Paul II repeatedly emphasized his respect for Eastern theology as an enrichment for the whole Church, declaring that, even after the painful division between the Christian East and the See of Rome, that theology has opened up profound thought-provoking perspectives of interest to the entire Church. He spoke in particular of the hesychast controversy. The term &quot;hesychasm&quot;, he said, refers to a practice of prayer marked by deep tranquillity of the spirit intent on contemplating God unceasingly by invoking the name of Jesus. While from a Catholic viewpoint there have been tensions concerning some developments of the practice, the Pope said, there is no denying the goodness of the intention that inspired its defence, which was to stress that man is offered the concrete possibility of uniting himself in his inner heart with God in that profound union of grace known as &quot;theosis&quot;, divinization.

Among the treasures of &quot;the venerable and ancient tradition of the Eastern Churches&quot; with which he said Catholics should be familiar, so as to be nourished by it, he mentioned in particular &quot;the teaching of the Cappadocian Fathers on divinization (which) passed into the tradition of all the Eastern Churches and is part of their common heritage. This can be summarized in the thought already expressed by Saint Irenaeus at the end of the second century: God passed into man so that man might pass over to God. This theology of divinization remains one of the achievements particularly dear to Eastern Christian thought.&quot;

=== Latter Day Saint theology ===

Mormonism includes a belief in the doctrine of exaltation, by which is meant a literal divinization. According to Latter-day Saint scholars, there are similarities between the Latter-day Saint belief of eternal progression and the beliefs found in the patristic writings of the first, second, and third centuries A.D.

According to the founder of the Latter Day Saint movement, Joseph Smith, through obedience to Christ and the gradual acquisition of knowledge, the faithful may eventually become heirs of God in the afterlife and &quot;inherit all things&quot; as Christ himself &quot;inherited all things.&quot; Latter-day Saints believe they will continue to worship and be subject to God the Father in the name of Christ in the afterlife.

Mormons do not characterize the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit in terms of an immaterial, formless substance or essence that sets godhood apart as a separate genus from humanity. They believe that this classification of divinity was originated by post-apostolic theologians, whose speculations on God were influenced by Greek metaphysical philosophers such as the Neoplatonists, who described their notions of deity in similar terms of a divine substance/essence (ousia)—i.e. terms which were unknown to the pre-Nicean Christian world. Latter-day Saints believe that through modern day revelation, God restored the doctrine that all humans are spiritually begotten (Hebrews 12:9, Acts 17:28–29) sons and daughters of Heavenly Father, and thus are all part of the same heavenly family. Because humans are literally God&#x27;s children, they can also be heirs of his glory, and joint heirs with Jesus Christ (Romans 8:16–17).

Latter-day Saints believe that the &quot;glory of God is intelligence, in other words, light and truth&quot; (D&amp;C 93:36). Therefore the process of inheriting his glory is a process of learning. As a crucial step in this process, all of God&#x27;s spirit children had the choice to come to earth in order to receive a body and continue their development. Latter-day Saints believe that the fallen state of humanity (mortality) was not the result of an unplanned cancellation of God&#x27;s plan for an eternal earthly paradise, rather it was a crucial step that provides the opportunity to learn and grow in the face of opposition (2 Nephi 2:11, 25). Thus, the purpose of earth life is to gain knowledge and experience—which includes overcoming trials and mistakes through the atonement of Jesus Christ and, using the lessons learned, to become stronger and wiser, more like their Heavenly Father (D&amp;C 98:3). Those who endure to the end (Matthew 24:13, Mark 13:13) while in mortality, as well as those who accept the gospel after death (see baptism for the dead), will be able to dwell in the presence of God, where they can continue to grow in light and truth, which &quot;light groweth brighter and brighter until the perfect day&quot; (D&amp;C 50:24). Latter-day Saints believe that the Father and the Son both possess glorified, immortal, physical bodies (D&amp;C 130:22) and that thanks to Christ&#x27;s resurrection, humans will also be resurrected and inherit this same type of body (Philippians 3:21).

==Primary source citations==
==Secondary source citations==
== References==
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*Harris, William E. (1989). &quot;From Man to God: an L.D.S. Scientist Views Creation, Progression, and Exaltation&quot;. Bountiful, Utah: Horizon Publishers. 
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q216545" start="3" end="21" title="Christian theology" label="Christian theology"/>
<link wikidata="Q60738771" start="23" end="35" title="Divinization (Christian)" label="divinization"/>
<link wikidata="Q580995" start="86" end="96" title="apotheosis" label="apotheosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q60738771" start="140" end="150" title="Divinization (Christian)" label="theopoesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129863" start="154" end="161" title="Theosis (Eastern Orthodox theology)" label="theosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3852175" start="193" end="205" title="divine grace" label="divine grace"/>
<link wikidata="Q58646537" start="211" end="217" title="Holy Spirit (Christianity)" label="spirit"/>
<link wikidata="Q825" start="221" end="224" title="God in Christianity" label="God"/>
<link wikidata="Q302" start="246" end="252" title="Christ" label="Christ"/>
<link wikidata="Q190388" start="489" end="506" title="John of the Cross" label="John of the Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q9268" start="986" end="998" title="Judaism" label="Jewish piety"/>
<link wikidata="Q182603" start="1050" end="1063" title="Church Fathers" label="Greek Fathers"/>
<link wikidata="Q35856" start="1193" end="1208" title="Baptism" label="baptized person"/>
<link wikidata="Q223693" start="1237" end="1265" title="Ecclesiology" label="Church as the Body of Christ"/>
<link wikidata="Q616175" start="1321" end="1343" title="Incarnation (Christianity)" label="incarnational theology"/>
<link wikidata="Q182123" start="1434" end="1442" title="Irenaeus" label="Irenaeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364921" start="1552" end="1567" title="Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Lyon" label="church of Lyons"/>
<link wikidata="Q2709434" start="1636" end="1653" title="Adversus Haereses" label="Adversus Haereses"/>
<link wikidata="Q44024" start="1893" end="1917" title="Athanasius of Alexandria" label="Athanasius of Alexandria"/>
<link wikidata="Q302" start="1952" end="1964" title="Jesus Christ" label="Jesus Christ"/>
<link wikidata="Q19809" start="1993" end="2002" title="Christmas" label="Christmas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1250390" start="2003" end="2011" title="homilies" label="homilies"/>
<link wikidata="Q66086" start="2188" end="2197" title="Eucharist" label="Eucharist"/>
<link wikidata="Q191734" start="2212" end="2228" title="Gregory of Nyssa" label="Gregory of Nyssa"/>
<link wikidata="Q44079" start="2233" end="2252" title="Cyril of Alexandria" label="Cyril of Alexandria"/>
<link wikidata="Q182603" start="2438" end="2452" title="Church Fathers" label="Church Fathers"/>
<link wikidata="Q182123" start="2499" end="2507" title="Irenaeus" label="Irenaeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q188883" start="3205" end="3226" title="Clement of Alexandria" label="Clement of Alexandria"/>
<link wikidata="Q185117" start="3830" end="3843" title="Justin Martyr" label="Justin Martyr"/>
<link wikidata="Q44024" start="4073" end="4105" title="Athanasius of Alexandria" label="Athanasius, bishop of Alexandria"/>
<link wikidata="Q8018" start="4482" end="4500" title="Augustine of Hippo" label="Augustine of Hippo"/>
<link wikidata="Q182603" start="5115" end="5129" title="Church Fathers" label="Church Fathers"/>
<link wikidata="Q182123" start="5155" end="5163" title="Irenaeus" label="Irenaeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q188883" start="6000" end="6021" title="Clement of Alexandria" label="Clement of Alexandria"/>
<link wikidata="Q185117" start="6740" end="6753" title="Justin Martyr" label="Justin Martyr"/>
<link wikidata="Q220787" start="7211" end="7232" title="Theophilus of Antioch" label="Theophilus of Antioch"/>
<link wikidata="Q207113" start="7689" end="7707" title="Hippolytus of Rome" label="Hippolytus of Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q44024" start="8424" end="8448" title="Athanasius of Alexandria" label="Athanasius of Alexandria"/>
<link wikidata="Q191734" start="8786" end="8802" title="Gregory of Nyssa" label="Gregory of Nyssa"/>
<link wikidata="Q8018" start="9501" end="9519" title="Augustine of Hippo" label="Augustine of Hippo"/>
<link wikidata="Q206842" start="9681" end="9702" title="Maximus the Confessor" label="Maximus the Confessor"/>
<link wikidata="Q44079" start="10106" end="10125" title="Cyril of Alexandria" label="Cyril of Alexandria"/>
<link wikidata="Q44011" start="10768" end="10788" title="Gregory of Nazianzus" label="Gregory of Nazianzus"/>
<link wikidata="Q44258" start="11382" end="11399" title="Basil of Caesarea" label="Basil of Caesarea"/>
<link wikidata="Q35032" start="11543" end="11560" title="Eastern Orthodox Church" label="Eastern Orthodoxy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2560959" start="12532" end="12542" title="gnosiology" label="gnosiology"/>
<link wikidata="Q41679" start="12674" end="12687" title="scholasticism" label="scholasticism"/>
<link wikidata="Q655970" start="13020" end="13027" title="theoria" label="theoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q37090" start="13660" end="13667" title="Trinity" label="Trinity"/>
<link wikidata="Q182603" start="13862" end="13876" title="Church Fathers" label="Church Fathers"/>
<link wikidata="Q41374" start="14366" end="14375" title="Incarnation" label="incarnate"/>
<link wikidata="Q7238930" start="14515" end="14521" title="praxis (Orthodox)" label="praxis"/>
<link wikidata="Q629589" start="14617" end="14626" title="hesychasm" label="hesychasm"/>
<link wikidata="Q66086" start="14799" end="14808" title="Eucharist" label="Eucharist"/>
<link wikidata="Q647582" start="14868" end="14887" title="prayer of the heart" label="prayer of the heart"/>
<link wikidata="Q131115" start="14960" end="14961" title="First Epistle to the Thessalonians" label="1"/>
<link wikidata="Q131107" start="14966" end="14967" title="Second Epistle to the Thessalonians" label="2"/>
<link wikidata="Q929140" start="15094" end="15104" title="Philokalia" label="Philokalia"/>
<link wikidata="Q629589" start="15245" end="15254" title="hesychasm" label="hesychast"/>
<link wikidata="Q243787" start="15450" end="15465" title="Gregory Palamas" label="Gregory Palamas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1289960" start="15540" end="15554" title="Light of Tabor" label="Light of Tabor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2992160" start="15793" end="15800" title="Synergism (theology)" label="synergy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5715209" start="15943" end="15950" title="Henosis" label="Henosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q16874480" start="16124" end="16140" title="self-realization" label="self-realization"/>
<link wikidata="Q842798" start="16171" end="16188" title="Western Christian" label="Western Christian"/>
<link wikidata="Q4384645" start="16437" end="16458" title="entire sanctification" label="entire sanctification"/>
<link wikidata="Q44325" start="16692" end="16703" title="ontological" label="ontological"/>
<link wikidata="Q44024" start="17315" end="17325" title="Athanasius" label="Athanasius"/>
<link wikidata="Q44079" start="17330" end="17349" title="Cyril of Alexandria" label="Cyril of Alexandria"/>
<link wikidata="Q8018" start="17630" end="17648" title="Augustine of Hippo" label="Augustine of Hippo"/>
<link wikidata="Q44024" start="18045" end="18069" title="Athanasius of Alexandria" label="Athanasius of Alexandria"/>
<link wikidata="Q75561" start="18252" end="18284" title="Catechism of the Catholic Church" label="Catechism of the Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="18346" end="18354" title="Medieval" label="Medieval"/>
<link wikidata="Q41679" start="18355" end="18365" title="Scholasticism" label="scholastic"/>
<link wikidata="Q9438" start="18377" end="18391" title="Thomas Aquinas" label="Thomas Aquinas"/>
<link wikidata="Q41374" start="18609" end="18620" title="Incarnation" label="Incarnation"/>
<link wikidata="Q57317" start="18987" end="18998" title="Karl Rahner" label="Karl Rahner"/>
<link wikidata="Q730757" start="19901" end="19911" title="Roman Rite" label="Roman Rite"/>
<link wikidata="Q655970" start="20547" end="20560" title="purgative way" label="purgative way"/>
<link wikidata="Q655970" start="20655" end="20671" title="illuminative way" label="illuminative way"/>
<link wikidata="Q655970" start="20864" end="20875" title="unitive way" label="unitive way"/>
<link wikidata="Q310686" start="21036" end="21060" title="Dionysius the Areopagite" label="Dionysius the Areopagite"/>
<link wikidata="Q315347" start="21145" end="21158" title="Peter Lombard" label="Peter Lombard"/>
<link wikidata="Q457968" start="21160" end="21178" title="Alexander of Hales" label="Alexander of Hales"/>
<link wikidata="Q60059" start="21180" end="21196" title="Albert the Great" label="Albert the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q9438" start="21198" end="21212" title="Thomas Aquinas" label="Thomas Aquinas"/>
<link wikidata="Q43746" start="21217" end="21228" title="Bonaventure" label="Bonaventure"/>
<link wikidata="Q76548" start="21827" end="21842" title="Meister Eckhart" label="Meister Eckhart"/>
<link wikidata="Q229190" start="22161" end="22179" title="Catherine of Siena" label="Catherine of Siena"/>
<link wikidata="Q190388" start="22204" end="22221" title="John of the Cross" label="John of the Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q1850093" start="22231" end="22247" title="Orestes Brownson" label="Orestes Brownson"/>
<link wikidata="Q165580" start="22293" end="22304" title="Anabaptists" label="Anabaptists"/>
<link wikidata="Q258344" start="22353" end="22362" title="Hutterite" label="Hutterite"/>
<link wikidata="Q1319859" start="22370" end="22385" title="Peter Riedemann" label="Peter Riedemann"/>
<link wikidata="Q110223" start="22418" end="22434" title="Mennonite" label="Dutch Mennonites"/>
<link wikidata="Q930971" start="22436" end="22448" title="Dirk Philips" label="Dirk Philips"/>
<link wikidata="Q335171" start="22453" end="22465" title="Menno Simons" label="Menno Simons"/>
<link wikidata="Q45996" start="22677" end="22684" title="mysticism" label="Mystics"/>
<link wikidata="Q85276" start="22774" end="22782" title="Hans Hut" label="Hans Hut"/>
<link wikidata="Q351459" start="23484" end="23499" title="Tuomo Mannermaa" label="Tuomo Mannermaa"/>
<link wikidata="Q12562" start="24750" end="24761" title="Protestant Reformation" label="Reformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7886798" start="24800" end="24817" title="union with Christ" label="union with Christ"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151419" start="24905" end="24919" title="sanctification" label="sanctification"/>
<link wikidata="Q37577" start="24962" end="24973" title="John Calvin" label="John Calvin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2544737" start="24976" end="24989" title="Henry Scougal" label="Henry Scougal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1645505" start="25315" end="25334" title="English Reformation" label="English Reformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1801816" start="25634" end="25651" title="Lancelot Andrewes" label="Lancelot Andrewes"/>
<link wikidata="Q9204" start="25729" end="25739" title="C.S. Lewis" label="C.S. Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q33203" start="26066" end="26075" title="Methodist" label="Methodist"/>
<link wikidata="Q193664" start="26099" end="26106" title="pietism" label="pietist"/>
<link wikidata="Q179807" start="26160" end="26170" title="asceticism" label="asceticism"/>
<link wikidata="Q45996" start="26217" end="26225" title="mystical" label="mystical"/>
<link wikidata="Q15633792" start="26268" end="26306" title="Methodist theology" label="Methodist (Wesleyan-Arminian) theology"/>
<link wikidata="Q60227" start="26483" end="26486" title="sin" label="sin"/>
<link wikidata="Q4384645" start="26494" end="26514" title="Christian perfection" label="Christian perfection"/>
<link wikidata="Q543076" start="26545" end="26562" title="Council of Vienne" label="Council of Vienne"/>
<link wikidata="Q160598" start="26806" end="26812" title="heresy" label="heresy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4384645" start="26992" end="27012" title="Christian perfection" label="Christian perfection"/>
<link wikidata="Q82708" start="27051" end="27068" title="Church of England" label="Church of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q213393" start="27092" end="27103" title="John Wesley" label="John Wesley"/>
<link wikidata="Q3360416" start="28136" end="28160" title="universal reconciliation" label="universal reconciliation"/>
<link wikidata="Q947823" start="28170" end="28183" title="apocatastasis" label="apocatastasis"/>
<link wikidata="Q324640" start="28233" end="28244" title="charismatic movement" label="charismatic"/>
<link wikidata="Q6497067" start="28245" end="28265" title="Latter Rain (post–World War II movement)" label="Latter Rain Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q183308" start="28278" end="28285" title="New Age" label="New Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q940573" start="28290" end="28301" title="New Thought" label="New Thought"/>
<link wikidata="Q51639" start="28491" end="28507" title="return of Christ" label="return of Christ"/>
<link wikidata="Q3567687" start="28852" end="28865" title="millennialism" label="millennialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q859557" start="28873" end="28890" title="liberal Christianity" label="liberal Christian"/>
<link wikidata="Q170337" start="28943" end="28954" title="eschatology" label="eschatology"/>
<link wikidata="Q629589" start="29031" end="29040" title="hesychasm" label="hesychasm"/>
<link wikidata="Q969258" start="29404" end="29491" title="Enchiridion symbolorum, definitionum et declarationum de rebus fidei et morum" label="&amp;quot;Enchiridion Symbolorum et Definitionum&amp;quot; (Handbook of Creeds and Definitions)"/>
<link wikidata="Q63637" start="29559" end="29594" title="Heinrich Joseph Dominicus Denzinger" label="Heinrich Joseph Dominicus Denzinger"/>
<link wikidata="Q243787" start="29645" end="29660" title="Gregory Palamas" label="Gregory Palamas"/>
<link wikidata="Q919060" start="29785" end="29793" title="Quietism (Christian philosophy)" label="quietism"/>
<link wikidata="Q384263" start="30477" end="30484" title="Barlaam of Seminara" label="Barlaam"/>
<link wikidata="Q4685025" start="30587" end="30603" title="Adrian Fortescue" label="Adrian Fortescue"/>
<link wikidata="Q302556" start="30644" end="30665" title="Catholic Encyclopedia" label="Catholic Encyclopedia"/>
<link wikidata="Q655970" start="30907" end="30920" title="theoria" label="contemplation"/>
<link wikidata="Q789195" start="30956" end="30971" title="auto-suggestion" label="auto-suggestion"/>
<link wikidata="Q989" start="32468" end="32485" title="Pope John Paul II" label="Pope John Paul II"/>
<link wikidata="Q5746591" start="32808" end="32829" title="hesychast controversy" label="hesychast controversy"/>
<link wikidata="Q747802" start="34078" end="34087" title="Mormonism" label="Mormonism"/>
<link wikidata="Q3851691" start="34125" end="34135" title="Exaltation (LDS Church)" label="exaltation"/>
<link wikidata="Q47102" start="34456" end="34468" title="Joseph Smith" label="Joseph Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q162145" start="35184" end="35197" title="Neoplatonism" label="Neoplatonists"/>
<link wikidata="Q1411075" start="35284" end="35289" title="ousia" label="ousia"/>
<link wikidata="Q81990" start="36792" end="36812" title="baptism for the dead" label="baptism for the dead"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="253373" wikidata="Q3405770" url="?curid=253373" title="1996 Governor General's Awards">
<text>The 1996 Governor General&#x27;s Awards for Literary Merit were presented on November 13, 1996.

==English==
==French==
==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3405770" start="4" end="58" title="1996 Governor General&amp;#x27;s Awards" label="1996 Governor General&amp;#x27;s Awards for Literary Merit"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="253374" wikidata="Q46172" url="?curid=253374" title="Denis Thatcher">
<text>Sir Denis Thatcher, 1st Baronet, (10 May 1915 – 26 June 2003) was an English businessman and the husband of Margaret Thatcher, who served as the first female British prime minister from 1979 to 1990; thus, he became the first male prime ministerial spouse.

Thatcher was granted the Thatcher baronetcy in 1990, the only baronetcy created since 1964, and remains the most recent non-royal to have been awarded a hereditary title.

== Early life ==
Denis Thatcher was born on 10 May 1915 at 26 Southbrook Road, Lee, Lewisham, London, as the first child of New Zealand–born British businessman Thomas Herbert &quot;Jack&quot; Thatcher and Lilian Kathleen Bird. At age eight, Denis entered a preparatory school in Bognor Regis as a , following which he attended the nonconformist public school Mill Hill School in north London. At school he excelled at cricket, being a left-handed batsman.

Thatcher left Mill Hill School in 1933 and joined the family paint and preservatives business, Atlas Preservatives. He also studied accountancy to improve his grasp of business, and in 1935 he was appointed works manager. He joined the Territorial Army shortly after the Munich crisis, as he was convinced war was imminent a view reinforced by a visit he made to Nazi Germany with his father&#x27;s business in 1937.

== War record ==

During the Second World War, Thatcher was commissioned as a second lieutenant into the 34th Searchlight (Queen&#x27;s Own Royal West Kent Regiment) of the Royal Engineers. He transferred to the Royal Artillery on 1 August 1940. During the war he was promoted to war substantive captain and temporary major. He served throughout the Allied invasion of Sicily and the Italian campaign and was twice mentioned in dispatches, and in 1945 was appointed a Member of the Order of the British Empire (MBE). The first mention in dispatches came on 11 January 1945, for service in Italy, and the second on 29 November 1945, again for Italian service.

His MBE was gazetted on 20 September 1945, and was awarded for his efforts in initiating and supporting Operation Goldflake, the transfer of I Canadian Corps from Italy to the north-west European theatre of operations. Thatcher was based in Marseille, attached to HQ 203 sub-area. In the recommendation for the MBE (dated 28 March 1945), his commanding officer wrote: &quot;Maj. Thatcher set an outstanding example of energy, initiative and drive. He deserves most of the credit for [...] the excellence of the work done.&quot;

Thatcher also received the approximate French equivalent of a mention when he was cited in orders at &quot;Corps d&#x27;Armée&quot; level for his efforts in promoting smooth relations between the Commonwealth military forces and the French civil and military authorities. He was promoted to substantive lieutenant on 11 April 1945. Demobilised in 1946, he returned to run the family business his father having died (aged 57) on 24 June 1943, when Thatcher was in Sicily. Because of army commitments, Thatcher was unable to attend the funeral.

He remained in the Territorial Army reserve of officers until reaching the age limit for service on 10 May 1965, when he retired, retaining the honorary rank of major.

On 21 September 1982 he was awarded the Territorial Decoration (TD) for his service.

== Marriages ==

Thatcher married twice, during wartime to Margot Kempson in 1942 (divorced in 1948), and in 1951 to Margaret Roberts.

=== Margot Kempson ===
On 28 March 1942, Thatcher married Margaret Doris &quot;Margot&quot; Kempson, the daughter of a businessman, at St Mary&#x27;s Church in Monken Hadley. They met at an officers&#x27; dance at Grosvenor House the year before.

Thatcher and his first wife never lived together. Their married life became confined to snatched weekends and irregular leaves as Thatcher was often abroad during the war. When Thatcher returned to England after being demobilised in 1946, his wife told him she had met someone else and wanted a divorce.

Thatcher was so traumatised by the event that he completely refused to talk about his first marriage or the separation, even to his daughter, as she states in her 1996 biography of him. Thatcher&#x27;s two children found out about his first marriage only in 1976 (by which time, their mother had become Leader of the Opposition) and then only when the media revealed it.

=== Margaret Thatcher ===

In February 1949, at a Paint Trades Federation function in Dartford, he met Margaret Hilda Roberts, a chemist and newly selected parliamentary candidate. When she met Denis for the first time, she described him as &quot;not a very attractive creature&quot; and &quot;very reserved but quite nice&quot;. They married on 13 December 1951, at Wesley&#x27;s Chapel in City Road, London; the Robertses were Methodists. Margaret Thatcher was elected Leader of the Conservative Party in 1975. She went on to win the 1979 general election to become the first female prime minister in British history. Denis became the first husband of a British prime minister.

In 1953, they had twin children (Carol and Mark), who were born on 15 August at Queen Charlotte&#x27;s and Chelsea Hospital in Hammersmith, seven weeks premature. Thatcher was watching the deciding Test of the 1953 Ashes series at the time of the twins&#x27; birth. They had watched the Coronation earlier in the year from Parliament Square.

Not long after the 1964 general election, Thatcher suffered a nervous breakdown which put a severe strain on his marriage. The breakdown was probably caused by the increasing pressure of running the family business, caring for his relatives, and his wife&#x27;s preoccupation with her political career, which left him lonely and exhausted. Thatcher sailed to South Africa and stayed there for two months to recuperate. His wife&#x27;s biographer David Cannadine described it as &quot;the greatest crisis of their marriage&quot;, but immediately after, he recovered and returned home, he maintained a happy marriage for the rest of his life.

This second marriage for Thatcher led to the future prime minister being sometimes referred to as &quot;Mrs Denis Thatcher&quot; in such sources as selection minutes, travel itineraries, and society publications such as &quot;Queen&quot;, even after she was elected a Member of Parliament. As Margaret&#x27;s political career progressed, she preferred to be known only as &quot;Mrs Thatcher&quot;.

According to John Campbell, a biographer of his wife, &quot;their marriage was more a partnership of mutual convenience than a romance&quot;, quoting their daughter Carol in her biography of Denis:

== Business career ==

Thatcher was already a wealthy man when he met Margaret, and he financed her training as a barrister, and a home in Chelsea, London. He also bought a large house in Lamberhurst, Kent, in 1965. His firm employed 200 people by 1957.

Thatcher became managing director of his family&#x27;s firm Atlas Preservatives in 1947 and chairman in 1951, leading its overseas expansion. By the early 1960s, he found being in sole control of the family company difficult. This, his wife&#x27;s political career, and their desire for financial security caused Thatcher to sell Atlas to Castrol in 1965 for £530,000 (£ today). He continued to run Atlas and received a seat on Castrol&#x27;s board; after Burmah Oil took over Castrol in 1966, Thatcher became a senior divisional director, managing the planning and control department. He retired from Burmah in June 1975, four months after his wife won the Conservative Party leadership election.

In addition to being a director of Burmah Oil, Thatcher was a director and deputy chairman of Attwoods from July 1983 until January 1994. He was also a director of Quinton Hazell and a consultant to Amec and CSX.

His wife&#x27;s biographer Robin Harris concludes:

== Public life and perceptions ==
Thatcher refused press interviews and made only brief speeches. When he did speak to the press, he called his wife &quot;The Boss&quot;. Margaret Thatcher often acknowledged her husband&#x27;s support. In her autobiography, she wrote: &quot;I could never have been Prime Minister for more than 11 years without Denis by my side.&quot; Thatcher saw his role as helping her survive the stress of the job, which he urged her to resign on the tenth anniversary of her becoming prime minister in 1989, sensing that otherwise she would be forced out.

In an interview with &quot;The Times&quot; in October 1970, Thatcher said: &quot;I don&#x27;t pretend that I&#x27;m anything but an honest-to-God right-wingerthose are my views and I don&#x27;t care who knows &#x27;em.&quot; His public image was shaped by the satirical &quot;Dear Bill&quot; columns appearing since 1979 in &quot;Private Eye&quot;, which portrayed him as a &quot;juniper-sozzled, rightwing, golf-obsessed halfwit&quot;, and Thatcher found it useful to play along with this image to avoid allegations of unduly influencing his wife in political matters.

Given his professional background, Thatcher served as an advisor on financial matters, warning Margaret about the poor condition of British Leyland after reviewing its books. He often insisted that she avoid overwork, to little avail, sometimes pleading, &quot;Bed, woman!&quot; They otherwise usually kept their careers separate; an exception was when Thatcher accompanied his wife on a 1967 visit to the United States sponsored by the International Visitor Leadership Program.

Thatcher was consistent in his strong opposition to the death penalty, calling it &quot;absolutely awful&quot; and &quot;barbaric&quot;. He said that he was against it because of innocent people being wrongly hanged and because juries could also be afraid to convict for fear of making a mistake. Like his wife, Thatcher was consistently anti-socialist. He told his daughter in 1995 that he would have banned trade unions altogether in Britain. He had low regard for the BBC, thinking it was biased against his wife and her government, as well as unpatriotic. In his most famous outburst about the corporation, he claimed his wife had been &quot;stitched up by bloody BBC and Trots&quot; when she was questioned by a member of the public about the sinking of the on &quot;Nationwide&quot; in 1983.

Thatcher was reported by New Zealand (NZ) broadcaster and former diplomat Chris Laidlaw—at the time NZ High Commissioner to Zimbabwe—as leaning towards him during a Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting, asking &quot;So, what do you think the fuzzy wuzzies are up to?&quot;

In December 1990, following the resignation of his wife as prime minister, it was announced that Thatcher would be created a baronet, (the first and only baronetcy created since 1964). The award was gazetted in February 1991, giving his title as Sir Denis Thatcher, 1st Baronet, of Scotney in the County of Kent. Thus, his wife was entitled to style herself &quot;Lady Thatcher&quot; while retaining her seat in the House of Commons; however, she made it known that she preferred to remain addressed as &quot;Mrs Thatcher&quot;, and would not use the style. She was created a life peeress as Baroness Thatcher (Lady Thatcher in her own right) shortly after she retired from the Commons in 1992.

In July 1991, Thatcher was created a Commander of the Order of St John; his wife was also made a Dame of the order.

== Illness and death ==
In the autumn of 1992, Thatcher was diagnosed with prostate cancer, but it was caught early. He responded well to treatment.

On 17 January 2003, Thatcher underwent a six-hour heart-bypass operation and aortic valve operation at a Harley Street clinic. He had complained of breathlessness for several weeks before Christmas 2002, and the problem was diagnosed in early January. He left the clinic on 28 January 2003 and appeared to recover fully after recuperation. Thatcher returned home on 14 February and visited his son Mark in South Africa in April, but in early June, he again complained of breathlessness and listlessness. Lady Thatcher&#x27;s staff also thought he looked unwell, and on 13 June, he was admitted to the Royal Brompton Hospital for further tests. Nothing wrong was found with his heart but terminal pancreatic cancer was diagnosed, along with fluid in his lungs. He was told nothing could be done for him, and after seven days there, on 20 June, he was transferred to the Lister Hospital. He lost consciousness on 24 June and never regained it. He died on the morning of 26 June, at the age of 88.

His funeral service took place on 3 July 2003 at the chapel of the Royal Hospital Chelsea in London, followed by a cremation at Mortlake Crematorium in Richmond, London. On 30 October, a memorial service was held at Westminster Abbey. His ashes were buried under a white marble marker just outside the Royal Hospital in Chelsea. After his wife&#x27;s death in 2013, her ashes were buried near his.

== Profiles ==

=== &quot;Married to Maggie&quot; ===
Produced by his daughter Carol, Thatcher&#x27;s single public interview was made into a documentary film titled &quot;Married to Maggie&quot;, broadcast after his death. In it he revealed that the spouses he liked were Raisa Gorbacheva, Nancy Reagan and Barbara Bush. He called his wife&#x27;s successor, John Major, &quot;a ghastly prime minister&quot;, saying that &quot;[i]t would have been a [...] very good thing&quot; had he lost the 1992 general election. He added that he thought his wife was &quot;the best prime minister since Churchill.&quot;

=== &quot;Below the Parapet&quot; ===
 (1996) is the biography by his daughter Carol. In it, he said that politics as a profession or way of life did not appeal to him. World leaders he got on with included George H. W. Bush, F. W. de Klerk, Hussein of Jordan and Mikhail Gorbachev, whilst he disliked Indira Gandhi and Sir Sonny Ramphal. Thatcher admitted that he was not sure where the Falkland Islands were until they were invaded in 1982.

== Medals and honours ==
Thatcher was awarded the following medals and honours:



== References ==
=== Works cited ===
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
== External links ==

*British Army Officers 1939−1945
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q46172" start="0" end="31" title="Denis Thatcher" label="Sir Denis Thatcher, 1st Baronet"/>
<link wikidata="Q7416" start="108" end="125" title="Margaret Thatcher" label="Margaret Thatcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q14211" start="158" end="180" title="British prime minister" label="British prime minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q921439" start="231" end="255" title="spouse of the prime minister of the United Kingdom" label="prime ministerial spouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q7711358" start="283" end="301" title="Thatcher baronetcy" label="Thatcher baronetcy"/>
<link wikidata="Q282019" start="320" end="329" title="baronetcy" label="baronetcy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5737899" start="411" end="427" title="hereditary title" label="hereditary title"/>
<link wikidata="Q6537297" start="514" end="522" title="Lewisham" label="Lewisham"/>
<link wikidata="Q4367464" start="688" end="706" title="Preparatory school (United Kingdom)" label="preparatory school"/>
<link wikidata="Q890621" start="710" end="722" title="Bognor Regis" label="Bognor Regis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144064" start="762" end="775" title="Nonconformist (Protestantism)" label="nonconformist"/>
<link wikidata="Q6858340" start="790" end="806" title="Mill Hill School" label="Mill Hill School"/>
<link wikidata="Q734547" start="810" end="822" title="north London" label="north London"/>
<link wikidata="Q5375" start="849" end="856" title="cricket" label="cricket"/>
<link wikidata="Q810903" start="878" end="885" title="batsman" label="batsman"/>
<link wikidata="Q274579" start="959" end="971" title="preservative" label="preservative"/>
<link wikidata="Q4116214" start="1020" end="1031" title="accountancy" label="accountancy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2609672" start="1124" end="1140" title="Territorial Army (United Kingdom)" label="Territorial Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q154255" start="1159" end="1172" title="Munich crisis" label="Munich crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="1251" end="1263" title="Nazi Germany" label="Nazi Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q56826567" start="1384" end="1401" title="second lieutenant" label="second lieutenant"/>
<link wikidata="Q7270049" start="1429" end="1470" title="Queen&amp;#x27;s Own Royal West Kent Regiment" label="Queen&amp;#x27;s Own Royal West Kent Regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q3098650" start="1479" end="1494" title="Royal Engineers" label="Royal Engineers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2587335" start="1518" end="1533" title="Royal Artillery" label="Royal Artillery"/>
<link wikidata="Q5036510" start="1602" end="1609" title="captain (British Army and Royal Marines)" label="captain"/>
<link wikidata="Q4896145" start="1624" end="1629" title="Major (United Kingdom)" label="major"/>
<link wikidata="Q217981" start="1656" end="1681" title="Allied invasion of Sicily" label="Allied invasion of Sicily"/>
<link wikidata="Q162333" start="1690" end="1706" title="Italian campaign (World War II)" label="Italian campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q1809982" start="1721" end="1744" title="mentioned in dispatches" label="mentioned in dispatches"/>
<link wikidata="Q14420" start="1774" end="1815" title="Member of the Order of the British Empire" label="Member of the Order of the British Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q3186812" start="1978" end="1986" title="gazetted" label="gazetted"/>
<link wikidata="Q7097081" start="2070" end="2089" title="Operation Goldflake" label="Operation Goldflake"/>
<link wikidata="Q2813535" start="2107" end="2123" title="I Canadian Corps" label="I Canadian Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q44700" start="2153" end="2169" title="European theatre of World War II" label="European theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q23482" start="2207" end="2216" title="Marseille" label="Marseille"/>
<link wikidata="Q188497" start="2602" end="2620" title="Corps d&amp;#x27;Armée" label="Corps d&amp;#x27;Armée"/>
<link wikidata="Q4969928" start="2691" end="2719" title="British Empire in World War II" label="Commonwealth military forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q20715023" start="2798" end="2808" title="first lieutenant" label="lieutenant"/>
<link wikidata="Q5347425" start="3248" end="3270" title="Efficiency Decoration" label="Territorial Decoration"/>
<link wikidata="Q149676" start="3590" end="3603" title="Monken Hadley" label="Monken Hadley"/>
<link wikidata="Q5610643" start="3644" end="3659" title="Grosvenor House" label="Grosvenor House"/>
<link wikidata="Q2741536" start="4286" end="4310" title="Leader of the Opposition (United Kingdom)" label="Leader of the Opposition"/>
<link wikidata="Q858775" start="4441" end="4449" title="Dartford" label="Dartford"/>
<link wikidata="Q593644" start="4484" end="4491" title="chemist" label="chemist"/>
<link wikidata="Q7250834" start="4511" end="4534" title="parliamentary candidate" label="parliamentary candidate"/>
<link wikidata="Q7983825" start="4722" end="4742" title="Wesley&amp;#x27;s Chapel" label="Wesley&amp;#x27;s Chapel"/>
<link wikidata="Q5123401" start="4746" end="4755" title="City Road" label="City Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q33203" start="4784" end="4793" title="Methodist" label="Methodist"/>
<link wikidata="Q5163063" start="4818" end="4858" title="1975 Conservative Party leadership election" label="elected Leader of the Conservative Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q918450" start="4891" end="4912" title="1979 United Kingdom general election" label="1979 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q921439" start="4998" end="5033" title="Spouse of the prime minister of the United Kingdom" label="husband of a British prime minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q2449855" start="5069" end="5074" title="Carol Thatcher" label="Carol"/>
<link wikidata="Q713468" start="5079" end="5083" title="Mark Thatcher" label="Mark"/>
<link wikidata="Q7270242" start="5116" end="5159" title="Queen Charlotte&amp;#x27;s and Chelsea Hospital" label="Queen Charlotte&amp;#x27;s and Chelsea Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q277162" start="5163" end="5174" title="Hammersmith" label="Hammersmith"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5246" end="5263" title="1953 Ashes series#Fifth Test at The Oval" label="1953 Ashes series"/>
<link wikidata="Q3797766" start="5323" end="5333" title="Coronation of Elizabeth II" label="Coronation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368556" start="5359" end="5376" title="Parliament Square" label="Parliament Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q220208" start="5398" end="5419" title="1964 United Kingdom general election" label="1964 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q12135" start="5441" end="5458" title="nervous breakdown" label="nervous breakdown"/>
<link wikidata="Q4382556" start="5825" end="5840" title="David Cannadine" label="David Cannadine"/>
<link wikidata="Q7240907" start="6169" end="6178" title="Preselection" label="selection"/>
<link wikidata="Q1748150" start="6241" end="6258" title="Queen (magazine)" label="&amp;quot;Queen&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q16707842" start="6289" end="6309" title="Member of Parliament (United Kingdom)" label="Member of Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q6224989" start="6433" end="6446" title="John Campbell (biographer)" label="John Campbell"/>
<link wikidata="Q808967" start="6733" end="6742" title="barrister" label="barrister"/>
<link wikidata="Q2122861" start="6807" end="6824" title="Lamberhurst, Kent" label="Lamberhurst, Kent"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049970" start="7213" end="7220" title="Castrol" label="Castrol"/>
<link wikidata="Q865030" start="7330" end="7340" title="Burmah Oil" label="Burmah Oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q295118" start="7772" end="7776" title="Amec" label="Amec"/>
<link wikidata="Q856783" start="7781" end="7784" title="CSX" label="CSX"/>
<link wikidata="Q7352456" start="7814" end="7826" title="Robin Harris (author)" label="Robin Harris"/>
<link wikidata="Q50008" start="8446" end="8455" title="The Times" label="The Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q5246816" start="8695" end="8704" title="Dear Bill" label="Dear Bill"/>
<link wikidata="Q2195701" start="8749" end="8760" title="Private Eye" label="Private Eye"/>
<link wikidata="Q959362" start="8799" end="8806" title="Gin" label="juniper"/>
<link wikidata="Q2046187" start="9122" end="9137" title="British Leyland" label="British Leyland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1655069" start="9427" end="9467" title="International Visitor Leadership Program" label="International Visitor Leadership Program"/>
<link wikidata="Q1865659" start="9526" end="9539" title="Capital punishment in the United Kingdom" label="death penalty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1646639" start="9808" end="9822" title="anti-socialist" label="anti-socialist"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="9941" end="9944" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q181133" start="10146" end="10151" title="Trotskyism" label="Trots"/>
<link wikidata="Q39039689" start="10163" end="10207" title="Diana Gould–Margaret Thatcher exchange" label="she was questioned by a member of the public"/>
<link wikidata="Q3284956" start="10214" end="10225" title="Sinking of the ARA General Belgrano" label="the sinking"/>
<link wikidata="Q3337012" start="10242" end="10252" title="Nationwide (TV programme)" label="Nationwide"/>
<link wikidata="Q1077440" start="10343" end="10356" title="Chris Laidlaw" label="Chris Laidlaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q3458201" start="10434" end="10474" title="Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting" label="Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting"/>
<link wikidata="Q5511057" start="10515" end="10528" title="Fuzzy-Wuzzy" label="fuzzy wuzzies"/>
<link wikidata="Q282019" start="10672" end="10679" title="baronet" label="baronet"/>
<link wikidata="Q7711358" start="10793" end="10824" title="Thatcher baronets" label="Sir Denis Thatcher, 1st Baronet"/>
<link wikidata="Q7435720" start="10829" end="10836" title="Scotney" label="Scotney"/>
<link wikidata="Q23298" start="10844" end="10858" title="County of Kent" label="County of Kent"/>
<link wikidata="Q9247597" start="10963" end="10979" title="House of Commons" label="House of Commons"/>
<link wikidata="Q2914468" start="11123" end="11132" title="life peer" label="life peer"/>
<link wikidata="Q543609" start="11236" end="11240" title="1992 United Kingdom general election" label="1992"/>
<link wikidata="Q1465984" start="11280" end="11313" title="Commander of the Order of St John" label="Commander of the Order of St John"/>
<link wikidata="Q181257" start="11435" end="11450" title="prostate cancer" label="prostate cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q186020" start="11560" end="11582" title="Coronary artery bypass surgery" label="heart-bypass operation"/>
<link wikidata="Q616071" start="11587" end="11599" title="aortic valve" label="aortic valve"/>
<link wikidata="Q773458" start="11615" end="11628" title="Harley Street" label="Harley Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q7373850" start="12111" end="12134" title="Royal Brompton Hospital" label="Royal Brompton Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q212961" start="12206" end="12223" title="pancreatic cancer" label="pancreatic cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q6646489" start="12379" end="12394" title="Lister Hospital, Chelsea" label="Lister Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q1628509" start="12573" end="12595" title="Royal Hospital Chelsea" label="Royal Hospital Chelsea"/>
<link wikidata="Q6914776" start="12634" end="12654" title="Mortlake Crematorium" label="Mortlake Crematorium"/>
<link wikidata="Q2500974" start="12658" end="12674" title="Richmond, London" label="Richmond, London"/>
<link wikidata="Q5933" start="12722" end="12739" title="Westminster Abbey" label="Westminster Abbey"/>
<link wikidata="Q11173933" start="12841" end="12870" title="Death and funeral of Margaret Thatcher" label="his wife&amp;#x27;s death in 2013"/>
<link wikidata="Q229520" start="13178" end="13194" title="Raisa Gorbacheva" label="Raisa Gorbacheva"/>
<link wikidata="Q193426" start="13196" end="13208" title="Nancy Reagan" label="Nancy Reagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q190628" start="13213" end="13225" title="Barbara Bush" label="Barbara Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q9559" start="13264" end="13274" title="John Major" label="John Major"/>
<link wikidata="Q543609" start="13399" end="13420" title="1992 United Kingdom general election" label="1992 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q8016" start="13496" end="13505" title="Churchill" label="Churchill"/>
<link wikidata="Q23505" start="13721" end="13738" title="George H. W. Bush" label="George H. W. Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q151813" start="13740" end="13754" title="F. W. de Klerk" label="F. W. de Klerk"/>
<link wikidata="Q146906" start="13756" end="13773" title="Hussein of Jordan" label="Hussein of Jordan"/>
<link wikidata="Q30487" start="13778" end="13795" title="Mikhail Gorbachev" label="Mikhail Gorbachev"/>
<link wikidata="Q1149" start="13816" end="13829" title="Indira Gandhi" label="Indira Gandhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q958984" start="13834" end="13851" title="Sir Sonny Ramphal" label="Sir Sonny Ramphal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2992361" start="13940" end="13955" title="1982 invasion of the Falkland Islands" label="invaded in 1982"/>
<link wikidata="Q768855" start="14018" end="14036" title="Orders, decorations, and medals of the United Kingdom" label="medals and honours"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="253375" wikidata="Q95149" url="?curid=253375" title="HarperCollins">
<text>HarperCollins Publishers LLC is a British-American publishing company that is considered to be one of the &quot;Big Five&quot; English-language publishers, along with Penguin Random House, Hachette, Macmillan, and Simon &amp; Schuster. HarperCollins is headquartered in New York City and London and is a subsidiary of News Corp.

The company&#x27;s name is derived from a combination of the firm&#x27;s predecessors. Harper &amp; Brothers, founded in 1817 in New York, merged with Row, Peterson &amp; Company in 1962 to form Harper &amp; Row, which was acquired by News Corp in 1987. The Scottish publishing company William Collins, Sons, founded in 1819 in Glasgow, was acquired by News Corp in 1987 and merged with Harper &amp; Row to form HarperCollins. The logo for the firm combines the fire from Harper&#x27;s torch and the water from Collins&#x27; fountain.

HarperCollins has publishing groups in the United States, Canada, the United Kingdom, Australia, New Zealand, Brazil, India, and China. The company publishes different imprints, including former independent publishing houses and new imprints. The company&#x27;s worldwide CEO is Brian Murray.

==History==
The earliest of the publishing firms that comprise HarperCollins was founded in 1817 by James Harper and his brother John, initially operating under the name J &amp; J Harper. They were later joined by two other brothers, Joseph Wesley and Fletcher Harper, with the firm becoming Harper &amp; Brothers in 1833.

Harper &amp; Brothers originated several notable magazine publications in the nineteenth century that would later be sold or discontinued, including &quot;Harper&#x27;s Magazine&quot;, &quot;Harper&#x27;s Weekly&quot;, &quot;Harper&#x27;s Bazaar&quot;, and &quot;Harper&#x27;s Young People&quot;.

In 1962, Harper &amp; Brothers merged with Row, Peterson &amp; Company to become Harper &amp; Row. The firm acquired Thomas Y. Crowell Co. and J. B. Lippincott &amp; Co. in the 1970s, with Crowell and the trade operations of Lippincott merged into Harper &amp; Row in 1980. In 1988, Harper &amp; Row purchased the religious publisher Zondervan, including subsidiary Marshall Pickering.

William Collins, Sons was established in Glasgow in 1819 by Presbyterian schoolmaster William Collins. The firm&#x27;s early emphasis was on religion and education, but diversified over time, making a significant move into fiction in 1917 under the leadership of Godfrey Collins.

The Collins Crime Club imprint published many works in the Golden Age of Detective Fiction, including novels by Agatha Christie and Rex Stout. The religious imprint Fount would be home to C. S. Lewis. Collins would become the British Commonwealth publisher for a number of popular American juvenile series and authors, including The Hardy Boys, Nancy Drew, and Dr. Seuss.

===Mergers and acquisitions===
Rupert Murdoch&#x27;s News Corporation acquired Harper &amp; Row in 1987. News Corp had owned a 40% stake in Collins since 1981 and became the sole owner in 1989. News Corp merged the two publishers in 1989, combining the name as HarperCollins and creating a logo with a stylized depiction of flames atop waves derived from the torch logo for Harper &amp; Row and the fountain logo for Collins.

In 1990, HarperCollins sold J. B. Lippincott &amp; Co., its medical publishing division, to the Dutch publisher Wolters Kluwer.

In 1996, HarperCollins sold Scott Foresman and HarperCollins College to Pearson, which merged them with Addison-Wesley Longman.

News Corporation purchased the Hearst Book Group, consisting of William Morrow &amp; Company and Avon Books, in 1999. These imprints are now published under the rubric of HarperCollins. HarperCollins bought educational publisher Letts and Lonsdale in March 2010.

In 2011, HarperCollins announced they had agreed to acquire the publisher Thomas Nelson. The purchase was completed on 11 July 2012, with an announcement that Thomas Nelson would operate independently given the position it has in Christian book publishing. Both Thomas Nelson and Zondervan were then organized as imprints, or &quot;keystone publishing programs,&quot; under a new division, HarperCollins Christian Publishing. Key roles in the reorganization were awarded to former Thomas Nelson executives.

In 2012, HarperCollins acquired part of the trade operations of John Wiley &amp; Son in Canada.

In 2014, HarperCollins acquired Canadian romance publisher Harlequin Enterprises for C$455 million.

In 2018, HarperCollins acquired the business publisher Amacom from the American Management Association.

In 2020, HarperCollins acquired the children&#x27;s publishers Egmont Books UK, Egmont Poland and Schneiderbuch Germany from the Egmont Group.

On 29 March 2021, HarperCollins announced that it would acquire HMH Books &amp; Media, the trade publishing division of Houghton Mifflin Harcourt, for $349 million. The deal would allow HMH to pay down its debt and focus on digital education. The deal was completed on 10 May. As of 7 July 2021, HMH&#x27;s adult books will be published as Mariner Books, while HMH&#x27;s children&#x27;s books will be published as Clarion Books.

In 2021, HarperCollins acquired the British publisher Pavilion Books.

In 2022 HarperCollins acquired Cider Mill Press.

===Management history===
Brian Murray, the current CEO of HarperCollins, succeeded Jane Friedman who was CEO from 1997 to 2008. Notable management figures include Lisa Sharkey, current senior vice president and director of creative development and Barry Winkleman from 1989 to 1994.

=== &quot;United States v. Apple Inc.&quot; ===
In April 2012, the United States Department of Justice filed &quot;United States v. Apple Inc.&quot;, naming Apple, HarperCollins, and four other major publishers as defendants. The suit alleged that they conspired to fix prices for e-books, and weaken Amazon.com&#x27;s position in the market, in violation of antitrust law.

In December 2013, a federal judge approved a settlement of the antitrust claims, in which HarperCollins and the other publishers paid into a fund that provided credits to customers who had overpaid for books due to the price-fixing.

===US warehouse closings===
On 5 November 2012, HarperCollins announced to employees privately and then later in the day publicly that it was closing its remaining two US warehouses, to merge shipping and warehousing operations with R. R. Donnelley in Indiana. The Scranton, Pennsylvania, warehouse closed in September 2013 and a Nashville, Tennessee, warehouse, under the name Thomas Nelson (which distributes the religious arm of HarperCollins/Zondervan Books), in the winter of 2013. Several office positions and departments continued to work for HarperCollins in Scranton, but in a new location.

The Scranton warehouse closing eliminated about 200 jobs, and the Nashville warehouse closing eliminated up to 500 jobs; the exact number of distribution employees is unknown.

HarperCollins previously closed two US warehouses, one in Williamsport, Pennsylvania, in 2011 and another in Grand Rapids, Michigan, in 2012. &quot;We have taken a long-term, global view of our print distribution and are committed to offering the broadest possible reach for our authors,&quot; said HarperCollins Chief Executive Brian Murray, according to&quot;Publishers Weekly&quot;. &quot;We are retooling the traditional distribution model to ensure we can competitively offer the entire HarperCollins catalog to customers regardless of location.&quot; Company officials attribute the closings and mergers to the rapidly growing demand for e-book formats and the decline in print purchasing.

===Internet Archive lawsuit===
In June 2020, HarperCollins was one of a group of publishers who sued the Internet Archive, arguing that its collection of e-books was denying authors and publishers revenue and accusing the library of &quot;willful mass copyright infringement&quot;.

=== Lindsay Lohan lawsuit ===
In September 2020, HarperCollins sued Lindsay Lohan for entering into a book deal and collecting a $350,000 advance for a tell-all memoir that never materialized.

===Anne Frank&#x27;s betrayal===
A 2022 book written by Rosemary Sullivan, with HarperCollins as main publisher, designated a Jewish notary as the most likely suspect in Anne Frank&#x27;s betrayal. The conclusion was challenged by experts. The notary&#x27;s family members threatened a lawsuit and started a foundation. The Dutch publisher withdrew the book, but HarperCollins has not taken any definitive decision.

===UAW strike===

On 10 November 2022, approximately 250 unionized workers at HarperCollins began an indefinite strike. Local 2110 of the United Auto Workers (UAW) union includes people in design, marketing, publicity, and sales for the company. The UAW union made the decision to strike after drawn-out negotiations between it and HarperCollins, which resulted in members &quot;working without a contract since April.&quot; According to a spokesperson, HarperCollins &quot;has agreed to a number of proposals that the UAW is seeking to include in a new contract&quot; and &quot;is disappointed an agreement has not been reached&quot; but &quot;will continue to negotiate in good faith.&quot;

On 21 December 2022 the local put their in-person picketing on &quot;pause&quot; to give strikers an opportunity to spend time with their loved ones. The picketing resumed as scheduled on 3 January 2023.

After three months of negotiations, the union agreed to a new contract with HarperCollins on February 16, 2023.
Under the new terms, the annual starting pay of HarperCollins employees has increased from $45,000 to $47,500 upon ratification, and is set to rise to $50,000 by 2025. Additionally, full-time employees in the union will receive a lump sum payment of $1,500. The contract also allows workers making less than $60,000 to file for two hours of overtime pay per week without approval from a manager, and puts measures in place to compensate junior-level staff for diversity and inclusion work which is typically unpaid in the industry.

The workers returned to their duties on February 21.

==Noted books==
HarperCollins maintains the backlist of many of the books originally published by its many merged imprints, in addition to having picked up new authors since the merger. Authors published originally by Harper include Mark Twain, the Brontë sisters, and William Makepeace Thackeray. Authors published originally by Collins include H. G. Wells and Agatha Christie. HarperCollins also acquired the publishing rights to J. R. R. Tolkien&#x27;s work in 1990 when Unwin Hyman was bought. Following is a list of some of the more noted books and series published by HarperCollins and their various imprints and merged publishing houses.
* &quot;The Hobbit&quot;, J. R. R. Tolkien (1937) (originally published by George Allen &amp; Unwin)
* &quot;The Lord of the Rings&quot;, J. R. R. Tolkien (1954–1955) (originally published by George Allen &amp; Unwin)
* &quot;The Art of Loving&quot;, Erich Fromm (1956)
* &quot;Master and Commander&quot;, Patrick O&#x27;Brian (1970) (adapted into the 2003 film &quot;Master and Commander: The Far Side of the World&quot;)
* the &quot;Leaphorn and Chee books&quot;, Tony Hillerman (1970–2006)
* &quot;The Silmarillion&quot;, J. R. R. Tolkien (ed. Christopher Tolkien ) (1977) (originally published by George Allen &amp; Unwin)
* &quot;Collins English Dictionary&quot; (1979), a major dictionary
* &quot;Sharpe&quot; series, Bernard Cornwell (1981–2006)
* &quot;&quot;, Hayden Herrera (1983), adapted into the 2002 film &quot;Frida&quot;
* &quot;The History of Middle-earth&quot; series, J. R. R. Tolkien (ed. Christopher Tolkien) (1983–1996)
* &quot;Weaveworld&quot;, Clive Barker (1987)
* the Paladin Poetry Series (1987–1993)
* &quot;The Alchemist&quot;, Paulo Coelho, (1988) (first published in Portuguese as &quot;O Alquimista&quot;, 1988)
* subsequent novels in the &quot;Take Back Plenty&quot; series, Colin Greenland (1990+)
* &quot;Where There&#x27;s a Will: Who Inherited What and Why&quot;, Stephen M. Silverman (1991)
*&quot;Dorothy Wordsworth&#x27;s Illustrated Lakeland Journals&quot; (1991, Diamond Books)
* &quot;The Language of the Genes&quot;, Steve Jones (1993)
* &quot;The Gifts of the Body&quot;, Rebecca Brown (1994)
* &quot;Microserfs&quot;, Douglas Coupland (1995)
* &quot;Thoughts&quot;, Tionne Watkins (1999)
* &quot;Shuka Saptati: Seventy tales of the Parrot&quot; a new translation from the Sanskrit by A. N. D. Haksar (2000)
* &quot;First They Killed My Father: A Daughter of Cambodia Remembers&quot;, Loung Ung (2000)
* &quot;Bel Canto&quot;, Ann Patchett (2001)
* &quot;A Theory of Relativity&quot;, Jacquelyn Mitchard (2001)
* recent volumes in the &quot;Discworld&quot; series by Terry Pratchett (books from 2001 to present)
* &quot;American Gods&quot;, Neil Gaiman (2001)
* &quot;Boonville&quot;, Robert Mailer Anderson (2003 reprint)
* &quot;Quicksilver&quot;, Neal Stephenson (2003)
* &quot;Don Quixote&quot;, a new translation by Edith Grossman (2003, Ecco)
* &quot;Acquainted with the Night&quot;, Christopher Dewdney (2004)
* &quot;State of fear&quot;, by Michael Crichton (2004)
* &quot;Darkhouse&quot;, Alex Barclay (2005)
* &quot;Anansi Boys&quot;, Neil Gaiman (2005)
* &quot;The Hot Kid&quot;, Elmore Leonard (2005)
* &quot;Freaky Green Eyes&quot;, by Joyce Carol Oates (2006)
* &quot;Next&quot;, Michael Crichton (2006)
* &quot;Domicilium Decoratus&quot;, Kelly Wearstler (2006) 
* &quot;Pretty Little Liars&quot;, Sara Shepard (2006)
* &quot;Mister B. Gone&quot;, Clive Barker (Harper) (2007)
* &quot;Loving Natalee: A Mother&#x27;s Testament of Hope and Faith&quot;, Beth Holloway (2007) (about Natalee Holloway)
* &quot;The Raw Shark Texts&quot;, Steven Hall (2007)
* &quot;The Children of Húrin&quot;, J. R. R. Tolkien (ed. Christopher Tolkien) (2007)
* &quot;The Family: The Secret Fundamentalism at the Heart of American Power&quot;, Jeff Sharlet (2008)
* &quot;Going Rogue: An American Life&quot;, Sarah Palin (2009)
* &quot;Pirate Latitudes&quot;, Michael Crichton (2009) (posthumous publication)
* &quot;Wolf Hall&quot;, Hilary Mantel (2009)
* &quot;Shattered: The True Story of a Mother&#x27;s Love, a Husband&#x27;s Betrayal, and a Cold-Blooded Texas Murder&quot;, Kathryn Casey (2010)
* &quot;Micro&quot;, Michael Crichton (2011) (posthumous publication)
* &quot;The Dressmaker of Khair Khana&quot;, Gayle Tzemach Lemmon (2011)
* &quot;A Shot at History: My Obsessive Journey to Olympic Gold&quot; by Abhinav Bindra (2011)
* &quot;Go Set a Watchman&quot;, Harper Lee (2015)
* &quot;The Poppy War&quot;, R. F. Kuang (2018)
* &quot;Inside the Tablighi Jamaat&quot;, Ziya Us Salam (2020)

===Harper children&#x27;s books===
Children&#x27;s book editor Ursula Nordstrom was the director of Harper&#x27;s Department of Books for Boys and Girls from 1940 to 1973, overseeing the publication of classics such as &quot;Goodnight Moon&quot;, &quot;Where the Wild Things Are&quot;, &quot;The Giving Tree&quot;, &quot;Charlotte&#x27;s Web&quot;, Beverly Cleary&#x27;s series starring Ramona Quimby, and &quot;Harold and the Purple Crayon&quot;. They were the publishing home of Maurice Sendak, Shel Silverstein, and Margaret Wise Brown. In 1998, Nordstrom&#x27;s personal correspondence was published as &quot;Dear Genius: The Letters of Ursula Nordstrom&quot; (illustrated by Maurice Sendak), edited by Charlotte Zolotow. Zolotow began her career as a stenographer to Nordstrom, became her &quot;protégé&quot;, and went on to write more than 80 books and edit hundreds of others, including Nordstrom&#x27;s &quot;The Secret Language&quot; and the works of Paul Fleischman. Zolotow later became head of the children&#x27;s books department, and went on to become the company&#x27;s first female vice president.

&quot;The Chronicles of Narnia&quot; series by C. S. Lewis, while not originally published by a merged imprint of HarperCollins, was acquired by the publisher.

HarperCollins has published these notable children&#x27;s books:

* the I Can Read! series for beginning readers, including the &quot;Amelia Bedelia&quot; (Peggy Parish), &quot;Frog and Toad&quot; (Arnold Lobel) and &quot;Little Bear&quot; (Else Holmelund Minarik and Maurice Sendak) books
* the &quot;Warriors&quot; series (2003–present)
* the &quot;Pretty Little Liars&quot; series, by Sara Shepard (2007–present)
* &quot;A Series of Unfortunate Events&quot;, Lemony Snicket
* &quot;A Taste of Blackberries&quot;, Doris Buchanan Smith (1973)
* &quot;Skulduggery Pleasant&quot; series, Derek Landy
* &quot;Bart Simpson&#x27;s Guide to Life&quot; (1993)
* international rights to Dr. Seuss (inherited from Collins; 1950s–present)
* &quot;Love That Dog&quot;, Sharon Creech (2001)
* &quot;The Giving Tree&quot;, Shel Silverstein (1964)
* &quot;Where the Sidewalk Ends (book)&quot;, Shel Silverstein (1974)
* &quot;The Saga of Darren Shan&quot;, Darren Shan (2000–2004)
** &quot;Cirque du Freak&quot; manga series, Darren Shan and Takahiro Arai (2006–2009)
* &quot;The Dangerous Book for Boys&quot;, Conn and Hal Iggulden (2006)
* &quot;Sabriel&quot;, Garth Nix (1995)
* &quot;A Barrel of Laughs, a Vale of Tears&quot;, Jules Feiffer (1995)
* &quot;Mister God, This Is Anna&quot;, Fynn (pseudonym of Sydney Hopkins) (1974)
* the &quot;Little House on the Prairie&quot; series, Laura Ingalls Wilder (1932–2006)
* &quot;The Wolves in the Walls&quot;, Neil Gaiman and Dave McKean (2003)
* &quot;Monster&quot;, Walter Dean Myers (1999)
* &quot;Coraline&quot;, Neil Gaiman and Dave McKean (2002)
* &quot;Surviving the Applewhites&quot;, Stephanie S. Tolan (2002)
* &quot;The Gollywhopper Games&quot; (2008)
* &quot;Ruby Redfort&quot; (series), Lauren Child (2011)
* &quot;Divergent&quot;, Veronica Roth (2011)
* &quot;Survivors&quot; series (2012–2019)
* &quot;The School for Good and Evil&quot;, Soman Chainani (2013–present)
* &quot;Splat the Cat&quot;, Rob Scotton (2007–present)
* &quot;The Secret Zoo&quot;, Bryan Chick (2010–2023)
* &quot;Charlotte&#x27;s Web&quot;, E. B. White (2015)
* &quot;Little Penguin&quot;, Tadgh Bentley (2015–present)
* &quot;Elinor Wonders Why&quot; adapted books (2021–present)

==Imprints==
HarperCollins has more than 120 book imprints, most of which are based in the United States. Collins still exists as an imprint, chiefly for wildlife and natural history books, field guides, as well as for English and bilingual dictionaries based on the Bank of English, a large corpus of contemporary English texts.

HarperCollins&#x27; imprints, including current and defunct imprints prior to various mergers, include:

===Current===
====Adult====
====Children====

* HarperCollins Children&#x27;s Books
** Harper Festival, a publisher of novelty books founded in 1992
** HarperTeen
** HarperTeen Impulse (digital imprint)
** HarperTrophy
** Harper Fire 
** Amistad
** Balzer + Bray
** Collins
** Clarion Books
** Greenwillow Books
** Heartdrum
** HMH Books for Young Readers
** Katherine Tegen Books
** Walden Pond Press
** Blink Young Adult
*Farshore (formerly Egmont UK)
**Electric Monkey
====Christian====

* Thomas Nelson
** Grupo Nelson
** Nelson Books
** Tommy Nelson
** W Publishing Group
* Zondervan
** Editorial Vida
** Zonderkidz
**Zondervan Academic
**Zondervan Reflective
====Audio====
* HarperAudio
* Caedmon, audiobooks
* HarperCollins Children&#x27;s Audio

====Bureau====
* HarperCollins Speakers Bureau

====Digital====
* HarperCollins e-Books
* HarperCollins Productions

====Digital first====
* One More Chapter

====Film and television====
* 3000 Pictures (joint venture with Sony Pictures)

===Defunct===
==Business strategy==
===Web approach===
In 2008, HarperCollins launched a browsing feature on its website where customers can read selected excerpts from books before purchasing, on both desktop and mobile browsers. This functionality gave the publisher&#x27;s website the ability to compete with physical bookstores, in which customers can typically look at the book itself, and Amazon&#x27;s use of excerpts (&quot;teasers&quot;) for online book purchasers.

At the beginning of October 2013, the company announced a partnership with online digital library Scribd. The official statement revealed that the &quot;majority&quot; of the HarperCollins US and HarperCollins Christian catalogs will be available in Scribd&#x27;s subscription service. Chantal Restivo-Alessi, chief digital officer at HarperCollins, explained to the media that the deal represents the first time that the publisher has released such a large portion of its catalog.

HarperCollins formerly operated &quot;authonomy&quot;, an online community of authors, from 2008 to 2015. The website offered an alternative to the traditional &quot;slush pile&quot; approach for handling unsolicited manuscripts sent to a publisher with little chance of being reviewed. Using authonomy, authors could submit their work for peer review and ranking by other members; the five highest-ranked manuscripts each month would be read by HarperCollins editors for potential publication. The site was closed after authors &quot;learned to game the system&quot; to earn top-five rankings, and fewer authonomy titles were selected to be published.

From 2009 to 2010, HarperCollins operated BookArmy, a social networking site.

===Speakers Bureau===
The HarperCollins Speakers Bureau (also known as HCSB) is the first lecture agency to be created by a major publishing house. It was launched in May 2005 as a division of HarperCollins to book paid speaking engagements for the authors HarperCollins, and its sister companies, publish. Andrea Rosen is the director.

Some of the notable authors the HCSB represents include Carol Alt, Dennis Lehane, Gregory Maguire, Danny Meyer, Mehmet Oz, Sidney Poitier, Ted Sorensen, and Kate White.

===HarperAcademic===
HarperAcademic is the academic marketing department of HarperCollins. HarperAcademic provides instructors with the latest in adult titles for course adoption at the high school and college level, as well as titles for first-year and other common read programs at academic institutions. They also attend several major academic conferences to showcase new titles for academic professionals.

HarperAcademic Calling, a podcast produced by the department, provides interviews with authors of noteworthy titles.

===HarperStudio===
HarperCollins announced HarperStudio in 2008 as a &quot;new, experimental unit... that will eliminate the traditional profit distributions to authors. The long-established author advances and bookseller returns has not proved to be very profitable to either the author or the publisher. The approach HarperStudio is now taking is to offer little or no advance, but instead to split the profit 50% (rather than the industry standard 15%), with the author.&quot; The division was headed by Bob Miller, previously the founding publisher of Hyperion, the adult books division of the Walt Disney Company. HarperStudio folded in March 2010 after Miller left for Workman Publishing.

===HarperCollins India===

HarperCollins Publishers India Pvt Ltd. is a wholly owned subsidiary of HarperCollins Worldwide. It came into being in 1992.

==Controversies==

===&quot;If I Did It&quot;===

&quot;If I Did It&quot; was a book written by O. J. Simpson about his alleged murder of Nicole Simpson, which was planned as a HarperCollins title, and which attracted considerable controversy and a legal battle over publication.

===Ben Collins===
In August 2010, the company became embroiled in a legal battle with the BBC after a book it was due to publish, later identified as the forthcoming autobiography of racing driver Ben Collins, revealed the identity of The Stig from &quot;Top Gear&quot;. In his blog, &quot;Top Gear&quot; executive producer Andy Wilman accused HarperCollins of &quot;hoping to cash in&quot; on the BBC&#x27;s intellectual property, describing the publishers as &quot;a bunch of chancers&quot;. On 1 September, the BBC&#x27;s request for an injunction preventing the book from being published was turned down, effectively confirming the book&#x27;s revelation that &quot;The Stig&quot; was indeed Collins.

===&quot;East and West&quot;===
The company became embroiled in controversy in 1998 after it was revealed it blocked Chris Patten&#x27;s (the last British governor of Hong Kong) book &quot;East and West&quot; after a direct intervention by the then-CEO of News International, Rupert Murdoch. It was later revealed by Stuart Proffitt, the editor who had worked on the book for HarperCollins, that this intervention was designed to appease the Chinese authorities—of whom the book was critical—as Murdoch intended to extend his business empire into China and did not wish to cause problems there by allowing the book to be published.

Murdoch&#x27;s intervention caused both Proffitt&#x27;s resignation from the company and outrage from the international media apart from affiliated companies. Chris Patten later published with Macmillan Publishing, initially in America, where it carried the logo &quot;The book that Rupert Murdoch refused to publish&quot;. After a successful legal campaign against HarperCollins, Patten went on to publish the book in the UK in September 1998 after accepting a sum of £500,000 and receiving an apology from Rupert Murdoch.

===Ebooks===
In March 2011, HarperCollins announced it would distribute ebooks to libraries with DRM enabled to delete the item after being lent 26 times. HarperCollins has drawn criticism of this plan, in particular its likening of ebooks, which are purely digital, to traditional paperback trade books, which wear over time.

===Omission of Israel from an atlas===
In December 2014, &quot;The Tablet&quot; reported that an atlas published for Middle East schools did not label Israel on a map of the Middle East. A representative for Collins Bartholomew, a subsidiary of HarperCollins that specializes in maps, explained that including Israel would have been &quot;unacceptable&quot; to their customers in the Arab states of the Persian Gulf and the omission was in line with &quot;local preferences&quot;. The company later apologized and destroyed all the books.

=== &quot;What the (Bleep) Just Happened?&quot; ===
HarperCollins announced in January 2017 that they would discontinue selling copies of Monica Crowley&#x27;s book &quot;What the (Bleep) Just Happened?&quot;, due to allegations of plagiarism. The 2012 book had lifted passages from a number of sources including columns, news articles and think tank reports. HarperCollins said in a statement to CNN&#x27;s &quot;KFile&quot;, &quot;The book which has reached the end of its natural sales cycle, will no longer be offered for purchase until such time as the author has the opportunity to source and revise the material.&quot;

==See also==

* Books in the United States
* Books in the United Kingdom
* COBUILD – a research facility set up by Collins in conjunction with the University of Birmingham
* &quot;Harper&#x27;s Magazine&quot; – a separately owned magazine, although begun by the original Harper &amp; Brothers
* List of largest UK book publishers

== References ==
==External links==
* Greenwillow Books records, 1974–2014</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q95149" start="0" end="28" title="HarperCollins" label="HarperCollins Publishers LLC"/>
<link wikidata="Q3972943" start="51" end="69" title="publishing company" label="publishing company"/>
<link wikidata="Q3972943" start="112" end="120" title="Big Five (publishers)" label="Big Five"/>
<link wikidata="Q2908540" start="167" end="187" title="Penguin Random House" label="Penguin Random House"/>
<link wikidata="Q1567078" start="189" end="197" title="Hachette Book Group USA" label="Hachette"/>
<link wikidata="Q2108217" start="199" end="208" title="Macmillan Publishers" label="Macmillan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1756332" start="214" end="234" title="Simon &amp;amp; Schuster" label="Simon &amp;amp; Schuster"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="270" end="283" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="288" end="294" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q14289857" start="318" end="327" title="News Corp" label="News Corp"/>
<link wikidata="Q3127696" start="417" end="438" title="Harper &amp;amp; Brothers" label="Harper &amp;amp; Brothers"/>
<link wikidata="Q3127696" start="525" end="541" title="Harper &amp;amp; Row" label="Harper &amp;amp; Row"/>
<link wikidata="Q22" start="588" end="596" title="Scotland" label="Scottish"/>
<link wikidata="Q8007001" start="616" end="637" title="William Collins, Sons" label="William Collins, Sons"/>
<link wikidata="Q4093" start="658" end="665" title="Glasgow" label="Glasgow"/>
<link wikidata="Q2608849" start="1034" end="1041" title="imprint (trade name)" label="imprint"/>
<link wikidata="Q356267" start="1260" end="1272" title="James Harper (publisher)" label="James Harper"/>
<link wikidata="Q5458782" start="1412" end="1427" title="Fletcher Harper" label="Fletcher Harper"/>
<link wikidata="Q1170076" start="1639" end="1661" title="Harper&amp;#x27;s Magazine" label="Harper&amp;#x27;s Magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q3127693" start="1675" end="1695" title="Harper&amp;#x27;s Weekly" label="Harper&amp;#x27;s Weekly"/>
<link wikidata="Q654606" start="1709" end="1729" title="Harper&amp;#x27;s Bazaar" label="Harper&amp;#x27;s Bazaar"/>
<link wikidata="Q5663331" start="1747" end="1773" title="Harper&amp;#x27;s Young People" label="Harper&amp;#x27;s Young People"/>
<link wikidata="Q3127696" start="1863" end="1879" title="Harper &amp;amp; Row" label="Harper &amp;amp; Row"/>
<link wikidata="Q7795366" start="1899" end="1920" title="Thomas Y. Crowell Co." label="Thomas Y. Crowell Co."/>
<link wikidata="Q15077094" start="1925" end="1951" title="J. B. Lippincott &amp;amp; Co." label="J. B. Lippincott &amp;amp; Co."/>
<link wikidata="Q8073886" start="2116" end="2125" title="Zondervan" label="Zondervan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6773740" start="2148" end="2166" title="Marshall Pickering" label="Marshall Pickering"/>
<link wikidata="Q4093" start="2210" end="2217" title="Glasgow" label="Glasgow"/>
<link wikidata="Q178169" start="2229" end="2241" title="Presbyterian" label="Presbyterian"/>
<link wikidata="Q3568512" start="2255" end="2270" title="William Collins (publisher)" label="William Collins"/>
<link wikidata="Q5576408" start="2432" end="2447" title="Godfrey Collins" label="Godfrey Collins"/>
<link wikidata="Q5147368" start="2454" end="2472" title="Collins Crime Club" label="Collins Crime Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q3704447" start="2509" end="2540" title="Golden Age of Detective Fiction" label="Golden Age of Detective Fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q35064" start="2562" end="2577" title="Agatha Christie" label="Agatha Christie"/>
<link wikidata="Q337351" start="2582" end="2591" title="Rex Stout" label="Rex Stout"/>
<link wikidata="Q9204" start="2638" end="2649" title="C. S. Lewis" label="C. S. Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7785" start="2676" end="2696" title="British Commonwealth" label="British Commonwealth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1471089" start="2779" end="2793" title="The Hardy Boys" label="The Hardy Boys"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076932" start="2795" end="2805" title="Nancy Drew" label="Nancy Drew"/>
<link wikidata="Q298685" start="2811" end="2820" title="Dr. Seuss" label="Dr. Seuss"/>
<link wikidata="Q53944" start="2854" end="2868" title="Rupert Murdoch" label="Rupert Murdoch"/>
<link wikidata="Q185278" start="2876" end="2892" title="News Corporation" label="News Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q15077094" start="3278" end="3304" title="J. B. Lippincott &amp;amp; Co." label="J. B. Lippincott &amp;amp; Co."/>
<link wikidata="Q55" start="3346" end="3351" title="Netherlands" label="Dutch"/>
<link wikidata="Q249798" start="3362" end="3376" title="Wolters Kluwer" label="Wolters Kluwer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7436348" start="3407" end="3421" title="Scott Foresman" label="Scott Foresman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1916402" start="3451" end="3458" title="Pearson plc" label="Pearson"/>
<link wikidata="Q353060" start="3483" end="3505" title="Addison-Wesley" label="Addison-Wesley Longman"/>
<link wikidata="Q8015856" start="3572" end="3600" title="William Morrow &amp;amp; Company" label="William Morrow &amp;amp; Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q2874472" start="3605" end="3615" title="Avon Books" label="Avon Books"/>
<link wikidata="Q6533859" start="3737" end="3755" title="Letts and Lonsdale" label="Letts and Lonsdale"/>
<link wikidata="Q2648991" start="3846" end="3859" title="Thomas Nelson (publisher)" label="Thomas Nelson"/>
<link wikidata="Q8073886" start="4052" end="4061" title="Zondervan" label="Zondervan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1479654" start="4344" end="4364" title="John Wiley &amp;amp; Son" label="John Wiley &amp;amp; Son"/>
<link wikidata="Q612938" start="4436" end="4457" title="Harlequin Enterprises" label="Harlequin Enterprises"/>
<link wikidata="Q95149" start="4533" end="4539" title="Amacom" label="Amacom"/>
<link wikidata="Q2842975" start="4549" end="4580" title="American Management Association" label="American Management Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q2083868" start="4712" end="4724" title="Egmont Group" label="Egmont Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q390074" start="4847" end="4872" title="Houghton Mifflin Harcourt" label="Houghton Mifflin Harcourt"/>
<link wikidata="Q19637076" start="5362" end="5375" title="Jane Friedman" label="Jane Friedman"/>
<link wikidata="Q16148671" start="5678" end="5705" title="United States v. Apple (2012)" label="United States v. Apple Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q312" start="5720" end="5725" title="Apple Inc." label="Apple"/>
<link wikidata="Q128093" start="5844" end="5851" title="e-books" label="e-books"/>
<link wikidata="Q3884" start="5864" end="5874" title="Amazon (company)" label="Amazon.com"/>
<link wikidata="Q3277149" start="5922" end="5935" title="United States antitrust law" label="antitrust law"/>
<link wikidata="Q1200230" start="6157" end="6169" title="Price fixing" label="price-fixing"/>
<link wikidata="Q2124539" start="6405" end="6420" title="RR Donnelley" label="R. R. Donnelley"/>
<link wikidata="Q461" start="7752" end="7768" title="Internet Archive" label="Internet Archive"/>
<link wikidata="Q44903" start="7998" end="8011" title="Lindsay Lohan" label="Lindsay Lohan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7368437" start="8180" end="8197" title="Rosemary Sullivan" label="Rosemary Sullivan"/>
<link wikidata="Q110593731" start="8248" end="8263" title="Arnold van den Bergh" label="a Jewish notary"/>
<link wikidata="Q4583" start="8294" end="8304" title="Anne Frank" label="Anne Frank"/>
<link wikidata="Q1814260" start="8679" end="8698" title="United Auto Workers" label="United Auto Workers"/>
<link wikidata="Q7245" start="10372" end="10382" title="Mark Twain" label="Mark Twain"/>
<link wikidata="Q835808" start="10388" end="10402" title="Brontë sisters" label="Brontë sisters"/>
<link wikidata="Q167768" start="10408" end="10435" title="William Makepeace Thackeray" label="William Makepeace Thackeray"/>
<link wikidata="Q42511" start="10485" end="10496" title="H. G. Wells" label="H. G. Wells"/>
<link wikidata="Q35064" start="10501" end="10516" title="Agatha Christie" label="Agatha Christie"/>
<link wikidata="Q892" start="10571" end="10587" title="J. R. R. Tolkien" label="J. R. R. Tolkien"/>
<link wikidata="Q56677707" start="10613" end="10624" title="George Allen &amp;amp; Unwin" label="Unwin Hyman"/>
<link wikidata="Q74287" start="10792" end="10802" title="The Hobbit" label="The Hobbit"/>
<link wikidata="Q892" start="10810" end="10826" title="J. R. R. Tolkien" label="J. R. R. Tolkien"/>
<link wikidata="Q56677707" start="10859" end="10883" title="George Allen &amp;amp; Unwin" label="George Allen &amp;amp; Unwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q15228" start="10893" end="10914" title="The Lord of the Rings" label="The Lord of the Rings"/>
<link wikidata="Q973382" start="11010" end="11027" title="The Art of Loving" label="The Art of Loving"/>
<link wikidata="Q57085" start="11035" end="11046" title="Erich Fromm" label="Erich Fromm"/>
<link wikidata="Q923416" start="11062" end="11082" title="Master and Commander" label="Master and Commander"/>
<link wikidata="Q355438" start="11090" end="11110" title="Patrick O&amp;#x27;Brian" label="Patrick O&amp;#x27;Brian"/>
<link wikidata="" start="11152" end="11199" title="Master and Commander: The Far Side of the World" label="Master and Commander: The Far Side of the World"/>
<link wikidata="Q3213866" start="11219" end="11242" title="The Blessing Way" label="Leaphorn and Chee books"/>
<link wikidata="Q181920" start="11250" end="11264" title="Tony Hillerman" label="Tony Hillerman"/>
<link wikidata="Q79762" start="11285" end="11301" title="The Silmarillion" label="The Silmarillion"/>
<link wikidata="Q82032" start="11331" end="11350" title="Christopher Tolkien" label="Christopher Tolkien"/>
<link wikidata="Q260453" start="11419" end="11445" title="Collins English Dictionary" label="Collins English Dictionary"/>
<link wikidata="Q1272578" start="11481" end="11506" title="Sharpe (novel series)" label="&amp;quot;Sharpe&amp;quot; series"/>
<link wikidata="Q446605" start="11508" end="11524" title="Bernard Cornwell" label="Bernard Cornwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q35738" start="11609" end="11614" title="Frida (2002 film)" label="Frida"/>
<link wikidata="Q334750" start="11629" end="11656" title="The History of Middle-earth" label="The History of Middle-earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1446005" start="11734" end="11744" title="Weaveworld" label="Weaveworld"/>
<link wikidata="Q298761" start="11752" end="11764" title="Clive Barker" label="Clive Barker"/>
<link wikidata="Q7126365" start="11778" end="11799" title="Paladin Poetry Series" label="Paladin Poetry Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q179021" start="11820" end="11833" title="The Alchemist (novel)" label="The Alchemist"/>
<link wikidata="Q12881" start="11841" end="11853" title="Paulo Coelho" label="Paulo Coelho"/>
<link wikidata="Q7677573" start="11961" end="11977" title="Take Back Plenty" label="Take Back Plenty"/>
<link wikidata="Q742918" start="11992" end="12007" title="Colin Greenland" label="Colin Greenland"/>
<link wikidata="Q59772972" start="12085" end="12105" title="Stephen M. Silverman" label="Stephen M. Silverman"/>
<link wikidata="Q448992" start="12120" end="12138" title="Dorothy Wordsworth" label="Dorothy Wordsworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q7745466" start="12212" end="12237" title="The Language of the Genes" label="The Language of the Genes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1391397" start="12245" end="12256" title="Steve Jones (biologist)" label="Steve Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q7736426" start="12272" end="12293" title="The Gifts of the Body" label="The Gifts of the Body"/>
<link wikidata="Q3110553" start="12301" end="12314" title="Rebecca Brown (author)" label="Rebecca Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q2466980" start="12330" end="12340" title="Microserfs" label="Microserfs"/>
<link wikidata="Q322060" start="12348" end="12364" title="Douglas Coupland" label="Douglas Coupland"/>
<link wikidata="Q9420" start="12380" end="12388" title="Thoughts" label="Thoughts"/>
<link wikidata="Q273981" start="12396" end="12410" title="Tionne Watkins" label="Tionne Watkins"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12426" end="12468" title="Śukasaptati#History" label="Shuka Saptati: Seventy tales of the Parrot"/>
<link wikidata="Q4648191" start="12514" end="12529" title="A. N. D. Haksar" label="A. N. D. Haksar"/>
<link wikidata="Q3010947" start="12545" end="12606" title="First They Killed My Father" label="First They Killed My Father: A Daughter of Cambodia Remembers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2330022" start="12614" end="12623" title="Loung Ung" label="Loung Ung"/>
<link wikidata="Q4881733" start="12639" end="12648" title="Bel Canto (novel)" label="Bel Canto"/>
<link wikidata="Q433485" start="12656" end="12668" title="Ann Patchett" label="Ann Patchett"/>
<link wikidata="Q4660051" start="12684" end="12706" title="A Theory of Relativity" label="A Theory of Relativity"/>
<link wikidata="Q6120271" start="12714" end="12732" title="Jacquelyn Mitchard" label="Jacquelyn Mitchard"/>
<link wikidata="Q3257270" start="12770" end="12779" title="Discworld" label="Discworld"/>
<link wikidata="Q46248" start="12796" end="12811" title="Terry Pratchett" label="Terry Pratchett"/>
<link wikidata="Q430514" start="12849" end="12862" title="American Gods" label="American Gods"/>
<link wikidata="Q210059" start="12870" end="12881" title="Neil Gaiman" label="Neil Gaiman"/>
<link wikidata="Q4943725" start="12897" end="12906" title="Boonville (novel)" label="Boonville"/>
<link wikidata="Q7347284" start="12914" end="12936" title="Robert Mailer Anderson" label="Robert Mailer Anderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q4398917" start="12960" end="12971" title="Quicksilver (novel)" label="Quicksilver"/>
<link wikidata="Q312853" start="12979" end="12994" title="Neal Stephenson" label="Neal Stephenson"/>
<link wikidata="Q480" start="13010" end="13021" title="Don Quixote" label="Don Quixote"/>
<link wikidata="Q5338555" start="13050" end="13064" title="Edith Grossman" label="Edith Grossman"/>
<link wikidata="Q5332296" start="13072" end="13076" title="Ecco Press" label="Ecco"/>
<link wikidata="Q4674759" start="13086" end="13111" title="Acquainted with the Night (book)" label="Acquainted with the Night"/>
<link wikidata="Q1086632" start="13119" end="13138" title="Christopher Dewdney" label="Christopher Dewdney"/>
<link wikidata="Q2164310" start="13154" end="13167" title="State of fear" label="State of fear"/>
<link wikidata="Q172140" start="13178" end="13194" title="Michael Crichton" label="Michael Crichton"/>
<link wikidata="Q5223654" start="13210" end="13219" title="Darkhouse" label="Darkhouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q517660" start="13227" end="13239" title="Alex Barclay" label="Alex Barclay"/>
<link wikidata="Q2360806" start="13255" end="13266" title="Anansi Boys" label="Anansi Boys"/>
<link wikidata="Q3223832" start="13301" end="13312" title="The Hot Kid" label="The Hot Kid"/>
<link wikidata="Q336519" start="13320" end="13334" title="Elmore Leonard" label="Elmore Leonard"/>
<link wikidata="Q3815684" start="13350" end="13367" title="Freaky Green Eyes" label="Freaky Green Eyes"/>
<link wikidata="Q217557" start="13378" end="13395" title="Joyce Carol Oates" label="Joyce Carol Oates"/>
<link wikidata="Q971336" start="13411" end="13415" title="Next (Crichton novel)" label="Next"/>
<link wikidata="Q172140" start="13423" end="13439" title="Michael Crichton" label="Michael Crichton"/>
<link wikidata="Q5290277" start="13455" end="13475" title="Domicilium Decoratus" label="Domicilium Decoratus"/>
<link wikidata="Q4949401" start="13483" end="13498" title="Kelly Wearstler" label="Kelly Wearstler"/>
<link wikidata="Q2528710" start="13515" end="13534" title="Pretty Little Liars (book series)" label="Pretty Little Liars"/>
<link wikidata="Q774860" start="13542" end="13554" title="Sara Shepard" label="Sara Shepard"/>
<link wikidata="Q15032968" start="13570" end="13584" title="Mister B. Gone" label="Mister B. Gone"/>
<link wikidata="Q298761" start="13592" end="13604" title="Clive Barker" label="Clive Barker"/>
<link wikidata="" start="13629" end="13688" title="Loving Natalee: A Mother&amp;#x27;s Testament of Hope and Faith" label="Loving Natalee: A Mother&amp;#x27;s Testament of Hope and Faith"/>
<link wikidata="Q4897515" start="13696" end="13709" title="Beth Holloway" label="Beth Holloway"/>
<link wikidata="Q51722302" start="13724" end="13740" title="Natalee Holloway" label="Natalee Holloway"/>
<link wikidata="Q2977684" start="13750" end="13769" title="The Raw Shark Texts" label="The Raw Shark Texts"/>
<link wikidata="Q2291294" start="13777" end="13788" title="Steven Hall (author)" label="Steven Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q331651" start="13804" end="13825" title="The Children of Húrin" label="The Children of Húrin"/>
<link wikidata="" start="13891" end="13959" title="The Family: The Secret Fundamentalism at the Heart of American Power" label="The Family: The Secret Fundamentalism at the Heart of American Power"/>
<link wikidata="Q1686355" start="13967" end="13979" title="Jeff Sharlet (writer)" label="Jeff Sharlet"/>
<link wikidata="" start="13995" end="14024" title="Going Rogue: An American Life" label="Going Rogue: An American Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q43144" start="14032" end="14043" title="Sarah Palin" label="Sarah Palin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2608486" start="14059" end="14075" title="Pirate Latitudes" label="Pirate Latitudes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2657795" start="14140" end="14149" title="Wolf Hall" label="Wolf Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q465700" start="14157" end="14170" title="Hilary Mantel" label="Hilary Mantel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7490692" start="14186" end="14295" title="Shattered (Casey book)" label="Shattered: The True Story of a Mother&amp;#x27;s Love, a Husband&amp;#x27;s Betrayal, and a Cold-Blooded Texas Murder"/>
<link wikidata="Q6377016" start="14303" end="14316" title="Kathryn Casey" label="Kathryn Casey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1356447" start="14332" end="14337" title="Micro (novel)" label="Micro"/>
<link wikidata="Q7731011" start="14402" end="14431" title="The Dressmaker of Khair Khana" label="The Dressmaker of Khair Khana"/>
<link wikidata="Q5528818" start="14439" end="14459" title="Gayle Tzemach Lemmon" label="Gayle Tzemach Lemmon"/>
<link wikidata="" start="14475" end="14530" title="A Shot at History: My Obsessive Journey to Olympic Gold" label="A Shot at History: My Obsessive Journey to Olympic Gold"/>
<link wikidata="Q320610" start="14540" end="14554" title="Abhinav Bindra" label="Abhinav Bindra"/>
<link wikidata="Q18949486" start="14570" end="14587" title="Go Set a Watchman" label="Go Set a Watchman"/>
<link wikidata="Q182658" start="14595" end="14605" title="Harper Lee" label="Harper Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q56491386" start="14621" end="14634" title="The Poppy War" label="The Poppy War"/>
<link wikidata="Q53411010" start="14642" end="14653" title="R. F. Kuang" label="R. F. Kuang"/>
<link wikidata="Q124077842" start="14669" end="14695" title="Inside the Tablighi Jamaat" label="Inside the Tablighi Jamaat"/>
<link wikidata="Q106041248" start="14703" end="14716" title="Ziya Us Salam" label="Ziya Us Salam"/>
<link wikidata="Q7901268" start="14788" end="14804" title="Ursula Nordstrom" label="Ursula Nordstrom"/>
<link wikidata="Q5583528" start="14950" end="14964" title="Goodnight Moon" label="Goodnight Moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q13912" start="14978" end="15003" title="Where the Wild Things Are" label="Where the Wild Things Are"/>
<link wikidata="Q2915384" start="15017" end="15032" title="The Giving Tree" label="The Giving Tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q45735" start="15046" end="15066" title="Charlotte&amp;#x27;s Web" label="Charlotte&amp;#x27;s Web"/>
<link wikidata="Q1316719" start="15074" end="15088" title="Beverly Cleary" label="Beverly Cleary"/>
<link wikidata="Q7289900" start="15112" end="15125" title="Ramona (novel series)" label="Ramona Quimby"/>
<link wikidata="Q5662880" start="15137" end="15165" title="Harold and the Purple Crayon" label="Harold and the Purple Crayon"/>
<link wikidata="Q314771" start="15206" end="15220" title="Maurice Sendak" label="Maurice Sendak"/>
<link wikidata="Q361257" start="15222" end="15238" title="Shel Silverstein" label="Shel Silverstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q5970117" start="15244" end="15263" title="Margaret Wise Brown" label="Margaret Wise Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q314771" start="15405" end="15419" title="Maurice Sendak" label="Maurice Sendak"/>
<link wikidata="Q1967386" start="15432" end="15449" title="Charlotte Zolotow" label="Charlotte Zolotow"/>
<link wikidata="Q181066" start="15481" end="15493" title="stenographer" label="stenographer"/>
<link wikidata="Q11339514" start="15685" end="15700" title="Paul Fleischman" label="Paul Fleischman"/>
<link wikidata="Q483412" start="15846" end="15870" title="The Chronicles of Narnia" label="The Chronicles of Narnia"/>
<link wikidata="Q9204" start="15887" end="15898" title="C. S. Lewis" label="C. S. Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q16996249" start="16073" end="16084" title="I Can Read!" label="I Can Read!"/>
<link wikidata="Q4742224" start="16135" end="16149" title="Amelia Bedelia" label="Amelia Bedelia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7160712" start="16157" end="16169" title="Peggy Parish" label="Peggy Parish"/>
<link wikidata="Q5505227" start="16178" end="16191" title="Frog and Toad" label="Frog and Toad"/>
<link wikidata="Q695702" start="16199" end="16211" title="Arnold Lobel" label="Arnold Lobel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2500140" start="16223" end="16234" title="Little Bear (book)" label="Little Bear"/>
<link wikidata="Q2493515" start="16242" end="16264" title="Else Holmelund Minarik" label="Else Holmelund Minarik"/>
<link wikidata="Q314771" start="16269" end="16283" title="Maurice Sendak" label="Maurice Sendak"/>
<link wikidata="Q739702" start="16297" end="16324" title="Warriors (novel series)" label="&amp;quot;Warriors&amp;quot; series"/>
<link wikidata="Q2528710" start="16352" end="16371" title="Pretty Little Liars (book series)" label="Pretty Little Liars"/>
<link wikidata="Q774860" start="16389" end="16401" title="Sara Shepard" label="Sara Shepard"/>
<link wikidata="Q213841" start="16425" end="16455" title="A Series of Unfortunate Events" label="A Series of Unfortunate Events"/>
<link wikidata="Q458346" start="16463" end="16477" title="Lemony Snicket" label="Lemony Snicket"/>
<link wikidata="Q4659986" start="16486" end="16509" title="A Taste of Blackberries" label="A Taste of Blackberries"/>
<link wikidata="Q5297904" start="16517" end="16537" title="Doris Buchanan Smith" label="Doris Buchanan Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q15262674" start="16547" end="16586" title="Skulduggery Pleasant" label="&amp;quot;Skulduggery Pleasant&amp;quot; series"/>
<link wikidata="Q1200066" start="16588" end="16599" title="Derek Landy" label="Derek Landy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4809986" start="16608" end="16641" title="Bart Simpson&amp;#x27;s Guide to Life" label="Bart Simpson&amp;#x27;s Guide to Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q298685" start="16681" end="16690" title="Dr. Seuss" label="Dr. Seuss"/>
<link wikidata="Q6691403" start="16739" end="16752" title="Love That Dog" label="Love That Dog"/>
<link wikidata="Q510811" start="16760" end="16773" title="Sharon Creech" label="Sharon Creech"/>
<link wikidata="Q2915384" start="16789" end="16804" title="The Giving Tree" label="The Giving Tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q361257" start="16812" end="16828" title="Shel Silverstein" label="Shel Silverstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q7993468" start="16844" end="16874" title="Where the Sidewalk Ends (book)" label="Where the Sidewalk Ends (book)"/>
<link wikidata="Q853855" start="16914" end="16937" title="The Saga of Darren Shan" label="The Saga of Darren Shan"/>
<link wikidata="Q356428" start="16945" end="16956" title="Darren Shan" label="Darren Shan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3016534" start="16978" end="16993" title="Cirque du Freak (manga)" label="Cirque du Freak"/>
<link wikidata="Q8274" start="17000" end="17005" title="manga" label="manga"/>
<link wikidata="Q843300" start="17030" end="17043" title="Takahiro Arai" label="Takahiro Arai"/>
<link wikidata="Q3480273" start="17064" end="17091" title="The Dangerous Book for Boys" label="The Dangerous Book for Boys"/>
<link wikidata="Q706794" start="17099" end="17103" title="Conn Iggulden" label="Conn"/>
<link wikidata="Q3101665" start="17136" end="17143" title="Sabriel" label="Sabriel"/>
<link wikidata="Q536913" start="17151" end="17160" title="Garth Nix" label="Garth Nix"/>
<link wikidata="Q4655365" start="17176" end="17211" title="A Barrel of Laughs, a Vale of Tears" label="A Barrel of Laughs, a Vale of Tears"/>
<link wikidata="Q975547" start="17219" end="17232" title="Jules Feiffer" label="Jules Feiffer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1571779" start="17248" end="17272" title="Mister God, This Is Anna" label="Mister God, This Is Anna"/>
<link wikidata="Q1571779" start="17299" end="17313" title="Sydney Hopkins" label="Sydney Hopkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q5400672" start="17334" end="17361" title="Little House on the Prairie" label="Little House on the Prairie"/>
<link wikidata="Q237514" start="17376" end="17396" title="Laura Ingalls Wilder" label="Laura Ingalls Wilder"/>
<link wikidata="Q7775455" start="17417" end="17440" title="The Wolves in the Walls" label="The Wolves in the Walls"/>
<link wikidata="Q210059" start="17448" end="17459" title="Neil Gaiman" label="Neil Gaiman"/>
<link wikidata="Q721300" start="17464" end="17475" title="Dave McKean" label="Dave McKean"/>
<link wikidata="Q60738864" start="17491" end="17498" title="Monster (Walter Dean Myers novel)" label="Monster"/>
<link wikidata="Q7964666" start="17506" end="17523" title="Walter Dean Myers" label="Walter Dean Myers"/>
<link wikidata="Q475125" start="17539" end="17547" title="Coraline" label="Coraline"/>
<link wikidata="Q210059" start="17555" end="17566" title="Neil Gaiman" label="Neil Gaiman"/>
<link wikidata="Q721300" start="17571" end="17582" title="Dave McKean" label="Dave McKean"/>
<link wikidata="Q7647239" start="17598" end="17623" title="Surviving the Applewhites" label="Surviving the Applewhites"/>
<link wikidata="Q7608385" start="17631" end="17649" title="Stephanie S. Tolan" label="Stephanie S. Tolan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7737146" start="17665" end="17687" title="The Gollywhopper Games" label="The Gollywhopper Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q272535" start="17709" end="17721" title="Ruby Redfort" label="Ruby Redfort"/>
<link wikidata="Q272535" start="17738" end="17750" title="Lauren Child" label="Lauren Child"/>
<link wikidata="Q627192" start="17766" end="17775" title="Divergent (book)" label="Divergent"/>
<link wikidata="Q328212" start="17783" end="17796" title="Veronica Roth" label="Veronica Roth"/>
<link wikidata="Q55739548" start="17812" end="17821" title="Survivors (novel series)" label="Survivors"/>
<link wikidata="Q61500246" start="17855" end="17883" title="The School for Good and Evil" label="The School for Good and Evil"/>
<link wikidata="Q16200795" start="17891" end="17905" title="Soman Chainani" label="Soman Chainani"/>
<link wikidata="Q7578418" start="17929" end="17942" title="Splat the Cat" label="Splat the Cat"/>
<link wikidata="Q116769346" start="17985" end="17999" title="The Secret Zoo" label="The Secret Zoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q45735" start="18039" end="18059" title="Charlotte&amp;#x27;s Web" label="Charlotte&amp;#x27;s Web"/>
<link wikidata="Q361617" start="18067" end="18078" title="E. B. White" label="E. B. White"/>
<link wikidata="Q96377160" start="18153" end="18171" title="Elinor Wonders Why" label="Elinor Wonders Why"/>
<link wikidata="Q2608849" start="18258" end="18265" title="imprint (trade name)" label="imprint"/>
<link wikidata="Q4856113" start="18475" end="18490" title="Bank of English" label="Bank of English"/>
<link wikidata="Q461183" start="18500" end="18506" title="text corpus" label="corpus"/>
<link wikidata="Q115907632" start="18959" end="18968" title="Heartdrum" label="Heartdrum"/>
<link wikidata="Q7961476" start="19028" end="19045" title="Walden Pond Press" label="Walden Pond Press"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19087" end="19096" title="Egmont Books#Egmont UK / Farshore" label="Egmont UK"/>
<link wikidata="Q2648991" start="19137" end="19150" title="Thomas Nelson (publisher)" label="Thomas Nelson"/>
<link wikidata="Q8073886" start="19223" end="19232" title="Zondervan" label="Zondervan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5016792" start="19339" end="19346" title="Caedmon Audio" label="Caedmon"/>
<link wikidata="Q95149" start="19415" end="19444" title="HarperCollins Speakers Bureau" label="HarperCollins Speakers Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q822314" start="19621" end="19634" title="Sony Pictures" label="Sony Pictures"/>
<link wikidata="Q3884" start="20032" end="20045" title="Amazon (company)" label="Amazon&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q1467888" start="20211" end="20217" title="Scribd" label="Scribd"/>
<link wikidata="Q7542363" start="20762" end="20772" title="slushpile" label="slush pile"/>
<link wikidata="Q215028" start="20936" end="20947" title="peer review" label="peer review"/>
<link wikidata="Q4943154" start="21292" end="21300" title="BookArmy" label="BookArmy"/>
<link wikidata="Q441856" start="21723" end="21732" title="Carol Alt" label="Carol Alt"/>
<link wikidata="Q311744" start="21734" end="21747" title="Dennis Lehane" label="Dennis Lehane"/>
<link wikidata="Q736137" start="21749" end="21764" title="Gregory Maguire" label="Gregory Maguire"/>
<link wikidata="Q5220622" start="21766" end="21777" title="Danny Meyer" label="Danny Meyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2537149" start="21779" end="21788" title="Mehmet Oz" label="Mehmet Oz"/>
<link wikidata="Q104049" start="21790" end="21804" title="Sidney Poitier" label="Sidney Poitier"/>
<link wikidata="Q518197" start="21806" end="21818" title="Ted Sorensen" label="Ted Sorensen"/>
<link wikidata="Q6375855" start="21824" end="21834" title="Kate White" label="Kate White"/>
<link wikidata="Q7888605" start="22922" end="22930" title="Disney Hyperion" label="Hyperion"/>
<link wikidata="Q7414" start="22964" end="22983" title="Walt Disney Company" label="Walt Disney Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q4779613" start="23041" end="23059" title="Workman Publishing" label="Workman Publishing"/>
<link wikidata="Q44473" start="23311" end="23324" title="O. J. Simpson" label="O. J. Simpson"/>
<link wikidata="Q268018" start="23353" end="23367" title="Nicole Simpson" label="Nicole Simpson"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="23586" end="23589" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q816470" start="23693" end="23704" title="Ben Collins (racing driver)" label="Ben Collins"/>
<link wikidata="Q1409858" start="23731" end="23739" title="The Stig" label="The Stig"/>
<link wikidata="Q33162" start="23751" end="23759" title="Top Gear (2002 TV series)" label="Top Gear"/>
<link wikidata="Q4761497" start="23820" end="23831" title="Andy Wilman" label="Andy Wilman"/>
<link wikidata="Q131257" start="23905" end="23926" title="intellectual property" label="intellectual property"/>
<link wikidata="Q23368" start="24319" end="24331" title="Chris Patten" label="Chris Patten"/>
<link wikidata="Q5329740" start="24391" end="24404" title="East and West (book)" label="East and West"/>
<link wikidata="Q1105124" start="24458" end="24476" title="News International" label="News International"/>
<link wikidata="Q53944" start="24478" end="24492" title="Rupert Murdoch" label="Rupert Murdoch"/>
<link wikidata="Q2108217" start="25028" end="25048" title="Macmillan Publishing" label="Macmillan Publishing"/>
<link wikidata="Q128093" start="25432" end="25438" title="ebooks" label="ebooks"/>
<link wikidata="Q192532" start="25457" end="25460" title="Digital rights management" label="DRM"/>
<link wikidata="Q3522948" start="25751" end="25761" title="The Tablet" label="The Tablet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1109743" start="25896" end="25915" title="Collins Bartholomew" label="Collins Bartholomew"/>
<link wikidata="Q2218629" start="26072" end="26103" title="Arab states of the Persian Gulf" label="Arab states of the Persian Gulf"/>
<link wikidata="Q6899924" start="26366" end="26380" title="Monica Crowley" label="Monica Crowley"/>
<link wikidata="Q28453415" start="26399" end="26430" title="What the (Bleep) Just Happened?" label="What the (Bleep) Just Happened?"/>
<link wikidata="Q48340" start="26625" end="26628" title="CNN" label="CNN"/>
<link wikidata="Q14954815" start="26642" end="26647" title="Andrew Kaczynski" label="KFile"/>
<link wikidata="Q48799056" start="26871" end="26897" title="Books in the United States" label="Books in the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q48741351" start="26900" end="26927" title="Books in the United Kingdom" label="Books in the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q5013265" start="26930" end="26937" title="COBUILD" label="COBUILD"/>
<link wikidata="Q223429" start="27002" end="27026" title="University of Birmingham" label="University of Birmingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q1170076" start="27035" end="27057" title="Harper&amp;#x27;s Magazine" label="Harper&amp;#x27;s Magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q6624980" start="27150" end="27184" title="List of largest UK book publishers" label="List of largest UK book publishers"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="253377" wikidata="Q585329" url="?curid=253377" title="Merriam-Webster">
<text>Merriam-Webster, Incorporated is an American company that publishes reference books and is mostly known for its dictionaries. It is the oldest dictionary publisher in the United States.

In 1831, George and Charles Merriam founded the company as G &amp; C Merriam Co. in Springfield, Massachusetts. In 1843, after Noah Webster died, the company bought the rights to &quot;An American Dictionary of the English Language&quot; from Webster&#x27;s estate. All Merriam-Webster dictionaries trace their lineage to this source.

In 1964, Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc., acquired Merriam-Webster, Inc., as a subsidiary. The company adopted its current name, Merriam-Webster, Incorporated, in 1982.

==History==
===19th century===

In 1806, Webster published his first dictionary, . The following year, in 1807, Webster began two consecutive decades of intensive work to expand his publication into a fully comprehensive dictionary, &quot;An American Dictionary of the English Language&quot;. To help trace the etymology of words, Webster learned 26 languages. Webster hoped to standardize American speech, since Americans in different parts of the United States used somewhat different vocabularies and spelled, pronounced, and used words differently.

In 1825, while spending a year abroad at the University of Cambridge and then in Paris, Webster completed this dictionary, which featured 70,000 words, about 12,000 of which had never before appeared in a dictionary. A spellin reformer, Webster believed that English spelling rules were unnecessarily complex and used the dictionary to introduce American English spellings, replacing &quot;colour&quot; with &quot;color&quot;, &quot;waggon&quot; with &quot;wagon&quot;, and &quot;centre&quot; with &quot;center&quot;. He also added American words, including &quot;skunk&quot; and &quot;squash&quot;, that did not appear in British dictionaries. Three years later, at age of 70 in 1828, Webster published the dictionary. But the dictionary proved a commercial disappointment, selling only 2,500 copies and leaving him in debt. In 1840, however, he released a second edition, which was published in two volumes and proved a vastly greater commercial success.

In 1843, following Webster&#x27;s death, George Merriam and Charles Merriam secured publishing and revision rights to Webster&#x27;s 1840 dictionary. Four years later, in 1847, they published a revised version of it, which did not change any of the main text but added new section. In 1859, they published a second update with illustrations. In 1864, Merriam published a greatly expanded edition, which was the first version to change Webster&#x27;s text, largely overhauling his work yet retaining many of his definitions and the title, &quot;An American Dictionary&quot;. In 1884, the edition contained 118,000 words, &quot;3000 more than any other English dictionary&quot;.

In 1890, they published a dictionary, which they retitled &quot;Webster&#x27;s International&quot;. The vocabulary was vastly expanded in &quot;Webster&#x27;s New International&quot; editions published in 1909 and 1934, featuring over half a million words. Their 1934 edition was retrospectively called &quot;Webster&#x27;s Second International&quot;, or simply &quot;The Second Edition&quot; of the New International.

In 1898, &quot;Collegiate Dictionary&quot;, now in its eleventh edition, was introduced. In 1890, following publication of &quot;Webster&#x27;s International&quot;. two &quot;Collegiate&quot; editions were issued as abridgments of each of their &quot;Unabridged&quot; editions. 

===20th century===
Since the 1940s, the company has released several specialized dictionaries, language aides, and other references. In 1961, Merriam overhauled the dictionary again, publishing &quot;Webster&#x27;s Third New International&quot;, edited by Philip B. Gove, whose revisions sparked public controversy. Many of the changes were in formatting, omitting needless punctuation, or avoiding complete sentences when a phrase was sufficient. Others more controversial revisions signaled a shift from linguistic prescriptivism and towards describing American English as it was used at that time.

In 1964, the company became a subsidiary of Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc..

In 1983, in the ninth edition of the &quot;Collegiate&quot; titled &quot;Webster&#x27;s Ninth New Collegiate Dictionary&quot; (WNNCD), the &quot;Collegiate&quot; adopted changes which distinguish it as a separate entity rather than merely an abridgment of the &quot;Third New International&quot;, whose main text has remained virtually unrevised since 1961. Some proper names were returned to the word list, including names of Knights of the Round Table. The most notable change was the inclusion of the date of the first known citation of each word, to document its entry into English. 

In 1983, after losing the right to exclusive use of the name Webster, its name was changed to Merriam-Webster, Incorporated, which was first reflected with publication of &quot;Webster&#x27;s Ninth New Collegiate Dictionary&quot;. Previous publications used &quot;&#x27;A Merriam-Webster Dictionary&quot; as a subtitle.

===21st century===
In 2003, the eleventh edition of &quot;Collegiate&quot;, was published, including over 225,000 definitions and more than 165,000 entries. A CD-ROM of the text is sometimes included. This dictionary is the preferred source &quot;for general matters of spelling&quot; by &quot;The Chicago Manual of Style&quot;, which is followed by many U.S.-based book publishers and magazines. The &quot;Chicago Manual&quot; states that it &quot;normally opts for&quot; the first spelling listed.

The dictionary maintains an active social media presence, where it frequently posts dictionary-related content and its views on politics. Its Twitter account frequently used dictionary jargon to criticize and lampoon the Trump administration. In November 2021, for instance, Merriam Webster subtly accused Kyle Rittenhouse of fake crying at his trial in a tweet that went viral.

==Services==
In 1996, Merriam-Webster launched its first website, which provided free access to an online dictionary and thesaurus.

Merriam-Webster has also published dictionaries of synonyms, English usage, geography in its &quot;Merriam-Webster&#x27;s Geographical Dictionary&quot;, biography, proper names, medical terms, sports terms, slang, Spanish/English, and others. Non-dictionary publications include &quot;Collegiate Thesaurus&quot;, &quot;Secretarial Handbook&quot;, &quot;Manual for Writers and Editors&quot;, &quot;Collegiate Encyclopedia&quot;, &quot;Encyclopedia of Literature&quot;, and &quot;Encyclopedia of World Religions&quot;.

On February 16, 2007, Merriam-Webster announced the launch of a mobile dictionary and thesaurus service developed with Ask Me How, a mobile search and information provider. Consumers can use the service to access definitions, spelling, and synonyms via text message. Other services include Merriam-Webster&#x27;s Word of the Day and Open Dictionary, a wiki service, which provides subscribers the opportunity to create and submit their own new words and definitions.

==Pronunciation guides==

The Merriam-Webster company once used a unique set of phonetic symbols in their dictionaries—intended to help people from different parts of the United States learn how to pronounce words the same way as others who spoke with the same accent or dialect did. Unicode accommodated IPA symbols from Unicode version 1.1 published in 1993, but did not support the phonetic symbols specific to Merriam-Webster dictionaries until Unicode version 4.0 published in 2003. Hence, to enable computerized access to the pronunciation without having to rework all dictionaries to IPA notation, the online services of Merriam-Webster specify phonetics using a less-specific set of ASCII characters.

==Writing entries==
Merriam creates entries by finding uses of a particular word in print and recording them in a database of &quot;citations&quot;. Editors at Merriam spend about an hour a day looking at print sources, from books and newspapers to less formal publications, like advertisements and product packaging, to study the uses of individual words and choose things that should be preserved in the citation file. Merriam-Webster&#x27;s citation file contains more than 16 million entries documenting individual uses of words. Millions of these citations are recorded on 3-by-5 cards in their paper citation files. The earliest entries in the paper citation files date back to the late 19th century. Since 2009, all new entries are recorded in an electronic database.

==See also==
*Lists of Merriam-Webster&#x27;s Words of the Year
*Quordle, an online word game owned by the company launched in 2022
*Kory Stamper, lexicographer, editor, and social media personality at Merriam-Webster 
*&quot;Webster&#x27;s Dictionary&quot;
*&quot;Webster&#x27;s Third New International Dictionary&quot;
*&quot;Word War 5&quot;, a word game collection co-distributed by the company launched in 1995

==References==
==External links==
* G. &amp; C. Merriam Company Collection at the Amherst College Archives &amp; Special Collections</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q585329" start="0" end="29" title="Merriam-Webster" label="Merriam-Webster, Incorporated"/>
<link wikidata="Q6612531" start="36" end="52" title="list of companies of the United States by state" label="American company"/>
<link wikidata="Q13136" start="68" end="83" title="reference work" label="reference books"/>
<link wikidata="Q1858336" start="108" end="124" title="Webster&amp;#x27;s Dictionary" label="its dictionaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q5542413" start="196" end="202" title="George Merriam" label="George"/>
<link wikidata="Q585329" start="246" end="267" title="Merriam-Webster" label="G &amp;amp; C Merriam Co."/>
<link wikidata="Q49158" start="271" end="297" title="Springfield, Massachusetts" label="Springfield, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q241676" start="314" end="326" title="Noah Webster" label="Noah Webster"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="372" end="418" title="Webster&amp;#x27;s Dictionary#Noah Webster&amp;#x27;s American Dictionary of the English Language" label="An American Dictionary of the English Language"/>
<link wikidata="Q2743906" start="532" end="561" title="Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc." label="Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="1140" end="1153" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q35794" start="1290" end="1313" title="University of Cambridge" label="University of Cambridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1172021" start="1464" end="1480" title="spelling reform" label="spellin reformer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860" start="1504" end="1511" title="English language" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q7976" start="1591" end="1607" title="American English" label="American English"/>
<link wikidata="Q43604020" start="1809" end="1814" title="skunk" label="skunk"/>
<link wikidata="Q5339301" start="1831" end="1837" title="Squash (plant)" label="squash"/>
<link wikidata="Q5542413" start="2244" end="2258" title="George Merriam" label="George Merriam"/>
<link wikidata="Q33105447" start="3781" end="3819" title="Webster&amp;#x27;s Third New International Dictionary" label="Webster&amp;#x27;s Third New International"/>
<link wikidata="Q7183159" start="3837" end="3851" title="Philip Babcock Gove" label="Philip B. Gove"/>
<link wikidata="Q82622" start="3955" end="3966" title="punctuation" label="punctuation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321978" start="4087" end="4112" title="linguistic prescriptivism" label="linguistic prescriptivism"/>
<link wikidata="Q777864" start="4125" end="4135" title="Linguistic description" label="describing"/>
<link wikidata="Q2743906" start="4227" end="4256" title="Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc." label="Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q1644266" start="4686" end="4712" title="Knights of the Round Table" label="Knights of the Round Table"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860" start="4837" end="4844" title="English language" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q7982" start="5328" end="5334" title="CD-ROM" label="CD-ROM"/>
<link wikidata="Q8020" start="5463" end="5490" title="The Chicago Manual of Style" label="The Chicago Manual of Style"/>
<link wikidata="Q918" start="5812" end="5819" title="Twitter" label="Twitter"/>
<link wikidata="Q27809653" start="5891" end="5911" title="First presidency of Donald Trump" label="Trump administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q98663135" start="5976" end="5992" title="Kyle Rittenhouse" label="Kyle Rittenhouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q179797" start="6171" end="6180" title="thesaurus" label="thesaurus"/>
<link wikidata="Q42106" start="6234" end="6242" title="synonyms" label="synonyms"/>
<link wikidata="Q6820064" start="6244" end="6257" title="Merriam Webster&amp;#x27;s Dictionary of English Usage" label="English usage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071" start="6259" end="6268" title="geography" label="geography"/>
<link wikidata="Q6820050" start="6282" end="6328" title="Merriam-Webster&amp;#x27;s Geographical Dictionary" label="Merriam-Webster&amp;#x27;s Geographical Dictionary"/>
<link wikidata="Q36279" start="6336" end="6345" title="biography" label="biography"/>
<link wikidata="Q147276" start="6347" end="6359" title="proper names" label="proper names"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192539" start="6361" end="6374" title="medical terminology" label="medical terms"/>
<link wikidata="Q349" start="6376" end="6382" title="sports" label="sports"/>
<link wikidata="Q8102" start="6390" end="6395" title="slang" label="slang"/>
<link wikidata="Q179797" start="6787" end="6796" title="thesaurus" label="thesaurus"/>
<link wikidata="Q17166101" start="6954" end="6966" title="text message" label="text message"/>
<link wikidata="Q171" start="7053" end="7057" title="wiki" label="wiki"/>
<link wikidata="Q743569" start="7249" end="7264" title="Phonetic transcription" label="phonetic symbol"/>
<link wikidata="Q8819" start="7453" end="7460" title="Unicode" label="Unicode"/>
<link wikidata="Q846513" start="7474" end="7477" title="International Phonetic Association" label="IPA"/>
<link wikidata="Q8815" start="7860" end="7865" title="ASCII" label="ASCII"/>
<link wikidata="Q1553001" start="8457" end="8469" title="Index card" label="3-by-5 cards"/>
<link wikidata="Q6646770" start="8669" end="8718" title="Lists of Merriam-Webster&amp;#x27;s Words of the Year" label="Lists of Merriam-Webster&amp;#x27;s Words of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q124366378" start="8720" end="8727" title="Quordle" label="Quordle"/>
<link wikidata="Q6432808" start="8788" end="8800" title="Kory Stamper" label="Kory Stamper"/>
<link wikidata="Q1858336" start="8881" end="8906" title="Webster&amp;#x27;s Dictionary" label="Webster&amp;#x27;s Dictionary"/>
<link wikidata="Q33105447" start="8920" end="8969" title="Webster&amp;#x27;s Third New International Dictionary" label="Webster&amp;#x27;s Third New International Dictionary"/>
<link wikidata="Q55637905" start="8983" end="8993" title="Word War 5" label="Word War 5"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="253378" wikidata="Q7490010" url="?curid=253378" title="Sharon Butala">
<text>Sharon Butala (born Sharon Annette LeBlanc, 1940 in Nipawin, Saskatchewan) is a Canadian writer and novelist.

==Life==
Butala was born in an outpost hospital in Nipawin, Saskatchewan. She was the second of five daughters born to Amy Graham and Achille LeBlanc, who ran a sawmill near Garrick, Saskatchewan. In 1946 her family moved to the French-Canadian town of St. Louis, Saskatchewan, and moved again when she was thirteen years old to the city of Saskatoon, Saskatchewan. She attended the University of Saskatchewan obtaining both a Bachelor of Arts degree and a Bachelor of Education degree. Between her third and fourth year of university she married for the first time. This marriage lasted 14 years, and her son, Sean Hoy, was born during this time.

After graduating she taught English in Saskatchewan and British Columbia and also taught in a special program for the YMCA in Halifax, Nova Scotia. In 1969 she returned to Saskatoon and worked in special education at Princess Alexandra School. In 1972 she returned to the University of Saskatchewan to work on a post-graduate diploma in education and began teaching for the College of Education.

By 1975 she was divorced and working on her Master of Education degree with a budding academic career when she met Peter Butala. She abandoned her degree, and they were married on May 21, 1976, after which she moved to his ranch near Eastend, Saskatchewan. It was here that she began writing seriously, and this environment became the setting of much of her writing. Her first book, &quot;Country of the Heart&quot;, was published in 1984 and was shortlisted for the Books in Canada First Novel Award.

As head of the Eastend Arts Council she spearheaded the creation of the Wallace Stegner House Residence for Artists in which Wallace Stegner&#x27;s childhood home was turned into a retreat for writers and artists. She lived near Eastend until 14 months after Peter&#x27;s death in 2007. She now lives in Calgary, Alberta.

She was shortlisted for the Governor General&#x27;s award three times, once for fiction for &quot;Queen of the Headaches,&quot; and twice for nonfiction, for &quot;The Perfection of the Morning&quot; and &quot;Where I Live Now.&quot; The Fall 2012 issue of &quot;Prairie Fire&quot;, entitled &quot;The Visionary Art of Sharon Butala&quot; was dedicated to Butala and her work and influence. She and her husband, Peter Butala, were also involved in the creation of the Old Man on His Back Prairie and Heritage Conservation Area. The Butala homestead is now the interpretive centre for this area of original and restored mixed grass prairie.

==Awards==
* Marian Engel Award (1998)
* Officer of the Order of Canada (2001)
* Honorary Doctor of Laws, University of Regina (2000)
* Honorary Doctor of Letters, University of Saskatchewan (2004)
* Honorary Doctor of Letters, University of Alberta (2013)
* Saskatchewan Order of Merit (2009)
* Cheryl and Henry Kloppenburg Award for Literary Excellence. (2012)
* Five Conservation Awards

==Works==

===Fiction===
*&quot;A Tropical Holiday,&quot; Branch Lines, 1981; Southwest Saskatchewan Writers Project
*&quot;Fever&quot;, HarperCollins, 1990
*&quot;Upstream&quot;, Fifth House, 1991; HarperCollins, 1996
*&quot;Country of the Heart&quot;, Fifth House, 1984; HarperCollins, 1999
*&quot;The Fourth Archangel&quot;, HarperCollins, 1992
*&quot;Luna&quot;, HarperPerennial Canada, 1994
*&quot;Queen of the Headaches&quot;, Coteau Books, 1994 (nominated for a Governor General&#x27;s Award)
*&quot;The Gates of the Sun&quot;, HarperCollins, 2001
*&quot;The Garden of Eden&quot;, HarperFlamingo Canada- A Phyllis Bruce Book, 2002
*&quot;Real Life&quot;, HarperFlamingo Canada – A Phyllis Bruce Book, 2002
*&quot;Wild Rose&quot;, Coteau Books, 2015
*&quot;Zara&#x27;s Dead&quot;, Coteau Books, 2018
*&quot;Season of Fury and Wonder&quot;, 2019 (winner of the 2019 W.O. Mitchell City of Calgary Book Award)

===Non-fiction===
*&quot;Harvest, Fifth House&quot;, 1992
*&quot;The Perfection of the Morning: An Apprenticeship in Nature&quot;, HarperCollins, 1994 (nominated for a Governor General&#x27;s Award)
*&quot;Coyote&#x27;s Morning Cry: Meditations &amp; Dreams From a Life in Nature&quot;, HarperCollins, 1995
*&quot;Wild Stone Heart: An Apprenticeship in the Fields&quot;, HarperFlamingo Canada, 2000
*&quot;Old Man on His Back: Portrait of a Prairie Landscape&quot;, HarperCollins – A Phyllis Bruce Book, 2002 (with Courtney Milne)
*&quot;Lilac Moon&quot;, HarperPerennial – A Phyllis Bruce Book, 2005 (winner of the 2005 Saskatchewan Book Award for non-fiction)
*&quot;The Girl in Saskatoon: A Meditation on Friendship, Memory and Murder&quot;, HarperCollins – A Phyllis Bruce Book, 2008
*&quot;Where I Live Now: A Journey through Love and Loss to Healing and Hope&quot;, Simon &amp; Schuster, 2017 (nominated for a Governor General&#x27;s Award)
*&quot;This Strange Visible Air: Essays on Aging and the Writing Life&quot;, Freehand Books, 2021

==References==
==External links==
* Western American Literature Journal: Sharon Butala 
* 2008 Interview at books site Pickle Me This
* SharonButala.com</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7490010" start="0" end="13" title="Sharon Butala" label="Sharon Butala"/>
<link wikidata="Q1915543" start="52" end="73" title="Nipawin, Saskatchewan" label="Nipawin, Saskatchewan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196645" start="80" end="88" title="Canadians" label="Canadian"/>
<link wikidata="Q6625963" start="100" end="108" title="novelist" label="novelist"/>
<link wikidata="Q857880" start="340" end="355" title="French-Canadian" label="French-Canadian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2204776" start="364" end="387" title="St. Louis, Saskatchewan" label="St. Louis, Saskatchewan"/>
<link wikidata="Q10566" start="452" end="475" title="Saskatoon, Saskatchewan" label="Saskatoon, Saskatchewan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1514848" start="494" end="520" title="University of Saskatchewan" label="University of Saskatchewan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1973" start="816" end="832" title="British Columbia" label="British Columbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2141" start="886" end="906" title="Halifax, Nova Scotia" label="Halifax, Nova Scotia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="977" end="1002" title="Princess Alexandra School#Education" label="Princess Alexandra School"/>
<link wikidata="Q1521430" start="1391" end="1412" title="Eastend, Saskatchewan" label="Eastend, Saskatchewan"/>
<link wikidata="Q456040" start="1624" end="1657" title="Amazon.ca First Novel Award" label="Books in Canada First Novel Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q203460" start="1785" end="1800" title="Wallace Stegner" label="Wallace Stegner"/>
<link wikidata="Q36312" start="1964" end="1971" title="Calgary" label="Calgary"/>
<link wikidata="Q1951" start="1973" end="1980" title="Alberta" label="Alberta"/>
<link wikidata="Q7237867" start="2246" end="2258" title="Prairie Fire (magazine)" label="Prairie Fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q7084466" start="2451" end="2509" title="Old Man on His Back Prairie and Heritage Conservation Area" label="Old Man on His Back Prairie and Heritage Conservation Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q8038447" start="2637" end="2655" title="Marian Engel Award" label="Marian Engel Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q99700" start="2680" end="2695" title="Order of Canada" label="Order of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q1514848" start="2788" end="2814" title="University of Saskatchewan" label="University of Saskatchewan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1573331" start="2883" end="2910" title="Saskatchewan Order of Merit" label="Saskatchewan Order of Merit"/>
<link wikidata="Q3405753" start="3484" end="3513" title="1985 Governor General&amp;#x27;s Awards" label="Governor General&amp;#x27;s Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q3405766" start="4097" end="4126" title="1994 Governor General&amp;#x27;s Awards" label="Governor General&amp;#x27;s Award"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4550" end="4573" title="Saskatchewan Book Award" label="Saskatchewan Book Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q42530217" start="4845" end="4874" title="2017 Governor General&amp;#x27;s Awards" label="Governor General&amp;#x27;s Award"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="253383" wikidata="Q155451" url="?curid=253383" title="Sjambok">
<text>The sjambok (), or litupa, is a heavy leather whip. It is traditionally made from adult hippopotamus or rhinoceros hide, but it is also commonly made out of plastic.

A strip of the animal&#x27;s hide is cut and carved into a strip long, tapering from about thick at the handle to about at the tip. This strip is then rolled until reaching a tapered-cylindrical form. The resulting whip is both flexible and durable. A plastic version was made for the apartheid era South African Police, and used for riot control.

Peter Hathaway Capstick describes a sjambok as a short swordlike whip made from rhino pizzle leather that could lay a man open like a straight razor.

The sjambok was heavily used by the Voortrekkers driving their oxen while migrating from the Cape of Good Hope, and remains in use by herdsmen to drive cattle. They are widely available in South Africa from informal traders to regular stores from a variety of materials, lengths and thicknesses.
==Use by police==
===South Africa===
In South Africa, use of the sjambok by police is sometimes seen as synonymous with the apartheid era, but its use on people started much earlier. It is sometimes used outside the official judiciary by people who carry out punishments imposed by extralegal courts. South African police officers favoured the sjambok, with the South African Police stating that they inflicted less injury as compared to the wooden baton. Despite this, public perception of the sjambok was poor, both domestically and internationally. Allegations of police brutality concerning the sjambok were widespread, which eventually led to the sjambok being effectively banned for riot control in September 1989.

===United Kingdom===
In 1963, an enquiry into the police force of Sheffield in the United Kingdom found that rhino whips had been used on suspects.

==Other types==
The name seems to have originated as &quot;cambuk&quot; in Indonesia, where it was the name of a wooden rod for punishing slaves, where it was possibly derived from the Persian &quot;chabouk&quot; or &quot;chabuk&quot;. When Malay slaves arrived in South Africa in the 1800s, the instrument and its name were imported with them, the material was changed to hide, and the name was finally incorporated into Afrikaans, spelled as &quot;sambok&quot;. It is known in Bengali as &quot;chabuk&quot;.

The instrument is also known as &quot;imvubu&quot; (hippopotamus in Zulu), &quot;kiboko&quot; (hippopotamus in Swahili) and as &quot;mnigolo&quot; (hippopotamus in Malinké). In the Portuguese African colonies, the Congo Free State and the Belgian Congo, it was called a &quot;chicote&quot;, from the Portuguese word for whip, or &quot;fimbo&quot; and was used to force labour from local people through flogging, sometimes to death. The official tariff for punishment in this case was lowered in time from twenty strokes to eight, then (in 1949) six, and progressively four and two, until flogging was outlawed completely in 1955. In North Africa, particularly Egypt, the whip was called a kurbash, Arabic for whip. The term &quot;shaabuug&quot; is used in the Somali language; it can also refer to a generic leather whip.

==In popular culture==
In the film &quot;Would You Rather&quot;, players are given the option to stab a fellow contestant with an ice pick or whip another contestant with a sjambok.

In Willard Price&#x27;s &quot;Elephant Adventure&quot;, the cruel Arab slaver known as the Thunder Man enjoys flogging captives with a sjambok made from hippopotamus hide.

In the novel V. by Thomas Pynchon the Sjambok is a major feature in the narrative of the Herero Wars, where it serves as a symbol for the violence and sexual perversion of the German and European colonizers.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q155451" start="4" end="11" title="Sjambok" label="sjambok"/>
<link wikidata="Q155451" start="19" end="25" title="Sjambok" label="litupa"/>
<link wikidata="Q152910" start="46" end="50" title="Whip (implement)" label="whip"/>
<link wikidata="Q34505" start="88" end="100" title="hippopotamus" label="hippopotamus"/>
<link wikidata="Q34718" start="104" end="114" title="rhinoceros" label="rhinoceros"/>
<link wikidata="Q11409" start="452" end="461" title="apartheid" label="apartheid"/>
<link wikidata="Q2304339" start="466" end="486" title="South African Police" label="South African Police"/>
<link wikidata="Q160146" start="501" end="513" title="riot control" label="riot control"/>
<link wikidata="Q7174579" start="516" end="539" title="Peter Hathaway Capstick" label="Peter Hathaway Capstick"/>
<link wikidata="Q34718" start="596" end="601" title="rhino" label="rhino"/>
<link wikidata="Q925901" start="602" end="608" title="pizzle" label="pizzle"/>
<link wikidata="Q597040" start="650" end="664" title="straight razor" label="straight razor"/>
<link wikidata="Q338949" start="703" end="715" title="Voortrekkers" label="Voortrekkers"/>
<link wikidata="Q4092" start="760" end="777" title="Cape of Good Hope" label="Cape of Good Hope"/>
<link wikidata="Q11409" start="1087" end="1096" title="apartheid" label="apartheid"/>
<link wikidata="Q121650" start="1405" end="1417" title="Baton (law enforcement)" label="wooden baton"/>
<link wikidata="Q42448" start="1751" end="1760" title="Sheffield" label="Sheffield"/>
<link wikidata="Q252" start="1909" end="1918" title="Indonesia" label="Indonesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q8463" start="1972" end="1977" title="slavery" label="slave"/>
<link wikidata="Q142702" start="2075" end="2080" title="Malays (ethnic group)" label="Malay"/>
<link wikidata="Q14196" start="2256" end="2265" title="Afrikaans" label="Afrikaans"/>
<link wikidata="Q9610" start="2313" end="2320" title="Bengali language" label="Bengali"/>
<link wikidata="Q34505" start="2397" end="2409" title="hippopotamus" label="hippopotamus"/>
<link wikidata="Q10179" start="2413" end="2417" title="Zulu language" label="Zulu"/>
<link wikidata="Q34505" start="2440" end="2452" title="hippopotamus" label="hippopotamus"/>
<link wikidata="Q7838" start="2456" end="2463" title="Swahili language" label="Swahili"/>
<link wikidata="Q34505" start="2493" end="2505" title="hippopotamus" label="hippopotamus"/>
<link wikidata="Q819186" start="2509" end="2516" title="Mandinka people" label="Malinké"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2526" end="2553" title="Portuguese colonies#Portuguese Africa and the overseas provinces" label="Portuguese African colonies"/>
<link wikidata="Q76048" start="2559" end="2575" title="Congo Free State" label="Congo Free State"/>
<link wikidata="Q213510" start="2584" end="2597" title="Belgian Congo" label="Belgian Congo"/>
<link wikidata="Q5146" start="2645" end="2655" title="Portuguese language" label="Portuguese"/>
<link wikidata="Q27381" start="2978" end="2990" title="North Africa" label="North Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q11743602" start="3034" end="3041" title="kurbash" label="kurbash"/>
<link wikidata="Q13955" start="3043" end="3049" title="Arabic language" label="Arabic"/>
<link wikidata="Q13275" start="3105" end="3120" title="Somali language" label="Somali language"/>
<link wikidata="Q2913392" start="3209" end="3225" title="Would You Rather (film)" label="Would You Rather"/>
<link wikidata="Q8003474" start="3354" end="3367" title="Willard Price" label="Willard Price"/>
<link wikidata="Q5359299" start="3381" end="3399" title="Elephant Adventure" label="Elephant Adventure"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191071" start="3537" end="3539" title="V." label="V."/>
<link wikidata="Q35155" start="3543" end="3557" title="Thomas Pynchon" label="Thomas Pynchon"/>
<link wikidata="Q16512674" start="3613" end="3624" title="Herero Wars" label="Herero Wars"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="253385" wikidata="Q3017619" url="?curid=253385" title="David Carpenter (disambiguation)">
<text>David Carpenter (born 1930) is an American serial killer.

David Carpenter may also refer to:
*David Carpenter, early Texas settler and namesake of Carpenters Bayou 
*David Carpenter, better known as Dave Carpender, guitarist
*David Aaron Carpenter (born 1986), violist
*David Carpenter (cricketer) (1935–2022), English cricketer
*David Carpenter (historian) (born 1947), British historian
*David Carpenter (writer) (born 1941), Canadian novelist
*J. D. &quot;David&quot; Carpenter (born 1948), Canadian poet and novelist
*Dave Carpenter (1959–2008), bassist
*David G. Carpenter, U.S. Assistant Secretary of State
*David Carpenter (baseball, born 1985), baseball player 
*David Carpenter (baseball, born 1987), baseball player
*David O. Carpenter, professor of environmental health sciences</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1173934" start="0" end="15" title="David Carpenter" label="David Carpenter"/>
<link wikidata="Q5045748" start="148" end="164" title="Carpenters Bayou" label="Carpenters Bayou"/>
<link wikidata="Q5228490" start="200" end="214" title="Dave Carpender" label="Dave Carpender"/>
<link wikidata="Q5230559" start="227" end="248" title="David Aaron Carpenter" label="David Aaron Carpenter"/>
<link wikidata="Q17305756" start="271" end="298" title="David Carpenter (cricketer)" label="David Carpenter (cricketer)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5232178" start="331" end="358" title="David Carpenter (historian)" label="David Carpenter (historian)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3017627" start="391" end="415" title="David Carpenter (writer)" label="David Carpenter (writer)"/>
<link wikidata="Q15429505" start="448" end="481" title="J. D. Carpenter" label="J. D. &amp;quot;David&amp;quot; Carpenter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1173147" start="523" end="537" title="Dave Carpenter" label="Dave Carpenter"/>
<link wikidata="Q5233920" start="560" end="578" title="David G. Carpenter" label="David G. Carpenter"/>
<link wikidata="Q3017622" start="615" end="652" title="David Carpenter (baseball, born 1985)" label="David Carpenter (baseball, born 1985)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3017624" start="672" end="709" title="David Carpenter (baseball, born 1987)" label="David Carpenter (baseball, born 1987)"/>
<link wikidata="Q18763922" start="728" end="746" title="David O. Carpenter" label="David O. Carpenter"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="253389" wikidata="Q162109" url="?curid=253389" title="Sim (game)">
<text>Sim is a two-player paper-and-pencil game.

==Gameplay==
Six dots (vertices) are drawn. Each dot is connected to every other dot by a line (edge).

Two players take turns coloring any uncolored lines. One player colors in one color, and the other colors in another color, with each player trying to avoid the creation of a triangle made solely of their color (only triangles with the dots as all corners count; intersections of lines are not relevant); the player who completes such a triangle loses immediately.

==Analysis==
Ramsey theory can also be used to show that no game of Sim can end in a tie. Specifically, since the &quot;Ramsey number&quot; &quot;R&quot;(3, 3) is equal to 6, any two-coloring of the complete graph on 6 vertices (&quot;K&quot;6) must contain a monochromatic triangle, and therefore is not a tied position. This will also apply to any super-graph of &quot;K&quot;6. For another proof that there must eventually be a triangle of either color, see the Theorem on friends and strangers.

Computer search techniques verified in 1974 that the second player can win Sim with perfect play. A strategy that could be easily implemented by human players was found in 2020.

The game of Sim is one example of a Ramsey game. Other Ramsey games are possible. For instance, the players can be allowed to color more than one line during their turns. Another Ramsey game similar to Sim and related to the Ramsey number &quot;R&quot;(4, 4) = 18 is played on 18 vertices and the 153 edges between them. The two players must avoid to color all six edges connecting four vertices.

Because the Ramsey number &quot;R&quot;(3, 3, 3) is equal to 17, any three-coloring of the complete graph on 17 vertices must contain a monochromatic triangle. A corresponding Ramsey game uses pencils of three colors. One approach can have three players compete, while another would allow two players to alternately select any of the three colors to paint an edge of the graph, until a player loses by completing a monochromatic triangle. Finding perfect winning strategies for these variants is most likely out of reach.

A technical report by Wolfgang Slany is available online, with many references to literature on Sim, going back to the game&#x27;s introduction by Gustavus Simmons in 1969, including proofs and estimates of the difficulty as well as computational complexity of Sim and other Ramsey games.

==Software==

An app including its source code in the visual multi-platform Catrobat programming language is available for playing it against one&#x27;s smartphone.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q162109" start="0" end="3" title="Sim (game)" label="Sim"/>
<link wikidata="Q2347716" start="20" end="41" title="paper-and-pencil game" label="paper-and-pencil game"/>
<link wikidata="Q1304193" start="67" end="75" title="Vertex_(graph_theory)" label="vertices"/>
<link wikidata="Q166507" start="140" end="144" title="Edge_(graph_theory)" label="edge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1336170" start="527" end="540" title="Ramsey theory" label="Ramsey theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q918099" start="634" end="647" title="Ramsey number" label="Ramsey number"/>
<link wikidata="Q45715" start="713" end="727" title="complete graph" label="complete graph"/>
<link wikidata="Q837506" start="979" end="1011" title="Theorem on friends and strangers" label="Theorem on friends and strangers"/>
<link wikidata="Q10770146" start="1727" end="1740" title="monochromatic" label="monochromatic"/>
<link wikidata="Q381312" start="2261" end="2277" title="Gustavus Simmons" label="Gustavus Simmons"/>
<link wikidata="Q205084" start="2347" end="2371" title="Computational complexity theory" label="computational complexity"/>
<link wikidata="Q45341807" start="2480" end="2488" title="Catrobat" label="Catrobat"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="253392" wikidata="Q8026938" url="?curid=253392" title="Wiretap (disambiguation)">
<text>Wiretap, or telephone tap, is the monitoring of telephone and Internet conversations by a third party.

Wiretap may also refer to:

* &quot;Wiretap&quot; (film), a proposed remake of the film &quot;Overhead&quot;
* &quot;WireTap&quot; (magazine)
* &quot;WireTap&quot; (radio program), a weekly radio program aired by the Canadian Broadcasting Corporation
* &quot;The Wiretap EP&quot;, a 2002 album by Your Enemies Friends

==See also==
* &quot;Wiretapper&quot;, a 1955 crime drama</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q8026938" start="0" end="7" title="Wiretap (disambiguation)" label="Wiretap"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067529" start="12" end="25" title="Telephone tapping" label="telephone tap"/>
<link wikidata="Q8026938" start="104" end="111" title="Wiretap (disambiguation)" label="Wiretap"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055695" start="134" end="160" title="Wiretap (film)" label="&amp;quot;Wiretap&amp;quot; (film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2927330" start="215" end="245" title="WireTap (magazine)" label="&amp;quot;WireTap&amp;quot; (magazine)"/>
<link wikidata="Q8026741" start="248" end="283" title="WireTap (radio program)" label="&amp;quot;WireTap&amp;quot; (radio program)"/>
<link wikidata="Q8058781" start="363" end="377" title="The Wiretap EP" label="The Wiretap EP"/>
<link wikidata="Q17038867" start="444" end="454" title="Wiretapper" label="Wiretapper"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="253397" wikidata="Q2139722" url="?curid=253397" title="Carbonation">
<text>Carbonation is the chemical reaction of carbon dioxide to give carbonates, bicarbonates, and carbonic acid. In chemistry, the term is sometimes used in place of carboxylation, which refers to the formation of carboxylic acids.

In inorganic chemistry and geology, carbonation is common. Metal hydroxides (MOH) and metal oxides (M&#x27;O) react with CO2 to give bicarbonates and carbonates:
:MOH + CO2 → M(HCO3)
:M&#x27;O + CO2 → M&#x27;CO3

==Selected carbonations==
===Carbonic anhydrase===
In mammalian physiology, transport of carbon dioxide to the lungs involves a carbonation reaction catalyzed by the enzyme carbonic anhydrase. In the absence of such catalysts, carbon dioxide cannot be expelled sufficient rate to support metabolic needs. The enzyme harbors a zinc aquo complex, which captures carbon dioxide to give a zinc bicarbonate:

===Behavior of concrete===
In reinforced concrete, the chemical reaction between carbon dioxide 
In the air and calcium hydroxide and hydrated calcium silicate in the concrete is known as neutralisation. The similar reaction in which calcium hydroxide from cement reacts with carbon dioxide and forms insoluble calcium carbonate is carbonatation.

===Urea production===
Carbonation of ammonia is one step in the industrial production of urea:In 2020, worldwide production capacity was approximately 180 million tonnes. As a fertilizer, it is a source of nitrogen for plants.
Urea production plants are almost always located adjacent to the site where the ammonia is manufactured.
In the subsequent urea conversion: the ammonium carbamate is decomposed into urea, releasing water:

===Solubility===
Henry&#x27;s law states that P=KBx where P is the partial pressure of gas above the solution. KB is Henry&#x27;s law constant. KB increases as temperature increases. x is the mole fraction of gas in the solution. According to Henry&#x27;s law carbonation increases in a solution as temperature decreases.

Since carbonation is the process of giving compounds like carbonic acid (liq) from CO2 (gas) {i.e. making liquid from gasses} thus the partial pressure of CO2 has to decrease or the mole fraction of CO2 in solution has to increase {P/x = KB} and both these two conditions support increase in carbonation.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2139722" start="0" end="11" title="Carbonation" label="Carbonation"/>
<link wikidata="Q36534" start="19" end="36" title="chemical reaction" label="chemical reaction"/>
<link wikidata="Q1997" start="40" end="54" title="carbon dioxide" label="carbon dioxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q181699" start="63" end="72" title="carbonate" label="carbonate"/>
<link wikidata="Q409202" start="75" end="86" title="bicarbonate" label="bicarbonate"/>
<link wikidata="Q104334" start="93" end="106" title="carbonic acid" label="carbonic acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q2329" start="111" end="120" title="chemistry" label="chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q901081" start="161" end="174" title="carboxylation" label="carboxylation"/>
<link wikidata="Q134856" start="209" end="224" title="carboxylic acid" label="carboxylic acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q11165" start="231" end="250" title="inorganic chemistry" label="inorganic chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069" start="255" end="262" title="geology" label="geology"/>
<link wikidata="Q977420" start="287" end="302" title="Metal hydroxide" label="Metal hydroxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q50690" start="314" end="325" title="metal oxide" label="metal oxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q409202" start="361" end="372" title="bicarbonate" label="bicarbonate"/>
<link wikidata="Q181699" start="378" end="387" title="carbonate" label="carbonate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1997" start="530" end="544" title="carbon dioxide" label="carbon dioxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q8047" start="607" end="613" title="enzyme" label="enzyme"/>
<link wikidata="Q284089" start="614" end="632" title="carbonic anhydrase" label="carbonic anhydrase"/>
<link wikidata="Q623024" start="772" end="784" title="aquo complex" label="aquo complex"/>
<link wikidata="Q184190" start="875" end="894" title="reinforced concrete" label="reinforced concrete"/>
<link wikidata="Q1997" start="926" end="940" title="carbon dioxide" label="carbon dioxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q182849" start="957" end="974" title="calcium hydroxide" label="calcium hydroxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q416365" start="988" end="1004" title="calcium silicate" label="calcium silicate"/>
<link wikidata="Q337120" start="1033" end="1047" title="Neutralization (chemistry)" label="neutralisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q902902" start="1177" end="1190" title="carbonatation" label="carbonatation"/>
<link wikidata="Q48318" start="1282" end="1286" title="urea" label="urea"/>
<link wikidata="Q285804" start="1643" end="1659" title="Henry&amp;#x27;s law" label="Henry&amp;#x27;s law"/>
<link wikidata="Q125264" start="1818" end="1831" title="mole fraction" label="mole fraction"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="253407" wikidata="Q4358176" url="?curid=253407" title="Council">
<text>A council is a group of people who come together to consult, deliberate, or make decisions. A council may function as a legislature, especially at a town, city or county/shire level, but most legislative bodies at the state/provincial or national level are not considered councils. At such levels, there may be no separate executive branch, and the council may effectively represent the entire government. A board of directors might also be denoted as a council.

A committee might also be denoted as a council, though a committee is generally a subordinate body composed of members of a larger body, while a council may not be. Because many schools have a student council, the council is the form of governance with which many people are likely to have their first experience as electors or participants.

A member of a council may be referred to as a councillor or councilperson, or by the gender-specific titles of councilman and councilwoman.

==In politics==
Notable examples of types of councils encountered in politics include:

* Borough council, a form of local government
* Catholic Ecumenical Councils, ecclesiastical gatherings for ordering the Catholic Church.
* City council, a form of local government.
* Community council, the most local official representative body in Scotland and in Wales.
* Council of Europe, a political, intergovernmental organization with 47 member countries.
* Council of the European Union, the upper house of the European Union.
* Council of State, an organ of government in many states.
* County council, a council that governs a county in the British Isles.
* District council, a unit of government in various jurisdictions.
* Ecumenical Councils, pan-Christian discussion bodies.
* European Council, the body of heads of states or of governments of the European Union.
* Labour council, an association of labour unions or union branches in a given area.
* Municipal council, a form of local government.
* National security council, an executive-branch governmental body responsible for coordinating policy on national security issues.
* Parish councils in England, a form of local government in part of the United Kingdom.
* Privy council, a body that advises the head of state of a country.
* Provincial council, a governing body for a province.
* Regional council, a local-government body in various countries.
* Shire council, an entity of local government in Australia.
* Shura Council, the formerly upper house of the Egyptian parliament.
* Town council, a democratically elected form of government for small municipalities or parishes
* Tribal Council, First Nations&#x27; and Native American Nations&#x27; governing bodies
* UK Research Councils, government agencies responsible for an area of research in the United Kingdom
* United Nations Security Council, a decision-making body at the United Nations
* Vatican Council, a high-level policy-council of the Roman Catholic Church
* Village council (Palestinian Authority), a local-government body in Palestine
* Workers&#x27; council, a council composed of working-class or proletarian members.

==In other fields==
Types of councils encountered in other spheres include:
* Arts council: a government or private, non-profit organization dedicated to promoting the arts.
* Bar council: a professional body that regulates the profession of barristers together with the Inns of Court.
* Buddhist councils: important historical events in the history of Buddhism.
* Council (Boy Scouts): a non-profit private corporation within Boy Scouts of America.
* Ecumenical council: a meeting of the bishops of the whole church convened to discuss and settle matters of Church doctrine and practice.
* Military council:
* Science research council
* Student council: a student organization present in many elementary schools, middle schools, high schools, colleges and universities.
* Synod: in a Christian church.
* University Council: running a university.
* War Council: discussions pertaining to a declaration of war, or tactics and strategy of a coming battle.
* Works council: a body representing the workers of a plant, factory, etc., elected to negotiate with the management about working conditions, wages, etc.
* Youth council: an example of youth voice engaged in youth-led decision-making.

== References ==
== See also ==
* Consul
* Legislative Council
* Pontifical Council
* Local government in Australia
* United Nations Security Council
*Directorial system: a form is government where a group of people act as the head of State and/or Government.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q4358176" start="2" end="9" title="Council" label="council"/>
<link wikidata="Q11204" start="120" end="131" title="legislature" label="legislature"/>
<link wikidata="Q3957" start="149" end="153" title="town" label="town"/>
<link wikidata="Q515" start="155" end="159" title="city" label="city"/>
<link wikidata="Q28575" start="163" end="169" title="county" label="county"/>
<link wikidata="Q662296" start="170" end="175" title="shire" label="shire"/>
<link wikidata="Q35798" start="323" end="339" title="executive branch" label="executive branch"/>
<link wikidata="Q7188" start="394" end="404" title="government" label="government"/>
<link wikidata="Q188628" start="408" end="426" title="board of directors" label="board of directors"/>
<link wikidata="Q865588" start="466" end="475" title="committee" label="committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q2259825" start="657" end="672" title="student council" label="student council"/>
<link wikidata="Q4358176" start="853" end="863" title="Council" label="councillor"/>
<link wikidata="Q4358176" start="867" end="880" title="Council" label="councilperson"/>
<link wikidata="Q4358176" start="918" end="928" title="Council" label="councilman"/>
<link wikidata="Q4358176" start="933" end="945" title="Council" label="councilwoman"/>
<link wikidata="Q5195043" start="1038" end="1045" title="Borough" label="Borough"/>
<link wikidata="Q5053154" start="1084" end="1112" title="Catholic Ecumenical Councils" label="Catholic Ecumenical Councils"/>
<link wikidata="Q701632" start="1176" end="1188" title="City council" label="City council"/>
<link wikidata="Q3403338" start="1220" end="1237" title="Community council" label="Community council"/>
<link wikidata="Q8908" start="1311" end="1328" title="Council of Europe" label="Council of Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q8896" start="1402" end="1431" title="Council of the European Union" label="Council of the European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q3687335" start="1474" end="1490" title="Council of State" label="Council of State"/>
<link wikidata="Q4321471" start="1533" end="1547" title="County council" label="County council"/>
<link wikidata="Q1306241" start="1605" end="1621" title="District council (disambiguation)" label="District council"/>
<link wikidata="Q51645" start="1672" end="1691" title="Ecumenical Councils" label="Ecumenical Councils"/>
<link wikidata="Q8886" start="1728" end="1744" title="European Council" label="European Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q39086937" start="1817" end="1831" title="Labour council" label="Labour council"/>
<link wikidata="Q701632" start="1902" end="1919" title="Municipal council" label="Municipal council"/>
<link wikidata="Q6452225" start="1951" end="1976" title="National security council" label="National security council"/>
<link wikidata="Q7137435" start="2083" end="2109" title="Parish councils in England" label="Parish councils in England"/>
<link wikidata="Q6528244" start="2171" end="2184" title="Privy council" label="Privy council"/>
<link wikidata="Q2114076" start="2240" end="2258" title="Provincial council (disambiguation)" label="Provincial council"/>
<link wikidata="Q395536" start="2295" end="2311" title="Regional Council (disambiguation)" label="Regional council"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2361" end="2374" title="Shire council" label="Shire council"/>
<link wikidata="Q124819854" start="2422" end="2435" title="Shura Council" label="Shura Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q637846" start="2450" end="2461" title="upper house" label="upper house"/>
<link wikidata="Q3507268" start="2492" end="2504" title="Town council" label="Town council"/>
<link wikidata="Q7840289" start="2589" end="2603" title="Tribal Council" label="Tribal Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q7315077" start="2678" end="2698" title="UK Research Councils" label="UK Research Councils"/>
<link wikidata="Q37470" start="2780" end="2811" title="United Nations Security Council" label="United Nations Security Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141393" start="2860" end="2875" title="Vatican Council (disambiguation)" label="Vatican Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q7930708" start="2936" end="2975" title="Village council (Palestinian Authority)" label="Village council (Palestinian Authority)"/>
<link wikidata="Q627093" start="3016" end="3037" title="Workers&amp;#x27; council" label="Workers&amp;#x27; council"/>
<link wikidata="Q4801520" start="3178" end="3190" title="Arts council" label="Arts council"/>
<link wikidata="Q4857984" start="3276" end="3287" title="Bar council" label="Bar council"/>
<link wikidata="Q752404" start="3388" end="3405" title="Buddhist councils" label="Buddhist councils"/>
<link wikidata="Q6664316" start="3465" end="3485" title="Council (Boy Scouts)" label="Council (Boy Scouts)"/>
<link wikidata="Q608132" start="3527" end="3548" title="Boy Scouts of America" label="Boy Scouts of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q51645" start="3552" end="3570" title="Ecumenical council" label="Ecumenical council"/>
<link wikidata="Q26261742" start="3691" end="3707" title="Military council" label="Military council"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3711" end="3735" title="Science research council" label="Science research council"/>
<link wikidata="Q2259825" start="3738" end="3753" title="Student council" label="Student council"/>
<link wikidata="Q111161" start="3873" end="3878" title="Synod" label="Synod"/>
<link wikidata="Q7894668" start="3905" end="3923" title="University Council" label="University Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q2574878" start="3949" end="3960" title="Council of war" label="War Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q671974" start="4056" end="4069" title="Works council" label="Works council"/>
<link wikidata="Q1741735" start="4211" end="4224" title="Youth council" label="Youth council"/>
<link wikidata="Q4489757" start="4325" end="4331" title="Consul" label="Consul"/>
<link wikidata="Q2994119" start="4334" end="4353" title="Legislative Council" label="Legislative Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q2518047" start="4356" end="4374" title="Pontifical Council" label="Pontifical Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q18481123" start="4377" end="4406" title="Local government in Australia" label="Local government in Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q37470" start="4409" end="4440" title="United Nations Security Council" label="United Nations Security Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q2523556" start="4442" end="4460" title="Directorial system" label="Directorial system"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="253408" wikidata="Q1061718" url="?curid=253408" title="Chandler Motor Car">
<text>The Chandler Motor Car Company produced automobiles in the United States of America during the 1910s and 1920s.

==Corporate strategy==
Chandler was incorporated in 1913, with Frederick C. Chandler as President, headquartered and with its factory in Cleveland, Ohio. Chandler was a former designer for the Lozier Motor Company, a top end luxury automobile manufacturer. Chandler and several other Lozier executives left the company to form his company.

Chandler concentrated on producing a good quality motor-car within the price range of middle class Americans. Chandlers were well received in the marketplace.

==Production==
In 1920, Chandler had a line of six cars, ranging from $1995 to $3595. This grew to 10 by 1922, ranging from $1495 to $2375. Like many other medium-price carmakers, in the middle 1920s Chandler introduced a lower-priced &quot;companion car&quot; called the Cleveland. In 1924, they introduced the &quot;Traffic Transmission,&quot; a constant-mesh gearbox that reduced the need for extra clutching when downshifting. This was several years before General Motors offered the &quot;Synchro-Mesh&quot; transmission, which allowed the driver to shift into first gear while moving forward at low speeds.

Chandler&#x27;s peak year was 1927, when they sold 20,000 cars. Hopes for continued growth of the market led to overexpansion by the company the following year, which finished 1928 over half a million dollars in debt.

In 1929, Chandler Motor Company was purchased by its expanding competitor Hupp Motor Car Company for its factory and manufacturing facilities, and the brand was discontinued.

Chandler, like most cars built before all-steel bodies became the industry standard in the mid-1930s, used bodies built with a metal skin around a wooden frame (an &quot;armored wood&quot; frame). Due to the use of fabric roofs, after a few decades the wood tended to rot; because of this Chandlers have survived in smaller numbers than some other popular automobiles of the era that used all-steel bodies.


==Production models==
* Chandler Light Weight Model 19 Touring 1919
* Chandler Metropolitan Sedan, 1922

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1061718" start="4" end="30" title="Chandler Motor Car" label="Chandler Motor Car Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q1420" start="40" end="50" title="automobile" label="automobile"/>
<link wikidata="Q37320" start="250" end="259" title="Cleveland" label="Cleveland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365013" start="306" end="312" title="Lozier" label="Lozier"/>
<link wikidata="Q1208529" start="962" end="983" title="constant-mesh gearbox" label="constant-mesh gearbox"/>
<link wikidata="Q4917" start="1429" end="1436" title="United States dollar" label="dollars"/>
<link wikidata="Q1638351" start="1521" end="1543" title="Hupp Motor Car Company" label="Hupp Motor Car Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q339062" start="1891" end="1894" title="Decomposition" label="rot"/>
<link wikidata="Q5071176" start="2102" end="2129" title="Chandler Metropolitan Sedan" label="Chandler Metropolitan Sedan"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="253409" wikidata="Q38496" url="?curid=253409" title="Boxer (dog breed)">
<text>The Boxer is a medium to large, short-haired dog breed of mastiff-type, developed in Germany. The coat is smooth and tight-fitting; colors are fawn or brindled, with or without white markings. Boxers are brachycephalic (they have broad, short skulls), have a square muzzle, mandibular prognathism (an underbite), very strong jaws, and a powerful bite ideal for hanging on to large prey. The Boxer was bred from the Old English Bulldog and the now extinct Bullenbeisser, which became extinct by crossbreeding rather than by a decadence of the breed. The Boxer is a member of both The Kennel Club and American Kennel Club (AKC) Working Group.

The first Boxer club was founded in 1895, with Boxers being first exhibited in a dog show for St. Bernards in Munich the next year. Based on 2013 AKC statistics, Boxers held steady as the seventh-most popular breed of dog in the United States for the fourth consecutive year. According to the AKC&#x27;s website, though, the boxer is now the 11th-most popular dog breed in the United States.

==Appearance==

The head is the most distinctive feature of the Boxer. The breed standard dictates that it must be in perfect proportion to the body and above all it must never be too light. The greatest value is to be placed on the muzzle being of correct form and in absolute proportion to the skull. The length of the muzzle to the whole of the head should be a ratio of 1:3. Folds are always present from the root of the nose running downwards on both sides of the muzzle, and the tip of the nose should lie somewhat higher than the root of the muzzle. In addition, a Boxer should be slightly prognathous, i.e., the lower jaw should protrude beyond the upper jaw and bend slightly upwards in what is commonly called an underbite or &quot;undershot bite&quot;.

Boxers were originally a docked and cropped breed, and this is still done in some countries, but due to pressure from veterinary associations, animal rights groups, and the general public, both cropping of the ears and docking of the tail have been prohibited in some countries around the world, and is not recognised by the breed standard laid down by The Kennel Club of the UK. The American Kennel club still permits cropped ears. A line of naturally short-tailed (bobtail) Boxers was developed in the United Kingdom in anticipation of a tail-docking ban there; after several generations of controlled breeding, these dogs were accepted in the Kennel Club (UK) registry in 1998, and today representatives of the bobtail line can be found in many countries. In 2008, the Fédération Cynologique Internationale (FCI) added a &quot;naturally stumpy tail&quot; as a disqualifying fault in their breed standard, meaning those Boxers born with a bobtail can no longer be shown in FCI member countries. In the United States and Canada as of 2012, cropped ears are still more common in show dogs, though the practice of cosmetic cropping is currently opposed by the American Veterinary Medical Association. In March 2005, the AKC breed standard was changed to include a description of the uncropped ear, but to severely penalize an undocked tail. The tail of a boxer is typically docked before the cartilage is fully formed, from 3–5 days old. The procedure does not require any sutures when performed at this young age, and anesthesia is not used. The docking of the tail is not permitted under the breed standard of The Kennel Club UK.

===Coat and colors===
The Boxer is a short-haired breed, with a smooth coat that lies tight to the body. The recognized colors are fawn and brindle, frequently with a white underbelly and white on the feet. These white markings, called &quot;flash&quot;, often extend onto the neck or face, and dogs that have these markings are known as &quot;flashy&quot;. &quot;Fawn&quot; denotes a range of colors, the tones of which may be described variously as light tan or yellow, reddish tan, mahogany, or stag/deer red, and dark honey-blonde. In the UK and Europe, fawn Boxers are typically rich in color and are often called &quot;red&quot;. &quot;Brindle&quot; refers to a dog with black stripes on a fawn background. Some brindle Boxers are so heavily striped that they give the appearance of &quot;reverse brindling&quot;, fawn stripes on a black body; these dogs are conventionally called &quot;reverse brindles&quot;, but that is actually a misnomer—they are still fawn dogs with black stripes. In addition, the breed standards state that the fawn background must clearly contrast with or show through the brindling.

The Boxer does not carry the gene for a solid black coat color, so purebred black Boxers do not exist. Boxers that appear black are actually heavily brindled, where the fawn color is completely sealed out by the black striping. These are often referred to as &quot;sealed&quot; Boxers, and are not an AKC recognized coloring.
===White Boxers===
Boxers with white markings covering more than one-third of their coat – conventionally called &quot;white&quot; Boxers – are neither albino nor rare; about 20–25% of all Boxers born are white. Genetically, these dogs are either fawn or brindle, with excessive white markings overlying the base coat color. Like fair-skinned humans, white Boxers have a higher risk of sunburn and associated skin cancers than darker Boxers. The extreme piebald gene, which is responsible for white markings in Boxers, is linked to congenital sensorineural deafness in dogs. An estimated 18% of white Boxers are deaf in one or both ears, though Boxer rescue organizations see about double that number.

In the past, breeders often euthanized white puppies at birth. A 1998 study of Boxers in the Netherlands showed that 17% of Boxer pups were euthanized because they were white. Previously, the American Boxer Club &quot;unofficially recommended euthanasia for these animals.&quot; Reasons for euthanizing white pups include the view that selling a dog with &quot;faults&quot; is unethical, which is in stark contrast to the AKC preference for docked tails. Additionally there is the perception that white Boxers are at higher risk of ending up abandoned in rescues. Today, breeders are increasingly reluctant to euthanize healthy pups, and may choose to neuter and place them in pet homes, instead.

==Temperament==
 

Boxers are a bright, energetic, and playful breed and tend to be very good with children. They are patient and spirited with children, but also protective, making them a popular choice for families. They are active, strong dogs that require adequate exercise to prevent boredom-associated behaviors such as chewing, digging, or licking. Boxers have earned a slight reputation of being &quot;headstrong&quot;, which can be related to inappropriate obedience training. Owing to their intelligence and working-breed characteristics, training based on corrections often has limited usefulness. Boxers, like other animals, typically respond better to positive reinforcement techniques such as clicker training, an approach based on operant conditioning and behaviorism, which offers the dog an opportunity to think independently and to problem-solve. Stanley Coren&#x27;s survey of obedience trainers, summarized in his book &quot;The Intelligence of Dogs&quot;, ranked Boxers at number average working/obedience intelligence. Many who have worked with Boxers disagree quite strongly with Coren&#x27;s survey results, and maintain that a skilled trainer who uses reward-based methods will find Boxers have far above-average intelligence and working ability.

The Boxer by nature is not an aggressive or vicious breed. It is an instinctive guardian and can become very attached to its family. Like all dogs, it requires proper socialization. Boxers are generally patient with smaller dogs and puppies, but difficulties with larger adult dogs, especially those of the same sex, may occur. Boxers are generally more comfortable with companionship, in either human or canine form. They are very patient and are great to adopt as family dogs because they are good with children and people of all kinds. 
==History==

The Boxer is a hunting mastiff developed in Germany in the late 19th century from the now extinct Bullenbeisser, a dog of English Mastiff descent, and Bulldogs brought in from Great Britain. The Bullenbeisser had been working as a hunting dog for centuries, employed in the pursuit of bear, wild boar, and deer. Its task was to seize the prey and hold it until the hunters arrived. In later years, faster dogs were favored and a smaller Bullenbeisser was bred in Brabant, in northern Belgium. The Brabanter Bullenbeisser is generally accepted as being a direct ancestor of today&#x27;s Boxer.

In 1894, three Germans, Friedrich Robert, Elard König, and R. Höpner, decided to stabilize the breed and put it on exhibition at a dog show. This was done in Munich in 1896, and the year before they founded the first Boxer Club, the Deutscher Boxer Club. The club went on to publish the first Boxer breed standard in 1904, a detailed document that has not been changed much since.

The breed was introduced to other parts of Europe in the late 19th century and to the United States around the turn of the 20th century. The AKC registered the first Boxer in 1904, and recognized the first Boxer champion, Dampf vom Dom, in 1915. During World War I, the Boxer was co-opted for military work, acting as a valuable messenger dog, pack carrier, attack dog, and guard dog. The Boxer did not become popular around the world until after World War II. Taken home by returning soldiers, the dog was introduced to a wider audience and soon became a favorite as a companion, a show dog, and a guard dog.

===Early genealogy===


German citizen George Alt, a Munich resident, mated a brindle-colored female dog imported from France named Flora with a local dog of unknown ancestry, known simply as &quot;Boxer&quot;, resulting in a fawn-and-white male, named Lechner&#x27;s Box after its owner.

This dog was mated with his own dam, Flora, and one of his offspring was a female called Alt&#x27;s Schecken. George Alt mated Schecken with a Bulldog named Dr. Toneissen&#x27;s Tom to produce the historically significant dog Mühlbauer&#x27;s Flocki. Flocki was the first Boxer to enter the German Stud Book after winning the aforementioned show for St. Bernards in Munich 1896, which was the first event to have a class specific for Boxers.

The white female dog Ch. Blanka von Angertor, Flocki&#x27;s sister, was even more influential when mated with Piccolo von Angertor (Lechner&#x27;s Box grandson) to produce the predominantly white (particolored) female dog Meta von der Passage, which, even bearing little resemblance with the modern Boxer standard (early photographs depict her as too long, weak-backed, and down-faced), is considered the mother of the breed. John Wagner, in &quot;The Boxer&quot; (first published in 1939) said the following regarding this female dog:

===Breed name===
The name &quot;Boxer&quot; is supposedly derived from the breed&#x27;s tendency to play by standing on its hind legs and &quot;boxing&quot; with its front paws. According to Andrew H. Brace&#x27;s &quot;Pet Owner&#x27;s Guide to the Boxer&quot;, this theory is the least plausible explanation. He claims, &quot;it&#x27;s unlikely that a nation so permeated with nationalism would give to one of its most famous breeds a name so obviously anglicised&quot;.

German linguistic and historical evidence finds the earliest written source for the word Boxer in the 18th century, where it is found in a text in the &quot;Deutsches Fremdwörterbuch&quot; (&quot;The German Dictionary of Foreign Words&quot;), which cites an author named Musäus of 1782 writing . At that time, the spelling &quot;baxer&quot; equalled &quot;boxer&quot;. Both the verb (&quot;boxen&quot; [English &quot;to box, to punch, to jab&quot;]) and the noun (&quot;Boxer&quot;) were common German words as early as the late 18th century. The term &quot;Boxl&quot;, also written &quot;Buxn&quot; or &quot;Buchsen&quot; in the Bavarian dialect, means &quot;short (leather) trousers&quot; or &quot;underwear&quot;. The very similar-sounding term &quot;Boxerl&quot;, also from the Bavarian dialect, is an endearing term for &quot;Boxer&quot;. More in line with historical facts, Brace states that many other theories may explain the origin of the breed name, from which he favors the one claiming the smaller Bullenbeisser (Brabanter) dogs were also known as &quot;Boxl&quot; and that Boxer is just a corruption of that word.

In the same vein runs a theory based on the fact that a group of dogs was known as &quot;Bierboxer&quot; in Munich by the time of the breed&#x27;s development. These dogs were the result from mixes of Bullenbeisser and other similar breeds. &quot;Bier&quot; (beer) probably refers to the &quot;Biergarten&quot;, the typical Munich beer garden, an open-air restaurant where people used to take their dogs along. The nickname &quot;Deutscher Boxer&quot; was derived from &quot;Bierboxer&quot; and Boxer could also be a corruption of the former or a contraction of the latter.

A passage from the book &quot;The Complete Boxer&quot; by Milo G Denlinger states:

Boxer is also the name of a dog owned by John Peerybingle, the main character in the best-selling 1845 book &quot;The Cricket on the Hearth&quot; by Charles Dickens, which is evidence that &quot;Boxer&quot; was commonly used as a dog name by the early 19th century, before the establishment of the breed by the end of that same century.

==Health==

A 2024 UK study found a life expectancy of 11.3 years for the breed compared to an average of 12.7 for purebreeds and 12 for crossbreeds. A 2024 Italian study found a life expectancy of 9 years for the breed compared to 10 years overall. A 2005 Swedish study of insurance data found 50% of Boxers died by the age of 10, higher than the overall rate of 35% of dogs dying by the age of 10.

Leading health issues to which Boxers are prone include cancers, heart conditions such as aortic stenosis and arrhythmogenic right ventricular cardiomyopathy (the so-called &quot;Boxer cardiomyopathy&quot;), hypothyroidism, hip dysplasia, and degenerative myelopathy and epilepsy; other conditions that may be seen are gastric dilatation volvulus (also known as bloat), intestinal problems, and allergies (although these may be more related to diet than breed). Entropion, a malformation of the eyelid requiring surgical correction, is occasionally seen, and some lines have a tendency toward spondylosis deformans, a fusing of the spine, or dystocia. Other conditions that are less common but occur more often in Boxers than other breeds are histiocytic ulcerative colitis (sometimes called Boxer colitis), an invasive &quot;E. coli&quot; infection, and indolent corneal ulcers, often called Boxer eye ulcers.

An emerging health concern among boxers is Boxer Juvenile Kidney Disease (JKD), where the kidneys do not develop normally during gestation and leads to chronic renal failure. JKD is most frequently diagnosed in dogs under the age of 3, and often much earlier than this in puppies before the age of 12 months. There is strong evidence to suggest JKD is an inherited condition in boxers with research being undertaken by the University of Ohio to determine the gene mutation, as well as other work separately by the UK Boxer Breeder Council.

About 22% of puppies die before reaching seven weeks of age. Stillbirth is the most frequent cause of death, followed by infection. Mortality due to infection increases significantly with increases in inbreeding.

According to a UK Kennel Club health survey, cancer accounts for 38.5% of Boxer deaths, followed by old age (21.5%), cardiac (6.9%) and gastrointestinal (6.9%) related issues. The breed is particularly predisposed to mast cell tumours, a cancer of the immune system. Median lifespan was 10.25 years. Responsible breeders use available tests to screen their breeding stock before breeding, and in some cases throughout the life of the dog, in an attempt to minimize the occurrence of these diseases in future generations.

The Boxer is one of the more commonly affected breeds for degenerative myelopathy.

==Nutrition==

Boxers need plenty of exercise, which means their diet should be high in quality calories. The main source of these calories should be lean animal protein, which includes lean chicken, turkey, lamb, and fish. While on a high calorie diet, owners should be thoughtful of the amount of treats given as this tends to cause obesity. Owners should be mindful of the food to snack ratio being consumed by the Boxer when determining how many treats are acceptable. Some healthy snacks include raw fruits and vegetables.

Boxers are also prone to dental problems, increasing their susceptibility for bad breath; dry dog food that is large and difficult for them to chew improves the likelihood for plaque removal. Plaque can also be removed by crude fiber in kibble, which has a flexible structure that increases chewing time. Dry dog food is often coated with polyphosphates, which further reduces plaque buildup by preventing calcium production in saliva. Odor production from the boxer&#x27;s mouth is likely to be reduced if its teeth and oral cavity are kept in healthy conditions.

==Uses==

Boxers are friendly, lively companions that are popular as family dogs. Their suspicion of strangers, alertness, agility, and strength make them formidable guard dogs. They sometimes appear at dog agility or dog obedience trials and flyball events. These strong and intelligent animals have also been used as service dogs, guide dogs for the blind, therapy dogs, police dogs in K9 units, and occasionally herding cattle or sheep. The versatility of Boxers was recognized early on by the military, which has used them as valuable messenger dogs, pack carriers, and attack and guard dogs in times of war.

==Notable Boxers==

* Punch and Judy were awarded the Dickin Medal for conspicuous gallantry or devotion to duty while serving in a military conflict.
==See also==
* List of dog breeds

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q38496" start="4" end="9" title="Boxer (dog breed)" label="Boxer"/>
<link wikidata="Q39367" start="45" end="54" title="dog breed" label="dog breed"/>
<link wikidata="Q1907935" start="58" end="70" title="mastiff-type" label="mastiff-type"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="85" end="92" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q2138972" start="143" end="147" title="Fawn (colour)" label="fawn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1969557" start="151" end="159" title="brindled" label="brindled"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="204" end="218" title="Cephalic index#Brachycephalic animals" label="brachycephalic"/>
<link wikidata="Q16370" start="274" end="284" title="mandible" label="mandibular"/>
<link wikidata="Q1968264" start="285" end="296" title="prognathism" label="prognathism"/>
<link wikidata="Q180284" start="325" end="328" title="jaw" label="jaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q4918888" start="346" end="350" title="bite" label="bite"/>
<link wikidata="Q2594288" start="415" end="434" title="Old English Bulldog" label="Old English Bulldog"/>
<link wikidata="Q38666" start="455" end="468" title="Bullenbeisser" label="Bullenbeisser"/>
<link wikidata="Q39431" start="579" end="594" title="The Kennel Club" label="The Kennel Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q38216" start="599" end="619" title="American Kennel Club" label="American Kennel Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q38090" start="736" end="748" title="St. Bernard (dog)" label="St. Bernards"/>
<link wikidata="Q1968264" start="1632" end="1643" title="prognathism" label="prognathous"/>
<link wikidata="Q13091232" start="1825" end="1831" title="Docking (dog)" label="docked"/>
<link wikidata="Q5187978" start="1836" end="1843" title="Cropping (animal)" label="cropped"/>
<link wikidata="Q426" start="1943" end="1956" title="animal rights" label="animal rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q6980652" start="2267" end="2274" title="Natural bobtail" label="bobtail"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="2304" end="2318" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q38603" start="2572" end="2609" title="Fédération Cynologique Internationale" label="Fédération Cynologique Internationale"/>
<link wikidata="Q627933" start="2879" end="2888" title="Conformation show" label="show dogs"/>
<link wikidata="Q2843064" start="2959" end="2998" title="American Veterinary Medical Association" label="American Veterinary Medical Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q2138972" start="3563" end="3567" title="fawn (colour)" label="fawn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1969557" start="3572" end="3579" title="brindle" label="brindle"/>
<link wikidata="Q40887768" start="5087" end="5098" title="Dog coat genetics" label="Genetically"/>
<link wikidata="Q652653" start="5606" end="5616" title="Animal euthanasia" label="euthanized"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321905" start="6941" end="6963" title="positive reinforcement" label="positive reinforcement"/>
<link wikidata="Q38615" start="6983" end="6999" title="clicker training" label="clicker training"/>
<link wikidata="Q847079" start="7022" end="7042" title="operant conditioning" label="operant conditioning"/>
<link wikidata="Q168338" start="7047" end="7058" title="behaviorism" label="behaviorism"/>
<link wikidata="Q5612041" start="7141" end="7154" title="Stanley Coren" label="Stanley Coren"/>
<link wikidata="Q2576652" start="7221" end="7245" title="The Intelligence of Dogs" label="The Intelligence of Dogs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1907935" start="8125" end="8132" title="mastiff" label="mastiff"/>
<link wikidata="Q38666" start="8200" end="8213" title="Bullenbeisser" label="Bullenbeisser"/>
<link wikidata="Q38418" start="8224" end="8239" title="English Mastiff" label="English Mastiff"/>
<link wikidata="Q38383" start="8253" end="8260" title="Bulldog" label="Bulldog"/>
<link wikidata="Q23666" start="8278" end="8291" title="Great Britain" label="Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q58697" start="8393" end="8402" title="wild boar" label="wild boar"/>
<link wikidata="Q848831" start="8565" end="8572" title="Province of Brabant" label="Brabant"/>
<link wikidata="Q31" start="8586" end="8593" title="Belgium" label="Belgium"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8929" end="8949" title="Deutscher Boxer Club" label="Deutscher Boxer Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q579565" start="8995" end="9009" title="breed standard" label="breed standard"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="9331" end="9342" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q38953" start="9436" end="9446" title="attack dog" label="attack dog"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="9525" end="9537" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q38090" start="10329" end="10340" title="St. Bernard (dog)" label="St. Bernard"/>
<link wikidata="Q32112" start="11103" end="11109" title="boxing" label="boxing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1205648" start="11590" end="11615" title="Deutsches Fremdwörterbuch" label="Deutsches Fremdwörterbuch"/>
<link wikidata="Q524648" start="12535" end="12545" title="Corruption (grammar)" label="corruption"/>
<link wikidata="Q825220" start="13334" end="13359" title="The Cricket on the Hearth" label="The Cricket on the Hearth"/>
<link wikidata="Q5686" start="13369" end="13384" title="Charles Dickens" label="Charles Dickens"/>
<link wikidata="Q38945" start="13695" end="13706" title="Mongrel" label="crossbreeds"/>
<link wikidata="Q12078" start="14015" end="14021" title="cancer" label="cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q531019" start="14049" end="14064" title="aortic stenosis" label="aortic stenosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q4951681" start="14138" end="14158" title="Boxer cardiomyopathy" label="Boxer cardiomyopathy"/>
<link wikidata="Q131151912" start="14167" end="14181" title="Hypothyroidism in dogs" label="hypothyroidism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1434611" start="14183" end="14196" title="Hip dysplasia (canine)" label="hip dysplasia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1182826" start="14202" end="14225" title="Canine degenerative myelopathy" label="degenerative myelopathy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6150957" start="14278" end="14305" title="gastric dilatation volvulus" label="gastric dilatation volvulus"/>
<link wikidata="Q42982" start="14354" end="14363" title="allergies" label="allergies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1327273" start="14421" end="14430" title="Entropion" label="Entropion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1811189" start="14601" end="14609" title="dystocia" label="dystocia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1477" start="14714" end="14732" title="ulcerative colitis" label="ulcerative colitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5171113" start="14814" end="14837" title="Corneal ulcers in animals" label="indolent corneal ulcers"/>
<link wikidata="" start="15226" end="15255" title="Pedigree Dogs Exposed: Three Years On#Boxers" label="inherited condition in boxers"/>
<link wikidata="Q39431" start="15641" end="15655" title="UK Kennel Club" label="UK Kennel Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q1182826" start="16206" end="16229" title="degenerative myelopathy" label="degenerative myelopathy"/>
<link wikidata="Q393808" start="17530" end="17541" title="dog agility" label="dog agility"/>
<link wikidata="Q39446" start="17549" end="17564" title="obedience trial" label="obedience trial"/>
<link wikidata="Q917579" start="17570" end="17577" title="flyball" label="flyball"/>
<link wikidata="Q16910166" start="17963" end="17977" title="Punch and Judy (dogs)" label="Punch and Judy"/>
<link wikidata="Q843103" start="17995" end="18007" title="Dickin Medal" label="Dickin Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q21078" start="18107" end="18125" title="List of dog breeds" label="List of dog breeds"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="253410" wikidata="Q292078" url="?curid=253410" title="Dickinsonia">
<text>Dickinsonia is a genus of extinct organism, most likely an animal, that lived during the late Ediacaran period in what is now Australia, China, Russia, and Ukraine. It is one of the best known members of the Ediacaran biota. The individual &quot;Dickinsonia&quot; typically resembles a bilaterally symmetrical ribbed oval. Its affinities are presently unknown; its mode of growth has been considered consistent with a stem-group bilaterian affinity, though various other affinities have been proposed. It lived during the late Ediacaran (final part of Precambrian). The discovery of cholesterol molecules in fossils of &quot;Dickinsonia&quot; lends support to the idea that &quot;Dickinsonia&quot; was an animal, though these results have been questioned.

== Description ==
&quot;Dickinsonia&quot; fossils are known only in the form of imprints and casts in sandstone beds. The specimens found range from a few millimetres to about in length, and from a fraction of a millimetre to a few millimetres thick. They are nearly bilaterally symmetric, segmented, round or oval in outline, slightly expanded to one end (i.e. egg-shaped outline). The rib-like segments are radially inclined towards the wide and narrow ends, and the width and length of the segments increases towards the wide end of the fossil. The body is divided into two by a midline ridge or groove, except for a single unpaired segment at one end, dubbed the &quot;anterior most unit&quot; suggested to represent the front of the organism. It is disputed whether the segments are offset from each other following glide reflection, and are thus isomers, or whether the segments are symmetric across the midline, and thus follow true bilateral symmetry, as the specimens displaying the offset may be the result of taphonomic distortion. The number of segments/isomer pairs varies from 12 in smaller individuals to 74 in the largest Australian specimens.

The body of &quot;Dickinsonia&quot; is suggested to have been sack-like, with the outer layer being made of a resistant but unmineralised material. Some specimens from Russia show the presence of branched internal structures. Some authors have suggested that the underside of the body bore cilia, as well as infolded pockets.

&quot;Dickinsonia&quot; is suggested to have grown by adding a new pair of segments/isomers at the end opposite the unpaired &quot;anterior most unit&quot;. &quot;Dickinsonia&quot; probably exhibited indeterminate growth (having no maximum size), though it is suggested that the addition of new segments slowed down later in growth. Deformed specimens from Russia indicate that individuals of &quot;Dickinsonia&quot; could regenerate after being damaged.

== Ecology ==
&quot;Dickinsonia&quot; is suggested to have been a mobile marine organism that lived on the seafloor and fed by consuming microbial mats growing on the seabed using structures present on its underside. &quot;Dickinsonia&quot;-shaped trace fossils, presumed to represent feeding impressions, sometimes found in chains demonstrating this behaviour have been observed. These trace fossils have been assigned to the genus &quot;Epibaion&quot;. A 2022 study suggested that &quot;Dickinsonia&quot; temporarily adhered itself to the seafloor by the use of mucus, which may have been an adaptation to living in very shallow water environments.

== Discovery ==

The first species and specimens of this fossil organism were first discovered in the Ediacara Member of the Rawnsley Quartzite, Flinders Ranges in South Australia. Reg Sprigg, the original discoverer of the Ediacaran biota in Australia, described &quot;Dickinsonia&quot;, naming it after Ben Dickinson, then Director of Mines for South Australia, and head of the government department that employed Sprigg. Additional specimens of &quot;Dickinsonia&quot; are also known from the Mogilev Formation in the Dniester River Basin of Podolia, Ukraine, the Lyamtsa, Verkhovka, Zimnegory and Yorga Formations in the White Sea area of the Arkhangelsk Region, Chernokamen Formation of the Central Urals, Russia, (these deposits have been dated to 567–550 Myr.), the Dengying Formation in the Yangtze Gorges area, South China. (ca. 551–543 Ma).

=== Taphonomy ===
As a rule, &quot;Dickinsonia&quot; fossils are preserved as negative impressions (&quot;death masks&quot;) on the bases of sandstone beds. Such fossils are imprints of the upper sides of the benthic organisms that have been buried under the sand. The imprints formed as a result of cementation of the sand before complete decomposition of the body. The mechanism of cementation is not quite clear; among many possibilities, the process could have arisen from conditions which gave rise to pyrite &quot;death masks&quot; on the decaying body, or perhaps it was due to the carbonate cementation of the sand. The imprints of the bodies of organisms are often strongly compressed, distorted, and sometimes partly extend into the overlying rock. These deformations appear to show attempts by the organisms to escape from the falling sediment.

Rarely, &quot;Dickinsonia&quot; have been preserved as a cast in massive sandstone lenses, where it occurs together with &quot;Pteridinium&quot;, &quot;Rangea&quot; and some others. Large beds containing many hundreds of &quot;Dickinsonia&quot; (along with many other species) are preserved &quot;in situ&quot; within Nilpena Ediacara National Park, with park rangers providing on-site guided tours in the cooler months of the year. These specimens are products of events where organisms were first stripped from the sea-floor, transported and deposited within sand flow. In such cases, stretched and ripped &quot;Dickinsonia&quot; occur. The first such specimen was described as a separate genus and species, &quot;Chondroplon bilobatum&quot; and later re-identified as &quot;Dickinsonia&quot;.

== Taxonomy ==

=== Species ===
Since 1947, a total of nine species have been described, of which three are currently considered valid:

A claimed specimen of &quot;Dickinsonia&quot; from India was later determined to be the remains of a beehive.

=== External relationships ===
&quot;Dickinsonia&quot; is classified as part of the group Proarticulata or Dickinsoniomorpha. Proarticulata includes a number of morphologically similar organisms, such &quot;Spriggina&quot;, &quot;Yorgia&quot;, &quot;Andiva&quot; and &quot;Cephalonega&quot;, which share the same segmented articulation. The affinities of Proarticulata to other organisms, including to other members of the Ediacaran biota, like rangeomorphs, have long been contentious. It has been historically proposed that most Ediacaran organisms were closely related to each other, as part of the grouping &quot;Vendobionta&quot;, though recent authors argue that this grouping as a whole is likely to be polyphyletic. Gregory Retallack has proposed that the fossils of &quot;Dickinsonia&quot; and other Ediacaran biota represent lichens that grew in a terrestrial environment, but this has been broadly rejected by other authors, who argue that a marine environment of deposition better fits available evidence. Other proposal have included giant protists, as proposed by Adolf Seilacher. Most modern research suggest that &quot;Dickinsonia&quot; and other proarticulatans are likely to be animals, possibly belonging to Eumetazoa. A chemical study of Russian specimens found that they were enriched with cholesterol, which is only produced by animals, supporting an animal affinity, though these results have been questioned by other authors, who consider the association between the cholesterol molecules and the &quot;Dickinsonia&quot; fossils to not be definitive. Within Animalia, a number of affinities have been proposed, including as stem-eumetazoans forming a clade with rangeomorphs, to Placozoa, and to Cnidaria. A number of researchers have proposed close affinities to Bilateria, based on the bilateral or nearly bilateral organisation of proarticulatans, though proarticulatans are not likely to be a member of the bilaterian crown group.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q34740" start="17" end="22" title="genus" label="genus"/>
<link wikidata="Q729" start="59" end="65" title="animal" label="animal"/>
<link wikidata="Q188654" start="94" end="103" title="Ediacaran" label="Ediacaran"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="126" end="135" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="137" end="142" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q159" start="144" end="150" title="Russia" label="Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q212" start="156" end="163" title="Ukraine" label="Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q723846" start="208" end="223" title="Ediacaran biota" label="Ediacaran biota"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="286" end="309" title="Symmetry in biology#Bilateral symmetry" label="bilaterally symmetrical"/>
<link wikidata="Q4688967" start="327" end="337" title="Affinity (taxonomy)" label="affinities"/>
<link wikidata="Q5173" start="429" end="438" title="bilateria" label="bilateria"/>
<link wikidata="Q43656" start="583" end="594" title="cholesterol" label="cholesterol"/>
<link wikidata="Q40614" start="608" end="615" title="Fossil" label="fossils"/>
<link wikidata="Q174789" start="912" end="922" title="millimetre" label="millimetre"/>
<link wikidata="Q876450" start="1578" end="1594" title="glide reflection" label="glide reflection"/>
<link wikidata="Q598159" start="1697" end="1715" title="bilateral symmetry" label="bilateral symmetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q596086" start="1777" end="1798" title="Taphonomy" label="taphonomic distortion"/>
<link wikidata="Q180436" start="2208" end="2213" title="Cilium" label="cilia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3003222" start="2445" end="2465" title="indeterminate growth" label="indeterminate growth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1964349" start="2838" end="2851" title="microbial mat" label="microbial mat"/>
<link wikidata="Q853800" start="2949" end="2961" title="trace fossil" label="trace fossil"/>
<link wikidata="Q5382415" start="3140" end="3148" title="Epibaion" label="Epibaion"/>
<link wikidata="Q3649349" start="3265" end="3270" title="mucus" label="mucus"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3478" end="3496" title="Rawnsley Quartzite" label="Rawnsley Quartzite"/>
<link wikidata="Q745846" start="3498" end="3513" title="Flinders Ranges" label="Flinders Ranges"/>
<link wikidata="Q35715" start="3517" end="3532" title="South Australia" label="South Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2138025" start="3534" end="3544" title="Reg Sprigg" label="Reg Sprigg"/>
<link wikidata="Q723846" start="3577" end="3592" title="Ediacaran biota" label="Ediacaran biota"/>
<link wikidata="Q53835435" start="3658" end="3671" title="Ben Dickinson" label="Ben Dickinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q35715" start="3700" end="3715" title="South Australia" label="South Australia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3849" end="3866" title="Mogilev Formation" label="Mogilev Formation"/>
<link wikidata="Q131210" start="3874" end="3888" title="Dniester River" label="Dniester River"/>
<link wikidata="Q191607" start="3898" end="3905" title="Podolia" label="Podolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q212" start="3907" end="3914" title="Ukraine" label="Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3920" end="3927" title="Lyamtsa Formation" label="Lyamtsa"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3929" end="3938" title="Verkhovka Formation" label="Verkhovka"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3940" end="3949" title="Zimnegory Formation" label="Zimnegory"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3954" end="3969" title="Yorga Formation" label="Yorga Formation"/>
<link wikidata="Q44133" start="3978" end="3987" title="White Sea" label="White Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1875" start="4000" end="4018" title="Arkhangelsk Region" label="Arkhangelsk Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q159" start="4064" end="4070" title="Russia" label="Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q680300" start="5189" end="5200" title="Pteridinium" label="Pteridinium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1442538" start="5214" end="5220" title="Rangea" label="Rangea"/>
<link wikidata="Q216681" start="5359" end="5366" title="in situ" label="in situ"/>
<link wikidata="Q112581488" start="5380" end="5410" title="Nilpena Ediacara National Park" label="Nilpena Ediacara National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q2566978" start="6197" end="6210" title="Proarticulata" label="Proarticulata"/>
<link wikidata="Q3028869" start="6214" end="6231" title="Dickinsoniomorpha" label="Dickinsoniomorpha"/>
<link wikidata="Q132927" start="6314" end="6323" title="Spriggina" label="Spriggina"/>
<link wikidata="Q141203" start="6337" end="6343" title="Yorgia" label="Yorgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4754504" start="6357" end="6363" title="Andiva" label="Andiva"/>
<link wikidata="Q2668806" start="6380" end="6391" title="Cephalonega" label="Cephalonega"/>
<link wikidata="Q723846" start="6530" end="6545" title="Ediacaran biota" label="Ediacaran biota"/>
<link wikidata="Q547464" start="6552" end="6563" title="rangeomorph" label="rangeomorph"/>
<link wikidata="Q2512784" start="6724" end="6735" title="Vendobionta" label="Vendobionta"/>
<link wikidata="Q217743" start="6817" end="6829" title="Polyphyly" label="polyphyletic"/>
<link wikidata="Q16150140" start="6831" end="6848" title="Gregory Retallack" label="Gregory Retallack"/>
<link wikidata="Q10892" start="7160" end="7167" title="protist" label="protist"/>
<link wikidata="Q67804" start="7185" end="7200" title="Adolf Seilacher" label="Adolf Seilacher"/>
<link wikidata="Q5174" start="7334" end="7343" title="Eumetazoa" label="Eumetazoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q43656" start="7418" end="7429" title="cholesterol" label="cholesterol"/>
<link wikidata="Q131040" start="7810" end="7818" title="Placozoa" label="Placozoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q25441" start="7827" end="7835" title="Cnidaria" label="Cnidaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q5173" start="7895" end="7904" title="Bilateria" label="Bilateria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1462809" start="8053" end="8064" title="crown group" label="crown group"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="253413" wikidata="Q204630" url="?curid=253413" title="Phil McGraw">
<text>Phillip Calvin McGraw (born September 1, 1950), known professionally as Dr. Phil, is an American television personality and author who is best known for hosting the talk show &quot;Dr. Phil&quot;. He holds a doctorate in clinical psychology, though he ceased renewing his license to practice psychology in 2006.

McGraw rose to fame with appearances on &quot;The Oprah Winfrey Show&quot; in the late 1990s. Oprah Winfrey then helped McGraw launch his own advice show, &quot;Dr. Phil&quot;, in September 2002.

==Early life and education==
McGraw was born in Vinita, Oklahoma, on September 1, 1950, the son of Joseph J. McGraw Jr. and his wife Anne Geraldine &quot;Jerry&quot; (née Stevens). He grew up with two older sisters, Deana and Donna, and younger sister Brenda in the oilfields of North Texas where his father was an equipment supplier. At age 13, he worked at an A&amp;W Root Beer stand and a local chain called Pizza Planet in Oklahoma City.

McGraw moved to Kansas with his father as the latter pursued his lifelong goal of becoming a psychologist. There, he attended Shawnee Mission North High School in Overland Park, Kansas. He played linebacker on the high school football team and, in 1968, earned a football scholarship to the University of Tulsa where he played middle linebacker under coach Glenn Dobbs. 

He later transferred to Midwestern State University in Wichita Falls, Texas, where he graduated in 1975 with a B.A. in psychology. He went on to earn an M.A. in experimental psychology in 1976 and a Ph.D. in clinical psychology in 1979, both at North Texas State University (now the University of North Texas), where his dissertation was titled &quot;Rheumatoid Arthritis: A Psychological Intervention.&quot; He did a year of post-doctoral training in forensic psychology at the Wilmington Institute. McGraw&#x27;s doctoral advisor was Frank Lawlis, who later became the primary contributing psychologist for the &quot;Dr. Phil&quot; television show.

==Early career==
After obtaining his doctorate, McGraw rejoined his father in Wichita Falls, Texas, where the elder McGraw had established his private psychology practice.

In 1985, McGraw and his father partnered with Thelma Box, a Texas businesswoman, in presenting &quot;Pathways&quot; self-help seminars. In October 1991, six years after joining Box, the younger McGraw sold his share in the company for $325,000.

In 1990, McGraw co-founded Courtroom Sciences, Inc. (CSI), a trial consulting firm, with lawyer Gary Dobbs. CSI would perform &quot;dry runs&quot; of court cases in simulated courtrooms, and McGraw would offer advice about what parts of the lawyer&#x27;s case worked and what parts did not. McGraw is no longer an officer or director of the company. The TV show &quot;Bull&quot; is based on McGraw&#x27;s experience as a trial consultant, and he is credited as one of the creators of the series. McGraw began working with Oprah Winfrey through CSI.

==Television career==

===Oprah Winfrey and the &quot;Dr. Phil&quot; show===
In 1995, Oprah Winfrey hired McGraw&#x27;s legal consulting firm CSI to prepare her for the Amarillo Texas beef trial. Winfrey was so impressed with McGraw that she thanked him for her victory in that case, which ended in 1998. Soon after, she invited him to appear on her show. His appearance proved so successful that he began appearing weekly as a relationship and life strategy expert on Tuesdays, starting in April 1998.

In September 2002, McGraw formed Peteski Productions and launched his own syndicated daily television show, &quot;Dr. Phil&quot;, produced by Winfrey&#x27;s Harpo Studios. &quot;Dr. Phil&quot; is an advice show in which McGraw tackles a different topic each show, offering advice to his guests. He signed a five-year extension of his syndication deal with his show&#x27;s distributors, King World Productions, Inc. The deal was to pay McGraw $15 million per year and keep the show in production through the 2013–2014 television season.

In 2007, McGraw was named 30th on the &quot;Forbes&quot; Celebrity 100 list. On May 21, 2007, &quot;Dr. Phil&quot; was ranked fourth by Nielsen Media Research, with 6.69 million viewers. On May 12, 2008, almost one year later, the show was ranked sixth with 5.69 million viewers. At that time, the only talk show more popular than &quot;Dr. Phil&quot; was &quot;The Oprah Winfrey Show&quot;. On December 11, 2018, &quot;Dr. Phil&quot; was the top syndicated show with a &quot;2.9 live-plus-same-day&quot; national Nielsen rating, ranking first among talk shows for the 117th consecutive week. His ranking improved, and by 2020, he was in the 22nd spot on the aforementioned &quot;Forbes&quot; list with earnings of $65.5 million.

===Spin-off shows===
In 2005, Phil and Jay McGraw, Phil&#x27;s eldest son, formed Stage 29 Productions, and a week later, announced a new show called &quot;Moochers&quot; (similar to ABC&#x27;s &quot;Kicked Out&quot;). Ultimately, the show was not produced.

In 2006, the &quot;Dr. Phil House&quot; (similar to CBS&#x27;s &quot;Big Brother&quot;) began airing as part of the &quot;Dr. Phil&quot; television show. Following a protest by neighbors, the house in Los Angeles was shut down, and production resumed on a sound stage on a studio back lot.

Stage 29 launched &quot;Decision House&quot; in September 2007. It was executive produced by Jay McGraw, and featured Judge Lynn Toler (from &quot;Divorce Court&quot;) on MyNetworkTV. The show produced 13 episodes during its only season, which ran until May 24, 2008.

Late in 2007, McGraw began promoting the &quot;Dr. Phil Show&quot; spinoff series &quot;The Doctors&quot;. The show, which first aired in September 2008 and ended in August 2022, was hosted by television personality and ER physician Travis Stork; Jay was executive producer of the show. On September 8, 2008, &quot;The Doctors&quot; debuted and, as of November 10, had a 2.0 rating. The show won a Daytime Emmy Award as Outstanding Talk Show/Informative in 2010, and was nominated eight times between 2009 and 2013.

&quot;Daily Mail TV&quot;, executive produced by Phil and Jay McGraw, along with producers Martin Clarke, Carla Pennington, and Jeffrey Wilson, won the Daytime Emmy Award for Outstanding News Program in 2019.

In August 2021, the reality television series &quot;House Calls with Dr. Phil&quot; aired on CBS. In the series, McGraw visits various families at home and offers advice on their home life. The series ended after six episodes in September 2021. 

=== Merit Street ===
In November 2023, McGraw announced Merit Street Media, a new Fort Worth-based media company and television network he planned to launch in 2024. The network would be devoted primarily to news and true crime programming, and be anchored by &quot;Dr. Phil Primetime—&quot;a successor to the syndicated &quot;Dr. Phil&quot; series. Merit Street launched on April 2, 2024.

=== Doctor on Demand ===
In 2012, McGraw founded the telehealth company Doctor On Demand, an online platform that allows individuals to schedule virtual appointments with a network of physicians and therapists. The company launched a web and mobile service in 2014. The platform focuses on services related to preventative care, medication management, wellness, and mental health. According to ABC News, the company had a network of around 11,000 board-certified physicians as of 2015. In March 2020, during the COVID-19 pandemic, the company expanded its bandwidth and increased its pool of therapists to deal with the increasing volume of patients seeking virtual consultations and care.

== Approach to psychology ==

McGraw&#x27;s advice and methods have drawn criticism from fellow psychotherapists and non-experts. McGraw&#x27;s critics regard advice given by him to be, at best, simplistic and, at worst, ineffective or harmful. The National Alliance on Mental Illness called McGraw&#x27;s conduct in one episode of his television show &quot;unethical&quot; and &quot;incredibly irresponsible&quot;. McGraw said in a 2001 &quot;Chicago Tribune&quot; interview that he never liked traditional one-on-one counseling, and that &quot;I&#x27;m not the Hush-Puppies, pipe and &#x27;Let&#x27;s talk about your mother&#x27; kind of psychologist.&quot;

McGraw frequently advises individuals to seek professional help, particularly psychotherapy. A 2016 study at The Ohio State University found that viewers were more likely to seek professional mental health care for themselves and their children after seeing McGraw deal with similar issues on the &quot;Dr. Phil&quot; show. The study attributed this phenomenon to viewers&#x27; tendency to form a parasocial bond with McGraw through watching the show, and have increased belief in their ability to seek help.

== Controversies and lawsuits ==

===1970s===
In 1971, McGraw lived in Topeka, Kansas, and ran the Grecian Health Spa alongside his father and two friends. McGraw abruptly closed the business, filed for bankruptcy and moved out of state in September 1973. McGraw had sold the lifetime membership contracts customers had signed to another company, resulting in customers being still legally responsible for the membership even though the spa was closed. McGraw and his business partners were investigated by the state&#x27;s Attorney General office. Lead investigator Emory Goad said &quot;McGraw had been pulling off a textbook example of a membership scam. He was signing up hundreds of customers to long, expensive contracts, then turning around and selling the contracts to a financial institution for a percentage of the total value up front in cash. He then simply shut down the spa at some point after collecting that money and left town. It was a total rip-off because the customers would still be liable for the contract payments, only now to the financial institution.&quot; McGraw was sued by several Topeka banks for $41,000 they claimed he owed, but the lawsuits and investigation stalled when he left the state.

===2000s===
McGraw stopped renewing his Texas license to practice psychology in 2006; he has never had a license in California, where his show is taped. In 2002, the California Board of Psychology determined that, because McGraw&#x27;s television show was more about entertainment than psychology, McGraw did not need a license.

In 2003, McGraw lent his name and image to a line of nutritional supplements, including vitamin packets, meal replacement drinks, and power bars under the brand name Shape Up, under a licensing agreement with CSA Nutraceuticals, a Texas start-up. The deal stipulated that a certain percentage of sales would be given to the Dr. Phil Foundation, a Dallas charity that works on issues like childhood obesity. CSA Nutraceuticals stopped producing the supplements in 2004 after the Federal Trade Commission began investigating it for false advertising. Three disappointed consumers filed a lawsuit in 2004, claiming that it made false or unproven claims. In 2006, a $10.5 million settlement was reached.

In 2003, &quot;The Making of Dr. Phil&quot;, an unauthorized biography by Sophia Dembling and Lisa Gutierrez, was published by John Wiley and Sons. The book covers McGraw&#x27;s personal and professional life, including allegations of abuse and unethical practices, with interviews from his childhood friends and former classmates.

In 2006, McGraw was named a co-defendant, along with Paramount, CBS Television, and others, in a 2006 lawsuit filed concerning the disappearance of Natalee Holloway. The lawsuit was filed by Deepak Kalpoe and his brother Satish Kalpoe, who claimed that an interview they did with McGraw, aired in September 2005, was &quot;manipulated and later broadcast as being accurate, and which portrays Deepak Kalpoe and Satish Kalpoe &#x27;as engaging in criminal activity against Natalee Holloway and constitutes defamation.&#x27;&quot; On March 17, 2015, the lawsuit against McGraw and CBS was dismissed. The court records disclosed the lawsuit by Deepak and Satish Kalpoe was rejected one week before the civil trial was set to begin.

Another contentious case arose in January 2008, when McGraw visited pop star Britney Spears in her hospital room. The visit by McGraw drew criticism from the Spears family and mental health professionals; it appeared to be part of an attempt at getting Spears and her parents to participate in an &quot;intervention&quot; on the &quot;Dr. Phil&quot; television show. Immediately after the visit, McGraw issued public statements about Spears&#x27; situation that the Spears&#x27; family spokeswoman Lou Taylor said violated their family&#x27;s trust in McGraw. &quot;This is another example of a trust being betrayed&quot;, Taylor told &quot;Today&quot; co-host Meredith Vieira. &quot;Rather than helping the family&#x27;s situation, the celebrity psychologist caused additional damage&quot;. Several mental health care professionals criticized McGraw for his actions, but fellow television psychologist Joyce Brothers defended McGraw. It was reported that a psychologist filed a complaint with the California Board of Psychology (BOP), alleging that McGraw had practiced psychology without a license and had violated doctor-patient privilege by discussing Spears&#x27; case with the media. A copy of the complaint appeared in the media, but there is no way to verify whether or not it was submitted to BOP as it does not disclose that information unless an investigation is opened. Martin Greenberg, a former BOP president, said on the &quot;Today Show&quot; that this incident was not a matter that the law covers or would be concerned about.

Later that year, McGraw was sued by Thomas Riccio, the memorabilia collector responsible for taping the Las Vegas robbery that led to O. J. Simpson&#x27;s conviction. Riccio sued McGraw in Los Angeles Superior Court for defamation and other complaints, stemming from an interview he did on the &quot;Dr. Phil Show&quot; which aired on October 8, 2008. The claims were dismissed, with the judge finding that it was protected speech under the First Amendment.

===2010s===
In 2016, McGraw and his wife filed a $250 million defamation lawsuit against American Media Inc., a publishing company that owns the &quot;National Enquirer&quot; and Radar Online, due primarily to their publishing an interview from a former patient who had accused McGraw of sexually assaulting her in the 1980s while under his care. McGraw had denied the sexual abuse allegations since they were first made against him in 2003. The lawsuit was later dropped on mutual terms.

McGraw was criticized for an interview featuring former actress Shelley Duvall, which aired in 2016. Vivian Kubrick described McGraw&#x27;s behavior towards Duvall as &quot;exploitative&quot; and &quot;appallingly cruel&quot; and called for a boycott of the show.

===2020s===

In February 2022, around a dozen current and former employees of &quot;Dr. Phil&quot; alleged that they experienced &quot;verbal abuse in a workplace that fosters fear, intimidation, and racism.&quot; Seven current employees also claimed that the show&#x27;s guests are often manipulated and treated unethically. Attorneys for McGraw and his co-producer, Carla Pennington, categorically denied every allegation.

A former guest who appeared on &quot;Dr. Phil&quot; in 2016, Danielle Bregoli, also known as &quot;Bhad Bhabie&quot;, criticized the methods of Turn-About Ranch, an Escalante, Utah-based therapeutic horse ranch for troubled youth that McGraw had endorsed. In 2022, McGraw, Viacom and CBS were sued by Bregoli and Hannah Archuleta, another former guest, for recommending their parents send them to Turn-About Ranch. Afterward, McGraw stopped recommending Turn-About Ranch on &quot;Dr. Phil&quot;.

== Writing career ==
In 1999, McGraw published his first book, &quot;Life Strategies&quot;. In the following six years, McGraw published three additional relationship books, &quot;Relationship Rescue&quot;, &quot;Self Matters&quot;, and &quot;Family First&quot;. Since 2022, McGraw and physician John Whyte have co-written a series of columns for WebMD and &quot;USA Today&quot;. The former has also written op-eds for &quot;Sportico&quot; and &quot;The Hill&quot;.

=== Selected works ===
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 


== Awards and recognition ==
McGraw was inducted into the Broadcasting &amp; Cable Hall of Fame in 2015. In 2020, he received a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame. McGraw was invited to give the presidential address at the 2006 annual convention of the American Psychological Association, where he received the APA&#x27;s Presidential Citation for &quot;highlighting mental health issues&quot; to &quot;more Americans than any other living psychologist.&quot;

==Personal life==

McGraw married his first wife, Debbie Higgins McCall, in 1970, when he was 20 years old. According to her, McGraw was domineering and would not allow her to participate in the family business. She claimed that she was confined to domestic duties and instructed to begin lifting weights to improve her bustline. McCall also claimed that infidelity had ended their marriage.

While annulling the marriage in 1973, McGraw met and began dating Robin Jo Jameson, whom he married in 1976. The couple have two children together, Jay McGraw and Jordan McGraw.

McGraw is a private pilot, with an instrument rating, flying single-engine airplanes. He is a Christian. He launched a Dr. Phil Foundation charity in October 2003.

McGraw endorsed Donald Trump in the 2024 United States presidential election.

== Filmography ==
== Discography ==

=== Guest appearances ===
== References ==
==External links==
* 
* Official biography</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q204630" start="0" end="21" title="Phil McGraw" label="Phillip Calvin McGraw"/>
<link wikidata="Q204630" start="72" end="80" title="Phil McGraw" label="Dr. Phil"/>
<link wikidata="Q2741767" start="181" end="189" title="Dr. Phil (talk show)" label="Dr. Phil"/>
<link wikidata="Q199906" start="221" end="240" title="clinical psychology" label="clinical psychology"/>
<link wikidata="Q9418" start="292" end="302" title="psychology" label="psychology"/>
<link wikidata="Q694106" start="359" end="381" title="The Oprah Winfrey Show" label="The Oprah Winfrey Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q55800" start="407" end="420" title="Oprah Winfrey" label="Oprah Winfrey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1003693" start="558" end="574" title="Vinita, Oklahoma" label="Vinita, Oklahoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q3493922" start="789" end="800" title="North Texas" label="North Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q15267446" start="872" end="889" title="A&amp;amp;W Root Beer" label="A&amp;amp;W Root Beer"/>
<link wikidata="Q34863" start="937" end="950" title="Oklahoma City" label="Oklahoma City"/>
<link wikidata="Q7491545" start="1079" end="1112" title="Shawnee Mission North High School" label="Shawnee Mission North High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q500481" start="1116" end="1137" title="Overland Park, Kansas" label="Overland Park, Kansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1848657" start="1244" end="1263" title="University of Tulsa" label="University of Tulsa"/>
<link wikidata="Q5568775" start="1310" end="1321" title="Glenn Dobbs" label="Glenn Dobbs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1932075" start="1349" end="1376" title="Midwestern State University" label="Midwestern State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q128349" start="1380" end="1400" title="Wichita Falls, Texas" label="Wichita Falls, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1765120" start="1436" end="1440" title="B.A." label="B.A."/>
<link wikidata="Q2091008" start="1478" end="1482" title="M.A." label="M.A."/>
<link wikidata="Q475042" start="1486" end="1509" title="experimental psychology" label="experimental psychology"/>
<link wikidata="Q752297" start="1524" end="1529" title="Ph.D." label="Ph.D."/>
<link wikidata="Q199906" start="1533" end="1552" title="clinical psychology" label="clinical psychology"/>
<link wikidata="Q860527" start="1608" end="1633" title="University of North Texas" label="University of North Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1266946" start="1646" end="1658" title="dissertation" label="dissertation"/>
<link wikidata="Q932219" start="1777" end="1796" title="forensic psychology" label="forensic psychology"/>
<link wikidata="Q7839968" start="2457" end="2473" title="trial consulting" label="trial consulting"/>
<link wikidata="Q24207659" start="2764" end="2768" title="Bull (2016 TV series)" label="Bull"/>
<link wikidata="Q55800" start="2918" end="2931" title="Oprah Winfrey" label="Oprah Winfrey"/>
<link wikidata="Q55800" start="3032" end="3045" title="Oprah Winfrey" label="Oprah Winfrey"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3115" end="3140" title="Food libel laws#Texas Beef Group v. Winfrey" label="Amarillo Texas beef trial"/>
<link wikidata="Q1572845" start="3524" end="3534" title="TV syndication" label="syndicated"/>
<link wikidata="Q2741767" start="3564" end="3572" title="Dr. Phil (TV series)" label="Dr. Phil"/>
<link wikidata="Q2012913" start="3607" end="3620" title="Harpo Studios" label="Harpo Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q4354137" start="3836" end="3864" title="King World Productions, Inc." label="King World Productions, Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q5467229" start="4025" end="4057" title="Forbes Celebrity 100" label="&amp;quot;Forbes&amp;quot; Celebrity 100"/>
<link wikidata="Q699413" start="4123" end="4145" title="Nielsen Media Research" label="Nielsen Media Research"/>
<link wikidata="Q694106" start="4349" end="4371" title="The Oprah Winfrey Show" label="The Oprah Winfrey Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q2231918" start="4757" end="4767" title="Jay McGraw" label="Jay McGraw"/>
<link wikidata="Q127173" start="5046" end="5057" title="Big Brother (TV series)" label="Big Brother"/>
<link wikidata="Q6709244" start="5392" end="5402" title="Lynn Toler" label="Lynn Toler"/>
<link wikidata="Q16249501" start="5415" end="5428" title="Divorce Court" label="Divorce Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q1148579" start="5439" end="5450" title="MyNetworkTV" label="MyNetworkTV"/>
<link wikidata="Q7730495" start="5625" end="5636" title="The Doctors (talk show)" label="The Doctors"/>
<link wikidata="Q3298949" start="5770" end="5782" title="Travis Stork" label="Travis Stork"/>
<link wikidata="Q1179189" start="5935" end="5953" title="Daytime Emmy Award" label="Daytime Emmy Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q108336842" start="6316" end="6341" title="House Calls with Dr. Phil" label="House Calls with Dr. Phil"/>
<link wikidata="Q43380" start="6357" end="6360" title="CBS" label="CBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q127163704" start="6567" end="6585" title="Merit Street Media" label="Merit Street Media"/>
<link wikidata="Q130288439" start="6777" end="6795" title="Dr. Phil Primetime" label="Dr. Phil Primetime"/>
<link wikidata="Q46994" start="6955" end="6965" title="telehealth" label="telehealth"/>
<link wikidata="Q287171" start="7296" end="7304" title="ABC News (United States)" label="ABC News"/>
<link wikidata="Q81068910" start="7414" end="7431" title="COVID-19 pandemic" label="COVID-19 pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q12859163" start="7842" end="7877" title="National Alliance on Mental Illness" label="National Alliance on Mental Illness"/>
<link wikidata="Q47596" start="8037" end="8052" title="Chicago Tribune" label="Chicago Tribune"/>
<link wikidata="Q183257" start="8332" end="8345" title="psychotherapy" label="psychotherapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q309331" start="8363" end="8388" title="The Ohio State University" label="The Ohio State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q2051893" start="8651" end="8666" title="parasocial interaction" label="parasocial bond"/>
<link wikidata="Q41057" start="8835" end="8849" title="Topeka, Kansas" label="Topeka, Kansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501926" start="9288" end="9304" title="Attorney General" label="Attorney General"/>
<link wikidata="Q3241451" start="10708" end="10725" title="childhood obesity" label="childhood obesity"/>
<link wikidata="Q786713" start="10798" end="10822" title="Federal Trade Commission" label="Federal Trade Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q65067294" start="11069" end="11091" title="unauthorized biography" label="unauthorized biography"/>
<link wikidata="Q1479654" start="11148" end="11167" title="John Wiley and Sons" label="John Wiley and Sons"/>
<link wikidata="Q43380" start="11418" end="11421" title="CBS" label="CBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q51722302" start="11485" end="11518" title="disappearance of Natalee Holloway" label="disappearance of Natalee Holloway"/>
<link wikidata="Q51722302" start="11545" end="11558" title="Deepak Kalpoe" label="Deepak Kalpoe"/>
<link wikidata="Q51722302" start="11575" end="11588" title="Satish Kalpoe" label="Satish Kalpoe"/>
<link wikidata="Q11975" start="12161" end="12175" title="Britney Spears" label="Britney Spears"/>
<link wikidata="Q130838" start="12725" end="12730" title="Today (NBC program)" label="Today"/>
<link wikidata="Q434497" start="12745" end="12760" title="Meredith Vieira" label="Meredith Vieira"/>
<link wikidata="Q3187222" start="12987" end="13001" title="Joyce Brothers" label="Joyce Brothers"/>
<link wikidata="Q7072129" start="13665" end="13678" title="Thomas Riccio (auction owner)" label="Thomas Riccio"/>
<link wikidata="Q44473" start="13763" end="13776" title="O. J. Simpson" label="O. J. Simpson"/>
<link wikidata="Q465666" start="14177" end="14196" title="American Media Inc." label="American Media Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q1814777" start="14239" end="14256" title="National Enquirer" label="National Enquirer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7279976" start="14267" end="14279" title="Radar Online" label="Radar Online"/>
<link wikidata="Q235478" start="14642" end="14656" title="Shelley Duvall" label="Shelley Duvall"/>
<link wikidata="Q276175" start="14679" end="14693" title="Vivian Kubrick" label="Vivian Kubrick"/>
<link wikidata="Q28784685" start="15330" end="15346" title="Danielle Bregoli" label="Danielle Bregoli"/>
<link wikidata="Q28784685" start="15368" end="15379" title="Bhad Bhabie" label="Bhad Bhabie"/>
<link wikidata="Q483705" start="15434" end="15449" title="Escalante, Utah" label="Escalante, Utah"/>
<link wikidata="Q214346" start="15542" end="15548" title="Viacom (2005–2019)" label="Viacom"/>
<link wikidata="Q43380" start="15553" end="15556" title="CBS" label="CBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q3536160" start="16113" end="16118" title="WebMD" label="WebMD"/>
<link wikidata="Q39681" start="16129" end="16138" title="USA Today" label="USA Today"/>
<link wikidata="Q2602337" start="16174" end="16180" title="op-eds" label="op-eds"/>
<link wikidata="Q7119727" start="16191" end="16199" title="Sportico" label="Sportico"/>
<link wikidata="Q7739683" start="16210" end="16230" title="The Hill (newspaper)" label="&amp;quot;The Hill&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q71719" start="16419" end="16441" title="Hollywood Walk of Fame" label="Hollywood Walk of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q466587" start="16532" end="16566" title="American Psychological Association" label="American Psychological Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q2231918" start="17281" end="17291" title="Jay McGraw" label="Jay McGraw"/>
<link wikidata="Q1418204" start="17347" end="17364" title="instrument rating" label="instrument rating"/>
<link wikidata="Q106039" start="17406" end="17415" title="Christian" label="Christian"/>
<link wikidata="Q22686" start="17493" end="17505" title="Donald Trump" label="Donald Trump"/>
<link wikidata="Q101110072" start="17513" end="17553" title="2024 United States presidential election" label="2024 United States presidential election"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="253414" wikidata="Q6537297" url="?curid=253414" title="Lewisham">
<text>Lewisham ( ) is an area of southeast London, England, south of Charing Cross. It is the principal area of the London Borough of Lewisham, and was within the historic county of Kent until 1889. It is identified in the London Plan as one of 35 major centres in Greater London, with a large shopping centre and street market. Lewisham had a population of 60,573 in 2011.

==History==

The earliest written reference to Lewisham – – is from a charter from 862 which established the boundaries with neighbouring Bromley.

Lewisham is sometimes said to have been founded, according to Bede, by a pagan Jute, Leof, who settled (by burning his boat) near St Mary&#x27;s Church (Ladywell) where the ground was drier, in the 6th century, but there seems to be no solid source for this speculation, and there is no such passage in Bede&#x27;s history.

As to the etymology of the name, Daniel Lysons (1796) wrote:

:&quot;In the most ancient Saxon records this place is called &quot;Levesham&quot;, that is, the house among the meadows; &quot;leswe&quot;, &quot;læs&quot;, &quot;læse&quot;, or &quot;læsew&quot;, in the Saxon, signifies a meadow, and ham, a dwelling. A Latin legal record, dated 1440, mentions a place in Kent as &quot;Levesham&quot; which may refer to Lewisham. It is now written, as well in parochial and other records as in common usage, Lewisham.&quot;

&quot;Leofshema&quot; was an important settlement at the confluence of the rivers Quaggy (from Farnborough) and Ravensbourne (Caesar&#x27;s Well, Keston), so the village expanded north into the wetter area as drainage techniques improved.

King Alfred was Lord of the Manor of Lewisham, as is celebrated by a plaque in Lewisham Library.

The Manor of Lewisham, with its appendages of Greenwich and Combe, was given by Elthruda, King Alfred&#x27;s niece, to the Saint Peter&#x27;s Abbey, Ghent in a Charter dated 18 September around 918, of which Lewisham then became a cell, or an alien priory. This grant is said to have been confirmed by King Edgar in 964, and by Edward the Confessor in 1044, with the addition of many privileges.

In the mid-17th century, the then vicar of Lewisham, Abraham Colfe, built a grammar school, a primary school and six almshouses for the inhabitants.

In the 17th century the Manor of Lewisham was purchased by George Legge, later Baron Dartmouth. His son William was raised by Queen Anne to several positions of honour and trust, and was a member of her privy council; and on 5 September 1711, was ennobled as Viscount Lewisham, and Earl of Dartmouth. His grandson George, Lord Dartmouth, obtained the privilege of holding a fair twice a year, and a market twice a week, upon Blackheath in the parish. The fair used to be held on 12 May and 11 October, but in 1772 it was discontinued, (except for the sale of cattle) by the Earl of Dartmouth, as lord of the manor.

The village of Lewisham had its nucleus in its southern part, around the parish church of St Mary, towards the present site of University Hospital Lewisham. The centre migrated north with the coming of the North Kent line to Dartford in 1849, encouraging commuter housing. The &quot;Official Illustrated Guide to South-Eastern and North and Mid-Kent Railways&quot; of June 1863, by George Measom, describes Lewisham as follows: &quot;Lewisham Station, situated on the slope of an eminence amidst picturesque scenery, beautiful green meadows rising abruptly to the summit of the hill on the left, dotted with handsome residences and gardens, while the Common is seen intersected by various crossroads and studded with country inns and houses on the low ground or valley to the right. The area of the parish is 5,789 acres... Lord of the manor, the Earl of Dartmouth to whom it gives the title Viscount.&quot;

Lewisham was administratively part of Kent until 1889, and then formed part of the Metropolitan Borough of Lewisham in the County of London until 1965.

The town centre was hit by a V-1 flying bomb in 1944: there were over 300 casualties including 51 fatalities, and it devastated the high street, which was fully restored by the mid-1950s. This horrific event is commemorated by a plaque outside the Lewisham Shopping Centre (opened in 1977). The plaque was on the pavement outside the Marks &amp; Spencer store in the main shopping precinct. However, suffering wear and tear, the local authority arranged for it to be mounted to the façade.
In 1955 Sainsbury&#x27;s opened a store in Lewisham which was reported to be Europe&#x27;s largest self-service supermarket, with 7,500 square feet of retail space, although the one now incorporated in the 1977 shopping centre is much smaller. The area at the north end of the High Street was pedestrianised in 1994. It is home to a daily street market and a local landmark, the clock tower, completed in 1900 to commemorate Queen Victoria&#x27;s Diamond Jubilee in 1897. The police station, opened in 2004 to replace the station in Ladywell, is one of the largest in Europe.

Lewisham Cricket Club was one of the most prestigious London sides during the Victorian era. From 1864 they played at Lewisham Cricket Ground, which lay north of Ladywell Road, until its closure later in the 19th century. Lewisham Swimming Club was also very successful, with several of its members representing England at water polo and other gymkhana events. During the First World War, Lewisham Hospital&#x27;s infirmary became the Lewisham Military Hospital, and during the Second World War the hospital was hit by a V-1 flying bomb, which destroyed two wards, injured 70 people and killed one nurse.

Lewisham is also the site of one of the worst disasters on the British railway network in the 20th century. On 4 December 1957 a crowded steam-hauled passenger express headed for the Kent coast overran signals at danger in thick fog near St Johns station and crashed into a stationary electric train for the Hayes branch line. The force of the impact brought down an overhead railway bridge onto the wreckage below. An electric multiple unit about to cross the bridge towards Nunhead managed to pull up in time. Ninety passengers and crew died in the accident.

In 1969, Lewisham was identified in the Greater London Council&#x27;s &quot;Greater London Development Plan&quot; as one of the top tier Major Strategic Centres. However, the Major Strategic Centres were identified based on their exiting retail trade turnover and their relationship with the Primary Road Network was mostly coincidental in that only some of them coincided with the primary network.

In 1977, the Battle of Lewisham saw 500 members of the National Front, who were attempting to march through the area, and their police escort, attacked by more than 4000 counter-demonstrators.

The Docklands Light Railway was extended to Lewisham in 1999. Molesworth Street widened to create a bypass around the shopping area as part of the &quot;Lewisham 2000&quot; project, including sculptures by John Maine. This saw the demolition of the 1932 art deco Lewisham Odeon which had also provided a live music venue hosting artists from Johnny Cash to the Rolling Stones.

The 2010s and early 2020s saw the construction of many high-rise residential buildings around Loampit Vale and Molesworth Street. The former roundabout by Lewisham station was replaced with an &quot;H&quot; junction to release land for further private development. This was to be supported by the cancelled Bakerloo Line extension to Lewisham.

In 2013 the Glass Mill Leisure Centre opened opposite Lewisham station with its façade defined by a large scale embedded kinetic artwork &quot;Razzle Dazzle Boogie Woogie&quot; by the artist Phil Coy. The project was awarded the Best Built Project – Community Scale Scheme in the London Planning Awards 2013/14.

==Governance==
The parish of Lewisham was governed by a vestry; and from 1855 until 1900 by the Lewisham District Board of Works, in combination with Penge. Following the London Government Act 1899, the County of London was split into 28 metropolitan boroughs in 1900. Lewisham, with the parish of Lee, became part of the Metropolitan Borough of Lewisham. In 1965, under the London Government Act 1963, the current 32 London boroughs were formed and today Lewisham is part of the London Borough of Lewisham.

Lewisham London Borough Council is based in Catford. The current directly elected mayor is Brenda Dacres. In the London Assembly, the London Borough of Lewisham is joined with the Royal Borough of Greenwich to form the Greenwich and Lewisham constituency, with the current Assembly Member being Len Duvall. For Westminster elections, Lewisham is covered by the Lewisham Deptford constituency, whose Member of Parliament (MP) is Vicky Foxcroft.

==Commercial area and amenities==
Lewisham&#x27;s commercial area is one of the largest in south-east London. Lewisham Shopping Centre, opened in 1977, has 70 stores and is over 330,000 square feet. Shops include Marks &amp; Spencer, W H Smith, Sainsbury&#x27;s, H&amp;M, TK Maxx, JD Sports, SportsDirect.com, Argos and Boots. The centre is between Molesworth Street (a dual carriageway section of the A21) and Lewisham High Street. Lewisham Market and the Central Library are outside the shopping centre in the High Street. Also part of the complex is the Lewisham House office tower, once the tallest building in the borough and formerly occupied by Citibank. There are proposals to convert this brutalist skyscraper to flats.

Lewisham has a bowling alley and the Glassmill Swimming pool and Gym.

Lewisham has a number of parks, such as Hilly Fields and Lewisham Park.

For 14 years between 2001 and 2015, Lewisham was the only London Borough not to have a cinema. Lewisham once had many cinemas, such as the Lewisham Odeon. In 1930 there were 30 venues showing films. As of 2022, there is only one cinema operating in the borough: Catford Mews.

Opened in 1894, University Hospital Lewisham is a National Health Service, acute hospital run by the Lewisham and Greenwich NHS Trust serving the whole London Borough of Lewisham as well as some surrounding areas. In July 2012 the government recommended that Lewisham&#x27;s Accident &amp; Emergency ward should be closed, with emergency provision transferred to Queen Elizabeth Hospital, London. However, there was a strong campaign in Lewisham against the proposed closure, including a march on 24 November 2012, and a successful legal challenge. In July 2013, the High Court ruled that the closure of Lewisham A&amp;E could not go ahead. In October 2013, the Court of Appeal ruled that Health Secretary Jeremy Hunt did not have power to implement cuts at Lewisham Hospital.

==Education==
Secondary schools in Lewisham include:
* Addey and Stanhope School
* Bonus Pastor Catholic College
* Conisborough College
* Deptford Green School
* Forest Hill School (Boys only)
* Haberdashers&#x27; Aske&#x27;s Hatcham College
* Haberdashers&#x27; Knights Academy
* Prendergast School
* Prendergast Ladywell School
* Prendergast Vale School
* St Matthew Academy
* Sedgehill School
* Sydenham School
* Trinity Church of England School

==Transport==
===National Rail===
Lewisham station provides the area with Southeastern services to London Victoria, London Charing Cross, London Cannon Street, Dartford via Woolwich Arsenal, Dartford via Bexleyheath, Gravesend via Bexleyheath, Slade Green via Bexleyheath, Slade Green via Sidcup, Hayes and Orpington.

===DLR===
Lewisham station also provides DLR services to Bank via Canary Wharf.

===Buses===
Lewisham is served by many London Buses routes.
*21 to Newington Green via New Cross, London Bridge and Moorgate
*47 to Bellingham via Catford or to Shoreditch via Canada Water and London Bridge (24 Hour service)
*54 to Elmers End via Catford and Beckenham or to Woolwich via Blackheath
*75 to Croydon via Catford, Penge and South Norwood
*89 to Slade Green via Blackheath, Welling and Bexleyheath
*108 to Stratford via Blackheath, North Greenwich, Poplar and Bow (24 Hour service)
*122 to Crystal Palace via Brockley, Forest Hill and Sydenham or to Plumstead via Eltham and Woolwich
*136 to Elephant &amp; Castle via New Cross and Peckham or to Grove Park via Catford
*178 to Woolwich via Kidbrooke
*180 to Belvedere via Greenwich and Woolwich
*181 to Grove Park via Catford
*185 to Victoria via Catford, Dulwich and Camberwell
*199 to Bellingham via Catford or to Canada Water via Greenwich
*208 to Orpington via Catford and Bromley
*225 to Canada Water via New Cross or to Hither Green
*261 to Locksbottom via Grove Park and Bromley
*273 to Petts Wood via Grove Park and Chislehurst
*284 to Grove Park via Catford
*321 to Foots Cray via Eltham and Sidcup or to New Cross (24 Hour service)
*380 to Belmarsh Prison via Blackheath and Woolwich
*436 to Battersea via New Cross, Peckham and Camberwell
*P4 to Brixton via Brockley and Dulwich
*N21 to Bexleyheath via Eltham or to Trafalgar Square via New Cross and London Bridge (Night Bus)
*N89 to Erith via Blackheath, Welling and Bexleyheath or to Trafalgar Square via New Cross, Peckham, Elephant &amp; Castle and Blackfriars (Night Bus)
*N136 to Oxford Circus via New Cross, Peckham, Camberwell, Victoria and Trafalgar Square or to Chislehurst via Catford and Grove Park (Night Bus)
*N199 to St Mary Cray via Catford, Bromley and Petts Wood or to Trafalgar Square via Greenwich, Canada Water and London Bridge (Night Bus)

==Redevelopment==
Lewisham London Borough Council&#x27;s local development plan was intended to improve Lewisham&#x27;s town centre to become a metropolitan centre to rival Bromley, Croydon and Kingston upon Thames.

There is a skyscraper adjacent to the shopping centre which used to be owned by Citibank until they moved to the Docklands which may be converted to residential.

There are four major development sites around on Loampit Vale:

*The Renaissance development comprises flats in buildings from five to 24 storeys, including private and L&amp;Q social housing, as well as the new Glass Mill Leisure Centre, which opened in 2013 and replaced the Ladywell leisure centre.
*Lewisham Gateway is a much-delayed redevelopment site bounded by the DLR station, Lewisham High Street, the shopping centre and the railway to Blackheath. The highway layout has been changed from a roundabout to two signalised junctions, while the rivers Ravensbourne and Quaggy have been re-routed. The development is intended to include shops, restaurants, bars, cafes, leisure facilities and up to 800 homes. The first phase of construction started in May 2014 with a 15 and 25-story residential building east of the DLR station.
*Thurston Road industrial estate had planning consent granted in 2008; however, the development has been heavily delayed. The development was completed in 2016 and includes L&amp;Q social housing. The scheme is a mixed used site, which includes residential and commercial buildings of between two and 17 storeys, as well a car park.
*The former Sherwood Court industrial estate is now the Chapter student housing scheme.
*Lewisham Shopping Centre and surrounding areas will be redeveloped to provide 1700 new homes, a revamped shopping centre high street and a green meadow running through the middle.

==Notable people==

Among those who were born or have lived in Lewisham are:

*Joe Absolom (actor) born and brought up in Lewisham 
*Merky ACE (grime music artist) born and brought up in Lewisham 
*Ginger Baker (drummer of Cream) born and brought up in Lewisham
*Natasha Bedingfield (singer/songwriter) brought up in Lewisham 
*Rosa May Billinghurst (suffragette) lived in Lewisham
*D-Block Europe (hip hop collective) born and brought up in Lewisham 
*Yannick Bolasie (footballer), brought up in Lewisham
*Herbert Burden youngest soldier to be executed by the British Army in World War I, born in Lewisham
*Kate Bush (musician) lived in Brockley and Lewisham
*Hughroy Currie (Boxer), British Heavyweight Champion in 1985–86. Lived in Catford, Brockley and briefly Bromley.
*Ann Batten Cristall (1769–1848), poet and schoolteacher
*General Sir John Crocker (British Army general, service in World War I and World War II), born in Lewisham
*Leland Lewis Duncan (photographer, writer) born in Lewisham
*Franz Goedecker (merchant and artist), lived in Lewisham
*Malcolm Hardee (comedian) lived in Blackheath and Lewisham
*Danielle Harold (actress best known for playing Lola in &quot;Eastenders&quot;) born and raised in Lewisham
*Keeley Hazell (page-3 girl &amp; model) born in Lewisham
*Jessica Hynes (actress and comedian) born in Lewisham
*Greg James (TV and radio presenter) born in Lewisham
*Eman Kellam (TV presenter) born and brought up in Lewisham
*Frank King (cricketer) born in Lewisham
*Kwes (record music producer and Warp recording artist) born and brought up in Lewisham
*Elsa Lanchester (Anglo-American actress) born in Lewisham
*Lillie Langtry (actress) lived in Wickham Way, Lewisham
*Jude Law (actor) lived in Lewisham
*Neal Lawson (politician) was born in Lewisham
*Angie Le Mar (comedian, radio broadcaster) was born and brought up in Lewisham
*Emma Leslie (English writer, 1838–1909) lived in Lewisham
*Delroy Lindo (actor) born in Lewisham
*Marie Lloyd (entertainer) lived in Lewisham and New Cross
*Ruben Loftus-Cheek (footballer)
*Alexander McQueen (designer) born in Lewisham
*Josh Maja (footballer), born in Lewisham
*Russ Millions (rapper) born and brought up in Lewisham
*MNEK (musician) was born in Lewisham
*Edith Nesbit (writer) lived in Blackheath, Grove Park and Lewisham
*P Money (Grime music artist) born and brought up in Lewisham
*Eddie Nketiah (footballer), born in Lewisham
*Novelist (Grime music artist) born and brought up in Lewisham
*Gary Oldman (actor) born and raised in New Cross
*William Page (historian and general editor of the Victoria County History) lived in Lewisham from 1875 until he emigrated to Queensland in 1881
*Jonathan Palmer former Formula One driver and commentator
*Mica Paris (musician) lived in Lewisham
*Gladys Powers (centenarian), born in Lewisham
*Maxi Priest (musician), born and raised in Lewisham
*Luke Pritchard (musician), born in Lewisham
*Louise Redknapp (singer, TV presenter and former wife of footballer Jamie Redknapp), born in Lewisham
*Kieran Richardson (footballer) lived in Lewisham
*David Rocastle (footballer) born and raised in Lewisham and Brockley. Attended primary school in Brockley
*George Solomos (American writer) lived in Catford.
*Sidi Bou Said (band) consists of four women from Lewisham
*Doris Stokes (spirit-medium) lived in Lewisham
*Doveton Sturdee British Admiral of the Fleet, born in Lewisham
*David Sylvian (musician) lived in Lewisham.
*Kae Tempest (spoken word performer, poet, recording artist, novelist and playwright) grew up in Brockley
*Eamonn Walker (TV and film actor, husband of Sandra Walker), born in Lewisham
*Richard Walsh (actor), born in Lewisham
*Conrad Williams Commonwealth Games 2014 gold medalist
*Ian Wright (footballer) lived in Lewisham and Brockley
*Shaun Wright-Phillips (footballer and son of Ian Wright) grew up in Brockley
*Sid Vicious (musician), born in Lewisham
*Troy von Scheibner (magician), born in Lewisham
*Henry Williamson (author), born and raised in Lewisham
*Bill Wyman, bass player of the Rolling Stones, born in Lewisham Hospital

==Geography==

Almost all of the SE13 postcode district, which is associated with Lewisham is within the London Borough of Lewisham, except for the Coldbath Estate and part of the Orchard Estate along Lewisham Road, which are covered by the Royal Borough of Greenwich. The town includes areas such as St Johns and Hither Green, as well as Lee and Ladywell to the south and east.

===Climate===
The nearest Met Office climate station is based in Greenwich Park:

==See also==
*London Borough of Lewisham
*Lewisham Shopping Centre
*University Hospital Lewisham
*Lewisam
*Lewisham, Sydney, named after Lewisham
*Lewisham Station
*Battle of Lewisham
*Lewisham Rail Crash

==References==
==External links==

* Lewisham Local History Society
*The Battle of Lewisham – an article on london based website libcom.org
* Lewisham Law Centre
* Lewisham cctv
* Lewisham at Surbubia
* Lewisham Photographs
* Lewisham Voices
* London Borough of Lewisham
* Lewisham Forum
* 90 Years of Life in Lewisham
* Lewisham Councillor Mike Harris</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6537297" start="0" end="8" title="Lewisham" label="Lewisham"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="37" end="43" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q216185" start="63" end="76" title="Charing Cross" label="Charing Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q215030" start="110" end="136" title="London Borough of Lewisham" label="London Borough of Lewisham"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138494" start="157" end="172" title="Historic counties of England" label="historic county"/>
<link wikidata="Q23298" start="176" end="180" title="Kent" label="Kent"/>
<link wikidata="Q1571368" start="217" end="228" title="London Plan" label="London Plan"/>
<link wikidata="Q29536" start="590" end="595" title="pagan" label="pagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q154845" start="596" end="600" title="Jutes" label="Jute"/>
<link wikidata="Q345" start="647" end="654" title="St Mary" label="St Mary"/>
<link wikidata="Q6470814" start="670" end="678" title="Ladywell" label="Ladywell"/>
<link wikidata="Q5217989" start="875" end="888" title="Daniel Lysons (antiquarian)" label="Daniel Lysons"/>
<link wikidata="Q101985" start="931" end="936" title="Saxon" label="Saxon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2473769" start="1446" end="1452" title="River Quaggy" label="Quaggy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1787950" start="1476" end="1488" title="River Ravensbourne" label="Ravensbourne"/>
<link wikidata="Q83476" start="1604" end="1615" title="Alfred the Great" label="King Alfred"/>
<link wikidata="Q83476" start="1792" end="1803" title="Alfred the Great" label="King Alfred"/>
<link wikidata="Q1170767" start="1825" end="1856" title="Saint Peter&amp;#x27;s Abbey, Ghent" label="Saint Peter&amp;#x27;s Abbey, Ghent"/>
<link wikidata="Q4726489" start="1945" end="1957" title="alien priory" label="alien priory"/>
<link wikidata="Q192925" start="2004" end="2014" title="Edgar the Peaceful" label="King Edgar"/>
<link wikidata="Q130005" start="2030" end="2050" title="Edward the Confessor" label="Edward the Confessor"/>
<link wikidata="Q15512271" start="2152" end="2165" title="Abraham Colfe" label="Abraham Colfe"/>
<link wikidata="Q967098" start="2175" end="2189" title="grammar school" label="grammar school"/>
<link wikidata="Q9842" start="2193" end="2207" title="primary school" label="primary school"/>
<link wikidata="Q15548045" start="2216" end="2225" title="almshouse" label="almshouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q3760572" start="2308" end="2320" title="George Legge, 1st Baron Dartmouth" label="George Legge"/>
<link wikidata="Q5326247" start="2328" end="2343" title="Earl of Dartmouth" label="Baron Dartmouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q9374853" start="2353" end="2360" title="William Legge, 1st Earl of Dartmouth" label="William"/>
<link wikidata="Q119702" start="2375" end="2385" title="Anne, Queen of Great Britain" label="Queen Anne"/>
<link wikidata="Q683120" start="2452" end="2465" title="Privy Council of the United Kingdom" label="privy council"/>
<link wikidata="Q5326247" start="2531" end="2548" title="Earl of Dartmouth" label="Earl of Dartmouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1815782" start="2845" end="2862" title="lord of the manor" label="lord of the manor"/>
<link wikidata="Q7068215" start="2897" end="2904" title="nucleated village" label="nucleus"/>
<link wikidata="Q14956783" start="2992" end="3020" title="University Hospital Lewisham" label="University Hospital Lewisham"/>
<link wikidata="Q529213" start="3071" end="3086" title="North Kent line" label="North Kent line"/>
<link wikidata="Q2380329" start="3090" end="3098" title="Dartford railway station" label="Dartford"/>
<link wikidata="Q23298" start="3812" end="3816" title="Kent" label="Kent"/>
<link wikidata="Q1925821" start="3857" end="3889" title="Metropolitan Borough of Lewisham" label="Metropolitan Borough of Lewisham"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137312" start="3897" end="3913" title="County of London" label="County of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q153348" start="3956" end="3971" title="V-1 flying bomb" label="V-1 flying bomb"/>
<link wikidata="Q6537326" start="4175" end="4199" title="Lewisham Shopping Centre" label="Lewisham Shopping Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q714491" start="4261" end="4280" title="Marks &amp;amp; Spencer" label="Marks &amp;amp; Spencer"/>
<link wikidata="Q152096" start="4425" end="4441" title="Sainsbury&amp;#x27;s" label="Sainsbury&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q221488" start="4710" end="4720" title="pedestrian" label="pedestrian"/>
<link wikidata="Q853854" start="4796" end="4807" title="clock tower" label="clock tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q9439" start="4842" end="4856" title="Victoria of the United Kingdom" label="Queen Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1208163" start="4864" end="4879" title="Diamond Jubilee" label="Diamond Jubilee"/>
<link wikidata="Q6470814" start="4950" end="4958" title="Ladywell" label="Ladywell"/>
<link wikidata="Q182688" start="5072" end="5085" title="Victorian era" label="Victorian era"/>
<link wikidata="Q7707" start="5317" end="5327" title="water polo" label="water polo"/>
<link wikidata="Q14181442" start="5338" end="5346" title="gymkhana" label="gymkhana"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="5366" end="5381" title="World War I" label="First World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="5472" end="5488" title="World War II" label="Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1312322" start="5640" end="5655" title="Lewisham rail crash" label="worst disasters"/>
<link wikidata="Q1505124" start="5663" end="5686" title="Rail transport in Great Britain" label="British railway network"/>
<link wikidata="Q23298" start="5783" end="5787" title="Kent" label="Kent"/>
<link wikidata="Q37477" start="5829" end="5832" title="fog" label="fog"/>
<link wikidata="Q7593815" start="5838" end="5854" title="St Johns railway station" label="St Johns station"/>
<link wikidata="Q2236241" start="6076" end="6083" title="Nunhead" label="Nunhead"/>
<link wikidata="Q1476542" start="6202" end="6224" title="Greater London Council" label="Greater London Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q4871551" start="6575" end="6593" title="Battle of Lewisham" label="Battle of Lewisham"/>
<link wikidata="Q216360" start="6760" end="6783" title="Docklands Light Railway" label="Docklands Light Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q801096" start="6800" end="6808" title="Lewisham DLR station" label="Lewisham"/>
<link wikidata="Q16932600" start="7019" end="7033" title="Lewisham Odeon" label="Lewisham Odeon"/>
<link wikidata="Q18142" start="7189" end="7198" title="high-rise" label="high-rise"/>
<link wikidata="Q801096" start="7533" end="7549" title="Lewisham station" label="Lewisham station"/>
<link wikidata="Q101775699" start="7670" end="7678" title="Phil Coy" label="Phil Coy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7923504" start="7848" end="7854" title="administrative vestry" label="vestry"/>
<link wikidata="Q6537317" start="7888" end="7920" title="Lewisham District (Metropolis)" label="Lewisham District Board of Works"/>
<link wikidata="Q6670448" start="7963" end="7989" title="London Government Act 1899" label="London Government Act 1899"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137312" start="7995" end="8011" title="County of London" label="County of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q1925821" start="8114" end="8146" title="Metropolitan Borough of Lewisham" label="Metropolitan Borough of Lewisham"/>
<link wikidata="Q6670449" start="8167" end="8193" title="London Government Act 1963" label="London Government Act 1963"/>
<link wikidata="Q215030" start="8272" end="8298" title="London Borough of Lewisham" label="London Borough of Lewisham"/>
<link wikidata="Q6537320" start="8301" end="8332" title="Lewisham London Borough Council" label="Lewisham London Borough Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q124798613" start="8392" end="8405" title="Brenda Dacres" label="Brenda Dacres"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135593" start="8414" end="8429" title="London Assembly" label="London Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q693450" start="8481" end="8507" title="Royal Borough of Greenwich" label="Royal Borough of Greenwich"/>
<link wikidata="Q3116153" start="8520" end="8555" title="Greenwich and Lewisham (London Assembly constituency)" label="Greenwich and Lewisham constituency"/>
<link wikidata="Q6521755" start="8596" end="8606" title="Len Duvall" label="Len Duvall"/>
<link wikidata="Q597358" start="8662" end="8679" title="Lewisham Deptford (UK Parliament constituency)" label="Lewisham Deptford"/>
<link wikidata="Q16707842" start="8700" end="8720" title="Member of Parliament (United Kingdom)" label="Member of Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q19957802" start="8729" end="8743" title="Vicky Foxcroft" label="Vicky Foxcroft"/>
<link wikidata="Q6537326" start="8856" end="8880" title="Lewisham Shopping Centre" label="Lewisham Shopping Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q714491" start="8959" end="8978" title="Marks &amp;amp; Spencer" label="Marks &amp;amp; Spencer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1548712" start="8980" end="8989" title="W H Smith" label="W H Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q188326" start="9009" end="9016" title="H&amp;amp;M" label="H&amp;amp;M"/>
<link wikidata="Q23823668" start="9018" end="9025" title="TK Maxx" label="TK Maxx"/>
<link wikidata="Q6108019" start="9027" end="9036" title="JD Sports" label="JD Sports"/>
<link wikidata="Q7579661" start="9038" end="9054" title="SportsDirect.com" label="SportsDirect.com"/>
<link wikidata="Q4789707" start="9056" end="9061" title="Argos (retailer)" label="Argos"/>
<link wikidata="Q6123139" start="9066" end="9071" title="Boots UK" label="Boots"/>
<link wikidata="Q857063" start="9398" end="9406" title="Citibank" label="Citibank"/>
<link wikidata="Q14956783" start="9913" end="9941" title="University Hospital Lewisham" label="University Hospital Lewisham"/>
<link wikidata="Q918396" start="9947" end="9970" title="National Health Service" label="National Health Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q4677936" start="9972" end="9977" title="acute medicine" label="acute"/>
<link wikidata="Q16996252" start="9998" end="10030" title="Lewisham and Greenwich NHS Trust" label="Lewisham and Greenwich NHS Trust"/>
<link wikidata="Q1295316" start="10172" end="10201" title="Emergency department" label="Accident &amp;amp; Emergency ward"/>
<link wikidata="Q7270343" start="10260" end="10292" title="Queen Elizabeth Hospital, London" label="Queen Elizabeth Hospital, London"/>
<link wikidata="Q1617747" start="10464" end="10474" title="High Court of Justice" label="High Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137751" start="10559" end="10574" title="Court of Appeal of England and Wales" label="Court of Appeal"/>
<link wikidata="Q333533" start="10603" end="10614" title="Jeremy Hunt (politician)" label="Jeremy Hunt"/>
<link wikidata="Q4681059" start="10730" end="10755" title="Addey and Stanhope School" label="Addey and Stanhope School"/>
<link wikidata="Q4942660" start="10758" end="10787" title="Bonus Pastor Catholic College" label="Bonus Pastor Catholic College"/>
<link wikidata="Q16896543" start="10790" end="10810" title="Conisborough College" label="Conisborough College"/>
<link wikidata="Q5260950" start="10813" end="10834" title="Deptford Green School" label="Deptford Green School"/>
<link wikidata="Q5468940" start="10837" end="10855" title="Forest Hill School" label="Forest Hill School"/>
<link wikidata="Q15222486" start="10870" end="10916" title="Haberdashers&amp;#x27; Aske&amp;#x27;s Hatcham College" label="Haberdashers&amp;#x27; Aske&amp;#x27;s Hatcham College"/>
<link wikidata="Q5636712" start="10919" end="10953" title="Haberdashers&amp;#x27; Knights Academy" label="Haberdashers&amp;#x27; Knights Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7240535" start="10956" end="10974" title="Prendergast School" label="Prendergast School"/>
<link wikidata="Q16897010" start="10977" end="11004" title="Prendergast Ladywell School" label="Prendergast Ladywell School"/>
<link wikidata="Q16897012" start="11007" end="11030" title="Prendergast Vale School" label="Prendergast Vale School"/>
<link wikidata="Q7594709" start="11033" end="11051" title="St Matthew Academy" label="St Matthew Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7445239" start="11054" end="11070" title="Sedgehill School" label="Sedgehill School"/>
<link wikidata="Q7659785" start="11073" end="11088" title="Sydenham School" label="Sydenham School"/>
<link wikidata="Q16897463" start="11091" end="11123" title="Trinity Church of England School" label="Trinity Church of England School"/>
<link wikidata="Q801096" start="11159" end="11175" title="Lewisham station" label="Lewisham station"/>
<link wikidata="Q108888230" start="11199" end="11211" title="Southeastern (train operating company)" label="Southeastern"/>
<link wikidata="Q985210" start="11224" end="11239" title="London Victoria railway station" label="London Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q801128" start="11241" end="11261" title="Charing Cross railway station" label="London Charing Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q800615" start="11263" end="11283" title="Cannon Street railway station" label="London Cannon Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q2380329" start="11285" end="11293" title="Dartford railway station" label="Dartford"/>
<link wikidata="Q801639" start="11298" end="11314" title="Woolwich Arsenal railway station" label="Woolwich Arsenal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3262067" start="11329" end="11340" title="Bexleyheath railway station" label="Bexleyheath"/>
<link wikidata="Q2615632" start="11342" end="11351" title="Gravesend railway station" label="Gravesend"/>
<link wikidata="Q2155070" start="11369" end="11380" title="Slade Green railway station" label="Slade Green"/>
<link wikidata="Q2068572" start="11414" end="11420" title="Sidcup railway station" label="Sidcup"/>
<link wikidata="Q2479740" start="11422" end="11427" title="Hayes railway station" label="Hayes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1956050" start="11432" end="11441" title="Orpington railway station" label="Orpington"/>
<link wikidata="Q216360" start="11485" end="11488" title="Docklands Light Railway" label="DLR"/>
<link wikidata="Q806704" start="11501" end="11505" title="Bank–Monument station" label="Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q1032811" start="11510" end="11522" title="Canary Wharf DLR station" label="Canary Wharf"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192411" start="11564" end="11576" title="London Buses" label="London Buses"/>
<link wikidata="Q20055445" start="11586" end="11588" title="London Buses route 21" label="21"/>
<link wikidata="Q122897" start="11592" end="11607" title="Newington Green" label="Newington Green"/>
<link wikidata="Q369361" start="11612" end="11621" title="New Cross" label="New Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q801125" start="11623" end="11636" title="London Bridge station" label="London Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q2356445" start="11641" end="11649" title="Moorgate" label="Moorgate"/>
<link wikidata="Q6608454" start="11651" end="11653" title="London Buses route 47" label="47"/>
<link wikidata="Q2488252" start="11657" end="11667" title="Bellingham, London" label="Bellingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q305029" start="11672" end="11679" title="Catford" label="Catford"/>
<link wikidata="Q1027127" start="11686" end="11696" title="Shoreditch" label="Shoreditch"/>
<link wikidata="Q5029446" start="11701" end="11713" title="Canada Water bus station" label="Canada Water"/>
<link wikidata="Q6608454" start="11751" end="11753" title="London Buses route 54" label="54"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076782" start="11757" end="11767" title="Elmers End" label="Elmers End"/>
<link wikidata="Q123372" start="11784" end="11793" title="Beckenham" label="Beckenham"/>
<link wikidata="Q1006232" start="11800" end="11808" title="Woolwich" label="Woolwich"/>
<link wikidata="Q880861" start="11813" end="11823" title="Blackheath, London" label="Blackheath"/>
<link wikidata="Q16986572" start="11825" end="11827" title="London Buses route 75" label="75"/>
<link wikidata="Q2213391" start="11831" end="11838" title="Croydon" label="Croydon"/>
<link wikidata="Q124007" start="11852" end="11857" title="Penge" label="Penge"/>
<link wikidata="Q2265962" start="11862" end="11875" title="South Norwood" label="South Norwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q6670145" start="11877" end="11879" title="London Buses route 89" label="89"/>
<link wikidata="Q146225" start="11883" end="11894" title="Slade Green" label="Slade Green"/>
<link wikidata="Q146779" start="11911" end="11918" title="Welling" label="Welling"/>
<link wikidata="Q146732" start="11923" end="11934" title="Bexleyheath" label="Bexleyheath"/>
<link wikidata="Q6669917" start="11936" end="11939" title="London Buses route 108" label="108"/>
<link wikidata="Q7622001" start="11943" end="11952" title="Stratford bus station" label="Stratford"/>
<link wikidata="Q7055510" start="11969" end="11984" title="North Greenwich bus station" label="North Greenwich"/>
<link wikidata="Q123360" start="11986" end="11992" title="Poplar, London" label="Poplar"/>
<link wikidata="Q122607" start="11997" end="12000" title="Bow, London" label="Bow"/>
<link wikidata="Q6608454" start="12020" end="12023" title="London Buses route 122" label="122"/>
<link wikidata="Q122909" start="12027" end="12041" title="Crystal Palace, London" label="Crystal Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q2216536" start="12046" end="12054" title="Brockley" label="Brockley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1626233" start="12056" end="12067" title="Forest Hill, London" label="Forest Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q2104233" start="12072" end="12080" title="Sydenham, London" label="Sydenham"/>
<link wikidata="Q946533" start="12087" end="12096" title="Plumstead" label="Plumstead"/>
<link wikidata="Q2057625" start="12101" end="12107" title="Eltham, London" label="Eltham"/>
<link wikidata="Q6608454" start="12122" end="12125" title="London Buses route 136" label="136"/>
<link wikidata="Q2716414" start="12129" end="12150" title="Elephant &amp;amp; Castle" label="Elephant &amp;amp; Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2690524" start="12169" end="12176" title="Peckham" label="Peckham"/>
<link wikidata="Q5611425" start="12183" end="12193" title="Grove Park, Lewisham" label="Grove Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q6608454" start="12207" end="12210" title="London Buses route 178" label="178"/>
<link wikidata="Q1006232" start="12214" end="12222" title="Woolwich" label="Woolwich"/>
<link wikidata="Q2482914" start="12227" end="12236" title="Kidbrooke" label="Kidbrooke"/>
<link wikidata="Q17510126" start="12238" end="12241" title="London Buses route 180" label="180"/>
<link wikidata="Q147108" start="12245" end="12254" title="Belvedere, London" label="Belvedere"/>
<link wikidata="Q179385" start="12259" end="12268" title="Greenwich, London" label="Greenwich"/>
<link wikidata="Q6608454" start="12283" end="12286" title="London Buses route 181" label="181"/>
<link wikidata="Q6669985" start="12314" end="12317" title="London Buses route 185" label="185"/>
<link wikidata="Q985210" start="12321" end="12329" title="London Victoria railway station" label="Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q146766" start="12343" end="12350" title="Dulwich" label="Dulwich"/>
<link wikidata="Q385060" start="12355" end="12365" title="Camberwell" label="Camberwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q6608454" start="12367" end="12370" title="London Buses route 199" label="199"/>
<link wikidata="Q6608454" start="12431" end="12434" title="London Buses route 208" label="208"/>
<link wikidata="Q123977" start="12438" end="12447" title="Orpington" label="Orpington"/>
<link wikidata="Q6608454" start="12473" end="12476" title="London Buses route 225" label="225"/>
<link wikidata="Q2252580" start="12513" end="12525" title="Hither Green" label="Hither Green"/>
<link wikidata="Q6608454" start="12527" end="12530" title="London Buses route 261" label="261"/>
<link wikidata="Q124015" start="12534" end="12545" title="Locksbottom" label="Locksbottom"/>
<link wikidata="Q6608454" start="12574" end="12577" title="London Buses route 273" label="273"/>
<link wikidata="Q123296" start="12581" end="12591" title="Petts Wood" label="Petts Wood"/>
<link wikidata="Q122917" start="12611" end="12622" title="Chislehurst" label="Chislehurst"/>
<link wikidata="Q6608454" start="12624" end="12627" title="London Buses route 284" label="284"/>
<link wikidata="Q6608454" start="12655" end="12658" title="London Buses route 321" label="321"/>
<link wikidata="Q146254" start="12662" end="12672" title="Foots Cray" label="Foots Cray"/>
<link wikidata="Q146705" start="12688" end="12694" title="Sidcup" label="Sidcup"/>
<link wikidata="Q6608454" start="12730" end="12733" title="London Buses route 380" label="380"/>
<link wikidata="Q3403995" start="12737" end="12752" title="Belmarsh Prison" label="Belmarsh Prison"/>
<link wikidata="Q6670093" start="12782" end="12785" title="London Buses route 436" label="436"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138912" start="12789" end="12798" title="Battersea" label="Battersea"/>
<link wikidata="Q6608454" start="12838" end="12840" title="London Buses route P4" label="P4"/>
<link wikidata="Q146690" start="12844" end="12851" title="Brixton" label="Brixton"/>
<link wikidata="Q6630672" start="12878" end="12881" title="London Buses route N21" label="N21"/>
<link wikidata="Q129143" start="12914" end="12930" title="Trafalgar Square" label="Trafalgar Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q6630672" start="12976" end="12979" title="London Buses route N89" label="N89"/>
<link wikidata="Q146671" start="12983" end="12988" title="Erith" label="Erith"/>
<link wikidata="Q880829" start="13102" end="13113" title="Blackfriars, London" label="Blackfriars"/>
<link wikidata="Q6630672" start="13127" end="13131" title="London Buses route N136" label="N136"/>
<link wikidata="Q1996213" start="13135" end="13148" title="Oxford Circus" label="Oxford Circus"/>
<link wikidata="Q122917" start="13221" end="13232" title="Chislehurst" label="Chislehurst"/>
<link wikidata="Q6630672" start="13273" end="13277" title="London Buses route N199" label="N199"/>
<link wikidata="Q123350" start="13281" end="13293" title="St Mary Cray" label="St Mary Cray"/>
<link wikidata="Q6537320" start="13430" end="13461" title="Lewisham London Borough Council" label="Lewisham London Borough Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q122892" start="13585" end="13592" title="Bromley" label="Bromley"/>
<link wikidata="Q2213391" start="13594" end="13601" title="Croydon" label="Croydon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2321706" start="13606" end="13626" title="Kingston upon Thames" label="Kingston upon Thames"/>
<link wikidata="Q857063" start="13709" end="13717" title="Citibank" label="Citibank"/>
<link wikidata="Q124041" start="13742" end="13751" title="London Docklands" label="Docklands"/>
<link wikidata="Q20713470" start="13961" end="13968" title="L&amp;amp;Q" label="L&amp;amp;Q"/>
<link wikidata="Q30313989" start="14015" end="14029" title="leisure centre" label="Leisure Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q6537326" start="15050" end="15074" title="Lewisham Shopping Centre" label="Lewisham Shopping Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1691313" start="15310" end="15321" title="Joe Absolom" label="Joe Absolom"/>
<link wikidata="Q21585366" start="15364" end="15373" title="Merky ACE" label="Merky ACE"/>
<link wikidata="Q122232" start="15429" end="15441" title="Ginger Baker" label="Ginger Baker"/>
<link wikidata="Q203736" start="15454" end="15459" title="Cream (band)" label="Cream"/>
<link wikidata="Q212906" start="15494" end="15513" title="Natasha Bedingfield" label="Natasha Bedingfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q7367088" start="15559" end="15580" title="Rosa May Billinghurst" label="Rosa May Billinghurst"/>
<link wikidata="Q63313993" start="15614" end="15628" title="D-Block Europe" label="D-Block Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q4022527" start="15684" end="15699" title="Yannick Bolasie" label="Yannick Bolasie"/>
<link wikidata="Q55613656" start="15738" end="15752" title="Herbert Burden" label="Herbert Burden"/>
<link wikidata="Q636" start="15839" end="15848" title="Kate Bush" label="Kate Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q2216536" start="15869" end="15877" title="Brockley" label="Brockley"/>
<link wikidata="Q18159851" start="15892" end="15906" title="Hughroy Currie" label="Hughroy Currie"/>
<link wikidata="Q19037320" start="16006" end="16025" title="Ann Batten Cristall" label="Ann Batten Cristall"/>
<link wikidata="Q5531654" start="16063" end="16070" title="General (United Kingdom)" label="General"/>
<link wikidata="Q1361104" start="16071" end="16087" title="John Crocker" label="Sir John Crocker"/>
<link wikidata="Q6520769" start="16171" end="16190" title="Leland Lewis Duncan" label="Leland Lewis Duncan"/>
<link wikidata="Q100784078" start="16232" end="16247" title="Franz Goedecker" label="Franz Goedecker"/>
<link wikidata="Q6742367" start="16290" end="16304" title="Malcolm Hardee" label="Malcolm Hardee"/>
<link wikidata="Q880861" start="16325" end="16335" title="Blackheath, London" label="Blackheath"/>
<link wikidata="Q5219378" start="16350" end="16365" title="Danielle Harold" label="Danielle Harold"/>
<link wikidata="Q236431" start="16459" end="16472" title="Keeley Hazell" label="Keeley Hazell"/>
<link wikidata="Q259679" start="16517" end="16530" title="Jessica Hynes" label="Jessica Hynes"/>
<link wikidata="Q5605762" start="16572" end="16582" title="Greg James" label="Greg James"/>
<link wikidata="Q27996569" start="16626" end="16637" title="Eman Kellam" label="Eman Kellam"/>
<link wikidata="Q5487694" start="16686" end="16696" title="Frank King (cricketer, born 1911)" label="Frank King"/>
<link wikidata="Q6450332" start="16727" end="16731" title="Kwes" label="Kwes"/>
<link wikidata="Q543707" start="16759" end="16763" title="Warp Records" label="Warp"/>
<link wikidata="Q233009" start="16815" end="16830" title="Elsa Lanchester" label="Elsa Lanchester"/>
<link wikidata="Q297743" start="16874" end="16888" title="Lillie Langtry" label="Lillie Langtry"/>
<link wikidata="Q160432" start="16931" end="16939" title="Jude Law" label="Jude Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q6984134" start="16967" end="16978" title="Neal Lawson" label="Neal Lawson"/>
<link wikidata="Q4763208" start="17014" end="17026" title="Angie Le Mar" label="Angie Le Mar"/>
<link wikidata="Q90283499" start="17094" end="17105" title="Emma Leslie" label="Emma Leslie"/>
<link wikidata="Q362559" start="17153" end="17165" title="Delroy Lindo" label="Delroy Lindo"/>
<link wikidata="Q6762922" start="17192" end="17203" title="Marie Lloyd" label="Marie Lloyd"/>
<link wikidata="Q369361" start="17240" end="17249" title="New Cross" label="New Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q18616995" start="17251" end="17269" title="Ruben Loftus-Cheek" label="Ruben Loftus-Cheek"/>
<link wikidata="Q207939" start="17284" end="17301" title="Alexander McQueen" label="Alexander McQueen"/>
<link wikidata="Q27063921" start="17331" end="17340" title="Josh Maja" label="Josh Maja"/>
<link wikidata="Q65029167" start="17373" end="17386" title="Russ Millions" label="Russ Millions"/>
<link wikidata="Q6716905" start="17429" end="17433" title="MNEK" label="MNEK"/>
<link wikidata="Q231708" start="17467" end="17479" title="Edith Nesbit" label="Edith Nesbit"/>
<link wikidata="Q5611425" start="17510" end="17520" title="Grove Park, Lewisham" label="Grove Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q154063" start="17535" end="17542" title="P Money" label="P Money"/>
<link wikidata="Q1166726" start="17544" end="17549" title="Grime (music)" label="Grime"/>
<link wikidata="Q41259115" start="17597" end="17610" title="Eddie Nketiah" label="Eddie Nketiah"/>
<link wikidata="Q18160990" start="17643" end="17651" title="Novelist (rapper)" label="Novelist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1166726" start="17653" end="17658" title="Grime (music)" label="Grime"/>
<link wikidata="Q83492" start="17706" end="17717" title="Gary Oldman" label="Gary Oldman"/>
<link wikidata="Q369361" start="17745" end="17754" title="New Cross" label="New Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q8012111" start="17756" end="17768" title="William Henry Page" label="William Page"/>
<link wikidata="Q7926668" start="17806" end="17829" title="Victoria County History" label="Victoria County History"/>
<link wikidata="Q36074" start="17881" end="17891" title="Queensland" label="Queensland"/>
<link wikidata="Q171515" start="17901" end="17916" title="Jonathan Palmer" label="Jonathan Palmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1968" start="17924" end="17935" title="Formula One" label="Formula One"/>
<link wikidata="Q6827833" start="17960" end="17970" title="Mica Paris" label="Mica Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q1988314" start="18001" end="18014" title="Gladys Powers" label="Gladys Powers"/>
<link wikidata="Q705413" start="18048" end="18059" title="Maxi Priest" label="Maxi Priest"/>
<link wikidata="Q211768" start="18101" end="18115" title="Luke Pritchard" label="Luke Pritchard"/>
<link wikidata="Q456386" start="18146" end="18161" title="Louise Redknapp" label="Louise Redknapp"/>
<link wikidata="Q317810" start="18214" end="18228" title="Jamie Redknapp" label="Jamie Redknapp"/>
<link wikidata="Q309728" start="18249" end="18266" title="Kieran Richardson" label="Kieran Richardson"/>
<link wikidata="Q764158" start="18299" end="18313" title="David Rocastle" label="David Rocastle"/>
<link wikidata="Q5544685" start="18406" end="18420" title="George Solomos" label="George Solomos"/>
<link wikidata="Q7508676" start="18458" end="18471" title="Sidi Bou Said (band)" label="Sidi Bou Said"/>
<link wikidata="Q5297993" start="18517" end="18529" title="Doris Stokes" label="Doris Stokes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1453116" start="18565" end="18580" title="Doveton Sturdee" label="Doveton Sturdee"/>
<link wikidata="Q842486" start="18589" end="18609" title="Admiral of the Fleet" label="Admiral of the Fleet"/>
<link wikidata="Q519273" start="18629" end="18642" title="David Sylvian" label="David Sylvian"/>
<link wikidata="Q6375824" start="18674" end="18685" title="Kae Tempest" label="Kae Tempest"/>
<link wikidata="Q2216536" start="18770" end="18778" title="Brockley" label="Brockley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1276942" start="18780" end="18793" title="Eamonn Walker" label="Eamonn Walker"/>
<link wikidata="Q7329792" start="18859" end="18872" title="Richard Walsh (actor)" label="Richard Walsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q605872" start="18900" end="18915" title="Conrad Williams (athlete)" label="Conrad Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q312595" start="18955" end="18965" title="Ian Wright" label="Ian Wright"/>
<link wikidata="Q192747" start="19011" end="19032" title="Shaun Wright-Phillips" label="Shaun Wright-Phillips"/>
<link wikidata="Q47878" start="19089" end="19100" title="Sid Vicious" label="Sid Vicious"/>
<link wikidata="Q17036461" start="19131" end="19149" title="Troy (TV series)" label="Troy von Scheibner"/>
<link wikidata="Q1278677" start="19180" end="19196" title="Henry Williamson" label="Henry Williamson"/>
<link wikidata="Q312559" start="19236" end="19246" title="Bill Wyman" label="Bill Wyman"/>
<link wikidata="Q11036" start="19263" end="19281" title="the Rolling Stones" label="the Rolling Stones"/>
<link wikidata="Q7389916" start="19343" end="19347" title="SE postcode area" label="SE13"/>
<link wikidata="Q215030" start="19415" end="19441" title="London Borough of Lewisham" label="London Borough of Lewisham"/>
<link wikidata="Q693450" start="19551" end="19577" title="Royal Borough of Greenwich" label="Royal Borough of Greenwich"/>
<link wikidata="Q929586" start="19755" end="19769" title="Greenwich Park" label="Greenwich Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q215030" start="19786" end="19812" title="London Borough of Lewisham" label="London Borough of Lewisham"/>
<link wikidata="Q6537326" start="19814" end="19838" title="Lewisham Shopping Centre" label="Lewisham Shopping Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q14956783" start="19840" end="19868" title="University Hospital Lewisham" label="University Hospital Lewisham"/>
<link wikidata="Q108649705" start="19870" end="19877" title="Lewisam" label="Lewisam"/>
<link wikidata="Q743940" start="19879" end="19895" title="Lewisham, New South Wales" label="Lewisham, Sydney"/>
<link wikidata="Q801096" start="19919" end="19935" title="Lewisham station" label="Lewisham Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q4871551" start="19937" end="19955" title="Battle of Lewisham" label="Battle of Lewisham"/>
<link wikidata="Q1312322" start="19957" end="19976" title="Lewisham rail crash" label="Lewisham Rail Crash"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="253415" wikidata="Q6858340" url="?curid=253415" title="Mill Hill School">
<text>Mill Hill School is a 13–18 co-educational private, day and boarding school in Mill Hill, London, England that was established in 1807. It is a member of the Headmasters&#x27; and Headmistresses&#x27; Conference.

==History==
A committee of Nonconformist merchants and ministers, including John Pye-Smith founded the school, originally called Mill Hill Grammar School, for boys on 25 January 1807. They located it sufficiently distant of London at that time, because of &quot;dangers both physical and moral awaiting youth while passing through the streets of a large, crowded and corrupt city&quot;. A boarding house was opened in the residence once occupied by Peter Collinson, with about 20 boys. John Atkinson was the first headmaster and chaplain until 1810.
Mill Hill School occupies a site, part of which formed the gardens of Ridgeway House, the house of the botanist Peter Collinson. He was one of the most important importers of rare and exotic plants into English gardens. Many of the species that he introduced to Mill Hill in the 18th century continue to grow today in the grounds of the School. In 1746 Collinson planted Britain&#x27;s first hydrangea on the grounds, now located adjacent to School House.

The estate was purchased by the botanist Richard Salisbury in 1802, Ridgeway House became the setting for a long-running scientific dispute between the new owner and his guest, James Edward Smith. The flora of Mill Hill was supplemented by the work of the amateur botanist Richard William Bowry Buckland (died 1947), governor of the foundation from 1878 to 1889, who cultivated a garden in the south-west of the school&#x27;s grounds for the enjoyment of future generations. He wrote in his diary:
In 1939, Mill Hill School&#x27;s premises became a hospital. The school was evacuated to St. Bees School in Cumberland for the duration of the Second World War. Collinson House, a school for girls, was named for it. A St Bees Association was founded in commemoration of this period of evacuation in the school&#x27;s history by Michael Berry and David Smith.

Mill Hill first admitted sixth form girls in 1975 and became fully co-educational in 1997. The BBC news website usually uses a picture taken at Mill Hill School for articles about boarding schools.

In 2005 the school was one of 50 of the country&#x27;s leading independent schools which were found guilty of running an illegal price-fixing cartel, exposed by &quot;The Times&quot;. Together they had driven up fees for thousands of parents. Each school was required to pay a nominal penalty of £10,000, and all agreed to make ex-gratia payments totalling three million pounds into a trust. It is to benefit persons who were students at the schools during the cartel period.

In March 2007, Mill Hill celebrated its . To mark the occasion, the school was granted a new coat of arms by Robert Noel, Her Majesty&#x27;s Lancaster Herald.

In 2018, the school experienced controversy when it was featured in the music video of London rapper Stefflon Don. In it, she was shown nude in the changing room showers, dancing on tables in classrooms, and smoking marijuana in the dormitories.

==Houses==
Mill Hill School is divided into houses. These are:

===Boarding houses===
* Burton Bank – Named to commemorate its original position on Burton Hole Lane
* Collinson – Named after Peter Collinson, who once owned what is now the estate
* Macgregor – Named after Mary Macgregor, the founder and first head of The Mount, Mill Hill International
* Ridgeway – Peter Collinson&#x27;s original house on the site

Winterstoke House was converted into Grimsdell Mill Hill Pre-Preparatory School, in 1995.

===Day houses===
* Atkinson – Named after the first headmaster, John Atkinson
* Cedars – Named in honour of the cedars planted by Peter Collinson
* McClure – Named after Sir John McClure, headmaster at the turn of the 20th century
* Murray – Named in honour of Sir James Murray, teacher and longtime editor of the Oxford English Dictionary; who began compiling his dictionary while a master at Mill Hill
* Priestley – Named after headmaster Thomas Priestley
* School House – Named after Tite&#x27;s famous building constructed in the 1820s
* Weymouth – Named after headmaster Richard Weymouth
* Winfield – Named after headmaster William Winfield

==Heads==
In January 2016, Frances King became the school&#x27;s first female Head.

The following people have served as Head:

Evans served as head from January 1828 to June 1828.

==Architecture==

The chapel was opened in 1896. Designed by Basil Champneys, it is a basilica in form. The School House was designed by Sir William Tite, famous for his work on the London Royal Exchange, School House was erected in 1825 and is described as being in the Greco-Roman style. Other buildings within the site are of both traditional and modern styling. The cricket house was used as a set in the tenth episode of &quot;Inspector Morse&quot;. In honour of Patrick Troughton the Mill Hill theatre was dedicated to the actor and named the Patrick Troughton Theatre in 2007.

==The Mill Hill Education Group==
The school is run by the Mill Hill School Foundation (now known as The Mill Hill Education Group), a registered charity under English law. The Education Group offers education to boys and girls aged 3 to 18 in seven schools. The Mill Hill Education Group&#x27;s other schools are:
*Belmont – a day school for pupils aged 7 to 13. Head: Leon Roberts
*Grimsdell – a pre-preparatory day school for pupils aged 3 to 7. Head: Kate Simon
*The Mount, Mill Hill International – a mixed day and boarding school for international pupils aged 11 to 16. Head: Sarah Bellotti.
*Cobham Hall – an independent day and boarding school for girls aged 11 to 18. Head: Wendy Barrett.
*Lyonsdown – an independent preparatory school for girls aged 3 to 11. Head: Rittu Hall.
*Keble Prep – an independent preparatory school for boys and girls aged 4 to 13. Head: Perran Gill.
*St Joseph&#x27;s In The Park – an independent preparatory school for boys and girls aged 2 to 11. Head: Douglas Brown.

==Notable alumni==
* Nick Auterac, rugby union player
* Ethan Bamber, English county cricketer
* John Batten, physician to Queen Elizabeth II
* Richard Berengarten, poet
* Michael Bishop, Baron Glendonbrook, businessman
* Jasper Britton, actor
* Russell Brain, 1st Baron Brain, neurologist
* David Buck, actor
* Francis Cammaerts, Special Operations Executive (SOE) operative
* James Challis, astronomer
* Ernest Cook, English philanthropist and businessman (grandson of Thomas Cook)
* Chris Corner, producer and songwriter
* Francis Crick, molecular biologist, biophysicist and neuroscientist
* Misha Crosby, director, actor and producer
* Richard Dimbleby, broadcaster
* Sophia Dunkley, international cricketer
* John Richard Easonsmith, officer
* Sir Eric Errington, Bt., British barrister and Conservative Party politician
* Ivor Malcolm Haddon Etherington, mathematician
* David Dayan Fisher, actor
* Seb Fontaine, house music DJ
* Felix Francis, author of the &#x27;Dick Francis&#x27; novels
* Nicholas Franks, professor of biophysics and anaesthetics at Imperial College London
* Ben Glassberg, conductor
* Sarvepalli Gopal, Indian historian
* Inglis Gundry, composer, novelist, musicologist, music pedagogue and writer
* Tanika Gupta, playwright and scriptwriter
* Joseph Hardcastle, liberal member of Parliament
* Sir Norman Hartnell, fashion designer
* Hartley Heard, cricketer
* Thomas Helmore, choirmaster and choral historian and writer
* Francis Heron, England footballer and FA Cup winner
* Hubert Heron, England footballer and FA Cup winner
* Stanislav Ianevski, actor
* Chaz Jankel, musician
* Simon Jenkins, newspaper columnist, editor and author
* Robert Evan Kendell, psychiatrist
* Evgeny Lebedev, owner of &quot;Independent&quot; and &quot;Evening Standard&quot; newspapers
* Nick Leslau, businessman
* Keith Levene, musician, Public Image Limited
* Tom Lindsay, Rugby Union player
* Malcolm Mackintosh, Special Operations Executive (SOE) operative and intelligence analyst
* Norman Macrae, British journalist, former deputy editor of &quot;The Economist&quot;
* Ernest Maddox, eye surgeon and inventor of numerous optical instruments such as Maddox rod and Maddox wing
* Bob Marshall-Andrews, politician
* Harry Melling, actor
* Thanos Papalexis, convicted murderer
* Sajith Premadasa, Sri Lankan politician (Leader of the opposition)
* Adam Rossington, Middlesex cricketer
* Paul Sandifer, neurologist
* Vir Sanghvi, journalist, columnist, and talk show host
* Ernest Satow, British scholar, diplomat and Japanologist
* Daniel Sharman, actor
* Henry Shaw, botanist
* Tulip Siddiq, Labour Member of Parliament
* George Spencer-Brown, mathematician
* Roger Spong, international rugby union footballer, England and Great Britain
* Mitchell Symons, journalist and writer
* Sir Denis Thatcher Bt., husband of the former British Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher
* David Tinker, Royal Navy officer killed in the Falklands War
* Lord Toulson, Justice of the Supreme Court
* Patrick Troughton, actor
* Austin Vince, long distance adventure motorcyclist
* Eric A. Walker, Professor Emeritus of Imperial History at the University of Cambridge
* Herbert Ward, explorer, writer and sculptor, whose statue &quot;Grief&quot; was presented to the school by the artist
* Sir Frank William Wills Kt., architect, surveyor and Lord Mayor of Bristol; member of the Wills tobacco family
* Sir George Alfred Wills Bt. businessman and chairman of Imperial Tobacco
* William Wills, 1st Baron Winterstoke, businessman, Liberal politician, High Sheriff of Bristol &amp; 1st chairman of Imperial Tobacco

==References==
Notes

Citations
==Further reading==
* Brett-James, Norman G. &quot;The Book of Remembrance and War Record of Mill Hill School 1914-1918&quot; (1919)
* Brett-James, Norman G. &quot;The Book of Remembrance and War Record of Mill Hill School 1939-1945&quot; (1948)
* Brett-James, Norman G. &quot;The History of Mill Hill School 1807-1923&quot; (revised ed. 1923)

==External links==
* Profile on ISC website
* Old Millhillians Club
* Institute of Historical Research and the History of Parliament Trust&#x27;s early history of Mill Hill School</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6858340" start="0" end="16" title="Mill Hill School" label="Mill Hill School"/>
<link wikidata="Q541394" start="28" end="42" title="co-educational" label="co-educational"/>
<link wikidata="Q2418495" start="43" end="50" title="Private schools in the United Kingdom" label="private"/>
<link wikidata="Q1493752" start="52" end="55" title="Day school" label="day"/>
<link wikidata="Q269770" start="60" end="75" title="boarding school" label="boarding school"/>
<link wikidata="Q149688" start="79" end="88" title="Mill Hill" label="Mill Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="90" end="96" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q5689840" start="158" end="211" title="Headmasters&amp;#x27; and Headmistresses&amp;#x27; Conference" label="Headmasters&amp;#x27; and Headmistresses&amp;#x27; Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144064" start="241" end="254" title="Nonconformist (Protestantism)" label="Nonconformist"/>
<link wikidata="Q6058440" start="290" end="304" title="John Pye-Smith" label="John Pye-Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="438" end="444" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q1350818" start="663" end="678" title="Peter Collinson (botanist)" label="Peter Collinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1350818" start="876" end="891" title="Peter Collinson FRS" label="Peter Collinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q155997" start="1156" end="1165" title="hydrangea" label="hydrangea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1358261" start="1262" end="1279" title="Richard Anthony Salisbury" label="Richard Salisbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q458004" start="1398" end="1416" title="James Edward Smith (botanist)" label="James Edward Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q7587252" start="1808" end="1823" title="St. Bees School" label="St. Bees School"/>
<link wikidata="Q23360" start="1827" end="1837" title="Cumberland" label="Cumberland"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="1862" end="1878" title="Second World War" label="Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="2174" end="2177" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q50008" start="2445" end="2454" title="The Times" label="The Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q14659" start="2848" end="2860" title="coat of arms" label="coat of arms"/>
<link wikidata="Q7348058" start="2864" end="2875" title="Robert Noel (officer of arms)" label="Robert Noel"/>
<link wikidata="Q30916819" start="3016" end="3028" title="Stefflon Don" label="Stefflon Don"/>
<link wikidata="Q2845" start="3131" end="3140" title="marijuana" label="marijuana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1350818" start="3353" end="3368" title="Peter Collinson (botanist)" label="Peter Collinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q16901553" start="3480" end="3514" title="The Mount, Mill Hill International" label="The Mount, Mill Hill International"/>
<link wikidata="Q960207" start="3931" end="3947" title="James Murray (lexicographer)" label="Sir James Murray"/>
<link wikidata="Q44996" start="3984" end="4009" title="Oxford English Dictionary" label="Oxford English Dictionary"/>
<link wikidata="Q4867132" start="4560" end="4575" title="Basil Champneys" label="Basil Champneys"/>
<link wikidata="Q8019436" start="4640" end="4652" title="William Tite" label="William Tite"/>
<link wikidata="Q1241240" start="4688" end="4702" title="Royal Exchange, London" label="Royal Exchange"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4908" end="4921" title="List of Inspector Morse episodes#Series 3 (1989)" label="tenth episode"/>
<link wikidata="Q2685847" start="4931" end="4946" title="Inspector Morse (TV series)" label="Inspector Morse"/>
<link wikidata="Q559430" start="4967" end="4984" title="Patrick Troughton" label="Patrick Troughton"/>
<link wikidata="Q11635" start="4999" end="5006" title="theatre" label="theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q708676" start="5219" end="5237" title="Charitable organisation" label="registered charity"/>
<link wikidata="Q16901553" start="5551" end="5585" title="The Mount, Mill Hill International" label="The Mount, Mill Hill International"/>
<link wikidata="Q5138885" start="5683" end="5694" title="Cobham Hall School" label="Cobham Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q19609647" start="6113" end="6125" title="Nick Auterac" label="Nick Auterac"/>
<link wikidata="Q56223903" start="6148" end="6160" title="Ethan Bamber" label="Ethan Bamber"/>
<link wikidata="Q29642349" start="6189" end="6200" title="John Batten (physician)" label="John Batten"/>
<link wikidata="Q7324472" start="6236" end="6255" title="Richard Berengarten" label="Richard Berengarten"/>
<link wikidata="Q202923" start="6264" end="6298" title="Michael Bishop, Baron Glendonbrook" label="Michael Bishop, Baron Glendonbrook"/>
<link wikidata="Q6163901" start="6314" end="6328" title="Jasper Britton" label="Jasper Britton"/>
<link wikidata="Q3453442" start="6338" end="6368" title="Russell Brain, 1st Baron Brain" label="Russell Brain, 1st Baron Brain"/>
<link wikidata="Q3017584" start="6384" end="6394" title="David Buck" label="David Buck"/>
<link wikidata="Q3081338" start="6404" end="6421" title="Francis Cammaerts" label="Francis Cammaerts"/>
<link wikidata="Q240390" start="6423" end="6451" title="Special Operations Executive" label="Special Operations Executive"/>
<link wikidata="Q731321" start="6470" end="6483" title="James Challis" label="James Challis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5392919" start="6498" end="6509" title="Ernest Cook" label="Ernest Cook"/>
<link wikidata="Q328725" start="6563" end="6574" title="Thomas Cook" label="Thomas Cook"/>
<link wikidata="Q704635" start="6578" end="6590" title="Chris Corner" label="Chris Corner"/>
<link wikidata="Q123280" start="6618" end="6631" title="Francis Crick" label="Francis Crick"/>
<link wikidata="Q6875458" start="6688" end="6700" title="Misha Crosby" label="Misha Crosby"/>
<link wikidata="Q3430720" start="6733" end="6749" title="Richard Dimbleby" label="Richard Dimbleby"/>
<link wikidata="Q58495592" start="6765" end="6779" title="Sophia Dunkley" label="Sophia Dunkley"/>
<link wikidata="Q6254732" start="6807" end="6830" title="John Richard Easonsmith" label="John Richard Easonsmith"/>
<link wikidata="Q7526647" start="6842" end="6865" title="Eric Errington" label="Sir Eric Errington, Bt."/>
<link wikidata="Q808967" start="6875" end="6884" title="barrister" label="barrister"/>
<link wikidata="Q9626" start="6889" end="6907" title="Conservative Party (UK)" label="Conservative Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q82955" start="6908" end="6918" title="politician" label="politician"/>
<link wikidata="Q3377238" start="6921" end="6952" title="Ivor Malcolm Haddon Etherington" label="Ivor Malcolm Haddon Etherington"/>
<link wikidata="Q3381268" start="6970" end="6988" title="David Dayan Fisher" label="David Dayan Fisher"/>
<link wikidata="Q7442306" start="6998" end="7010" title="Seb Fontaine" label="Seb Fontaine"/>
<link wikidata="Q5442214" start="7029" end="7042" title="Felix Francis" label="Felix Francis"/>
<link wikidata="Q23301472" start="7092" end="7107" title="Nicholas Franks" label="Nicholas Franks"/>
<link wikidata="Q189022" start="7153" end="7176" title="Imperial College London" label="Imperial College London"/>
<link wikidata="Q108001097" start="7179" end="7192" title="Ben Glassberg" label="Ben Glassberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q6543882" start="7206" end="7222" title="Sarvepalli Gopal" label="Sarvepalli Gopal"/>
<link wikidata="Q16014894" start="7243" end="7256" title="Inglis Gundry" label="Inglis Gundry"/>
<link wikidata="Q7683298" start="7321" end="7333" title="Tanika Gupta" label="Tanika Gupta"/>
<link wikidata="Q6283788" start="7365" end="7382" title="Joseph Hardcastle (politician)" label="Joseph Hardcastle"/>
<link wikidata="Q5492240" start="7415" end="7434" title="Sir Norman Hartnell" label="Sir Norman Hartnell"/>
<link wikidata="Q87003637" start="7455" end="7468" title="Hartley Heard" label="Hartley Heard"/>
<link wikidata="Q246073" start="7482" end="7496" title="Thomas Helmore" label="Thomas Helmore"/>
<link wikidata="Q3081487" start="7544" end="7557" title="Francis Heron" label="Francis Heron"/>
<link wikidata="Q47762" start="7559" end="7566" title="England national football team" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q11151" start="7582" end="7588" title="FA Cup" label="FA Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q933942" start="7598" end="7610" title="Hubert Heron" label="Hubert Heron"/>
<link wikidata="Q376025" start="7651" end="7669" title="Stanislav Ianevski" label="Stanislav Ianevski"/>
<link wikidata="Q359791" start="7679" end="7690" title="Chaz Jankel" label="Chaz Jankel"/>
<link wikidata="Q587339" start="7703" end="7716" title="Simon Jenkins" label="Simon Jenkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q7344122" start="7759" end="7778" title="Robert Evan Kendell" label="Robert Evan Kendell"/>
<link wikidata="Q2889271" start="7795" end="7809" title="Evgeny Lebedev" label="Evgeny Lebedev"/>
<link wikidata="Q11149" start="7826" end="7837" title="The Independent" label="Independent"/>
<link wikidata="Q666494" start="7854" end="7870" title="Evening Standard" label="Evening Standard"/>
<link wikidata="Q16193211" start="7890" end="7901" title="Nick Leslau" label="Nick Leslau"/>
<link wikidata="Q1389464" start="7917" end="7929" title="Keith Levene" label="Keith Levene"/>
<link wikidata="Q845265" start="7941" end="7961" title="Public Image Limited" label="Public Image Limited"/>
<link wikidata="Q19663197" start="7964" end="7975" title="Tom Lindsay (rugby union)" label="Tom Lindsay"/>
<link wikidata="Q19335397" start="7998" end="8016" title="Malcolm Mackintosh" label="Malcolm Mackintosh"/>
<link wikidata="Q7052559" start="8090" end="8103" title="Norman Macrae" label="Norman Macrae"/>
<link wikidata="Q180089" start="8155" end="8168" title="The Economist" label="The Economist"/>
<link wikidata="Q24579101" start="8177" end="8190" title="Ernest Maddox" label="Ernest Maddox"/>
<link wikidata="Q18351349" start="8257" end="8267" title="Maddox rod" label="Maddox rod"/>
<link wikidata="Q25109882" start="8272" end="8283" title="Maddox wing" label="Maddox wing"/>
<link wikidata="Q4933265" start="8286" end="8306" title="Bob Marshall-Andrews" label="Bob Marshall-Andrews"/>
<link wikidata="Q5671042" start="8321" end="8334" title="Harry Melling (actor)" label="Harry Melling"/>
<link wikidata="Q7710620" start="8344" end="8360" title="Thanos Papalexis" label="Thanos Papalexis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7402667" start="8383" end="8399" title="Sajith Premadasa" label="Sajith Premadasa"/>
<link wikidata="Q4679701" start="8452" end="8467" title="Adam Rossington" label="Adam Rossington"/>
<link wikidata="Q28055459" start="8491" end="8504" title="Paul Sandifer" label="Paul Sandifer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7933534" start="8520" end="8531" title="Vir Sanghvi" label="Vir Sanghvi"/>
<link wikidata="Q166598" start="8577" end="8589" title="Ernest Satow" label="Ernest Satow"/>
<link wikidata="Q3014680" start="8636" end="8650" title="Daniel Sharman" label="Daniel Sharman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1991246" start="8660" end="8670" title="Henry Shaw (botanist)" label="Henry Shaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q7852071" start="8683" end="8695" title="Tulip Siddiq" label="Tulip Siddiq"/>
<link wikidata="Q1508271" start="8727" end="8747" title="George Spencer-Brown" label="George Spencer-Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q7358940" start="8765" end="8776" title="Roger Spong" label="Roger Spong"/>
<link wikidata="Q6881416" start="8844" end="8859" title="Mitchell Symons" label="Mitchell Symons"/>
<link wikidata="Q46172" start="8885" end="8907" title="Denis Thatcher" label="Sir Denis Thatcher Bt."/>
<link wikidata="Q5240435" start="8974" end="8986" title="David Tinker" label="David Tinker"/>
<link wikidata="Q7359021" start="9037" end="9049" title="Lord Toulson" label="Lord Toulson"/>
<link wikidata="Q559430" start="9082" end="9099" title="Patrick Troughton" label="Patrick Troughton"/>
<link wikidata="Q4823321" start="9109" end="9121" title="Austin Vince" label="Austin Vince"/>
<link wikidata="Q17001069" start="9162" end="9176" title="Eric A. Walker (historian)" label="Eric A. Walker"/>
<link wikidata="Q17421995" start="9250" end="9262" title="Herbert Ward (sculptor)" label="Herbert Ward"/>
<link wikidata="Q44411487" start="9370" end="9397" title="Sir Frank William Wills" label="Sir Frank William Wills Kt."/>
<link wikidata="Q16159367" start="9423" end="9444" title="Lord Mayor of Bristol" label="Lord Mayor of Bristol"/>
<link wikidata="Q2536590" start="9460" end="9473" title="Wills tobacco" label="Wills tobacco"/>
<link wikidata="Q5536178" start="9483" end="9510" title="George Alfred Wills" label="Sir George Alfred Wills Bt."/>
<link wikidata="Q1471161" start="9539" end="9555" title="Imperial Tobacco" label="Imperial Tobacco"/>
<link wikidata="Q8020420" start="9558" end="9594" title="William Wills, 1st Baron Winterstoke" label="William Wills, 1st Baron Winterstoke"/>
<link wikidata="Q622441" start="9609" end="9616" title="Liberal Party (UK)" label="Liberal"/>
<link wikidata="Q5756704" start="9629" end="9652" title="High Sheriff of Bristol" label="High Sheriff of Bristol"/>
<link wikidata="Q1471161" start="9675" end="9691" title="Imperial Tobacco" label="Imperial Tobacco"/>
<link wikidata="Q6017180" start="10102" end="10105" title="Independent Schools Council" label="ISC"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="253416" wikidata="Q8207109" url="?curid=253416" title="Housing association">
<text>In Ireland and the United Kingdom, housing associations are private, non-profit organisations that provide low-cost &quot;social housing&quot; for people in need of a home. Any budget surplus is used to maintain existing housing and to help finance new homes and it cannot be used for personal benefit of directors or shareholders. Although independent, they are regulated by the state and commonly receive public funding. They are now the United Kingdom&#x27;s major providers of new housing for rent, while many also run shared ownership schemes to help those who cannot afford to buy a home outright.

Housing associations provide a wide range of housing, some managing large estates of housing for families, while the smallest may perhaps manage a single scheme of housing for older people. Much of the supported accommodation in the UK is also provided by housing associations, with specialist projects for people with mental health issues or learning disabilities, with substance misuse problems (alcohol or illegal drugs), the formerly homeless, young people, ex-offenders, asylum seekers, and people fleeing domestic violence.

In Australia, the term &quot;housing association&quot; refers to larger, growth-oriented &#x27;not-for-dividend&#x27; community-housing providers. Smaller community housing providers may include trusts, cooperatives etc. State and territory-owned public housing represents about 80% of social housing in Australia. Over the years these public housing entities have had different names including: &#x27;housing commissions&#x27;, and &#x27;housing trusts&#x27;.

==History==
Housing associations first appeared in the second half of the nineteenth century as part of the growth in philanthropic and voluntary organisations brought about by the growth of the middle classes in the wake of the Industrial Revolution. Early examples are the Guinness Trust, Peabody Trust and the Metropolitan Association for Improving the Dwellings of the Industrious Classes.

They increased in importance over the last decades of the twentieth century due to changes to council housing brought in by the Thatcher government, when rules were introduced that prevented councils subsidising their housing from local taxes, channelled grants for construction of new social housing to housing associations and allowed council tenants to buy their homes at a large discount. This, combined with cost-cutting initiatives in local government and a housing benefit scheme that was more generous to housing associations than local authorities, led to many councils transferring their housing stock to housing associations. These organisations are often referred to as large-scale voluntary transfer organisations or local housing companies.

The Housing Acts of 1985 and 1988 facilitated the transfer of council housing to not-for-profit housing associations. The 1988 Act redefined housing associations as non-public bodies, permitting access to private finance, which was a strong motivation for transfer as public sector borrowing had been severely constrained. These new housing associations were also the providers of most new public-sector housing. By 2003 36.5% of the social rented housing stock was held by housing associations. Currently, some of the biggest housing associations in the UK are Clarion Housing Group, Sanctuary Housing, L&amp;Q and Peabody Trust, to name just a few. Some housing associations have partnerships with real estate investment trusts: Civitas Social Housing is the largest social housing real estate investment trust, working with 15 housing associations.

==Legal status==
Housing associations may be constituted using various forms of legal entity. Many are industrial and provident societies, but there are also trusts, co-operatives and companies. They may or may not be registered charities.

Registered social landlord (RSL) is the technical name for social landlords that in England were formerly registered with the Housing Corporation, or in Wales with the Welsh Government. From 2010 to 2012, associations were termed registered providers under the Housing and Regeneration Act 2008, irrespective of status (private, public, for-profit or not-for-profit). , the terms registered social landlord and private registered providers of social housing are both used as alternative names for housing association.

Housing associations are generally considered as private entities in that they are not owned or directly controlled by the state. This status, however, has been challenged by a number of legal rulings. In 2004 the British government accepted an EU ruling that considered housing associations as public bodies for the purposes of procurement.

Subsequently, the English High Court in &quot;Weaver v. London and Quadrant Housing Trust&quot; [2008] EWHC 1377 (Admin) ruled that housing associations were public authorities and as a result could be subject to judicial review in certain circumstances. The court stated that the housing association sector was &#x27;permeated by state control and influence with a view to meeting the government&#x27;s aims for affordable housing, and in which RSLs work side by side with, and can in a very real sense be said to take the place of, local authorities&#x27;.

This issue had wider political significance since housing associations&#x27; borrowing (which stood at approximately £30 billion in 2006) does not contribute to the UK&#x27;s public sector borrowing requirement, the control of which is both a stated government objective and part of the EU&#x27;s criteria for membership of the European single currency.

==Management==
A feature of housing associations is that, although the larger housing associations usually have paid staff, a committee or board of management made up of volunteers, or paid non-executive members, has overall responsibility for the work of the organisation. A board might include residents, representatives from local authorities and community groups, business people and politicians. There are more than 30,000 voluntary board members running housing associations throughout England.

==Funding and regulation==
Housing associations&#x27; day-to-day activities are funded by rent and service charges payments made by, or on behalf of, those living in its properties. In this sense, housing associations are run as commercial entities and the majority do not depend on donations for their general activities.

New housing generally receives economic subsidies, the source of which will depend on where the association is based:

* In England, housing associations are funded and regulated by the Homes and Communities Agency (HCA), the exception being funding in London which from April 2012 is the responsibility of the Greater London Authority. The HCA&#x27;s predecessor until 2008 was the Housing Corporation. The Housing Corporation&#x27;s regulatory role was split out to a separate body from 2010, the Tenant Services Authority (TSA), but merged again into the HCA from April 2012.
* In Northern Ireland, the same role is carried out by the Northern Ireland Housing Executive.
* In Scotland, this function is fulfilled by the Scottish Government.
* In Wales, the regulation and funding of housing associations is carried out by the Welsh Government.

Subsidies for new homes (often termed &#x27;social housing grant&#x27;) amount to sizeable public investments. In its 2008–11 prospectus, the Housing Corporation stated that in the three-year period to 2011 investment would be &quot;at least £8 billion&quot;. The majority of this would go to housing associations for use in development projects. Since 2003, in an effort to seek greater value for money, much of the funding by the Housing Corporation for new house building has been channelled to fewer than 80 &quot;developing housing associations&quot; that have achieved &quot;partner status&quot; through partner programme agreements. Long-term lender option borrower option loans (LOBOs) have been taken out in the past by housing associations.

Housing associations borrow money to pay for new homes and improvements. After the Housing Act 1988, the proportion of the cost of new homes met by capital grants was scaled back by the government, so borrowing became the primary source of funding for investment. Much of this was simply borrowed from banks and building societies, but after the 2007–2008 financial crisis, these institutions ceased to offer long-term loans, so developing associations are increasingly turning to corporate bonds to raise funds for expansion.

The HCA implemented a new government policy of &quot;affordable rents&quot; for its 2011–15 funding round, requiring associations to set rents at up to 80% of market rents so that less up-front capital subsidy would be required. In September 2013, a group of London boroughs initiated a judicial review to challenge this policy.

==Landlord&#x27;s obligations==
A landlord&#x27;s obligations are set out in several pieces of legislation, including the Landlord and Tenant Act 1985, which applies to tenancies entered into after 1961. In summary, section 11 provides that a landlord shall:

* keep in repair the structure and exterior of the dwelling, including drains, gutters and external pipes;
* keep in repair and proper working order the installations in the dwelling for the supply of water, gas, and electricity, and for sanitation (including basins, sinks, baths and sanitary conveniences, but not other fixtures, fittings and appliances for making use of the supply of water, gas or electricity), and keep in repair and proper working order the installation in the dwelling for space heating and heating water.

If a landlord refuses to repair a rented property, the tenant can take action to require them to carry out necessary works and claim compensation.

==Industry bodies==
There are four industry bodies representing housing associations working in the UK, each covering a respective country. They are:
* England – National Housing Federation (NHF)
* Scotland – Scottish Federation of Housing Associations (SFHA)
* Wales – Community Housing Cymru
* Northern Ireland – Northern Ireland Federation of Housing Associations (NIFHA)

The NHF (formerly the National Federation of Housing Associations) claimed that at the start of 2003 they had around 1,400 non-profit housing organisations in their membership, owning or managing approximately 1.8 million homes across England.

In the 2000s, some larger associations formed regional groups for purposes including lobbying government bodies. The G15 group of London&#x27;s largest associations was followed by East Seven in East Anglia.

==See also==
*Decent Homes Standard
*Council house
*Public housing
*Arms-length management organisation
*Housing Action Trust
*Homeowners association

==References==
==External links==
* National Housing Federation (covers England only)
* Scottish Federation of Housing Associations
* Community Housing Cymru
* Northern Ireland Federation of Housing Associations
* Housingnet
* Social Housing Law Association
* Chartered Institute of Housing</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q8207109" start="35" end="55" title="Housing association" label="housing associations"/>
<link wikidata="Q163740" start="69" end="79" title="Non-profit organization" label="non-profit"/>
<link wikidata="Q21585398" start="122" end="136" title="Public housing in the United Kingdom" label="social housing"/>
<link wikidata="Q428148" start="363" end="385" title="regulated by the state" label="regulated by the state"/>
<link wikidata="Q193219" start="407" end="421" title="public funding" label="public funding"/>
<link wikidata="Q157171" start="497" end="501" title="renting" label="rent"/>
<link wikidata="Q5384699" start="523" end="539" title="equity sharing" label="shared ownership"/>
<link wikidata="Q12135" start="924" end="937" title="mental disorder" label="mental health"/>
<link wikidata="Q860740" start="948" end="969" title="learning disability" label="learning disabilities"/>
<link wikidata="Q3184856" start="976" end="992" title="substance misuse" label="substance misuse"/>
<link wikidata="Q7331102" start="1003" end="1010" title="alcohol abuse" label="alcohol"/>
<link wikidata="Q3184856" start="1022" end="1027" title="drug abuse" label="drugs"/>
<link wikidata="Q131327" start="1043" end="1051" title="homeless" label="homeless"/>
<link wikidata="Q190007" start="1053" end="1065" title="young people" label="young people"/>
<link wikidata="Q2142602" start="1067" end="1078" title="ex-offender" label="ex-offender"/>
<link wikidata="Q564811" start="1081" end="1095" title="asylum seekers" label="asylum seekers"/>
<link wikidata="Q156537" start="1116" end="1133" title="domestic violence" label="domestic violence"/>
<link wikidata="Q185733" start="1716" end="1729" title="Philanthropy" label="philanthropic"/>
<link wikidata="Q241588" start="1793" end="1805" title="middle class" label="middle class"/>
<link wikidata="Q2269" start="1827" end="1848" title="Industrial Revolution" label="Industrial Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q5616590" start="1873" end="1887" title="Guinness Trust" label="Guinness Trust"/>
<link wikidata="Q7334263" start="1889" end="1902" title="Peabody Trust" label="Peabody Trust"/>
<link wikidata="Q6824987" start="1911" end="1990" title="Metropolitan Association for Improving the Dwellings of the Industrious Classes" label="Metropolitan Association for Improving the Dwellings of the Industrious Classes"/>
<link wikidata="Q3306184" start="2087" end="2102" title="council house" label="council housing"/>
<link wikidata="Q7416" start="2121" end="2129" title="Margaret Thatcher" label="Thatcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q6501447" start="2563" end="2571" title="local government" label="councils"/>
<link wikidata="Q25055044" start="2769" end="2773" title="Housing Act 1985" label="1985"/>
<link wikidata="Q22343377" start="2778" end="2782" title="Housing Act 1988" label="1988"/>
<link wikidata="Q30324183" start="3311" end="3332" title="Clarion Housing Group" label="Clarion Housing Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q61930737" start="3334" end="3351" title="Sanctuary Housing" label="Sanctuary Housing"/>
<link wikidata="Q20713470" start="3353" end="3360" title="L&amp;amp;Q" label="L&amp;amp;Q"/>
<link wikidata="Q7334263" start="3365" end="3378" title="Peabody Trust" label="Peabody Trust"/>
<link wikidata="Q697852" start="3449" end="3477" title="real estate investment trust" label="real estate investment trust"/>
<link wikidata="Q60752535" start="3480" end="3502" title="Civitas Social Housing" label="Civitas Social Housing"/>
<link wikidata="Q697852" start="3533" end="3561" title="real estate investment trust" label="real estate investment trust"/>
<link wikidata="Q3778211" start="3682" end="3694" title="legal entity" label="legal entity"/>
<link wikidata="Q6027821" start="3705" end="3739" title="industrial and provident society" label="industrial and provident societies"/>
<link wikidata="Q5074438" start="3760" end="3766" title="charitable trusts in English law" label="trusts"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3768" end="3781" title="Housing cooperative#United Kingdom" label="co-operatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q708676" start="3831" end="3840" title="charitable organization" label="charities"/>
<link wikidata="Q5916108" start="3969" end="3988" title="Housing Corporation" label="Housing Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5916159" start="4104" end="4137" title="Housing and Regeneration Act 2008" label="Housing and Regeneration Act 2008"/>
<link wikidata="Q1617747" start="4723" end="4741" title="English High Court" label="English High Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q898871" start="4918" end="4933" title="judicial review" label="judicial review"/>
<link wikidata="Q21" start="6112" end="6119" title="England" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q5890410" start="6632" end="6660" title="Homes and Communities Agency" label="Homes and Communities Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135166" start="6757" end="6781" title="Greater London Authority" label="Greater London Authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q5916108" start="6829" end="6848" title="Housing Corporation" label="Housing Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7699486" start="6945" end="6970" title="Tenant Services Authority" label="Tenant Services Authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q7058505" start="7084" end="7118" title="Northern Ireland Housing Executive" label="Northern Ireland Housing Executive"/>
<link wikidata="Q32521" start="7169" end="7188" title="Scottish Government" label="Scottish Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q3112646" start="7275" end="7291" title="Welsh Government" label="Welsh Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q22906325" start="7944" end="7973" title="lender option borrower option" label="lender option borrower option"/>
<link wikidata="Q22343377" start="8129" end="8145" title="Housing Act 1988" label="Housing Act 1988"/>
<link wikidata="Q449067" start="8358" end="8376" title="building society" label="building societies"/>
<link wikidata="Q896666" start="8392" end="8418" title="2007–2008 financial crisis" label="2007–2008 financial crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1662098" start="8527" end="8541" title="corporate bond" label="corporate bond"/>
<link wikidata="Q211690" start="8833" end="8847" title="London borough" label="London borough"/>
<link wikidata="Q898871" start="8861" end="8876" title="judicial review" label="judicial review"/>
<link wikidata="Q6484723" start="9026" end="9054" title="Landlord and Tenant Act 1985" label="Landlord and Tenant Act 1985"/>
<link wikidata="Q6973426" start="10005" end="10032" title="National Housing Federation" label="National Housing Federation"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10052" end="10095" title="Scottish Federation of Housing Associations" label="Scottish Federation of Housing Associations"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10113" end="10136" title="Community Housing Cymru" label="Community Housing Cymru"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10158" end="10209" title="Northern Ireland Federation of Housing Associations" label="Northern Ireland Federation of Housing Associations"/>
<link wikidata="Q6973426" start="10223" end="10226" title="National Housing Federation" label="NHF"/>
<link wikidata="Q16992592" start="10581" end="10584" title="G15 (housing associations)" label="G15"/>
<link wikidata="Q5249070" start="10687" end="10708" title="Decent Homes Standard" label="Decent Homes Standard"/>
<link wikidata="Q3306184" start="10710" end="10723" title="Council house" label="Council house"/>
<link wikidata="Q6532502" start="10725" end="10739" title="Public housing" label="Public housing"/>
<link wikidata="Q4793851" start="10741" end="10776" title="Arms-length management organisation" label="Arms-length management organisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5916081" start="10778" end="10798" title="Housing Action Trust" label="Housing Action Trust"/>
<link wikidata="Q706636" start="10800" end="10822" title="Homeowners association" label="Homeowners association"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="253418" wikidata="Q177126" url="?curid=253418" title="DNA computing">
<text>DNA computing is an emerging branch of unconventional computing which uses DNA, biochemistry, and molecular biology hardware, instead of the traditional electronic computing. Research and development in this area concerns theory, experiments, and applications of DNA computing. Although the field originally started with the demonstration of a computing application by Len Adleman in 1994, it has now been expanded to several other avenues such as the development of storage technologies, nanoscale imaging modalities, synthetic controllers and reaction networks, etc.

== History ==
Leonard Adleman of the University of Southern California initially developed this field in 1994. Adleman demonstrated a proof-of-concept use of DNA as a form of computation which solved the seven-point Hamiltonian path problem. Since the initial Adleman experiments, advances have occurred and various Turing machines have been proven to be constructible.

Since then the field has expanded into several avenues. In 1995, the idea for DNA-based memory was proposed by Eric Baum who conjectured that a vast amount of data can be stored in a tiny amount of DNA due to its ultra-high density. This expanded the horizon of DNA computing into the realm of memory technology although the &quot;in vitro&quot; demonstrations were made after almost a decade.

The field of DNA computing can be categorized as a sub-field of the broader DNA nanoscience field started by Ned Seeman about a decade before Len Adleman&#x27;s demonstration. Ned&#x27;s original idea in the 1980s was to build arbitrary structures using bottom-up DNA self-assembly for applications in crystallography. However, it morphed into the field of structural DNA self-assembly which as of 2020 is extremely sophisticated. Self-assembled structure from a few nanometers tall all the way up to several tens of micrometers in size have been demonstrated in 2018.

In 1994, Prof. Seeman&#x27;s group demonstrated early DNA lattice structures using a small set of DNA components. While the demonstration by Adleman showed the possibility of DNA-based computers, the DNA design was trivial because as the number of nodes in a graph grows, the number of DNA components required in Adleman&#x27;s implementation would grow exponentially. Therefore, computer scientists and biochemists started exploring tile-assembly where the goal was to use a small set of DNA strands as tiles to perform arbitrary computations upon growth. Other avenues that were theoretically explored in the late 90&#x27;s include DNA-based security and cryptography, computational capacity of DNA systems, DNA memories and disks, and DNA-based robotics.

Before 2002, Lila Kari showed that the DNA operations performed by genetic recombination in some organisms are Turing complete.

In 2003, John Reif&#x27;s group first demonstrated the idea of a DNA-based walker that traversed along a track similar to a line follower robot. They used molecular biology as a source of energy for the walker. Since this first demonstration, a wide variety of DNA-based walkers have been demonstrated.

== Applications, examples, and recent developments ==
In 1994 Leonard Adleman presented the first prototype of a DNA computer. The TT-100 was a test tube filled with 100 microliters of a DNA solution. He managed to solve an instance of the directed Hamiltonian path problem. In Adleman&#x27;s experiment, the Hamiltonian Path Problem was implemented notationally as the &quot;travelling salesman problem&quot;. For this purpose, different DNA fragments were created, each one of them representing a city that had to be visited. Every one of these fragments is capable of a linkage with the other fragments created. These DNA fragments were produced and mixed in a test tube. Within seconds, the small fragments form bigger ones, representing the different travel routes. Through a chemical reaction, the DNA fragments representing the longer routes were eliminated. The remains are the solution to the problem, but overall, the experiment lasted a week. However, current technical limitations prevent the evaluation of the results. Therefore, the experiment isn&#x27;t suitable for the application, but it is nevertheless a proof of concept.

=== Combinatorial problems ===
First results to these problems were obtained by Leonard Adleman.

* In 1994: Solving a Hamiltonian path in a graph with seven summits.
* In 2002: Solving a NP-complete problem as well as a 3-SAT problem with 20 variables.

=== Tic-tac-toe game ===
In 2002, J. Macdonald, D. Stefanović and M. Stojanović created a DNA computer able to play tic-tac-toe against a human player. The calculator consists of nine bins corresponding to the nine squares of the game. Each bin contains a substrate and various combinations of DNA enzymes. The substrate itself is composed of a DNA strand onto which was grafted a fluorescent chemical group at one end, and the other end, a repressor group. Fluorescence is only active if the molecules of the substrate are cut in half. The DNA enzymes simulate logical functions. For example, such a DNA will unfold if two specific types of DNA strand are introduced to reproduce the logic function AND.

By default, the computer is considered to have played first in the central square. The human player starts with eight different types of DNA strands corresponding to the eight remaining boxes that may be played. To play box number i, the human player pours into all bins the strands corresponding to input #i. These strands bind to certain DNA enzymes present in the bins, resulting, in one of these bins, in the deformation of the DNA enzymes which binds to the substrate and cuts it. The corresponding bin becomes fluorescent, indicating which box is being played by the DNA computer. The DNA enzymes are divided among the bins in such a way as to ensure that the best the human player can achieve is a draw, as in real tic-tac-toe.

=== Neural network based computing ===
Kevin Cherry and Lulu Qian at Caltech developed a DNA-based artificial neural network that can recognize 100-bit hand-written digits. They achieved this by programming on a computer in advance with the appropriate set of weights represented by varying concentrations weight molecules which are later added to the test tube that holds the input DNA strands.

=== Improved speed with Localized (cache-like) Computing ===
One of the challenges of DNA computing is its slow speed. While DNA is a biologically compatible substrate, i.e., it can be used at places where silicon technology cannot, its computational speed is still very slow. For example, the square-root circuit used as a benchmark in the field takes over 100 hours to complete. While newer ways with external enzyme sources are reporting faster and more compact circuits, Chatterjee et al. demonstrated an interesting idea in the field to speed up computation through localized DNA circuits, a concept being further explored by other groups. This idea, while originally proposed in the field of computer architecture, has been adopted in this field as well. In computer architecture, it is very well-known that if the instructions are executed in sequence, having them loaded in the cache will inevitably lead to fast performance, also called the principle of localization. This is because with instructions in fast cache memory, there is no need swap them in and out of main memory, which can be slow. Similarly, in localized DNA computing, the DNA strands responsible for computation are fixed on a breadboard-like substrate ensuring physical proximity of the computing gates. Such localized DNA computing techniques have been shown to potentially reduce the computation time by orders of magnitude.

=== Renewable (or reversible) DNA computing ===
Subsequent research on DNA computing has produced reversible DNA computing, bringing the technology one step closer to the silicon-based computing used in (for example) PCs. In particular, John Reif and his group at Duke University have proposed two different techniques to reuse the computing DNA complexes. The first design uses dsDNA gates, while the second design uses DNA hairpin complexes.
While both designs face some issues (such as reaction leaks), this appears to represent a significant breakthrough in the field of DNA computing. Some other groups have also attempted to address the gate reusability problem.

Using strand displacement reactions (SRDs), reversible proposals are presented in the &quot;Synthesis Strategy of Reversible Circuits on DNA Computers&quot; paper for implementing reversible gates and circuits on DNA computers by combining DNA computing and reversible computing techniques. This paper also proposes a universal reversible gate library (URGL) for synthesizing n-bit reversible circuits on DNA computers with an average length and cost of the constructed circuits better than the previous methods.

==Methods==
There are multiple methods for building a computing device based on DNA, each with its own advantages and disadvantages. Most of these build the basic logic gates (AND, OR, NOT) associated with digital logic from a DNA basis. Some of the different bases include DNAzymes, deoxyoligonucleotides, enzymes, and toehold exchange.

=== Strand displacement mechanisms ===
The most fundamental operation in DNA computing and molecular programming is the strand displacement mechanism. Currently, there are two ways to perform strand displacement:

* Toehold mediated strand displacement (TMSD)
* Polymerase-based strand displacement (PSD)

=== Toehold exchange ===
Besides simple strand displacement schemes, DNA computers have also been constructed using the concept of toehold exchange. In this system, an input DNA strand binds to a sticky end, or toehold, on another DNA molecule, which allows it to displace another strand segment from the molecule. This allows the creation of modular logic components such as AND, OR, and NOT gates and signal amplifiers, which can be linked into arbitrarily large computers. This class of DNA computers does not require enzymes or any chemical capability of the DNA.

=== Chemical reaction networks (CRNs) ===
The full stack for DNA computing looks very similar to a traditional computer architecture. At the highest level, a C-like general purpose programming language is expressed using a set of chemical reaction networks (CRNs). This intermediate representation gets translated to domain-level DNA design and then implemented using a set of DNA strands. In 2010, Erik Winfree&#x27;s group showed that DNA can be used as a substrate to implement arbitrary chemical reactions. This opened the way to design and synthesis of biochemical controllers since the expressive power of CRNs is equivalent to a Turing machine. Such controllers can potentially be used &quot;in vivo&quot; for applications such as preventing hormonal imbalance.

===DNAzymes===
Catalytic DNA (deoxyribozyme or DNAzyme) catalyze a reaction when interacting with the appropriate input, such as a matching oligonucleotide. These DNAzymes are used to build logic gates analogous to digital logic in silicon; however, DNAzymes are limited to one-, two-, and three-input gates with no current implementation for evaluating statements in series.

The DNAzyme logic gate changes its structure when it binds to a matching oligonucleotide and the fluorogenic substrate it is bonded to is cleaved free. While other materials can be used, most models use a fluorescence-based substrate because it is very easy to detect, even at the single molecule limit. The amount of fluorescence can then be measured to tell whether or not a reaction took place. The DNAzyme that changes is then &quot;used&quot;, and cannot initiate any more reactions. Because of this, these reactions take place in a device such as a continuous stirred-tank reactor, where old product is removed and new molecules added.

Two commonly used DNAzymes are named E6 and 8-17. These are popular because they allow cleaving of a substrate in any arbitrary location. Stojanovic and MacDonald have used the E6 DNAzymes to build the MAYA I and MAYA II machines, respectively; Stojanovic has also demonstrated logic gates using the 8-17 DNAzyme. While these DNAzymes have been demonstrated to be useful for constructing logic gates, they are limited by the need of a metal cofactor to function, such as Zn2+ or Mn2+, and thus are not useful in vivo.

A design called a &quot;stem loop&quot;, consisting of a single strand of DNA which has a loop at an end, are a dynamic structure that opens and closes when a piece of DNA bonds to the loop part. This effect has been exploited to create several logic gates. These logic gates have been used to create the computers MAYA I and MAYA II which can play tic-tac-toe to some extent.

===Enzymes===
Enzyme-based DNA computers are usually of the form of a simple Turing machine; there is analogous hardware, in the form of an enzyme, and software, in the form of DNA.
Benenson, Shapiro and colleagues have demonstrated a DNA computer using the FokI enzyme and expanded on their work by going on to show automata that diagnose and react to prostate cancer: under expression of the genes PPAP2B and GSTP1 and an over expression of PIM1 and HPN. Their automata evaluated the expression of each gene, one gene at a time, and on positive diagnosis then released a single strand DNA molecule (ssDNA) that is an antisense for MDM2. MDM2 is a repressor of protein 53, which itself is a tumor suppressor. On negative diagnosis it was decided to release a suppressor of the positive diagnosis drug instead of doing nothing. A limitation of this implementation is that two separate automata are required, one to administer each drug. The entire process of evaluation until drug release took around an hour to complete. This method also requires transition molecules as well as the FokI enzyme to be present. The requirement for the FokI enzyme limits application &quot;in vivo&quot;, at least for use in &quot;cells of higher organisms&quot;. It should also be pointed out that the &#x27;software&#x27; molecules can be reused in this case.

=== Algorithmic self-assembly ===


DNA nanotechnology has been applied to the related field of DNA computing. DNA tiles can be designed to contain multiple sticky ends with sequences chosen so that they act as Wang tiles. A DX array has been demonstrated whose assembly encodes an XOR operation; this allows the DNA array to implement a cellular automaton which generates a fractal called the Sierpinski gasket. This shows that computation can be incorporated into the assembly of DNA arrays, increasing its scope beyond simple periodic arrays.

== Capabilities ==
DNA computing is a form of parallel computing in that it takes advantage of the many different molecules of DNA to try many different possibilities at once. For certain specialized problems, DNA computers are faster and smaller than any other computer built so far. Furthermore, particular mathematical computations have been demonstrated to work on a DNA computer.

DNA computing does not provide any new capabilities from the standpoint of computability theory, the study of which problems are computationally solvable using different models of computation.
For example,
if the space required for the solution of a problem grows exponentially with the size of the problem (EXPSPACE problems) on von Neumann machines, it still grows exponentially with the size of the problem on DNA machines.
For very large EXPSPACE problems, the amount of DNA required is too large to be practical.

== Alternative technologies ==
A partnership between IBM and Caltech was established in 2009 aiming at &quot;DNA chips&quot; production. A Caltech group is working on the manufacturing of these nucleic-acid-based integrated circuits. One of these chips can compute whole square roots. A compiler has been written in Perl.

== Pros and cons ==
The slow processing speed of a DNA computer (the response time is measured in minutes, hours or days, rather than milliseconds) is compensated by its potential to make a high amount of multiple parallel computations. This allows the system to take a similar amount of time for a complex calculation as for a simple one. This is achieved by the fact that millions or billions of molecules interact with each other simultaneously. However, it is much harder to analyze the answers given by a DNA computer than by a digital one.

==See also==
* Biocomputer
* Chemical computer 
* Computational gene
* DNA code construction
* DNA digital data storage
* DNA sequencing
* Membrane computing
* Molecular electronics
* Peptide computing
* Parallel computing
* Quantum computing
* Transcriptor
* Wetware computer
* Molecular logic gate
==References==
==Further reading==
* — The first general text to cover the whole field.
* — The book starts with an introduction to DNA-related matters, the basics of biochemistry and language and computation theory, and progresses to the advanced mathematical theory of DNA computing.

* — A new general text to cover the whole field.
==External links==
* DNA modeled computing
* How Stuff Works explanation
* Dirk de Pol: &quot;DNS – Ein neuer Supercomputer?&quot;. In: Die Neue Gesellschaft / Frankfurter Hefte , Heft 2/96, Februar 1996, S. 170–172
* &#x27;DNA computer&#x27; cracks code, Physics Web
* Ars Technica
* - The New York Times DNA Computer for detecting Cancer
* Bringing DNA computers to life, in Scientific American
* Japanese Researchers store information in bacteria DNA
* International Meeting on DNA Computing and Molecular Programming
* LiveScience.com-How DNA Could Power Computers</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q177126" start="0" end="13" title="DNA computing" label="DNA computing"/>
<link wikidata="Q176499" start="39" end="63" title="unconventional computing" label="unconventional computing"/>
<link wikidata="Q7430" start="75" end="78" title="DNA" label="DNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q7094" start="80" end="92" title="biochemistry" label="biochemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q7202" start="98" end="115" title="molecular biology" label="molecular biology"/>
<link wikidata="Q68" start="153" end="173" title="electronic computing" label="electronic computing"/>
<link wikidata="Q918650" start="369" end="380" title="Leonard Adleman" label="Len Adleman"/>
<link wikidata="Q918650" start="584" end="599" title="Leonard Adleman" label="Leonard Adleman"/>
<link wikidata="Q4614" start="607" end="640" title="University of Southern California" label="University of Southern California"/>
<link wikidata="Q1201019" start="704" end="720" title="proof-of-concept" label="proof-of-concept"/>
<link wikidata="Q987652" start="786" end="810" title="Hamiltonian path problem" label="Hamiltonian path problem"/>
<link wikidata="Q163310" start="886" end="900" title="Turing machine" label="Turing machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q602847" start="1412" end="1427" title="DNA nanotechnology" label="DNA nanoscience"/>
<link wikidata="Q11743" start="2678" end="2687" title="Lila Kari" label="Lila Kari"/>
<link wikidata="Q918650" start="3160" end="3175" title="Leonard Adleman" label="Leonard Adleman"/>
<link wikidata="" start="3229" end="3235" title=":de:TT-100" label="TT-100"/>
<link wikidata="Q273037" start="3347" end="3363" title="Hamiltonian path" label="Hamiltonian path"/>
<link wikidata="Q322212" start="3474" end="3501" title="travelling salesman problem" label="travelling salesman problem"/>
<link wikidata="Q88399897" start="3762" end="3771" title="test tube" label="test tube"/>
<link wikidata="Q1201019" start="4222" end="4238" title="proof of concept" label="proof of concept"/>
<link wikidata="Q918650" start="4321" end="4336" title="Leonard Adleman" label="Leonard Adleman"/>
<link wikidata="Q987652" start="4360" end="4376" title="Hamiltonian path problem" label="Hamiltonian path"/>
<link wikidata="Q215206" start="4429" end="4440" title="NP-complete" label="NP-complete"/>
<link wikidata="Q875276" start="4462" end="4467" title="3-satisfiability" label="3-SAT"/>
<link wikidata="Q210339" start="4612" end="4623" title="tic-tac-toe" label="tic-tac-toe"/>
<link wikidata="Q173183" start="5058" end="5075" title="Logic function" label="logical functions"/>
<link wikidata="Q59667767" start="5994" end="6003" title="Lulu Qian" label="Lulu Qian"/>
<link wikidata="Q16338" start="7958" end="7960" title="Personal computer" label="PC"/>
<link wikidata="Q191081" start="9101" end="9104" title="Logical AND" label="AND"/>
<link wikidata="Q1651704" start="9106" end="9108" title="Logical OR" label="OR"/>
<link wikidata="Q190558" start="9110" end="9113" title="Logical NOT" label="NOT"/>
<link wikidata="Q170451" start="9131" end="9144" title="digital logic" label="digital logic"/>
<link wikidata="Q133686" start="9209" end="9230" title="oligonucleotide" label="deoxyoligonucleotides"/>
<link wikidata="Q60750466" start="9480" end="9516" title="Toehold mediated strand displacement" label="Toehold mediated strand displacement"/>
<link wikidata="Q4859565" start="9766" end="9776" title="sticky end" label="sticky end"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10369" end="10402" title="Chemical reaction networks" label="chemical reaction networks (CRNs)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5260078" start="10939" end="10952" title="deoxyribozyme" label="deoxyribozyme"/>
<link wikidata="Q133686" start="11049" end="11064" title="oligonucleotide" label="oligonucleotide"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12131" end="12137" title="MAYA I" label="MAYA I"/>
<link wikidata="Q6714630" start="12142" end="12149" title="MAYA II" label="MAYA II"/>
<link wikidata="Q141124" start="12438" end="12445" title="in vivo" label="in vivo"/>
<link wikidata="Q170451" start="12693" end="12703" title="logic gate" label="logic gate"/>
<link wikidata="Q6714630" start="12774" end="12781" title="MAYA II" label="MAYA II"/>
<link wikidata="Q210339" start="12797" end="12808" title="tic-tac-toe" label="tic-tac-toe"/>
<link wikidata="Q163310" start="12903" end="12917" title="Turing machine" label="Turing machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q986838" start="13084" end="13088" title="FokI" label="FokI"/>
<link wikidata="Q181257" start="13179" end="13194" title="prostate cancer" label="prostate cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q18033153" start="13226" end="13232" title="PPAP2B" label="PPAP2B"/>
<link wikidata="Q18026593" start="13237" end="13242" title="GSTP1" label="GSTP1"/>
<link wikidata="Q18030550" start="13269" end="13273" title="PIM1" label="PIM1"/>
<link wikidata="Q18027247" start="13278" end="13281" title="HPN (gene)" label="HPN"/>
<link wikidata="Q18028978" start="13459" end="13463" title="MDM2" label="MDM2"/>
<link wikidata="Q283350" start="13488" end="13498" title="p53" label="protein 53"/>
<link wikidata="Q474147" start="14382" end="14391" title="Wang tile" label="Wang tile"/>
<link wikidata="Q498186" start="14453" end="14456" title="Exclusive or" label="XOR"/>
<link wikidata="Q189156" start="14509" end="14527" title="cellular automaton" label="cellular automaton"/>
<link wikidata="Q81392" start="14546" end="14553" title="fractal" label="fractal"/>
<link wikidata="Q663365" start="14565" end="14582" title="Sierpinski gasket" label="Sierpinski gasket"/>
<link wikidata="Q232661" start="14764" end="14782" title="parallel computing" label="parallel computing"/>
<link wikidata="Q818930" start="15179" end="15199" title="Computability theory (computer science)" label="computability theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141985" start="15412" end="15420" title="EXPSPACE" label="EXPSPACE"/>
<link wikidata="Q189088" start="15434" end="15454" title="von Neumann architecture" label="von Neumann machines"/>
<link wikidata="Q37156" start="15676" end="15679" title="IBM" label="IBM"/>
<link wikidata="Q161562" start="15684" end="15691" title="Caltech" label="Caltech"/>
<link wikidata="Q591745" start="15732" end="15740" title="DNA chip" label="DNA chip"/>
<link wikidata="Q42478" start="15939" end="15943" title="Perl" label="Perl"/>
<link wikidata="Q2064646" start="16508" end="16519" title="Biocomputer" label="Biocomputer"/>
<link wikidata="Q176853" start="16522" end="16539" title="Chemical computer" label="Chemical computer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5157315" start="16543" end="16561" title="Computational gene" label="Computational gene"/>
<link wikidata="Q5140300" start="16564" end="16585" title="DNA code construction" label="DNA code construction"/>
<link wikidata="Q5205754" start="16588" end="16612" title="DNA digital data storage" label="DNA digital data storage"/>
<link wikidata="Q380546" start="16615" end="16629" title="DNA sequencing" label="DNA sequencing"/>
<link wikidata="Q6815122" start="16632" end="16650" title="Membrane computing" label="Membrane computing"/>
<link wikidata="Q899903" start="16653" end="16674" title="Molecular electronics" label="Molecular electronics"/>
<link wikidata="Q7166527" start="16677" end="16694" title="Peptide computing" label="Peptide computing"/>
<link wikidata="Q232661" start="16697" end="16715" title="Parallel computing" label="Parallel computing"/>
<link wikidata="Q17995793" start="16718" end="16735" title="Quantum computing" label="Quantum computing"/>
<link wikidata="Q12975193" start="16738" end="16750" title="Transcriptor" label="Transcriptor"/>
<link wikidata="Q177023" start="16753" end="16769" title="Wetware computer" label="Wetware computer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3908937" start="16772" end="16792" title="Molecular logic gate" label="Molecular logic gate"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="253421" wikidata="Q452421" url="?curid=253421" title="Collective bargaining">
<text>Collective bargaining is a process of negotiation between employers and a group of employees aimed at agreements to regulate working salaries, working conditions, benefits, and other aspects of workers&#x27; compensation and rights for workers. The interests of the employees are commonly presented by representatives of a trade union to which the employees belong. A collective agreement reached by these negotiations functions as a labour contract between an employer and one or more unions, and typically establishes terms regarding wage scales, working hours, training, health and safety, overtime, grievance mechanisms, and rights to participate in workplace or company affairs. Such agreements can also include &#x27;productivity bargaining&#x27; in which workers agree to changes to working practices in return for higher pay or greater job security.

The union may negotiate with a single employer (who is typically representing a company&#x27;s shareholders) or may negotiate with a group of businesses, depending on the country, to reach an industry-wide agreement. Collective bargaining consists of the process of negotiation between representatives of a union and employers (generally represented by management, or, in some countries such as Austria, Sweden, Belgium, and the Netherlands, by an employers&#x27; organization) in respect of the terms and conditions of employment of employees, such as wages, hours of work, working conditions, grievance procedures, and about the rights and responsibilities of trade unions. The parties often refer to the result of the negotiation as a &quot;collective bargaining agreement&quot; (CBA) or as a &quot;collective employment agreement&quot; (CEA).

==History==
The term &quot;collective bargaining&quot; was first used in 1891 by Beatrice Webb, a founder of the field of industrial relations in Britain. It refers to the sort of collective negotiations and agreements that had existed since the rise of trade unions during the 18th century.

=== United States ===

In the United States, the National Labor Relations Act of 1935 made it illegal for any employer to deny union rights to an employee. The issue of unionizing government employees in a public-sector trade union was much more controversial until the 1950s. In 1962, President John F. Kennedy issued an executive order granting federal employees the right to unionize.

An issue of jurisdiction surfaced in &quot;National Labor Relations Board v. Catholic Bishop of Chicago &quot;(1979) when the Supreme Court held that the National Labor Relations Board (NLRB) could not assert jurisdiction over a church-operated school because such jurisdiction would violate the First Amendment establishment of freedom of religion and the separation of church of state.

==International protection==
The right to collectively bargain is recognized in international human rights conventions. Article 23 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights identifies the ability to organize trade unions as a fundamental human right. Article 2(a) of the International Labour Organization&#x27;s &quot;Declaration on Fundamental Principles and Rights at Work&quot; defines the &quot;freedom of association and the effective recognition of the right to collective bargaining&quot; as an essential right of workers. The Freedom of Association and Protection of the Right to Organise Convention, 1948 (C087) and several other conventions specifically protect collective bargaining through the creation of international labour standards that discourage countries from violating workers&#x27; rights to associate and collectively bargain.

==Empirical findings==
* Union members and other workers covered by collective agreements get, on average, a wage markup over their nonunionized (or uncovered) counterparts. Such a markup is typically 5–10 percent in industrial countries.
* Unions tend to equalize the income distribution, especially between skilled and unskilled workers.
* The deadweight loss associated with unions is 0.2 to 0.5 percent of GDP, which is similar to monopolies in product markets.
* An empirical model for empirical analysis and computer-assisted collective bargaining has been developed at the Hans Böckler Foundation.

==Internationally==
===OECD===
Only one in three OECD employees have wages which were agreed on through collective bargaining. The Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development, with its 36 members, has become an outspoken proponent for collective bargaining as a way to ensure that the falling unemployment also leads to higher wages.

=== Canada ===
In June 2007 the Supreme Court of Canada extensively reviewed the rationale for regarding collective bargaining as a human right. In the case of &quot;Facilities Subsector Bargaining Association v. British Columbia&quot;, the Court made the following observations:
===Sweden===
In Sweden the coverage of collective agreements is very high despite the absence of legal mechanisms to extend agreements to whole industries. In 2018, 83% of all private-sector employees were covered by collective agreements, 100% of public sector employees and in all 90% (referring to the whole labor market). This reflects the dominance of self-regulation (regulation by the labour market parties themselves) over state regulation in Swedish industrial relations.

===Australia===
Collective bargaining in Australia has its roots in the early 20th century, with the introduction of the conciliation and arbitration system. This system was established to resolve industrial disputes through the intervention of an independent third party, which could make legally binding decisions. Over the years, this system underwent significant transformations, reflecting the changing priorities of different governments and the shifting balance of power between employers and unions.

Legislative Framework
The Fair Work Act 2009 is the cornerstone of contemporary collective bargaining in Australia. The Act provides for &quot;good faith bargaining&quot; requirements, ensuring that parties engage in negotiations sincerely with the aim of reaching an agreement. This framework facilitates several key aspects of the collective bargaining process:

1. Enterprise Bargaining: The focus of collective bargaining in Australia is on enterprise bargaining, which allows for more flexible working conditions tailored to the specific needs of an enterprise and its employees.

2. Role of Unions: While union membership has declined in recent decades, unions still play a crucial role in the collective bargaining process, representing workers in negotiations with employers.

3. Bargaining Representative: Employees can appoint a bargaining agent, such as a union representative, to negotiate on their behalf.

4. Good Faith Bargaining: Parties involved in collective bargaining are required to meet good faith bargaining requirements, which include attending meetings, considering proposals, and responding in a timely manner.

5. Industrial Action: Industrial action, including strikes and lockouts, can be a part of the bargaining process but is subject to strict regulations, including protected action ballots.

===United States===
In the United States, the National Labor Relations Act (1935) covers most collective agreements in the private sector. This act makes it illegal for employers to discriminate, spy on, harass, or terminate the employment of workers because of their union membership or to retaliate against them for engaging in organizing campaigns or other &quot;concerted activities&quot;, to form company unions, or to refuse to engage in collective bargaining with the union that represents their employees. It is also illegal to require any employee to join a union as a condition of employment. Unions are also able to secure safe work conditions and equitable pay for their labor.

At a workplace where a majority of workers have voted for union representation, a committee of employees and union representatives negotiate a contract with the management regarding wages, hours, benefits, and other terms and conditions of employment, such as protection from termination of employment without just cause. Individual negotiation is prohibited. Once the workers&#x27; committee and management have agreed on a contract, it is then put to a vote of all workers at the workplace. If approved, the contract is usually in force for a fixed term of years, and when that term is up, it is then renegotiated between employees and management. Sometimes there are disputes over the union contract; this particularly occurs in cases of workers fired without just cause in a union workplace. These then go to arbitration, which is similar to an informal court hearing; a neutral arbitrator then rules whether the termination or other contract breach is extant, and if it is, orders that it be corrected.

In 24 U.S. states, employees who are working in a unionized shop may be required to contribute towards the cost of representation (such as at disciplinary hearings) if their fellow employees have negotiated a union security clause in their contract with management. Dues are generally 1–2% of pay. However, union members and other workers covered by collective agreements get, on average, a 5–10% wage markup over their nonunionized (or uncovered) counterparts. Some states, especially in the south-central and south-eastern regions of the U.S., have outlawed union security clauses; this can cause controversy, as it allows some net beneficiaries of the union contract to avoid paying their portion of the costs of contract negotiation. Regardless of state, the Supreme Court has held that the Act prevents a person&#x27;s union dues from being used without consent to fund political causes that may be opposed to the individual&#x27;s personal politics. Instead, in states where union security clauses are permitted, such dissenters may elect to pay only the proportion of dues which go directly toward representation of workers.

The American Federation of Labor was formed in 1886, providing unprecedented bargaining powers for a variety of workers.
The Railway Labor Act (1926) required employers to bargain collectively with unions.

In 1931 the Supreme Court, in the case of &quot;Texas &amp; N.O.R. Co. v. Brotherhood of Railway Clerks&quot;, upheld the act&#x27;s prohibition of employer interference in the selection of bargaining representatives. In 1962, President Kennedy signed an executive order giving public-employee unions the right to collectively bargain with federal government agencies.

The Office of Labor-Management Standards, part of the United States Department of Labor, is required to collect all collective bargaining agreements covering 1,000 or more workers, excluding those involving railroads and airlines. They provide public access to these collections through their website.

==See also==
* Corporatism
*11 U.S.C. § 1113 – Rejection of Collective Bargaining Agreements
* 2011 United States public employee protests
* 2011 Wisconsin protests, related to attempts to reduce or eliminate collective bargaining rights for public employee unions in Wisconsin
* Boulwarism
* Critique of work
* Enterprise bargaining agreement
* Freedom of association
* Labour economics
* Labour law
* Project Labor Agreement
* Right to Organise and Collective Bargaining Convention, 1949
* Right-to-work law
* Sectoral collective bargaining
* Social corporatism
* Solidarity economy
* Strike action
* Surface bargaining

== Citations ==
== General and cited references==

* Buidens, Wayne, and others. &quot;Collective Gaining: A Bargaining Alternative&quot;. &quot;Phi Delta Kappan&quot; 63 (1981): 244–245.
* DeGennaro, William, and Kay Michelfeld. &quot;Joint Committees Take the Rancor out of Bargaining with Our Teachers&quot;. &quot;The American School Board Journal&quot; 173 (1986): 38–39.
* Herman, Jerry J. &quot;With Collaborative Bargaining, You Work with the Union—Not Against It&quot;. &quot;The American School Board Journal&quot; 172 (1985): 41–42, 47.
* Huber, Joe; and Jay Hennies. &quot;Fix on These Five Guiding Lights, and Emerge from the Bargaining Fog&quot;. &quot;The American School Board Journal&quot; 174 (1987): 31.
* Jones, Ken and Golding, John, &quot;Productivity Bargaining&quot; (Fabian research series, no. 257, November 1966)
* Kjellberg, Anders (2019) &quot;Sweden: collective bargaining under the industry norm&quot;, in Torsten Müller &amp; Kurt Vandaele &amp; Jeremy Waddington (eds.) &quot;Collective bargaining in Europe: towards an endgame&quot;, European Trade Union Institute (ETUI) Brussels 2019. Vol. III (pp. 583–604).
* Liontos, Demetri. Collaborative Bargaining: Case Studies and Recommendations. Eugene: Oregon School Study Council, University of Oregon, September 1987. &quot;OSSC Bulletin Series&quot;. 27 pages. ED number not yet assigned.
* McMahon, Dennis O. &quot;Getting to Yes&quot;. Paper presented at the annual conference of the American Association of School Administrators, New Orleans, LA, February 20–23, 1987. ED 280 188.
* Namit, Chuck; and Larry Swift. &quot;Prescription for Labor Pains: Combine Bargaining with Problem Solving&quot;. &quot;The American School Board Journal&quot; 174 (1987): 24.
* Nyland, Larry. &quot;Win/Win Bargaining Takes Perseverance&quot;. &quot;The Executive Educator&quot; 9 (1987): 24.
* Smith, Patricia; and Russell Baker. &quot;An Alternative Form of Collective Bargaining&quot;. &quot;Phi Delta Kappan&quot; 67 (1986): 605–607.
* Alberta Human Rights Act, RSA 2000, c A-25
* Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms
* Donnelly, Jack. &quot;Cultural and Universal Human Right&quot;. &quot;Human Right Quarterly&quot; 6(1984): 400–419
* &quot;Dunmore v. Ontario (Attorney General)&quot;, [2001] 3 S.C.R. 1016, 2001 SCC 94
* &quot;Health Services and Support—Facilities Subcontractor Bargaining Assn. v. British Columbia&quot;, [2007] SCC 27, [2007] 2 S.C.R. 391
* Mathiesen, Kay. &quot;labor laws on unionization and collective bargaining — comparative study&quot;. &quot;Journal of information Ethics&quot;. 3(2009):245–567. Print.
* Sitati, Ezekiel. &quot;Examining the development sin the labor laws&quot;. &quot;Melbourne Journal of Politics&quot; 3(2009):56–74. Print
* &quot;Ontario (Attorney General) v. Fraser&quot;, 2011 SCC 20
* Reference Re Public Service Employee Relations Act (Alberta), [1987] 1 S.C.R. 313
==External links==
* Labor &amp; Worklife Program at Harvard Law school
* Collective Bargaining, Labor Law, and Labor History at DigitalCommons@ILR
* Collective Bargaining Agreements at DigitalCommons@ILR</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q452421" start="0" end="21" title="Collective bargaining" label="Collective bargaining"/>
<link wikidata="Q2915476" start="225" end="243" title="labour rights" label="rights for workers"/>
<link wikidata="Q178790" start="323" end="334" title="trade union" label="trade union"/>
<link wikidata="Q163887" start="368" end="388" title="collective agreement" label="collective agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q628967" start="434" end="449" title="Labor and employment law" label="labour contract"/>
<link wikidata="Q667022" start="593" end="601" title="overtime" label="overtime"/>
<link wikidata="Q5608720" start="603" end="612" title="Grievance (labour)" label="grievance"/>
<link wikidata="Q302562" start="844" end="856" title="job security" label="job security"/>
<link wikidata="Q627272" start="1307" end="1335" title="employers&amp;#x27; organization" label="employers&amp;#x27; organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q242666" start="1788" end="1801" title="Beatrice Webb" label="Beatrice Webb"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154442" start="2049" end="2077" title="National Labor Relations Act" label="National Labor Relations Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q7257291" start="2206" end="2231" title="public-sector trade union" label="public-sector trade union"/>
<link wikidata="Q9696" start="2296" end="2311" title="John F. Kennedy" label="John F. Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3024155" start="2543" end="2573" title="National Labor Relations Board" label="National Labor Relations Board"/>
<link wikidata="Q12616" start="2685" end="2700" title="First Amendment to the United States Constitution" label="First Amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q7813" start="2916" end="2953" title="Universal Declaration of Human Rights" label="Universal Declaration of Human Rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q54129" start="3052" end="3085" title="International Labour Organization" label="International Labour Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q5249475" start="3099" end="3155" title="Declaration on Fundamental Principles and Rights at Work" label="Declaration on Fundamental Principles and Rights at Work"/>
<link wikidata="Q688503" start="3180" end="3202" title="freedom of association" label="freedom of association"/>
<link wikidata="Q5500710" start="3315" end="3388" title="Freedom of Association and Protection of the Right to Organise Convention" label="Freedom of Association and Protection of the Right to Organise Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q6054717" start="3499" end="3529" title="international labour standards" label="international labour standards"/>
<link wikidata="Q163887" start="3700" end="3720" title="collective agreement" label="collective agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q3915542" start="3901" end="3920" title="income distribution" label="income distribution"/>
<link wikidata="Q358063" start="3978" end="3993" title="deadweight loss" label="deadweight loss"/>
<link wikidata="Q43637" start="4067" end="4077" title="monopoly" label="monopolies"/>
<link wikidata="Q105130" start="4212" end="4235" title="Hans Böckler Foundation" label="Hans Böckler Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q41550" start="4287" end="4291" title="OECD" label="OECD"/>
<link wikidata="Q123253540" start="4750" end="4813" title="Facilities Subsector Bargaining Association v. British Columbia" label="Facilities Subsector Bargaining Association v. British Columbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5158702" start="5467" end="5495" title="Commonwealth Conciliation and Arbitration Act 1904" label="conciliation and arbitration"/>
<link wikidata="Q656365" start="5832" end="5841" title="Employment" label="employers"/>
<link wikidata="Q19873277" start="5881" end="5899" title="Fair Work Act 2009" label="Fair Work Act 2009"/>
<link wikidata="Q628191" start="7015" end="7032" title="Industrial action" label="Industrial action"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154442" start="7227" end="7255" title="National Labor Relations Act" label="National Labor Relations Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q1418259" start="7583" end="7596" title="company union" label="company union"/>
<link wikidata="Q207946" start="8685" end="8696" title="arbitration" label="arbitration"/>
<link wikidata="Q464242" start="10018" end="10046" title="American Federation of Labor" label="American Federation of Labor"/>
<link wikidata="Q7284170" start="10139" end="10156" title="Railway Labor Act" label="Railway Labor Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q11201" start="10233" end="10246" title="United States Supreme Court" label="Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q9696" start="10458" end="10465" title="John F. Kennedy" label="Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7079254" start="10595" end="10631" title="Office of Labor-Management Standards" label="Office of Labor-Management Standards"/>
<link wikidata="Q628807" start="10645" end="10678" title="United States Department of Labor" label="United States Department of Labor"/>
<link wikidata="Q192886" start="10909" end="10920" title="Corporatism" label="Corporatism"/>
<link wikidata="Q4547784" start="10922" end="10986" title="11 U.S.C. § 1113 – Rejection of Collective Bargaining Agreements" label="11 U.S.C. § 1113 – Rejection of Collective Bargaining Agreements"/>
<link wikidata="Q4622781" start="10989" end="11032" title="2011 United States public employee protests" label="2011 United States public employee protests"/>
<link wikidata="Q1935930" start="11035" end="11058" title="2011 Wisconsin protests" label="2011 Wisconsin protests"/>
<link wikidata="Q3643164" start="11174" end="11184" title="Boulwarism" label="Boulwarism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1789468" start="11187" end="11203" title="Critique of work" label="Critique of work"/>
<link wikidata="Q5380369" start="11206" end="11237" title="Enterprise bargaining agreement" label="Enterprise bargaining agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q688503" start="11240" end="11262" title="Freedom of association" label="Freedom of association"/>
<link wikidata="Q28161" start="11265" end="11281" title="Labour economics" label="Labour economics"/>
<link wikidata="Q628967" start="11284" end="11294" title="Labour law" label="Labour law"/>
<link wikidata="Q7249182" start="11297" end="11320" title="Project Labor Agreement" label="Project Labor Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q7333673" start="11323" end="11383" title="Right to Organise and Collective Bargaining Convention, 1949" label="Right to Organise and Collective Bargaining Convention, 1949"/>
<link wikidata="Q7333460" start="11386" end="11403" title="Right-to-work law" label="Right-to-work law"/>
<link wikidata="Q28134321" start="11406" end="11436" title="Sectoral collective bargaining" label="Sectoral collective bargaining"/>
<link wikidata="Q15718641" start="11439" end="11457" title="Social corporatism" label="Social corporatism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1783877" start="11460" end="11478" title="Solidarity economy" label="Solidarity economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q49776" start="11481" end="11494" title="Strike action" label="Strike action"/>
<link wikidata="Q7645950" start="11497" end="11515" title="Surface bargaining" label="Surface bargaining"/>
<link wikidata="Q7181522" start="11662" end="11678" title="Phi Delta Kappan" label="Phi Delta Kappan"/>
<link wikidata="Q16827937" start="11835" end="11868" title="The American School Board Journal" label="The American School Board Journal"/>
<link wikidata="Q766145" start="12779" end="12799" title="University of Oregon" label="University of Oregon"/>
<link wikidata="Q4743096" start="12986" end="13031" title="American Association of School Administrators" label="American Association of School Administrators"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="253429" wikidata="Q41661" url="?curid=253429" title="Constantine VI">
<text>Constantine VI (; , 14 January 771 – before 805), sometimes called the Blind, was Byzantine emperor from 780 to 797. The only child of Emperor Leo IV, Constantine was named co-emperor with him at the age of five in 776 and succeeded him as sole Emperor in 780, aged nine. His mother Irene exercised control over him as regent until 790, assisted by her chief minister Staurakios. The regency ended when Constantine reached maturity, but Irene sought to remain an active participant in the government. After a brief interval of sole rule Constantine named his mother empress in 792, making her his official colleague.

Constantine suffered military defeats and made controversial decisions, such as blinding his loyal general Alexios Mosele and illicitly marrying his mistress, Theodote. Taking advantage of her son&#x27;s unpopularity, Irene had Constantine deposed, blinded and imprisoned in 797 and seized power for herself alone, becoming the first Empress regnant of the Empire. Constantine likely died shortly thereafter.

Constantine VI was the final ruler to be universally recognized as Roman emperor, being recognized as such by both the Empire which he ruled in the east, the papacy and the Western European powers over which the pope held suzerainty. The Byzantines&#x27; ability to protect the Papacy had waned following the Arab Conquests, leading the Papacy to increasingly seek protection from the Franks. This culminated in 800 when Pope Leo III, who owed his power and position to the Franks, crowned Charlemagne as &#x27;Emperor of the Romans&#x27;. Based on the assertion that a woman could not be Empress in her own right, this laid the foundations of a new polity, independent of the East, that would evolve into the Holy Roman Empire.

According to Byzantine sources, the rebel Thomas the Slav (–823) claimed to be Constantine VI in an effort to gain support against Michael II. However, most modern scholars dismiss this as a later fabrication.

== Early life and the regency of Irene ==
Constantine VI was the only child of Emperor Leo IV and Irene. Constantine was crowned co-emperor by his father in 776, and succeeded as sole emperor in 780, at the age of nine. Due to his minority, Irene and her chief minister Staurakios exercised the regency for him.

In 787, Constantine, then sixteen-years-old had signed the decrees of the Second Council of Nicaea, but he appears to have had iconoclast sympathies. In 788, Irene herself broke off the engagement of Constantine with Rotrude, a daughter of Charlemagne. Turning against Charlemagne, the Byzantines now supported Lombard pretender Adalgis, who had been forced into exile after the Frankish invasion of Italy. Adalgis was given command of a Roman expeditionary corps, landing in Calabria towards the end of 788 but was defeated by the united armies of the Lombard dukes Hildeprand of Spoleto and Grimoald III of Benevento as well as Frankish troops under Winiges.

After a conspiracy against Irene was suppressed in the spring of 790 she attempted to get official recognition as empress. This backfired and with military support Constantine finally came to actual power in 790, after the Armeniacs rebelled against Irene. Nevertheless, after campaigning unsuccessfully in the Balkans, Constantine restored his mother in 792 after just two years out of power and made her co-ruler.

== Reign ==
Once in control of the state, Constantine proved incapable of sound governance. Constantine himself suffered a humiliating defeat at the hands of Kardam of Bulgaria in the 792 Battle of Marcellae. A plot developed in favor of his uncle, the &quot;Caesar&quot; Nikephoros. Constantine had his uncle&#x27;s eyes put out and the tongues of his father&#x27;s four other half-brothers cut off. His former Armeniac supporters revolted after he had blinded their &quot;stratēgos&quot; Alexios Mosele due to alleged involvement in the plot. They also disapproved of Irene as co-ruler. Constantine crushed this revolt with extreme cruelty in 793.

He then divorced his wife Maria of Amnia, who had failed to provide him with a male heir, and married his mistress Theodote, an unpopular and canonically illegal act which sparked off the so-called &quot;Moechian controversy&quot;. Although Patriarch Tarasios of Constantinople did not publicly speak against it, he did refuse to officiate the marriage. Popular disapproval was expressed by Theodote&#x27;s uncle, Plato of Sakkoudion, who even broke communion with Tarasios for his passive stance. Plato&#x27;s intransigence led to his own imprisonment, while his monastic supporters were persecuted and exiled to Thessalonica. The &quot;Moechian controversy&quot; cost Constantine what popularity he had left, especially in the church establishment, which Irene took care to vocally support against her own son.

On 19 August 797, Constantine was captured, blinded, and imprisoned by the supporters of his mother, who had organized a conspiracy, leaving Irene to be crowned as first Empress regnant of Constantinople. It is unknown when exactly Constantine died; it was certainly before 805, though he may have died of his wounds shortly after being blinded (indeed, the act may have been &quot;performed in a particularly brutal manner in order to ensure that he would not survive&quot;). He was buried in the Monastery of St. Euphrosyne, which Irene had founded.

===Economy===
Although the eighth century was a period of depopulation and ruralisation, there is evidence of a degree of prosperity, for example, the written record of the very large payment of 7,200 &quot;nomismata&quot; (100 pounds of gold) by Constantine for the fair of St John at Ephesus in 795, which seems to suggest that the peasantry was industrious at the time.

==Family==
By his first wife Maria, Constantine VI had two daughters:
* Euphrosyne (790 after 836), who married Emperor Michael II
* Irene (789 after July 796), who became a nun
By his mistress and then second wife Theodote, Constantine VI had two sons, both of whom died young:
* Leo (7 October 796 1 May 797)
* An unnamed son (posthumously 797/8 between 802 and 808)
==Gallery==
==See also==

* List of Byzantine emperors

==Notes==
==References==
=== Works cited ===
* 
* 
* 

== Further reading ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q41661" start="0" end="14" title="Constantine VI" label="Constantine VI"/>
<link wikidata="Q41661" start="67" end="76" title="Constantine VI" label="the Blind"/>
<link wikidata="Q128866" start="82" end="99" title="Byzantine emperor" label="Byzantine emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q41645" start="143" end="149" title="Leo IV the Khazar" label="Leo IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q206737" start="283" end="288" title="Irene of Athens" label="Irene"/>
<link wikidata="Q477406" start="319" end="325" title="regent" label="regent"/>
<link wikidata="Q1271912" start="368" end="378" title="Staurakios (eunuch)" label="Staurakios"/>
<link wikidata="Q32251" start="725" end="739" title="Alexios Mosele (general)" label="Alexios Mosele"/>
<link wikidata="Q2883232" start="777" end="785" title="Theodote (empress)" label="Theodote"/>
<link wikidata="Q842606" start="1095" end="1108" title="Roman emperor" label="Roman emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q19546" start="1186" end="1192" title="papacy" label="papacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q27496" start="1201" end="1215" title="Western Europe" label="Western Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q463573" start="1250" end="1260" title="suzerainty" label="suzerainty"/>
<link wikidata="Q132086" start="1449" end="1461" title="Pope Leo III" label="Pope Leo III"/>
<link wikidata="Q3044" start="1518" end="1529" title="Charlemagne" label="Charlemagne"/>
<link wikidata="Q12548" start="1738" end="1755" title="Holy Roman Empire" label="Holy Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q313838" start="1800" end="1815" title="Thomas the Slav" label="Thomas the Slav"/>
<link wikidata="Q41640" start="1889" end="1899" title="Michael II" label="Michael II"/>
<link wikidata="Q41645" start="2056" end="2062" title="Leo IV the Khazar" label="Leo IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q206737" start="2067" end="2072" title="Irene (empress)" label="Irene"/>
<link wikidata="Q105742802" start="2090" end="2122" title="coronation of the Byzantine emperor" label="crowned co-emperor by his father"/>
<link wikidata="Q1271912" start="2239" end="2249" title="Staurakios (eunuch)" label="Staurakios"/>
<link wikidata="Q477406" start="2264" end="2271" title="regency" label="regency"/>
<link wikidata="Q187201" start="2356" end="2380" title="Second Council of Nicaea" label="Second Council of Nicaea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1018769" start="2409" end="2419" title="Byzantine iconoclasm" label="iconoclast"/>
<link wikidata="Q269691" start="2499" end="2506" title="Rotrude" label="Rotrude"/>
<link wikidata="Q3044" start="2522" end="2533" title="Charlemagne" label="Charlemagne"/>
<link wikidata="Q354300" start="2611" end="2618" title="Adalgis" label="Adalgis"/>
<link wikidata="Q114717" start="2670" end="2687" title="Siege of Pavia (773–74)" label="invasion of Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q124255676" start="2794" end="2806" title="Byzantine expedition to Calabria (788/789)" label="was defeated"/>
<link wikidata="Q1291466" start="2849" end="2870" title="Hildeprand of Spoleto" label="Hildeprand of Spoleto"/>
<link wikidata="Q608446" start="2875" end="2900" title="Grimoald III of Benevento" label="Grimoald III of Benevento"/>
<link wikidata="Q1287701" start="2934" end="2941" title="Winiges of Spoleto" label="Winiges"/>
<link wikidata="Q682167" start="3167" end="3176" title="Armeniacs" label="Armeniacs"/>
<link wikidata="Q438637" start="3519" end="3537" title="Kardam of Bulgaria" label="Kardam of Bulgaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1578852" start="3549" end="3568" title="Battle of Marcellae" label="Battle of Marcellae"/>
<link wikidata="Q188751" start="3620" end="3626" title="Caesar (title)" label="Caesar"/>
<link wikidata="Q7034837" start="3633" end="3643" title="Nikephoros (Caesar)" label="Nikephoros"/>
<link wikidata="Q335954" start="3835" end="3844" title="stratēgos" label="stratēgos"/>
<link wikidata="Q32251" start="3851" end="3865" title="Alexios Mosele (general)" label="Alexios Mosele"/>
<link wikidata="Q2991373" start="4038" end="4052" title="Maria of Amnia" label="Maria of Amnia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2883232" start="4127" end="4135" title="Theodote (empress)" label="Theodote"/>
<link wikidata="Q188462" start="4154" end="4165" title="canon law" label="canonically"/>
<link wikidata="Q1255067" start="4263" end="4289" title="Tarasios of Constantinople" label="Tarasios of Constantinople"/>
<link wikidata="Q2269212" start="4426" end="4445" title="Plato of Sakkoudion" label="Plato of Sakkoudion"/>
<link wikidata="Q285571" start="4870" end="4877" title="political mutilation in Byzantine culture" label="blinded"/>
<link wikidata="Q1198478" start="5586" end="5595" title="nomisma" label="nomismata"/>
<link wikidata="Q47611" start="5665" end="5672" title="Ephesus" label="Ephesus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2280791" start="5825" end="5835" title="Euphrosyne (9th century)" label="Euphrosyne"/>
<link wikidata="Q41640" start="5873" end="5883" title="Michael II" label="Michael II"/>
<link wikidata="Q128866" start="6150" end="6176" title="List of Byzantine emperors" label="List of Byzantine emperors"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="253432" wikidata="Q1533748" url="?curid=253432" title="MTG">
<text>Mtg is as an abbreviation for the words &quot;meeting&quot; and &quot;mortgage&quot;.

MTG may also refer to:

==Businesses and organizations==
* Mağusa Türk Gücü S.K., a Turkish Cypriot sports club
* Maria-Theresia-Gymnasium, a Munich school for gifted students
* Metalogenia, a ground engaging tools company based in Spain
* Metro Tunneling Group, joint venture of Five Companies
* Modern Times Group, a Swedish media company and owner of Viasat and Metro International
* MTG Hawke&#x27;s Bay, a museum, art gallery and theatre in New Zealand
* Servicios Aéreos MTT (ICAO airline code codice_1), a Mexican airline; see List of airline codes

==Science and technology==
* Methanol to gasoline, a process for producing liquid hydrocarbons from methanol
* Middle temporal gyrus, a region in the brain
* Meteosat Third Generation, geostationary meteorological satellites built for EUMETSAT
*Monothioglycerol, a thiol used in mass spectrometry and cell culturing

==Places==
* Mato Grosso Airport (IATA airport code codice_1), Mato Grosso, Brazil; see List of airports by IATA airport code: M
* Mottingham railway station (station code codice_1), London, England, National Rail station code

==Other==
* Goliath language (ISO 639 language code codice_4)
* &quot;&quot;, a trading card game
* Marjorie Taylor Greene (born 1974), Republican member of the United States House of Representatives
** &quot;MTG&quot;, a 2023 book by Marjorie Taylor Greene, published by Winning Team Publishing
* Mind the gap, a train announcement
* &quot;Man the Guns&quot;, an expansion for the strategy game &quot;Hearts of Iron IV&quot;

==See also==
* 
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1533748" start="0" end="3" title="MTG" label="Mtg"/>
<link wikidata="Q2761147" start="46" end="53" title="meeting" label="meeting"/>
<link wikidata="Q1546676" start="70" end="78" title="mortgage (disambiguation)" label="mortgage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1533748" start="87" end="90" title="MTG" label="MTG"/>
<link wikidata="Q2304796" start="146" end="167" title="Mağusa Türk Gücü S.K." label="Mağusa Türk Gücü S.K."/>
<link wikidata="Q1895591" start="201" end="225" title="Maria-Theresia-Gymnasium" label="Maria-Theresia-Gymnasium"/>
<link wikidata="Q18390566" start="265" end="276" title="Metalogenia" label="Metalogenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q16253933" start="327" end="348" title="Metro Tunneling Group" label="Metro Tunneling Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q378944" start="384" end="402" title="Modern Times Group" label="Modern Times Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q17054366" start="474" end="494" title="MTG Hawke&amp;#x27;s Bay" label="MTG Hawke&amp;#x27;s Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q251957" start="621" end="642" title="List of airline codes" label="List of airline codes"/>
<link wikidata="Q902539" start="673" end="693" title="Methanol to gasoline" label="Methanol to gasoline"/>
<link wikidata="Q5407200" start="755" end="776" title="Middle temporal gyrus" label="Middle temporal gyrus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1429889" start="802" end="827" title="Meteosat Third Generation" label="Meteosat Third Generation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2745755" start="889" end="905" title="3-Mercaptopropane-1,2-diol" label="Monothioglycerol"/>
<link wikidata="" start="1049" end="1089" title="List of airports by IATA airport code: M" label="List of airports by IATA airport code: M"/>
<link wikidata="Q2433460" start="1092" end="1118" title="Mottingham railway station" label="Mottingham railway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q5580728" start="1201" end="1217" title="Goliath language" label="Goliath language"/>
<link wikidata="Q98380406" start="1289" end="1311" title="Marjorie Taylor Greene" label="Marjorie Taylor Greene"/>
<link wikidata="Q113293290" start="1461" end="1484" title="Winning Team Publishing" label="Winning Team Publishing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1378362" start="1487" end="1499" title="Mind the gap" label="Mind the gap"/>
<link wikidata="Q15712701" start="1591" end="1608" title="Hearts of Iron IV" label="Hearts of Iron IV"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="253433" wikidata="Q5562214" url="?curid=253433" title="Gillian Chan">
<text>Gillian Chan (born 1954) is a Canadian children&#x27;s author who lives in Dundas, Ontario.

She was educated at Orange Hill Grammar School and the University of East Anglia (BEd, 1980).

Chan is also the author of a short diary entry of Chin Mei-ling&#x27;s during the Christmas week a year or so after the original diary ended for the Christmas treasury from the Dear Canada series, &quot;A Season for Miracles: Twelve Tales of Christmas.&quot;

On October 27, 2006, Chan competed on the television show &quot;Jeopardy!&quot;, finishing in last place.

==Works==
*&quot;Golden Girl and Other Stories&quot; - 1994
*&quot;Glory Days and Other Stories&quot; - 1996 (Nominated for a Governor General&#x27;s Award)
*&quot;The Carved Box&quot; - 2001
*&quot;A Foreign Field&quot; - 2002
*&quot;An Ocean Apart: The Gold Mountain Diary of Chin Mei-ling (Dear Canada)&quot; - 2004
*&quot;The Turning&quot; - 2005
*&quot;I Am Canada: A Call to Battle&quot; - 2012

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5562214" start="0" end="12" title="Gillian Chan" label="Gillian Chan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196645" start="30" end="38" title="Canadians" label="Canadian"/>
<link wikidata="Q131539" start="39" end="61" title="children&amp;#x27;s author" label="children&amp;#x27;s author"/>
<link wikidata="Q620726" start="75" end="90" title="Dundas, Ontario" label="Dundas, Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q6858331" start="113" end="139" title="Mill Hill County High School" label="Orange Hill Grammar School"/>
<link wikidata="Q1045828" start="148" end="173" title="University of East Anglia" label="University of East Anglia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5246823" start="365" end="383" title="Dear Canada series" label="Dear Canada series"/>
<link wikidata="Q499767" start="512" end="521" title="Jeopardy!" label="Jeopardy!"/>
<link wikidata="Q23307636" start="622" end="650" title="Glory Days and Other Stories" label="Glory Days and Other Stories"/>
<link wikidata="Q3405770" start="681" end="710" title="1996 Governor General&amp;#x27;s Awards" label="Governor General&amp;#x27;s Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q5246823" start="848" end="859" title="Dear Canada" label="Dear Canada"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="253436" wikidata="Q2350870" url="?curid=253436" title="Fall Rot">
<text>Fall Rot (Case Red) was the plan for a German military operation after the success of (Case Yellow), the Battle of France, an invasion of the Benelux countries and northern France. The Allied armies had been defeated and pushed back in the north to the Channel coast, which culminated in the Dunkirk evacuation. The operation to complete the conquest of France by the German Army began on 5 June 1940. began with a preliminary attack over the river Somme on the Channel Coast to the Seine, beginning on 5 June and the main offensive by Army Group A on 9 June further east over the river Aisne.

==Background==
===French defensive preparations===

By the end of May 1940, the best-equipped French armies had been sent north and lost in and the evacuation from Dunkirk, which cost the Allies French commander Maxime Weygand was faced with the prospect of defending a front from Sedan, along the Aisne and Somme rivers to Abbeville on the Channel, with divisions. The 51st (Highland) Infantry Division and a few British divisions being sent to French ports south of the Somme to form the &quot;2nd BEF&quot; were the only British contribution. Weygand lacked reserves to counter a breakthrough against divisions and the , which had air supremacy, except over the English Channel.

Between six and ten million civilian refugees had fled the fighting and clogged the roads, in what became known as (The Exodus) and few arrangements had been made for their reception. The population of Chartres declined from 23,000 to 800 and Lille from 200,000 to 20,000, while cities in the south such as Pau and Bordeaux rapidly grew in size.

==Prelude==
===Battle of Abbeville===

The Battle of Abbeville took place from the 28 May to 4 June 1940 near Abbeville during the Battle of France in the Second World War. While Operation Dynamo, the Dunkirk evacuation, was under way, Weygand tried to exploit the immobilisation of German forces, to attack northwards over the Somme and rescue the trapped Allied forces in the Dunkirk pocket. The attack was carried out by the French (2nd DCr, heavy armoured division) and (4th DCr) and the British 1st Armoured Division. The attacks reduced the size of the German bridgehead by about 50 per cent.

===Weygand line===

The French armies had fallen back on their lines of supply and communications and had easier access to repair shops, supply dumps and stores. About 112,000 evacuated French soldiers were repatriated via the Normandy and the Brittany ports. It was some substitute for the lost divisions in Flanders. The French were also able to make good a significant amount of their armoured/armored losses and raised the 1st and 2nd DCr; the 4th DCr also had its losses replaced; morale rose and was very high by the end of May 1940.

Morale improved because most French soldiers knew of German success only by hearsay; surviving French officers had gained tactical experience against German mobile units and had increased confidence in their weapons, after seeing their artillery (which the post-battle analysis of the recognised as technically excellent) and tanks perform better in combat than German armour. The French tanks had heavier armour/armor and bigger guns. Between 23 and 28 May, the French reconstituted the Seventh and Tenth armies. Weygand decided on hedgehog tactics, in defence in depth, to inflict maximum attrition on German units. He employed units in towns and small villages, which were prepared for all-round defence. Behind that, the new infantry, armoured and half-mechanised divisions were ready to counter-attack and relieve the surrounded units, which were ordered to hold out at all costs.

==Battle==

Army Group B attacked either side of Paris; in its 47 divisions it had the majority of the mobile units. After 48 hours, the Germans had not broken through the French defence. On the Aisne, the XVI (General Erich Hoepner) employed over 1,000 armoured fighting vehicles (AFVs) in two panzer divisions and a motorised division against the French. The assault was crude and Hoepner lost 80 out of 500 AFVs in the first attack. The German 4th Army had captured bridgeheads over the Somme but the Germans struggled to get over the Aisne as the French defence in depth frustrated the crossing. At Amiens, the Germans were repeatedly driven back by powerful French artillery concentrations, a marked improvement in French tactics.

The German Army relied on the to silence French artillery as the German infantry inched forward, only forcing crossings on the third day. The (French Air Force) attempted to bomb them but failed. German sources acknowledged the battle was &quot;hard and costly in lives, the enemy putting up severe resistance, particularly in the woods and tree lines continuing the fight when our troops had pushed past the point of resistance&quot;. South of Abbeville, the French Tenth Army (General Robert Altmayer) had its front broken and it was forced to retreat to Rouen and southwards over the Seine river. The 7th Division headed west over the Seine river through Normandy and captured the port of Cherbourg on 18 June, forcing the surrender of much of the 51st (Highland) Division on 12 June. German spearheads were overextended and vulnerable to counter strokes but the denied the French the ability to concentrate and the fear of air attack negated their mass and mobile use by Weygand.
On 10 June, the French government declared Paris an open city. The German 18th Army advanced on Paris against determined French opposition but the line was broken in several places. Weygand asserted it would not take long for the French Army to disintegrate. On 13 June, Churchill attended a meeting of the Anglo-French Supreme War Council at Tours. He suggested a Franco-British Union, which the French rejected. On 14 June, Paris fell and the Parisians unable to flee the city found that in most cases the Germans were extremely well mannered.

The air superiority established by the became air supremacy, with the on the verge of collapse. The French had only just begun to make the majority of bomber sorties; between 5 and 9 June during Operation Paula, when over 1,815 sorties were flown, 518 by bombers. The number of sorties flown declined as losses became impossible to replace. The RAF attempted to divert the attention of the with 660 sorties flown against targets over the Dunkirk area but lost many aircraft; on 21 June, 37 Bristol Blenheims were destroyed. After 9 June, French aerial resistance virtually ceased and some surviving aircraft withdrew to French North Africa. attacks concentrated on the direct and indirect support of the army. The attacked lines of resistance which then quickly collapsed under armoured attack.

===Maginot Line===

Army Group C in the east was to help Army Group A to encircle and capture the French forces on the Maginot Line. The goal of the operation was to envelop the Metz region, with its fortifications, to prevent a French counter-offensive from Alsace against the German line on the Somme. The XIX (General Heinz Guderian) was to advance to the French border with Switzerland and trap the French forces in the Vosges Mountains while the XVI attacked the Maginot Line from the west, into its vulnerable rear to take the cities of Verdun, Toul and Metz. The French had moved the 2nd Army Group from the Alsace and Lorraine to the Weygand line on the Somme, leaving only small forces guarding the Maginot Line. After Army Group B had begun its offensive against Paris and into Normandy, Army Group A began its advance into the rear of the Maginot Line. On 15 June, Army Group C launched Operation Tiger, a frontal assault across the Rhine into France.

German attempts to break the Maginot Line prior to Tiger had failed. One assault lasted for eight hours at the north end of the line, costing the Germans 46 dead and 251 wounded for two French were killed at (Chappy Farm shelter) and one at . On 15 June, the last well-equipped French forces, including the Fourth Army, were preparing to leave as the Germans struck; only a skeleton force held the line. The Germans greatly outnumbered the French and could call upon I of seven divisions and 1,000 guns, although most were First World War vintage and could not penetrate the thick armour of the fortresses. Only 88 mm guns were effective and 16 were allocated to the operation; guns and eight railway batteries were also employed. The deployed .

The battle was difficult and slow progress was made against strong French resistance but the fortresses were overcome one by one. fired 15,802 rounds at German infantry. It was the most bombarded of all the French positions but its armour protected it from fatal damage. The same day that &quot;Tiger&quot; began, started. Five assault divisions of the VII crossed the Rhine into the Colmar area with a view to advancing to the Vosges Mountains. It had 400 artillery pieces including heavy artillery and mortars. The French 104th Division and 105th Division were driven back into the Vosges Mountains on 17 June. On the same day, XIX reached the Swiss border and the Maginot defences were cut off from France. Most units surrendered on 25 June and the Germans claimed to have taken 500,000 prisoners. Some main fortresses continued the fight, despite appeals for surrender. The last fort did not surrender until 10 July and then only under protest and after a request from General Alphonse Georges. Of the 58 big fortifications on the Maginot Line, ten were captured by the German army.

==Aftermath==
===Second BEF evacuation===

The evacuation of the second BEF took place during Operation Aerial between 15 and 25 June. The &quot;Luftwaffe&quot;, with complete domination of the French skies, was determined to prevent more Allied evacuations after the Dunkirk debacle. was assigned to the Normandy and Brittany sectors. On 9 and 10 June, the port of Cherbourg was subject to 15 tonnes of German bombs, while Le Havre received 10 bombing attacks that sank 2,949 GRT of escaping Allied shipping. On 17 June, Junkers Ju 88s (mainly from 30) sank a &quot;10,000 tonne ship&quot; which was the 16,243 GRT liner off St Nazaire, killing some 4,000 Allied personnel (nearly doubling the British killed in the Battle of France), yet the failed to prevent the evacuation of some 190,000–200,000 Allied personnel.

===Armistice===
Discouraged by the hostile reaction in the cabinet to a British proposal for a Franco-British Union and believing his ministers no longer supported him, Prime Minister Paul Reynaud resigned on 16 June. He was succeeded by Marshal Philippe Pétain, who delivered a radio address to the French people, announcing his intention to ask for an armistice with Germany. When Hitler received word from the French government that they wished to negotiate an armistice, he selected the Forest of Compiègne, the site of the 1918 Armistice, as the venue. On 21 June 1940, Hitler visited the site to start the negotiations, which took place in the railway carriage in which the 1918 Armistice was signed. After listening to the preamble, Hitler left the carriage in a calculated gesture of disdain for the French delegates and negotiations were turned over to Wilhelm Keitel, the Chief of Staff of Oberkommando der Wehrmacht (OKW). The armistice was signed on the next day at 6:36 p.m. (French time), by General Keitel for Germany and General Charles Huntziger for France and came into effect at 12:35 a.m. on 25 June, once the Franco-Italian Armistice had been signed, at 6:35 p.m. on 24 June, near Rome.

====Italy====
Italy declared war on France and Britain on the evening of 10 June, to take effect just after midnight. The two sides exchanged air raids on the first day of war but little transpired on the Alpine front, since both France and Italy had adopted a defensive strategy. There was some skirmishing between patrols and the French forts of the exchanged fire with their Italian counterparts of the . On 17 June, France announced that it would seek an armistice with Germany and on 21 June, with a Franco-German armistice about to be signed, the Italians launched a general offensive all along the Alpine front, with the main attack in the northern sector and a secondary advance along the coast. The offensive was conducted by 32 Italian divisions and penetrated a few kilometres into French territory, against the Army of the Alps (General René Olry) which held the frontier with three divisions. The coastal town of Menton was captured but on the Côte d&#x27;Azur the invasion was held up by a French NCO and seven men. On the evening of 24 June, a Franco-Italian Armistice was signed at Rome and came into effect at the same time as the Second Armistice at Compiègne with Germany (22 June), just after midnight on 25 June.

==See also==
* List of Axis operational codenames in the European Theatre
* List of French military equipment of World War II
* List of German military equipment of World War II

==Footnotes==
==References==

Books
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 

Journals


==Further reading==
* 
* 
* 


==External links==
* Maginot Line at War </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2350870" start="10" end="18" title="Fall Rot" label="Case Red"/>
<link wikidata="Q151340" start="105" end="121" title="Battle of France" label="Battle of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q13116" start="142" end="149" title="Benelux" label="Benelux"/>
<link wikidata="Q911972" start="292" end="310" title="Dunkirk evacuation" label="Dunkirk evacuation"/>
<link wikidata="Q70802" start="354" end="360" title="French Third Republic" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q701923" start="368" end="379" title="German Army (Wehrmacht)" label="German Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q37646" start="449" end="454" title="Somme (river)" label="Somme"/>
<link wikidata="Q34640" start="462" end="475" title="English Channel" label="Channel Coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q1471" start="483" end="488" title="Seine" label="Seine"/>
<link wikidata="Q163259" start="536" end="548" title="Army Group A" label="Army Group A"/>
<link wikidata="Q4022" start="581" end="586" title="river" label="river"/>
<link wikidata="Q41962" start="587" end="592" title="Aisne (river)" label="Aisne"/>
<link wikidata="Q911972" start="743" end="766" title="Dunkirk evacuation" label="evacuation from Dunkirk"/>
<link wikidata="Q170357" start="807" end="821" title="Maxime Weygand" label="Maxime Weygand"/>
<link wikidata="Q184371" start="876" end="881" title="Sedan, Ardennes" label="Sedan"/>
<link wikidata="Q34640" start="932" end="943" title="English Channel" label="the Channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2438997" start="965" end="998" title="51st (Highland) Infantry Division" label="51st (Highland) Infantry Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q130272" start="1480" end="1488" title="Chartres" label="Chartres"/>
<link wikidata="Q132671" start="1585" end="1588" title="Pau, Pyrénées-Atlantiques" label="Pau"/>
<link wikidata="Q1479" start="1593" end="1601" title="Bordeaux" label="Bordeaux"/>
<link wikidata="Q28520" start="1735" end="1744" title="Abbeville" label="Abbeville"/>
<link wikidata="Q151340" start="1756" end="1772" title="Battle of France" label="Battle of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="1780" end="1796" title="Second World War" label="Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q911972" start="1804" end="1820" title="Operation Dynamo" label="Operation Dynamo"/>
<link wikidata="Q110886184" start="2125" end="2146" title="1st Armoured Division (United Kingdom)" label="1st Armoured Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q750633" start="3320" end="3336" title="defence in depth" label="defence in depth"/>
<link wikidata="Q157572" start="3665" end="3677" title="Army Group B" label="Army Group B"/>
<link wikidata="Q57367" start="3872" end="3885" title="Erich Hoepner" label="Erich Hoepner"/>
<link wikidata="Q3093" start="4191" end="4196" title="Aisne" label="Aisne"/>
<link wikidata="Q41604" start="4256" end="4262" title="Amiens" label="Amiens"/>
<link wikidata="Q30974" start="4947" end="4952" title="Rouen" label="Rouen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1471" start="5028" end="5033" title="Seine" label="Seine"/>
<link wikidata="Q15878" start="5048" end="5056" title="Normandy" label="Normandy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3667188" start="5082" end="5091" title="Cherbourg" label="Cherbourg"/>
<link wikidata="Q862308" start="5426" end="5435" title="open city" label="open city"/>
<link wikidata="Q2994292" start="5681" end="5713" title="Anglo-French Supreme War Council" label="Anglo-French Supreme War Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q288" start="5717" end="5722" title="Tours" label="Tours"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5739" end="5759" title="Franco-British Union#World War II (1940)" label="Franco-British Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q898788" start="5925" end="5940" title="air superiority" label="air superiority"/>
<link wikidata="Q898788" start="5967" end="5980" title="air supremacy" label="air supremacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2078945" start="6116" end="6131" title="Operation Paula" label="Operation Paula"/>
<link wikidata="Q330417" start="6411" end="6427" title="Bristol Blenheim" label="Bristol Blenheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q27381" start="6548" end="6560" title="North Africa" label="North Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q313823" start="6737" end="6749" title="Army Group C" label="Army Group C"/>
<link wikidata="Q163259" start="6774" end="6786" title="Army Group A" label="Army Group A"/>
<link wikidata="Q162746" start="6836" end="6848" title="Maginot Line" label="Maginot Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q22690" start="6895" end="6899" title="Metz" label="Metz"/>
<link wikidata="Q70560" start="7038" end="7052" title="Heinz Guderian" label="Heinz Guderian"/>
<link wikidata="Q39" start="7095" end="7106" title="Switzerland" label="Switzerland"/>
<link wikidata="Q187843" start="7141" end="7157" title="Vosges Mountains" label="Vosges Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q154748" start="7260" end="7266" title="Verdun" label="Verdun"/>
<link wikidata="Q154728" start="7268" end="7272" title="Toul" label="Toul"/>
<link wikidata="Q584" start="7661" end="7666" title="Rhine" label="Rhine"/>
<link wikidata="Q130994" start="8812" end="8818" title="Colmar" label="Colmar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1337896" start="9409" end="9425" title="Alphonse Joseph Georges" label="Alphonse Georges"/>
<link wikidata="Q924671" start="9610" end="9626" title="Operation Aerial" label="Operation Aerial"/>
<link wikidata="Q327" start="9834" end="9842" title="Brittany" label="Brittany"/>
<link wikidata="Q191118" start="9910" end="9916" title="tonnes" label="tonnes"/>
<link wikidata="Q42810" start="9940" end="9948" title="Le Havre" label="Le Havre"/>
<link wikidata="Q4940698" start="9961" end="9976" title="Bombing of France during World War II" label="bombing attacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q752079" start="9993" end="9996" title="Gross register tonnage" label="GRT"/>
<link wikidata="Q155661" start="10038" end="10051" title="Junkers Ju 88" label="Junkers Ju 88"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="10408" end="10415" title="United Kingdom" label="British"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10431" end="10451" title="Franco-British union#World War II (1940)" label="Franco-British Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q161076" start="10520" end="10532" title="Paul Reynaud" label="Paul Reynaud"/>
<link wikidata="Q474485" start="10574" end="10581" title="Marshal of France" label="Marshal"/>
<link wikidata="Q5721" start="10582" end="10597" title="Philippe Pétain" label="Philippe Pétain"/>
<link wikidata="Q107706" start="10690" end="10699" title="armistice" label="armistice"/>
<link wikidata="Q2302755" start="10827" end="10846" title="Forest of Compiègne" label="Forest of Compiègne"/>
<link wikidata="Q253224" start="10864" end="10878" title="Armistice with Germany (Compiègne)" label="1918 Armistice"/>
<link wikidata="Q76361" start="11198" end="11212" title="Wilhelm Keitel" label="Wilhelm Keitel"/>
<link wikidata="Q112119463" start="11218" end="11232" title="Chief of Staff" label="Chief of Staff"/>
<link wikidata="Q152412" start="11236" end="11262" title="Oberkommando der Wehrmacht" label="Oberkommando der Wehrmacht"/>
<link wikidata="Q704264" start="11381" end="11398" title="Charles Huntziger" label="Charles Huntziger"/>
<link wikidata="Q172579" start="11559" end="11564" title="Kingdom of Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1286" start="11750" end="11756" title="Alps" label="Alpine"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12368" end="12384" title="Army of the Alps#20th Century" label="Army of the Alps"/>
<link wikidata="Q1763491" start="12394" end="12403" title="René Olry" label="René Olry"/>
<link wikidata="Q180083" start="12471" end="12477" title="Menton" label="Menton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2862273" start="12604" end="12628" title="Franco-Italian Armistice" label="Franco-Italian Armistice"/>
<link wikidata="Q220" start="12643" end="12647" title="Rome" label="Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q170360" start="12693" end="12722" title="Armistice of 22 June 1940" label="Second Armistice at Compiègne"/>
<link wikidata="Q16208528" start="12795" end="12853" title="List of Axis operational codenames in the European Theatre" label="List of Axis operational codenames in the European Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q104873367" start="12856" end="12905" title="List of French military equipment of World War II" label="List of French military equipment of World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q17008463" start="12908" end="12957" title="List of German military equipment of World War II" label="List of German military equipment of World War II"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="253441" wikidata="Q41618" url="?curid=253441" title="Leo VI the Wise">
<text>Leo VI, also known as Leo the Wise (, 19 September 866 – 11 May 912), was Byzantine Emperor from 886 to 912. The second ruler of the Macedonian dynasty (although his parentage is unclear), he was very well read, leading to his epithet. During his reign, the renaissance of letters, begun by his predecessor Basil I, continued; but the empire also saw several military defeats in the Balkans against Bulgaria and against the Arabs in Sicily and the Aegean. His reign also witnessed the formal discontinuation of several ancient Roman institutions, such as the separate office of Roman consul.

==Early life==

Born on 19 September 866 to the empress Eudokia Ingerina, Leo was either the illegitimate son of Emperor Michael III or the second son of Michael&#x27;s successor, Basil I the Macedonian. Eudokia was both Michael III&#x27;s mistress and Basil&#x27;s wife. In 867, Michael was assassinated by Basil, who succeeded him as emperor. As the second-eldest son of the Emperor, Leo was associated on the throne in 870 and became the direct heir on the death of his older half-brother Constantine in 879. However, Leo and Basil did not like each other; a relationship that only deteriorated after Eudokia&#x27;s death, when Leo, unhappy with his marriage to Theophano, took up a mistress in the person of Zoe Zaoutzaina. Basil married Zoe off to an insignificant official, and later almost had Leo blinded when he was accused of conspiring against him. On 29 August 886, Basil died in a hunting accident, though he claimed on his deathbed that there was an assassination attempt in which Leo was possibly involved.

==Domestic policy==

One of the first actions of Leo VI after his succession was the reburial, with great ceremony, of the remains of Michael III in the imperial mausoleum within the Church of the Holy Apostles in Constantinople. This contributed to the suspicion that Leo was (or at least believed himself to be) in truth Michael&#x27;s son. Seeking political reconciliation, the new emperor secured the support of the officials in the capital, and surrounded himself with bureaucrats like Stylianos Zaoutzes (the father of his mistress, Zoe Zaoutzaina) and the eunuch Samonas, an Arab defector whom Leo raised to the rank of &quot;patrikios&quot; and who stood in as godfather to Leo&#x27;s son, Constantine VII. His attempts to control the great aristocratic families (e.g., the Phokadai and the Doukai) occasionally led to serious conflicts, the most significant being the revolt of Andronikos Doukas in 906.

Leo also attempted to involve himself in the church through his arbitrary interference with the patriarchate. Using his former tutor Patriarch Photios&#x27;s excommunication by Pope John VIII as an excuse, Leo dismissed him and replaced him with his own 19-year-old brother Stephen in December 886. On Stephen&#x27;s death in 893, Leo replaced him with Zaoutzes&#x27; nominee, Antony II Kauleas, who died in 901. Leo then promoted his own Imperial secretary (&quot;mystikos&quot;) Nicholas, but suspicions that he was involved in the failed assassination attempt against Leo in 903 as well as his opposition to Leo&#x27;s fourth marriage saw Nicholas replaced with Leo&#x27;s spiritual father Euthymios in 907.

The magnificent Church of Agios Lazaros in Larnaca was constructed during the rule of Leo VI in the late 9th century, and it was built after the relics of St. Lazaros were transported from Crete to Constantinople. The church is one of the best examples of Byzantine architecture. Leo also completed work on the &quot;Basilika&quot;, the Greek translation and update of the law code issued by Justinian I, which had been started during the reign of Basil.

Bishop Liutprand of Cremona gives an account similar to those about Caliph Harun al-Rashid, to the effect that Leo would sometimes disguise himself and go about Constantinople looking for injustice or corruption. According to one story, he was even captured by the city guards during one of his investigations. Late in the evening, he was walking alone and disguised. Though he bribed two patrols with 12 &quot;nomismata&quot; and moved on, a third city patrol arrested him. When a terrified guardian recognized the jailed ruler in the morning, the arresting officer was rewarded for doing his duty, while the other patrols were dismissed and punished severely.

==Foreign policy==

Leo VI&#x27;s fortune in war was more mixed than Basil&#x27;s had been. In indulging his chief counselor Stylianos Zaoutzes, Leo provoked a war with Simeon I of Bulgaria in 894, but he was defeated. Bribing the Magyars to attack the Bulgarians from the north, Leo scored an indirect success in 895. However, deprived of his new allies, he lost the major Battle of Boulgarophygon in 896 and had to make the required commercial concessions and to pay annual tribute.

Although he won a victory in 900 against the Emirate of Tarsus, in which the Arab army was destroyed and the Emir himself captured, in the west the Emirate of Sicily took Taormina, the last Byzantine outpost on the island of Sicily, in 902. Nevertheless, Leo continued to apply pressure on his eastern frontier through the creation of the new &quot;thema&quot; of Mesopotamia, a Byzantine invasion of Armenia in 902, and the sacking of Theodosiopolis, as well as successful raids in the Arab &quot;Thughur&quot;.

Then, in 904 the renegade Leo of Tripolis sacked Thessalonica with his pirates—an event described in &quot;The Capture of Thessalonica&quot; by John Kaminiates—while a large-scale expedition to recover Crete under Himerios in 911–912 failed disastrously. Nevertheless, the same period also saw the establishment of the important frontier provinces (&quot;kleisourai&quot;) of Lykandos and Leontokome on territory recently taken from the Arabs. In 907 Constantinople was attacked by the Kievan Rus&#x27; under Oleg of Novgorod, who was seeking favorable trading rights with the empire. Leo paid them off, but they attacked again in 911, and a trade treaty was finally signed.
==Marriages==

Leo VI caused a major scandal with his numerous marriages which failed to produce a legitimate heir to the throne. His first wife Theophano, whom Basil had forced him to marry on account of her family connections to the Martinakioi, and whom Leo hated, died in 897, and Leo married Zoe Zaoutzaina, the daughter of his adviser Stylianos Zaoutzes, though she died as well in 899. Upon this marriage Leo created the title of &quot;basileopatōr&quot; (&quot;father of the emperor&quot;) for his father-in-law.

After Zoe&#x27;s death a third marriage was technically illegal, but he married again, only to have his third wife Eudokia Baïana die in 901. Instead of marrying a fourth time, which would have been an even greater sin than a third marriage (according to the Patriarch Nicholas Mystikos) Leo took as mistress Zoe Karbonopsina. He married her only after she had given birth to a son in 905, but incurred the opposition of the patriarch. Replacing Nicholas Mystikos with Euthymios, Leo got his marriage recognized by the church (albeit with a long penance attached, and with an assurance that Leo would outlaw all future fourth marriages).

==Succession==

The future Constantine VII was the illegitimate son born before Leo&#x27;s uncanonical fourth marriage to Zoe Karbonopsina. To strengthen his son&#x27;s position as heir, Leo had Constantine crowned as co-emperor on 15 May 908, when he was only two years old. Leo VI died on 11 May 912. He was succeeded by his younger brother Alexander, who had reigned as emperor alongside his father and brother since 879.
Alexander died thirteen months later, and Constantine succeeded him. Shortly before Constantine reached the age of maturity, one of his regents made himself senior co-emperor as Romanos I. Romanus married his daughter to Constantine, and their son became emperor as Romanos II on Constantine&#x27;s death in 959.

==Works==
Leo VI was a prolific writer, and he produced works on many different topics and in many styles, including political orations, liturgical poems, and theological treatises. On many occasions he would personally deliver highly wrought and convoluted sermons in the churches of Constantinople.

In the subject matter of legal works and treatises, he established a legal commission that carried out his father&#x27;s original intent of codifying all of existing Byzantine law. The end result was a six-volume work consisting of 60 books, entitled the &quot;Basilika&quot;. Written in Greek, the &quot;Basilika&quot; translated and systematically arranged practically all of the laws preserved in the &quot;Corpus Juris Civilis&quot;, thereby providing a foundation upon which all later Byzantine laws could be built. Leo then began integrating new laws issued during his reign into the &quot;Basilika&quot;. Called &quot;Novels&quot;, or &quot;New Laws&quot;, these were codes that dealt with current problems and issues, such as the prohibition on fourth marriages. Both the &quot;Basilika&quot; and the Novels were concerned with ecclesiastical law (canon law) as well as secular law. Most importantly, from a historical perspective, they finally did away with much of the remaining legal and constitutional architecture that the Byzantine Empire had inherited from the Roman Empire, and even from the days of the Roman Republic. Obsolete institutions such as the Curiae, the Roman Senate, even the Consulate, were finally removed from a legal perspective, even though these still continued in a lesser, decorative form.
The supposed &quot;Book of the Prefect&quot; and the &quot;Kletorologion&quot; of Philotheos were also issued under Leo&#x27;s name and testify to his government&#x27;s interest in organization and the maintenance of public order. The &quot;Book of the Eparch&quot; described the rules and regulations for trade and trade organizations in Constantinople, while the &quot;Kletorologion&quot; was an attempt to standardize officials and ranks at the Byzantine court. Leo is also the author, or at least sponsor, of the &quot;Tactica&quot;, a notable treatise on military operations.

Succeeding generations saw Leo as a prophet and a magician, and soon a collection of oracular poems and some short divinatory texts, the so-called &quot;Oracles of Leo the Wise&quot;, at least in part based on earlier Greek sources, were attached to the Emperor&#x27;s name in later centuries and were believed to foretell the future of the world.

Finally, Leo is credited with translating the relics of St. Lazarus to Constantinople in the year 890. There are several stichera (hymns) attributed to him that are chanted on Lazarus Saturday in the Eastern Orthodox Church. He also composed hymns that are sung on the Great Feast of the Exaltation of the Cross.

==Family==

By his first wife, Theophano Martinakia, Leo VI had one daughter:
* Eudokia, who died in 892.
By his second wife, Zoe Zaoutzaina, Leo had one daughter:
* Anna, betrothed and married to the Holy Roman Emperor Louis the Blind. 
By his third wife, Eudokia Baïana, Leo had one son:
* Basil, who survived for only a few days.
By his fourth wife, Zoe Karbonopsina, Leo had two children:
* Anna
* Constantine VII.

==See also==

*List of Byzantine emperors

==Notes==
==References==
=== Works cited ===
* 
* 
* 
* 

==External links==

*French translations of a Turkish-language compendium of divinatory works, including some ascribed to Leo the Sage available at .
*Greek text with Migne&#x27;s Latin translation of Leo&#x27;s works at 
*The Mosaic of Leo VI in the Narthex of Hagia Sophia
* Digitalized manuscripts of Leo VI the Wise at the Princeton University Library</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q41618" start="0" end="6" title="Leo VI the Wise" label="Leo VI"/>
<link wikidata="Q41618" start="22" end="25" title="Leo VI the Wise" label="Leo"/>
<link wikidata="Q41618" start="26" end="34" title="Leo VI the Wise" label="the Wise"/>
<link wikidata="Q128866" start="74" end="91" title="Byzantine Emperor" label="Byzantine Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q332531" start="133" end="151" title="Macedonian dynasty" label="Macedonian dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q207869" start="227" end="234" title="epithet" label="epithet"/>
<link wikidata="Q41592" start="307" end="314" title="Basil I" label="Basil I"/>
<link wikidata="Q12544" start="335" end="341" title="Byzantine Empire" label="empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q23522" start="383" end="390" title="Balkans" label="Balkans"/>
<link wikidata="Q203817" start="399" end="407" title="First Bulgarian Empire" label="Bulgaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1460" start="433" end="439" title="Sicily" label="Sicily"/>
<link wikidata="Q34575" start="448" end="454" title="Aegean Sea" label="Aegean"/>
<link wikidata="Q40779" start="578" end="590" title="Roman consul" label="Roman consul"/>
<link wikidata="Q260119" start="649" end="665" title="Eudokia Ingerina" label="Eudokia Ingerina"/>
<link wikidata="Q41622" start="714" end="725" title="Michael III" label="Michael III"/>
<link wikidata="Q41592" start="773" end="780" title="Basil I" label="Basil I"/>
<link wikidata="Q1811611" start="785" end="795" title="Macedonia (theme)" label="Macedonian"/>
<link wikidata="Q625369" start="833" end="841" title="Mistress (lover)" label="mistress"/>
<link wikidata="Q2461901" start="1258" end="1267" title="Theophano Martinakia" label="Theophano"/>
<link wikidata="Q2426005" start="1305" end="1319" title="Zoe Zaoutzaina" label="Zoe Zaoutzaina"/>
<link wikidata="Q3882219" start="1557" end="1570" title="assassination" label="assassination"/>
<link wikidata="Q586568" start="1799" end="1826" title="Church of the Holy Apostles" label="Church of the Holy Apostles"/>
<link wikidata="Q16869" start="1830" end="1844" title="Constantinople" label="Constantinople"/>
<link wikidata="Q572700" start="2090" end="2101" title="Bureaucrat" label="bureaucrats"/>
<link wikidata="Q628791" start="2107" end="2125" title="Stylianos Zaoutzes" label="Stylianos Zaoutzes"/>
<link wikidata="Q3470912" start="2186" end="2193" title="Samonas" label="Samonas"/>
<link wikidata="Q154668" start="2249" end="2258" title="patrikios" label="patrikios"/>
<link wikidata="Q223973" start="2285" end="2294" title="Godparent" label="godfather"/>
<link wikidata="Q41608" start="2314" end="2329" title="Constantine VII" label="Constantine VII"/>
<link wikidata="Q1670168" start="2398" end="2406" title="Phokas (Byzantine family)" label="Phokadai"/>
<link wikidata="Q36148" start="2415" end="2421" title="Doukai" label="Doukai"/>
<link wikidata="Q1565096" start="2503" end="2520" title="Andronikos Doukas (general under Leo VI)" label="Andronikos Doukas"/>
<link wikidata="Q60719" start="2663" end="2672" title="Ecumenical Patriarch of Constantinople" label="Patriarch"/>
<link wikidata="Q243187" start="2673" end="2680" title="Photios I of Constantinople" label="Photios"/>
<link wikidata="Q170504" start="2707" end="2721" title="Pope John VIII" label="Pope John VIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q1269166" start="2804" end="2811" title="Stephen I of Constantinople" label="Stephen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1281221" start="2907" end="2924" title="Antony II Kauleas" label="Antony II Kauleas"/>
<link wikidata="Q246657" start="2995" end="3003" title="mystikos" label="mystikos"/>
<link wikidata="Q552447" start="3011" end="3019" title="Nicholas Mystikos" label="Nicholas"/>
<link wikidata="Q644403" start="3223" end="3232" title="Euthymius I of Constantinople" label="Euthymios"/>
<link wikidata="Q634112" start="3258" end="3281" title="Church of Saint Lazarus, Larnaca" label="Church of Agios Lazaros"/>
<link wikidata="Q171882" start="3285" end="3292" title="Larnaca" label="Larnaca"/>
<link wikidata="Q34374" start="3431" end="3436" title="Crete" label="Crete"/>
<link wikidata="Q47591" start="3498" end="3520" title="Byzantine architecture" label="Byzantine architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q810134" start="3559" end="3567" title="Basilika" label="Basilika"/>
<link wikidata="Q9129" start="3579" end="3584" title="Greek language" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q187719" start="3615" end="3623" title="Corpus Juris Civilis" label="law code"/>
<link wikidata="Q41866" start="3634" end="3645" title="Justinian I" label="Justinian I"/>
<link wikidata="Q317911" start="3705" end="3725" title="Liutprand of Cremona" label="Liutprand of Cremona"/>
<link wikidata="Q131401" start="3766" end="3772" title="Caliphate" label="Caliph"/>
<link wikidata="Q131002" start="3773" end="3788" title="Harun al-Rashid" label="Harun al-Rashid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1198478" start="4109" end="4118" title="nomismata" label="nomismata"/>
<link wikidata="Q628791" start="4486" end="4504" title="Stylianos Zaoutzes" label="Stylianos Zaoutzes"/>
<link wikidata="Q18639147" start="4510" end="4524" title="Byzantine–Bulgarian war of 894–896" label="provoked a war"/>
<link wikidata="Q192264" start="4530" end="4550" title="Simeon I of Bulgaria" label="Simeon I of Bulgaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q133032" start="4592" end="4599" title="Magyars" label="Magyars"/>
<link wikidata="Q203817" start="4614" end="4624" title="First Bulgarian Empire" label="Bulgarians"/>
<link wikidata="Q1811747" start="4735" end="4759" title="Battle of Boulgarophygon" label="Battle of Boulgarophygon"/>
<link wikidata="Q19877149" start="4892" end="4909" title="Emirate of Tarsus" label="Emirate of Tarsus"/>
<link wikidata="Q166382" start="4956" end="4960" title="Emir" label="Emir"/>
<link wikidata="Q1250763" start="4995" end="5012" title="Emirate of Sicily" label="Emirate of Sicily"/>
<link wikidata="Q199952" start="5018" end="5026" title="Taormina" label="Taormina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1460" start="5072" end="5078" title="Sicily" label="Sicily"/>
<link wikidata="Q379817" start="5196" end="5201" title="Theme (Byzantine district)" label="thema"/>
<link wikidata="Q164395" start="5211" end="5222" title="Mesopotamia (theme)" label="Mesopotamia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2622868" start="5248" end="5255" title="Bagratid Armenia" label="Armenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q122803" start="5283" end="5297" title="Theodosiopolis (Armenia)" label="Theodosiopolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1565700" start="5345" end="5352" title="Thughur" label="Thughur"/>
<link wikidata="Q662404" start="5387" end="5402" title="Leo of Tripolis" label="Leo of Tripolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1109261" start="5403" end="5409" title="Sack of Thessalonica (904)" label="sacked"/>
<link wikidata="Q17151" start="5410" end="5422" title="Thessalonica" label="Thessalonica"/>
<link wikidata="Q121550" start="5505" end="5520" title="John Kaminiates" label="John Kaminiates"/>
<link wikidata="Q603771" start="5563" end="5568" title="Emirate of Crete" label="Crete"/>
<link wikidata="Q3122679" start="5575" end="5583" title="Himerios (admiral)" label="Himerios"/>
<link wikidata="Q1637444" start="5716" end="5726" title="kleisoura (Byzantine district)" label="kleisourai"/>
<link wikidata="Q913342" start="5737" end="5745" title="Lykandos" label="Lykandos"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5750" end="5760" title="Leontokome" label="Leontokome"/>
<link wikidata="Q16869" start="5812" end="5826" title="Constantinople" label="Constantinople"/>
<link wikidata="Q2707090" start="5827" end="5839" title="Rus&amp;#x27;-Byzantine War (907)" label="was attacked"/>
<link wikidata="Q1108445" start="5847" end="5863" title="Kievan Rus&amp;#x27;" label="Kievan Rus&amp;#x27;"/>
<link wikidata="Q6131983" start="5870" end="5886" title="Oleg of Novgorod" label="Oleg of Novgorod"/>
<link wikidata="Q187436" start="5950" end="5963" title="Bribery" label="paid them off"/>
<link wikidata="Q4400909" start="6003" end="6015" title="Rus&amp;#x27;-Byzantine Treaty (911)" label="trade treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q2461901" start="6181" end="6190" title="Theophano Martinakia" label="Theophano"/>
<link wikidata="Q2426005" start="6333" end="6347" title="Zoe Zaoutzaina" label="Zoe Zaoutzaina"/>
<link wikidata="Q2616622" start="6479" end="6491" title="basileopator" label="basileopatōr"/>
<link wikidata="Q2586963" start="6673" end="6687" title="Eudokia Baïana" label="Eudokia Baïana"/>
<link wikidata="Q552447" start="6827" end="6844" title="Nicholas Mystikos" label="Nicholas Mystikos"/>
<link wikidata="Q218215" start="6867" end="6883" title="Zoe Karbonopsina" label="Zoe Karbonopsina"/>
<link wikidata="Q41608" start="6934" end="6939" title="Constantine VII" label="a son"/>
<link wikidata="Q294425" start="7540" end="7549" title="Alexander (Byzantine emperor)" label="Alexander"/>
<link wikidata="Q41646" start="7800" end="7809" title="Romanos I Lekapenos" label="Romanos I"/>
<link wikidata="Q41847" start="7888" end="7898" title="Romanos II" label="Romanos II"/>
<link wikidata="Q810134" start="8499" end="8507" title="Basilika" label="Basilika"/>
<link wikidata="Q187719" start="8648" end="8668" title="Corpus Juris Civilis" label="Corpus Juris Civilis"/>
<link wikidata="Q188462" start="9094" end="9103" title="canon law" label="canon law"/>
<link wikidata="Q17167" start="9358" end="9372" title="Roman Republic" label="Roman Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q835567" start="9408" end="9414" title="Curiae" label="Curiae"/>
<link wikidata="Q598719" start="9420" end="9432" title="Byzantine Senate" label="Roman Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q40779" start="9443" end="9452" title="Roman consul" label="Consulate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1993944" start="9584" end="9603" title="Book of the Prefect" label="Book of the Prefect"/>
<link wikidata="Q1774213" start="9618" end="9657" title="Kletorologion of Philotheos" label="&amp;quot;Kletorologion&amp;quot; of Philotheos"/>
<link wikidata="Q7674065" start="10082" end="10101" title="Tactica of Emperor Leo VI the Wise" label="&amp;quot;Tactica&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q20552759" start="10300" end="10323" title="Oracles of Leo the Wise" label="Oracles of Leo the Wise"/>
<link wikidata="Q663370" start="10526" end="10537" title="Translation (relic)" label="translating"/>
<link wikidata="Q187616" start="10542" end="10548" title="relics" label="relics"/>
<link wikidata="Q539890" start="10552" end="10563" title="Lazarus of Bethany" label="St. Lazarus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1961692" start="10617" end="10625" title="stichera" label="stichera"/>
<link wikidata="Q27283" start="10672" end="10688" title="Lazarus Saturday" label="Lazarus Saturday"/>
<link wikidata="Q35032" start="10696" end="10719" title="Eastern Orthodox Church" label="Eastern Orthodox Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q1402000" start="10765" end="10776" title="Great Feast" label="Great Feast"/>
<link wikidata="Q815520" start="10784" end="10807" title="Exaltation of the Cross" label="Exaltation of the Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q2461901" start="10841" end="10861" title="Theophano Martinakia" label="Theophano Martinakia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2426005" start="10936" end="10950" title="Zoe Zaoutzaina" label="Zoe Zaoutzaina"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10976" end="10980" title="Anna (daughter of Leo VI)" label="Anna"/>
<link wikidata="Q181765" start="11011" end="11029" title="Holy Roman Emperor" label="Holy Roman Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q310435" start="11030" end="11045" title="Louis the Blind" label="Louis the Blind"/>
<link wikidata="Q2586963" start="11067" end="11081" title="Eudokia Baïana" label="Eudokia Baïana"/>
<link wikidata="Q218215" start="11163" end="11179" title="Zoe Karbonopsina" label="Zoe Karbonopsina"/>
<link wikidata="Q41608" start="11212" end="11227" title="Constantine VII" label="Constantine VII"/>
<link wikidata="Q128866" start="11245" end="11271" title="List of Byzantine emperors" label="List of Byzantine emperors"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="253445" wikidata="Q294425" url="?curid=253445" title="Alexander (Byzantine emperor)">
<text>Alexander (, &quot;Alexandros&quot;, 23 November 8706 June 913) was briefly Byzantine emperor from 912 to 913, and the third emperor of the Macedonian dynasty.

==Life==
Born in the purple, Alexander was the third son of Emperor Basil I and Eudokia Ingerina. Unlike his older brother Leo VI the Wise, his paternity was not disputed between Basil I and Michael III because he was born years after Michael&#x27;s death. As a child, Alexander was crowned as co-emperor by his father in early 879, following the death of Basil&#x27;s son Constantine.

Upon the death of his brother Leo on 11 May 912, Alexander succeeded as senior emperor alongside Leo&#x27;s young son Constantine VII. He was the first Byzantine emperor to use the term &quot;autocrator&quot; () on coinage to celebrate the ending of his thirty-three years as co-emperor. Alexander promptly dismissed most of Leo&#x27;s advisers and appointees, including the admiral Himerios, the patriarch Euthymios, and the empress Zoe Karbonopsina, the mother of Constantine VII, whom he locked up in a nunnery. The patriarchate was again conferred on Nicholas Mystikos, who had been removed from this position due to his opposition to Leo&#x27;s fourth marriage. 

During his short reign, Alexander found himself attacked by the forces of Al-Muqtadir of the Abbasid Caliphate in the east, and provoked a war with Simeon I of Bulgaria by refusing to send the traditional tribute on his accession. Alexander died soon after, allegedly from a stomach disease caused by excessive eating and alcohol.

The sources are uniformly hostile towards Alexander, who is depicted as lazy, lecherous, drunk, and malignant, including the rumor that he planned to castrate the young Constantine VII in order to exclude him from the succession. He did not, but Alexander did leave his successor a hostile regent (Nicholas Mystikos) and the beginning of a long war against Bulgaria. The sources also accused the emperor of idolatry, including making pagan sacrifices to the golden statue of a boar in the Hippodrome, and providing it with new teeth and genitals, in hope of curing his impotence.

==See also==

*List of Byzantine emperors

==Notes==
==References==
===Sources===
*
*
*
*
* 
*</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q294425" start="0" end="9" title="Alexander (Byzantine emperor)" label="Alexander"/>
<link wikidata="Q128866" start="76" end="93" title="Byzantine emperor" label="Byzantine emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q332531" start="140" end="158" title="Macedonian dynasty" label="Macedonian dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q643330" start="170" end="188" title="Born in the purple" label="Born in the purple"/>
<link wikidata="Q41592" start="229" end="236" title="Basil I" label="Basil I"/>
<link wikidata="Q260119" start="241" end="257" title="Eudokia Ingerina" label="Eudokia Ingerina"/>
<link wikidata="Q41618" start="284" end="299" title="Leo VI the Wise" label="Leo VI the Wise"/>
<link wikidata="Q41622" start="352" end="363" title="Michael III" label="Michael III"/>
<link wikidata="Q105742802" start="444" end="465" title="coronation of the Byzantine emperor" label="crowned as co-emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q108872591" start="534" end="545" title="Constantine (son of Basil I)" label="Constantine"/>
<link wikidata="Q41608" start="666" end="681" title="Constantine VII" label="Constantine VII"/>
<link wikidata="Q782456" start="740" end="750" title="autocrator" label="autocrator"/>
<link wikidata="Q3122679" start="931" end="939" title="Himerios (admiral)" label="Himerios"/>
<link wikidata="Q644403" start="955" end="964" title="Patriarch Euthymius I of Constantinople" label="Euthymios"/>
<link wikidata="Q218215" start="982" end="998" title="Zoe Karbonopsina" label="Zoe Karbonopsina"/>
<link wikidata="Q552447" start="1103" end="1120" title="Nicholas Mystikos" label="Nicholas Mystikos"/>
<link wikidata="Q201465" start="1291" end="1302" title="Al-Muqtadir" label="Al-Muqtadir"/>
<link wikidata="Q12536" start="1310" end="1317" title="Abbasid" label="Abbasid"/>
<link wikidata="Q131401" start="1318" end="1324" title="Caliph" label="Caliph"/>
<link wikidata="Q192264" start="1365" end="1385" title="Simeon I of Bulgaria" label="Simeon I of Bulgaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q175827" start="1492" end="1507" title="stomach disease" label="stomach disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q477406" start="1839" end="1845" title="regent" label="regent"/>
<link wikidata="Q552447" start="1847" end="1864" title="Nicholas Mystikos" label="Nicholas Mystikos"/>
<link wikidata="Q20747555" start="1889" end="1897" title="Byzantine–Bulgarian war of 913–927" label="long war"/>
<link wikidata="Q203817" start="1906" end="1914" title="First Bulgarian Empire" label="Bulgaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q29536" start="1983" end="1988" title="pagan" label="pagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q897" start="2007" end="2011" title="gold" label="gold"/>
<link wikidata="Q58697" start="2026" end="2030" title="boar" label="boar"/>
<link wikidata="Q387548" start="2038" end="2048" title="Hippodrome of Constantinople" label="Hippodrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q184674" start="2118" end="2127" title="Erectile dysfunction" label="impotence"/>
<link wikidata="Q128866" start="2145" end="2171" title="List of Byzantine emperors" label="List of Byzantine emperors"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="253447" wikidata="Q840148" url="?curid=253447" title="Almost">
<text>In set theory, when dealing with sets of infinite size, the term almost or nearly is used to refer to all but a negligible amount of elements in the set. The notion of &quot;negligible&quot; depends on the context, and may mean &quot;of measure zero&quot; (in a measure space), &quot;finite&quot; (when infinite sets are involved), or &quot;countable&quot; (when uncountably infinite sets are involved).

For example:
*The set formula_1 is almost formula_2 for any formula_3 in formula_2, because only finitely many natural numbers are less than &quot;formula_3&quot;.
*The set of prime numbers is not almost formula_2, because there are infinitely many natural numbers that are not prime numbers.
*The set of transcendental numbers are almost formula_7, because the algebraic real numbers form a countable subset of the set of real numbers (which is uncountable).
*The Cantor set is uncountably infinite, but has Lebesgue measure zero. So almost all real numbers in (0, 1) are members of the complement of the Cantor set.

==See also==

*Almost periodic function - and Operators
*Almost all
*Almost surely
*Approximation
*List of mathematical jargon

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q12482" start="3" end="13" title="set theory" label="set theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q36161" start="33" end="37" title="set (mathematics)" label="sets"/>
<link wikidata="Q205140" start="41" end="54" title="infinite set" label="infinite size"/>
<link wikidata="Q840148" start="65" end="71" title="Almost" label="almost"/>
<link wikidata="Q840148" start="75" end="81" title="Almost" label="nearly"/>
<link wikidata="Q3058212" start="262" end="275" title="measure space" label="measure space"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128796" start="363" end="387" title="uncountably infinite set" label="uncountably infinite set"/>
<link wikidata="Q840148" start="478" end="487" title="Almost" label="formula_2"/>
<link wikidata="Q21199" start="516" end="530" title="natural number" label="natural number"/>
<link wikidata="Q49008" start="581" end="593" title="prime number" label="prime number"/>
<link wikidata="Q840148" start="609" end="618" title="Almost" label="formula_2"/>
<link wikidata="Q173091" start="710" end="731" title="transcendental number" label="transcendental number"/>
<link wikidata="Q840148" start="744" end="753" title="Almost" label="formula_7"/>
<link wikidata="Q168817" start="767" end="776" title="algebraic number" label="algebraic"/>
<link wikidata="Q12916" start="777" end="781" title="real number" label="real"/>
<link wikidata="Q66707394" start="797" end="806" title="countable" label="countable"/>
<link wikidata="Q177646" start="807" end="813" title="subset" label="subset"/>
<link wikidata="Q273188" start="870" end="880" title="Cantor set" label="Cantor set"/>
<link wikidata="Q827230" start="914" end="930" title="Lebesgue measure" label="Lebesgue measure"/>
<link wikidata="Q242767" start="993" end="1003" title="complement (set theory)" label="complement"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066983" start="1039" end="1063" title="Almost periodic function" label="Almost periodic function"/>
<link wikidata="Q1397701" start="1081" end="1091" title="Almost all" label="Almost all"/>
<link wikidata="Q1434353" start="1093" end="1106" title="Almost surely" label="Almost surely"/>
<link wikidata="Q27058" start="1108" end="1121" title="Approximation" label="Approximation"/>
<link wikidata="Q728368" start="1123" end="1150" title="List of mathematical jargon" label="List of mathematical jargon"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="253448" wikidata="Q122974" url="?curid=253448" title="Locomobile Company of America">
<text>The Locomobile Company of America was a pioneering American automobile manufacturer founded in 1899, and known for its dedication to precision before the assembly-line era. It was one of the earliest car manufacturers in the advent of the automobile age. For the first two years after its founding, the company was located in Watertown, Massachusetts. Production was transferred to Bridgeport, Connecticut, in 1900, where it remained until the company&#x27;s demise in 1929. The company manufactured affordable, small steam cars until 1903, when production switched entirely to internal combustion-powered luxury automobiles. Locomobile was taken over in 1922 by Durant Motors and eventually went out of business in 1929. All cars produced by the original company were always sold under the brand name Locomobile.

==History==


The Locomobile Company of America was founded in 1899, the name coined from &quot;locomotive&quot; and &quot;automobile&quot;. John B. Walker, editor and publisher of &quot;Cosmopolitan&quot;, bought the plans for an early steam-powered vehicle produced by Francis and Freelan Stanley for a price they could not resist, US$250,000 (). At the time, one car had been built, and 199 more had been ordered. Walker promptly sold half of his interest to paving contractor Amzi L. Barber for the same price as he had purchased the entire company. Walker and Barber&#x27;s partnership lasted two weeks. Walker went on to found Mobile Company of America at the Stanley works in Tarrytown, New York, while Barber moved house to Bridgeport, Connecticut, as Locomobile, where the Stanley twins were named general managers. The Stanley twins founded the Stanley Motor Carriage Company in 1902, becoming the sharpest rival to Locomobile.&lt;ref name= &quot;Kimes/Clark&quot;&gt;&lt;/ref&gt;
Locomobile began by producing steam cars. The steam Locomobiles were unreliable, finicky to operate, prone to kerosene fires, had small water tanks (getting only per tank), and took time to raise steam; author Rudyard Kipling described one example as a &quot;nickel-plated fraud&quot;. Initially, they were offered with a single body style only, an inexpensive runabout at $600 (). Nevertheless, they were a curiosity and middle-class Americans clamoured for the latest technology. Salesmen, doctors, and people needing quick mobility found them useful. More than 4,000 were built between 1899 and 1902.

In 1901, Locomobile offered seven body styles at prices between $600 () and $1,400 (). Most Locomobiles had simple twin-cylinder engines (3x4 in, 76.2x102 mm; 57 in3, 927 cm3) and a wire-wrapped 300-psi boiler, and burned the liquid fuel naphtha to create steam. Typical of the product was the 1904 Runabout, which seated two passengers and sold for $750 (). The two-cylinder steam engine was situated amidships of the wood-framed car. By now, the car had improved boilers and a new water pump, manufactured by the Overman Wheel Company in Chicopee Falls, Massachusetts. This company itself built the Victor Steamer.
During the Boer War, Locomobile did establish a new mark of sorts, becoming the first automobile to be used in war; it was a generator and searchlight tractor used to dismantle the Klein Nek minefield. It also served as a catering vehicle, with the useful ability (in British eyes, at least) of being able to brew a cup of tea by tapping the boiler.

This was, unfortunately, not a sure way to guarantee commercial success, even in Britain, and Locomobile started experimenting with gasoline internal combustion engines in 1902, starting with a four-cylinder, steel-chassis model designed by Andrew L. Riker. This encouraged the firm to drop steam vehicles the following year, selling the Stanley brothers back their rights for $20,000. In 1903, Barber relinquished his position to his son-in-law Samuel Todd Davis, Jr., who became President of the Locomobile Company.

==Switch to internal combustion engines==

The 1904 internal combustion Locomobile Touring car had a tonneau and space for five passengers, and sold for $4500, quite a change from the low-priced steam buggies. The front-mounted, vertical, water-cooled straight-four engine produced . A three-speed sliding transmission was used, as on the &quot;Système Panhard&quot; cars with which it competed. The angle steel-framed car weighed . The 1908 Locomobile 40 Runabout was a two-seater and sold for $4,750 (). On the strength of recent competition successes, Locomobile soon became known for well-built and speedy luxury cars.

==In competition==
Like other early marques, Locomobile entered motor racing, contesting the 1905 Gordon Bennett Cup with a racer; after suffering a transmission gear failure, and with no spare available, driver Joe Tracy only managed two circuits of Auvergne before the transmission packed up entirely. Tracy did better for the company at the Vanderbilt Cup, placing third. A , F-head was damaged by tire trouble, so Tracy failed again in the 1906 Vanderbilt, but in 1908, George Robertson (wearing number 16) took the win in this car, ahead of fellow Locomobile pilot Joe Florida in third, becoming the first United States-built car to win in international competition. This was the high-water mark for Locomobile racing, and they soon faded from the scene, though Orin Davis did score a win in the Los Angeles–Phoenix rally in 1913. A Locomobile was raced by Eva Mudge, believed to be the first female driving licence holder and first female racing driver. In 1925, the Locomobile team entered a front-wheel-drive Miller car called the &quot;Junior Eight Special&quot; after their recently introduced smaller car at the Indianapolis 500, but there was nothing Locomobile about it aside from the name.

==Model 48 and the Durant years==
The most important for the marque became the impressive Model 48. Introduced in 1911 as the &quot;type M,&quot; it had a very conservative, perhaps dated, concept. It had a conventional but huge chassis with a wheelbase of . Its engine was a straight six with side valves; cylinders were still cast in pairs and it featured a nonremovable cylinder head. Displacement was , from a bore and stroke, giving it a 48.6-hp tax rating by the North American Chamber of Commerce. While called the &quot;M&quot; internally, this car is usually referred to by its tax hp rating. The brake horsepower rating was somewhere north of 90 for the original model, higher in the later versions. Quality of materials and workmanship were impeccable and among the best in the world. Such was also its pricing: A typical open-body cost about $10,000 when the average Model T Ford Phaeton cost about $300. Locomobile also offered custom designs for the lamps and metal work, carried out by Tiffany Studios. Until 1915, left- or right-hand drive could be specified; afterwards, left-hand drive became standard. Right-hand drive cars were meant for export and sat on a chassis four inches shorter. Around 1919, the engine was updated with a longer stroke, for displacement while retaining the same tax hp rating.

A smaller &quot;38 hp&quot; model, very similar to the Model 48, was added in 1913. The model 38 has a , version of the T-head six and sits on a somewhat shorter wheelbase. By 1914, Locomobile had stopped selling all four-cylinder models to concentrate exclusively on sixes.

In July 1922, Locomobile was acquired by Durant Motors, which not only continued using the Locomobile brand name for their top-of-the-line autos until 1929, but also still produced the Model 48 until its demise in 1929. Until the mid-1920s, this car was Locomobile&#x27;s only offering. In 1925, the marque brought out their first new model, the 8-66 Junior Eight, with a more contemporary straight-eight engine, and more importantly, a lower price of $1,785.

Introduction of the even smaller Junior Six was in 1926, but this car remained available only for one model year. The larger Model 90 that appeared in the same year was produced until 1929.

With the 8-70 of 1927, Locomobile added one more eight-cylinder car. Using an off the shelf Lycoming engine, this was not accepted as a true Locomobile in the marketplace and it served to damage the company&#x27;s reputation. In the following year, the Junior Eight 8-66 was phased out.

For 1929, a new 8-86 and 8-88 came out, but it was too late to save the company. Locomobile production ended in 1929.

==Locomobile model specifications==
* Locomobile Model 48 Sportif

== Overview of production figures ==
==Locomobiles in fiction==
A Locomobile is the setting for one of the final scenes of F. Scott Fitzgerald&#x27;s first novel, &quot;This Side of Paradise&quot;, in which the protagonist, Amory Blaine, argues for socialism to the father of a college friend, who staunchly defends the capitalist ideal.

In the spring and summer of 1946, a seven-passenger 1911 Locomobile touring car was driven from Boston to Los Angeles and back as a promotional tour for the Columbia Pictures film &quot;Gallant Journey&quot;. While not appearing in the movie, the Locomobile attracted much attention for the picture on the tour.

In Thomas Savage&#x27;s 1967 novel &quot;The Power of the Dog&quot;, set in the 1920s, the Locomobile is esteemed by protagonist Peter Gordon as a peer to the Pierce-Arrow: &quot;... Those were the vehicles of the high and mighty, and he knew that only the Locomobile (fancied by old General Pershing, among others) rivaled the Pierce.&quot;

Clive Cussler&#x27;s 2007 novel, &quot;The Chase&quot;, as well as his 2010 novel &quot;The Spy&quot;, featured a 1906 Locomobile.

In Dashiell Hammett&#x27;s 1925 mystery story &quot;Scorched Face&quot;, the rich girls for whom the Continental Op is looking, were driving a Locomobile &quot;with a special cabriolet body&quot; when they disappeared.

Papa LaBas from Ishmael Reed&#x27;s 1972 novel &quot;Mumbo Jumbo&quot; drives a Locomobile.

The Locomobile is central to the 2015 historical novel by Lisa Begin-Kruysman titled &quot;Around the World in 1909: Harriet White Fisher and Her Locomobile&quot;. The novel is based on Harriet White Fisher&#x27;s circumnavigation of the globe; the Locomobile is driven, hauled, pushed, and floated in places where no man, let alone woman, had yet explored, certainly not on wheels.

==See also==

* List of defunct United States automobile manufacturers

==References==
==Further reading==
* &quot;Frank Leslie&#x27;s Popular Monthly&quot; (January 1904)
* 
* Ball, Donald L. &quot;The Genealogy of the Locomobile Steam Carriage, 1899–1904&quot;, 1994

==External links==

* Old 16 Locomobile (VanderbiltCupRaces.com)
* 1906 Locomobile The story of the 1908 Vanderbilt Cup win
* Locomobile Catalog on DurantCars site 1920s Locomobiles
* Locomobile items on Henry Ford Museum site
* Locomobile Society Home Page
* Locomobile Advertising View the old locomobile ads
* 1923 Locomobile Model 48 Sportif in the &#x27;Hemmings&#x27; magazine</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q122974" start="4" end="33" title="Locomobile Company of America" label="Locomobile Company of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q190117" start="60" end="83" title="automobile manufacturer" label="automobile manufacturer"/>
<link wikidata="Q54172" start="326" end="350" title="Watertown, Massachusetts" label="Watertown, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q49174" start="382" end="405" title="Bridgeport, Connecticut" label="Bridgeport, Connecticut"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054271" start="518" end="527" title="steam car" label="steam car"/>
<link wikidata="Q12757" start="578" end="597" title="internal combustion engine" label="internal combustion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1266780" start="663" end="676" title="Durant Motors" label="Durant Motors"/>
<link wikidata="Q93301" start="911" end="921" title="locomotive" label="locomotive"/>
<link wikidata="Q6223220" start="956" end="970" title="John Brisben Walker" label="John B. Walker"/>
<link wikidata="Q333644" start="1002" end="1014" title="Cosmopolitan (magazine)" label="Cosmopolitan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5480826" start="1086" end="1093" title="Francis Edgar Stanley" label="Francis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5500942" start="1098" end="1113" title="Freelan O. Stanley" label="Freelan Stanley"/>
<link wikidata="Q4917" start="1149" end="1152" title="United States dollar" label="US$"/>
<link wikidata="Q4749591" start="1295" end="1309" title="Amzi L. Barber" label="Amzi L. Barber"/>
<link wikidata="Q6886831" start="1448" end="1473" title="Mobile Company of America" label="Mobile Company of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q1020341" start="1498" end="1517" title="Tarrytown, New York" label="Tarrytown, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q49174" start="1547" end="1570" title="Bridgeport, Connecticut" label="Bridgeport, Connecticut"/>
<link wikidata="Q507456" start="1670" end="1700" title="Stanley Motor Carriage Company" label="Stanley Motor Carriage Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q76904" start="1916" end="1924" title="kerosene" label="kerosene"/>
<link wikidata="Q34743" start="2016" end="2031" title="Rudyard Kipling" label="Rudyard Kipling"/>
<link wikidata="Q1783428" start="2167" end="2175" title="runabout (car)" label="runabout"/>
<link wikidata="Q4917" start="2179" end="2180" title="United States dollar" label="$"/>
<link wikidata="Q245656" start="2531" end="2539" title="cylinder (engine)" label="cylinder"/>
<link wikidata="Q898983" start="2649" end="2656" title="naphtha" label="naphtha"/>
<link wikidata="Q24525607" start="2926" end="2947" title="Overman Wheel Company" label="Overman Wheel Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q1650454" start="2951" end="2980" title="Chicopee Falls, Massachusetts" label="Chicopee Falls, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q16889425" start="3012" end="3026" title="Victor Steamer" label="Victor Steamer"/>
<link wikidata="Q215112" start="3039" end="3047" title="Boer War" label="Boer War"/>
<link wikidata="Q946042" start="3167" end="3178" title="searchlight" label="searchlight"/>
<link wikidata="Q4757668" start="3620" end="3635" title="Andrew L. Riker" label="Andrew L. Riker"/>
<link wikidata="Q1402386" start="3981" end="3992" title="Touring car" label="Touring car"/>
<link wikidata="Q2442151" start="3999" end="4006" title="tonneau" label="tonneau"/>
<link wikidata="Q1784109" start="4150" end="4170" title="straight-four engine" label="straight-four engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q4115030" start="4243" end="4258" title="Système Panhard" label="Système Panhard"/>
<link wikidata="Q5367" start="4586" end="4598" title="motor racing" label="motor racing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1342606" start="4620" end="4638" title="Gordon Bennett Cup in auto racing" label="Gordon Bennett Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q6212710" start="4734" end="4743" title="Joe Tracy" label="Joe Tracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q172879" start="4773" end="4781" title="Circuit de Charade" label="Auvergne"/>
<link wikidata="Q2727828" start="4866" end="4880" title="Vanderbilt Cup" label="Vanderbilt Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q6074791" start="4996" end="5012" title="George Robertson (racing driver)" label="George Robertson"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5092" end="5103" title="Joe Florida" label="Joe Florida"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5289" end="5299" title="Orin Davis" label="Orin Davis"/>
<link wikidata="Q16556" start="5335" end="5342" title="Phoenix, Arizona" label="Phoenix"/>
<link wikidata="Q7856" start="5343" end="5348" title="rally racing" label="rally"/>
<link wikidata="Q98241691" start="5384" end="5393" title="Eva Mudge" label="Eva Mudge"/>
<link wikidata="Q5671099" start="5539" end="5545" title="Harry Miller (auto racing)" label="Miller"/>
<link wikidata="Q8032" start="5645" end="5661" title="Indianapolis 500" label="Indianapolis 500"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6178" end="6188" title="Tax horsepower#NACC" label="tax rating"/>
<link wikidata="Q312950" start="6728" end="6743" title="Louis Comfort Tiffany" label="Tiffany Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q1266780" start="7367" end="7380" title="Durant Motors" label="Durant Motors"/>
<link wikidata="Q6665955" start="8423" end="8450" title="Locomobile Sportif" label="Locomobile Model 48 Sportif"/>
<link wikidata="Q2581681" start="8621" end="8642" title="This Side of Paradise" label="This Side of Paradise"/>
<link wikidata="Q7272" start="8701" end="8710" title="socialism" label="socialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q6206" start="8772" end="8782" title="capitalism" label="capitalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q3819893" start="8977" end="8992" title="Gallant Journey" label="Gallant Journey"/>
<link wikidata="Q40978" start="9263" end="9275" title="Pierce-Arrow Motor Car Company" label="Pierce-Arrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q272383" start="9396" end="9404" title="John J. Pershing" label="Pershing"/>
<link wikidata="Q366266" start="9447" end="9460" title="Clive Cussler" label="Clive Cussler"/>
<link wikidata="Q366266" start="9486" end="9495" title="The Chase (Clive Cussler)" label="The Chase"/>
<link wikidata="Q186335" start="9582" end="9598" title="Dashiell Hammett" label="Dashiell Hammett"/>
<link wikidata="Q2568029" start="9676" end="9694" title="the Continental Op" label="the Continental Op"/>
<link wikidata="Q983544" start="9815" end="9827" title="Ishmael Reed" label="Ishmael Reed"/>
<link wikidata="Q6935365" start="9852" end="9863" title="Mumbo Jumbo (novel)" label="Mumbo Jumbo"/>
<link wikidata="Q52303158" start="10078" end="10098" title="Harriet White Fisher" label="Harriet White Fisher"/>
<link wikidata="Q4434543" start="10292" end="10346" title="List of defunct United States automobile manufacturers" label="List of defunct United States automobile manufacturers"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="253456" wikidata="Q371730" url="?curid=253456" title="Well-defined expression">
<text>In mathematics, a well-defined expression or unambiguous expression is an expression whose definition assigns it a unique interpretation or value. Otherwise, the expression is said to be &quot;not well defined&quot;, ill defined or &quot;ambiguous&quot;. A function is well defined if it gives the same result when the representation of the input is changed without changing the value of the input. For instance, if formula_1 takes real numbers as input, and if formula_2 does not equal formula_3 then formula_1 is not well defined (and thus not a function). The term &quot;well-defined&quot; can also be used to indicate that a logical expression is unambiguous or uncontradictory.

A function that is not well defined is not the same as a function that is undefined. For example, if formula_5, then even though formula_6 is undefined, this does not mean that the function is &quot;not&quot; well defined; rather, 0 is not in the domain of formula_1.

==Example==
Let formula_8 be sets, let formula_9 and &quot;define&quot; formula_10 as formula_11 if formula_12 and formula_13 if formula_14.

Then formula_1 is well defined if formula_16. For example, if formula_17 and formula_18, then formula_19 would be well defined and equal to formula_20.

However, if formula_21, then formula_1 would not be well defined because formula_19 is &quot;ambiguous&quot; for formula_24. For example, if formula_25 and formula_26, then formula_27 would have to be both 0 and 1, which makes it ambiguous. As a result, the latter &quot;formula_1&quot; is not well defined and thus not a function.

==&quot;Definition&quot; as anticipation of definition==
In order to avoid the quotation marks around &quot;define&quot; in the previous simple example, the &quot;definition&quot; of formula_1 could be broken down into two logical steps:

While the definition in step 1 is formulated with the freedom of any definition and is certainly effective (without the need to classify it as &quot;well defined&quot;), the assertion in step 2 has to be proven. That is, formula_1 is a function if and only if formula_31, in which case formula_1 – as a function – is well defined.

On the other hand, if formula_21, then for an formula_24, we would have that formula_35 &quot;and&quot; formula_36, which makes the binary relation formula_1 not &quot;functional&quot; (as defined in Binary relation#Special types of binary relations) and thus not well defined as a function. Colloquially, the &quot;function&quot; formula_1 is also called ambiguous at point formula_39 (although there is &quot;per definitionem&quot; never an &quot;ambiguous function&quot;), and the original &quot;definition&quot; is pointless. &lt;br&gt; 

Despite these subtle logical problems, it is quite common to use the term definition (without apostrophes) for &quot;definitions&quot; of this kind, for three reasons:

# It provides a handy shorthand of the two-step approach.
# The relevant mathematical reasoning (i.e., step 2) is the same in both cases.
# In mathematical texts, the assertion is &quot;up to 100%&quot; true.

==Independence of representative==
Questions regarding the well-definedness of a function often arise when the defining equation of a function refers not only to the arguments themselves, but also to elements of the arguments, serving as representatives. This is sometimes unavoidable when the arguments are cosets and when the equation refers to coset representatives. The result of a function application must then not depend on the choice of representative.

===Functions with one argument===
For example, consider the following function:
:formula_40
where formula_41 and formula_42 are the integers modulo &quot;m&quot; and formula_43 denotes the congruence class of &quot;n&quot; mod &quot;m&quot;.

N.B.: formula_44 is a reference to the element formula_45, and formula_46 is the argument of &quot;formula_1&quot;.

The function &quot;formula_1&quot; is well defined, because:

:formula_49

As a counter example, the converse definition:

:formula_50
does not lead to a well-defined function, since e.g. formula_51 equals formula_52 in formula_53, but the first would be mapped by formula_54 to formula_55, while the second would be mapped to formula_56, and formula_55 and formula_56 are unequal in formula_59.

===Operations===
In particular, the term &quot;well-defined&quot; is used with respect to (binary) operations on cosets. In this case, one can view the operation as a function of two variables, and the property of being well-defined is the same as that for a function. For example, addition on the integers modulo some &quot;n&quot; can be defined naturally in terms of integer addition. 
:formula_60

The fact that this is well-defined follows from the fact that we can write any representative of formula_61 as formula_62, where formula_63 is an integer. Therefore, 

:formula_64

similar holds for any representative of formula_65, thereby making formula_66 the same, irrespective of the choice of representative.

==Well-defined notation==
For real numbers, the product formula_67 is unambiguous because formula_68; hence the notation is said to be &quot;well defined&quot;. This property, also known as associativity of multiplication, guarantees the result does not depend on the sequence of multiplications; therefore, a specification of the sequence can be omitted. The subtraction operation is non-associative; despite that, there is a convention that formula_69 is shorthand for formula_70, thus it is considered &quot;well-defined&quot;. On the other hand, Division is non-associative, and in the case of formula_71, parenthesization conventions are not well established; therefore, this expression is often considered ill-defined.

Unlike with functions, notational ambiguities can be overcome by means of additional definitions (e.g., rules of precedence, associativity of the operator). For example, in the programming language C, the operator codice_1 for subtraction is &quot;left-to-right-associative&quot;, which means that codice_2 is defined as codice_3, and the operator codice_4 for assignment is &quot;right-to-left-associative&quot;, which means that codice_5 is defined as codice_6. In the programming language APL there is only one rule: from right to left – but parentheses first.

==Other uses of the term==
A solution to a partial differential equation is said to be &quot;well-defined&quot; if it is continuously determined by boundary conditions as those boundary conditions are changed.

==See also==
* Definitionism
* Existence
* Pathological (mathematics)
* Uniqueness
* Uniqueness quantification
* Undefined
* Well-formed formula

==References==

===Notes===
===Sources===
* &quot;Contemporary Abstract Algebra&quot;, Joseph A. Gallian, 6th Edition, Houghlin Mifflin, 2006, .
* &quot;Algebra: Chapter 0&quot;, Paolo Aluffi, . Page 16.
* &quot;Abstract Algebra&quot;, Dummit and Foote, 3rd edition, . Page 1.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q395" start="3" end="14" title="mathematics" label="mathematics"/>
<link wikidata="Q371730" start="18" end="41" title="Well-defined expression" label="well-defined expression"/>
<link wikidata="Q371730" start="45" end="67" title="Well-defined expression" label="unambiguous expression"/>
<link wikidata="Q6498784" start="74" end="84" title="expression (mathematics)" label="expression"/>
<link wikidata="Q371730" start="217" end="228" title="Well-defined expression" label="ill defined"/>
<link wikidata="Q7883028" start="758" end="767" title="undefined (mathematics)" label="undefined"/>
<link wikidata="Q192439" start="931" end="937" title="Domain of a function" label="domain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1799665" start="1235" end="1245" title="Modulo operation" label="formula_20"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2352" end="2401" title="Binary relation#Special types of binary relations" label="Binary relation#Special types of binary relations"/>
<link wikidata="Q1211071" start="3312" end="3326" title="representative (mathematics)" label="representative"/>
<link wikidata="Q751969" start="3382" end="3387" title="coset" label="coset"/>
<link wikidata="Q319400" start="3668" end="3697" title="modular arithmetic" label="integers modulo &amp;quot;m&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3725" end="3741" title="modular arithmetic#Congruence classes" label="congruence class"/>
<link wikidata="Q3884033" start="4392" end="4401" title="operation (mathematics)" label="operation"/>
<link wikidata="Q177251" start="5201" end="5214" title="associativity" label="associativity"/>
<link wikidata="Q40754" start="5371" end="5382" title="subtraction" label="subtraction"/>
<link wikidata="Q1226939" start="5561" end="5569" title="Division (mathematics)" label="Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q845118" start="5850" end="5860" title="Operator precedence" label="precedence"/>
<link wikidata="Q15777" start="5935" end="5936" title="C (programming language)" label="C"/>
<link wikidata="Q296187" start="6229" end="6232" title="APL (programming language)" label="APL"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6262" end="6275" title="APL (programming language)#Design" label="right to left"/>
<link wikidata="Q271977" start="6345" end="6374" title="partial differential equation" label="partial differential equation"/>
<link wikidata="Q16948615" start="6528" end="6541" title="Definitionism" label="Definitionism"/>
<link wikidata="Q468777" start="6544" end="6553" title="Existence" label="Existence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1456138" start="6556" end="6582" title="Pathological (mathematics)" label="Pathological (mathematics)"/>
<link wikidata="Q17548110" start="6585" end="6595" title="Uniqueness" label="Uniqueness"/>
<link wikidata="Q2502253" start="6598" end="6623" title="Uniqueness quantification" label="Uniqueness quantification"/>
<link wikidata="Q7883028" start="6626" end="6635" title="Undefined (mathematics)" label="Undefined"/>
<link wikidata="Q655328" start="6638" end="6657" title="Well-formed formula" label="Well-formed formula"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="253459" wikidata="Q15528060" url="?curid=253459" title="Lesley Choyce">
<text>Lesley Choyce (born 21 March 1951) (m. Linda Choyce) is a Canadian author of novels, non-fiction, children&#x27;s books, young adult novels, and poetry.

He is the author of more than 100 books for adults, teens and children, and teaches in the English department and transition year program at Dalhousie University. He is a year-round surfer and founding member of the 1990s spoken word rock band The SurfPoets. Choyce also runs Pottersfield Press, a small literary publishing house. He hosted the national TV show &quot;Off The Page&quot; for many years. His books have been translated into Spanish, French, German and Danish, and he has been awarded the Dartmouth Book Award and the Ann Connor Brimer Award.

He lives at Lawrencetown Beach, Nova Scotia.

==References==

*&quot;Canadian Who&#x27;s Who.&quot; Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 1985, 1986, 1987, 1988, etc..
*&quot;Contemporary Authors,&quot; Volume 130. Chicago: Gale Research, 1989.
*&quot;Contemporary Authors,&quot; Volume 211. Chicago: Thomson Gale, 2004. (feature biography).
*&quot;Dictionary of International Biography.&quot; Cambridge: International Bibliographic Centre, 1999.
*&quot;International Authors and Writers Who&#x27;s Who&quot;. Cambridge: Int. Bibliographic Centre, 1996.
*&quot;International Who&#x27;s Who&quot;. London: Routledge, 2009.
*&quot;Something About Authors&quot;. Chicago: Gale Research, 1997.
*&quot;Who&#x27;s Who in America&quot;. Chicago: Marquis Publishing, 1985. 
*&quot;Who&#x27;s Who of North American Poets&quot;. Cornwall, Ont.: Vesta Publishing, 1987.
*&quot;Who&#x27;s Who in Canadian Literature&quot;. Toronto: Reference Press, 1984, 1985, 1986, 1987, etc.
*&quot;Who&#x27;s Who in the World&quot;. Eight Ed. Wilmette, Ill.: Marquis, 1993.
*&quot;Who&#x27;s Who in Entertainment.&quot; New Providence, NJ: Marquis, 1997.

==External links==
* Lesley Choyce</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q15528060" start="0" end="13" title="Lesley Choyce" label="Lesley Choyce"/>
<link wikidata="Q8261" start="77" end="82" title="novel" label="novel"/>
<link wikidata="Q213051" start="85" end="96" title="non-fiction" label="non-fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q131539" start="98" end="119" title="children&amp;#x27;s books" label="children&amp;#x27;s books"/>
<link wikidata="Q1233720" start="121" end="139" title="young adult novels" label="young adult novels"/>
<link wikidata="Q482" start="145" end="151" title="poetry" label="poetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q579321" start="295" end="315" title="Dalhousie University" label="Dalhousie University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1952" start="744" end="755" title="Nova Scotia" label="Nova Scotia"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="253465" wikidata="Q1178892" url="?curid=253465" title="Vulnerable">
<text>Vulnerable may refer to:
==General==
*Vulnerability
*Vulnerability (computing)
*Vulnerable adult
*Vulnerable species

==Music==

===Albums===
*&quot;Vulnerable&quot; (Marvin Gaye album), 1997
*&quot;Vulnerable&quot; (Tricky album), 2003
*&quot;Vulnerable&quot; (The Used album), 2012

===Songs===
* &quot;Vulnerable&quot; (Roxette song), 1994
* &quot;Vulnerable&quot; (Selena Gomez song), 2020
* &quot;Vulnerable&quot;, a song by Secondhand Serenade from &quot;Awake&quot;, 2007
* &quot;Vulnerable&quot;, a song by Pet Shop Boys from &quot;Yes&quot;, 2009
* &quot;Vulnerable&quot;, a song by Tinashe from &quot;Black Water&quot;, 2013
* &quot;Vulnerability&quot;, a song by Operation Ivy from &quot;Energy&quot;, 1989

==Other uses==
* Climate change vulnerability, vulnerability to anthropogenic climate change used in discussion of society&#x27;s response to climate change
* Vulnerable, a scoring feature of the game of contract bridge where larger bonuses and penalties apply; see Glossary of contract bridge terms#Vulnerable

==See also==
*</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1178892" start="0" end="10" title="Vulnerable" label="Vulnerable"/>
<link wikidata="Q1178984" start="38" end="51" title="Vulnerability" label="Vulnerability"/>
<link wikidata="Q631425" start="53" end="78" title="Vulnerability (computing)" label="Vulnerability (computing)"/>
<link wikidata="Q17149508" start="80" end="96" title="Vulnerable adult" label="Vulnerable adult"/>
<link wikidata="Q278113" start="98" end="116" title="Vulnerable species" label="Vulnerable species"/>
<link wikidata="Q2017595" start="143" end="185" title="Vulnerable (Marvin Gaye album)" label="&amp;quot;Vulnerable&amp;quot; (Marvin Gaye album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2353292" start="193" end="230" title="Vulnerable (Tricky album)" label="&amp;quot;Vulnerable&amp;quot; (Tricky album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2079844" start="238" end="277" title="Vulnerable (The Used album)" label="&amp;quot;Vulnerable&amp;quot; (The Used album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2656261" start="299" end="336" title="Vulnerable (Roxette song)" label="&amp;quot;Vulnerable&amp;quot; (Roxette song)"/>
<link wikidata="Q93341844" start="345" end="387" title="Vulnerable (Selena Gomez song)" label="&amp;quot;Vulnerable&amp;quot; (Selena Gomez song)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2076818" start="461" end="466" title="Awake (Secondhand Serenade album)" label="Awake"/>
<link wikidata="Q1507848" start="540" end="543" title="Yes (Pet Shop Boys album)" label="Yes"/>
<link wikidata="Q17507649" start="611" end="622" title="Black Water (Tinashe album)" label="Black Water"/>
<link wikidata="Q168810" start="699" end="705" title="Energy (Operation Ivy album)" label="Energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q104834114" start="736" end="764" title="Climate change vulnerability" label="Climate change vulnerability"/>
<link wikidata="Q125928" start="783" end="811" title="anthropogenic climate change" label="anthropogenic climate change"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="985" end="1029" title="Glossary of contract bridge terms#Vulnerable" label="Glossary of contract bridge terms#Vulnerable"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="253478" wikidata="Q320358" url="?curid=253478" title="Austin Clarke (novelist)">
<text>Austin Ardinel Chesterfield &quot;Tom&quot; Clarke, (July 26, 1934 – June 26, 2016), was a Barbadian novelist, essayist, and short story writer who was based in Toronto, Ontario, Canada. Among his notable books are novels such as &quot;The Polished Hoe&quot; (2002), memoirs including &quot;Membering&quot; (2015), and two collections of poetry, &quot;Where the Sun Shines Best&quot; (2013) and &quot;In Your Crib&quot; (2015).

==Early life and education==

Austin Clarke was born in 1934 in St. James, Barbados, where he received his early education in Anglican schools. He taught at a rural school for three years. In 1955, he moved to Canada and attended the University of Toronto&#x27;s Trinity College for two years.

==Career==
Clarke was a reporter at the &quot;Timmins Daily Press&quot; and the &quot;Globe and Mail&quot;, before joining the Canadian Broadcasting Corporation as a freelance journalist. He subsequently taught at several American universities, including Yale University (Hoyt fellow, 1968–70), Duke University (1971–72), and the University of Texas (visiting professor, 1973) and helped establish black studies programs at several universities.

In 1973, he was designated cultural attaché at the Barbadian embassy in Washington, DC. He was later General Manager of the Caribbean Broadcasting Corporation in Barbados (1975–77). He was writer in residence at Concordia University, Montreal, Quebec (1977), and at the University of Western Ontario (1978). He became a Canadian citizen in 1981. From 1988 to 1993 he served on the Immigration and Refugee Board of Canada.

He was not the first Canadian writer of African origin, that distinction belonging to 19th-century author Amelia E. Johnson. However, George Elliott Clarke says that Clarke was &quot;the author of African descent in English, in Canada, that anyone who was interested in being a writer would have to be aware of, to challenge as well.&quot; In September 2012, at the International Festival of Authors, Clarke was announced as the winner of the $10,000 Harbourfront Festival Prize &quot;on the merits of his published work and efforts in fostering literary talent in new and aspiring writers&quot;. Previous recipients of the award (established in 1984) include: Dionne Brand, Wayson Choy, Christopher Dewdney, Helen Humphreys, Paul Quarrington, Peter Robinson, Seth, Jane Urquhart, and Guy Vanderhaeghe. Clarke was reported as saying: &quot;I rejoiced when I saw that Authors at Harbourfront Centre had named me this year&#x27;s winner of the Harbourfront Festival Prize. I did not come to this city on September 29, 1959, as a writer. I came as a student. However, my career as a writer buried any contention of being a scholar and I thank Authors at Harbourfront Centre for saving me from the more painful life of the &#x27;gradual student.&#x27; It is an honour to be part of such a prestigious list of authors.&quot;

An outspoken intellectual, he avoided talking about &quot;multiculturalism&quot;, hoping his own term &quot;omniculturalism&quot; could be accepted by people from both the political left and right. He ran as a Progressive Conservative candidate in the 1977 Ontario general election.

Clarke died on June 26, 2016, at the age of 81, in Toronto.

==Selected awards and honours==

*1980, Casa de las Américas Prize, Cuba
*1992, Toronto Arts Award for Lifetime Achievement in Literature
*1997, Lifetime Achievement Award from Frontier College in Toronto
*1998, Member of the Order of Canada. 
*1999, Martin Luther King Jr. Achievement Award for Excellence in Writing.
*1999, W. O. Mitchell Literary Prize
*2002, Giller Prize, for &quot;The Polished Hoe&quot; 
*2003, Commonwealth Writers&#x27; Prize
*2009, Toronto Book Award, for &quot;More&quot;.
*2012, Harbourfront Festival Prize

==Bibliography==

===Novels===
*&quot;The Survivors of the Crossing&quot; (Toronto: McClelland &amp; Stewart, 1964)
*&quot;Amongst Thistles and Thorns&quot; (Toronto: McClelland &amp; Stewart, 1965)
*&quot;The Meeting Point&quot; (Toronto: Macmillan, 1967; Boston: Little, Brown, 1972)
*&quot;Storm of Fortune&quot; (Boston: Little, Brown, 1973)
*&quot;The Bigger Light&quot; (Boston: Little, Brown, 1975)
*&quot;The Prime Minister&quot; (Don Mills, Ont.: General Publishing, 1977)
*&quot;Proud Empires&quot; (London: Gollancz, 1986; Penguin-Viking, 1988, )
*&quot;The Origin of Waves&quot; (McClelland &amp; Stewart, 1997; winner of the Rogers Writers&#x27; Trust Fiction Prize)
*&quot;The Question&quot; (Toronto: McClelland &amp; Stewart, 1999; nominated for a Governor General&#x27;s Award)
*&quot;The Polished Hoe&quot; (Toronto: Thomas Allen, 2002; winner of the Giller Prize and the Commonwealth Writers&#x27; Prize)
*&quot;More&quot; (2008, winner of the City of Toronto Book Award)

===Short story collections===
*&quot;When He Was Free and Young and He Used to Wear Silks&quot; (Toronto: Anansi, 1971; revised edition Little, Brown, 1973)
*&quot;When Women Rule&quot; (Toronto: McClelland &amp; Stewart, 1985)
*&quot;Nine Men Who Laughed&quot; (Toronto: McClelland &amp; Stewart, 1986)
*&quot;In This City&quot; (Toronto: Exile Editions, 1992)
*&quot;There Are No Elders&quot; (Toronto: Exile Editions, 1993)
*&quot;The Austin Clarke Reader&quot;, ed. Barry Callaghan (Toronto: Exile Editions, 1996)
*&quot;Choosing His Coffin: The Best Stories of Austin Clarke&quot; (Toronto: Thomas Allen, 2003)
*&quot;They Never Told Me: and Other Stories&quot; (Holstein, ON: Exile Editions, 2013)
*&quot;Canadian Experience&quot; (Toronto: Exile Editions, 1994)

===Poetry===
*&quot;Where the Sun Shines Best&quot; (Toronto: Guernica Editions, 2013)
*&quot;In Your Crib&quot; (Toronto: Guernica Editions, 2015)

===Memoirs===
*&quot;Growing Up Stupid Under the Union Jack: a Memoir&quot; (Toronto: McClelland &amp; Stewart, 1980; Thomas Allen, 2005, )
*&quot;A Stranger In A Strange Land&quot;, &quot;The Globe and Mail&quot;, Toronto, 15 August 1990, p. 30.
*&quot;Public Enemies: Police Violence and Black Youth&quot; (Toronto: HarperCollins, 1992)
*&quot;A Passage Back Home: A Personal Reminiscence of Samuel Selvon&quot; (Toronto: Exile Editions, 1994)
*&quot;Pigtails &#x27;n Breadfruit: A Culinary Memoir&quot; (New Press, 1999); as &quot;Pigtails &#x27;n&#x27; Breadfruit: The Rituals of Slave Food, A Barbadian Memoir&quot; (Toronto: Random House, 1999; University of Toronto Press, 2001); &quot;Pig Tails &#x27;n&#x27; Breadfruit - Anniversary Edition&quot; (Ian Randle Publishers, 2014, )
*&quot;Love and Sweet Food: A Culinary Memoir&quot; (Toronto: Thomas Allen, 2004; )
*&quot;′Membering&quot; (Toronto: Dundurn Press, 2015)

==References==
==External links==
*Austin Clarke interview by Linda Richards, &quot;January magazine&quot;, November 2002.
*Famous Canadian Immigrant Authors
*Austin Clarke&#x27;s entry in &quot;The Canadian Encyclopedia&quot;
*&quot;Austin Clarke&quot;, English-Canadian Writers, Athabasca University.
*Carol Brennan, &quot;Austin C. Clarke&quot;, Gale Contemporary Black Biography.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q320358" start="0" end="50" title="Austin Clarke (novelist)" label="Austin Ardinel Chesterfield &amp;quot;Tom&amp;quot; Clarke"/>
<link wikidata="Q49084" start="125" end="136" title="short story" label="short story"/>
<link wikidata="Q172" start="161" end="168" title="Toronto" label="Toronto"/>
<link wikidata="Q1904" start="170" end="177" title="Ontario" label="Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q7757650" start="236" end="252" title="The Polished Hoe" label="The Polished Hoe"/>
<link wikidata="Q592141" start="493" end="502" title="Saint James, Barbados" label="St. James"/>
<link wikidata="Q244" start="504" end="512" title="Barbados" label="Barbados"/>
<link wikidata="Q180865" start="663" end="684" title="University of Toronto" label="University of Toronto"/>
<link wikidata="Q3551685" start="692" end="707" title="Trinity College, Toronto" label="Trinity College"/>
<link wikidata="Q7806799" start="770" end="789" title="Timmins Daily Press" label="Timmins Daily Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q604525" start="810" end="824" title="The Globe and Mail" label="Globe and Mail"/>
<link wikidata="Q461761" start="851" end="884" title="Canadian Broadcasting Corporation" label="Canadian Broadcasting Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q49112" start="979" end="994" title="Yale University" label="Yale University"/>
<link wikidata="Q168751" start="1019" end="1034" title="Duke University" label="Duke University"/>
<link wikidata="Q49213" start="1054" end="1073" title="University of Texas" label="University of Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="1243" end="1257" title="Washington, DC" label="Washington, DC"/>
<link wikidata="Q5039360" start="1295" end="1329" title="Caribbean Broadcasting Corporation" label="Caribbean Broadcasting Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q326342" start="1383" end="1403" title="Concordia University" label="Concordia University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144262" start="1441" end="1470" title="University of Western Ontario" label="University of Western Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q21176955" start="1700" end="1717" title="Amelia E. Johnson" label="Amelia E. Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1507305" start="1728" end="1749" title="George Elliott Clarke" label="George Elliott Clarke"/>
<link wikidata="Q4825975" start="1960" end="1993" title="International Festival of Authors" label="International Festival of Authors"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2045" end="2072" title="Authors at Harbourfront Centre#Harbourfront Festival Prize" label="Harbourfront Festival Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q543625" start="2255" end="2267" title="Dionne Brand" label="Dionne Brand"/>
<link wikidata="Q7976884" start="2269" end="2280" title="Wayson Choy" label="Wayson Choy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1086632" start="2282" end="2301" title="Christopher Dewdney" label="Christopher Dewdney"/>
<link wikidata="Q15497562" start="2303" end="2318" title="Helen Humphreys" label="Helen Humphreys"/>
<link wikidata="Q7153036" start="2320" end="2336" title="Paul Quarrington" label="Paul Quarrington"/>
<link wikidata="Q637306" start="2338" end="2352" title="Peter Robinson (novelist)" label="Peter Robinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q442386" start="2354" end="2358" title="Seth (cartoonist)" label="Seth"/>
<link wikidata="Q446687" start="2360" end="2373" title="Jane Urquhart" label="Jane Urquhart"/>
<link wikidata="Q3122199" start="2379" end="2395" title="Guy Vanderhaeghe" label="Guy Vanderhaeghe"/>
<link wikidata="Q190656" start="2973" end="2989" title="multiculturalism" label="multiculturalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7094973" start="3167" end="3196" title="1977 Ontario general election" label="1977 Ontario general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q182566" start="3300" end="3326" title="Casa de las Américas Prize" label="Casa de las Américas Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q99700" start="3486" end="3501" title="Order of Canada" label="Order of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q4922009" start="3511" end="3551" title="Black Theatre Workshop" label="Martin Luther King Jr. Achievement Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q8038448" start="3586" end="3615" title="W. O. Mitchell Literary Prize" label="W. O. Mitchell Literary Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q1411331" start="3617" end="3621" title="2002 in literature" label="2002"/>
<link wikidata="Q1328335" start="3623" end="3635" title="Giller Prize" label="Giller Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q7757650" start="3647" end="3663" title="The Polished Hoe" label="The Polished Hoe"/>
<link wikidata="Q5153697" start="3678" end="3710" title="Commonwealth Writers&amp;#x27; Prize" label="Commonwealth Writers&amp;#x27; Prize"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3767" end="3794" title="Authors at Harbourfront Centre#Harbourfront Festival Prize" label="Harbourfront Festival Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q6800322" start="3880" end="3904" title="McClelland &amp;amp; Stewart" label="McClelland &amp;amp; Stewart"/>
<link wikidata="Q552959" start="4061" end="4074" title="Little, Brown" label="Little, Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q7359348" start="4434" end="4474" title="Rogers Writers&amp;#x27; Trust Fiction Prize" label="Rogers Writers&amp;#x27; Trust Fiction Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q3405776" start="4560" end="4589" title="2000 Governor General&amp;#x27;s Awards" label="Governor General&amp;#x27;s Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q7757650" start="4598" end="4614" title="The Polished Hoe" label="The Polished Hoe"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4665" end="4677" title="Giller Prize#2002" label="Giller Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q5153697" start="4686" end="4718" title="Commonwealth Writers&amp;#x27; Prize" label="Commonwealth Writers&amp;#x27; Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q604525" start="5896" end="5914" title="The Globe and Mail" label="The Globe and Mail"/>
<link wikidata="Q95149" start="6025" end="6038" title="HarperCollins" label="HarperCollins"/>
<link wikidata="Q744182" start="6338" end="6350" title="Random House" label="Random House"/>
<link wikidata="Q3740079" start="6464" end="6485" title="Ian Randle Publishers" label="Ian Randle Publishers"/>
<link wikidata="Q5314923" start="6613" end="6626" title="Dundurn Press" label="Dundurn Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q130334" start="6830" end="6855" title="The Canadian Encyclopedia" label="The Canadian Encyclopedia"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="253479" wikidata="Q1441723" url="?curid=253479" title="Francis Rogallo">
<text>Francis Melvin Rogallo (January 27, 1912 – September 1, 2009) was an American aeronautical engineer inventor born in Sanger, California, U.S. Together with his wife, he is credited with the invention of the Rogallo wing, or &quot;flexible wing&quot;, a precursor to the modern hang glider and paraglider. His patents were ranged over mechanical utility patents and ornamental design patents for wing controls, airfoils, target kite, flexible wing, and advanced configurations for flexible wing vehicles.

==Career==
Francis Rogallo earned an aeronautical engineering degree at Stanford University in 1935. Since 1936, Rogallo worked for the National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics (NACA) as an aeronautics project engineer at the wind tunnels. During 1948, he and his wife, Gertrude Rogallo, invented and patented a self-inflating flexible kite. They called this kite the &quot;flexible wing&quot;. Rogallo had originally invented the wing with the idea to create an aircraft which would be simple enough and inexpensive enough that anyone could have one. The wing was flown by Rogallo as a model glider with small payloads hung beneath the wing (thus model hang glider) and as a kite.

The Rogallo wing is one of the simplest airfoils ever created. A wing using the airfoil could be used to carry payloads, undercarriage devices, pilot-control assemblies, etc. For the next six years, the Rogallos tried ceaselessly to attract both government and industry interest in their flexible wing, and they licensed a manufacturer in Connecticut to sell a kite based on it. When the DuPont company announced the development of Mylar in 1952, Rogallo immediately saw how superior it would be for his kite, and the five-dollar toy &quot;Flexikite&quot; became one of the first products to use the plastic material. The Rogallos found themselves traveling to kiting events around the Northeast to fly and promote the toy, with moderate success.

On October 4, 1957, the Russian Sputnik began beeping its message from orbit, and everything changed. The space race caught the imagination of the newly formed NASA and Rogallo was in position to seize the opportunity. The Rogallos released their patent to the government, and with Rogallo&#x27;s help at the wind tunnels, NASA began a series of experiments testing the Parawing (NASA renamed the Rogallo wing the Parawing, and modern hang glider pilots often refer to it as the flexible Rogallo wing) at altitudes up to 200,000 feet and as fast as Mach 3 in order to evaluate them as alternative recovery system for the Gemini space capsules and used rocket stages. By 1960, NASA had made test flights of a framed Parawing powered aircraft, called the &quot;flying Jeep&quot; or Fleep, and of a weight shift Parawing glider, called Paresev, in a series of several shapes and sizes, manned and unmanned. A key wing configuration applying Francis Rogallo&#x27;s leadership that gave base to kited gliders with hung pilots using weight-shift control was designed by Charles Richards and constructed by the Richards team in 1961–2; such wing became a template for recreational use or Rogallo&#x27;s inventions, ending up mechanically and ornamentally in Skiplane, ski-kites, and hang gliders of the 1960–1975.

In 1967, projects focused on the Parasev were stopped by NASA in favor of round parachutes. NASA was not in the business of applying Rogallo&#x27;s family of airfoils to personal aircraft such as kites, hang gliders, and powered light aircraft; however what was already in the Paresev series of aircraft provided all the fundamental mechanics that could be simplified to lighter personal aircraft. That task of lightening and tweaking what the Paresev team had done with the Rogallo wing was taken up by independent designers around the world: Barry Palmer in 1961, Richard Miller, Thomas Purcell, and Australian Mike Burns were among the first to tap the technology for manned personal-craft glider/kite use.

As of 2003, Rogallo had new designs for kites.

Tens of thousands of people have taken hang gliding lessons in Rogallo wing type hang gliders at Jockey&#x27;s Ridge State Park, an enormous sand dune which is located five miles from the site of the first powered aircraft flight. Mr. Rogallo was frequently seen at the park flying his own hang glider in the 1970s and 1980s.

Francis Rogallo died at home on September 1, 2009, in Southern Shores, North Carolina, near Kitty Hawk, the birthplace of aviation. Gertrude died on January 28, 2008.

The Rogallo name lives on as members of the United States Hang Gliding and Paragliding Association are called &quot;Rogallo&quot; members.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1441723" start="0" end="22" title="Francis Rogallo" label="Francis Melvin Rogallo"/>
<link wikidata="Q8421" start="78" end="90" title="Aeronautics" label="aeronautical"/>
<link wikidata="Q81096" start="91" end="99" title="engineer" label="engineer"/>
<link wikidata="Q14208553" start="100" end="108" title="invention" label="inventor"/>
<link wikidata="Q174427" start="117" end="135" title="Sanger, California" label="Sanger, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q1816539" start="207" end="219" title="Rogallo wing" label="Rogallo wing"/>
<link wikidata="Q208147" start="277" end="288" title="hang gliding" label="hang glider"/>
<link wikidata="Q178380" start="293" end="303" title="paraglider" label="paraglider"/>
<link wikidata="Q11481471" start="395" end="408" title="Aircraft flight control systems" label="wing controls"/>
<link wikidata="Q4698744" start="410" end="417" title="airfoil" label="airfoil"/>
<link wikidata="Q41506" start="577" end="596" title="Stanford University" label="Stanford University"/>
<link wikidata="Q618604" start="641" end="684" title="National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics" label="National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics"/>
<link wikidata="Q193010" start="734" end="745" title="wind tunnel" label="wind tunnel"/>
<link wikidata="Q5553381" start="778" end="794" title="Gertrude Rogallo" label="Gertrude Rogallo"/>
<link wikidata="Q42861" start="844" end="848" title="kite" label="kite"/>
<link wikidata="Q1816539" start="1195" end="1207" title="Rogallo wing" label="Rogallo wing"/>
<link wikidata="Q779" start="1530" end="1541" title="Connecticut" label="Connecticut"/>
<link wikidata="Q221062" start="1579" end="1585" title="DuPont" label="DuPont"/>
<link wikidata="Q441961" start="1623" end="1628" title="Mylar" label="Mylar"/>
<link wikidata="Q80811" start="1971" end="1978" title="Sputnik" label="Sputnik"/>
<link wikidata="Q23548" start="2099" end="2103" title="NASA" label="NASA"/>
<link wikidata="Q160669" start="2488" end="2494" title="Mach number" label="Mach 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q957055" start="2567" end="2580" title="space capsule" label="space capsule"/>
<link wikidata="Q1161829" start="2591" end="2604" title="Multistage rocket" label="rocket stages"/>
<link wikidata="Q514047" start="2719" end="2724" title="Ryan XV-8" label="Fleep"/>
<link wikidata="Q2030228" start="2772" end="2779" title="Paresev" label="Paresev"/>
<link wikidata="Q5082026" start="3003" end="3019" title="Charles Richards (NASA engineer)" label="Charles Richards"/>
<link wikidata="Q4864309" start="3791" end="3803" title="Barry Hill Palmer" label="Barry Palmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q42861" start="3998" end="4002" title="kite flying" label="kite"/>
<link wikidata="Q208147" start="4045" end="4057" title="hang gliding" label="hang gliding"/>
<link wikidata="Q1816539" start="4069" end="4081" title="Rogallo wing" label="Rogallo wing"/>
<link wikidata="Q14707995" start="4103" end="4133" title="Jockey&amp;#x27;s Ridge State Park" label="Jockey&amp;#x27;s Ridge State Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q628311" start="4425" end="4435" title="Kitty Hawk, North Carolina" label="Kitty Hawk"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="253480" wikidata="Q41608" url="?curid=253480" title="Constantine VII">
<text>Constantine VII Porphyrogenitus (; 17 May 905 – 9 November 959) was the fourth Byzantine emperor of the Macedonian dynasty, reigning from 6 June 913 to 9 November 959. He was the son of Emperor Leo VI and his fourth wife, Zoe Karbonopsina, and the nephew of his predecessor Alexander.

Most of his reign was dominated by co-regents: from 913 until 919 he was under the regency of his mother, while from 920 until 945 he shared the throne with Romanos Lekapenos, whose daughter Helena he married, and his sons. Constantine VII is best known for the &quot;Geoponika&quot; (τά γεοπονικά), an important agronomic treatise compiled during his reign, and three, perhaps four, books; (bearing in Greek the heading Πρὸς τὸν ἴδιον υἱὸν Ῥωμανόν), (Περὶ τῆς Βασιλείου Τάξεως), &quot;De Thematibus&quot; (Περὶ θεμάτων Άνατολῆς καὶ Δύσεως), and &quot;Vita Basilii&quot; (Βίος Βασιλείου), though his authorship of the &quot;Vita Basilii&quot; is not certain.

The epithet &quot;porphyrogenitus&quot; alludes to the Purple chamber of the imperial palace, decorated with porphyry, where legitimate children of reigning emperors were normally born. Constantine was also born in this room, although his mother Zoe had not been married to Leo at that time. Nevertheless, the epithet allowed him to underline his position as the legitimate son, as opposed to all others, who claimed the throne during his lifetime. Sons born to a reigning Emperor held precedence in the Eastern Roman line of succession over elder sons not born &quot;in the purple&quot;.

==Life==
===Regency===
Constantine was born in Constantinople on 17/18 May 905, an illegitimate son of Leo VI before an uncanonical fourth marriage. To help legitimize him, his mother gave birth to him in the Purple Room of the imperial palace, hence his nickname &quot;Porphyrogennetos&quot;. He was elevated to the throne as a two-year-old child by his father and uncle on 15 May 908 (Whitsunday).

In early 913, as his uncle Alexander lay dying, he appointed a seven-man regency council for Constantine. It was headed by the Patriarch Nicholas Mystikos, the two &quot;magistroi&quot; John Eladas and Stephen, the &quot;rhaiktor&quot; John Lazanes, the otherwise obscure Euthymius and Alexander&#x27;s henchmen Basilitzes and Gabrielopoulos. Following Alexander&#x27;s death (6 June), the new and shaky regime survived the attempted usurpation of Constantine Doukas, and Patriarch Nicholas Mystikos quickly assumed a dominant position among the regents.

Patriarch Nicholas was presently forced to make peace with Tsar Simeon of Bulgaria, whom he reluctantly recognized as Bulgarian emperor. Because of this unpopular concession, Patriarch Nicholas was driven out of the regency by Constantine&#x27;s mother Zoe. She was no more successful with the Bulgarians, who defeated her main supporter, the general Leo Phokas, in 917.

In March 919, she was replaced as regent by the admiral Romanos Lekapenos, who married his daughter Helena Lekapene to Constantine. Romanos used his position to advance to the ranks of &quot;basileopatōr&quot; in April 919, to &quot;kaisar&quot; (Caesar) on 24 September 920, and finally to co-emperor on 17 December 920. Thus, just short of reaching nominal majority, Constantine was eclipsed by a senior emperor.

Constantine&#x27;s youth had been a sad one due to his unpleasant appearance, his taciturn nature, and his relegation to the third level of succession, behind Christopher Lekapenos, the eldest son of Romanos I Lekapenos. Nevertheless, he was a very intelligent young man with a large range of interests, and he dedicated those years to studying the court&#x27;s ceremony.

===Senior emperor===
Romanos kept and maintained power until 16/20 December 944, when he was deposed by his sons, the co-emperors Stephen and Constantine. Romanos spent the last years of his life in exile on the Island of Prote as a monk and died on 15 June 948. With the help of his wife, Constantine VII succeeded in removing his brothers-in-law, and on 27 January 945, Constantine VII became sole emperor at the age of 39, after a life spent in the shadow. Several months later, on 6 April (Easter), Constantine VII crowned his own son Romanos II co-emperor. Having never exercised executive authority, Constantine remained primarily devoted to his scholarly pursuits and delegated his authority to bureaucrats and generals, as well as to his energetic wife Helena Lekapene.

In 947, Constantine VII ordered the immediate restitution of all peasant lands, without compensation; by the end of his reign, the condition of the landed peasantry, which formed the foundation of the whole economic and military strength of the Empire, was better off than it had been for a century.

In 949, Constantine launched a new fleet of 100 ships (20 &quot;dromons&quot;, 64 &quot;chelandia&quot;, and 10 galleys) against the Arab corsairs hiding in Crete, but like his father&#x27;s attempt to retake the island in 911, this attempt also failed.

On the Eastern frontier things went better, even if with alternate success. In the same year, the Byzantines conquered Germanicea, repeatedly defeated the enemy armies, and in 952 they crossed the upper Euphrates. But in 953, the Hamdanid &quot;amir&quot; Sayf al-Dawla retook Germanicea and entered the imperial territory. The land in the east was eventually recovered by Nikephoros Phokas, who conquered Adata, in northern Syria, in 958, and by the general John Tzimiskes, who one year later captured Samosata, in northern Mesopotamia. An Arab fleet was also destroyed by Greek fire in 957. 

Constantine had active diplomatic relationships with foreign courts, including those of the caliph of Cordoba Abd ar-Rahman III and of Otto I, Holy Roman Emperor. In the autumn of 957 Constantine was visited by Olga of Kiev, regent of the Kievan Rus&#x27;. The reasons for this voyage have never been clarified; but she was baptised a Christian with the name Helena, and sought Christian missionaries to encourage her people to adopt Christianity. According to legends, Constantine VII fell in love with Olga, but she found a way to refuse him by tricking him into becoming her godfather. When she was baptized, she said it was inappropriate for a godfather to marry his goddaughter.

Constantine VII died at Constantinople on 9 November 959 and was succeeded by his son Romanos II. It was rumored that he had been poisoned by his son or his daughter-in-law Theophano.

==Madrid Skylitzes&#x27; depictions of Constantine==
==Literary activity==
Constantine VII was recognized as a writer and scholar, surrounding himself with educated people of the Imperial Court. He wrote, or had commissioned, the works &quot;Geoponika&quot; (&quot;On Agriculture&quot;, in Greek Τὰ γεωπονικά), a compilation of agronomic works from earlier Greek and Punic texts that are otherwise lost; (&quot;On Ceremonies&quot;, in Greek, Περὶ τῆς βασιλείου τάξεως), describing the kinds of court ceremonies (also described later in a more negative light by Liutprand of Cremona); (&quot;On the Administration of the Empire&quot;, bearing in Greek the heading Πρὸς τὸν ἴδιον ὑιὸν Ρωμανόν), giving advice on running the Empire internally and on fighting external enemies; a history of the Empire covering events following the death of the chronographer Theophanes the Confessor in 817; and &quot;Excerpta Historica&quot; (&quot;Excerpts from the Histories&quot;), a collection of excerpts from ancient historians (many of whose works are now lost) in four volumes (1. De legationibus. 2. De virtutibus et vitiis. 3. De insidiis. 4. De sententiis). In &quot;The Manuscript Tradition of Polybius&quot;, John Michael Moore (CUP, 1965) provides a useful summary of the commission by Porphyrogenitus of the Constantine Excerpts:

He felt that the historical studies were being seriously neglected, mainly because of the bulk of the histories. He therefore decided that a selection under fifty-three titles should be made from all the important historians extant in Constantinople; thus he hoped to assemble in a more manageable compass the most valuable parts of each author. ... Of the fifty-three titles into which the excerpts were divided, only six have survived: &quot;de Virtutibus et Vitiis; de Sententiis; de Insidiis; de Strategematis; de Legationibus Gentium ad Romanos; de Legationibus Romanorum ad Gentes&quot;. The titles of only about half the remaining forty-seven sections are known.
Also amongst his historical works is a history eulogizing the reign and achievements of his grandfather, Basil I (&quot;Vita Basilii&quot;, Βίος Βασιλείου). These books are insightful and of interest to the historian, sociologist, and anthropologist as a source of information about nations neighbouring the Empire. They also offer a fine insight into the Emperor himself.

In his book, &quot;A Short History of Byzantium&quot;, John Julius Norwich refers to Constantine VII as &quot;The Scholar Emperor&quot;. Norwich describes Constantine:

He was, we are told, a passionate collector—not only of books and manuscripts but works of art of every kind; more remarkable still for a man of his class, he seems to have been an excellent painter. He was the most generous of patrons—to writers and scholars, artists and craftsmen. Finally, he was an excellent Emperor: a competent, conscientious and hard-working administrator and an inspired picker of men, whose appointments to military, naval, ecclesiastical, civil and academic posts were both imaginative and successful. He did much to develop higher education and took a special interest in the administration of justice.
==Family==
By his wife Helena Lekapene, the daughter of Emperor Romanos I, Constantine VII had several children:
* Leo ( 939–944), who died young.
* Romanos II (939–963), who succeeded as emperor.
* Zoe, sent to a convent.
* Theodora, who married emperor John I Tzimiskes.
*Agatha, sent to a convent.
*Theophano, sent to a convent.
*Anna, sent to a convent.

== Legacy ==
Constantine VII is still remembered in the Eastern Orthodox liturgy when the transfer of the Holy Mandylion is celebrated on 16 August in the Julian calendar which corresponds to 31 August in the Gregorian calendar. This feast is part of the Nut Feast of the Saviour for Slavs.

== Solidi ==
==See also==

*List of Byzantine emperors
==Notes==

==References==
==Sources==

* Constantine VII, &quot;De ceremoniis&quot;, ed. J. Reiske (2 vols., 1829, 1830). English translation &#x27;The Book of Ceremonies&#x27; accompanying the Greek text in 2 volumes by Ann Moffatt and Maxeme Tall, Canberra 2012 (Byzantina Australiensia 18).
* Constantine VII, &#x27;Story of the Image of Edessa&#x27;, tr. B. Slater, J. Jackson, in I. Wilson, &quot;The Turin Shroud&quot; (1978), pp. 235–251
* Constantine VII, &quot;Three treatises on Imperial military expeditions&quot;, ed. tr. J.F. Haldon (1990).
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
==External links==

*Written works by Constantine VII; Opera Omnia by Migne Patrologia Graeca with analytical indexes
*De administrando Imperio chapters 29–36 at the Internet Archive</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q41608" start="0" end="31" title="Constantine VII" label="Constantine VII Porphyrogenitus"/>
<link wikidata="Q128866" start="79" end="96" title="Byzantine emperor" label="Byzantine emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q332531" start="104" end="122" title="Macedonian dynasty" label="Macedonian dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q41618" start="186" end="200" title="Emperor Leo VI" label="Emperor Leo VI"/>
<link wikidata="Q218215" start="222" end="238" title="Zoe Karbonopsina" label="Zoe Karbonopsina"/>
<link wikidata="Q294425" start="274" end="283" title="Alexander (Byzantine emperor)" label="Alexander"/>
<link wikidata="Q41646" start="443" end="460" title="Romanos Lekapenos" label="Romanos Lekapenos"/>
<link wikidata="Q2631107" start="477" end="483" title="Helena Lekapene" label="Helena"/>
<link wikidata="Q1235421" start="554" end="563" title="Geoponika" label="Geoponika"/>
<link wikidata="Q173113" start="599" end="608" title="Agronomy" label="agronomic"/>
<link wikidata="Q463903" start="772" end="785" title="De Thematibus" label="De Thematibus"/>
<link wikidata="Q65074544" start="838" end="850" title="Vita Basilii" label="Vita Basilii"/>
<link wikidata="Q337238" start="1055" end="1063" title="porphyry (geology)" label="porphyry"/>
<link wikidata="Q207869" start="1256" end="1263" title="epithet" label="epithet"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1309" end="1319" title="Legitimation#Family law" label="legitimate"/>
<link wikidata="Q11572907" start="1464" end="1482" title="line of succession" label="line of succession"/>
<link wikidata="Q643330" start="1503" end="1533" title="Born in the purple" label="born &amp;quot;in the purple&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q16869" start="1583" end="1597" title="Constantinople" label="Constantinople"/>
<link wikidata="Q105742802" start="1837" end="1859" title="coronation of the Byzantine emperor" label="elevated to the throne"/>
<link wikidata="Q3446130" start="1923" end="1933" title="Whitsunday" label="Whitsunday"/>
<link wikidata="Q294425" start="1964" end="1973" title="Alexander (Byzantine emperor)" label="Alexander"/>
<link wikidata="Q477406" start="2010" end="2017" title="regency" label="regency"/>
<link wikidata="Q552447" start="2074" end="2091" title="Nicholas Mystikos" label="Nicholas Mystikos"/>
<link wikidata="Q1258027" start="2107" end="2116" title="magistros" label="magistroi"/>
<link wikidata="Q19665593" start="2123" end="2134" title="John Eladas" label="John Eladas"/>
<link wikidata="Q19668461" start="2139" end="2146" title="Stephen (son of Kalomaria)" label="Stephen"/>
<link wikidata="Q20268620" start="2158" end="2166" title="rhaiktor" label="rhaiktor"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2173" end="2185" title="John Lazanes" label="John Lazanes"/>
<link wikidata="Q4705045" start="2385" end="2403" title="Constantine Doukas (usurper)" label="Constantine Doukas"/>
<link wikidata="Q192264" start="2552" end="2563" title="Simeon I of Bulgaria" label="Tsar Simeon"/>
<link wikidata="Q219" start="2567" end="2575" title="Bulgaria" label="Bulgaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q218215" start="2746" end="2749" title="Zoe Karbonopsina" label="Zoe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1281522" start="2844" end="2854" title="Leo Phokas the Elder" label="Leo Phokas"/>
<link wikidata="Q132851" start="2913" end="2920" title="admiral" label="admiral"/>
<link wikidata="Q41646" start="2921" end="2938" title="Romanos Lekapenos" label="Romanos Lekapenos"/>
<link wikidata="Q2631107" start="2965" end="2980" title="Helena Lekapene" label="Helena Lekapene"/>
<link wikidata="Q2616622" start="3056" end="3068" title="basileopator" label="basileopatōr"/>
<link wikidata="Q188751" start="3112" end="3118" title="Caesar (title)" label="Caesar"/>
<link wikidata="Q18000" start="3224" end="3232" title="Age of majority" label="majority"/>
<link wikidata="Q2191351" start="3440" end="3461" title="Christopher Lekapenos" label="Christopher Lekapenos"/>
<link wikidata="Q1291408" start="3784" end="3791" title="Stephen Lekapenos" label="Stephen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1281912" start="3796" end="3807" title="Constantine Lekapenos" label="Constantine"/>
<link wikidata="Q579117" start="3876" end="3881" title="Prote" label="Prote"/>
<link wikidata="Q21196" start="4148" end="4154" title="Easter" label="Easter"/>
<link wikidata="Q41847" start="4193" end="4203" title="Romanos II" label="Romanos II"/>
<link wikidata="Q731662" start="4798" end="4804" title="dromon" label="dromon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069049" start="4822" end="4831" title="chelandia" label="chelandia"/>
<link wikidata="Q35323" start="4867" end="4871" title="Arab" label="Arab"/>
<link wikidata="Q34374" start="4891" end="4896" title="Crete" label="Crete"/>
<link wikidata="Q134703" start="5108" end="5118" title="Germanicea" label="Germanicea"/>
<link wikidata="Q34589" start="5192" end="5201" title="Euphrates" label="Euphrates"/>
<link wikidata="Q837187" start="5219" end="5227" title="Hamdanid dynasty" label="Hamdanid"/>
<link wikidata="Q2544585" start="5245" end="5258" title="Sayf al-Dawla" label="Sayf al-Dawla"/>
<link wikidata="Q41625" start="5362" end="5379" title="Nikephoros II" label="Nikephoros Phokas"/>
<link wikidata="Q5637609" start="5395" end="5400" title="Hadath" label="Adata"/>
<link wikidata="Q858" start="5414" end="5419" title="Syria" label="Syria"/>
<link wikidata="Q41603" start="5448" end="5462" title="John Tzimiskes" label="John Tzimiskes"/>
<link wikidata="Q667098" start="5492" end="5500" title="Samosata" label="Samosata"/>
<link wikidata="Q11767" start="5514" end="5525" title="Mesopotamia" label="Mesopotamia"/>
<link wikidata="Q179537" start="5563" end="5573" title="Greek fire" label="Greek fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q131401" start="5676" end="5682" title="caliph" label="caliph"/>
<link wikidata="Q5818" start="5686" end="5693" title="Córdoba, Spain" label="Cordoba"/>
<link wikidata="Q190418" start="5694" end="5711" title="Abd ar-Rahman III" label="Abd ar-Rahman III"/>
<link wikidata="Q43915" start="5719" end="5745" title="Otto I, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Otto I, Holy Roman Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q193198" start="5795" end="5807" title="Olga of Kiev" label="Olga of Kiev"/>
<link wikidata="Q1108445" start="5823" end="5839" title="Kievan Rus&amp;#x27;" label="Kievan Rus&amp;#x27;"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043" start="6018" end="6030" title="Christianity" label="Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q223973" start="6162" end="6171" title="Godparent" label="godfather"/>
<link wikidata="Q41847" start="6355" end="6365" title="Romanos II" label="Romanos II"/>
<link wikidata="Q232137" start="6442" end="6451" title="Theophano (born Anastaso)" label="Theophano"/>
<link wikidata="Q1235421" start="6696" end="6705" title="Geoponika" label="Geoponika"/>
<link wikidata="Q396340" start="6782" end="6791" title="agronomic" label="agronomic"/>
<link wikidata="Q4383747" start="6821" end="6826" title="Punic" label="Punic"/>
<link wikidata="Q317911" start="7015" end="7035" title="Liutprand of Cremona" label="Liutprand of Cremona"/>
<link wikidata="Q297584" start="7309" end="7333" title="Theophanes the Confessor" label="Theophanes the Confessor"/>
<link wikidata="Q106995049" start="7352" end="7370" title="Constantinian Excerpts" label="Excerpta Historica"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8556" end="8563" title="Basil I" label="Basil I"/>
<link wikidata="Q335071" start="8880" end="8899" title="John Julius Norwich" label="John Julius Norwich"/>
<link wikidata="Q2631107" start="9648" end="9663" title="Helena Lekapene" label="Helena Lekapene"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9689" end="9698" title="Romanos I" label="Romanos I"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9774" end="9784" title="Romanos II" label="Romanos II"/>
<link wikidata="Q3621591" start="9850" end="9858" title="Theodora, daughter of Constantine VII" label="Theodora"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9880" end="9896" title="John I Tzimiskes" label="John I Tzimiskes"/>
<link wikidata="Q3333484" start="10040" end="10056" title="Eastern Orthodoxy" label="Eastern Orthodox"/>
<link wikidata="Q223246" start="10090" end="10104" title="Image of Edessa" label="Holy Mandylion"/>
<link wikidata="Q11184" start="10139" end="10154" title="Julian calendar" label="Julian calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q12138" start="10193" end="10211" title="Gregorian calendar" label="Gregorian calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q4462543" start="10239" end="10263" title="Nut Feast of the Saviour" label="Nut Feast of the Saviour"/>
<link wikidata="Q40477" start="10268" end="10273" title="Slavs" label="Slavs"/>
<link wikidata="Q128866" start="10304" end="10330" title="List of Byzantine emperors" label="List of Byzantine emperors"/>
<link wikidata="Q461" start="11075" end="11091" title="Internet Archive" label="Internet Archive"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="253485" wikidata="Q86142" url="?curid=253485" title="Eurovision Young Dancers 1989">
<text>The Eurovision Young Dancers 1989 was the third edition of the Eurovision Young Dancers held at the Palais des Congrès in Paris, France, on 28 June 1989. Organised by the European Broadcasting Union (EBU) and host broadcaster France Régions 3 (FR3), dancers from ten countries participated in the televised final. A total of seventeen countries took part in the competition. and made their debut at the contest.

The participant countries could send one or two dancers, male or female, that could not be older than 19. Each dancer was free to participate in any of these two categories: classical dancing or contemporary, modern or jazz dancing. The pas de deux performances could not be longer than ten minutes, while the variations could not be longer than five minutes. There were four awards that year: contemporary dancing prize, classical dancing prize and two jury&#x27;s special prizes (also for contemporary and classical dance).

The non-qualified countries were , , , , , and . Agnès Letestu of France won the contemporary dance prize, with Tetsuya Kumakawa of United Kingdom winning the classical ballet prize.

==Location==
The Palais des congrès de Paris, a concert venue, convention centre and shopping mall in the 17th arrondissement of Paris, France, was the host venue for the 1989 edition of the Eurovision Young Dancers.

The venue was built by French architect Guillaume Gillet, and was inaugurated in 1974. The venue hosted the Eurovision Song Contest 1978. Nearby the venue are Bois de Boulogne and the affluent neighbourhood of Neuilly-sur-Seine. The closest métro and RER stations are Porte Maillot and Neuilly – Porte Maillot, accessible via the lower levels of the building.

==Format==
The format consists of dancers who are non-professional and between the ages of 16–21, competing in a performance of dance routines of their choice, which they have prepared in advance of the competition. All the dancers then take part in a choreographed group dance during &#x27;Young Dancers Week&#x27;.

Jury members of a professional aspect and representing the elements of ballet, contemporary, and modern dancing styles, score each of the competing individual and group dance routines. The overall winner upon completion of the final dances is chosen by the professional jury members.

The opening act was &quot;Mon truc en plumes&quot; performed by host Zizi Jeanmaire with her dancers and for the interval &quot;Concerto en Ré&quot; by L&#x27;École du Ballet de l&#x27;Ópera de Paris.

==Results==
Due to time restrictions, a semi-final was held to select the ten performers for the final.

===Preliminary round===
Broadcasters from sixteen countries took part in the preliminary semi-final round of the 1989 contest, of which ten qualified to the televised grand final. The following participants failed to qualify.

===Final===
==Jury members==
The jury members consisted of the following:

* – Roland Petit (Head of jury)
* – Frank Andersen
* – 
* – Igor Eisner
* – John Neumeier
* – Ekaterina Maximova
* – Heinz Spoerli
* – Vladimir Vasiliev
== Broadcasts ==
The 1989 Young Dancers competition was broadcast in 19 countries including Jordan and Bulgaria. Known details on the broadcasts in each country, including the specific broadcasting stations and commentators are shown in the tables below.


==See also==
* Eurovision Song Contest 1989

== Notes and references ==
=== Notes ===
===References===
== External links ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q86142" start="4" end="33" title="Eurovision Young Dancers 1989" label="Eurovision Young Dancers 1989"/>
<link wikidata="Q26281" start="63" end="87" title="Eurovision Young Dancers" label="Eurovision Young Dancers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1781591" start="100" end="118" title="Palais des congrès de Paris" label="Palais des Congrès"/>
<link wikidata="Q90" start="122" end="127" title="Paris" label="Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q166400" start="171" end="198" title="European Broadcasting Union" label="European Broadcasting Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q1322641" start="226" end="242" title="France 3" label="France Régions 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q909781" start="650" end="661" title="pas de deux" label="pas de deux"/>
<link wikidata="Q3847357" start="723" end="733" title="Variation (ballet)" label="variations"/>
<link wikidata="Q395118" start="989" end="1002" title="Agnès Letestu" label="Agnès Letestu"/>
<link wikidata="Q15106769" start="1052" end="1068" title="Tetsuya Kumakawa" label="Tetsuya Kumakawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1781591" start="1141" end="1168" title="Palais des congrès de Paris" label="Palais des congrès de Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q8719053" start="1172" end="1185" title="concert venue" label="concert venue"/>
<link wikidata="Q1378975" start="1187" end="1204" title="convention centre" label="convention centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q31374404" start="1209" end="1222" title="shopping mall" label="shopping mall"/>
<link wikidata="Q197297" start="1230" end="1258" title="17th arrondissement of Paris" label="17th arrondissement of Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="1260" end="1266" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q211754" start="1450" end="1478" title="Eurovision Song Contest 1978" label="Eurovision Song Contest 1978"/>
<link wikidata="Q209626" start="1501" end="1517" title="Bois de Boulogne" label="Bois de Boulogne"/>
<link wikidata="Q48958" start="1552" end="1569" title="Neuilly-sur-Seine" label="Neuilly-sur-Seine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344536" start="1610" end="1623" title="Porte Maillot (Paris Métro)" label="Porte Maillot"/>
<link wikidata="Q384902" start="1628" end="1651" title="Neuilly – Porte Maillot (Paris RER)" label="Neuilly – Porte Maillot"/>
<link wikidata="Q702269" start="1757" end="1769" title="professional" label="professional"/>
<link wikidata="Q837675" start="2021" end="2033" title="Jury" label="Jury members"/>
<link wikidata="Q41425" start="2092" end="2098" title="ballet" label="ballet"/>
<link wikidata="Q186035" start="2100" end="2112" title="Contemporary dance" label="contemporary"/>
<link wikidata="Q850130" start="2118" end="2124" title="Modern dance" label="modern"/>
<link wikidata="Q805232" start="2458" end="2505" title="Paris Opera Ballet" label="L&amp;#x27;École du Ballet de l&amp;#x27;Ópera de Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q367396" start="2919" end="2931" title="Roland Petit" label="Roland Petit"/>
<link wikidata="Q135407" start="2951" end="2965" title="Frank Andersen" label="Frank Andersen"/>
<link wikidata="Q695168" start="2991" end="3004" title="John Neumeier" label="John Neumeier"/>
<link wikidata="Q254142" start="3009" end="3027" title="Ekaterina Maximova" label="Ekaterina Maximova"/>
<link wikidata="Q125026" start="3032" end="3045" title="Heinz Spoerli" label="Heinz Spoerli"/>
<link wikidata="Q2533597" start="3050" end="3067" title="Vladimir Vasiliev (dancer)" label="Vladimir Vasiliev"/>
<link wikidata="Q810" start="3160" end="3166" title="Jordan" label="Jordan"/>
<link wikidata="Q219" start="3171" end="3179" title="Bulgaria" label="Bulgaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q208524" start="3340" end="3368" title="Eurovision Song Contest 1989" label="Eurovision Song Contest 1989"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="253491" wikidata="Q6578799" url="?curid=253491" title="TV and FM DX">
<text>TV DX and FM DX is the active search for distant radio or television stations received during unusual atmospheric conditions. The term DX is an old telegraphic term meaning &quot;long distance.&quot;

VHF/UHF television and radio signals are normally limited to a maximum &quot;deep fringe&quot; reception service area of approximately in areas where the broadcast spectrum is congested, and about 50 percent farther in the absence of interference. However, providing favourable atmospheric conditions are present, television and radio signals sometimes can be received hundreds or even thousands of miles outside their intended coverage area. These signals are often received using a large outdoor antenna system connected to a sensitive TV or FM receiver, although this may not always be the case. Many times smaller antennas and receivers such as those in vehicles will receive stations farther than normal depending on how favourable conditions are.

While only a limited number of local stations can normally be received at satisfactory signal strengths in any given area, tuning into other channels may reveal weaker signals from adjacent areas. More consistently strong signals, especially those accentuated by unusual atmospheric conditions, can be achieved by improving the antenna system. The development of interest in TV-FM DX as a hobby can arise after more distant signals are either intentionally or accidentally discovered, leading to a serious interest in improving the listener&#x27;s antenna and receiving installation for the purpose of actively seeking long-range television and radio reception. The TV-FM DX hobby is somewhat similar to other radio/electronic related hobbies such as amateur radio, Medium Wave DX, or short-wave radio, and organisations such as the Worldwide TV-FM DX Association have developed to coordinate and foster the further study and enjoyment of VHF/UHF television and FM broadcast DX.

==History==
After the Alexandra Palace, London 405-line BBC channel B1 TV service was introduced in 1936, it soon became apparent that television could be received well outside the original intended service area.

For example, in November 1938, engineers at the RCA Research Station, Riverhead, Long Island, accidentally received a 3,000-mile (4,800 km) transatlantic F2 broadcast of the London 45.0 MHz, 405-line BBC Television service.

The flickering black-and-white footage (characteristic of F2 propagation) included Jasmine Bligh, one of the original BBC announcers, and a brief shot of Elizabeth Cowell, who also shared announcing duties with Jasmine, an excerpt from an unknown period costume drama and the BBC&#x27;s station identification logo transmitted at the beginning and end of the day&#x27;s programmes.

This reception was recorded on 16 mm movie film, and is now considered to be the only surviving example of pre-war, live British television.

The BBC temporarily ceased transmissions on September 1, 1939 as World War II began. After the BBC Television Service recommenced in 1946, distant reception reports were received from various parts of the world, including Italy, South Africa, India, the Middle East, North America and the Caribbean.

In May 1940, the Federal Communications Commission (FCC), a U.S. government agency, formally allocated the 42 – 50 MHz band for FM radio broadcasting. It was soon apparent that distant FM signals from up to distance would often interfere with local stations during the summer months.

Because the 42 – 50 MHz FM signals were originally intended to only cover a relatively confined service area, the sporadic long-distance signal propagation was seen as a nuisance, especially by station management.

In February 1942, the first known published long-distance FM broadcast station reception report was reported by &quot;FM magazine&quot;. The report provided details of 45.1MHz W51C Chicago, Illinois, received in Monterrey, Mexico: &quot;Zenith Radio Corporation, operating W51C, has received a letter from a listener in Monterrey, Mexico, telling of daily reception of this station between 3:00 P.M. and 6:00 P.M. This is the greatest distance, 1,100 miles, from which consistent reception of the 50 [kW] transmitter has been reported.&quot;

In June 1945, the FCC decided that FM would have to move from the established 42 – 50 MHz pre-war band to a new band at 88 – 108 MHz. According to 1945 and 1946 FCC documents, the three major factors which the commission considered in its decision to place FM in the 88 – 108 MHz band were sporadic E co-channel interference, F2 layer interference, and extent of coverage.

During the 1950s to early 1960s, long-distance television reports started to circulate via popular U.S. electronics hobbyist periodicals such as &quot;DXing Horizons&quot;, &quot;Popular Electronics&quot;, &quot;Television Horizons&quot;, &quot;Radio Horizons&quot;, and &quot;Radio-Electronics&quot;. In January 1960, the TV DX interest was further promoted via Robert B. Cooper&#x27;s regular &quot;DXing Horizons&quot; column.

In 1957, the world record for TV DX was extended to with the reception of Britain&#x27;s channel BBC TV in various parts of Australia. Most notably, George Palmer in Melbourne, Victoria, received viewable pictures and audio of a news program from the BBC TV London station. This BBC F2 reception was recorded on movie film.

During the early 1960s, the U.K. magazine &quot;Practical Television&quot; first published a regular TV DX column edited by Charles Rafarel. By 1970, Rafarel&#x27;s column had attracted considerable interest from TV DXers worldwide. After Rafarel&#x27;s death in 1971, UK TV DXer Roger Bunney continued the monthly column, which continued to be published by &quot;Television Magazine&quot;. With the demise of &quot;Television Magazine&quot; in June 2008, Bunney&#x27;s column finished after 36 years of publication. In addition to the monthly TV DX column, Bunney has also published several TV DX books, including &quot;Long Distance Television Reception (TV-DX) for the Enthusiast&quot; 1981 , and &quot;A TV DXer&#x27;s Handbook&quot; 1986 .

==Tropospheric propagation==

Tropospheric propagation refers to the way radio signals travel through the lowest layer of the Earth&#x27;s atmosphere, the troposphere, at altitudes up to about to 17 km (11 miles). Weather conditions in the lower atmosphere can produce radio propagation over greater ranges than normal. If a temperature inversion occurs, with upper air warmer than lower air, VHF and UHF radio waves can be refracted over the Earth&#x27;s surface instead of following a straight-line path into space or into the ground. Such &quot;tropospheric ducting&quot; can carry signals for 800 km (500 miles) or more, far beyond usual range.

==F2 propagation (F2-skip) ==
The F2 layer is found about 200 miles (320 km) above the Earth&#x27;s surface and can reflect radio waves back toward the Earth. When the layer is particularly strong during periods of high sunspot activity, FM and TV reception can take place over 2000 miles (3000 km) or more, as the signal effectively &quot;bounces&quot; off the high atmospheric layer.

==Sporadic E propagation (E-skip)==


Sporadic E, also called E-skip, is the phenomenon of irregularly scattered patches of relatively dense ionization that develop seasonally within the E region of the ionosphere and reflect TV and FM frequencies, generally up to about 150 MHz. When frequencies reflect off multiple patches, it is referred to as multi-hop skip. E-skip allows radio waves to travel a thousand miles or even more beyond their intended area of reception. E-skip is unrelated to tropospheric ducting.

Television and FM signals received via Sporadic E can be extremely strong and range in strength over a short period from just detectable to overloading. Although polarisation shift can occur, single-hop Sporadic E signals tend to remain in the original transmitted polarisation. Long single-hop () Sporadic E television signals tend to be more stable and relatively free of multipath images. Shorter-skip () signals tend to be reflected from more than one part of the Sporadic E layer, resulting in multiple images and ghosting, with phase reversal at times. Picture degradation and signal-strength attenuation increases with each subsequent Sporadic E hop.

Sporadic E usually affects the lower VHF band I (TV channels 2 – 6) and band II (88 – 108 MHz FM broadcast band). The typical expected distances are about . However, under exceptional circumstances, a highly ionized Es cloud can propagate band I VHF signals down to approximately . When short-skip Es reception occurs, i.e., under in band I, there is a greater possibility that the ionized Es cloud will be capable of reflecting a signal at a much higher frequency – i.e., a VHF band 3 channel – since a sharp reflection angle (short skip) favours low frequencies, a shallower reflection angle from the same ionized cloud will favour a higher frequency.

At polar latitudes, Sporadic E can accompany auroras and associated disturbed magnetic conditions and is called Auroral-E.

No conclusive theory has yet been formulated as to the origin of Sporadic E. Attempts to connect the incidence of Sporadic E with the eleven-year Sunspot cycle have provided tentative correlations. There seems to be a positive correlation between sunspot maximum and Es activity in Europe. Conversely, there seems to be a negative correlation between maximum sunspot activity and Es activity in Australasia.

==Transequatorial propagation (TEP)==
Discovered in 1947, transequatorial spread-F (TE) propagation makes it possible for reception of television and radio stations between across the equator on frequencies as high as 432 MHz. Reception of lower frequencies in the 30 – 70 MHz range are most common. If sunspot activity is sufficiently high, signals up to 108 MHz are also possible. Reception of TEP signals above 220 MHz is extremely rare. Transmitting and receiving stations should be nearly equidistant from the geomagnetic equator.

The first large-scale VHF TEP communications occurred around 1957 – 58 during the peak of solar cycle 19. Around 1970, the peak of cycle 20, many TEP contacts were made between Australian and Japanese radio amateurs. With the rise of cycle 21 starting around 1977, amateur contacts were made between Greece/Italy and Southern Africa (both South Africa and Rhodesia/Zimbabwe), and between Central and South America by TEP.

&quot;Afternoon&quot; and &quot;evening&quot; are two distinctly different types of trans-equatorial propagation.

===Afternoon TEP===
Afternoon TEP peaks during the mid-afternoon and early evening hours and is generally limited to distances of . Signals propagated by this mode are limited to approximately 60 MHz. Afternoon TEP signals tend to have high signal strength and suffer moderate distortion due to multipath reflections.

===Evening TEP===
The second type of TEP peaks in the evening around 1900 to 2300 hours local time. Signals are possible up to 220 MHz, and even very rarely on 432 MHz. Evening TEP is quenched by moderate to severe geomagnetic disturbances. The occurrence of evening TEP is more heavily dependent on high solar activity than is the afternoon type.

During late September 2001, from 2000 to 2400 local time, VHF television and radio signals from Japan and Korea up to 220 MHz were received via evening transequatorial propagation near Darwin, Northern Territory.

==Earth – Moon – Earth (EME) propagation (Moonbounce)==
Since 1953, radio amateurs have been experimenting with lunar communications by reflecting VHF and UHF signals off the Moon. Moonbounce allows communication on Earth between any two points that can observe the Moon at a common time.

Since the Moon&#x27;s mean distance from Earth is , path losses are very high. It follows that a typical 240 dB total path loss places great demand on high-gain receiving antennas, high-power transmissions, and sensitive receiving systems. Even when all these factors are observed, the resulting signal level is often just above the noise.

Because of the low signal-to-noise ratio, as with amateur-radio practice, EME signals can generally only be detected using narrow-band receiving systems. This means that the only aspect of the TV signal that could be detected is the field scan modulation (AM vision carrier). FM broadcast signals also feature wide frequency modulation, hence EME reception is generally not possible. There are no published records of VHF/UHF EME amateur radio contacts using FM.

===Notable Earth-Moon-Earth (EME) DX receptions===
During the mid-1970s, John Yurek, K3PGP, using a home-constructed, 24-foot (7.3 m), 0.6-focal-diameter parabolic dish and UHF TV dipole feed-point tuned to channel 68, received KVST-68 Los Angeles (1200 kW ERP) and WBTB-68 Newark, New Jersey via moonbounce. At the time of the experiment there were only two known transmitters operating in the United States on UHF television channel 68, the main reason why this channel was selected for EME experiments.

For three nights in December 1978, astronomer Dr. Woodruff T. Sullivan III used the 305-metre Arecibo radio telescope to observe the Moon at a variety of frequencies. This experiment demonstrated that the lunar surface is capable of reflecting terrestrial band III (175 – 230 MHz) television signals back to Earth. While not yet confirmed, FM broadcast EME reception may also be possible using the Arecibo dish antenna.

In 2002, physicist Dr. Tony Mann demonstrated that a single high-gain UHF yagi antenna, low noise masthead preamplifier, VHF/UHF synthesised communications receiver, and personal computer with FFT spectrum analyser software could be used to successfully detect extremely weak UHF television carriers via EME.

==Auroral propagation==
An aurora is most likely to occur during periods of high solar activity when there is a high probability of a large solar flare. When such an eruption occurs, charged particles from the flare may spiral towards Earth arriving about a day later. This may or may not cause an aurora: if the interstellar magnetic field has same polarity, the particles do not get coupled to the geomagnetic field efficiently. Besides sunspot-related active solar surface areas, other solar phenomena that produce particles causing auroras, such as re-occurring coronal holes spraying out intense solar wind. These charged particles are affected and captured by the geomagnetic field and the various radiation belts surrounding earth. The aurora-producing relativistic electrons eventually precipitate towards Earth&#x27;s magnetic poles, resulting in an aurora which disrupts short-wave communications (SID) due to ionospheric/magnetic storms in the D, E, and F layers. Various visual effects are also seen in the sky towards the north – aptly called the Northern Lights. The same effect occurs in the Southern Hemisphere, but the visual effects are towards the south. The auroral event starts by onset of geomagnetic storm, followed by number of sub-storms over the next day or so.

The aurora produces a reflecting sheet (or metric sized columns) which tends to lie in a vertical plane. The result of this vertical ionospheric &quot;curtain&quot; is reflection of signals well into the upper VHF band. The reflection is very aspect sensitive. Since the reflecting sheet lies towards the poles, it follows that reflected signals will arrive from that general direction. An active region or coronal hole may persist for some 27 days resulting in a second aurora when the Sun has rotated. There is a tendency for auroras to occur around the March/April, September/October equinox periods, when the geomagnetic field is at right angle to Sun for efficient charged particle coupling. Signals propagated by aurora have a characteristic hum effect, which makes video and audio reception difficult. Video carriers, as heard on a communications receiver, no longer can be heard as a pure tone.

A typical radio aurora occurs in the afternoon, which produces strong and distorted signals for few hours. The local midnight sub-storming usually produces weaker signals, but with less distortion by Doppler from gyrating electrons.

Frequencies up to 200 MHz can be affected by auroral propagation.

==Meteor scatter propagation==
Meteor scatter occurs when a signal bounces off a meteor&#x27;s ionized trail.

When a meteor strikes earth&#x27;s atmosphere, a cylindrical region of free electrons is formed at the height of the E layer. This slender, ionized column is relatively long, and when first formed is sufficiently dense to reflect and scatter television and radio signals, generally observable from 25 MHz upwards through UHF TV, back to earth. Consequently, an incident television or radio signal is capable of being reflected up to distances approaching that of conventional Sporadic E propagation, typically about 1500 km (1000 miles). A signal reflected by such meteor ionisation can vary in duration from fractions of a second up to several minutes for intensely ionized trails. The events are classified as overdense and underdense, depending on the electron line-density (related to used frequency) of the trail plasma. The signal from overdense trail has a longer signal decay associated with fading and is physically a reflection from the ionized cylinder surface, while an underdense trail gives a signal of short duration, which rises fast and decays exponentially and is scattered from individual electrons inside the trail.

Frequencies in the range of 50 to 80 MHz have been found to be optimum for meteor scatter propagation. The 88 – 108 MHz FM broadcast band is also highly suited for meteor scatter experiments. During the major meteor showers, with extremely intense trails, band III 175 – 220 MHz signal reception can occur.

Ionized trails generally reflect lower frequencies for longer periods (and produce stronger signals) compared to higher frequencies. For example, an 8-second burst on 45.25 MHz may only cause a 4-second burst at 90.5 MHz.

The effect of a typical visually seen single meteor (of size 0.5 mm) shows up as a sudden &quot;burst&quot; of signal of short duration at a point not normally reached by the transmitter. The combined effect of several meteors impinging on earth&#x27;s atmosphere, while perhaps too weak to provide long-term ionisation, is thought to contribute to the existence of the night-time E layer.

The optimum time for receiving RF reflections off sporadic meteors is the early morning period, when the velocity of earth relative to the velocity of the particles is greatest which also increases the number of meteors occurring on the morning-side of the earth, but some sporadic meteor reflections can be received at any time of the day, least in the early evening.

The annual major meteor showers are detailed below:

* January 3 – 4: Quadrantids
* April 22 – 23: Lyrids
* May 5 – 6: Eta Aquariids
* June 9 – 10: Arietids &amp; zeta-Perseids
* August 12 – 13: Perseids
* October 21 – 22: Orionids
* November 3 – 5: Taurids
* November 16 – 18: Leonids (Note: activity varies, outburst only at about 33 year interval)
* December 13 – 14: Geminids
* December 22 – 23: Ursids

For observing meteor shower-related radio signals, the shower&#x27;s radiant must be above the (propagation mid path) horizon. Otherwise no meteor of the shower can hit the atmosphere along the propagation path and no reflections from the shower&#x27;s meteor trails can be observed.

== Satellite UHF TVRO DX ==
Although not by strict definition terrestrial TV DX, satellite UHF TVRO reception is related in certain aspects. For example, reception of satellite signals requires sensitive receiving systems and large outdoor antenna systems. However, unlike terrestrial TV DX, satellite UHF TV reception is far easier to predict. The geosynchronous satellite at height is a line of sight reception source. If the satellite is above the horizon, it can be generally received, if it is below the horizon, reception is not possible.

=== Notable Satellite UHF TVRO DX receptions ===
* In December 1975, Stephen Birkill, Sheffield, England, was the first DXer to receive viewable pictures from the 860 MHz Indian ATS-6 satellite, which was in synchronous orbit over Central Africa, for the purpose of providing educational television programs to the Indian subcontinent.
* In 1978, Ian Roberts, South Africa, received 714 MHz television pictures from the Soviet UHF Ekran-class Statsionar-T satellite.
* In 2022, amateur radio operator Derek OK9SGC, Czech Republic, received one of the few remaining analog terrestrial transmissions from Turkmenistan, which is being periodically picked up and relayed by newer Russian Meridian satellites.

==Digital modes==
Digital radio and digital television can also be received; however, there is much greater difficulty with reception of weak signals due to the cliff effect, particularly with the ATSC TV standard mandated in the U.S. However, when the signal is strong enough to be decoded identification is much easier than with analog TV as the picture is guaranteed to be noise-free when present. For DVB-T, hierarchical modulation may allow a lower-definition signal to be received even if the details of the full signal cannot be decoded. In reality, though, it&#x27;s actually much more difficult to get DVB-T E-skip reception as the lowest channel DVB-T transmissions operate on is channel E5 which is 178 MHz. A unique issue observed on analog TV at the end of the DTV transition in the United States was that very distant analog stations were viewable in the hours after the permanent shutdown of local analog transmitters in June 2009. This was particularly pronounced because June is one of the strongest months for DX reception on VHF, and most digital stations were assigned to UHF.

==DXing Software==

Over the last few years, FM DXing using computers became more popular then ever, people have started using different software for DXing based on their devices, as it provides more comfort and receivers can also be tuned remotely. This allows DXers to place their antennas in remote places without the need of being at the mentioned place while DXing.

Most popular programs among DXers are:
* XDR-GTK by Konrad Kosmatka &quot;(suitable for Sony XDR devices and NXP TEF668x-based receivers)&quot;
* FM-DX Webserver by Marek Farkaš &quot;(suitable for Sony XDR devices, NXP TEF668x based tuners and Software-defined radio)&quot;
* SDRSharp by AirSpy &quot;(suitable for Software-defined radio)&quot;
* SDR++ by Alexandre Rouma &quot;(suitable for Software-defined radio)&quot;

==See also==
* Federal Standard 1037C
* MW DX
* Skywave
* Radio propagation
* Thermal fade
* Clear-channel station
* In Channel Select (ICS)
* DYNAS

==References==
* 
* 

== External links ==
* european DXTV reception in the 60&#x27;s
* TV/FM Antenna Locator
* Worldwide TV/FM DX Association
* Worldwide TV/FM DX Association Forums
* Girard Westerberg&#x27;s page, including a live DX webcam
* Mike&#x27;s TV and FM DX
* Todd Emslie&#x27;s TV FM DX Site
* Jeff Kadet&#x27;s TV DX Page
* Siciliamedia Home of FM &amp; TV DX in Sicily
* FMLIST is a non-commercial worldwide database of FM stations, including a bandscan and logbook tool (FMINFO/myFM)
* Mixture.fr AM/FM/DAB database for France
* MeteorComm Meteor Burst Technology used for Data Communication
* FMSCAN reception prediction of FM, TV, MW, SW stations (also use the expert options for better results)
* Herman Wijnants&#x27; FMDX pages
* TV/FM Skip Log
* qth.net Mailing Lists for Radio, Television, Amateur and other related information for Enthusiasts.
* VHF DXing – From Fort Walton Beach, Florida
* Radio-info.com DX and Reception
* FM DX RDS LogBook Software
* VHF-DX network in South America and The Caribbean
* The International Project for Radio Meteor Observation researching meteor showers with Radio Meteor Observation
* FM-DX Webserver List Online list of currently active servers, which users can DX from.
* FMDX.pl Polish blog about DXing (with English articles), also containing tutorials on building FM yagis.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6578799" start="0" end="5" title="TV and FM DX" label="TV DX"/>
<link wikidata="Q6578799" start="10" end="15" title="TV and FM DX" label="FM DX"/>
<link wikidata="Q273623" start="49" end="54" title="radio station" label="radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1616075" start="58" end="76" title="television station" label="television station"/>
<link wikidata="Q844865" start="135" end="137" title="DXing" label="DX"/>
<link wikidata="Q721587" start="148" end="159" title="telegraphy" label="telegraphic"/>
<link wikidata="Q152466" start="201" end="204" title="very high frequency" label="VHF"/>
<link wikidata="Q628096" start="205" end="208" title="ultra high frequency" label="UHF"/>
<link wikidata="Q4769937" start="468" end="501" title="anomalous propagation" label="favourable atmospheric conditions"/>
<link wikidata="Q131214" start="699" end="706" title="antenna (radio)" label="antenna"/>
<link wikidata="Q629413" start="1283" end="1297" title="television antenna" label="antenna system"/>
<link wikidata="Q47728" start="1344" end="1349" title="hobby" label="hobby"/>
<link wikidata="Q185727" start="1706" end="1719" title="amateur radio" label="amateur radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q6720247" start="1721" end="1735" title="MW DX" label="Medium Wave DX"/>
<link wikidata="Q368646" start="1740" end="1756" title="short-wave radio" label="short-wave radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q254650" start="1957" end="1973" title="Alexandra Palace" label="Alexandra Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="1975" end="1981" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q2291066" start="1982" end="1990" title="405-line" label="405-line"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="1991" end="1994" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q191472" start="2006" end="2016" title="BBC One" label="TV service"/>
<link wikidata="Q218038" start="2197" end="2200" title="RCA" label="RCA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1770518" start="2219" end="2241" title="Riverhead, Long Island" label="Riverhead, Long Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q97" start="2289" end="2302" title="Atlantic Ocean" label="transatlantic"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2303" end="2305" title="Ionosphere#F layer" label="F2"/>
<link wikidata="Q39369" start="2335" end="2338" title="Megahertz" label="MHz"/>
<link wikidata="Q6161754" start="2457" end="2470" title="Jasmine Bligh" label="Jasmine Bligh"/>
<link wikidata="Q5362629" start="2528" end="2544" title="Elizabeth Cowell" label="Elizabeth Cowell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1886349" start="2684" end="2688" title="logo" label="logo"/>
<link wikidata="Q374638" start="2744" end="2754" title="Television programming" label="programmes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2630352" start="2776" end="2784" title="kinescope" label="recorded"/>
<link wikidata="Q11424" start="2794" end="2799" title="film" label="movie"/>
<link wikidata="Q6293" start="2800" end="2804" title="photographic film" label="film"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="2964" end="2976" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="3121" end="3126" title="Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q258" start="3128" end="3140" title="South Africa" label="South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="3142" end="3147" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q7204" start="3153" end="3164" title="Middle East" label="Middle East"/>
<link wikidata="Q49" start="3166" end="3179" title="North America" label="North America"/>
<link wikidata="Q664609" start="3188" end="3197" title="Caribbean" label="Caribbean"/>
<link wikidata="Q128831" start="3217" end="3250" title="Federal Communications Commission" label="Federal Communications Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q1297" start="3881" end="3898" title="Chicago, Illinois" label="Chicago, Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q81033" start="3912" end="3921" title="Monterrey" label="Monterrey"/>
<link wikidata="Q96" start="3923" end="3929" title="Mexico" label="Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q81033" start="4020" end="4037" title="Monterrey, Mexico" label="Monterrey, Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q41298" start="4742" end="4752" title="magazine" label="periodical"/>
<link wikidata="Q1263882" start="4796" end="4815" title="Popular Electronics" label="Popular Electronics"/>
<link wikidata="Q3816640" start="4894" end="4911" title="Radio-Electronics" label="Radio-Electronics"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="5172" end="5181" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3141" start="5214" end="5233" title="Melbourne, Australia" label="Melbourne, Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="5401" end="5405" title="United Kingdom" label="U.K."/>
<link wikidata="Q7237333" start="5421" end="5441" title="Practical Television" label="Practical Television"/>
<link wikidata="Q40631" start="6274" end="6285" title="troposphere" label="troposphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q190096" start="6444" end="6465" title="temperature inversion" label="temperature inversion"/>
<link wikidata="Q6582994" start="6989" end="6996" title="sunspot" label="sunspot"/>
<link wikidata="Q190382" start="7297" end="7307" title="ionization" label="ionization"/>
<link wikidata="Q1757813" start="7343" end="7351" title="E region" label="E region"/>
<link wikidata="Q162219" start="7359" end="7369" title="ionosphere" label="ionosphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q4262" start="7534" end="7544" title="radio wave" label="radio wave"/>
<link wikidata="Q193760" start="7835" end="7847" title="Polarization (waves)" label="polarisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q185553" start="8207" end="8221" title="Phase (waves)" label="phase reversal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1473826" start="8332" end="8342" title="Sporadic E" label="Sporadic E"/>
<link wikidata="Q152466" start="8369" end="8372" title="very high frequency" label="VHF"/>
<link wikidata="Q49385" start="9257" end="9270" title="Sunspot cycle" label="Sunspot cycle"/>
<link wikidata="Q45256" start="9506" end="9517" title="Australasia" label="Australasia"/>
<link wikidata="Q23538" start="9704" end="9711" title="equator" label="equator"/>
<link wikidata="Q6500960" start="10035" end="10046" title="geomagnetic" label="geomagnetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q6456166" start="10047" end="10054" title="L-shell" label="equator"/>
<link wikidata="Q41" start="10357" end="10363" title="Greece" label="Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="10364" end="10369" title="Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q217169" start="10413" end="10421" title="Rhodesia" label="Rhodesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q954" start="10422" end="10430" title="Zimbabwe" label="Zimbabwe"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="11359" end="11364" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q18097" start="11369" end="11374" title="Korea" label="Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q11568" start="11448" end="11474" title="Darwin, Northern Territory" label="Darwin, Northern Territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q405" start="11652" end="11656" title="Moon" label="Moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1343584" start="11658" end="11668" title="EME (communications)" label="Moonbounce"/>
<link wikidata="Q405" start="11773" end="11781" title="the Moon" label="the Moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5329" start="11876" end="11878" title="decibel" label="dB"/>
<link wikidata="Q738628" start="12127" end="12148" title="signal-to-noise ratio" label="signal-to-noise ratio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1087850" start="12726" end="12735" title="Parabolic reflector" label="parabolic"/>
<link wikidata="Q65" start="12808" end="12819" title="Los Angeles" label="Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q25395" start="12846" end="12864" title="Newark, New Jersey" label="Newark, New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q11063" start="13114" end="13124" title="astronomer" label="astronomer"/>
<link wikidata="Q8033243" start="13129" end="13153" title="Woodruff T. Sullivan III" label="Woodruff T. Sullivan III"/>
<link wikidata="Q102327045" start="13173" end="13196" title="Arecibo Observatory" label="Arecibo radio telescope"/>
<link wikidata="Q175122" start="13323" end="13334" title="Terrestrial television" label="terrestrial"/>
<link wikidata="Q169470" start="13509" end="13518" title="physicist" label="physicist"/>
<link wikidata="Q745829" start="13574" end="13586" title="yagi antenna" label="yagi antenna"/>
<link wikidata="Q623950" start="13693" end="13696" title="Fast Fourier transform" label="FFT"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055222" start="13697" end="13714" title="Spectrum analyzer" label="spectrum analyser"/>
<link wikidata="Q40609" start="13837" end="13843" title="aurora (astronomy)" label="aurora"/>
<link wikidata="Q119830" start="13950" end="13961" title="solar flare" label="solar flare"/>
<link wikidata="Q6500960" start="14210" end="14227" title="geomagnetic field" label="geomagnetic field"/>
<link wikidata="Q79833" start="14411" end="14421" title="solar wind" label="solar wind"/>
<link wikidata="Q188533" start="14514" end="14529" title="Van Allen radiation belt" label="radiation belts"/>
<link wikidata="Q40609" start="14870" end="14885" title="Aurora (astronomy)" label="Northern Lights"/>
<link wikidata="Q130011" start="15021" end="15038" title="geomagnetic storm" label="geomagnetic storm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1315" start="15686" end="15693" title="equinox" label="equinox"/>
<link wikidata="Q131136" start="16335" end="16341" title="Meteor" label="Meteor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2225" start="16491" end="16499" title="electron" label="electron"/>
<link wikidata="Q11465" start="18579" end="18587" title="velocity" label="velocity"/>
<link wikidata="Q838275" start="18914" end="18925" title="Quadrantids" label="Quadrantids"/>
<link wikidata="Q200531" start="18943" end="18949" title="Lyrids" label="Lyrids"/>
<link wikidata="Q249546" start="18963" end="18976" title="Eta Aquariids" label="Eta Aquariids"/>
<link wikidata="Q387592" start="18992" end="19000" title="Arietids" label="Arietids"/>
<link wikidata="Q8069718" start="19007" end="19020" title="Zeta Perseids" label="zeta-Perseids"/>
<link wikidata="Q173708" start="19039" end="19047" title="Perseids" label="Perseids"/>
<link wikidata="Q374114" start="19067" end="19075" title="Orionids" label="Orionids"/>
<link wikidata="Q32334" start="19094" end="19101" title="Taurids" label="Taurids"/>
<link wikidata="Q189698" start="19122" end="19129" title="Leonids" label="Leonids"/>
<link wikidata="Q1237067" start="19215" end="19223" title="Geminids" label="Geminids"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133679" start="19244" end="19250" title="Ursids" label="Ursids"/>
<link wikidata="Q26540" start="19618" end="19627" title="satellite" label="satellite"/>
<link wikidata="Q7697098" start="19632" end="19636" title="TVRO" label="TVRO"/>
<link wikidata="Q472251" start="19886" end="19900" title="geosynchronous" label="geosynchronous"/>
<link wikidata="Q42448" start="20169" end="20187" title="Sheffield, England" label="Sheffield, England"/>
<link wikidata="Q2819560" start="20261" end="20266" title="ATS-6" label="ATS-6"/>
<link wikidata="Q26540" start="20267" end="20276" title="satellite" label="satellite"/>
<link wikidata="Q940979" start="20291" end="20308" title="synchronous orbit" label="synchronous orbit"/>
<link wikidata="Q27433" start="20314" end="20328" title="Central Africa" label="Central Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q8434" start="20359" end="20368" title="education" label="education"/>
<link wikidata="Q15416" start="20371" end="20389" title="television program" label="television program"/>
<link wikidata="Q60140" start="20398" end="20417" title="Indian subcontinent" label="Indian subcontinent"/>
<link wikidata="Q258" start="20443" end="20455" title="South Africa" label="South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="20503" end="20509" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet"/>
<link wikidata="Q877664" start="20514" end="20519" title="Ekran" label="Ekran"/>
<link wikidata="Q213" start="20598" end="20612" title="Czech Republic" label="Czech Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q874" start="20686" end="20698" title="Turkmenistan" label="Turkmenistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q159" start="20759" end="20766" title="Russia" label="Russian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1475563" start="20767" end="20775" title="Meridian (satellite)" label="Meridian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1257510" start="20807" end="20820" title="Digital radio" label="Digital radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q202255" start="20825" end="20843" title="digital television" label="digital television"/>
<link wikidata="Q5132810" start="20950" end="20962" title="cliff effect" label="cliff effect"/>
<link wikidata="Q637801" start="20986" end="20990" title="ATSC" label="ATSC"/>
<link wikidata="Q382607" start="21194" end="21199" title="DVB-T" label="DVB-T"/>
<link wikidata="Q5753120" start="21201" end="21224" title="hierarchical modulation" label="hierarchical modulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q258137" start="21535" end="21544" title="analog TV" label="analog TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q4922416" start="21563" end="21598" title="DTV transition in the United States" label="DTV transition in the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q1331892" start="22504" end="22526" title="Software-defined radio" label="Software-defined radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1331892" start="22575" end="22597" title="Software-defined radio" label="Software-defined radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1331892" start="22652" end="22674" title="Software-defined radio" label="Software-defined radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q5440438" start="22698" end="22720" title="Federal Standard 1037C" label="Federal Standard 1037C"/>
<link wikidata="Q6720247" start="22723" end="22728" title="MW DX" label="MW DX"/>
<link wikidata="Q1639901" start="22731" end="22738" title="Skywave" label="Skywave"/>
<link wikidata="Q1474701" start="22741" end="22758" title="Radio propagation" label="Radio propagation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7783049" start="22761" end="22773" title="Thermal fade" label="Thermal fade"/>
<link wikidata="Q5130615" start="22776" end="22797" title="Clear-channel station" label="Clear-channel station"/>
<link wikidata="Q31836203" start="22800" end="22817" title="In Channel Select" label="In Channel Select"/>
<link wikidata="Q31836203" start="22826" end="22831" title="DYNAS" label="DYNAS"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="253492" wikidata="Q726474" url="?curid=253492" title="Factor analysis">
<text>Factor analysis is a statistical method used to describe variability among observed, correlated variables in terms of a potentially lower number of unobserved variables called factors. For example, it is possible that variations in six observed variables mainly reflect the variations in two unobserved (underlying) variables. Factor analysis searches for such joint variations in response to unobserved latent variables. The observed variables are modelled as linear combinations of the potential factors plus &quot;error&quot; terms, hence factor analysis can be thought of as a special case of errors-in-variables models.

Simply put, the factor loading of a variable quantifies the extent to which the variable is related to a given factor.

A common rationale behind factor analytic methods is that the information gained about the interdependencies between observed variables can be used later to reduce the set of variables in a dataset. Factor analysis is commonly used in psychometrics, personality psychology, biology, marketing, product management, operations research, finance, and machine learning. It may help to deal with data sets where there are large numbers of observed variables that are thought to reflect a smaller number of underlying/latent variables. It is one of the most commonly used inter-dependency techniques and is used when the relevant set of variables shows a systematic inter-dependence and the objective is to find out the latent factors that create a commonality.

==Statistical model==

===Definition===
The model attempts to explain a set of formula_1 observations in each of formula_2 individuals with a set of formula_3 &quot;common factors&quot; (formula_4) where there are fewer factors per unit than observations per unit (&lt;math&gt;k). Each individual has formula_3 of their own common factors, and these are related to the observations via the factor &quot;loading matrix&quot; (formula_6), for a single observation, according to

: formula_7

where
* formula_8 is the value of the formula_9th observation of the formula_10th individual,
* formula_11 is the observation mean for the formula_9th observation,
* formula_13 is the loading for the formula_9th observation of the formula_15th factor,
* formula_16 is the value of the formula_15th factor of the formula_10th individual, and
* formula_19 is the formula_20th &quot;unobserved stochastic error term&quot; with mean zero and finite variance.

In matrix notation

: formula_21

where observation matrix formula_22, loading matrix formula_23, factor matrix formula_24, error term matrix formula_25 and mean matrix formula_26 whereby the formula_20th element is simply formula_28.

Also we will impose the following assumptions on formula_29:

# formula_29 and formula_31 are independent.
# formula_32; where formula_33 is Expectation
# formula_34 where formula_35 is the covariance matrix, to make sure that the factors are uncorrelated, and formula_36 is the identity matrix.

Suppose formula_37. Then

: formula_38

and therefore, from conditions 1 and 2 imposed on formula_29 above, formula_40 and formula_41, giving

: formula_42

or, setting formula_43,

: formula_44

For any orthogonal matrix formula_45, if we set formula_46 and formula_47, the criteria for being factors and factor loadings still hold. Hence a set of factors and factor loadings is unique only up to an orthogonal transformation.

===Example===
Suppose a psychologist has the hypothesis that there are two kinds of intelligence, &quot;verbal intelligence&quot; and &quot;mathematical intelligence&quot;, neither of which is directly observed. Evidence for the hypothesis is sought in the examination scores from each of 10 different academic fields of 1000 students. If each student is chosen randomly from a large population, then each student&#x27;s 10 scores are random variables. The psychologist&#x27;s hypothesis may say that for each of the 10 academic fields, the score averaged over the group of all students who share some common pair of values for verbal and mathematical &quot;intelligences&quot; is some constant times their level of verbal intelligence plus another constant times their level of mathematical intelligence, i.e., it is a linear combination of those two &quot;factors&quot;. The numbers for a particular subject, by which the two kinds of intelligence are multiplied to obtain the expected score, are posited by the hypothesis to be the same for all intelligence level pairs, and are called &quot;factor loading&quot; for this subject. For example, the hypothesis may hold that the predicted average student&#x27;s aptitude in the field of astronomy is

:{10 × the student&#x27;s verbal intelligence} + {6 × the student&#x27;s mathematical intelligence}.

The numbers 10 and 6 are the factor loadings associated with astronomy. Other academic subjects may have different factor loadings.

Two students assumed to have identical degrees of verbal and mathematical intelligence may have different measured aptitudes in astronomy because individual aptitudes differ from average aptitudes (predicted above) and because of measurement error itself. Such differences make up what is collectively called the &quot;error&quot; — a statistical term that means the amount by which an individual, as measured, differs from what is average for or predicted by his or her levels of intelligence (see errors and residuals in statistics).

The observable data that go into factor analysis would be 10 scores of each of the 1000 students, a total of 10,000 numbers. The factor loadings and levels of the two kinds of intelligence of each student must be inferred from the data.

===Mathematical model of the same example===
In the following, matrices will be indicated by indexed variables. &quot;Subject&quot; indices will be indicated using letters formula_48,formula_49 and formula_50, with values running from formula_51 to formula_1 which is equal to formula_53 in the above example. &quot;Factor&quot; indices will be indicated using letters formula_1, formula_55 and formula_56, with values running from formula_51 to formula_3 which is equal to formula_59 in the above example. &quot;Instance&quot; or &quot;sample&quot; indices will be indicated using letters formula_9,formula_15 and formula_3, with values running from formula_51 to formula_64. In the example above, if a sample of formula_65 students participated in the formula_66 exams, the formula_9th student&#x27;s score for the formula_48th exam is given by formula_69. The purpose of factor analysis is to characterize the correlations between the variables formula_70 of which the formula_69 are a particular instance, or set of observations. In order for the variables to be on equal footing, they are normalized into standard scores formula_72:
:formula_73
where the sample mean is:
:formula_74
and the sample variance is given by:
:formula_75
The factor analysis model for this particular sample is then:
:formula_76

or, more succinctly:
:formula_77

where
* formula_78 is the formula_9th student&#x27;s &quot;verbal intelligence&quot;,
* formula_80 is the formula_9th student&#x27;s &quot;mathematical intelligence&quot;,
* formula_82 are the factor loadings for the formula_48th subject, for formula_84.

In matrix notation, we have
:formula_85
Observe that by doubling the scale on which &quot;verbal intelligence&quot;—the first component in each column of formula_29—is measured, and simultaneously halving the factor loadings for verbal intelligence makes no difference to the model. Thus, no generality is lost by assuming that the standard deviation of the factors for verbal intelligence is formula_51. Likewise for mathematical intelligence. Moreover, for similar reasons, no generality is lost by assuming the two factors are uncorrelated with each other. In other words:
:formula_88
where formula_89 is the Kronecker delta (formula_90 when formula_91 and formula_51 when formula_93).The errors are assumed to be independent of the factors:
:formula_94
Since any rotation of a solution is also a solution, this makes interpreting the factors difficult. See disadvantages below. In this particular example, if we do not know beforehand that the two types of intelligence are uncorrelated, then we cannot interpret the two factors as the two different types of intelligence. Even if they are uncorrelated, we cannot tell which factor corresponds to verbal intelligence and which corresponds to mathematical intelligence without an outside argument.

The values of the loadings formula_95, the averages formula_96, and the variances of the &quot;errors&quot; formula_31 must be estimated given the observed data formula_98 and formula_29 (the assumption about the levels of the factors is fixed for a given formula_29). 
The &quot;fundamental theorem&quot; may be derived from the above conditions:
:formula_101
The term on the left is the formula_102-term of the correlation matrix (a formula_103 matrix derived as the product of the formula_104 matrix of standardized observations with its transpose) of the observed data, and its formula_1 diagonal elements will be formula_51s. The second term on the right will be a diagonal matrix with terms less than unity. The first term on the right is the &quot;reduced correlation matrix&quot; and will be equal to the correlation matrix except for its diagonal values which will be less than unity. These diagonal elements of the reduced correlation matrix are called &quot;communalities&quot; (which represent the fraction of the variance in the observed variable that is accounted for by the factors):
:formula_107
The sample data formula_108 will not exactly obey the fundamental equation given above due to sampling errors, inadequacy of the model, etc. The goal of any analysis of the above model is to find the factors formula_109 and loadings formula_82 which give a &quot;best fit&quot; to the data. In factor analysis, the best fit is defined as the minimum of the mean square error in the off-diagonal residuals of the correlation matrix:
:formula_111

This is equivalent to minimizing the off-diagonal components of the error covariance which, in the model equations have expected values of zero. This is to be contrasted with principal component analysis which seeks to minimize the mean square error of all residuals. Before the advent of high-speed computers, considerable effort was devoted to finding approximate solutions to the problem, particularly in estimating the communalities by other means, which then simplifies the problem considerably by yielding a known reduced correlation matrix. This was then used to estimate the factors and the loadings. With the advent of high-speed computers, the minimization problem can be solved iteratively with adequate speed, and the communalities are calculated in the process, rather than being needed beforehand. The MinRes algorithm is particularly suited to this problem, but is hardly the only iterative means of finding a solution.

If the solution factors are allowed to be correlated (as in &#x27;oblimin&#x27; rotation, for example), then the corresponding mathematical model uses skew coordinates rather than orthogonal coordinates.

===Geometric interpretation===
The parameters and variables of factor analysis can be given a geometrical interpretation. The data (formula_108), the factors (formula_109) and the errors (formula_114) can be viewed as vectors in an formula_64-dimensional Euclidean space (sample space), represented as formula_116, formula_117 and formula_118 respectively. Since the data are standardized, the data vectors are of unit length (formula_119). The factor vectors define an formula_3-dimensional linear subspace (i.e. a hyperplane) in this space, upon which the data vectors are projected orthogonally. This follows from the model equation 
:formula_121
and the independence of the factors and the errors: formula_122. In the above example, the hyperplane is just a 2-dimensional plane defined by the two factor vectors. The projection of the data vectors onto the hyperplane is given by 
:formula_123
and the errors are vectors from that projected point to the data point and are perpendicular to the hyperplane. The goal of factor analysis is to find a hyperplane which is a &quot;best fit&quot; to the data in some sense, so it doesn&#x27;t matter how the factor vectors which define this hyperplane are chosen, as long as they are independent and lie in the hyperplane. We are free to specify them as both orthogonal and normal (formula_124) with no loss of generality. After a suitable set of factors are found, they may also be arbitrarily rotated within the hyperplane, so that any rotation of the factor vectors will define the same hyperplane, and also be a solution. As a result, in the above example, in which the fitting hyperplane is two dimensional, if we do not know beforehand that the two types of intelligence are uncorrelated, then we cannot interpret the two factors as the two different types of intelligence. Even if they are uncorrelated, we cannot tell which factor corresponds to verbal intelligence and which corresponds to mathematical intelligence, or whether the factors are linear combinations of both, without an outside argument.

The data vectors formula_116 have unit length. The entries of the correlation matrix for the data are given by formula_126. The correlation matrix can be geometrically interpreted as the cosine of the angle between the two data vectors formula_116 and formula_128. The diagonal elements will clearly be formula_51s and the off diagonal elements will have absolute values less than or equal to unity. The &quot;reduced correlation matrix&quot; is defined as 
:formula_130.

The goal of factor analysis is to choose the fitting hyperplane such that the reduced correlation matrix reproduces the correlation matrix as nearly as possible, except for the diagonal elements of the correlation matrix which are known to have unit value. In other words, the goal is to reproduce as accurately as possible the cross-correlations in the data. Specifically, for the fitting hyperplane, the mean square error in the off-diagonal components 
:formula_131

is to be minimized, and this is accomplished by minimizing it with respect to a set of orthonormal factor vectors. It can be seen that 
:formula_132

The term on the right is just the covariance of the errors. In the model, the error covariance is stated to be a diagonal matrix and so the above minimization problem will in fact yield a &quot;best fit&quot; to the model: It will yield a sample estimate of the error covariance which has its off-diagonal components minimized in the mean square sense. It can be seen that since the formula_133 are orthogonal projections of the data vectors, their length will be less than or equal to the length of the projected data vector, which is unity. The square of these lengths are just the diagonal elements of the reduced correlation matrix. These diagonal elements of the reduced correlation matrix are known as &quot;communalities&quot;:

:formula_134

Large values of the communalities will indicate that the fitting hyperplane is rather accurately reproducing the correlation matrix. The mean values of the factors must also be constrained to be zero, from which it follows that the mean values of the errors will also be zero.

==Practical implementation==
===Types of factor analysis===
====Exploratory factor analysis====

Exploratory factor analysis (EFA) is used to identify complex interrelationships among items and group items that are part of unified concepts. The researcher makes no &quot;a priori&quot; assumptions about relationships among factors.

====Confirmatory factor analysis====

Confirmatory factor analysis (CFA) is a more complex approach that tests the hypothesis that the items are associated with specific factors. CFA uses structural equation modeling to test a measurement model whereby loading on the factors allows for evaluation of relationships between observed variables and unobserved variables. Structural equation modeling approaches can accommodate measurement error and are less restrictive than least-squares estimation. Hypothesized models are tested against actual data, and the analysis would demonstrate loadings of observed variables on the latent variables (factors), as well as the correlation between the latent variables.

===Types of factor extraction===
Principal component analysis (PCA) is a widely used method for factor extraction, which is the first phase of EFA. Factor weights are computed to extract the maximum possible variance, with successive factoring continuing until there is no further meaningful variance left. The factor model must then be rotated for analysis.

Canonical factor analysis, also called Rao&#x27;s canonical factoring, is a different method of computing the same model as PCA, which uses the principal axis method. Canonical factor analysis seeks factors that have the highest canonical correlation with the observed variables. Canonical factor analysis is unaffected by arbitrary rescaling of the data.

Common factor analysis, also called principal factor analysis (PFA) or principal axis factoring (PAF), seeks the fewest factors which can account for the common variance (correlation) of a set of variables.

Image factoring is based on the correlation matrix of predicted variables rather than actual variables, where each variable is predicted from the others using multiple regression.

Alpha factoring is based on maximizing the reliability of factors, assuming variables are randomly sampled from a universe of variables. All other methods assume cases to be sampled and variables fixed.

Factor regression model is a combinatorial model of factor model and regression model; or alternatively, it can be viewed as the hybrid factor model, whose factors are partially known.

===Terminology===






===Criteria for determining the number of factors===
Researchers wish to avoid such subjective or arbitrary criteria for factor retention as &quot;it made sense to me&quot;. A number of objective methods have been developed to solve this problem, allowing users to determine an appropriate range of solutions to investigate. However these different methods often disagree with one another as to the number of factors that ought to be retained. For instance, the parallel analysis may suggest 5 factors while Velicer&#x27;s MAP suggests 6, so the researcher may request both 5 and 6-factor solutions and discuss each in terms of their relation to external data and theory.

====Modern criteria====
Horn&#x27;s parallel analysis (PA): A Monte-Carlo based simulation method that compares the observed eigenvalues with those obtained from uncorrelated normal variables. A factor or component is retained if the associated eigenvalue is bigger than the 95th percentile of the distribution of eigenvalues derived from the random data. PA is among the more commonly recommended rules for determining the number of components to retain, but many programs fail to include this option (a notable exception being R). However, Formann provided both theoretical and empirical evidence that its application might not be appropriate in many cases since its performance is considerably influenced by sample size, item discrimination, and type of correlation coefficient.

Velicer&#x27;s (1976) MAP test as described by Courtney (2013) “involves a complete principal components analysis followed by the examination of a series of matrices of partial correlations” (p. 397 (though this quote does not occur in Velicer (1976) and the cited page number is outside the pages of the citation). The squared correlation for Step “0” (see Figure 4) is the average squared off-diagonal correlation for the unpartialed correlation matrix. On Step 1, the first principal component and its associated items are partialed out. Thereafter, the average squared off-diagonal correlation for the subsequent correlation matrix is then computed for Step 1. On Step 2, the first two principal components are partialed out and the resultant average squared off-diagonal correlation is again computed. The computations are carried out for k minus one step (k representing the total number of variables in the matrix). Thereafter, all of the average squared correlations for each step are lined up and the step number in the analyses that resulted in the lowest average squared partial correlation determines the number of components or factors to retain. By this method, components are maintained as long as the variance in the correlation matrix represents systematic variance, as opposed to residual or error variance. Although methodologically akin to principal components analysis, the MAP technique has been shown to perform quite well in determining the number of factors to retain in multiple simulation studies. This procedure is made available through SPSS&#x27;s user interface, as well as the &quot;psych&quot; package for the R programming language.

==== Older methods ====
Kaiser criterion: The Kaiser rule is to drop all components with eigenvalues under 1.0 – this being the eigenvalue equal to the information accounted for by an average single item. The Kaiser criterion is the default in SPSS and most statistical software but is not recommended when used as the sole cut-off criterion for estimating the number of factors as it tends to over-extract factors. A variation of this method has been created where a researcher calculates confidence intervals for each eigenvalue and retains only factors which have the entire confidence interval greater than 1.0.

Scree plot:
The Cattell scree test plots the components as the X-axis and the corresponding eigenvalues as the Y-axis. As one moves to the right, toward later components, the eigenvalues drop. When the drop ceases and the curve makes an elbow toward less steep decline, Cattell&#x27;s scree test says to drop all further components after the one starting at the elbow. This rule is sometimes criticised for being amenable to researcher-controlled &quot;&quot;. That is, as picking the &quot;elbow&quot; can be subjective because the curve has multiple elbows or is a smooth curve, the researcher may be tempted to set the cut-off at the number of factors desired by their research agenda.

Variance explained criteria: Some researchers simply use the rule of keeping enough factors to account for 90% (sometimes 80%) of the variation. Where the researcher&#x27;s goal emphasizes parsimony (explaining variance with as few factors as possible), the criterion could be as low as 50%.

==== Bayesian methods ====

By placing a prior distribution over the number of latent factors and then applying Bayes&#x27; theorem, Bayesian models can return a probability distribution over the number of latent factors. This has been modeled using the Indian buffet process, but can be modeled more simply by placing any discrete prior (e.g. a negative binomial distribution) on the number of components.

===Rotation methods===
The output of PCA maximizes the variance accounted for by the first factor first, then the second factor, etc. A disadvantage of this procedure is that most items load on the early factors, while very few items load on later variables. This makes interpreting the factors by reading through a list of questions and loadings difficult, as every question is strongly correlated with the first few components, while very few questions are strongly correlated with the last few components.

Rotation serves to make the output easier to interpret. By choosing a different basis for the same principal componentsthat is, choosing different factors to express the same correlation structureit is possible to create variables that are more easily interpretable.

Rotations can be orthogonal or oblique; oblique rotations allow the factors to correlate. This increased flexibility means that more rotations are possible, some of which may be better at achieving a specified goal. However, this can also make the factors more difficult to interpret, as some information is &quot;double-counted&quot; and included multiple times in different components; some factors may even appear to be near-duplicates of each other. 

==== Orthogonal methods ====
Two broad classes of orthogonal rotations exist: those that look for sparse rows (where each row is a case, i.e. subject), and those that look for sparse columns (where each column is a variable).

* Simple factors: these rotations try to explain all factors by using only a few important variables. This effect can be achieved by using &quot;Varimax&quot; (the most common rotation).
* Simple variables: these rotations try to explain all variables using only a few important factors. This effect can be achieved using either &quot;Quartimax&quot; or the unrotated components of PCA.
* Both: these rotations try to compromise between both of the above goals, but in the process, may achieve a fit that is poor at both tasks; as such, they are unpopular compared to the above methods. &quot;Equamax&quot; is one such rotation.

====Problems with factor rotation====
It can be difficult to interpret a factor structure when each variable is loading on multiple factors. 
Small changes in the data can sometimes tip a balance in the factor rotation criterion so that a completely different factor rotation is produced. This can make it difficult to compare the results of different experiments. This problem is illustrated by a comparison of different studies of world-wide cultural differences. Each study has used different measures of cultural variables and produced a differently rotated factor analysis result. The authors of each study believed that they had discovered something new, and invented new names for the factors they found. A later comparison of the studies found that the results were rather similar when the unrotated results were compared. The common practice of factor rotation has obscured the similarity between the results of the different studies.

===Higher order factor analysis===

Higher-order factor analysis is a statistical method consisting of repeating steps factor analysis – oblique rotation – factor analysis of rotated factors. Its merit is to enable the researcher to see the hierarchical structure of studied phenomena. To interpret the results, one proceeds either by post-multiplying the primary factor pattern matrix by the higher-order factor pattern matrices (Gorsuch, 1983) and perhaps applying a Varimax rotation to the result (Thompson, 1990) or by using a Schmid-Leiman solution (SLS, Schmid &amp; Leiman, 1957, also known as Schmid-Leiman transformation) which attributes the variation from the primary factors to the second-order factors.

==Exploratory factor analysis (EFA) versus principal components analysis (PCA)==
Factor analysis is related to principal component analysis (PCA), but the two are not identical. There has been significant controversy in the field over differences between the two techniques. PCA can be considered as a more basic version of exploratory factor analysis (EFA) that was developed in the early days prior to the advent of high-speed computers. Both PCA and factor analysis aim to reduce the dimensionality of a set of data, but the approaches taken to do so are different for the two techniques. Factor analysis is clearly designed with the objective to identify certain unobservable factors from the observed variables, whereas PCA does not directly address this objective; at best, PCA provides an approximation to the required factors. From the point of view of exploratory analysis, the eigenvalues of PCA are inflated component loadings, i.e., contaminated with error variance.

Whilst EFA and PCA are treated as synonymous techniques in some fields of statistics, this has been criticised. Factor analysis &quot;deals with &quot;the assumption of an underlying causal structure&quot;: [it] assumes that the covariation in the observed variables is due to the presence of one or more latent variables (factors) that exert causal influence on these observed variables&quot;. In contrast, PCA neither assumes nor depends on such an underlying causal relationship. Researchers have argued that the distinctions between the two techniques may mean that there are objective benefits for preferring one over the other based on the analytic goal. If the factor model is incorrectly formulated or the assumptions are not met, then factor analysis will give erroneous results. Factor analysis has been used successfully where adequate understanding of the system permits good initial model formulations. PCA employs a mathematical transformation to the original data with no assumptions about the form of the covariance matrix. The objective of PCA is to determine linear combinations of the original variables and select a few that can be used to summarize the data set without losing much information.

=== Arguments contrasting PCA and EFA ===
Fabrigar et al. (1999) address a number of reasons used to suggest that PCA is not equivalent to factor analysis:

# It is sometimes suggested that PCA is computationally quicker and requires fewer resources than factor analysis. Fabrigar et al. suggest that readily available computer resources have rendered this practical concern irrelevant.
# PCA and factor analysis can produce similar results. This point is also addressed by Fabrigar et al.; in certain cases, whereby the communalities are low (e.g. 0.4), the two techniques produce divergent results. In fact, Fabrigar et al. argue that in cases where the data correspond to assumptions of the common factor model, the results of PCA are inaccurate results.
# There are certain cases where factor analysis leads to &#x27;Heywood cases&#x27;. These encompass situations whereby 100% or more of the variance in a measured variable is estimated to be accounted for by the model. Fabrigar et al. suggest that these cases are actually informative to the researcher, indicating an incorrectly specified model or a violation of the common factor model. The lack of Heywood cases in the PCA approach may mean that such issues pass unnoticed.
# Researchers gain extra information from a PCA approach, such as an individual&#x27;s score on a certain component; such information is not yielded from factor analysis. However, as Fabrigar et al. contend, the typical aim of factor analysis – i.e. to determine the factors accounting for the structure of the correlations between measured variables – does not require knowledge of factor scores and thus this advantage is negated. It is also possible to compute factor scores from a factor analysis.

=== Variance versus covariance ===
Factor analysis takes into account the random error that is inherent in measurement, whereas PCA fails to do so. This point is exemplified by Brown (2009), who indicated that, in respect to the correlation matrices involved in the calculations:

For this reason, Brown (2009) recommends using factor analysis when theoretical ideas about relationships between variables exist, whereas PCA should be used if the goal of the researcher is to explore patterns in their data.

===Differences in procedure and results===
The differences between PCA and factor analysis (FA) are further illustrated by Suhr (2009):
* PCA results in principal components that account for a maximal amount of variance for observed variables; FA accounts for &quot;common&quot; variance in the data.
* PCA inserts ones on the diagonals of the correlation matrix; FA adjusts the diagonals of the correlation matrix with the unique factors.
* PCA minimizes the sum of squared perpendicular distance to the component axis; FA estimates factors that influence responses on observed variables.
* The component scores in PCA represent a linear combination of the observed variables weighted by eigenvectors; the observed variables in FA are linear combinations of the underlying and unique factors.
* In PCA, the components yielded are uninterpretable, i.e. they do not represent underlying ‘constructs’; in FA, the underlying constructs can be labelled and readily interpreted, given an accurate model specification.

==In psychometrics==
===History===
Charles Spearman was the first psychologist to discuss common factor analysis and did so in his 1904 paper. It provided few details about his methods and was concerned with single-factor models. He discovered that school children&#x27;s scores on a wide variety of seemingly unrelated subjects were positively correlated, which led him to postulate that a single general mental ability, or &quot;g&quot;, underlies and shapes human cognitive performance.

The initial development of common factor analysis with multiple factors was given by Louis Thurstone in two papers in the early 1930s, summarized in his 1935 book, &quot;The Vector of Mind.&quot; Thurstone introduced several important factor analysis concepts, including communality, uniqueness, and rotation. He advocated for &quot;simple structure&quot;, and developed methods of rotation that could be used as a way to achieve such structure.

In Q methodology, William Stephenson, a student of Spearman, distinguish between &quot;R&quot; factor analysis, oriented toward the study of inter-individual differences, and &quot;Q&quot; factor analysis oriented toward subjective intra-individual differences.

Raymond Cattell was a strong advocate of factor analysis and psychometrics and used Thurstone&#x27;s multi-factor theory to explain intelligence. Cattell also developed the scree test and similarity coefficients.

===Applications in psychology===
Factor analysis is used to identify &quot;factors&quot; that explain a variety of results on different tests. For example, intelligence research found that people who get a high score on a test of verbal ability are also good on other tests that require verbal abilities. Researchers explained this by using factor analysis to isolate one factor, often called verbal intelligence, which represents the degree to which someone is able to solve problems involving verbal skills.

Factor analysis in psychology is most often associated with intelligence research. However, it also has been used to find factors in a broad range of domains such as personality, attitudes, beliefs, etc. It is linked to psychometrics, as it can assess the validity of an instrument by finding if the instrument indeed measures the postulated factors.

===Advantages===
* Reduction of number of variables, by combining two or more variables into a single factor. For example, performance at running, ball throwing, batting, jumping and weight lifting could be combined into a single factor such as general athletic ability. Usually, in an item by people matrix, factors are selected by grouping related items. In the Q factor analysis technique, the matrix is transposed and factors are created by grouping related people. For example, liberals, libertarians, conservatives, and socialists might form into separate groups.
* Identification of groups of inter-related variables, to see how they are related to each other. For example, Carroll used factor analysis to build his Three Stratum Theory. He found that a factor called &quot;broad visual perception&quot; relates to how good an individual is at visual tasks. He also found a &quot;broad auditory perception&quot; factor, relating to auditory task capability. Furthermore, he found a global factor, called &quot;g&quot; or general intelligence, that relates to both &quot;broad visual perception&quot; and &quot;broad auditory perception&quot;. This means someone with a high &quot;g&quot; is likely to have both a high &quot;visual perception&quot; capability and a high &quot;auditory perception&quot; capability, and that &quot;g&quot; therefore explains a good part of why someone is good or bad in both of those domains.

===Disadvantages===
* &quot;...each orientation is equally acceptable mathematically. But different factorial theories proved to differ as much in terms of the orientations of factorial axes for a given solution as in terms of anything else, so that model fitting did not prove to be useful in distinguishing among theories.&quot; (Sternberg, 1977). This means all rotations represent different underlying processes, but all rotations are equally valid outcomes of standard factor analysis optimization. Therefore, it is impossible to pick the proper rotation using factor analysis alone.
* Factor analysis can be only as good as the data allows. In psychology, where researchers often have to rely on less valid and reliable measures such as self-reports, this can be problematic.
* Interpreting factor analysis is based on using a &quot;heuristic&quot;, which is a solution that is &quot;convenient even if not absolutely true&quot;. More than one interpretation can be made of the same data factored the same way, and factor analysis cannot identify causality.

==In cross-cultural research==
Factor analysis is a frequently used technique in cross-cultural research. It serves the purpose of extracting cultural dimensions. The best known cultural dimensions models are those elaborated by Geert Hofstede, Ronald Inglehart, Christian Welzel, Shalom Schwartz and Michael Minkov. A popular visualization is Inglehart and Welzel&#x27;s cultural map of the world.

==In political science==

In an early 1965 study, political systems around the world are examined via factor analysis to construct related theoretical models and research, compare political systems, and create typological categories. For these purposes, in this study seven basic political dimensions are identified, which are related to a wide variety of political behaviour: these dimensions are Access, Differentiation, Consensus, Sectionalism, Legitimation, Interest, and Leadership Theory and Research.

Other political scientists explore the measurement of internal political efficacy using four new questions added to the 1988 National Election Study. Factor analysis is here used to find that these items measure a single concept distinct from external efficacy and political trust, and that these four questions provided the best measure of internal political efficacy up to that point in time.

==In marketing==
The basic steps are:
* Identify the salient attributes consumers use to evaluate products in this category.
* Use quantitative marketing research techniques (such as surveys) to collect data from a sample of potential customers concerning their ratings of all the product attributes.
* Input the data into a statistical program and run the factor analysis procedure. The computer will yield a set of underlying attributes (or factors).
* Use these factors to construct perceptual maps and other product positioning devices.

=== Information collection ===
The data collection stage is usually done by marketing research professionals. Survey questions ask the respondent to rate a product sample or descriptions of product concepts on a range of attributes. Anywhere from five to twenty attributes are chosen. They could include things like: ease of use, weight, accuracy, durability, colourfulness, price, or size. The attributes chosen will vary depending on the product being studied. The same question is asked about all the products in the study. The data for multiple products is coded and input into a statistical program such as R, SPSS, SAS, Stata, STATISTICA, JMP, and SYSTAT.

=== Analysis ===
The analysis will isolate the underlying factors that explain the data using a matrix of associations. Factor analysis is an interdependence technique. The complete set of interdependent relationships is examined. There is no specification of dependent variables, independent variables, or causality. Factor analysis assumes that all the rating data on different attributes can be reduced down to a few important dimensions. This reduction is possible because some attributes may be related to each other. The rating given to any one attribute is partially the result of the influence of other attributes. The statistical algorithm deconstructs the rating (called a raw score) into its various components and reconstructs the partial scores into underlying factor scores. The degree of correlation between the initial raw score and the final factor score is called a &quot;factor loading&quot;.

===Advantages===
* Both objective and subjective attributes can be used provided the subjective attributes can be converted into scores.
* Factor analysis can identify latent dimensions or constructs that direct analysis may not.
* It is easy and inexpensive.

===Disadvantages===
* Usefulness depends on the researchers&#x27; ability to collect a sufficient set of product attributes. If important attributes are excluded or neglected, the value of the procedure is reduced.
* If sets of observed variables are highly similar to each other and distinct from other items, factor analysis will assign a single factor to them. This may obscure factors that represent more interesting relationships. 
* Naming factors may require knowledge of theory because seemingly dissimilar attributes can correlate strongly for unknown reasons.

==In physical and biological sciences==
Factor analysis has also been widely used in physical sciences such as geochemistry, hydrochemistry, astrophysics and cosmology, as well as biological sciences, such as ecology, molecular biology, neuroscience and biochemistry.

In groundwater quality management, it is important to relate the spatial distribution of different chemical
parameters to different possible sources, which have different chemical signatures. For example, a sulfide mine is likely to be associated with high levels of acidity, dissolved sulfates and transition metals. These signatures can be identified as factors through R-mode factor analysis, and the location of possible sources can be suggested by contouring the factor scores.

In geochemistry, different factors can correspond to different mineral associations, and thus to mineralisation.

==In microarray analysis==
Factor analysis can be used for summarizing high-density oligonucleotide DNA microarrays data at probe level for Affymetrix GeneChips. In this case, the latent variable corresponds to the RNA concentration in a sample.

== Implementation ==

Factor analysis has been implemented in several statistical analysis programs since the 1980s:
*BMDP
*JMP (statistical software)
*Mplus (statistical software)]
*Python: module scikit-learn
*R (with the base function &quot;factanal&quot; or &quot;fa&quot; function in package psych). Rotations are implemented in the &quot;GPArotation&quot; R package.
*SAS (using PROC FACTOR or PROC CALIS)
* SPSS
*Stata

===Stand-alone===
*Factor - free factor analysis software developed by the Rovira i Virgili University

==See also==
* Confirmatory factor analysis
* Exploratory factor analysis
* Design of experiments
* Formal concept analysis
* Independent component analysis
* Non-negative matrix factorization
* Q methodology
* Recommendation system
* Root cause analysis
* Facet theory
==Notes==
==References==
==Further reading==
* 
* B.T. Gray (1997) Higher-Order Factor Analysis (Conference paper)
*Jennrich, Robert I., &quot;Rotation to Simple Loadings Using Component Loss Function: The Oblique Case,&quot; &quot;Psychometrika&quot;, Vol. 71, No. 1, pp. 173–191, March 2006.
*Katz, Jeffrey Owen, and Rohlf, F. James. Primary product functionplane: An oblique rotation to simple structure. &quot;Multivariate Behavioral Research&quot;, April 1975, Vol. 10, pp. 219–232.
*Katz, Jeffrey Owen, and Rohlf, F. James. Functionplane: A new approach to simple structure rotation. &quot;Psychometrika&quot;, March 1974, Vol. 39, No. 1, pp. 37–51.
*Katz, Jeffrey Owen, and Rohlf, F. James. Function-point cluster analysis. &quot;Systematic Zoology&quot;, September 1973, Vol. 22, No. 3, pp. 295–301.
* 
* J.Schmid and J. M. Leiman (1957). The development of hierarchical factor solutions. &quot;Psychometrika&quot;, 22(1), 53–61.

* Hans-Georg Wolff, Katja Preising (2005)Exploring item and higher order factor structure with the schmid-leiman solution : Syntax codes for SPSS and SAS&quot;Behavior research methods, instruments &amp; computers&quot;, 37 (1), 48-58

==External links==

* A Beginner&#x27;s Guide to Factor Analysis
* Exploratory Factor Analysis. A Book Manuscript by Tucker, L. &amp; MacCallum R. (1993). Retrieved June 8, 2006, from: 
* Garson, G. David, &quot;Factor Analysis,&quot; from &quot;Statnotes: Topics in Multivariate Analysis&quot;. Retrieved on April 13, 2009, from StatNotes: Topics in Multivariate Analysis, from G. David Garson at North Carolina State University, Public Administration Program
* Factor Analysis at 100 — conference material
* FARMS — Factor Analysis for Robust Microarray Summarization, an R package</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q726474" start="0" end="15" title="Factor analysis" label="Factor analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q12483" start="21" end="32" title="statistics" label="statistical"/>
<link wikidata="Q175199" start="57" end="68" title="variance" label="variability"/>
<link wikidata="Q50701" start="96" end="105" title="Variable (mathematics)" label="variables"/>
<link wikidata="Q726474" start="176" end="183" title="Factor analysis" label="factors"/>
<link wikidata="Q4422623" start="404" end="419" title="latent variable" label="latent variable"/>
<link wikidata="Q27628" start="461" end="479" title="linear combination" label="linear combination"/>
<link wikidata="Q1502698" start="517" end="522" title="errors and residuals in statistics" label="error"/>
<link wikidata="Q5395728" start="597" end="623" title="errors-in-variables models" label="errors-in-variables models"/>
<link wikidata="Q506132" start="981" end="994" title="psychometrics" label="psychometrics"/>
<link wikidata="Q641118" start="996" end="1007" title="personality" label="personality"/>
<link wikidata="Q39809" start="1029" end="1038" title="marketing" label="marketing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1780667" start="1040" end="1058" title="product management" label="product management"/>
<link wikidata="Q194292" start="1060" end="1079" title="operations research" label="operations research"/>
<link wikidata="Q43015" start="1081" end="1088" title="finance" label="finance"/>
<link wikidata="Q2539" start="1094" end="1110" title="machine learning" label="machine learning"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2826" end="2837" title="Multivariate random variable#Expected value" label="Expectation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134404" start="2875" end="2892" title="covariance matrix" label="covariance matrix"/>
<link wikidata="Q193794" start="2964" end="2979" title="identity matrix" label="identity matrix"/>
<link wikidata="Q333871" start="3186" end="3203" title="orthogonal matrix" label="orthogonal matrix"/>
<link wikidata="Q3997740" start="3383" end="3408" title="orthogonal transformation" label="orthogonal transformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q83500" start="3495" end="3507" title="intelligence (trait)" label="intelligence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1347572" start="3623" end="3631" title="Evidence" label="Evidence"/>
<link wikidata="Q49918" start="3795" end="3805" title="population (statistics)" label="population"/>
<link wikidata="Q188248" start="4097" end="4105" title="Constant (mathematics)" label="constant"/>
<link wikidata="Q333" start="4649" end="4658" title="astronomy" label="astronomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1502698" start="5397" end="5431" title="errors and residuals in statistics" label="errors and residuals in statistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q249772" start="6767" end="6777" title="normalization (statistics)" label="normalized"/>
<link wikidata="Q44337" start="7278" end="7284" title="Matrix (mathematics)" label="matrix"/>
<link wikidata="Q8216221" start="7805" end="7817" title="uncorrelated" label="uncorrelated"/>
<link wikidata="Q192826" start="7887" end="7902" title="Kronecker delta" label="Kronecker delta"/>
<link wikidata="Q175199" start="8599" end="8607" title="variance" label="variance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1432976" start="10901" end="10907" title="Generalized minimal residual method" label="MinRes"/>
<link wikidata="Q7534797" start="11172" end="11188" title="skew coordinates" label="skew coordinates"/>
<link wikidata="Q1476639" start="15928" end="15956" title="structural equation modeling" label="structural equation modeling"/>
<link wikidata="Q74304" start="16212" end="16236" title="least-squares estimation" label="least-squares estimation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2873" start="16482" end="16510" title="Principal component analysis" label="Principal component analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q726474" start="17202" end="17227" title="principal factor analysis" label="principal factor analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q186290" start="17406" end="17424" title="correlation matrix" label="correlation matrix"/>
<link wikidata="Q208042" start="17533" end="17552" title="multiple regression" label="multiple regression"/>
<link wikidata="Q60792852" start="18431" end="18448" title="parallel analysis" label="parallel analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q60792852" start="18666" end="18695" title="Horn&amp;#x27;s parallel analysis" label="Horn&amp;#x27;s parallel analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q206904" start="19171" end="19172" title="R (programming language)" label="R"/>
<link wikidata="Q4775757" start="19184" end="19191" title="Anton Formann" label="Formann"/>
<link wikidata="Q2564360" start="19353" end="19364" title="sample size" label="sample size"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19366" end="19385" title="Item response theory#The item response function" label="item discrimination"/>
<link wikidata="Q3433612" start="19399" end="19422" title="correlation coefficient" label="correlation coefficient"/>
<link wikidata="Q206904" start="21068" end="21090" title="R (programming language)" label="R programming language"/>
<link wikidata="Q181596" start="21337" end="21341" title="SPSS" label="SPSS"/>
<link wikidata="Q494735" start="21351" end="21371" title="statistical software" label="statistical software"/>
<link wikidata="Q208498" start="21583" end="21602" title="confidence interval" label="confidence interval"/>
<link wikidata="Q60526233" start="21710" end="21720" title="Scree plot" label="Scree plot"/>
<link wikidata="Q190524" start="21802" end="21812" title="eigenvalue" label="eigenvalue"/>
<link wikidata="Q62912" start="21821" end="21827" title="Y-axis" label="Y-axis"/>
<link wikidata="Q131012" start="22589" end="22598" title="Occam&amp;#x27;s razor" label="parsimony"/>
<link wikidata="Q278090" start="22734" end="22752" title="Prior probability" label="prior distribution"/>
<link wikidata="Q200726" start="22855" end="22879" title="probability distribution" label="probability distribution"/>
<link wikidata="Q30675511" start="22947" end="22968" title="Indian buffet process" label="Indian buffet process"/>
<link wikidata="Q743364" start="23039" end="23069" title="negative binomial distribution" label="negative binomial distribution"/>
<link wikidata="Q810255" start="23670" end="23696" title="Change of basis" label="choosing a different basis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="26274" end="26290" title="oblique rotation" label="oblique rotation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049914" start="26472" end="26488" title="matrix multiplication" label="post-multiplying"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="26501" end="26522" title="factor pattern matrix" label="factor pattern matrix"/>
<link wikidata="Q2168094" start="26606" end="26622" title="Varimax rotation" label="Varimax rotation"/>
<link wikidata="Q845777" start="26789" end="26798" title="Statistical dispersion" label="variation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2873" start="26965" end="26993" title="principal component analysis" label="principal component analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5421350" start="27178" end="27205" title="exploratory factor analysis" label="exploratory factor analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q190524" start="27741" end="27752" title="eigenvalues" label="eigenvalues"/>
<link wikidata="Q5421350" start="27841" end="27844" title="Exploratory factor analysis" label="EFA"/>
<link wikidata="Q2873" start="27849" end="27852" title="Principal component analysis" label="PCA"/>
<link wikidata="Q175199" start="29948" end="29956" title="variance" label="variance"/>
<link wikidata="Q186290" start="30596" end="30608" title="Correlation and dependence" label="correlations"/>
<link wikidata="Q196372" start="30862" end="30874" title="random error" label="random error"/>
<link wikidata="Q190524" start="31985" end="31997" title="Eigenvalues and eigenvectors" label="eigenvectors"/>
<link wikidata="Q356611" start="32345" end="32361" title="Charles Spearman" label="Charles Spearman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1753797" start="32741" end="32742" title="G factor (psychometrics)" label="g"/>
<link wikidata="Q914054" start="32886" end="32901" title="Louis Leon Thurstone" label="Louis Thurstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q30078124" start="32971" end="32989" title="The Vectors of Mind" label="The Vector of Mind"/>
<link wikidata="Q7265665" start="33251" end="33264" title="Q methodology" label="Q methodology"/>
<link wikidata="Q8018793" start="33266" end="33284" title="William Stephenson (psychologist)" label="William Stephenson"/>
<link wikidata="Q353133" start="33511" end="33526" title="Raymond Cattell" label="Raymond Cattell"/>
<link wikidata="Q506132" start="33572" end="33585" title="psychometrics" label="psychometrics"/>
<link wikidata="Q60526233" start="33684" end="33694" title="Scree plot" label="scree test"/>
<link wikidata="Q506132" start="34456" end="34469" title="psychometrics" label="psychometrics"/>
<link wikidata="Q7798005" start="35311" end="35331" title="Three Stratum Theory" label="Three Stratum Theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q5807210" start="37227" end="37246" title="Hofstede&amp;#x27;s cultural dimensions theory" label="cultural dimensions"/>
<link wikidata="Q313908" start="37314" end="37328" title="Geert Hofstede" label="Geert Hofstede"/>
<link wikidata="Q707169" start="37330" end="37346" title="Ronald Inglehart" label="Ronald Inglehart"/>
<link wikidata="Q15728993" start="37348" end="37364" title="Christian Welzel" label="Christian Welzel"/>
<link wikidata="Q561634" start="37366" end="37381" title="Shalom H. Schwartz" label="Shalom Schwartz"/>
<link wikidata="Q13419532" start="37429" end="37482" title="Inglehart–Welzel cultural map of the world" label="Inglehart and Welzel&amp;#x27;s cultural map of the world"/>
<link wikidata="Q2424752" start="38488" end="38496" title="product (business)" label="products"/>
<link wikidata="Q7268931" start="38521" end="38552" title="quantitative marketing research" label="quantitative marketing research"/>
<link wikidata="Q814232" start="38573" end="38580" title="statistical survey" label="surveys"/>
<link wikidata="Q852835" start="38625" end="38633" title="customer" label="customer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2509598" start="38876" end="38891" title="perceptual mapping" label="perceptual maps"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061357" start="38902" end="38921" title="positioning (marketing)" label="product positioning"/>
<link wikidata="Q206904" start="39544" end="39545" title="R (programming language)" label="R"/>
<link wikidata="Q181596" start="39547" end="39551" title="SPSS" label="SPSS"/>
<link wikidata="Q2003932" start="39553" end="39556" title="SAS System" label="SAS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1204300" start="39558" end="39563" title="Stata" label="Stata"/>
<link wikidata="Q1788435" start="39565" end="39575" title="STATISTICA" label="STATISTICA"/>
<link wikidata="Q161764" start="41451" end="41463" title="geochemistry" label="geochemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q625376" start="41465" end="41479" title="hydrochemistry" label="hydrochemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q37547" start="41481" end="41493" title="astrophysics" label="astrophysics"/>
<link wikidata="Q338" start="41498" end="41507" title="cosmology" label="cosmology"/>
<link wikidata="Q7150" start="41549" end="41556" title="ecology" label="ecology"/>
<link wikidata="Q7202" start="41558" end="41575" title="molecular biology" label="molecular biology"/>
<link wikidata="Q207011" start="41577" end="41589" title="neuroscience" label="neuroscience"/>
<link wikidata="Q7094" start="41594" end="41606" title="biochemistry" label="biochemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q161764" start="42096" end="42108" title="geochemistry" label="geochemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q133686" start="42291" end="42306" title="oligonucleotide" label="oligonucleotide"/>
<link wikidata="Q591745" start="42307" end="42322" title="DNA microarrays" label="DNA microarrays"/>
<link wikidata="Q2826104" start="42347" end="42357" title="Affymetrix" label="Affymetrix"/>
<link wikidata="Q11053" start="42422" end="42425" title="RNA" label="RNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q2468467" start="42572" end="42576" title="BMDP" label="BMDP"/>
<link wikidata="Q1161680" start="42578" end="42604" title="JMP (statistical software)" label="JMP (statistical software)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="42606" end="42611" title="Mplus" label="Mplus"/>
<link wikidata="Q28865" start="42637" end="42643" title="Python (programming language)" label="Python"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026367" start="42652" end="42664" title="scikit-learn" label="scikit-learn"/>
<link wikidata="Q206904" start="42666" end="42667" title="R (programming language)" label="R"/>
<link wikidata="Q2003932" start="42828" end="42831" title="SAS (software)" label="SAS"/>
<link wikidata="Q181596" start="42868" end="42872" title="SPSS" label="SPSS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1204300" start="42874" end="42879" title="Stata" label="Stata"/>
<link wikidata="Q3133193" start="42956" end="42983" title="Rovira i Virgili University" label="Rovira i Virgili University"/>
<link wikidata="Q5160137" start="43000" end="43028" title="Confirmatory factor analysis" label="Confirmatory factor analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5421350" start="43031" end="43058" title="Exploratory factor analysis" label="Exploratory factor analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2334061" start="43061" end="43082" title="Design of experiments" label="Design of experiments"/>
<link wikidata="Q1437394" start="43085" end="43108" title="Formal concept analysis" label="Formal concept analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1259145" start="43111" end="43141" title="Independent component analysis" label="Independent component analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q10843505" start="43144" end="43177" title="Non-negative matrix factorization" label="Non-negative matrix factorization"/>
<link wikidata="Q7265665" start="43180" end="43193" title="Q methodology" label="Q methodology"/>
<link wikidata="Q554950" start="43196" end="43217" title="Recommendation system" label="Recommendation system"/>
<link wikidata="Q1401207" start="43220" end="43239" title="Root cause analysis" label="Root cause analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q105038017" start="43242" end="43254" title="Facet theory" label="Facet theory"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="253510" wikidata="Q5024953" url="?curid=253510" title="Camarilla (disambiguation)">
<text>A [[camarilla]] is a group of courtiers or favourites who surround a king or ruler.

Camarilla may also refer to:

* Camarilla, a fictional sect from the &quot;&quot; books and role-playing games
* &quot;Camarilla&quot;, a 2003 play by Van Badham

==See also==

*Camarillo (disambiguation)
*Camarillas, a municipality in Teruel, Aragon, Spain
**Camarillas Formation, a geological formation in Teruel and La Rioja
*Camarillasaurus, a dinosaur
* &quot;Camarilla obliqua&quot;, or &quot;Allium obliquum&quot;, a Eurasian species of wild onion</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5024953" start="2" end="15" title="Camarilla (disambiguation)" label="[[camarilla]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q5024953" start="85" end="94" title="Camarilla (disambiguation)" label="Camarilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q7913138" start="236" end="246" title="Van Badham" label="Van Badham"/>
<link wikidata="Q16032885" start="263" end="289" title="Camarillo (disambiguation)" label="Camarillo (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1652442" start="291" end="301" title="Camarillas" label="Camarillas"/>
<link wikidata="Q5024955" start="345" end="365" title="Camarillas Formation" label="Camarillas Formation"/>
<link wikidata="Q135841" start="414" end="429" title="Camarillasaurus" label="Camarillasaurus"/>
<link wikidata="Q4268511" start="484" end="499" title="Allium obliquum" label="Allium obliquum"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="253511" wikidata="Q1024861" url="?curid=253511" title="Cabiria">
<text>Cabiria is a 1914 Italian epic silent film, directed by Giovanni Pastrone and shot in Turin. The film is set in ancient Sicily, Carthage, and Cirta during the period of the Second Punic War (218–202 BC). It follows the story of an abducted little girl, Cabiria, and features an eruption of Mount Etna, religious rituals in Carthage, the alpine trek of Hannibal, Archimedes&#x27; defeat of the Roman fleet at the Siege of Syracuse and Scipio maneuvering in North Africa. Apart from being a classic on its own terms, the film is also notable for being the first film in which the long-running film character Maciste makes his debut. According to Martin Scorsese, in this work Pastrone invented the epic movie and deserves credit for many of the innovations often attributed to D.W. Griffith and Cecil B. DeMille. Among those was the extensive use of a moving camera, thus freeing the feature-length narrative film from &quot;static gaze&quot;.

The historical background and characters in the story are taken from Livy&#x27;s &quot;Ab Urbe Condita&quot; (written &quot;ca.&quot; 27–25 BC). In addition, the script of &quot;Cabiria&quot; was partially based on Gustave Flaubert&#x27;s 1862 novel &quot;Salammbô&quot; and Emilio Salgari&#x27;s 1908 novel &quot;Cartagine in fiamme&quot; (&quot;Carthage in Flames&quot;). It was the first film shown at the White House, having been viewed on the South Lawn, by the President, First Lady, Vice President, his wife, members of the Cabinet and their wives, due to the summer heat in June 1914.

==Plot summary==
===First episode===
Batto and his young daughter, Cabiria, live in a lavish estate in the shadow of Mount Etna, at Catania, on the island of Sicily. Cabiria plays with dolls with her nurse, Croessa. When the volcanic Etna erupts violently, Batto prays to the god Pluto for deliverance but receives only a brief respite before his home and gardens are destroyed. While attempting to escape, servants discover a secret stairway leading underground. Taking advantage of the chaos and plundering Batto&#x27;s hidden underground treasure, the servants, along with Croessa and Cabiria, flee to the countryside. Batto and his wife mourn the loss of Cabiria, as they believe her to be buried beneath the rubble.

===Second episode===

The fugitive servants divide up the treasure (Croessa gets a ring) and make for the sea but soon run afoul of Phoenician pirates who take Croessa and Cabiria to Carthage, where the little girl is sold to Karthalo, the High Priest. He intends to sacrifice her to the great god Moloch. Also in Carthage are two Roman spies: Fulvius Axilla, a Roman patrician, and Maciste, his huge, muscular slave. The innkeeper, Bodastoret, welcomes Fulvius and Maciste to his Inn of the Striped Monkey. Croessa tries to prevent the sacrifice of Cabiria by pretending that the child is ill, but Croessa is whipped for her deception. Later, she chances upon Fulvius and Maciste. Recognizing them as fellow countrymen, she implores them to assist her.
The entrance to the huge Temple of Moloch is a gigantic three-eyed head, with the mouth as portal. One hundred young children are to perish as offerings. Inside the temple are frenzied devotees, and the colossal seated statue of the winged god Moloch is a hollow bronze furnace. The great chest opens for each victim, and when a youngster is slid into the inferno, the door closes and the open mouth belches flame. Croessa, Fulvius, and Maciste sneak into the temple, and the slave boldly snatches Cabiria away from the priest. Pursued by a frenzied mob, they make their way up to the roof, down the gargantuan façade, and back to the inn. However, Croessa pays a fatal price for the rescue.

===Third episode===
Meanwhile, Hannibal and his troops make their way across the snow-laden Alps towards Rome. Soldiers, elephants and other animals pick their way through the passes. Learning of the military events, Fulvius resolves to flee back to Rome after further intimidating the innkeeper to ensure silence. Numidian King Massinissa is visiting Carthage, and Hasdrubal, brother of Hannibal, promises him his beautiful daughter, Sophonisba, in marriage. In a great audience hall with two huge elephantine columns, Massinissa dispatches gifts and a message to meet secretly to Sophonisba, who, on receiving them, is giddy with anticipation.

Bodastoret, the innkeeper, sneaks into the Temple of Moloch and for a reward betrays the Romans&#x27; whereabouts and intentions. Fulvius, Maciste, and Cabiria are ambushed by the Priest&#x27;s henchmen as they attempt to flee the city the next morning, but Fulvius escapes by leaping spectacularly from a high precipice and swimming away. Maciste and Cabiria flee with henchmen hard on their heels to the cedar garden of Hasdrubal and encounter Massinissa and Sophonisba just as their secret tryst is commencing. Maciste implores the aristocratic couple, who have both concealed their true identities, to rescue Cabiria. Amid the chaos, Sophonisba, Cabiria, and a servant run away while Massinissa falsely denies to the Priest&#x27;s men that he has seen any little girl. Maciste, however, is captured, tortured and chained to a great millstone, which he must turn, but he can still manage to intimidate everyone around him.

===Fourth episode===
The Roman navy has besieged Syracuse, a Greek ally of Carthage, and Fulvius is now participating in the fighting. The Romans, however, are frustrated by a giant array of mirrors, producing a heat ray, which is deployed by the great inventor Archimedes to set fire to the ships&#x27; sails. The Roman fleet is spectacularly destroyed.

Fulvius, still bearing the ring Croessa had given him, is cast adrift and soon rescued. Although his rescuers rob the unconscious Fulvius, one of them recognizes the ring on his finger, and he is carried to Batto&#x27;s house, which has been rebuilt. The parents are overjoyed to learn that Cabiria is still alive, at least when he last saw her. As he takes his leave, Fulvius vows to seek Cabiria if he should ever return to Carthage.

===Fifth episode===

An intertitle relates that Syphax, King of Cirta, a rival desert kingdom, has deposed Massinissa and caused him to disappear into the desert. Hasdrubal now gives Sophonisba to the victor instead to strengthen his new alliance against Rome. Sophonisba is distinctly unhappy, and when she appears in her finery at the betrothal ceremony, she swoons and breaks the ceremonial vessel.

Already in possession of much of North Africa, the Roman general and consul Scipio strategizes with his new ally, Massinissa. They dispatch the resourceful Fulvius again as a spy in Carthage to observe its defenses. Stealthily deploying an impressive human pyramid of Roman soldiers, Fulvius successfully breaches the city walls.

In the elephantine hall, Hasdrubal dispatches the High Priest Karthalo on a mission to persuade Syphax to attack the Romans directly. Karthalo&#x27;s camel caravan traverses the vast dunescape. Meanwhile, Fulvius finds time to look for Maciste and Cabiria, now prisoners for 10 years. With a combination of intimidation and bribery, he extracts information from Bodastoret. With Fulvius disguised as a freedman, they secretly observe Maciste still in chains and harnessed to his millstone. That night, Fulvius returns to wake the sleeping strongman who is overwhelmed with happiness at again seeing his beloved master. Back at their hideout at the inn, Bodastoret is overcome with shock at seeing Maciste and dies. Fulvius and Maciste escape down the city walls.

In Cirta, before a palace with two huge feline columns, Syphax is given a formal sendoff by Sophonisba and Karthalo, the latter of whom has an eye for the former&#x27;s lovely slave, &quot;Elissa&quot;. While the military maneuvers continue, Fulvius and Maciste have fallen into dire straits, exhausted and thirsty in the desert wilderness. Maciste catches sight of a fire in the distance, as Syphax&#x27;s encampment has been torched by his enemies. The two Romans are soon captured by the mounted Cirtans.

While outside the city, King Syphax has been captured, Maciste and Fulvius are swept up with other prisoners within Cirta&#x27;s city walls. &quot;Elissa&quot;, who is really Cabiria, takes pity on the imprisoned pair and passes water to them without recognizing who they are. Cirta is under siege by Massinissa&#x27;s forces. Soldiers scale ladders outside the walls while boulders, spears, arrows, and boiling oil rain down on them.

Sophonisba dreams of triple-eyed Moloch. Unnerved, she interprets her dream as an omen that Cabiria/Elissa will somehow spell the doom of the city and confesses to Karthalo what happened in the cedar garden so many years ago.

Maciste, who has forced open the iron bars of his prison cell with his enormous strength, determines to exact revenge upon Karthalo. He intrudes through a window just in time to save Elissa, whom he now recognizes as Cabiria, from being raped by the priest. Fulvius soon joins the fray, but in the chaos of flight, they lose control of Cabiria and are forced to barricade themselves in a store room. Fulvius is appalled to learn that the girl is none other than Cabiria.

Just outside the city walls is another appalling sight: King Syphax is in chains taunted by the victorious King Massinissa, who is now dressed in Roman military regalia. The Cirtans have had enough and surrender. In the hall of the gigantic feline columns, Sophonisba grandiloquently surrenders and abases herself before her former fiancé and present husband&#x27;s captor, Massinissa. He, in turn, demurs and, just as elaborately, pledges himself to her. In a ceremonial hall with indigenous deities, the pair further ritualize their solidarity. Sophonisba marries Massinissa, and it is resolved that she will not be subjected to being paraded in a Roman triumph.

Fulvius and Maciste enjoy the ample provisions of the store room until the besieging guards attempt to smoke them out. Massinissa learns of the circumstances of the two &quot;heroes&quot; and, apparently ambivalent about such former Roman comrades, determines to spare them. Fulvius takes the opportunity to implore Sophonisba on Cabiria&#x27;s behalf, but in a fit of pique, she tells the distraught Roman that Cabiria is dead.

Scipio and his lieutenant, Lelius, camp near Cirta. Lelius, whose forces have preceded Scipio&#x27;s, tells his commander of the royals&#x27; treachery. At first, Massinissa arrogantly defies Scipio, dashing the Roman general&#x27;s message tablet to pieces but later wilts in the face of Rome&#x27;s majesty. He implores Scipio, however, to spare Sophonisba the humiliation of being paraded in Rome. Scipio will not relent.

In desperation, Massinissa persuades Fulvius, in reciprocation for having spared him earlier and in anticipation of an unspoken future favor, to lend him his slave Maciste. The slave receives a bracelet, inscribed with a message, and takes it to Queen Sophonisba. Receiving it, the Queen reads the message and understands that she is to poison herself with the powder in the hollow gift. Drinking the dissolved poison, Sophonisba divests herself of her jewelry with great flourishes. Fulvius arrives and, too late, they realize the purpose of Massinissa&#x27;s request. Sophonisba, writhing in agony, reveals that Cabiria still lives and, as repayment for the gift of death, she will be spared a second time from the fate of living sacrifice. Cabiria is retrieved from her prison cell and arrives in time to see the moribund Queen expire.

Fulvius and Cabiria cross the sea on the way to Rome. As Maciste plays the panpipes in the bowsprit, Fulvius pledges his love to Cabiria and festive sea sprites encircle the boat in a giant, diaphanous garland.

==Cast and characters==
:&quot;Historical figures denoted by an asterisk (*).&quot;
* Carolina Catena ... &quot;Cabiria&quot;, as a Child
* Émile Vardannes ... &quot;Batto&quot;, father of Cabiria
* Gina Marangoni ... &quot;Croessa&quot;, nurse of Cabiria
* Lidia Quaranta ... &quot;Cabiria&quot;, as an adult
* Dante Testa ... &quot;Karthalo&quot;, the High Priest of Carthage
* Umberto Mozzato ... &quot;Fulvio&quot; (Fulvius) Axilla, Roman patrician and spy
* Bartolomeo Pagano ... Maciste, slave of Axilla
* Raffaele di Napoli ... &quot;Bodastoret&quot;, an Innkeeper
* Émile Vardannes ... Hannibal*, Carthaginian general
* Edoardo Davesnes ... Hasdrubal*, Carthaginian general; brother of Hannibal
* Italia Almirante-Manzini ... Sofonisba* (Sophonisba), daughter of Hasdrubal
* Alessandro Bernard ... Siface* (Syphax), King of Cirta
* Luigi Chellini ... Scipione* (Scipio), Roman consul and general
* ?????????? ... Lelius* (Gaius Laelius), friend and sub-commander of Scipio
* Vitale Di Stefano ... Massinissa* (Masinissa), King of Numidia
* Enrico Gemelli ... Archimede* (Archimedes), Greek engineer and philosopher
* Ignazio Lupi ... Arbace
==Production==

Italian author Gabriele d&#x27;Annunzio contributed to the screenplay, writing all of the intertitles, naming the characters and the movie itself. The film was noted as being the first popular film to use the tracking shot – the camera is mounted on a dolly allowing it to both follow action and move within a film set or location. The tracking shot in itself was nothing new. &quot;Panorama&quot; effects (lateral and vertical) had been used frequently in film since 1896, but &quot;Cabiria&quot;, with the new freedom provided by the dolly, is innovative in introducing &quot;zoom&quot; movement, towards and away from the scene, which for years afterwards was referred to by both cameramen and directors as a &quot;Cabiria&quot; shot. This movement was such an innovation at the time that other film makers quickly incorporated it. The film was a major influence on D.W. Griffith&#x27;s &quot;Intolerance&quot; (1916) but he never uses &quot;Cabiria&quot; shots; the famous crane shot moving down and into the festival in Babylon is a &quot;panorama&quot; effect.

The elephants used in several scenes in the film are Indian elephants, rather than the much smaller and less intimidating North African elephant (which, though used in Hannibal&#x27;s invasion, was long extinct at time of filming) or the African elephant (which is undomesticable).

Film critic Roger Ebert has said that Griffith &quot;moves the camera with greater freedom and has a headlong narrative and an exciting use of cross-cutting that Pastrone does not approach&quot;, but never seeks to exploit possibilities of the genuinely mobile camera created by the &quot;Cabiria&quot; shot, although such camera movement can very occasionally be seen used to dramatic effect in other US films at this time, notably Allan Dwan&#x27;s &quot;David Harum&quot; (1915). The film also marked the debut of the Maciste character, who went on to have a long career in Italian sword and sandal films.

==Music==
The pastiche film score was composed largely by Manlio Mazza, who reworked the music of several composers including Mozart, Mendelssohn, Spontini, Donizetti and Gluck. But the film also contained an original composition by Mazza&#x27;s former teacher Ildebrando Pizzetti, which was composed on d&#x27;Annunzio&#x27;s recommendation: the ten-minute &quot;Sinfonia del fuoco&quot;. The piece was written to accompany the Invocation to Moloch, in the pivotal Second Episode of the film, when one hundred naked children are sacrificed to the god of Carthage. Scored for a large orchestra, including six first and six second violas, baritone, and a mixed chorus of more than five parts, the &quot;Sinfonia del fuoco&quot; was performed once only, on the evening of the film&#x27;s première, conducted by Mazza, at the Teatro Vittorio Emanuele in Turin, on 18 April 1914. Contemporary reviews indicate that on this occasion the work was performed as an Overture at the start of the film.

The size of the forces involved, coupled with Pizzetti&#x27;s refusal to allow others to conduct the work, and the fact that he himself never included it in his own concerts, meant that no further performances took place until 1988, when the 1914 version of the film was presented, with live orchestral accompaniment of the complete score, at the Orto Botanico, Rome. The &quot;Sinfonia del fuoco&quot; has since been recorded by Naxos Records in 1997.

==Distribution, remake and restorations==
&quot;Cabiria&quot; was released in Italy on April 18, 1914.

In June 1914, &quot;Cabiria&quot; became the first motion picture to be screened at the White House, when a screening on the lawn was viewed by President Wilson and his family from the porch and lawn chairs. (&quot;The Birth of a Nation&quot; was the first movie shown &quot;in&quot; the White House, in the East Room.)

A restored version of &quot;Cabiria&quot; was screened on 27 May 2006 at the Cannes Film Festival, featuring a filmed introduction by director Martin Scorsese.

==See also==
* 1914 in film
* List of historical drama films
* List of films with a 100% rating on Rotten Tomatoes, a film review aggregator website

== References ==
===Footnotes===
===Sources===


==External links==
* Roger Ebert review
* 
* Original Handbill for Cabiria (1914) available at the Internet Archive</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q652256" start="26" end="30" title="Epic film" label="epic"/>
<link wikidata="Q226730" start="31" end="42" title="silent film" label="silent film"/>
<link wikidata="Q53043" start="56" end="73" title="Giovanni Pastrone" label="Giovanni Pastrone"/>
<link wikidata="Q495" start="86" end="91" title="Turin" label="Turin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1460" start="120" end="126" title="Sicily" label="Sicily"/>
<link wikidata="Q6343" start="128" end="136" title="Carthage" label="Carthage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1093156" start="142" end="147" title="Cirta" label="Cirta"/>
<link wikidata="Q6271" start="173" end="189" title="Second Punic War" label="Second Punic War"/>
<link wikidata="Q16990" start="290" end="300" title="Mount Etna" label="Mount Etna"/>
<link wikidata="Q6343" start="323" end="331" title="Carthage" label="Carthage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1337302" start="337" end="348" title="Hannibal&amp;#x27;s crossing of the Alps" label="alpine trek"/>
<link wikidata="Q36456" start="352" end="360" title="Hannibal" label="Hannibal"/>
<link wikidata="Q8739" start="362" end="372" title="Archimedes" label="Archimedes"/>
<link wikidata="Q533090" start="412" end="429" title="Siege of Syracuse (214–212 BC)" label="Siege of Syracuse"/>
<link wikidata="Q2253" start="434" end="440" title="Scipio Africanus" label="Scipio"/>
<link wikidata="Q332436" start="606" end="613" title="Maciste" label="Maciste"/>
<link wikidata="Q41148" start="644" end="659" title="Martin Scorsese" label="Martin Scorsese"/>
<link wikidata="Q51123" start="775" end="788" title="D.W. Griffith" label="D.W. Griffith"/>
<link wikidata="Q72267" start="793" end="809" title="Cecil B. DeMille" label="Cecil B. DeMille"/>
<link wikidata="Q2039" start="1012" end="1016" title="Livy" label="Livy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1155892" start="1030" end="1045" title="Ab Urbe Condita (book)" label="Ab Urbe Condita"/>
<link wikidata="Q43444" start="1158" end="1174" title="Gustave Flaubert" label="Gustave Flaubert"/>
<link wikidata="Q117182" start="1199" end="1207" title="Salammbô" label="Salammbô"/>
<link wikidata="Q309786" start="1218" end="1232" title="Emilio Salgari" label="Emilio Salgari"/>
<link wikidata="Q35525" start="1352" end="1363" title="White House" label="White House"/>
<link wikidata="Q1511154" start="1391" end="1401" title="South Lawn" label="South Lawn"/>
<link wikidata="Q34296" start="1410" end="1419" title="Woodrow Wilson" label="President"/>
<link wikidata="Q234283" start="1421" end="1431" title="Ellen Axson Wilson" label="First Lady"/>
<link wikidata="Q299001" start="1433" end="1447" title="Thomas R. Marshall" label="Vice President"/>
<link wikidata="Q525035" start="1449" end="1457" title="Lois Irene Marshall" label="his wife"/>
<link wikidata="Q16990" start="1654" end="1664" title="Mount Etna" label="Mount Etna"/>
<link wikidata="Q1903" start="1669" end="1676" title="Catania" label="Catania"/>
<link wikidata="Q1460" start="1695" end="1701" title="Sicily" label="Sicily"/>
<link wikidata="Q152262" start="1817" end="1822" title="Pluto (mythology)" label="Pluto"/>
<link wikidata="Q41642" start="2391" end="2400" title="Phoenicia" label="Phoenicia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6343" start="2442" end="2450" title="Carthage" label="Carthage"/>
<link wikidata="Q275010" start="2557" end="2563" title="Moloch" label="Moloch"/>
<link wikidata="Q36456" start="3737" end="3745" title="Hannibal" label="Hannibal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1286" start="3798" end="3802" title="Alps" label="Alps"/>
<link wikidata="Q102679" start="4021" end="4029" title="Numidian" label="Numidian"/>
<link wikidata="Q314685" start="4035" end="4045" title="Massinissa" label="Massinissa"/>
<link wikidata="Q311702" start="4072" end="4081" title="Hasdrubal (Barcid)" label="Hasdrubal"/>
<link wikidata="Q241210" start="4141" end="4151" title="Sophonisba" label="Sophonisba"/>
<link wikidata="Q533090" start="5320" end="5337" title="Siege of Syracuse (214–212 BC)" label="besieged Syracuse"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5492" end="5500" title="Archimedes#The Archimedes Heat Ray" label="heat ray"/>
<link wikidata="Q8739" start="5542" end="5552" title="Archimedes" label="Archimedes"/>
<link wikidata="Q353141" start="6121" end="6127" title="Syphax" label="Syphax"/>
<link wikidata="Q1093156" start="6137" end="6142" title="Cirta" label="Cirta"/>
<link wikidata="Q311702" start="6236" end="6245" title="Hasdrubal (Barcid)" label="Hasdrubal"/>
<link wikidata="Q4489757" start="6545" end="6551" title="consul" label="consul"/>
<link wikidata="Q2253" start="6552" end="6558" title="Scipio Africanus" label="Scipio"/>
<link wikidata="Q2526293" start="6727" end="6740" title="human pyramid" label="human pyramid"/>
<link wikidata="Q841571" start="7209" end="7217" title="freedman" label="freedman"/>
<link wikidata="Q657438" start="9865" end="9878" title="Roman triumph" label="Roman triumph"/>
<link wikidata="Q706305" start="10338" end="10344" title="Gaius Laelius" label="Lelius"/>
<link wikidata="Q218802" start="11652" end="11659" title="panpipe" label="panpipe"/>
<link wikidata="Q20828805" start="11726" end="11737" title="sprite (creature)" label="sea sprites"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11875" end="11890" title="Carolina Catena" label="Carolina Catena"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11929" end="11944" title="Émile Vardannes" label="Émile Vardannes"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11988" end="12002" title="Gina Marangoni" label="Gina Marangoni"/>
<link wikidata="Q3832049" start="12047" end="12061" title="Lidia Quaranta" label="Lidia Quaranta"/>
<link wikidata="Q3702400" start="12101" end="12112" title="Dante Testa" label="Dante Testa"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12169" end="12184" title="Umberto Mozzato" label="Umberto Mozzato"/>
<link wikidata="Q696570" start="12252" end="12269" title="Bartolomeo Pagano" label="Bartolomeo Pagano"/>
<link wikidata="Q332436" start="12274" end="12281" title="Maciste" label="Maciste"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12301" end="12319" title="Raffaele di Napoli" label="Raffaele di Napoli"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12363" end="12378" title="Émile Vardannes" label="Émile Vardannes"/>
<link wikidata="Q36456" start="12383" end="12391" title="Hannibal" label="Hannibal"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12417" end="12433" title="Edoardo Davesnes" label="Edoardo Davesnes"/>
<link wikidata="Q452048" start="12438" end="12447" title="Hasdrubal Gisco" label="Hasdrubal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3804131" start="12494" end="12518" title="Italia Almirante-Manzini" label="Italia Almirante-Manzini"/>
<link wikidata="Q241210" start="12535" end="12545" title="Sophonisba" label="Sophonisba"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12572" end="12590" title="Alessandro Bernard" label="Alessandro Bernard"/>
<link wikidata="Q353141" start="12604" end="12610" title="Syphax" label="Syphax"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12629" end="12643" title="Luigi Chellini" label="Luigi Chellini"/>
<link wikidata="Q2253" start="12659" end="12665" title="Scipio Africanus" label="Scipio"/>
<link wikidata="Q706305" start="12719" end="12732" title="Gaius Laelius" label="Gaius Laelius"/>
<link wikidata="Q74956294" start="12772" end="12789" title="Vitale Di Stefano" label="Vitale Di Stefano"/>
<link wikidata="Q314685" start="12807" end="12816" title="Masinissa" label="Masinissa"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12837" end="12851" title="Enrico Gemelli" label="Enrico Gemelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q8739" start="12868" end="12878" title="Archimedes" label="Archimedes"/>
<link wikidata="Q15117287" start="12914" end="12926" title="Ignazio Lupi" label="Ignazio Lupi"/>
<link wikidata="Q193236" start="12969" end="12993" title="Gabriele d&amp;#x27;Annunzio" label="Gabriele d&amp;#x27;Annunzio"/>
<link wikidata="Q245069" start="13044" end="13054" title="intertitle" label="intertitle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1235811" start="13206" end="13211" title="Camera dolly" label="dolly"/>
<link wikidata="Q220285" start="13532" end="13536" title="Zooming (filmmaking)" label="zoom"/>
<link wikidata="Q51123" start="13823" end="13836" title="D.W. Griffith" label="D.W. Griffith"/>
<link wikidata="Q192206" start="13850" end="13861" title="Intolerance (film)" label="Intolerance"/>
<link wikidata="Q591305" start="14075" end="14090" title="Indian elephant" label="Indian elephant"/>
<link wikidata="Q2717596" start="14144" end="14166" title="North African elephant" label="North African elephant"/>
<link wikidata="Q185038" start="14260" end="14276" title="African elephant" label="African elephant"/>
<link wikidata="Q212173" start="14317" end="14328" title="Roger Ebert" label="Roger Ebert"/>
<link wikidata="Q5234789" start="14762" end="14773" title="David Harum (1915 film)" label="David Harum"/>
<link wikidata="Q332436" start="14826" end="14833" title="Maciste" label="Maciste"/>
<link wikidata="Q1433443" start="14890" end="14906" title="sword and sandal" label="sword and sandal"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14973" end="14985" title="Manlio Mazza" label="Manlio Mazza"/>
<link wikidata="Q379267" start="15176" end="15195" title="Ildebrando Pizzetti" label="Ildebrando Pizzetti"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072277" start="16255" end="16268" title="Orto Botanico dell&amp;#x27;Università di Roma &amp;quot;La Sapienza&amp;quot;" label="Orto Botanico"/>
<link wikidata="Q1579196" start="16338" end="16351" title="Naxos Records" label="Naxos Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q35525" start="16554" end="16565" title="White House" label="White House"/>
<link wikidata="Q220394" start="16681" end="16702" title="The Birth of a Nation" label="The Birth of a Nation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144849" start="16774" end="16783" title="East Room" label="East Room"/>
<link wikidata="Q42369" start="16864" end="16884" title="Cannes Film Festival" label="Cannes Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q41148" start="16930" end="16945" title="Martin Scorsese" label="Martin Scorsese"/>
<link wikidata="Q913888" start="16963" end="16975" title="1914 in film" label="1914 in film"/>
<link wikidata="Q2570381" start="16978" end="17008" title="List of historical drama films" label="List of historical drama films"/>
<link wikidata="Q15298003" start="17011" end="17062" title="List of films with a 100% rating on Rotten Tomatoes" label="List of films with a 100% rating on Rotten Tomatoes"/>
<link wikidata="Q461" start="17246" end="17262" title="Internet Archive" label="Internet Archive"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="253522" wikidata="Q420388" url="?curid=253522" title="Masquerade">
<text>Masquerade or Masquerades may refer to:
==Books==
* &quot;Masquerade&quot; (book), a 1979 children&#x27;s book by Kit Williams that sparked a worldwide treasure hunt
* &quot;Masquerades&quot; (novel), a 1995 Forgotten Realms novel by Kate Novak and Jeff Grubb
* &quot;Masquerade&quot;, a 2007 &quot;Blue Bloods&quot; novel by Melissa de la Cruz

==Theatre==
* &quot;The Masquerade&quot; (play), a 1719 play by Charles Johnson
* &quot;Mascarade&quot;, a 1724 comedy play by Ludvig Holberg
* &quot;Masquerade&quot; (play), an 1835 Russian play by Mikhail Lermontov
* Masquerade (theatre group), an English theatre group in Chennai, India, since 1994

==Films==
* &quot;The Masquerade&quot;, a 1913 animated film by Émile Cohl
* &quot;Masquerade&quot; (1929 film), an American drama film
* &quot;Masquerade&quot;, a 1931 film starring Vivienne Osborne
* &quot;Masquerade&quot; (1941 film), a Soviet film
* &quot;Masquerade&quot; (1965 film), a British spy spoof starring Cliff Robertson and Jack Hawkins
* &quot;Masquerade&quot; (1988 film), an American thriller starring Rob Lowe and Meg Tilly
* &quot;The Masquerade&quot;, a 2007 American thriller starring Brianne Davis and Christopher Masterson
* &quot;Masquerades&quot; (film), a 2008 film
* &quot;Masquerade&quot; (2012 film), or &quot;Gwanghae&quot;, South Korean film
* &quot;Masquerade&quot; (2021 film), an American thriller
* &quot;Masquerade&quot; (2022 film), a French comedy-drama

==Television==
===Shows===
* &quot;Masquerade&quot; (TV series), a 1983 American espionage series
* Masquerade (Bakugan Battle Brawlers), a masked character in the anime &quot;Bakugan Battle Brawlers&quot;
* &quot;Masquerade&quot;, the international title for Kasou Taishou, a Japanese semi-annual amateur skit show

===Episodes===
* &quot;Masquerade&quot; (&quot;Alias&quot;)
* &quot;Masquerade&quot; (&quot;Baywatch&quot;)
* &quot;Masquerade&quot; (&quot;Benson&quot;)
* &quot;Masquerade&quot; (&quot;The Bill&quot;)
* &quot;Masquerade&quot; (&quot;Dallas&quot;)
* &quot;Masquerade&quot; (&quot;Dynasty&quot;)
* &quot;Masquerade&quot; (&quot;ER&quot;)
* &quot;Masquerade&quot; (&quot;The Flash&quot;)
* &quot;Masquerade&quot; (&quot;The Fugitive&quot;)
* &quot;Masquerade&quot; (&quot;Hazbin Hotel&quot;)
* &quot;Masquerade&quot; (&quot;Iron Man: Armored Adventures&quot;)
* &quot;Masquerade&quot; (&quot;Law &amp; Order: Criminal Intent&quot;)
* &quot;Masquerade&quot; (&quot;Law &amp; Order: UK&quot;)
* &quot;Masquerade&quot; (&quot;NCIS&quot;)
* &quot;Masquerade&quot; (&quot;The Real Ghostbusters&quot;)
* &quot;Masquerade&quot; (&quot;Six Degrees&quot;)
* &quot;Masquerade&quot; (&quot;The Transformers&quot;)
* &quot;Masquerade&quot; (&quot;Trauma&quot;)
* &quot;Masquerade&quot; (&quot;Person of Interest&quot;)
* &quot;Masquerade&quot; (&quot;The Vampire Diaries&quot;)

==Music==
* The Masquerade (Atlanta), a concert venue in Atlanta, Georgia

===Classical music===
* Mascherata (English: Masquerade), an Italian dance from the sixteenth century
* &quot;Masquerade&quot;, lute piece by Robert de Visée ( – 1732/1733)
* &quot;Masquerade&quot; (Khachaturian), incidental music by Aram Khachaturian
* &quot;Masquerade&quot; (Clyne), a 2013 orchestral composition by Anna Clyne

===Bands===
* Masquerade (Finnish band), a Finnish post-punk band
* Masquerade (German band), a band with Drafi Deutscher that had a hit in 1984 with the song &quot;Guardian Angel&quot;
* Masquerade (Swedish band), a Swedish rock band

===Albums===
* &quot;Masquerade&quot; (Bananarama album), or the title song, 2022
* &quot;Masquerade&quot; (Eric Saade album), or the title song, 2010
* &quot;Masquerade&quot; (Golden Dawn album), 2003
* &quot;Masquerade&quot; (The Legendary Tigerman album), or the title song, 2006
* &quot;Masquerade&quot; (Rondò Veneziano album), 1989
* &quot;Masquerade&quot; (Running Wild album), 1995
* &quot;Masquerade&quot; (Wyclef Jean album), 2002
* &quot;Masquerade&quot;, an album by Dreams of Sanity, 1999
* &quot;The Masquerade&quot; (album), by mxmtoon, 2019
* &quot;The Masquerade&quot;, by Mêlée, 2010

===Songs===
* &quot;Masquerade&quot; (2PM song), 2012
* &quot;Masquerade&quot; (Kaya song), 2006
* &quot;Masquerade&quot;, by Alfred Hui and Win Win Yeung, 2022
* &quot;Masquerade&quot;, by Ashley Tisdale from &quot;Guilty Pleasure&quot;, 2009
* &quot;Masquerade&quot;, by Backstreet Boys from &quot;This Is Us&quot;, 2009
* &quot;Masquerade&quot;, by Beach House from &quot;Once Twice Melody&quot;, 2022
* &quot;Masquerade&quot;, by Berlin from &quot;Pleasure Victim&quot;, 1982
* &quot;Masquerade&quot;, by D&#x27;espairsRay from &quot;Redeemer&quot;, 2009
* &quot;Masquerade&quot;, by Edward Bear, 1972
* &quot;Masquerade&quot;, by Hey! Say! JUMP from &quot;Dear&quot;, 2016
* &quot;Masquerade&quot;, by Jack Hylton and His Orchestra, featured in the film &quot;The Shining&quot;, 1980
* &quot;Masquerade&quot;, by Nicki Minaj from &quot;Pink Friday: Roman Reloaded&quot;, 2012
* &quot;Masquerade&quot;, by Northlane from &quot;Singularity&quot;, 2013
* &quot;Masquerade&quot;, by Rania from &quot;Teddy Riley, the First Expansion In Asia&quot;, 2011
* &quot;Masquerade&quot;, by Sarah Nixey from &quot;Sing, Memory&quot;, 2007
* &quot;Masquerade&quot;, by Skids, 1979
* &quot;Masquerade&quot;, by Soul Asylum from &quot;Say What You Will, Clarence... Karl Sold the Truck&quot;, 1984
* &quot;Masquerade&quot;, by Swing Out Sister from &quot;Kaleidoscope World&quot;, 1989
* &quot;Masquerade&quot;, by Symphony X from &quot;Symphony X&quot;, 1994
* &quot;Masquerade&quot;, by Versailles from &quot;Holy Grail&quot;, 2011
* &quot;Masquerade&quot;, by Yes from &quot;Union&quot;, 1991
* &quot;Masquerade&quot;, from the musical &quot;The Phantom of the Opera&quot;, 1986
* &quot;The Masquerade&quot;, by Voltaire from &quot;Raised by Bats&quot;, 2014

==Other uses==
* Masquerade (biology), a form of camouflage relying on mimicry of inanimate objects such as twigs
* Masquerade (trope), a fantasy and speculative fiction trope involving a hidden society within the real world
* Masquerade, a type of computer threat

==See also==
* Masquerade ball, a costumed dance event 
* Masquerade ceremony, a rite or cultural event in many parts of the world, especially the Caribbean and Africa
* Masquerade society, a fictional society in &quot;Vampire: The Masquerade&quot;
* Masquerader (disambiguation)
* IP masquerading, a form of network address translation
* &quot;Mask-A-Raid&quot;, a 1931 animated short film starring Betty Boop
* Mascarade, a card game
* &quot;Maskarade&quot;, a 1906 opera by Carl Nielsen, based on the play by Ludvig Holberg
* &quot;Maskerade&quot;, a 1995 Discworld novel by Terry Pratchett
* &quot;This Masquerade&quot;, by Leon Russell, 1972</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q420388" start="0" end="10" title="Masquerade" label="Masquerade"/>
<link wikidata="Q420388" start="14" end="25" title="Masquerade" label="Masquerades"/>
<link wikidata="Q1907304" start="52" end="81" title="Masquerade (book)" label="&amp;quot;Masquerade&amp;quot; (book)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6783934" start="168" end="199" title="Masquerades (novel)" label="&amp;quot;Masquerades&amp;quot; (novel)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="299" end="310" title="Blue Bloods (novel series)#Masquerade" label="Blue Bloods"/>
<link wikidata="Q104857443" start="360" end="393" title="The Masquerade (play)" label="&amp;quot;The Masquerade&amp;quot; (play)"/>
<link wikidata="Q216692" start="473" end="487" title="Ludvig Holberg" label="Ludvig Holberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q3297216" start="490" end="519" title="Masquerade (play)" label="&amp;quot;Masquerade&amp;quot; (play)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6783926" start="565" end="591" title="Masquerade (theatre group)" label="Masquerade (theatre group)"/>
<link wikidata="Q275011" start="713" end="723" title="Émile Cohl" label="Émile Cohl"/>
<link wikidata="Q55622366" start="726" end="760" title="Masquerade (1929 film)" label="&amp;quot;Masquerade&amp;quot; (1929 film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7937898" start="832" end="848" title="Vivienne Osborne" label="Vivienne Osborne"/>
<link wikidata="Q3297214" start="851" end="885" title="Masquerade (1941 film)" label="&amp;quot;Masquerade&amp;quot; (1941 film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6783921" start="903" end="937" title="Masquerade (1965 film)" label="&amp;quot;Masquerade&amp;quot; (1965 film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1784284" start="1003" end="1037" title="Masquerade (1988 film)" label="&amp;quot;Masquerade&amp;quot; (1988 film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1928775" start="1156" end="1169" title="Brianne Davis" label="Brianne Davis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3297217" start="1198" end="1228" title="Masquerades (film)" label="&amp;quot;Masquerades&amp;quot; (film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q491957" start="1244" end="1278" title="Masquerade (2012 film)" label="&amp;quot;Masquerade&amp;quot; (2012 film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q107241201" start="1325" end="1359" title="Masquerade (2021 film)" label="&amp;quot;Masquerade&amp;quot; (2021 film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q106680669" start="1384" end="1418" title="Masquerade (2022 film)" label="&amp;quot;Masquerade&amp;quot; (2022 film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3850849" start="1472" end="1506" title="Masquerade (TV series)" label="&amp;quot;Masquerade&amp;quot; (TV series)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2583672" start="1543" end="1579" title="Masquerade (Bakugan Battle Brawlers)" label="Masquerade (Bakugan Battle Brawlers)"/>
<link wikidata="Q711291" start="1703" end="1716" title="Kasou Taishou" label="Kasou Taishou"/>
<link wikidata="Q1618992" start="1777" end="1819" title="Masquerade (Alias)" label="&amp;quot;Masquerade&amp;quot; (&amp;quot;Alias&amp;quot;)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4382458" start="1822" end="1867" title="Masquerade (Baywatch)" label="&amp;quot;Masquerade&amp;quot; (&amp;quot;Baywatch&amp;quot;)"/>
<link wikidata="Q16987835" start="1870" end="1913" title="Masquerade (Benson)" label="&amp;quot;Masquerade&amp;quot; (&amp;quot;Benson&amp;quot;)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7717954" start="1916" end="1961" title="Masquerade (The Bill)" label="&amp;quot;Masquerade&amp;quot; (&amp;quot;The Bill&amp;quot;)"/>
<link wikidata="Q16907249" start="1964" end="2007" title="Masquerade (Dallas)" label="&amp;quot;Masquerade&amp;quot; (&amp;quot;Dallas&amp;quot;)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1527998" start="2010" end="2054" title="Masquerade (Dynasty)" label="&amp;quot;Masquerade&amp;quot; (&amp;quot;Dynasty&amp;quot;)"/>
<link wikidata="Q463138" start="2057" end="2096" title="Masquerade (ER)" label="&amp;quot;Masquerade&amp;quot; (&amp;quot;ER&amp;quot;)"/>
<link wikidata="Q97164943" start="2099" end="2145" title="Masquerade (The Flash)" label="&amp;quot;Masquerade&amp;quot; (&amp;quot;The Flash&amp;quot;)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6599655" start="2148" end="2197" title="Masquerade (The Fugitive)" label="&amp;quot;Masquerade&amp;quot; (&amp;quot;The Fugitive&amp;quot;)"/>
<link wikidata="Q75020770" start="2200" end="2249" title="Masquerade (Hazbin Hotel)" label="&amp;quot;Masquerade&amp;quot; (&amp;quot;Hazbin Hotel&amp;quot;)"/>
<link wikidata="" start="2252" end="2317" title="Masquerade (Iron Man: Armored Adventures)" label="&amp;quot;Masquerade&amp;quot; (&amp;quot;Iron Man: Armored Adventures&amp;quot;)"/>
<link wikidata="" start="2320" end="2389" title="Masquerade (Law &amp;amp; Order: Criminal Intent)" label="&amp;quot;Masquerade&amp;quot; (&amp;quot;Law &amp;amp; Order: Criminal Intent&amp;quot;)"/>
<link wikidata="" start="2392" end="2448" title="Masquerade (Law &amp;amp; Order: UK)" label="&amp;quot;Masquerade&amp;quot; (&amp;quot;Law &amp;amp; Order: UK&amp;quot;)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1213606" start="2451" end="2492" title="Masquerade (NCIS)" label="&amp;quot;Masquerade&amp;quot; (&amp;quot;NCIS&amp;quot;)"/>
<link wikidata="Q257722" start="2495" end="2553" title="Masquerade (The Real Ghostbusters)" label="&amp;quot;Masquerade&amp;quot; (&amp;quot;The Real Ghostbusters&amp;quot;)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2609221" start="2556" end="2604" title="Masquerade (Six Degrees)" label="&amp;quot;Masquerade&amp;quot; (&amp;quot;Six Degrees&amp;quot;)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1839365" start="2607" end="2660" title="Masquerade (The Transformers)" label="&amp;quot;Masquerade&amp;quot; (&amp;quot;The Transformers&amp;quot;)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1578516" start="2663" end="2706" title="Masquerade (Trauma)" label="&amp;quot;Masquerade&amp;quot; (&amp;quot;Trauma&amp;quot;)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4994685" start="2709" end="2764" title="Masquerade (Person of Interest)" label="&amp;quot;Masquerade&amp;quot; (&amp;quot;Person of Interest&amp;quot;)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1469521" start="2767" end="2823" title="Masquerade (The Vampire Diaries)" label="&amp;quot;Masquerade&amp;quot; (&amp;quot;The Vampire Diaries&amp;quot;)"/>
<link wikidata="Q28453274" start="2837" end="2861" title="The Masquerade (Atlanta)" label="The Masquerade (Atlanta)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6782859" start="2924" end="2934" title="Mascherata" label="Mascherata"/>
<link wikidata="Q580371" start="3042" end="3057" title="Robert de Visée" label="Robert de Visée"/>
<link wikidata="Q2896795" start="3075" end="3112" title="Masquerade (Khachaturian)" label="&amp;quot;Masquerade&amp;quot; (Khachaturian)"/>
<link wikidata="Q20926206" start="3154" end="3184" title="Masquerade (Clyne)" label="&amp;quot;Masquerade&amp;quot; (Clyne)"/>
<link wikidata="Q21601016" start="3245" end="3270" title="Masquerade (Finnish band)" label="Masquerade (Finnish band)"/>
<link wikidata="Q63152" start="3299" end="3323" title="Masquerade (German band)" label="Masquerade (German band)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6783928" start="3419" end="3444" title="Masquerade (Swedish band)" label="Masquerade (Swedish band)"/>
<link wikidata="Q112811303" start="3482" end="3523" title="Masquerade (Bananarama album)" label="&amp;quot;Masquerade&amp;quot; (Bananarama album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q275786" start="3551" end="3592" title="Masquerade (Eric Saade album)" label="&amp;quot;Masquerade&amp;quot; (Eric Saade album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5579312" start="3620" end="3662" title="Masquerade (Golden Dawn album)" label="&amp;quot;Masquerade&amp;quot; (Golden Dawn album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q691392" start="3671" end="3724" title="Masquerade (The Legendary Tigerman album)" label="&amp;quot;Masquerade&amp;quot; (The Legendary Tigerman album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3850846" start="3752" end="3798" title="Masquerade (Rondò Veneziano album)" label="&amp;quot;Masquerade&amp;quot; (Rondò Veneziano album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1281707" start="3807" end="3850" title="Masquerade (Running Wild album)" label="&amp;quot;Masquerade&amp;quot; (Running Wild album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4357523" start="3859" end="3901" title="Masquerade (Wyclef Jean album)" label="&amp;quot;Masquerade&amp;quot; (Wyclef Jean album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q700119" start="3946" end="3962" title="Dreams of Sanity" label="Dreams of Sanity"/>
<link wikidata="Q85807858" start="3971" end="4005" title="The Masquerade (album)" label="&amp;quot;The Masquerade&amp;quot; (album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1778473" start="4057" end="4062" title="Mêlée (band)" label="Mêlée"/>
<link wikidata="Q6783922" start="4084" end="4117" title="Masquerade (2PM song)" label="&amp;quot;Masquerade&amp;quot; (2PM song)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6005476" start="4126" end="4160" title="Masquerade (Kaya song)" label="&amp;quot;Masquerade&amp;quot; (Kaya song)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4722894" start="4196" end="4206" title="Alfred Hui" label="Alfred Hui"/>
<link wikidata="Q111693357" start="4211" end="4224" title="Win Win Yeung" label="Win Win Yeung"/>
<link wikidata="Q922472" start="4286" end="4301" title="Guilty Pleasure (Ashley Tisdale album)" label="Guilty Pleasure"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074881" start="4370" end="4380" title="This Is Us (Backstreet Boys album)" label="This Is Us"/>
<link wikidata="Q109536641" start="4445" end="4462" title="Once Twice Melody" label="Once Twice Melody"/>
<link wikidata="Q7204304" start="4522" end="4537" title="Pleasure Victim" label="Pleasure Victim"/>
<link wikidata="Q1791407" start="4608" end="4616" title="Redeemer (D&amp;#x27;espairsRay album)" label="Redeemer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5341829" start="4658" end="4669" title="Edward Bear" label="Edward Bear"/>
<link wikidata="Q24873234" start="4731" end="4735" title="Dear (Hey! Say! JUMP album)" label="Dear"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4835" end="4846" title="The Shining (film)#Music and soundtrack" label="The Shining"/>
<link wikidata="" start="4911" end="4938" title="Pink Friday: Roman Reloaded" label="Pink Friday: Roman Reloaded"/>
<link wikidata="Q17034752" start="5001" end="5012" title="Singularity (Northlane album)" label="Singularity"/>
<link wikidata="Q104866140" start="5071" end="5111" title="Teddy Riley, the First Expansion In Asia" label="Teddy Riley, the First Expansion In Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7522581" start="5176" end="5188" title="Sing, Memory" label="Sing, Memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q547438" start="5230" end="5235" title="Skids (band)" label="Skids"/>
<link wikidata="Q2558050" start="5294" end="5344" title="Say What You Will, Clarence... Karl Sold the Truck" label="Say What You Will, Clarence... Karl Sold the Truck"/>
<link wikidata="Q6351998" start="5414" end="5432" title="Kaleidoscope World (Swing Out Sister album)" label="Kaleidoscope World"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066763" start="5496" end="5506" title="Symphony X (album)" label="Symphony X"/>
<link wikidata="Q3269784" start="5570" end="5580" title="Holy Grail (album)" label="Holy Grail"/>
<link wikidata="Q929649" start="5637" end="5642" title="Union (Yes album)" label="Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q382353" start="5704" end="5728" title="The Phantom of the Opera (1986 musical)" label="The Phantom of the Opera"/>
<link wikidata="Q17022647" start="5794" end="5808" title="Raised by Bats" label="Raised by Bats"/>
<link wikidata="Q192627" start="5839" end="5859" title="Masquerade (biology)" label="Masquerade (biology)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7960181" start="5938" end="5956" title="Masquerade (trope)" label="Masquerade (trope)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7797190" start="6071" end="6086" title="threat (computer)" label="computer threat"/>
<link wikidata="Q2641292" start="6103" end="6118" title="Masquerade ball" label="Masquerade ball"/>
<link wikidata="Q16941296" start="6146" end="6165" title="Masquerade ceremony" label="Masquerade ceremony"/>
<link wikidata="Q650924" start="6258" end="6276" title="Masquerade society" label="Masquerade society"/>
<link wikidata="Q116168256" start="6339" end="6367" title="Masquerader (disambiguation)" label="Masquerader (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q11182" start="6370" end="6385" title="IP masquerading" label="IP masquerading"/>
<link wikidata="Q6783360" start="6433" end="6444" title="Mask-A-Raid" label="Mask-A-Raid"/>
<link wikidata="Q325179" start="6501" end="6510" title="Mascarade (board game)" label="Mascarade"/>
<link wikidata="Q1977730" start="6532" end="6541" title="Maskarade" label="Maskarade"/>
<link wikidata="Q2357235" start="6623" end="6632" title="Maskerade" label="Maskerade"/>
<link wikidata="Q7786135" start="6690" end="6705" title="This Masquerade" label="This Masquerade"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="253536" wikidata="Q93645" url="?curid=253536" title="Joy Adamson">
<text>Friederike Victoria &quot;Joy&quot; Adamson ( Gessner; 20 January 1910 – 3 January 1980) was a naturalist, artist and author. Her book, &quot;Born Free&quot;, describes her experiences raising a lion cub named Elsa. &quot;Born Free&quot; was printed in several languages and made into an Academy Award-winning movie of the same name. In 1977, she was awarded the Austrian Cross of Honour for Science and Art.

==Biography==
Adamson was born to Victor and Traute Gessner ( Greipel) in Troppau, Silesia, Austria-Hungary (now Opava, Czech Republic), the second of three daughters. Her parents died when she was 10, and she went to live with her grandmother. In her autobiography &quot;The Searching Spirit&quot;, Adamson wrote about her grandmother, saying, &quot;It is to her I owe anything that may be good in me&quot;. 

She grew up on an estate near Opava in the village called Kreuzberg (now Kružberk, Czech Republic). With the outbreak of the WWII she had moved to Vienna earning a music degree before studying sculpting and medicine. As a young adult, Adamson considered careers as a concert pianist, and in medicine.

Joy Adamson married three times in the span of ten years. Her first marriage in 1935 was to Viktor von Klarwill (aka Ziebel; 1902–1985).

She went to Kenya in 1937 where she met and married in 1938 the botanist Peter Bally, who gave her the nickname &quot;Joy&quot;. Peter did botanical paintings, and it was he who encouraged her to continue sketching and painting the flora and fauna in her surroundings. She met her third husband, senior wildlife warden George Adamson, while on safari in the early 1940s and married him in 1944. They made their home together in Kenya.

Joy Adamson is best known for her conservation efforts associated with Elsa the Lioness. In 1956, George Adamson, in the course of his job as game warden of the Northern Frontier District in Kenya, shot and killed a lioness as she charged him and another warden. George later realized the lioness was just protecting her cubs, which were found nearby in a rocky crevice. Taking them home, Joy and George found it difficult to care for all the cubs&#x27; needs. The two largest cubs, named &quot;Big One&quot; and &quot;Lustica&quot;, were passed on to be cared for by a zoo in Rotterdam, and the smallest, &quot;Elsa&quot;, was raised by the couple.

After some time living together, the Adamsons decided to set Elsa free rather than send her to a zoo, and spent many months training her to hunt and survive on her own. They were in the end successful, and Elsa became the first lioness successfully released back into the wild, the first to have contact after release, and the first known released lion to have a litter of cubs. The Adamsons kept their distance from the cubs, getting close enough only to photograph them.

In January 1961, Elsa died from babesiosis, a disease resulting from a tick bite. Her three young cubs became a nuisance, killing the livestock of local farmers. The Adamsons, who feared the farmers might kill the cubs, were able to eventually capture them and transport them to neighboring Tanganyika Territory, where they were promised a home at Serengeti National Park. 

In the concluding part of &quot;Forever Free&quot; the Adamsons lost track of the cubs in their new home. After describing a fruitless search, Joy Adamson contemplated a pair of lions: My heart was with them wherever they were. But it was also with these two lions here in front of us; and as I watched this beautiful pair, I realized how all the characteristics of our cubs were inherent in them. Indeed, in every lion I saw during our searches I recognized the intrinsic nature of Elsa, Jespah, Gopa and Little Elsa, the spirit of all the magnificent lions in Africa.

During Elsa&#x27;s lifetime, Joy and George Adamson needed each other to educate her, but after she died and her cubs were taken in by the park, their interests went in separate directions, as did their lives. While neither wanted a divorce nor a legal separation, their conflicting interests (George wanted to continue to work with lions and she with cheetahs) made it necessary for them to live apart (though they sometimes discussed living together again, they never did). They spent each Christmas together and they remained on good terms.

Using her own notes and George&#x27;s journals, Joy wrote &quot;Born Free&quot; to tell the lion&#x27;s tale. She submitted it to a number of publishers before it was bought by Harvill Press, part of HarperCollins. Published in 1960, it became a bestseller, spending 13 weeks at the top of &quot;The New York Times&quot; Best Seller list and nearly a year on the chart overall. The success of the book was due to both the story of Elsa and the dozens of photographs of her. Readers had pictures of many of the events of Elsa&#x27;s life leading up to her release. Subsequent books were also heavily illustrated. &quot;Born Free&quot; received largely favorable reviews from critics. Adamson worked closely with publishers to promote the book, which contributed to the Adamsons&#x27; new-found international celebrity.

She spent the rest of her life raising money for wildlife, thanks to the popularity of &quot;Born Free&quot;. The book was followed by &quot;Living Free&quot;, which is about Elsa as a mother to her cubs, and &quot;Forever Free&quot;, which tells of the release of the cubs Jespah, Gopa and Little Elsa. Adamson shared book proceeds with various conservation projects.

While television specials kept the Adamsons&#x27; cause in the spotlight, Adamson spent her last 10 years travelling the world, giving speeches about the perils faced by wildlife in Africa. 

A book of her paintings, &quot;Joy Adamson&#x27;s Africa&quot;, was published in 1972. She rehabilitated a cheetah and an African leopard. Pippa the cheetah was raised as a pet and given to Adamson at the age of seven months in hopes that she could also be released. Pippa had four litters before her death. Adamson wrote &quot;The Spotted Sphinx&quot; and &quot;Pippa&#x27;s Challenge&quot; about Pippa and her cheetah family. Later, Adamson reached her goal of many years, when she obtained an African leopard cub. Penny was eight weeks old when a ranger acquaintance of George Adamson found her in 1976. Penny had a litter of two cubs before the publication of &quot;Queen of Shaba&quot;, Adamson&#x27;s posthumous and final book.

During her lifetime, she created more than 500 paintings and line drawings. Her work included portraits of the indigenous populations commissioned by the government of Kenya, as well as botanical illustrations for at least seven books on East African flora. She also did animal paintings, among them studies of Elsa and Pippa.

==Murder and legacy==

On 3 January 1980, in Shaba National Reserve in Kenya, Joy Adamson&#x27;s body was discovered by her assistant, Pieter Mawson. He mistakenly assumed she had been killed by a lion, and this was what was initially reported by the media. She was a few weeks short of her 70th birthday.

The police investigation found Adamson&#x27;s wounds were too sharp and bloodless to have been caused by an animal, and concluded she had been murdered. Paul Nakware Ekai, a discharged labourer formerly employed by Adamson, was found guilty of murder and sentenced to indefinite imprisonment. He escaped capital punishment because the judge ruled he might have been a minor when the crime was committed.

Joy Adamson was cremated and her ashes were buried in Elsa the Lioness&#x27;s grave in Meru National Park in Meru, Kenya.

George Adamson was murdered nine years later in 1989, near his camp in Kora National Park, while rushing to the aid of a tourist who was being attacked by poachers. He is credited with saving the tourist&#x27;s life.

In addition to Joy Adamson&#x27;s books about big cats, a book of her artwork was published as an autobiography entitled &quot;The Searching Spirit&quot;. George Adamson&#x27;s second autobiography, &quot;My Pride and Joy&quot;, was published in 1986.

==Bibliography==
===Books by Joy Adamson===
*&quot;Born Free&quot; (1960) 
*&quot;Elsa: The Story of a Lioness&quot; (1961)
*&quot;Living Free: The story of Elsa and her cubs&quot; (1961) 
*&quot;Forever Free: Elsa&#x27;s Pride&quot; (1962) 
*&quot;The Spotted Sphinx&quot; (1969) 
*&quot;Pippa: The Cheetah and her Cubs&quot; (1970) 
*&quot;Joy Adamson&#x27;s Africa&quot; (1972) 
*&quot;Pippa&#x27;s Challenge&quot; (1972) 
*&quot;Peoples of Kenya&quot; (1975) 
*; also, (1978) 
*&quot;Queen of Shaba: The Story of an African Leopard&quot; (1980) 
*&quot;Friends from the Forest&quot; (1980) 

=== As illustrator only ===

* &quot;Gardening in East Africa, II edition&quot;
* At least six other books depicting the flowers, trees, and shrubs of East Africa

===Books by George Adamson===
* A Lifetime With Lions. (Autobiography). Doubleday,1968. ASIN: B0006BQAZW
*Bwana Game: The Life Story of George Adamson, Collins &amp; Harvill (April 1969), 
*; also, The Harvill Press (22 September 1986), 

===Books by others===
* &quot;Wild Heart: The Story of Joy Adamson, Author of Born Free&quot; by Anne E. Neimark.
* &quot;Sleeping With Lions&quot; by Netta Pfeifer
*&quot;Joy Adamson : Behind the Mask&quot; by Caroline Cass.
*&quot;The Great Safari: The Lives of George and Joy Adamson&quot; by Adrian House

==Films==
* &quot;Born Free&quot;
* &quot;Living Free&quot;
*&quot;Elsa &amp; Her Cubs&quot; – 25 minutes; Benchmark Films Copyright MCMLXXI by Elsa Wild Animal Appeal and Benchmark Films, Inc.
*&quot;Joy Adamson – About the Adamsons&quot; – Producer-Benchmark Films, Inc.
*&quot;Joy Adamson&#x27;s Africa&quot; (1977) – 86 minutes
*&quot;The Joy Adamson Story&quot; (1980) – Programme featuring interviews with Joy Adamson about her life and work in Austria and in Africa, and her famous lioness Elsa. Director: Dick Thomsett Production Company: BBC

==References==
==External links==

* Letters written by Joy Adamson.
* Web page about Elsa
* Bibliography of films by and about Joy and George Adamson.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q93645" start="0" end="19" title="Joy Adamson" label="Friederike Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q93645" start="26" end="29" title="Joy Adamson" label="Joy"/>
<link wikidata="Q93645" start="36" end="43" title="Joy Adamson" label="Adamson"/>
<link wikidata="Q93645" start="46" end="53" title="Joy Adamson" label="Gessner"/>
<link wikidata="Q3870578" start="142" end="151" title="Born Free (book)" label="Born Free"/>
<link wikidata="Q1333406" start="210" end="214" title="Elsa the Lioness" label="Elsa"/>
<link wikidata="Q19020" start="288" end="301" title="Academy Award" label="Academy Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q1453797" start="310" end="332" title="Born Free" label="movie of the same name"/>
<link wikidata="Q306590" start="363" end="407" title="Austrian Cross of Honour for Science and Art" label="Austrian Cross of Honour for Science and Art"/>
<link wikidata="Q156080" start="484" end="491" title="Opava" label="Troppau"/>
<link wikidata="Q298874" start="493" end="500" title="Austrian Silesia" label="Silesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q28513" start="502" end="517" title="Austria-Hungary" label="Austria-Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q156080" start="523" end="528" title="Opava" label="Opava"/>
<link wikidata="Q213" start="530" end="544" title="Czech Republic" label="Czech Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1790332" start="894" end="918" title="Kružberk" label="Kružberk, Czech Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q114" start="1273" end="1278" title="Kenya" label="Kenya"/>
<link wikidata="Q13225111" start="1334" end="1345" title="Peter René Oscar Bally" label="Peter Bally"/>
<link wikidata="Q1506842" start="1580" end="1594" title="George Adamson" label="George Adamson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1333406" start="1768" end="1784" title="Elsa the Lioness" label="Elsa the Lioness"/>
<link wikidata="Q55643233" start="1858" end="1884" title="Northern Frontier District" label="Northern Frontier District"/>
<link wikidata="Q18775796" start="2267" end="2283" title="Diergaarde Blijdorp" label="zoo in Rotterdam"/>
<link wikidata="Q797668" start="2854" end="2864" title="babesiosis" label="babesiosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q924" start="3113" end="3133" title="Tanzania" label="Tanganyika Territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q11812902" start="3170" end="3193" title="Serengeti National Park" label="Serengeti National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q3870578" start="4377" end="4386" title="Born Free (book)" label="Born Free"/>
<link wikidata="Q95149" start="4513" end="4526" title="HarperCollins" label="HarperCollins"/>
<link wikidata="Q578913" start="4603" end="4650" title="The New York Times Best Seller list" label="&amp;quot;The New York Times&amp;quot; Best Seller list"/>
<link wikidata="Q762107" start="6802" end="6824" title="Shaba National Reserve" label="Shaba National Reserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q114" start="6828" end="6833" title="Kenya" label="Kenya"/>
<link wikidata="Q6015796" start="7332" end="7355" title="indefinite imprisonment" label="indefinite imprisonment"/>
<link wikidata="Q8454" start="7368" end="7386" title="capital punishment" label="capital punishment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1333406" start="7523" end="7539" title="Elsa the Lioness" label="Elsa the Lioness"/>
<link wikidata="Q1755551" start="7556" end="7574" title="Meru National Park" label="Meru National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q1784196" start="7663" end="7681" title="Kora National Park" label="Kora National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q3870578" start="8114" end="8123" title="Born Free (book)" label="Born Free"/>
<link wikidata="Q1453797" start="9390" end="9399" title="Born Free" label="Born Free"/>
<link wikidata="Q12125783" start="9414" end="9425" title="Living Free" label="Living Free"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="253538" wikidata="Q189299" url="?curid=253538" title="Necklace">
<text>A necklace is an article of jewellery that is worn around the neck. Necklaces may have been one of the earliest types of adornment worn by humans. They often serve ceremonial, religious, magical, or funerary purposes and are also used as symbols of wealth and status, given that they are commonly made of precious metals and stones.

The main component of a necklace is the band, chain, or cord that wraps around the neck. These are most often rendered in precious metals such as gold, silver, and platinum. Necklaces often have additional attachments suspended or inset into the necklace itself. These attachments typically include pendants, lockets, amulets, crosses, and precious and semiprecious materials such as diamond, pearls, rubies, emeralds, garnets, and sapphires. They are made with many different type of materials and are used for many things and sometimes classified as clothing.

== Historical necklaces ==
=== Prehistoric neckware ===
Prehistoric peoples often used natural materials such as feathers, bone, shells, and plant materials to create necklaces. Evidence of early Upper Paleolithic necklace making in southern Africa and east Africa dates back to 50,000 BP. By the Bronze Age metallic jewellery had replaced pre-metallic adornments. Necklaces were first depicted in statuary and art of the Ancient Near East, and early necklaces made of precious metals with inset stones were created in Europe.

=== Ancient civilizations ===
In Ancient Mesopotamia, cylinder seals were often strung and worn as jewellery. In Ancient Babylon, necklaces were made of carnelian, lapis lazuli, agate, and gold, which was also made into gold chains. Ancient Sumerians created necklaces and beads from gold, silver, lapis lazuli and carnelian. In Ancient Egypt, a number of different necklace types were worn. Upper-class Ancient Egyptians wore collars of organic or semi-precious and precious materials for religious, celebratory, and funerary purposes. These collars were often ornamented with semi-precious, glass, pottery, and hollow beads. Beads made from a variety of precious and semi-precious materials were also commonly strung together to create necklaces. Gold that was fashioned into stylised plant, animal, and insect shapes were common as well. Amulets were also turned into necklaces. In Ancient Crete necklaces were worn by all classes; peasants wore stones on flax thread while the wealthy wore beads of agate, pearl, carnelian, amethyst, and rock crystal. Pendants shaped into birds, animals, and humans were also worn, in addition to paste beads.
 In Ancient Greece, delicately made gold necklaces created with repoussé and plaited gold wires were worn. Most often these necklaces were ornamented with blue or green enameled rosettes, animal shapes, or vase-shaped pendants that were often detailed with fringes. It was also common to wear long gold chains with suspended cameos and small containers of perfume. New elements were introduced in the Hellenistic period; colored stones allowed for poly-chromatic pieces, and animal-head finials and spear-like or bud shaped pendants were hung from chains. Ancient Etruscans used granulation to create granulated gold beads which were strung with glass and faience beads to create colorful necklaces. In Ancient Rome necklaces were among the many types of jewellery worn by the Roman elite. Gold and silver necklaces were often ornamented with foreign and semi-precious objects such as amber, pearl, amethyst, sapphire, and diamond. In addition, ropes of pearls, gold plates inset with enamel, and lustrous stones set in gold filigree were often worn. Many large necklaces and the materials that adorned the necklaces were imported from the Near East.
 Later in the empire, following barbarian invasions, colorful and gaudy jewellery became popular. In the Byzantine era, ropes of pearls and embossed gold chains were most often worn, but new techniques such as the use of niello allowed for necklaces with brighter, more predominant gemstones. The Early Byzantine Era also saw a shift to distinctly Christian jewellery which displayed the new Christian iconography.

=== Timeline of non-classical European necklaces ===
2000 BC – AD 400: Bronze amulets embossed with coral were common. In Celtic and Gallic Europe, the most popular necklace was the heavy metal torc, made most often out of bronze, but sometimes out of silver, gold, or glass or amber beads. 

AD 400 – 1300: Early European barbarian groups favored wide, intricate gold collars not unlike the torc. Germanic tribes often wore gold and silver pieces with complex detailing and inlaid with colored glass and semi-precious stones, especially garnet. Anglo-Saxon and Scandinavian groups worked mainly in silver, due to a deficit of gold, and wrought patterns and animal forms into neck-rings. In the Gothic period necklaces were uncommon, though there are a few records of diamond, ruby, and pearl necklaces. It was not until the adoption of lower necklines later in the Middle Ages that necklaces became common.

1400–1500: During the Renaissance it was fashionable for men to wear a number of chains, plaques, and pendants around their necks, and by the end of the 15th century the wealthiest men would wear great, shoulder covering collars inlaid with gems. Women typically wore simpler pieces, such as gold chains, or strung beads or pearls. By the end of the period, larger, more heavily adorned pieces were common among the wealthy, particularly in Italy.

1500–1600: Long pearl ropes and chains with precious stones were commonly worn. In the latter half of the century, natural adornments, such as coral and pearl, were joined with enamel and metals to create intricate pendants. Heavily jeweled, delicately framed cameo pendants were popular as well. Chokers, last worn commonly in antiquity, also made a resurgence at this time.

1600–1700: Few men in the Baroque period wore jewellery, and for women necklaces were unsophisticated, often a simple strand of pearls or delicately linked and embellished strands of metal with small stones. Later in the century, after the invention of new diamond cutting techniques, priority was for the first time given to the jewels themselves, not their settings; it was common for jewels to be pinned to black velvet ribbons. Miniatures also grew in popularity, and were often made into portrait pendants or lockets.

1700–1800: Portrait pendants were still worn, and in extravagantly jeweled settings. The newly wealthy bourgeoisie delighted in jewellery, and the new imitation stones and imitation gold allowed them more access to the necklaces of the time. In the early part of the century, the dominant styles were a velvet ribbon with suspended pendants and the rivière necklace, a single row of large precious stones. By mid-century colorful, whimsical necklaces made of real and imitation gems were popular, and the end of the century saw a neo-Classical resurgence. In the Age of Enlightenment gowns often featured a neck ruffle which women accented with neck ribbons rather than traditional necklaces, but some women did wear chokers inlaid with rubies and diamonds. Seed pearls were introduced to the United States during the Federalist Era, leading to an increase in lacy pearl necklaces.

1800–1870: The low necklines of the court gowns fashionable at this time led to the use of large necklaces set with precious jewels. In Napoleon&#x27;s court that ancient Greek style was fashionable, and women wore strands of pearls or gold chains with cameos and jewels. In the Romantic period necklaces were extravagant: it was fashionable to wear a tight, gem-encrusted collar with matching jewel pendants attached and rosettes of gems with pearl borders. It was also common to wear jeweled brooches attached to neck ribbons. Some necklaces were made to be dismantled and reconfigured into a shorter necklace, brooches, and a bracelet. Highly embellished Gothic style necklaces from England reflected the crenelations, vertical lines and high relief of the cathedrals. Empress Eugénie popularised bare décolletage with multiple necklaces on the throat, shoulders, and bosom. There was also an interest in antiquity; mosaic jewellery and Roman and Greek necklaces were reproduced. Machine-made jewellery and electroplating allowed for an influx of inexpensive imitation necklaces.

1870–1910: The Edwardian era saw a resurgence of pearl necklaces, in addition to a dog-collar style of necklace made of gold or platinum with inset diamonds, emeralds, or rubies. The Art Nouveau movement inspired symbolic, abstract designs with natural and animal motifs. The materials used – glass, porcelain, bronze, ivory, mother of pearl, horn, and enamel – were not used for their value, but for their appearance.

1910–1970: Chanel popularised costume jewellery, and ropes of glass beads were common. The Art Deco movement created chunky, geometric jewellery that combined multiple types of gems and steel. By the 1960s costume jewellery was widely worn, which resulted in seasonal, ever-changing styles of necklaces and other jewellery. Fine jewellery that was common in this period included wholly geometric or organically shaped silver necklaces, and precious gems set in platinum or gold necklaces inspired by the time of the French Empire. Love beads (a single strand of stone or glass beads) and pendant necklaces (most often made of leather cords or metal chains with metal pendants) became popular and were worn mostly by men.

== East Asia ==

=== China ===

==== Chaozhu ====
In Qing dynasty China, a court necklace called ()&quot;,&quot; was worn by the Qing dynasty emperors and other members of the imperial family. The court necklace originated from a Buddhist rosary sent in 1643 by the Dalai Lama to the first emperor of the Qing dynasty. The necklace is composed of 108 small beads, with 4 large beads of contrasting stones to symbolize the 4 seasons, and was placed between groups of 27 beads. The necklace was also practical as it could be used for mathematical calculations in the absence of an abacus.
==== Necklace with longevity lock pendant ====

In China, there is a custom of wearing a necklace with a longevity lock pendant. These lock charms were sometimes personally tied around the necks of children by Buddhist or Taoist priests. The longevity lock is known as () and is an important form of amulet for children for thousand of years in Chinese culture. According to Chinese beliefs, the protect children from evil spirits and bad luck by locking its wearer&#x27;s soul and life inside of the lock. The is often made with precious materials, such as gold, silver, and jade, and having auspicious words carved on it. This form of necklace continues to be worn in present-days China.
==== Yingluo ====

 () was a ring-like neck ornament or fashionable necklace which was originally a Buddhist ornament depicted in Buddhist arts (e.g. sculptures and paintings) in China; the have roots in ancient India where its earlier prototype is the Indian ornament &quot;keyūra.&quot; The depictions of the &quot;keyūra&quot; was introduced in China along with Buddhism&quot;.&quot; The depictions of in China, such as those found in Dunhuang, evolved in shape and styles showing the cultural integration of foreign (non-Chinese) culture and the native Chinese culture due to the special characteristics of its geography.&quot;&quot; The eventually evolved from an ornament in Buddhist arts and eventually became an actual necklace by the Tang dynasty.&quot;&quot; The then became a classical form of necklace in Chinese society throughout centuries.&quot;&quot; It continues to be worn in present-day, especially as a common hanfu accessory being used by Hanfu enthusiasts since the Hanfu Movement. It comes in variety of styles, shapes, and materials.
== Oceania ==

=== Tasmania ===

==== Shell necklaces ====
Aboriginal Tasmanian women have been making shell necklaces from maireener (&quot;Phasianotrochus irisodontes&quot;) shells for at least 2,600 years, with some major collections in museums. The continuation of the practice is being threatened by reducing supply, and sixth-generation Palawa woman Lola Greeno is concerned that the practice will die out.

== Necklace lengths ==
Necklaces are typically classified by length:
; Collar
: About 30~33 centimetres (12~13-inch) long and sits high on the neck.
; Choker
: Close-fitting, short, 35~41 centimetres (14~16 in) long.
; Princess necklace
: 45~50 centimetres (18~20 in) long.
; Matinee necklace
: 56~58 centimetres (22~23 in) long.
; Opera necklace
: 75~90 centimetres (30~35 in) long and sits at the breastbone.
; Rope necklace
: Any longer than opera length.
; Lariat necklace
: Very long variation on the rope, without a clasp, often worn draped multiple times around the neck.

== Gallery ==
== Similar items ==
Pectoral ornaments are jewellery items that are also used similar to a necklace, such as reimiro, and ancient Egyptian pectorals.

Non-jewellery items, for example lanyards, for holding badges and cards, are similar to a necklace and are worn on a neck.

== See also ==
* Cross necklace
* Choker
* Collar
* Figaro chain
* Jewellery chain
* Livery collar
* Locket
* Love beads
* Pendant
* Torc
* Usekh collar

== Further reading ==
* &quot;Jewelry 7,000 Years&quot; ed. Hugh Tait. .
* &quot;Jewelry Through the Ages&quot; by Guido Gregorietti. .
* &quot;20,000 Years of Fashion: The History of Costume and Personal Adornment&quot; by Francois Boucher. .

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q189299" start="2" end="10" title="Necklace" label="necklace"/>
<link wikidata="Q161439" start="28" end="37" title="jewellery" label="jewellery"/>
<link wikidata="Q9633" start="62" end="66" title="neck" label="neck"/>
<link wikidata="Q2627975" start="164" end="174" title="Ceremony" label="ceremonial"/>
<link wikidata="Q9174" start="176" end="185" title="Religion" label="religious"/>
<link wikidata="Q148442" start="187" end="194" title="magic (illusion)" label="magical"/>
<link wikidata="Q2083647" start="199" end="207" title="Funerary art" label="funerary"/>
<link wikidata="Q694969" start="380" end="385" title="jewellery chain" label="chain"/>
<link wikidata="Q897" start="480" end="484" title="gold" label="gold"/>
<link wikidata="Q1090" start="486" end="492" title="silver" label="silver"/>
<link wikidata="Q5283" start="718" end="725" title="diamond" label="diamond"/>
<link wikidata="Q43436" start="727" end="732" title="pearl" label="pearl"/>
<link wikidata="Q43088" start="735" end="741" title="Ruby" label="rubies"/>
<link wikidata="Q43513" start="743" end="750" title="emerald" label="emerald"/>
<link wikidata="Q105368" start="753" end="759" title="garnet" label="garnet"/>
<link wikidata="Q127583" start="766" end="774" title="sapphire" label="sapphire"/>
<link wikidata="Q479505" start="1093" end="1110" title="Upper Paleolithic" label="Upper Paleolithic"/>
<link wikidata="Q503142" start="1183" end="1185" title="Before Present" label="BP"/>
<link wikidata="Q11761" start="1194" end="1204" title="Bronze Age" label="Bronze Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q269678" start="1319" end="1336" title="Ancient Near East" label="Ancient Near East"/>
<link wikidata="Q2481441" start="1458" end="1477" title="Ancient Mesopotamia" label="Ancient Mesopotamia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1123756" start="1479" end="1493" title="cylinder seals" label="cylinder seals"/>
<link wikidata="Q5684" start="1538" end="1553" title="Ancient Babylon" label="Ancient Babylon"/>
<link wikidata="Q324369" start="1578" end="1587" title="carnelian" label="carnelian"/>
<link wikidata="Q216798" start="1589" end="1601" title="lapis lazuli" label="lapis lazuli"/>
<link wikidata="Q123314" start="1603" end="1608" title="agate" label="agate"/>
<link wikidata="Q897" start="1614" end="1618" title="gold" label="gold"/>
<link wikidata="Q2397485" start="1650" end="1655" title="chain" label="chain"/>
<link wikidata="Q35355" start="1658" end="1675" title="Sumer" label="Ancient Sumerians"/>
<link wikidata="Q11768" start="1754" end="1767" title="Ancient Egypt" label="Ancient Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q497903" start="1852" end="1859" title="collar (clothing)" label="collars"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053956" start="2052" end="2057" title="Beads" label="Beads"/>
<link wikidata="Q131557" start="2266" end="2272" title="Amulet" label="Amulet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1516494" start="2310" end="2323" title="Ancient Crete" label="Ancient Crete"/>
<link wikidata="Q43436" start="2435" end="2440" title="pearl" label="pearl"/>
<link wikidata="Q79058" start="2453" end="2461" title="amethyst" label="amethyst"/>
<link wikidata="Q43010" start="2467" end="2479" title="quartz" label="rock crystal"/>
<link wikidata="Q11772" start="2577" end="2591" title="Ancient Greece" label="Ancient Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q656884" start="2637" end="2645" title="Repoussé and chasing" label="repoussé"/>
<link wikidata="Q2111434" start="2791" end="2798" title="pendant" label="pendant"/>
<link wikidata="Q28512" start="2898" end="2904" title="Cameo (carving)" label="cameos"/>
<link wikidata="Q428995" start="2974" end="2992" title="Hellenistic period" label="Hellenistic period"/>
<link wikidata="Q1406758" start="3060" end="3066" title="finial" label="finial"/>
<link wikidata="Q17161" start="3129" end="3146" title="Etruscan civilization" label="Ancient Etruscans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1543258" start="3152" end="3163" title="Granulation (jewellery)" label="granulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747689" start="3276" end="3288" title="Ancient Rome" label="Ancient Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q161439" start="3328" end="3337" title="jewellery" label="jewellery"/>
<link wikidata="Q897" start="3363" end="3367" title="Gold" label="Gold"/>
<link wikidata="Q1090" start="3372" end="3378" title="silver" label="silver"/>
<link wikidata="Q25381" start="3458" end="3463" title="amber" label="amber"/>
<link wikidata="Q43436" start="3465" end="3470" title="pearl" label="pearl"/>
<link wikidata="Q79058" start="3472" end="3480" title="amethyst" label="amethyst"/>
<link wikidata="Q127583" start="3482" end="3490" title="sapphire" label="sapphire"/>
<link wikidata="Q5283" start="3496" end="3503" title="diamond" label="diamond"/>
<link wikidata="Q269678" start="3713" end="3723" title="Ancient Near East" label="Near East."/>
<link wikidata="Q134313" start="3756" end="3765" title="barbarian" label="barbarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q12544" start="3829" end="3842" title="Byzantine Empire" label="Byzantine era"/>
<link wikidata="Q1164661" start="3945" end="3951" title="niello" label="niello"/>
<link wikidata="Q83437" start="4006" end="4014" title="gemstone" label="gemstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043" start="4072" end="4081" title="Christianity" label="Christian"/>
<link wikidata="Q35966" start="4262" end="4268" title="Celts" label="Celtic"/>
<link wikidata="Q273854" start="4273" end="4279" title="Gauls" label="Gallic"/>
<link wikidata="Q397447" start="4334" end="4338" title="torc" label="torc"/>
<link wikidata="Q134313" start="4463" end="4472" title="barbarian" label="barbarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q22633" start="4538" end="4553" title="Germanic peoples" label="Germanic tribes"/>
<link wikidata="Q46825" start="4835" end="4848" title="Gothic period" label="Gothic period"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="5006" end="5017" title="Middle Ages" label="Middle Ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q4692" start="5071" end="5082" title="Renaissance" label="Renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1424519" start="5795" end="5801" title="Choker" label="Choker"/>
<link wikidata="Q41493" start="5826" end="5835" title="Ancient history" label="antiquity"/>
<link wikidata="Q37853" start="5901" end="5908" title="Baroque" label="Baroque"/>
<link wikidata="Q134307" start="6368" end="6376" title="portrait" label="portrait"/>
<link wikidata="Q1402709" start="6389" end="6395" title="locket" label="locket"/>
<link wikidata="Q52090" start="6502" end="6513" title="bourgeoisie" label="bourgeoisie"/>
<link wikidata="Q112340485" start="6748" end="6764" title="Rivière (jewellery)" label="rivière necklace"/>
<link wikidata="Q12539" start="6962" end="6982" title="Age of Enlightenment" label="Age of Enlightenment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1424519" start="7116" end="7122" title="choker" label="choker"/>
<link wikidata="Q5440578" start="7217" end="7231" title="Federalist Era" label="Federalist Era"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351030" start="7318" end="7329" title="Court dress" label="court gowns"/>
<link wikidata="Q517" start="7418" end="7426" title="Napoleon" label="Napoleon"/>
<link wikidata="Q37068" start="7561" end="7576" title="Romantic period" label="Romantic period"/>
<link wikidata="Q499916" start="7776" end="7784" title="brooches" label="brooches"/>
<link wikidata="Q157130" start="8054" end="8069" title="Eugénie de Montijo" label="Empress Eugénie"/>
<link wikidata="Q2087952" start="8087" end="8098" title="décolletage" label="décolletage"/>
<link wikidata="Q185852" start="8381" end="8394" title="Edwardian era" label="Edwardian era"/>
<link wikidata="Q34636" start="8549" end="8560" title="Art Nouveau" label="Art Nouveau"/>
<link wikidata="Q218115" start="8797" end="8803" title="Chanel" label="Chanel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1536680" start="8816" end="8833" title="costume jewelry" label="costume jewellery"/>
<link wikidata="Q173782" start="8877" end="8885" title="Art Deco" label="Art Deco"/>
<link wikidata="Q179023" start="9302" end="9315" title="French colonial empire" label="French Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q6691752" start="9317" end="9327" title="Love beads" label="Love beads"/>
<link wikidata="Q8733" start="9561" end="9573" title="Qing dynasty" label="Qing dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="9574" end="9579" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q37349" start="9774" end="9784" title="Dalai Lama" label="Dalai Lama"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="10146" end="10151" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q56043156" start="10200" end="10214" title="Lock charm" label="longevity lock"/>
<link wikidata="Q131557" start="10395" end="10401" title="amulet" label="amulet"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="10997" end="11002" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q748" start="11150" end="11158" title="Buddhism" label="Buddhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q319114" start="11223" end="11231" title="Dunhuang" label="Dunhuang"/>
<link wikidata="Q9683" start="11528" end="11540" title="Tang dynasty" label="Tang dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q106611263" start="11715" end="11730" title="Hanfu accessories" label="hanfu accessory"/>
<link wikidata="Q5647802" start="11773" end="11787" title="Hanfu Movement" label="Hanfu Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q265730" start="11902" end="11922" title="Aboriginal Tasmanian" label="Aboriginal Tasmanian"/>
<link wikidata="Q13711699" start="11984" end="12011" title="Phasianotrochus irisodontes" label="Phasianotrochus irisodontes"/>
<link wikidata="Q265730" start="12186" end="12192" title="Aboriginal Tasmanian" label="Palawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q4227938" start="12328" end="12334" title="Collar (jewelry)" label="Collar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1424519" start="12408" end="12414" title="Choker" label="Choker"/>
<link wikidata="Q2139047" start="12960" end="12967" title="reimiro" label="reimiro"/>
<link wikidata="Q12065480" start="12973" end="12999" title="Pectoral (Ancient Egypt)" label="ancient Egyptian pectorals"/>
<link wikidata="Q174279" start="13035" end="13042" title="lanyard" label="lanyard"/>
<link wikidata="Q5188464" start="13143" end="13157" title="Cross necklace" label="Cross necklace"/>
<link wikidata="Q1424519" start="13160" end="13166" title="Choker" label="Choker"/>
<link wikidata="Q4227938" start="13169" end="13175" title="Collar (jewelry)" label="Collar"/>
<link wikidata="Q5447690" start="13178" end="13190" title="Figaro chain" label="Figaro chain"/>
<link wikidata="Q694969" start="13193" end="13208" title="Jewellery chain" label="Jewellery chain"/>
<link wikidata="Q481243" start="13211" end="13224" title="Livery collar" label="Livery collar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1402709" start="13227" end="13233" title="Locket" label="Locket"/>
<link wikidata="Q6691752" start="13236" end="13246" title="Love beads" label="Love beads"/>
<link wikidata="Q2111434" start="13249" end="13256" title="Pendant" label="Pendant"/>
<link wikidata="Q397447" start="13259" end="13263" title="Torc" label="Torc"/>
<link wikidata="Q253052" start="13266" end="13278" title="Usekh collar" label="Usekh collar"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="253539" wikidata="Q2124129" url="?curid=253539" title="REO Speed Wagon">
<text>The REO Speed Wagon (alternatively Reo Speedwagon) was a light motor truck model manufactured by REO Motor Car Company. It is an ancestor of the pickup truck.

First introduced in 1915, production continued through at least 1953, and made REO (the initials of its founder, Ransom Eli Olds) one of the better-known manufacturers of commercial vehicles in America prior to World War II. Although the basic design and styling of the chassis remained consistent, the Speed Wagon was manufactured in a variety of configurations (pickup and panel truck, passenger bus) to serve as delivery, tow, dump, and fire trucks, as well as hearses and ambulances. Other manufacturers provided refits for adapting the Speed Wagon for specialized purposes. The Speed Wagon used REO&#x27;s &quot;Gold Crown&quot; series of engines, and was well regarded for power, durability, and quality.

While REO produced some wagons based on its automobile chassis (the Model H) starting in 1908 and had organized a division to produce trucks in 1910 with success, the Speed Wagon&#x27;s introduction in 1915 was a significant step and a sales success. The company was soon offering a variety of Speed Wagon models with many options, and by 1925 had produced 125,000.

After years of roughly equal car and truck emphasis, REO shifted its focus completely to trucks, ending automobile production in 1936. Production for the civilian market was suspended during World War II, resuming in 1946. In 1967, Diamond T and Reo Trucks were combined to form the Diamond Reo Trucks Division of the White Motor Corporation.

The rock and roll quintet REO Speedwagon took its name from this vehicle, which was, in turn, later adapted into a main character in &quot;JoJo&#x27;s Bizarre Adventure&quot;.

== Models ==
* 1915 model featured 1-ton weight, four-cylinder engine, three speed transmission and aimed to be faster than the average speed of contemporary trucks.
* 1917 model featured 3.25-ton weight and canvas top and sides and cost $1125.
* 1925 model featured six-cylinder engine
* 1929 model featured REO&#x27;s &quot;Gold Crown&quot; , , six-cylinder engine.
* 1933 Model BN featured REO&#x27;s six-cylinder &quot;Gold Crown&quot; engine and combination of parts from the company&#x27;s Flying Cloud and Royale luxury cars. It is a rare, relatively fast panel delivery truck with wooden body.

==References==
==External links==

* Reo Speed Wagon Camper on display at Woodland Auto Display, Paso Robles, CA
* montage of light delivery trucks including early model Reo Speed Wagon
* 1924 Speed Wagon print advertisement
* 1925 Speed Wagon print advertisement
* 1928 Reo Speed Wagon print advertisement from Finland emphasizing the advantages of truck engines used in the Speed Wagon over engines from passenger cars.
* 1936 REO Speedwagon print advertisement
* Iowa 80 Trucking Museum</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2124129" start="4" end="19" title="REO Speed Wagon" label="REO Speed Wagon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2124129" start="35" end="49" title="REO Speed Wagon" label="Reo Speedwagon"/>
<link wikidata="Q43193" start="63" end="74" title="truck" label="motor truck"/>
<link wikidata="Q1584348" start="97" end="118" title="REO Motor Car Company" label="REO Motor Car Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q215601" start="145" end="157" title="pickup truck" label="pickup truck"/>
<link wikidata="Q560676" start="273" end="288" title="Ransom Eli Olds" label="Ransom Eli Olds"/>
<link wikidata="Q680328" start="1471" end="1480" title="Diamond T" label="Diamond T"/>
<link wikidata="Q1584348" start="1485" end="1495" title="REO Motor Car Company" label="Reo Trucks"/>
<link wikidata="Q5270903" start="1522" end="1540" title="Diamond Reo Trucks" label="Diamond Reo Trucks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1756227" start="1557" end="1580" title="White Motor Corporation" label="White Motor Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7749" start="1587" end="1600" title="rock and roll" label="rock and roll"/>
<link wikidata="Q845084" start="1609" end="1623" title="REO Speedwagon" label="REO Speedwagon"/>
<link wikidata="Q696918" start="1722" end="1751" title="JoJo&amp;#x27;s Bizarre Adventure" label="JoJo&amp;#x27;s Bizarre Adventure"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="253541" wikidata="Q201664" url="?curid=253541" title="Bracelet">
<text>A bracelet is an article of jewellery that is worn around the wrist. Bracelets may serve different uses, such as being worn as an ornament. When worn as ornaments, bracelets may have a function to hold other items of decoration, such as charms. Medical and identity information are marked on some bracelets, such as allergy bracelets, hospital patient-identification tags, and bracelet tags for newborn babies. Bracelets may be worn to signify a certain phenomenon, such as breast cancer awareness, or for religious/cultural purposes.

If a bracelet is a single, inflexible loop, it is often called a &quot;bangle&quot;. When it is worn around the ankle it is called an &quot;ankle bracelet&quot; or &quot;anklet&quot;. A &quot;boot bracelet&quot; is used to decorate boots. Bracelets can be manufactured from metal, leather, cloth, plastic, bead or other materials, and jewelry bracelets sometimes contain jewels, rocks, wood, shells, crystals, metal, or plastic hoops, pearls and many more materials.

==Origin and etymology==

Although the term &quot;armlet&quot; may be technically similar, it is taken to mean an item that sits on the upper shoulder: an arm ring. The origin of the term &#x27;bracelet&#x27; is from the Greek meaning &#x27;of the arm&#x27;, via the Old French . A bracelet is also a small brace or bracer (an arm-guard used by archers).

==Cultural and religious significance==
The history of Egyptian bracelets is as old as 5000 BCE. Starting with materials like bones, stones and woods to serve religious and spiritual interests. From the National Geographic Society, the Scarab Bracelet is one of the most recognized symbols of ancient Egypt. The scarab represented rebirth and regeneration. Carved scarabs were worn as jewelry and wrapped into the linen bandages of mummies. Myth told of the scarab god, Khepri, pushing the sun across the sky.

In 2008, Russian archaeologists from the Institute of Archaeology and Ethnology of Novosibirsk, working at the site of Denisova Cave in the Altai Mountains of Siberia, uncovered a small bone fragment from the fifth finger of a juvenile hominin, dubbed the &quot;X woman&quot; (referring to the maternal descent of mitochondrial DNA), or the Denisova hominin. Artifacts, including a bracelet, excavated in the cave at the same level were carbon dated to around 40,000 BP.

In Bulgaria, there is a tradition called martenitsa, which sometimes involves tying a red and white string around the wrist to please Baba Marta in order for spring to come sooner.

In Greece, a similar tradition, weaving a bracelet from a red and white string on the first day of March and wearing it till the end of summer, is called &quot;Martis&quot; and is considered to help protect the wearer&#x27;s skin from the strong Greek sun.

In some parts of India, the number and type of bangles worn by a woman denotes her marital status

In Sikhism, an iron bracelet is one of the most mandatory articles known as the Five Ks.

In Latin America, Azabache Bracelets are worn to protect against the Mal de ojo, or evil eye. The evil eye is believed to result of excessive admiration or envious looks by others. Having newborn babies wear an azabache (a gold bracelet or necklace with a black or red coral charm in the form of a fist), is believed to protect them from the evil eye.

==Types==
=== Alternative health ===
Alternative health bracelets, such as ionized bracelets, karma bracelets, magnetic bracelets, Power Balance hologram bracelets, etc., are not distinguished by their design but rather the beneficial function claimed for them by their manufacturers and distributors. Karma bracelets are made from wood beads and may contain various charms, and are associated with bringing good luck and good karma to those who choose to wear it. No claims of effectiveness made by manufacturers have ever been substantiated by independent sources.

=== Bangles ===
Hard material or rigid bracelets, usually made from metal, wood, or plastic, are referred to as &quot;bangles&quot; or &quot;bangle bracelets&quot;. They can be smooth, textured or set with stones. In India, glass bangles are common. There are a lot of handcrafted bangles in India too. Made from ordinary glass that is about in width, they are worn in groups so that arm movement causes them to make a gracious sound rather like the clinking of wind chimes. In India, it is also common that young children will wear thin gold bangles on their hands and ankles. A common type is also Friendship bracelets.

=== Beaded ===
Usually made from loose beads with a center hole and connected by a piece of string or elastic band through the holes. Most often made with wooden beads, plastic, glass or even crystal beads.

=== Charm ===
A charm bracelet carries pendants or trinkets which can be signifiers of important things, interests/hobbies, and memories in the wearer&#x27;s life. 

While traditional charms dangle, Italian charms feature individual pieces soldered flat onto the surface of the link.

=== Elastic ===

Made from an elastic fabric or spandex material, elastic bracelets are typically sublimation printed with colorful designs and reversible. First created and made popular by Zox in the early 2010s, they&#x27;ve become more popular in the past decade.

=== Link ===
Bracelets made from connecting or linking various or similar components or jewelry findings. Link bracelets can be made of a variety of materials including metals and gemstones.

===Penannular===
Penannular, meaning an incomplete circle, has been a very common form for bracelets, especially ones made in a single piece of a slightly flexible material such as metal or plastic. It is particularly popular in gold.

=== Slap ===
In the late 1980s and early 1990s, &quot;slap bracelets&quot;—flat, felt-covered metal strips that curved around one&#x27;s wrist when gently hit against it—were a popular fad. Often adorned with neon colors and vivid graphics, these bracelets could be found at inexpensive retailers. A false rumor emerged that &quot;slap bracelets&quot; caused bleeding and puncture wounds and thus they fell out of style.

=== Sports ===

The use of colored silicone rubber as a material for producing sports bracelets was popularized by Nike and Lance Armstrong through the Yellow Livestrong wristband starting in May 2003. Their success has led to the silicone bracelet becoming a low cost tool for various awareness, information, and charity campaigns. This can be likened to the use of awareness ribbons for similar purposes. These bracelets are also known as &quot;baller id bands&quot;, &quot;baller bands&quot; or &quot;wristbands&quot;. They can also be referred to as rubber wristbands, silicone wristbands or gel wristbands. For sport climbing, bracelets are designed with climbing cords (dynamic rope) to serve as a mountain climbing gear.

=== Tennis ===
While playing a match at the 1978 U.S. Open, tennis player Chris Evert was wearing a diamond line bracelet, which fell from her wrist to the surface of the court. She said about this, &quot;I dropped my tennis bracelet&quot;, and since then diamond line bracelets have also been called &quot;tennis bracelets&quot;. The term &quot;tennis bracelet&quot; appears in print before this incident, but not necessarily referring to diamond line bracelets. An advertisement for a &quot;sterling tennis bracelet&quot; in &quot;The New Yorker&quot; in 1975, for example, shows a solid silver bangle featuring a tennis racket design, made by the Gorham Manufacturing Company.

Tennis bracelets are made up of many identical settings, each of which incorporates a hinge. The links are usually riveted or soldered from the sides of the bracelet allowing it to flex freely around the wrist with minimal movement left-to-right. A typical tennis bracelet will feature round diamonds set in four claw settings. Tennis bracelets can be adjusted to fit the wearer by removing links, this must be done by a jeweller.

==See also==
* Anklet
* Armband
* Brace (armor)
* Friendship bracelet
* List of topics characterized as pseudoscience (bracelets with health/healing/performance benefits)
* Manillas
* Necklace
* Nomination (jewelry brand)
* POW bracelet
* Red string (Kabbalah)
* Slave bracelet
* Torc

== Explanatory notes ==
== References ==
==External links==

* Metropolitan jewelry, a collection catalog from The Metropolitan Museum of Art Libraries (fully available online as PDF), which contains material on bracelets
* Bracelets at the University of Michigan Museum of Art
* Bracelets at the British Museum</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q201664" start="2" end="10" title="Bracelet" label="bracelet"/>
<link wikidata="Q161439" start="28" end="37" title="jewellery" label="jewellery"/>
<link wikidata="Q185706" start="62" end="67" title="wrist" label="wrist"/>
<link wikidata="Q488720" start="237" end="243" title="Charm bracelet" label="charms"/>
<link wikidata="Q11190" start="245" end="252" title="Medical" label="Medical"/>
<link wikidata="Q4936912" start="257" end="265" title="Body identification" label="identity"/>
<link wikidata="Q3017587" start="316" end="332" title="allergy bracelet" label="allergy bracelet"/>
<link wikidata="Q16917" start="335" end="343" title="hospital" label="hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q4959784" start="474" end="497" title="breast cancer awareness" label="breast cancer awareness"/>
<link wikidata="Q3537455" start="607" end="613" title="bangle" label="bangle"/>
<link wikidata="Q168002" start="648" end="653" title="ankle" label="ankle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1478508" start="706" end="712" title="anklet" label="anklet"/>
<link wikidata="Q190868" start="768" end="772" title="boot" label="boot"/>
<link wikidata="Q187939" start="792" end="804" title="manufacturing" label="manufactured"/>
<link wikidata="Q11426" start="810" end="815" title="metal" label="metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q286" start="817" end="824" title="leather" label="leather"/>
<link wikidata="Q28823" start="826" end="831" title="cloth" label="cloth"/>
<link wikidata="Q11474" start="833" end="840" title="plastic" label="plastic"/>
<link wikidata="Q83437" start="907" end="912" title="Gemstone" label="jewel"/>
<link wikidata="Q8063" start="915" end="919" title="Rock (geology)" label="rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q287" start="922" end="926" title="wood" label="wood"/>
<link wikidata="Q191944" start="928" end="933" title="Exoskeleton" label="shell"/>
<link wikidata="Q6398218" start="1054" end="1060" title="armlet" label="armlet"/>
<link wikidata="Q4792469" start="1159" end="1167" title="arm ring" label="arm ring"/>
<link wikidata="Q382931" start="1320" end="1326" title="bracer" label="bracer"/>
<link wikidata="Q11768" start="1415" end="1423" title="Ancient Egypt" label="Egyptian"/>
<link wikidata="Q208141" start="1452" end="1455" title="Common Era" label="BCE"/>
<link wikidata="Q167186" start="1563" end="1590" title="National Geographic Society" label="National Geographic Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q215940" start="1830" end="1836" title="Khepri" label="Khepri"/>
<link wikidata="Q23498" start="1888" end="1902" title="Archaeology" label="archaeologists"/>
<link wikidata="Q883" start="1954" end="1965" title="Novosibirsk" label="Novosibirsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1029322" start="1990" end="2003" title="Denisova Cave" label="Denisova Cave"/>
<link wikidata="Q5955" start="2011" end="2026" title="Altai Mountains" label="Altai Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q5428" start="2030" end="2037" title="Siberia" label="Siberia"/>
<link wikidata="Q107588" start="2107" end="2114" title="hominin" label="hominin"/>
<link wikidata="Q173412" start="2308" end="2320" title="Radiocarbon dating" label="carbon dated"/>
<link wikidata="Q503142" start="2338" end="2340" title="Before Present" label="BP"/>
<link wikidata="Q219" start="2346" end="2354" title="Bulgaria" label="Bulgaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q537905" start="2384" end="2394" title="martenitsa" label="martenitsa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1416469" start="2477" end="2487" title="Baba Marta" label="Baba Marta"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="2800" end="2805" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q3537455" start="2830" end="2836" title="bangle" label="bangle"/>
<link wikidata="Q9316" start="2885" end="2892" title="Sikhism" label="Sikhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q3505882" start="2958" end="2969" title="the Five Ks" label="the Five Ks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1020115" start="3041" end="3051" title="Mal de ojo" label="Mal de ojo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1020115" start="3056" end="3064" title="evil eye" label="evil eye"/>
<link wikidata="Q6063731" start="3400" end="3416" title="ionized bracelet" label="ionized bracelet"/>
<link wikidata="Q132196" start="3419" end="3433" title="karma" label="karma bracelet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128259" start="3436" end="3453" title="magnet therapy" label="magnetic bracelet"/>
<link wikidata="Q210494" start="3456" end="3469" title="Power Balance" label="Power Balance"/>
<link wikidata="Q5884084" start="3470" end="3487" title="hologram bracelet" label="hologram bracelet"/>
<link wikidata="Q132196" start="3752" end="3757" title="karma" label="karma"/>
<link wikidata="Q3537455" start="4011" end="4017" title="bangle" label="bangle"/>
<link wikidata="Q3537455" start="4034" end="4050" title="bangle" label="bangle bracelets"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="4110" end="4115" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q1455890" start="4493" end="4513" title="Friendship bracelets" label="Friendship bracelets"/>
<link wikidata="Q488720" start="4740" end="4754" title="charm bracelet" label="charm bracelet"/>
<link wikidata="Q6093111" start="4923" end="4937" title="Italian charms" label="Italian charms"/>
<link wikidata="Q7538697" start="5759" end="5772" title="slap bracelet" label="slap bracelet"/>
<link wikidata="Q189964" start="5786" end="5790" title="felt" label="felt"/>
<link wikidata="Q13427002" start="5890" end="5893" title="fad" label="fad"/>
<link wikidata="Q146439" start="6162" end="6170" title="silicone" label="silicone"/>
<link wikidata="Q483915" start="6242" end="6246" title="Nike, Inc." label="Nike"/>
<link wikidata="Q2172" start="6251" end="6266" title="Lance Armstrong" label="Lance Armstrong"/>
<link wikidata="Q196066" start="6286" end="6306" title="Livestrong wristband" label="Livestrong wristband"/>
<link wikidata="Q153524" start="6494" end="6510" title="awareness ribbon" label="awareness ribbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1549506" start="6631" end="6640" title="wristband" label="wristband"/>
<link wikidata="Q1541373" start="6743" end="6757" title="sport climbing" label="sport climbing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1774271" start="6803" end="6815" title="dynamic rope" label="dynamic rope"/>
<link wikidata="Q1508030" start="6900" end="6914" title="1978 U.S. Open (tennis)" label="1978 U.S. Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q14286" start="6930" end="6941" title="Chris Evert" label="Chris Evert"/>
<link wikidata="Q217305" start="7389" end="7403" title="The New Yorker" label="The New Yorker"/>
<link wikidata="Q48386771" start="7506" end="7534" title="Gorham Manufacturing Company" label="Gorham Manufacturing Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q1478508" start="7984" end="7990" title="Anklet" label="Anklet"/>
<link wikidata="Q680343" start="7993" end="8000" title="Armband" label="Armband"/>
<link wikidata="Q2388208" start="8003" end="8016" title="Brace (armor)" label="Brace (armor)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1455890" start="8019" end="8038" title="Friendship bracelet" label="Friendship bracelet"/>
<link wikidata="Q4437154" start="8041" end="8086" title="List of topics characterized as pseudoscience" label="List of topics characterized as pseudoscience"/>
<link wikidata="Q1890419" start="8142" end="8150" title="Manillas" label="Manillas"/>
<link wikidata="Q189299" start="8153" end="8161" title="Necklace" label="Necklace"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8164" end="8190" title="Nomination (jewelry brand)" label="Nomination (jewelry brand)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7120070" start="8193" end="8205" title="POW bracelet" label="POW bracelet"/>
<link wikidata="Q3178472" start="8208" end="8229" title="Red string (Kabbalah)" label="Red string (Kabbalah)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7539180" start="8232" end="8246" title="Slave bracelet" label="Slave bracelet"/>
<link wikidata="Q397447" start="8249" end="8253" title="Torc" label="Torc"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="253553" wikidata="Q58579" url="?curid=253553" title="Erich Ludendorff">
<text>Erich Friedrich Wilhelm Ludendorff (; 9 April 1865 – 20 December 1937) was a Prussian-born German military officer and politician. He achieved fame during World War I (1914–1918) for his central role in the German victories at Liège and Tannenberg in 1914. After his appointment as First Quartermaster General of the Army General Staff in 1916, Ludendorff became Germany&#x27;s chief policymaker in a &quot;de facto&quot; military dictatorship until the country&#x27;s defeat in 1918. Later during the years of the Weimar Republic, he took part in the failed 1920 Kapp Putsch and Hitler&#x27;s 1923 Beer Hall Putsch, thereby contributing significantly to the Nazis&#x27; rise to power. 

Erich Ludendorff came from a family of minor nobility in Kruszewnia, in the Prussian Province of Posen. After completing his education as a cadet, he was commissioned a junior officer in 1885. In 1893, he was admitted to the prestigious German War Academy, and only a year later was recommended by its commandant to the General Staff Corps. By 1904, he had rapidly risen in rank to become a member of the Army&#x27;s Great General Staff, where he oversaw the development of the Schlieffen Plan.

Despite being removed from the Great General Staff for meddling in politics, Ludendorff restored his standing in the army through his success as a commander in World War I. In August 1914, he led the successful German assault on Liège, earning him the Pour le Mérite. On the Eastern Front under the command of General Paul von Hindenburg, Ludendorff was instrumental in inflicting a series of crushing defeats against the Russians, including at Tannenberg and the Masurian Lakes. 

By August 1916, Ludendorff had successfully lobbied for Hindenburg&#x27;s appointment as Supreme Commander as well as his own promotion to First Quartermaster General. Once he and Hindenburg had established a &quot;de facto&quot; military dictatorship, Ludendorff directed Germany&#x27;s entire military strategy and war effort until the end of the conflict. In this capacity, he secured Russia&#x27;s defeat in the east and launched a new wave of offensives on the Western Front resulting in advances not seen since the war&#x27;s outbreak. However, by late 1918, all improvements in Germany&#x27;s fortunes were reversed after its forces&#x27; decisive defeat in the Second Battle of the Marne and the Allies&#x27; Hundred Days Offensive. Faced with the war effort&#x27;s collapse and a growing popular revolution, Kaiser Wilhelm II forced Ludendorff to resign.

After the war, Ludendorff became a prominent nationalist leader and a promoter of the stab-in-the-back myth, which posited that Germany&#x27;s defeat and the settlement reached at Versailles were the result of a treasonous conspiracy by Marxists, Freemasons and Jews. He also took part in the failed 1920 Kapp Putsch and 1923 Beer Hall Putsch before unsuccessfully standing in the 1925 election for president against Hindenburg, his wartime superior. Thereafter, he retired from politics and devoted his final years to the study of military theory. His most famous work in this field was &quot;The Total War&quot;, where he argued that a nation&#x27;s entire physical and moral resources should remain forever poised for mobilization because peace was merely an interval in a never-ending chain of wars. Following his death from liver cancer in Munich in 1937, Ludendorff was given—against his explicit wishes—a state funeral organized and attended by Hitler.

==Early life==
Ludendorff was born on 9 April 1865 in Ludendorff near , in the Province of Posen and Kingdom of Prussia (now Kruszewnia, County, Poland), the third of six children of August Wilhelm Ludendorff (1833–1905). His father was descended from Pomeranian merchants who had been raised to the status of a Junker.

Erich&#x27;s mother, Klara Jeanette Henriette von Tempelhoff (1840–1914), was the daughter of the noble but impoverished Friedrich August Napoleon von Tempelhoff (1804–1868) and his wife Jeannette Wilhelmine von Dziembowska (1816–1854), who came from a Germanized Polish landed family on the side of her father Stephan von Dziembowski (1779–1859). Through Dziembowski&#x27;s wife Johanna Wilhelmine von Unruh (1793–1862), Erich was a remote descendant of the Counts of , the Dukes of Liegnitz and Brieg and the Margraves and Electors of Brandenburg.

Ludendorff had a stable and comfortable childhood, growing up on a small family farm. He received his early schooling from a maternal aunt and had a gift for mathematics, as did his younger brother Hans, who became a distinguished astronomer. Upon passing the entrance exam for the Cadet School at with distinction, he was put in a class two years ahead of his age group, and thereafter he was consistently first in his class. The famous World War II General Heinz Guderian attended the same Cadet School, which produced many well-trained German officers. Ludendorff&#x27;s education continued at the at near Berlin through to 1882.

==Pre-war military career==
In 1885, Ludendorff was commissioned as a subaltern into the 57th Infantry Regiment, then at Wesel. Over the next eight years, he was promoted to lieutenant and saw further service in the 2nd Marine Battalion, based at Kiel and Wilhelmshaven, and in the 8th Grenadier Guards at Frankfurt on the Oder. His service reports reveal the highest praise, with frequent commendations. In 1893, he entered the War Academy, where the commandant, General Meckel, recommended him to the General Staff, to which he was appointed in 1894. He rose rapidly and was a senior staff officer at the headquarters of V Corps from 1902 to 1904.

Next he joined the Great General Staff in Berlin, which was commanded by Alfred von Schlieffen, Ludendorff directed the Second or Mobilization Section from 1904 to 1913. Soon he was joined by Max Bauer, a brilliant artillery officer, who became a close friend.

In 1910 at age 45 &quot;the &#x27;old sinner&#x27;, as he liked to hear himself called&quot; married the daughter of a wealthy factory owner, Margarethe Schmidt (1875–1936). They met in a rainstorm when he offered his umbrella. She divorced to marry him, bringing three stepsons and a stepdaughter. Their marriage pleased both families and he was devoted to his stepchildren.

By 1911, Ludendorff was a full colonel. His section was responsible for writing the mass of detailed orders needed to bring the mobilized troops into position to implement the Plan. For this they covertly surveyed frontier fortifications in Russia, France and Belgium. For instance, in 1911 Ludendorff visited the key Belgian fortress city of Liège. Before the war, he was an Oberst in General Staff who studied the march route of the army in case of war.

Deputies of the Social Democratic Party of Germany, which became the largest party in the after the German federal elections of 1912, seldom gave priority to army expenditures, whether to build up its reserves or to fund advanced weaponry such as Krupp&#x27;s siege cannons. Instead, they preferred to concentrate military spending on the Imperial German Navy. Ludendorff&#x27;s calculations showed that to properly implement the Schlieffen Plan the Army lacked six corps.

Members of the General Staff were instructed to keep out of politics and the public eye, but Ludendorff shrugged off such restrictions. With a retired general, August Keim, and the head of the Pan-German League, Heinrich Class, he vigorously lobbied the for the additional men. In 1913 funding was approved for four additional corps but Ludendorff was transferred to regimental duties as commander of the 39th (Lower Rhine) Fusiliers, stationed at Düsseldorf. &quot;I attributed the change partly for my having pressed for those three additional army corps.&quot;

Barbara Tuchman characterizes Ludendorff in her book &quot;The Guns of August&quot; as Schlieffen&#x27;s devoted disciple who was a glutton for work and a man of granite character but who was deliberately friendless and forbidding and therefore remained little known or liked. It is true that as his wife testified, &quot;Anyone who knows Ludendorff knows that he has not a spark of humor...&quot;. He was voluble nonetheless, although he shunned small talk. John Lee, states that while Ludendorff was with his Fusiliers, &quot;he became the perfect regimental commander ... the younger officers came to adore him.&quot; His adjutant, Wilhelm Breucker, became a devoted lifelong friend.

==World War I==
===Battle of Liège===

At the outbreak of war in the summer of 1914 Ludendorff was appointed Deputy Chief of Staff to the German Second Army under General Karl von Bülow. His assignment was largely due to his previous work investigating defenses of Liège, Belgium. At the beginning of the Battle of Liège, Ludendorff was an observer with the 14th Brigade, which was to infiltrate the city at night and secure the bridges before they could be destroyed. The brigade commander was killed on 5 August, so Ludendorff led the successful assault to occupy the city and its citadel. In the following days, two of the forts guarding the city were taken by desperate frontal infantry attacks, while the remaining forts were smashed by huge Krupp 42-cm and Austro-Hungarian Škoda 30.5-cm howitzers. By 16 August, all the forts around Liège had fallen, allowing the German First Army to advance. As the victor of Liège, Ludendorff was awarded Germany&#x27;s highest military decoration for gallantry, the Pour le Mérite, presented by Kaiser Wilhelm II himself on 22 August.

===Command in the East===

German mobilization earmarked a single army, the Eighth, to defend their eastern frontier. When two Russian armies invaded East Prussia earlier than expected the command of the Eighth Army, Maximilian von Prittwitz with Georg von Waldersee as Chief of Staff, performed subpar and reportedly panicked. They accordingly were dismissed from command by the (OHL), the German Supreme Army Command. The War Cabinet chose a retired general, Paul von Hindenburg, as commander, while the &quot;OHL&quot; assigned Ludendorff as his new chief of staff. Hindenburg and Ludendorff first met on their private train heading east. They agreed that they must annihilate the nearest Russian army before they tackled the second. On arrival, they discovered that Max Hoffmann had already shifted much of the 8th Army by rail to the south to do just that, in an amazing feat of logistical planning. Nine days later the Eighth Army surrounded most of a Russian army at Tannenberg, taking 92,000 prisoners in one of the great victories in German history. Twice during the battle Ludendorff wanted to break off, fearing that the second Russian army was about to strike their rear, but Hindenburg held firm.

The Germans turned on the second invading army in the Battle of the Masurian Lakes; it fled with heavy losses to escape encirclement. During the rest of 1914, commanding an Army Group, Hindenburg and Ludendorff staved off the projected invasion of German Silesia by dexterously moving their outnumbered forces into Russian Poland, fighting the battle of the Vistula River, which ended with a brilliantly executed withdrawal during which they destroyed the Polish railway lines and bridges needed for an invasion. When the Russians had repaired most of the damage the Germans struck their flank in the battle of Łódź, where they almost surrounded another Russian army. Masters of surprise and deft maneuver, the pair argued that if properly reinforced they could trap the entire Russian army in Poland. During the winter of 1914–15 they lobbied passionately for this strategy, but were rebuffed by the &quot;OHL&quot;.

Early in 1915 Hindenburg and Ludendorff surprised the Russian army that still held a toehold in East Prussia by attacking in a snowstorm and surrounding it in the Second Battle of the Masurian Lakes. The &quot;OHL&quot; then transferred Ludendorff, but Hindenburg&#x27;s personal plea to the Kaiser reunited them. Erich von Falkenhayn, supreme commander at the &quot;OHL&quot;, came east to attack the flank of the Russian army that was pushing through the Carpathian passes towards Hungary. Employing overwhelming artillery, the Germans and Austro-Hungarians broke through the line between and and kept pushing until the Russians were driven out of most of Galicia, in Austro-Hungarian Poland. During this advance Falkenhayn rejected schemes to try to cut off the Russians in Poland, preferring direct frontal attacks like Bug–Narew Offensive. Outgunned, during the summer of 1915 the Russian commander Grand Duke Nicholas shortened his lines by withdrawing from most of Poland, destroying railroads, bridges, and many buildings while driving 743,000 Poles,
350,000 Jews, 300,000 Lithuanians and 250,000 Latvians into Russia.
During the winter of 1915–16 Ludendorff&#x27;s headquarters was in Kaunas. The Germans occupied present-day Lithuania, western Latvia, and north eastern Poland, an area almost the size of France. Ludendorff demanded Germanization of the conquered territories and far-ranging annexations, offering land to German settlers; &quot;see &quot;. Far-reaching plans envisioned Courland and Lithuania turned into border states ruled by German military governors answerable only to the Kaiser. He proposed massive annexations and colonization in Eastern Europe in the event of the victory of the German Reich, and was one of the main supporters of the Polish Border Strip. Ludendorff planned to combine German settlement and Germanisation in conquered areas with expulsions of native populations; and envisioned an eastern German empire whose resources would be used in future war with Great Britain and the United States Ludendorff&#x27;s plans went as far as making Crimea a German colony. As to the various nations and ethnic groups in conquered territories, Ludendorff believed they were &quot;incapable of producing real culture&quot;

On 16 March 1916, the Russians, now with adequate supplies of cannons and shells, attacked parts of the new German defenses, intending to penetrate at two points and then to pocket the defenders. They attacked almost daily until the end of the month, but the Lake Naroch Offensive failed, &quot;choked in swamp and blood&quot;.

The Russians did better attacking the Austro-Hungarians in the south; the Brusilov Offensive cracked their lines with a well-prepared surprise wide-front attack led by well-schooled assault troops. The breakthrough was finally stemmed by Austro-Hungarian troops recalled from Italy stiffened with German advisers and reserves. In July, Russian attacks on the Germans in the north were beaten back. On 27 July 1916, Hindenburg was given command of all troops on the Eastern Front from the Baltic to Brody in Ukraine. Ludendorff and Hindenburg visited their new command on a special train, and then set up headquarters in Brest-Litovsk. By August 1916 their front was holding everywhere.

===Promotion to First Quartermaster-General===

In the West in 1916 the Germans attacked unsuccessfully at Verdun and soon were reeling under British and French blows along the Somme. Ludendorff&#x27;s friends at the &quot;OHL&quot;, led by Max Bauer, lobbied for him relentlessly. The balance was tipped when Romania entered the war on the side of the Entente, thrusting into Hungary. Falkenhayn was replaced as Chief of the General Staff by Hindenburg on 29 August 1916. Ludendorff was again his chief of staff as first Quartermaster general, with the stipulation that he would have joint responsibility. He was promoted to General of the Infantry. Chancellor Bethmann Hollweg warned the War Cabinet: &quot;You don&#x27;t know Ludendorff, who is only great at a time of success. If things go badly he loses his nerve.&quot;
Their first concern was the sizable Romanian Army, so troops sent from the Western Front checked Romanian and Russian incursions into Hungary. Then Romania was invaded from the south by German, Austro-Hungarian, Bulgarian, and Ottoman troops commanded by August von Mackensen and from the north by a German and Austro-Hungarian army commanded by Falkenhayn. Bucharest fell in December 1916. According to Mackensen, Ludendorff&#x27;s distant management consisted of &quot;floods of telegrams, as superfluous as they were offensive.&quot;

When sure that the Romanians would be defeated the &quot;OHL&quot; moved west, retaining the previous staff except for the operations officer, blamed for Verdun. They toured the Western Front meeting—and evaluating—commanders, learning about their problems and soliciting their opinions. At each meeting Ludendorff did most of talking for Hindenburg. There would be no further attacks at Verdun and the Somme would be defended by revised tactics that exposed fewer men to British shells. A new backup defensive line would be built, like the one they had constructed in the east. The Allies would call the new fortifications the Hindenburg Line. The German goal was victory, which they defined as a Germany with extended borders that could be more easily defended in the next war.

Hindenburg was given titular command over all of the forces of the Central Powers. Ludendorff&#x27;s hand was everywhere. Every day he was on the telephone with the staffs of their armies and the Army was deluged with &quot;Ludendorff&#x27;s paper barrage&quot; of orders, instructions and demands for information. His finger extended into every aspect of the German war effort. He issued the two daily communiques, and often met with the newspaper and newsreel reporters. Before long the public idolized him as the German Army&#x27;s brain. Historian and correspondent William L. Shirer later called him &quot;virtually dictator of Germany from 1916 until the defeat.&quot; 

===The Home Front===
Ludendorff had a goal: &quot;One thing was certain—the power must be in my hands.&quot; As stipulated by the Constitution of the German Empire the government was run by civil servants appointed by the Kaiser. Confident that army officers were superior to civilians, the &quot;OHL&quot; volunteered to oversee the economy: procurement, raw materials, labor, and food. Max Bauer, with his industrialist friends, began by setting overambitious targets for military production in what they called the Hindenburg Program. Ludendorff enthusiastically participated in meetings on economic policy—loudly, sometimes pummeling the table with his fists. Implementation of the Program was assigned to General Groener, a staff officer who had directed the Field Railway Service effectively. His office was in the (civilian) War Ministry, not in the &quot;OHL&quot; as Ludendorff had wanted. Therefore, he assigned staff officers to most government ministries, so he knew what was going on and could press his demands.

War industry&#x27;s major problem was the scarcity of skilled workers, therefore 125,000 men were released from the armed forces and trained workers were no longer conscripted. The &quot;OHL&quot; wanted to enroll most German men and women into national service, but the Reichstag legislated that only males 17–60 were subject to &quot;patriotic service&quot; and refused to bind war workers to their jobs. Groener realized that they needed the support of the workers, so he insisted that union representatives be included on industrial dispute boards. He also advocated an excess profits tax. The industrialists were incensed. On 16 August 1917, Ludendorff telegraphed an order reassigning Groener to command the 33rd Infantry Division. Overall, &quot;unable to control labour and unwilling to control industry, the army failed miserably&quot;. To the public it seemed that Ludendorff was running the nation as well as the war. According to Ludendorff, &quot;the authorities ... represented me as a dictator&quot;. He would not become Chancellor because the demands for running the war were too great. The historian Frank Tipton argues that while not technically a dictator, Ludendorff was &quot;unquestionably the most powerful man in Germany&quot; in 1917–18.

The &quot;OHL&quot; did nothing to mitigate the crisis of growing food shortages in Germany. Despite the Allied blockade, everyone could have been fed adequately, but supplies were not managed effectively or fairly. In spring 1918, half of all the meat, eggs, and fruit consumed in Berlin were sold on the black market.

===In government===
The Navy advocated unrestricted submarine warfare, which would surely bring the United States into the war. At the Kaiser&#x27;s request, his commanders met with his friend, the eminent chemist Walther Nernst, who knew America well, and who warned against the idea. Ludendorff promptly ended the meeting; it was &quot;incompetent nonsense with which a civilian was wasting his time.&quot; Unrestricted submarine warfare began in February 1917, with the &quot;OHL&quot;’s strong support. This fatal mistake reflected poor military judgment in uncritically accepting the Navy’s contention that there were no effective potential countermeasures, like convoying, and confidence that the American armed forces were too feeble to fight effectively. By the end of the war, Germany would be at war with 27 nations.

Ludendorff, with the Kaiser&#x27;s blessing, helped Lenin and other 30 or so revolutionaries in exile return to Russia. Ludendorff agreed to send the Bolsheviks in Switzerland by train through Germany from where they would then travel to Russia via Sweden. Lenin, however, still took some convincing, insisting that he be sent on a sealed train. Lenin ultimately agreed on 31 March, and would depart Switzerland on 8 April.

In the spring of 1917 the Reichstag passed a resolution for peace without annexations or indemnities. They would be content with the successful defensive war undertaken in 1914. The &quot;OHL&quot; was unable to defeat the resolution or to have it substantially watered down. The commanders despised Chancellor Bethmann Hollweg as weak, so they forced his resignation by repeatedly threatening to resign themselves, despite the Kaiser&#x27;s admonition that this was not their business. Bethmann Hollweg was replaced by a minor functionary, Georg Michaelis, the food minister, who announced that he would deal with the resolution as &quot;in his own fashion&quot;. Despite this put-down, the Reichstag voted the financial credits needed for continuing the war.

Following the overthrow of Tsar Nicholas II of Russia, the new Russian government launched the Kerensky Offensive in July 1917, attacking the Austro-Hungarian lines in Galicia. After minor successes the Russians were driven back and many of their soldiers refused to fight. The counterattack was halted only after the line was pushed eastwards. The Germans capped the year in the East by capturing the strong Russian fortress of Riga in September 1917, starting with a brief, overwhelming artillery barrage using many gas shells then followed by infiltrating infantry. The Bolsheviks seized power and soon were at the peace table.

Ludendorff insisted on the huge territorial losses forced on Russia in the Treaty of Brest-Litovsk, even though this required that a million German soldiers remain in the east. During the peace negotiations with Russia, his representative kept demanding the economic concessions coveted by German industrialists. The commanders kept blocking attempts to frame a plausible peace offer to the western powers by insisting on borders expanded for future defense. Ludendorff regarded the Germans as the &quot;master race&quot; and after victory planned to settle ex-soldiers in the Baltic states and in Alsace-Lorraine, where they would take over property seized from Balts and the French. One after another the &quot;OHL&quot; toppled government ministers they regarded as weak.

===Western Front (1916–1917)===

In contrast to the &quot;OHL&#x27;s&quot; questionable interventions in politics and diplomacy, their armies continued to excel. The commanders would agree on what was to be done and then Ludendorff and the &quot;OHL&quot; staff produced the mass of orders specifying exactly what was to be accomplished. On the western front they stopped packing defenders in the front line, which reduced losses to enemy artillery. They issued a directive on elastic defense, in which attackers who penetrated a lightly held front line entered a battle zone in which they were punished by artillery and counterattacks. It remained German Army doctrine through World War II; schools taught the new tactics to all ranks. Its effectiveness is illustrated by comparing the first half of 1916 in which 77 German soldiers died or went missing for every 100 British to the second half when 55 Germans were lost for every 100 British.

By February 1917 the OHL was sure that the new French commander, General Robert Nivelle, would attack, and correctly foresaw that he would try to pinch off the German salient between Arras and Noyon. So the OHL withdrew German forces to the segment of the Hindenburg line across the base of the salient in , leaving the ground they gave up as a depopulated waste land. The Nivelle Offensive in April 1917 was blunted by mobile defense in depth. Many French units mutinied, though the &quot;OHL&quot; never grasped the extent of the disarray.

The British supported their allies with a successful attack near Arras and had another success in June 1917 at Messines Ridge in Flanders. Then at the end of July 1917, the British attacked Passchendaele Ridge. At first the defense was directed by General von Lossberg, a pioneer in defense in depth, but when the British adjusted their tactics, Ludendorff took over day-to-day control. The British eventually took Passchendaele Ridge at great cost.

Ludendorff worried about declining morale, so in July 1917 &quot;OHL&quot; established a propaganda unit. In October 1917 they began mandatory patriotic lectures to the troops, who were assured that if the war was lost they would &quot;become slaves of international capital&quot;. The lecturers were to &quot;ensure that a fight is kept up against all agitators, croakers, and weaklings&quot;.

To bolster the wobbling Austro-Hungarian government, the Germans provided some troops and led a joint attack in Italy in October. They sliced through the Italian lines in the mountains at Caporetto. Two hundred and fifty thousand Italians were captured and the rest of Italian Army was forced to retreat to the Grappa-Piave defensive line.

On 20 November 1917, the British achieved a total surprise by attacking at Cambrai. A short, intense bombardment preceded an attack by tanks, which led the infantry through the German wire. It was Ludendorff&#x27;s 52nd birthday, but he was too upset to attend the celebratory dinner. The British were not organized to exploit their breakthrough, and German reserves counterattacked, in some places driving the British back beyond their starting lines.

At the beginning of 1918 almost a million munition workers struck; one demand was peace without annexations. &quot;OHL&quot; ordered that all strikers fit to bear arms&#x27; be sent to the front, thereby degrading military service.&quot;

===Western Front (1918)===

With Russia out of the war, the Germans outnumbered the Allies on the Western Front. After extensive consultations, &quot;OHL&quot; planned a series of attacks to drive the British out of the war. During the winter all ranks were schooled in the innovative tactics proven at Caporetto and Riga. The first attack, Operation Michael, was on 21 March 1918 near Cambrai. After an effective hurricane bombardment coordinated by Colonel Bruchmüller, they slashed through the British lines, surmounting the obstacles that had thwarted their enemies for three years. On the first day they occupied as large an area as the Allies had won on the Somme after 140 days. The Allies were aghast, but it was not the triumph &quot;OHL&quot; had hoped for: they had planned another Tannenberg by surrounding tens of thousands of British troops in the Cambrai salient, but had been thwarted by stout defense and fighting withdrawal. They lost as many men as the defenders—the first day was the bloodiest of the war. Among the dead was Ludendorff’s oldest stepson; a younger had been killed earlier. The Germans were unable to cut any vital railway. When Ludendorff motored near the front he was displeased by seeing how: &quot;The numerous slightly wounded made things difficult by the stupid and displeasing way in which they hurried to the rear.&quot; The Americans doubled the number of troops being sent to France.

Their next attack was in Flanders. Again they broke through, advancing , and forcing the British to give back all of the ground that they had won the preceding year after weeks of battle. But the Germans were stopped short of the rail junction that was their goal. Next, to draw French reserves south, they struck along the . In their most successful attack yet they advanced on the first day, crossing the Marne but stopping from Paris. However each German triumph weakened their army and its morale. From 20 March 1918 to 25 June the German front lengthened from to .

Then the Germans struck near Reims, to seize additional railway lines for use in the salient, but were foiled by brilliant French elastic tactics. Undeterred, on 18 July 1918 Ludendorff, still &quot;aggressive and confident&quot;, traveled to Flanders to confer about the next attack there. A telephone call reported that the French and Americans, led by a mass of tanks, had smashed through the right flank of their salient pointing toward Paris, on the opening day of the Battle of Soissons. Everyone present realized that surely they had lost the war. Ludendorff was shattered.

&quot;OHL&quot; began to withdraw step by step to new defensive lines, first evacuating all of their wounded and supplies. Ludendorff&#x27;s communiques, which hitherto had been largely factual, now distorted the news, for instance claiming that American troops had to be herded onto troop ships by special police.

On 8 August 1918, the Germans were completely surprised at Amiens when British tanks broke through the defenses and intact German formations surrendered. To Ludendorff it was the &quot;black day in the history of the German Army&quot;. The German retreats continued, pressed by Allied attacks. &quot;OHL&quot; still vigorously opposed offering to give up the territory they desired in France and Belgium, so the German government was unable to make a plausible peace proposal.

Ludendorff became increasingly cantankerous, railing at his staff without cause, publicly accusing Hindenburg of talking nonsense, and sometimes bursting into tears. Bauer wanted him replaced, but instead a doctor, Hochheimer, was brought to &quot;OHL.&quot; He had worked closely with Ludendorff in Poland during the winter of 1915–16 on plans to bring in German colonists. Before the war he had a practice in nervous diseases. Hochheimer &quot;spoke as a friend and he listened as a friend&quot;, convincing Ludendorff that he could not work effectively with one hour of sleep a night and that he must relearn how to relax. After a month away from headquarters Ludendorff had recovered from the severest symptoms of battle fatigue.

===Downfall===
On 29 September 1918, Ludendorff and Hindenburg suddenly told an incredulous Kaiser that they could not guarantee the integrity of the Western front &quot;for two hours&quot; and they must have an immediate armistice. A new Chancellor, Prince Maximilian of Baden, approached President Woodrow Wilson, but Wilson&#x27;s terms were unacceptable to the German leadership, and so the German army fought on. The chancellor told the Kaiser that he and his cabinet would resign unless Ludendorff was removed, but that Hindenburg must remain to hold the army together. The Kaiser called his commanders in, curtly accepting Ludendorff&#x27;s resignation and then rejecting Hindenburg&#x27;s. Fuming, Ludendorff would not accompany the field marshal back to headquarters: &quot;I refused to ride with you because you have treated me so shabbily&quot;.

Ludendorff had assiduously sought all of the credit; now he was rewarded with all of the blame. Widely despised, and with revolution breaking out, he was hidden by his brother and a network of friends until he slipped out of Germany disguised in blue spectacles and a false beard and fake Finnish passport, settling in a Swedish admirer&#x27;s country home until the Swedish government asked him to leave in February 1919. Within seven months, he wrote two volumes of detailed memoirs. Friends, led by Breucker, provided him with documents and negotiated with publishers. Groener (who is not mentioned in the book) characterized it as a showcase of his &quot;caesar-mania&quot;. He was a brilliant general, according to John Wheeler-Bennett, stating that he was &quot;certainly one of the greatest routine military organizers that the world has ever seen&quot;, but he also said he was a ruinous political meddler. The influential military analyst Hans Delbrück concluded that &quot;The Empire was built by Moltke and Bismarck, destroyed by Tirpitz and Ludendorff.&quot;

==After the Great War==
In exile, Ludendorff wrote numerous books and articles about the German military&#x27;s conduct of the war while forming the foundation for the , the &quot;stab-in-the-back theory,&quot; for which he is considered largely responsible, insisting that a domestic crisis had sparked Germany&#x27;s surrender while the military situation held firm, ignoring that he himself had pressed the politicians for an armistice on military grounds. Ludendorff was convinced that Germany had fought a defensive war and, in his opinion, that Kaiser Wilhelm II had failed to organize a proper counter-propaganda campaign or provide efficient leadership.

Ludendorff was extremely suspicious of the Social Democrats and leftists, whom he blamed for the humiliation of Germany through the Versailles Treaty. Ludendorff claimed that he paid close attention to the business element (especially the Jews), and saw them turn their backs on the war effort by—as he saw it—letting profit, rather than patriotism, dictate production and financing.

Again focusing on the left, Ludendorff was appalled by the strikes that took place towards the end of the war and the way that the home front collapsed before the military front did, with the former poisoning the morale of soldiers on temporary leave. Most importantly, Ludendorff felt that the German people as a whole had underestimated what was at stake in the war; he was convinced that the Entente had started the war and was determined to dismantle Germany completely.

Ludendorff wrote:
==Political career in the Republic==
Ludendorff returned to Berlin in February 1919. Staying at the Adlon Hotel, he talked with another resident, Sir Neill Malcolm, the head of the British Military Mission. After Ludendorff presented his excuses for the German defeat Malcolm said, &quot;You mean that you were stabbed in the back?&quot; coining a key catchphrase for the German right wing.

On 12 March 1920, 5,000 troops under the command of Walther von Lüttwitz marched on the Chancellery, forcing the government led by Friedrich Ebert and Gustav Bauer to flee the city. The putschists proclaimed a new government with a right-wing politician, Wolfgang Kapp as the new &quot;chancellor&quot;. Ludendorff and Max Bauer were part of the putsch. The Kapp Putsch was soon defeated by a general strike that brought Berlin to a standstill. The leaders fled, Ludendorff to Bavaria, where a right-wing coup had succeeded. He published two volumes of annotatedand in a few instances pruneddocuments and commentaries documenting his war service. He reconciled with Hindenburg, who began to visit every year.

In May 1923, Ludendorff had an agreeable first meeting with Adolf Hitler, and soon he had regular contacts with Nazis. On 8 November 1923, the Bavarian Gustav von Kahr was addressing a jammed meeting in a large beer hall, the &quot;Bürgerbräukeller&quot;. Hitler, waving a pistol, jumped onto the stage, announcing that the national revolution was underway. The hall was occupied by armed men who covered the audience with a machine gun, the first move in the Beer Hall Putsch. Hitler announced that he would lead the Reich Government and Ludendorff would command the army. He addressed the now enthusiastically supportive audience and then spent the night in the War Ministry, unsuccessfully trying to obtain the army&#x27;s backing.

The next morning, 3,000 armed Nazis formed outside of the &quot;Bürgerbräukeller&quot; and marched into central Munich, the leaders just behind the flag bearers. They were blocked by a cordon of police, and firing broke out for less than a minute. Several of the Nazis in front were hit or dropped to the ground. Ludendorff and his adjutant Major Streck marched to the police line where they pushed aside the rifle barrels. He was respectfully arrested. He was indignant when he was sent home while the other leaders remained in custody. Four police officers and 15 Nazis had been killed, including Ludendorff&#x27;s servant, Kurt Neubauer.

They were tried in early 1924. Ludendorff was acquitted, but Heinz Pernet, Ludendorff&#x27;s stepson, was convicted of &quot;aiding and abetting treason,&quot; given a fifteen-month sentence. Hitler went to prison but was released after nine months. Ludendorff&#x27;s 60th birthday was celebrated by massed bands and a large torchlight parade. In 1924, he was elected to the Reichstag as a representative of the NSFB (a coalition of the German Freedom Party (DVFP) and members of the Nazi Party), serving until 1928. In 1925, he founded the Tannenbergbund, a German nationalist organization which was both anti-Semitic and anti-Catholic, and published literature espousing conspiracy theories involving Jews, Catholics—especially Jesuits—and Freemasons.

As his views became more extreme under the influence of his wife, Mathilde von Kemnitz, Ludendorff gradually began to part company with Hitler, who was surreptitiously working to undermine the reputation of his one serious rival for the leadership of the extreme right in Germany. The stranded relationships between NSDAP and other far right or nationalist movements only increased the gap between Hitler and Ludendorff&#x27;s ideas; the surge of the SA as the armed wing of National Socialism also made redundant the presence inside the party of a &quot;military&quot; leader (Ludendorff) interacting with the &quot;political&quot; leader (Hitler). By February 1926, Hitler&#x27;s movement was in the process of breaking ties with Ludendorff-sponsored Tannenbergbund. Previously, Ludendorff had been persuaded to run for President of the Republic in the March 1925 election as the DVFP candidate, in alliance with the Nazis, but received only 1.1 per cent of the vote; there is some evidence that Hitler himself persuaded Ludendorff to run, knowing that the results would be humiliating.

No one had a majority in the initial round of the election, so a second round was needed; Hindenburg entered the race and was narrowly elected. Ludendorff felt so humiliated by what he saw as a betrayal by his old friend that he broke off relations with Hindenburg, and in 1927 refused to even stand beside the field marshal at the dedication of the Tannenberg memorial. He attacked Hindenburg abusively for not having acted in a &quot;nationalistic soldier-like fashion&quot;. The Berlin-based liberal newspaper states in its article &quot;Ludendorff&#x27;s hate tirades against Hindenburg—Poisonous gas from Hitler&#x27;s camp&quot; that Ludendorff was, as of 29 March 1930, deeply grounded in Nazi ideology.

Tipton notes that Ludendorff was a social Darwinist who believed that war was the &quot;foundation of human society&quot;, and that military dictatorship was the normal form of government in a society in which every resource must be mobilized. The historian Margaret L. Anderson notes that after the war, Ludendorff wanted Germany to go to war against all of Europe, and that he became a pagan worshipper of the Nordic god Wotan (Odin); he detested not only Judaism, but also Christianity, which he regarded as a weakening force.

==Retirement and death==

In 1926, Ludendorff divorced Margarethe Schmidt and married his second wife Mathilde von Kemnitz (1877–1966). They published books and essays claiming that the world&#x27;s problems were the result of Christianity, especially the Jesuits and Catholics, but also conspiracies by Jews and the Freemasons. They founded the (Society for the Knowledge of God), a small and rather obscure esoterical society of theists. 

By the time Hitler came to power, Ludendorff was no longer sympathetic to him. The Nazis distanced themselves from Ludendorff because of his eccentric conspiracy theories.

On 30 January 1933, the occasion of Hitler&#x27;s appointment as Chancellor by President Hindenburg, Ludendorff allegedly sent the following telegram to Hindenburg:

Some historians consider this text to be a forgery. In an attempt to regain Ludendorff&#x27;s favor, Hitler arrived unannounced at Ludendorff&#x27;s home on his 70th birthday in 1935 to promote him to field marshal. Infuriated, Ludendorff allegedly rebuffed Hitler by telling him: &quot;An officer is named General Field-Marshal on the battlefield! Not at a birthday tea-party in the midst of peace.&quot; He wrote two further books on military themes.

Ludendorff died of liver cancer in the private clinic in Munich, on 20 December 1937 at the age of 72. He was given—against his explicit wishes—a state funeral organized and attended by Hitler, who declined to speak at his eulogy. He was buried in the in Tutzing in Bavaria.

==Decorations and awards==
He received the following honours:
* Knight of the Military Order of Max Joseph (Bavaria)
* Grand Commander&#x27;s Cross of the Royal House Order of Hohenzollern, with Star (Prussia)
* (military), &quot;8 August 1914&quot;; with Oak Leaves, &quot;23 February 1915&quot; (Prussia)
* Grand Cross of the Iron Cross, &quot;24 March 1918&quot; (Prussia)
* Iron Cross (1914) 1st and 2nd Classes
* Commander of the Order of the Zähringer Lion, 2nd Class (Baden)
* Knight of the Military Order of St. Henry (Saxony)
* Knight of the Military Merit Order ()
* Knight Grand Cross of the House and Merit Order of Peter Frederick Louis, with Swords and Laurels (Oldenburg)
* Military Merit Cross, 2nd class ()
* Military Merit Cross, 1st Class, with War Decoration (Austria-Hungary)
* Commander of the Imperial Austrian Order of Franz Joseph, with Star, &quot;1913&quot; (Austria-Hungary)
* Grand Cross of the Austrian Imperial Order of Leopold, &quot;1917&quot; (Austria-Hungary)
* Gold Military Merit Medal (, Austria-Hungary)
* Cross for Merit in War (Saxe-)
* Grand Cross of the Order of the Cross of Liberty, with Swords (Finland)

== Writings ==

===Books (selection)===

* 1919: &quot;Meine Kriegserinnerungen 1914–1918&quot;. Berlin: Mittler &amp; Sohn (republished 1936)
** translated into English by Frederic Appleby Holt as &quot;My War Memories 1914–1918&quot;, London: Hutchinson &amp; Co., 1919 (vol. I, vol. II; American edition as &quot;Ludendorff&#x27;s Own Story&quot;, Harper &amp; Brothers)
* 1920: (ed.) &quot;Urkunden der Obersten Heeresleitung über ihre Tätigkeit, 1916–18&quot;, Berlin: E. S. Mittler
** translated into English by F.A. Holt as &quot;The General Staff and its Problems: The History of the Relations between the High Command and the German Imperial Government as Revealed by Official Documents&quot;, London: Hutchinson and Son, 1920 (vol. I, vol. II)
* 1933: &quot;Mein militärischer Werdegang. Blätter der Erinnerung an unser stolzes Heer.&quot; Munich: Ludendorffs Verlag
* 1937: with Mitarbeitern: &quot;Mathilde Ludendorff – ihr Werk und Wirken.&quot; Munich: Ludendorffs Verlag
* 1937: &quot;Auf dem Weg zur Feldherrnhalle. Lebenserinnerungen an die Zeit des 9. November 1923.&quot; Munich: Ludendorffs Verlag
* 1939: with Mathilde Ludendorff: &quot;Die Judenmacht, ihr Wesen und Ende.&quot; Munich: Ludendorffs Verlag

===Smaller publications===
* 1926: &quot;Die Revolution von oben. Das Kriegsende und die Vorgänge beim Waffenstillstand. Zwei Vorträge.&quot; Lorch: Karl Rohm
* 1932: &quot;Schändliche Geheimnisse der Hochgrade.&quot; Ludendorffs Verlag, Munchen
* 1934: &quot;Wie der Weltkrieg 1914 „gemacht“ wurde.&quot; Munich: Völkischer Verlag
* 1934: &quot;Das Marne-Drama. Der Fall Moltke-Hentsch.&quot; Munich: Ludendorffs Verlag
* 1934: &quot;&quot;Tannenberg&quot;. Zum 20. Jahrestag der Schlacht.&quot; Munich: Ludendorffs Verlag
* 1934: &quot;Die politischen Hintergründe des 9. November 1923.&quot; Munich: Ludendorffs Verlag
* 1935: &quot;Über Unbotmäßigkeit im Kriege.&quot; Munich: Ludendorffs Verlag
* 1935: &quot;Französische Fälschung meiner Denkschrift von 1912 über den drohenden Krieg.&quot; Munich: Ludendorffs Verlag
* 1938–40: &quot;Feldherrnworte.&quot; Munich: Ludendorffs Verlag
* 1939: &quot;Tannenberg. Geschichtliche Wahrheit über die Schlacht.&quot; Munich: Ludendorffs Verlag

===As publisher===
* 1929–1933 (banned): &quot;Ludendorffs Volkswarte&quot; (&quot;Ludendorff&#x27;s Peoples&#x27; Viewpoint&quot;; weekly) Munich

== See also ==
* Dioscuri (World War I)

==Notes==
==References==
==Sources==

=== Primary sources ===
* Ludendorff, Erich. &quot;The Coming War&quot;. Faber and Faber, 1931. ()
* Ludendorff, Erich. &quot;The Nation at War&quot;. Hutchinson, London, 1936. ()

=== Secondary sources ===
* Astore, William J. &quot;The Tragic Pursuit of Total Victory.&quot; &quot;MHQ: Quarterly Journal of Military History&quot; (Autumn 2007) 20#1) pp. 64–73.
* Brownell, William and Denise Drace-Brownell. &quot;The First Nazi: Erich Ludendorff, The Man Who Made Hitler Possible&quot; (Berkeley: Counterpoint, 2016). 356 pp highly negative online review
* Jones, LTC William A. &quot;Ludendorff: Strategist&quot; (Pickle Partners Publishing, 2015) online.
* 
* Showalter, Dennis, and William J. Astore. &quot;Hindenburg: Icon of German Militarism &quot; (2005) excerpt
* Amm, Bettina: &quot;Ludendorff-Bewegung&quot;. In: Wolfgang Benz (Hrsg.): &quot;Handbuch des Antisemitismus&quot;. Judenfeindlichkeit in Geschichte und Gegenwart, Band 5: &quot;Organisationen, Institutionen, Bewegungen&quot;. De Gruyter, Berlin 2012. pp. 393 ff. .
* Gruchmann, Lothar: &quot;Ludendorffs „prophetischer“ Brief an Hindenburg vom Januar/Februar 1933. Eine Legende&quot;. In: &quot;Vierteljahrshefte für Zeitgeschichte.&quot; Band 47, 1999. pp. 559–562.
* Nebelin, Manfred: &quot;Ludendorff. Diktator im Ersten Weltkrieg.&quot; Siedler, München 2011. .
* Pöhlmann, Markus: &quot;Der moderne Alexander im Maschinenkrieg&quot;. In: Stig Förster (Hrsg.): &quot;Kriegsherren der Weltgeschichte. 22 historische Porträts&quot;. Beck, München 2006. pp. 268–286.
* Puschner, Uwe; Vollnhals, Clemens (Hrgb.); Die völkisch-religiöse Bewegung im Nationalsozialismus; Göttingen 2012 .
* Schwab, Andreas: &quot;Vom totalen Krieg zur deutschen Gotterkenntnis. Die Weltanschauung Erich Ludendorffs&quot;. In: &quot;Schriftenreihe der Eidgenössischen Militärbibliothek und des Historischen Dienstes.&quot; Nr. 17, Bern 2005.
* Wegehaupt, Phillip: &quot;Ludendorff, Erich&quot;. In: Wolfgang Benz (Hrsg.): &quot;Handbuch des Antisemitismus. Bd. 2: Personen&quot;. De Gruyter Saur, Berlin 2009, , pp. 494 ff. (retrieved über Verlag Walter de Gruyter Online).

==External links==

* Ludendorff by H. L. Mencken published in the June 1917 edition of the &quot;Atlantic Monthly&quot;
* Biography of Erich Ludendorff from Spartacus Educational
* at archive.org</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q58579" start="0" end="34" title="Erich Ludendorff" label="Erich Friedrich Wilhelm Ludendorff"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="155" end="166" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q671594" start="227" end="232" title="Battle of Liège" label="Liège"/>
<link wikidata="Q153858" start="237" end="247" title="Battle of Tannenberg" label="Tannenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q13405450" start="282" end="309" title="Generalquartiermeister" label="First Quartermaster General"/>
<link wikidata="Q10572199" start="317" end="335" title="German General Staff" label="Army General Staff"/>
<link wikidata="Q641853" start="401" end="443" title="Oberste Heeresleitung" label="&amp;quot;de facto&amp;quot; military dictatorship"/>
<link wikidata="Q41304" start="515" end="530" title="Weimar Republic" label="Weimar Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q161141" start="564" end="575" title="Kapp Putsch" label="Kapp Putsch"/>
<link wikidata="Q352" start="580" end="586" title="Adolf Hitler" label="Hitler"/>
<link wikidata="Q36749" start="599" end="615" title="Beer Hall Putsch" label="Beer Hall Putsch"/>
<link wikidata="Q4684105" start="659" end="684" title="Adolf Hitler&amp;#x27;s rise to power" label="Nazis&amp;#x27; rise to power"/>
<link wikidata="Q3545701" start="745" end="755" title="Kruszewnia" label="Kruszewnia"/>
<link wikidata="Q635253" start="773" end="790" title="Province of Posen" label="Province of Posen"/>
<link wikidata="Q10572199" start="1105" end="1124" title="German General Staff" label="Great General Staff"/>
<link wikidata="Q152468" start="1166" end="1181" title="Schlieffen Plan" label="Schlieffen Plan"/>
<link wikidata="Q156478" start="1436" end="1450" title="Pour le Mérite" label="Pour le Mérite"/>
<link wikidata="Q2667" start="1502" end="1521" title="Paul von Hindenburg" label="Paul von Hindenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q660655" start="1648" end="1662" title="First Battle of the Masurian Lakes" label="Masurian Lakes"/>
<link wikidata="Q219087" start="1961" end="1978" title="military strategy" label="military strategy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3049087" start="1983" end="1993" title="war effort" label="war effort"/>
<link wikidata="Q152989" start="2132" end="2145" title="Western Front (World War I)" label="Western Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q876417" start="2335" end="2361" title="Second Battle of the Marne" label="Second Battle of the Marne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130507" start="2383" end="2405" title="Hundred Days Offensive" label="Hundred Days Offensive"/>
<link wikidata="Q170306" start="2471" end="2481" title="German Revolution of 1918–1919" label="revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q2677" start="2483" end="2500" title="Kaiser Wilhelm II" label="Kaiser Wilhelm II"/>
<link wikidata="Q160944" start="2617" end="2638" title="stab-in-the-back myth" label="stab-in-the-back myth"/>
<link wikidata="Q8736" start="2689" end="2721" title="Treaty of Versailles" label="settlement reached at Versailles"/>
<link wikidata="Q7264" start="2768" end="2776" title="Marxism" label="Marxists"/>
<link wikidata="Q41726" start="2778" end="2788" title="Freemasons" label="Freemasons"/>
<link wikidata="Q7325" start="2793" end="2797" title="Jews" label="Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q31672" start="2912" end="2925" title="1925 German presidential election" label="1925 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q157740" start="2930" end="2939" title="President of Germany (1919–1945)" label="president"/>
<link wikidata="Q15680550" start="3063" end="3078" title="military theory" label="military theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q242412" start="3252" end="3264" title="mobilization" label="mobilization"/>
<link wikidata="Q623031" start="3360" end="3372" title="liver cancer" label="liver cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3545701" start="3546" end="3556" title="Kruszewnia" label="Ludendorff"/>
<link wikidata="Q635253" start="3571" end="3588" title="Province of Posen" label="Province of Posen"/>
<link wikidata="Q27306" start="3593" end="3611" title="Kingdom of Prussia" label="Kingdom of Prussia"/>
<link wikidata="Q101575" start="3629" end="3635" title="Poznań County" label="County"/>
<link wikidata="Q36" start="3637" end="3643" title="Poland" label="Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2615977" start="3744" end="3753" title="Province of Pomerania (1653–1815)" label="Pomerania"/>
<link wikidata="Q17101989" start="3804" end="3810" title="Junker" label="Junker"/>
<link wikidata="Q4137265" start="4066" end="4076" title="Germanisation of Poles during the Partitions" label="Germanized"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026" start="4077" end="4083" title="Polish people" label="Polish"/>
<link wikidata="Q3519259" start="4272" end="4277" title="Count" label="Count"/>
<link wikidata="Q570740" start="4288" end="4305" title="Duchy of Liegnitz" label="Dukes of Liegnitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q606974" start="4310" end="4315" title="Duchy of Brieg" label="Brieg"/>
<link wikidata="Q157802" start="4324" end="4332" title="Margrave" label="Margrave"/>
<link wikidata="Q22722" start="4338" end="4346" title="Prince-elector" label="Electors"/>
<link wikidata="Q148499" start="4350" end="4361" title="Margraviate of Brandenburg" label="Brandenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q31259" start="4562" end="4566" title="Hans Ludendorff" label="Hans"/>
<link wikidata="Q70560" start="4823" end="4837" title="Heinz Guderian" label="Heinz Guderian"/>
<link wikidata="Q571415" start="5068" end="5077" title="Subaltern (military)" label="subaltern"/>
<link wikidata="Q4011" start="5119" end="5124" title="Wesel" label="Wesel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1707" start="5245" end="5249" title="Kiel" label="Kiel"/>
<link wikidata="Q3857" start="5254" end="5267" title="Wilhelmshaven" label="Wilhelmshaven"/>
<link wikidata="Q4024" start="5304" end="5325" title="Frankfurt (Oder)" label="Frankfurt on the Oder"/>
<link wikidata="Q10572199" start="5501" end="5514" title="German General Staff" label="General Staff"/>
<link wikidata="Q28938" start="5722" end="5743" title="Alfred von Schlieffen" label="Alfred von Schlieffen"/>
<link wikidata="Q67930" start="5841" end="5850" title="Max Bauer" label="Max Bauer"/>
<link wikidata="Q152468" start="6464" end="6468" title="Schlieffen Plan" label="Plan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3992" start="6631" end="6636" title="Liège" label="Liège"/>
<link wikidata="Q49768" start="6761" end="6795" title="Social Democratic Party of Germany" label="Social Democratic Party of Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q462740" start="6845" end="6877" title="1912 German federal election" label="German federal elections of 1912"/>
<link wikidata="Q679201" start="6992" end="6997" title="Krupp" label="Krupp"/>
<link wikidata="Q156649" start="7084" end="7104" title="Imperial German Navy" label="Imperial German Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q100287" start="7379" end="7390" title="August Keim" label="August Keim"/>
<link wikidata="Q1483744" start="7643" end="7651" title="Fusilier" label="Fusilier"/>
<link wikidata="Q1718" start="7667" end="7677" title="Düsseldorf" label="Düsseldorf"/>
<link wikidata="Q59112" start="7784" end="7799" title="Barbara Tuchman" label="Barbara Tuchman"/>
<link wikidata="Q2417024" start="7843" end="7861" title="The Guns of August" label="The Guns of August"/>
<link wikidata="Q61030" start="8643" end="8657" title="Karl von Bülow" label="Karl von Bülow"/>
<link wikidata="Q3992" start="8737" end="8742" title="Liège" label="Liège"/>
<link wikidata="Q671594" start="8777" end="8792" title="Battle of Liège" label="Battle of Liège"/>
<link wikidata="Q168706" start="9219" end="9230" title="Big Bertha (howitzer)" label="Krupp 42-cm"/>
<link wikidata="Q223558" start="9252" end="9265" title="Skoda 305 mm Model 1911" label="Škoda 30.5-cm"/>
<link wikidata="Q156478" start="9482" end="9496" title="Pour le Mérite" label="Pour le Mérite"/>
<link wikidata="Q2677" start="9518" end="9528" title="Wilhelm II, German Emperor" label="Wilhelm II"/>
<link wikidata="Q61022" start="9769" end="9793" title="Maximilian von Prittwitz" label="Maximilian von Prittwitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q12631440" start="9799" end="9818" title="Georg von Waldersee" label="Georg von Waldersee"/>
<link wikidata="Q2667" start="10013" end="10032" title="Paul von Hindenburg" label="Paul von Hindenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q61027" start="10322" end="10334" title="Max Hoffmann" label="Max Hoffmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q153858" start="10526" end="10536" title="Battle of Tannenberg (1914)" label="Tannenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q660655" start="10817" end="10845" title="First Battle of the Masurian Lakes" label="Battle of the Masurian Lakes"/>
<link wikidata="Q81720" start="11018" end="11025" title="Silesia" label="Silesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q221457" start="11078" end="11092" title="Russian Poland" label="Russian Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q28205" start="11107" end="11134" title="battle of the Vistula River" label="battle of the Vistula River"/>
<link wikidata="Q696300" start="11364" end="11378" title="battle of Łódź (1914)" label="battle of Łódź"/>
<link wikidata="Q684872" start="11845" end="11880" title="Second Battle of the Masurian Lakes" label="Second Battle of the Masurian Lakes"/>
<link wikidata="Q57153" start="11996" end="12016" title="Erich von Falkenhayn" label="Erich von Falkenhayn"/>
<link wikidata="Q670489" start="12273" end="12276" title="Gorlice–Tarnów Offensive" label="and"/>
<link wikidata="Q180086" start="12340" end="12347" title="Galicia (Eastern Europe)" label="Galicia"/>
<link wikidata="Q11710499" start="12506" end="12525" title="Bug–Narew Offensive" label="Bug–Narew Offensive"/>
<link wikidata="Q160869" start="12586" end="12605" title="Grand Duke Nicholas Nikolaevich of Russia (1856–1929)" label="Grand Duke Nicholas"/>
<link wikidata="Q688339" start="12606" end="12625" title="Great Retreat (Russian)" label="shortened his lines"/>
<link wikidata="Q4115712" start="12876" end="12882" title="Kaunas" label="Kaunas"/>
<link wikidata="Q3976092" start="13452" end="13471" title="Polish Border Strip" label="Polish Border Strip"/>
<link wikidata="Q23666" start="13686" end="13699" title="Great Britain" label="Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="13708" end="13721" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q7835" start="13768" end="13774" title="Crimea" label="Crimea"/>
<link wikidata="Q30678285" start="14115" end="14121" title="Pocket (military)" label="pocket"/>
<link wikidata="Q525934" start="14200" end="14221" title="Lake Naroch Offensive" label="Lake Naroch Offensive"/>
<link wikidata="Q221967" start="14344" end="14362" title="Brusilov Offensive" label="Brusilov Offensive"/>
<link wikidata="Q465104" start="14768" end="14773" title="Brody" label="Brody"/>
<link wikidata="Q140147" start="14890" end="14903" title="Brest, Belarus" label="Brest-Litovsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q152989" start="15012" end="15016" title="Western Front (World War I)" label="West"/>
<link wikidata="Q130847" start="15064" end="15070" title="Battle of Verdun" label="Verdun"/>
<link wikidata="Q132568" start="15134" end="15139" title="Battle of the Somme" label="Somme"/>
<link wikidata="Q13405450" start="15479" end="15500" title="Quartermaster general" label="Quartermaster general"/>
<link wikidata="Q694005" start="15583" end="15606" title="General of the Infantry (Germany)" label="General of the Infantry"/>
<link wikidata="Q77113" start="15619" end="15635" title="Bethmann Hollweg" label="Bethmann Hollweg"/>
<link wikidata="Q835412" start="15819" end="15832" title="Romanian Armed Forces" label="Romanian Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q76909" start="16038" end="16058" title="August von Mackensen" label="August von Mackensen"/>
<link wikidata="Q311721" start="16949" end="16964" title="Hindenburg Line" label="Hindenburg Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q327287" start="17672" end="17689" title="William L. Shirer" label="William L. Shirer"/>
<link wikidata="Q702349" start="17909" end="17942" title="Constitution of the German Empire" label="Constitution of the German Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1619276" start="18297" end="18315" title="Hindenburg Programme" label="Hindenburg Program"/>
<link wikidata="Q57513" start="18497" end="18504" title="Wilhelm Groener" label="Groener"/>
<link wikidata="Q21595659" start="19923" end="19935" title="Frank Tipton" label="Frank Tipton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1119089" start="20430" end="20460" title="unrestricted submarine warfare" label="unrestricted submarine warfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q57125" start="20605" end="20619" title="Walther Nernst" label="Walther Nernst"/>
<link wikidata="Q1394" start="21271" end="21276" title="Vladimir Lenin" label="Lenin"/>
<link wikidata="Q83372" start="21369" end="21379" title="Bolsheviks" label="Bolsheviks"/>
<link wikidata="Q18356344" start="21551" end="21563" title="sealed train" label="sealed train"/>
<link wikidata="Q60115" start="22185" end="22200" title="Georg Michaelis" label="Georg Michaelis"/>
<link wikidata="Q40787" start="22438" end="22459" title="Nicholas II of Russia" label="Nicholas II of Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q690308" start="22501" end="22519" title="Kerensky Offensive" label="Kerensky Offensive"/>
<link wikidata="Q180086" start="22574" end="22581" title="Galicia (Eastern Europe)" label="Galicia"/>
<link wikidata="Q11347885" start="22835" end="22839" title="Battle of Jugla" label="Riga"/>
<link wikidata="Q122371" start="23113" end="23136" title="Treaty of Brest-Litovsk" label="Treaty of Brest-Litovsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q155144" start="23636" end="23651" title="Alsace-Lorraine" label="Alsace-Lorraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="24492" end="24504" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q49448" start="24833" end="24847" title="Robert Nivelle" label="Robert Nivelle"/>
<link wikidata="Q131329" start="24943" end="24948" title="Arras" label="Arras"/>
<link wikidata="Q49831" start="24953" end="24958" title="Noyon" label="Noyon"/>
<link wikidata="Q311721" start="25016" end="25031" title="Hindenburg line" label="Hindenburg line"/>
<link wikidata="Q1694094" start="25133" end="25150" title="Second Battle of the Aisne" label="Nivelle Offensive"/>
<link wikidata="Q3088431" start="25205" end="25231" title="French Army Mutinies" label="Many French units mutinied"/>
<link wikidata="Q239255" start="25343" end="25373" title="Battle of Arras (1917)" label="a successful attack near Arras"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144824" start="25411" end="25440" title="Battle of Messines (1917)" label="at Messines Ridge in Flanders"/>
<link wikidata="Q426227" start="25472" end="25512" title="Battle of Passchendaele" label="the British attacked Passchendaele Ridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q73367" start="25559" end="25571" title="Fritz von Lossberg" label="von Lossberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q242644" start="26338" end="26347" title="Battle of Caporetto" label="Caporetto"/>
<link wikidata="Q654374" start="26566" end="26573" title="Battle of Cambrai (1917)" label="Cambrai"/>
<link wikidata="Q152008" start="27525" end="27542" title="Operation Michael" label="Operation Michael"/>
<link wikidata="Q460942" start="27598" end="27619" title="hurricane bombardment" label="hurricane bombardment"/>
<link wikidata="Q90265" start="27643" end="27654" title="Georg Bruchmüller" label="Bruchmüller"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088364" start="28636" end="28647" title="Battle of the Lys (1918)" label="in Flanders"/>
<link wikidata="Q4872406" start="29659" end="29677" title="Battle of Soissons (1918)" label="Battle of Soissons"/>
<link wikidata="Q911448" start="30142" end="30148" title="Battle of Amiens (1918)" label="Amiens"/>
<link wikidata="Q76908" start="31547" end="31573" title="Prince Maximilian of Baden" label="Prince Maximilian of Baden"/>
<link wikidata="Q34296" start="31596" end="31610" title="Woodrow Wilson" label="Woodrow Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1281704" start="32443" end="32459" title="Finnish passport" label="Finnish passport"/>
<link wikidata="Q6263713" start="32874" end="32894" title="John Wheeler-Bennett" label="John Wheeler-Bennett"/>
<link wikidata="Q76575" start="33102" end="33115" title="Hans Delbrück" label="Hans Delbrück"/>
<link wikidata="Q44205" start="33161" end="33167" title="Helmuth von Moltke the Elder" label="Moltke"/>
<link wikidata="Q8442" start="33172" end="33180" title="Otto von Bismarck" label="Bismarck"/>
<link wikidata="Q155022" start="33195" end="33202" title="Alfred von Tirpitz" label="Tirpitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q49768" start="33932" end="33948" title="Social Democratic Party of Germany" label="Social Democrats"/>
<link wikidata="Q8736" start="34021" end="34038" title="Versailles Treaty" label="Versailles Treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q698095" start="34868" end="34879" title="Hotel Adlon" label="Adlon Hotel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1974924" start="34918" end="34931" title="Neill Malcolm" label="Neill Malcolm"/>
<link wikidata="Q63103" start="35212" end="35232" title="Walther von Lüttwitz" label="Walther von Lüttwitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q2646" start="35291" end="35306" title="Friedrich Ebert" label="Friedrich Ebert"/>
<link wikidata="Q57159" start="35311" end="35323" title="Gustav Bauer" label="Gustav Bauer"/>
<link wikidata="Q58863" start="35415" end="35428" title="Wolfgang Kapp" label="Wolfgang Kapp"/>
<link wikidata="Q161141" start="35518" end="35529" title="Kapp Putsch" label="Kapp Putsch"/>
<link wikidata="Q352" start="35930" end="35942" title="Adolf Hitler" label="Adolf Hitler"/>
<link wikidata="Q58860" start="36022" end="36037" title="Gustav Ritter von Kahr" label="Gustav von Kahr"/>
<link wikidata="Q592281" start="36102" end="36118" title="Bürgerbräukeller" label="Bürgerbräukeller"/>
<link wikidata="Q36749" start="36330" end="36346" title="Beer Hall Putsch" label="Beer Hall Putsch"/>
<link wikidata="Q97079" start="37309" end="37321" title="Heinz Pernet" label="Heinz Pernet"/>
<link wikidata="Q28887" start="37595" end="37599" title="December 1924 German federal election" label="1924"/>
<link wikidata="Q164866" start="37660" end="37664" title="National Socialist Freedom Movement" label="NSFB"/>
<link wikidata="Q541427" start="37707" end="37711" title="German Völkisch Freedom Party" label="DVFP"/>
<link wikidata="Q885146" start="37789" end="37803" title="Tannenbergbund" label="Tannenbergbund"/>
<link wikidata="Q36380" start="37978" end="37984" title="Jesuit" label="Jesuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q41726" start="37990" end="38000" title="Freemasons" label="Freemasons"/>
<link wikidata="Q75078" start="38069" end="38089" title="Mathilde von Kemnitz" label="Mathilde von Kemnitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q150793" start="38454" end="38456" title="Sturmabteilung" label="SA"/>
<link wikidata="Q31672" start="38858" end="38877" title="1925 German presidential election" label="March 1925 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q180973" start="39443" end="39462" title="Tannenberg memorial" label="Tannenberg memorial"/>
<link wikidata="Q202261" start="39840" end="39856" title="social Darwinism" label="social Darwinist"/>
<link wikidata="Q6759603" start="40063" end="40083" title="Margaret L. Anderson" label="Margaret L. Anderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q43610" start="40228" end="40233" title="Wōden" label="Wotan"/>
<link wikidata="Q9268" start="40263" end="40270" title="Judaism" label="Judaism"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043" start="40281" end="40293" title="Christianity" label="Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q75078" start="40438" end="40458" title="Mathilde von Kemnitz" label="Mathilde von Kemnitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q36380" start="40592" end="40599" title="Jesuits" label="Jesuits"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="40604" end="40613" title="Catholics" label="Catholics"/>
<link wikidata="Q41726" start="40653" end="40663" title="Freemasonry" label="Freemasons"/>
<link wikidata="Q7988482" start="40745" end="40755" title="Western esotericism" label="esoterical"/>
<link wikidata="Q620805" start="40767" end="40774" title="Theism" label="theists"/>
<link wikidata="Q159535" start="40929" end="40948" title="conspiracy theory" label="conspiracy theories"/>
<link wikidata="Q623031" start="41590" end="41602" title="liver cancer" label="liver cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q533166" start="41826" end="41833" title="Tutzing" label="Tutzing"/>
<link wikidata="Q980" start="41837" end="41844" title="Bavaria" label="Bavaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q707685" start="41925" end="41953" title="Military Order of Max Joseph" label="Military Order of Max Joseph"/>
<link wikidata="Q644621" start="42008" end="42035" title="House Order of Hohenzollern" label="House Order of Hohenzollern"/>
<link wikidata="Q536977" start="42156" end="42185" title="Grand Cross of the Iron Cross" label="Grand Cross of the Iron Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q154554" start="42225" end="42235" title="Iron Cross" label="Iron Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q688779" start="42282" end="42309" title="Order of the Zähringer Lion" label="Order of the Zähringer Lion"/>
<link wikidata="Q690054" start="42345" end="42372" title="Military Order of St. Henry" label="Military Order of St. Henry"/>
<link wikidata="Q661851" start="42398" end="42418" title="Military Merit Order (Württemberg)" label="Military Merit Order"/>
<link wikidata="Q471468" start="42450" end="42496" title="House and Merit Order of Peter Frederick Louis" label="House and Merit Order of Peter Frederick Louis"/>
<link wikidata="Q551060" start="42536" end="42556" title="Military Merit Cross (Mecklenburg-Schwerin)" label="Military Merit Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q701262" start="42573" end="42593" title="Military Merit Cross (Austria-Hungary)" label="Military Merit Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q629393" start="42681" end="42702" title="Order of Franz Joseph" label="Order of Franz Joseph"/>
<link wikidata="Q298950" start="42789" end="42805" title="Order of Leopold (Austria)" label="Order of Leopold"/>
<link wikidata="Q666722" start="42849" end="42869" title="Military Merit Medal (Austria-Hungary)" label="Military Merit Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q832822" start="42892" end="42914" title="Cross for Merit in War" label="Cross for Merit in War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1418102" start="42944" end="42973" title="Order of the Cross of Liberty" label="Order of the Cross of Liberty"/>
<link wikidata="Q378809" start="43243" end="43263" title="Hutchinson Heinemann" label="Hutchinson &amp;amp; Co."/>
<link wikidata="Q3127696" start="43349" end="43370" title="Harper (publisher)" label="Harper &amp;amp; Brothers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1273433" start="43472" end="43485" title="E.S. Mittler &amp;amp; Sohn" label="E. S. Mittler"/>
<link wikidata="Q378809" start="43709" end="43727" title="Hutchinson Heinemann" label="Hutchinson and Son"/>
<link wikidata="Q30742495" start="45384" end="45406" title="Dioscuri (World War I)" label="Dioscuri (World War I)"/>
<link wikidata="Q76372" start="46272" end="46285" title="Wolfgang Benz" label="Wolfgang Benz"/>
<link wikidata="Q17082702" start="47734" end="47755" title="Spartacus Educational" label="Spartacus Educational"/>
<link wikidata="Q461" start="47761" end="47772" title="Internet Archive" label="archive.org"/>
</links>
</doc>
