<doc id="247927" wikidata="Q218719" url="?curid=247927" title="Border control">
<text>Border control comprises measures taken by governments to monitor and regulate the movement of people, animals, and goods across land, air, and maritime borders. While border control is typically associated with international borders, it also encompasses controls imposed on internal borders within a single state.

Border control measures serve a variety of purposes, ranging from enforcing customs, sanitary and phytosanitary, or biosecurity regulations to restricting migration. While some borders (including most states&#x27; internal borders and international borders within the Schengen Area) are open and completely unguarded, others (including the vast majority of borders between countries as well as some internal borders) are subject to some degree of control and may be crossed legally only at designated checkpoints. Border controls in the 21st century are tightly intertwined with intricate systems of travel documents, visas, and increasingly complex policies that vary between countries.

It is estimated that the indirect economic cost of border controls, particularly migration restrictions, cost many trillions of dollars and the size of the global economy could double if migration restrictions were lifted.
==History==

States and rulers have always regarded the ability to determine who enters or remains in their territories as a key test of their sovereignty, but prior to World War I, border controls were only sporadically implemented. In medieval Europe, for example, the boundaries between rival countries and centres of power were largely symbolic or consisted of amorphous borderlands, &#x27;marches&#x27;, and &#x27;debatable lands&#x27; of indeterminate or contested status and the real &#x27;borders&#x27; consisted of the fortified walls that surrounded towns and cities, where the authorities could exclude undesirable or incompatible people at the gates, from vagrants, beggars and the &#x27;wandering poor&#x27;, to &#x27;masterless women&#x27;, lepers, Romani, or Jews.


The concept of border controls has its origins in antiquity. In Asia, the existence of border controls is evidenced in classical texts. The Arthashastra () makes mention of passes issued at the rate of one &quot;masha&quot; per pass to enter and exit the country. Chapter 34 of the Second Book of Arthashastra concerns with the duties of the () who must issue sealed passes before a person could enter or leave the countryside. Passports resembling those issued today were an important part of the Chinese bureaucracy as early as the Western Han (202 BCE-220 CE), if not in the Qin dynasty. They required such details as age, height, and bodily features. These passports (&quot;zhuan&quot;) determined a person&#x27;s ability to move throughout imperial counties and through points of control. Even children needed passports, but those of one year or less who were in their mother&#x27;s care may not have needed them.

===Medieval period===
In the medieval Islamic Caliphate, a form of passport was the &quot;bara&#x27;a&quot;, a receipt for taxes paid. Border controls were in place to ensure that only people who paid their &quot;zakah&quot; (for Muslims) or &quot;jizya&quot; (for dhimmis) taxes could travel freely between different regions of the Caliphate; thus, the &quot;bara&#x27;a&quot; receipt was a &quot;basic passport&quot;.

In medieval Europe, passports were issued since at least the reign of Henry V of England, as a means of helping his subjects prove who they were in foreign lands. The earliest reference to these documents is found in an act of Parliament, the Safe Conducts Act 1414 (2 Hen. 5. Stat. 1. c. 6). In 1540, granting travel documents in England became a role of the Privy Council of England, and it was around this time that the term &quot;passport&quot; was used. In 1794, issuing British passports became the job of the Office of the Secretary of State. The 1548 Imperial Diet of Augsburg required the public to hold imperial documents for travel, at the risk of permanent exile. During World War I, European governments introduced border passport requirements for security reasons, and to control the emigration of people with useful skills. These controls remained in place after the war, becoming a standard, though controversial, procedure. British tourists of the 1920s complained, especially about attached photographs and physical descriptions, which they considered led to a &quot;nasty dehumanisation&quot;.

Starting in the mid-19th century, the Ottoman Empire established quarantine stations on many of its borders to control disease. For example, along the Greek-Turkish border, all travellers entering and exiting the Ottoman Empire would be quarantined for 9–15 days. These stations would often be manned by armed guards. If plague appeared, the Ottoman army would be deployed to enforce border control and monitor disease.

===Modern history===
One of the earliest systematic attempts of modern nation states to implement border controls to restrict entry of particular groups were policies adopted by Canada, Australia, and America to curtail immigration of Asians in white settler states in the late 19th and early 20th centuries. The first anti-East Asian policy implemented in this era was the Chinese Exclusion Act of 1882 in America, which was followed suit by the Chinese Immigration Act of 1885 in Canada, which imposed what came to be called the Chinese head tax. These policies were a sign of injustice and unfair treatment to the Chinese workers because the jobs they engaged in were mostly menial jobs. Similar policies were adopted in various British colonies in Australia over the latter half of the 19th century targeting Asian immigrants arriving as a result of the region&#x27;s series of gold rushes as well as Kanakas (Pacific Islanders brought into Australia as indentured labourers) who alongside the Asians were perceived by trade unionists and White blue collar workers as a threat to the wages of White settlers. Following the establishment of the Commonwealth of Australia in 1901, these discriminatory border control measures quickly expanded into the White Australia Policy, while subsequent legislation in America (e.g. the Immigration Act of 1891, the Naturalisation Act of 1906, and the Immigration Act of 1917) resulted in an even stricter policy targeting immigrants from both Asia and parts of southern and eastern Europe.

Even following the adoption of measures such as the White Australia Policy and the Chinese Exclusion Act in English-speaking settler colonies, pervasive control of international borders remained a relatively rare phenomenon until the early 20th century, prior to which many states had open international borders either in practice or due to a lack of any legal restriction. John Maynard Keynes identified World War I in particular as the point when such controls became commonplace.

Decolonisation during the twentieth century saw the emergence of mass emigration from nations in the Global South, thus leading former colonial occupiers to introduce stricter border controls. In the United Kingdom this process took place in stages, with British nationality law eventually shifting from recognising all Commonwealth citizens as British subjects to today&#x27;s complex British nationality law which distinguishes between British citizens, modern British Subjects, British Overseas Citizens, and overseas nationals, with each non-standard category created as a result of attempts to balance border control and the need to mitigate statelessness. This aspect of the rise of border control in the 20th century has proven controversial. The British Nationality Act 1981 has been criticised by experts, as well as by the Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination of the United Nations, on the grounds that the different classes of British nationality it created are, in fact, closely related to the ethnic origins of their holders.

The creation of British Nationality (Overseas) status, for instance, (with fewer privileges than British citizen status) was met with criticism from many Hong Kong residents who felt that British citizenship would have been more appropriate in light of the &quot;moral debt&quot; owed to them by the UK. Some British politicians and magazines also criticised the creation of BN(O) status. In 2020, the British government under Boris Johnson announced a programme under which BN(O)s would have leave to remain in the UK with rights to work and study for five years, after which they may apply for settled status. They would then be eligible for full citizenship after holding settled status for 12 months. This was implemented as the eponymously named &quot;British National (Overseas) visa&quot;, a residence permit that BN(O)s and their dependent family members have been able to apply for since 31 January 2021. BN(O)s and their dependents who arrived in the UK before the new immigration route became available were granted &quot;Leave Outside the Rules&quot; at the discretion of the Border Force to remain in the country for up to six months as a temporary measure. In effect, this retroactively granted BN(O)s a path to right of abode in the United Kingdom. Despite the COVID-19 pandemic, about 7,000 people had entered the UK under this scheme between July 2020 and January 2021.

Ethnic tensions created during colonial occupation also resulted in discriminatory policies being adopted in newly independent African nations, such as Uganda under Idi Amin which banned Asians from Uganda, thus creating a mass exodus of the (largely Gujarati) Asian community of Uganda. Such ethnically driven border control policies took forms ranging from anti-Asian sentiment in East Africa to Apartheid policies in South Africa and Namibia (then known as Southwest Africa under South African rule) which created bantustans and pass laws to segregate and impose border controls against non-whites, and encouraged immigration of whites at the expense of Blacks as well as Indians and other Asians. Whilst border control in Europe and east of the Pacific have tightened over time, they have largely been liberalised in Africa, from Yoweri Museveni&#x27;s reversal of Idi Amin&#x27;s anti-Asian border controls to the fall of Apartheid (and thus racialised border controls) in South Africa.

The development of border control policies over the course of the 20th century also saw the standardisation of refugee travel documents under the Convention Relating to the Status of Refugees of 1951 and the 1954 Convention travel document for stateless people under the similar 1954 statelessness convention.

===COVID-19===
The pandemic in 2020 produced a drastic tightening of border controls across the globe. Many countries and regions have imposed quarantines, entry bans, or other restrictions for citizens of or recent travellers to the most affected areas. Other countries and regions have imposed global restrictions that apply to all foreign countries and territories, or prevent their own citizens from travelling overseas. The imposition of border controls has curtailed the spread of the virus, but because they were first implemented after community spread was established in multiple countries in different regions of the world, they produced only a modest reduction in the total number of people infected These strict border controls economic harm to the tourism industry through lost income and social harm to people who were unable to travel for family matters or other reasons. When the travel bans are lifted, many people are expected to resume traveling. However, some travel, especially business travel, may be decreased long-term as lower cost alternatives, such as teleconferencing and virtual events, are preferred. A possible long-term impact has been a decline of business travel and international conferencing, and the rise of their virtual, online equivalents. Concerns have been raised over the effectiveness of travel restrictions to contain the spread of COVID-19.

==Aspects==
Contemporary border control policies are complex and address a variety of distinct phenomena depending on the circumstances and political priorities of the state(s) implementing them. Consequently, there are several aspects of border control which vary in nature and importance from region to region.

===Air and maritime borders===
In addition to land borders, countries also apply border control measures to airspace and waters under their jurisdiction. Such measures control access to air and maritime territory as well as extractible resources (e.g. fish, minerals, fossil fuels).

Under the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS), states exercise varying degrees of control over different categories of territorial waters:
* Internal waters: Waters landward of the baseline, over which the state has complete sovereignty: not even innocent passage is allowed without explicit permission from said state. Lakes and rivers are considered internal waters.
* Territorial sea: A state&#x27;s territorial sea is a belt of coastal waters extending at most 22 kilometres from the baseline of a coastal state. If this would overlap with another state&#x27;s territorial sea, the border is taken as the median point between the states&#x27; baselines, unless the states in question agree otherwise. A state can also choose to claim a smaller territorial sea. The territorial sea is regarded as the sovereign territory of the state, although foreign ships (military and civilian) are allowed innocent passage through it, or transit passage for straits; this sovereignty also extends to the airspace over and seabed below. As a result of UNCLOS, states exercise a similar degree of control over its territorial sea as over land territory and may thus utilise coast guard and naval patrols to enforce border control measures provided they do not prevent innocent or transit passage.
* Contiguous zone: A state&#x27;s contiguous zone is a band of water extending farther from the outer edge of the territorial sea to up to from the baseline, within which a state can implement limited border control measures for the purpose of preventing or punishing &quot;infringement of its customs, fiscal, immigration or sanitary laws and regulations within its territory or territorial sea&quot;. This will typically be wide, but could be more (if a state has chosen to claim a territorial sea of less than 22 kilometres), or less, if it would otherwise overlap another state&#x27;s contiguous zone. However, unlike the territorial sea, there is no standard rule for resolving such conflicts and the states in question must negotiate their own compromise. America invoked a contiguous zone out to 44 kilometres from the baseline on 29 September 1999.
* Exclusive economic zone: An exclusive economic zone extends from the baseline to a maximum of . A coastal nation has control of all economic resources within its exclusive economic zone, including fishing, mining, oil exploration, and any pollution of those resources. However, it cannot prohibit passage or loitering above, on, or under the surface of the sea that is in compliance with the laws and regulations adopted by the coastal State in accordance with the provisions of the UN Convention, within that portion of its exclusive economic zone beyond its territorial sea. The only authority a state has over its EEZ is therefore its ability to regulate the extraction or spoliation of resources contained therein and border control measures implemented to this effect focus on the suppression of unauthorised commercial activity.

Vessels not complying with a state&#x27;s maritime policies may be subject to ship arrest and enforcement action by the state&#x27;s authorities. Maritime border control measures are controversial in the context of international trade disputes, as was the case following France&#x27;s detention of British fishermen in October 2021 in the aftermath of Brexit or when the Indonesian navy detained the crew of the &quot;Seven Seas Conqueress&quot; alleging that the vessel was unlawfully fishing within Indonesian territorial waters while the Singaporean government claimed the vessel was in Singaporean waters near Pedra Branca.

Similarly, international law accords each state control over the airspace above its land territory, internal waters, and territorial sea. Consequently, states have the authority to regulate flyover rights and tax foreign aircraft utilising their airspace. Additionally, the International Civil Aviation Organization designates states to administer international airspace, including airspace over waters not forming part of any state&#x27;s territorial sea. Aircraft unlawfully entering a country&#x27;s airspace may be grounded and their crews may be detained.

No country has sovereignty over international waters, including the associated airspace. All states have the freedom of fishing, navigation, overflight, laying cables and pipelines, as well as research. Oceans, seas, and waters outside national jurisdiction are also referred to as the high seas or, in Latin, &quot;mare liberum&quot; (meaning &quot;free sea&quot;). The 1958 Convention on the High Seas defined &quot;high seas&quot; to mean &quot;all parts of the sea that are not included in the territorial sea or in the internal waters of a State&quot; and where &quot;no State may validly purport to subject any part of them to its sovereignty&quot;. Ships sailing the high seas are generally under the jurisdiction of their flag state (if there is one); however, when a ship is involved in certain criminal acts, such as piracy, any nation can exercise jurisdiction under the doctrine of universal jurisdiction regardless of maritime borders.

As part of their air and maritime border control policies, most countries restrict or regulate the ability of foreign airlines and vessels to transport of goods or passengers between sea ports and airports in their jurisdiction, known as cabotage. Restrictions on maritime cabotage apply exist in most countries with territorial and internal waters so as to protect the domestic shipping industry from foreign competition, preserve domestically owned shipping infrastructure for national security purposes, and ensure safety in congested territorial waters. For example, in America, the Jones Act provides for extremely strict restrictions on cabotage. Similarly, China does not permit foreign flagged vessels to conduct domestic transport or domestic transhipments without the prior approval of the Ministry of Transport. While Hong Kong and Macau maintain distinct internal cabotage regimes from the mainland, maritime cabotage between either territory and the mainland is considered domestic carriage and accordingly is off limits to foreign vessels. Similarly, maritime crossings across the Taiwan Strait requires special permits from both the People&#x27;s Republic of China and the Republic of China and are usually off-limits to foreign vessels. In India, foreign vessels engaging in the coasting trade require a licence that is generally only issued when no local vessel is available. Similarly, a foreign vessel may only be issued a licence to engage in cabotage in Brazil if there are no Brazilian flagged vessels available for the intended transport.

As with maritime cabotage, most jurisdictions heavily restrict cabotage in passenger aviation, though rules regarding air cargo are typically more lax. Passenger cabotage is not usually granted under most open skies agreements. Air cabotage policies in the European Union are uniquely liberal insofar as carriers licensed by one member state are permitted to engage in cabotage in any EU member state, with few limitations. Chile has the most liberal air cabotage rules in the world, enacted in 1979, which allow foreign airlines to operate domestic flights, conditional upon reciprocal treatment for Chilean carriers in the foreign airline&#x27;s country. Countries apply special provisions to the ability of foreign airlines to carry passengers between two domestic destinations through an offshore hub.

Many countries implement air defence identification zones (ADIZs) requiring aircraft approaching within a specified distance of its airspace to contact or seek prior authorisation from its military or transport authorities. An ADIZ may extend beyond a country&#x27;s territory to give the country more time to respond to possibly hostile aircraft. The concept of an ADIZ is not defined in any international treaty and is not regulated by any international body, but is nevertheless a well-established aerial border control measure. Usually such zones only cover undisputed territory, do not apply to foreign aircraft not intending to enter territorial airspace, and do not overlap.

===Biosecurity===


Biosecurity refers to measures aimed at preventing the introduction and/or spread of harmful organisms (e.g. viruses, bacteria, etc.) to animals and plants in order to mitigate the risk of transmission of infectious disease. In agriculture, these measures are aimed at protecting food crops and livestock from pests, invasive species, and other organisms not conducive to the welfare of the human population. The term includes biological threats to people, including those from pandemic diseases and bioterrorism. The definition has sometimes been broadened to embrace other concepts, and it is used for different purposes in different contexts. The most common category of biosecurity policies are quarantine measures adopted to counteract the spread of disease and, when applied as a component of border control, focus primarily on mitigating the entry of infected individuals, plants, or animals into a country. Other aspects of biosecurity related to border control include mandatory vaccination policies for inbound travellers and measures to curtail the risk posed by bioterrorism or invasive species. Quarantine measures are frequently implemented with regard to the mobility of animals, including both pets and livestock. Notably, in order to reduce the risk of introducing rabies from continental Europe, the United Kingdom used to require that dogs, and most other animals introduced to the country, spend six months in quarantine at an HM Customs and Excise pound. This policy was abolished in 2000 in favour of a scheme generally known as Pet Passports, where animals can avoid quarantine if they have documentation showing they are up to date on their appropriate vaccinations.

In the past, quarantine measures were implemented by European countries in order to curtail the Bubonic Plague and Cholera. In the British Isles, for example, the Quarantine Act 1710 (9 Ann. c. 2) established maritime quarantine policies in an era in which strict border control measures as a whole were yet to become mainstream. The first act was called for due to fears that the plague might be imported from Poland and the Baltic states. A second act of Parliamemt, the Quarantine Act 1721 (8 Geo. 1. c. 10), was due to the prevalence of the plague at Marseille and other places in Provence, France. It was renewed in 1733 after a new outbreak in continental Europe, and again in 1743, due to an epidemic in Messina. A rigorous quarantine clause was introduced into the Levant Act 1752 an act regulating trade with the Levant, and various arbitrary orders were issued during the next twenty years to meet the supposed danger of infection from the Baltic states. Although no plague cases ever came to England during that period, the restrictions on traffic became more stringent, and a very strict Quarantine and Customs Act 1788 (28 Geo. 3. c. 34) was passed, with provisions affecting cargoes in particular. The act was revised in 1801 and 1805, and in 1823–24 an elaborate inquiry was followed by an act making quarantine only at the discretion of the Privy Council, which recognised yellow fever or other highly infectious diseases as calling for quarantine, along with plague. The threat of cholera in 1831 was the last occasion in England of the use of quarantine restrictions. Cholera affected every country in Europe despite all efforts to keep it out. When cholera returned to England in 1849, 1853 and 1865–66, no attempt was made to seal the ports. In 1847 the privy council ordered all arrivals with a clean bill of health from the Black Sea and the Levant to be admitted, provided there had been no case of plague during the voyage and afterwards, the practice of quarantine was discontinued.

In modern maritime law, biosecurity measures for arriving vessels centre around &#x27;pratique&#x27;, a licence from border control officials permitting a ship to enter port on assurance from the captain that the vessel is free from contagious disease. The clearance granted is commonly referred to as &#x27;free pratique&#x27;. A ship can signal a request for &#x27;pratique&#x27; by flying a solid yellow square-shaped flag. This yellow flag is the Q flag in the set of international maritime signal flags. In the event that &#x27;free pratique&#x27; is not granted, a vessel will be held in quarantine according to biosecurity rules prevailing at the port of entry until a border control officer inspects the vessel. During the COVID-19 pandemic, a controversy arose as to who granted pratique to the &quot;Ruby Princess&quot;. A related concept is the &#x27;bill of health&#x27;, a document issued by officials of a port of departure indicating to the officials of the port of arrival whether it is likely that the ship is carrying a contagious disease, either literally on board as fomites or via its crewmen or passengers. As defined in a consul&#x27;s handbook from 1879:

Another category of biosecurity measures adopted by border control organisations is mandatory vaccination. As a result of the prevalence of Yellow Fever across much of the African continent, a significant portion of countries in the region require arriving passengers to present an International Certificate of Vaccination or Prophylaxis (Carte Jaune) certifying that they have received the Yellow Fever vaccine. A variety of other countries require travellers who have visited areas where Yellow Fever is endemic to present a certificate in order to clear border checkpoints as a means of preventing the spread of the disease. Prior to the emergence of COVID-19, Yellow Fever was the primary human disease subjected to de facto vaccine passport measures by border control authorities around the world. Similar measures are in place with regard to Polio and meningococcal meningitis in regions where those diseases are endemic and countries bordering those regions. Prior to the eradication of Smallpox, similar Carte Jaune requirements were in force for that disease around the world.


As a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, biosecurity measures have become a highly visible aspect of border control across the globe. Most notably, quarantine and mandatory COVID-19 vaccination for international travellers. Together with a decreased willingness to travel, the implementation of biosecurity measures has had a negative economic and social impact on the travel industry. Slow travel increased in popularity during the pandemic, with tourists visiting fewer destinations during their trips.

Biosecurity measures such as restrictions on cross-border travel, the introduction of mandatory vaccination for international travellers, and the adoption of quarantine or mandatory testing measures have helped to contain the spread of COVID-19. While test-based border screening measures may prove effective under certain circumstances, they may fail to detect a significant quantity positive cases if only conducted upon arrival without follow-up. A minimum 10-day quarantine may be beneficial in preventing the spread of COVID-19 and may be more effective if combined with an additional control measure like border screening. A study in &quot;Science&quot; found that travel restrictions could delay the initial arrival of COVID-19 in a country, but that they produced only modest overall effects unless combined with domestic infection prevention and control measures to considerably reduce transmissions. (This is consistent with prior research on influenza and other communicable diseases.) Travel bans early in the pandemic were most effective for isolated locations, such as small island nations.

During the COVID-19 pandemic, many jurisdictions across the globe introduced biosecurity measures on internal borders. This ranged from quarantine measures imposed upon individuals crossing state lines within America to prohibitions on interstate travel in Australia.

===Customs===


Each country has its own laws and regulations for the import and export of goods into and out of a country, which its customs authority enforces. The import or export of some goods may be restricted or forbidden, in which case customs controls enforce such policies. Customs enforcement at borders can also entail collecting excise tax and preventing the smuggling of dangerous or illegal goods. A customs duty is a tariff or tax on the importation (usually) or exportation (unusually) of goods.

In many countries, border controls for arriving passengers at many international airports and some road crossings are separated into red and green channels in order to prioritise customs enforcement. Within the European Union&#x27;s common customs area, airports may operate additional blue channels for passengers arriving from within that area. For such passengers, border control may focus specifically on prohibited items and other goods that are not covered by the common policy. Luggage tags for checked luggage travelling within the EU are green-edged so they may be identified. In most EU member states, travellers coming from other EU countries within the Schengen Area can use the green lane, although airports outside the Schengen Area or with frequent flights arriving from jurisdictions within Schengen but outside the European Union may use blue channels for convenience and efficiency.

A customs area is an area designated for storage of commercial goods that have not cleared border controls. Commercial goods not yet cleared through customs are often stored in a type of customs area known as a bonded warehouse, until processed or re-exported. Ports authorised to handle international cargo generally include recognised bonded warehouses. For the purpose of customs duties, goods within the customs area are treated as being outside the country. This allows easy transshipment to a third country without customs authorities being involved. For this reason, customs areas are usually carefully controlled and fenced to prevent smuggling. However, the area is still territorially part of the country, so the goods within the area are subject to other local laws (for example drug laws and biosecurity regulations), and thus may be searched, impounded or turned back. The term is also sometimes used to define an area (usually composed of several countries) which form a customs union, a customs territory, or to describe the area at airports and ports where travellers are checked through customs.

Sanitary and phytosanitary (SPS) measures are customs measures to protect humans, animals, and plants from diseases, pests, or contaminants. The Agreement on the Application of Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures, concluded at the Uruguay Round of the Multilateral Trade Negotiations, establishes the types of SPS measures each jurisdiction is permitted to impose. Examples of SPS are tolerance limits for residues, restricted use of substances, labelling requirements related to food safety, hygienic requirements and quarantine requirements. In certain countries, sanitary and phytosanitary measures focuses extensively on curtailing and regulating the import of foreign agricultural products in order to protect domestic ecosystems. For example, Australian border controls restrict most (if not all) food products, certain wooden products and other similar items. Similar restrictions exist in Canada, America and New Zealand.
Border control in many countries in Asia and the Americas prioritises enforcing customs laws pertaining to narcotics. For instance, India and Malaysia are focusing resources on eliminating drug smuggling from Myanmar and Thailand respectively. The issue stems largely from the high output of dangerous and illegal drugs in the Golden Triangle as well as in regions further west such as Afghanistan. A similar problem exists east of the Pacific, and has resulted in countries such as Mexico and the United States tightening border control in response to the northward flow of illegal substances from regions such as Colombia. The Mexican Drug War and similar cartel activity in neighbouring areas has exacerbated the problem. In certain countries illegal importing, exporting, sale, or possession of drugs constitute capital offences and may result in a death sentence. A 2015 article by &quot;The Economist&quot; says that the laws of 32 countries provide for capital punishment for drug smuggling, but only in six countries – China, Iran, Saudi Arabia, Vietnam, Malaysia, and Singapore –are drug offenders known to be routinely executed. Additionally, Singapore, Malaysia, and Indonesia impose mandatory death sentences on individuals caught smuggling restricted substances across their borders. For example, Muhammad Ridzuan Ali was executed in Singapore on 19 May 2017 for drug trafficking. According to a 2011 article by the Lawyers Collective, an NGO in India, &quot;32 countries impose capital punishment for offences involving narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances.&quot; South Korean law provides for capital punishment for drug offences, but South Korea has a de facto moratorium on capital punishment as there have been no executions since 1997, even though there are still people on death row and new death sentences continue to be handed down.

===Border security===

Border security refers to measures taken by one or more governments to enforce their border control policies. Such measures target a variety of issues, ranging from customs violations and trade in unlawful goods to the suppression of unauthorised migration or travel. The specific border security measures taken by a jurisdiction vary depending on the priorities of local authorities and are affected by social, economic, and geographical factors.

In India, which maintains free movement with Nepal and Bhutan, border security focuses primarily on the Bangladeshi, Pakistani, and Myanmar borders. India&#x27;s primary focus with regard to the border with Bangladesh is to deter unlawful immigration and drug trafficking. On the Pakistani border, the Border Security Force aims to prevent the infiltration of Indian territory by terrorists from Pakistan and other countries in the west (Afghanistan, Iraq, Syria, etc.). In contrast, India&#x27;s border with Myanmar is porous and the 2021 military coup in Myanmar saw an influx of refugees seeking asylum in border states including Mizoram. The refoulement of Rohingya refugees is a contentious aspect of India&#x27;s border control policy vis à vis Myanmar.

Meanwhile, American border security policy is largely centred on the country&#x27;s border with Mexico. Security along this border is composed of many distinct elements; including physical barriers, patrol routes, lighting, and border patrol personnel. In contrast, the border with Canada is primarily composed of joint border patrol and security camera programmes, forming the longest undefended border in the world. In remote areas along the border with Canada, where staffed border crossings are not available, there are hidden sensors on roads, trails, railways, and wooded areas, which are located near crossing points.

Border security on the Schengen Area&#x27;s external borders is especially restrictive. Members of the Schengen Agreement are required to apply strict checks on travellers entering and exiting the area. These checks are co-ordinated by the European Union&#x27;s Frontex agency, and subject to common rules. The details of border controls, surveillance and the conditions under which permission to enter into the Schengen Area may be granted are exhaustively detailed in the Schengen Borders Code. All persons crossing external borders—inbound or outbound—are subject to a check by a border guard. The only exception is for regular cross-border commuters (both those with the right of free movement and third-country nationals) who are well known to the border guards: once an initial check has shown that there is no alert on record relating to them in the Schengen Information System or national databases, they can only be subject to occasional &#x27;random&#x27; checks, rather than systematic checks every time they cross the border. Additionally, border security in Europe is increasingly being outsourced to private companies, with the border security market growing at a rate of 7% per year. In its Border Wars series, the Transnational Institute showed that the arms and security industry helps shape European border security policy through lobbying, regular interactions with EU&#x27;s border institutions and its shaping of research policy. The institute criticises the border security industry for having a vested interest in increasing border militarisation in order to increase profits. Furthermore, the same companies are also often involved in the arms trade and thus profit twice: first from fuelling the conflicts, repression and human rights abuses that have led refugees to flee their homes and later from intercepting them along their migration routes.

====Border walls====
Border walls are a common aspect of border security measures across the world. Border walls generally seek to limit unauthorised travel across an international border and are frequently implemented as a populist response to refugees and economic migrants.

The India-Bangladesh barrier is a long fence of barbed wire and concrete just under high currently under construction. Its stated aim is to limit unauthorised migration. The project has run into several delays and there is no clear completion date for the project yet. Similar to India&#x27;s barrier with Bangladesh and the proposed wall between America and Mexico, Iran has constructed a wall on its frontier with Pakistan. The wall aims to reduce unauthorised border crossings and stem the flow of drugs, and is also a response to terrorist attacks, notably the one in the Iranian border town of Zahedan on 17 February 2007, which killed thirteen people, including nine Iranian Revolutionary Guard officials. Former president Donald Trump&#x27;s proposal to build a new wall along the border formed a major feature of his 2016 presidential campaign and, over the course of his presidency, his administration spent approximately US$15 billion on the project, with US$5 billion appropriated from US Customs and Border Protection, US$6.3 billion appropriated from anti-narcotics initiative funded by congress, and US$3.6 billion appropriated from the American military. Members of both the Democratic and Republican parties who opposed Trump&#x27;s border control policies regarded the border wall as unnecessary or undesirable, arguing that other measures would be more effective at reducing illegal immigration than building a wall, including tackling the economic issues that lead to immigration being a relevant issue altogether, border surveillance or an increase in the number of customs agents. Additionally, in August 2020, the United States constructed 3.8 km of short cable fencing along the border between Abbotsford, British Columbia, and Whatcom County, Washington.

Border walls have formed a major component of European border control policy following the European migrant crisis. The walls at Melilla and at Ceuta on Spain&#x27;s border with Morocco are designed to curtail the ability of refugees and migrants to enter the European Union via the two Spanish cities on the Moroccan coast. Similar measures have been taken on the Schengen area&#x27;s borders with Turkey in response to the refugee crisis in Syria. The creation of European Union&#x27;s collective border security organisation, Frontex, is another aspect of the bloc&#x27;s growing focus on border security. Within the Schengen Area, border security has become an especially prominent priority for the Hungarian government under right-wing strongman Viktor Orbán. Similarly, Saudi Arabia has begun construction of a border barrier or fence between its territory and Yemen to prevent the unauthorized movement of people and goods. The difference between the countries&#x27; economic situations means that many Yemenis head to Saudi Arabia to find work. Saudi Arabia does not have a barrier with its other neighbours in the Gulf Cooperation Council, whose economies are more similar. In 2006 Saudi Arabia proposed constructing a security fence along the entire length of its 900 kilometre long desert border with Iraq. As of July 2009 it was reported that Saudis will pay $3.5 billion for a security fence. The combined wall and ditch will be long and include five layers of fencing, watch towers, night-vision cameras, and radar cameras and manned by 30,000 troops. Elsewhere in Europe, the Republic of Macedonia began erecting a fence on its border with Greece in November 2015.

In 2003, Botswana began building a long electric fence along its border with Zimbabwe. The official reason for the fence is to stop the spread of foot-and-mouth disease among livestock. Zimbabweans argue that the height of the fence is clearly intended to keep out people. Botswana has responded that the fence is designed to keep out cattle, and to ensure that entrants have their shoes disinfected at legal border crossings. Botswana also argued that the government continues to encourage legal movement into the country. Zimbabwe was unconvinced, and the barrier remains a source of tension.

====Border checkpoints====


A Border checkpoint is a place where goods or individuals moving across borders are inspected for compliance with border control measures. Access-controlled borders often have a limited number of checkpoints where they can be crossed without legal sanctions. Arrangements or treaties may be formed to allow or mandate less restrained crossings (e.g. the Schengen Agreement). Land border checkpoints (land ports of entry) can be contrasted with the customs and immigration facilities at seaports, international airports, and other ports of entry.

Checkpoints generally serve two purposes:
* To prevent entrance of individuals who are either undesirable (e.g. criminals or others who pose threats) or simply unauthorised to enter.
* To prevent entrance of goods or contaminants that are illegal or subject to restriction, or to collect tariffs in accordance with customs or quarantine policies.

A border checkpoint at which travellers are permitted to enter a jurisdiction is known as a port of entry. International airports are usually ports of entry, as are road and rail crossings on a land border. Seaports can be used as ports of entry only if a dedicated customs presence is posted there. The choice of whether to become a port of entry is up to the civil authority controlling the port. An airport of entry is an airport that provides customs and immigration services for incoming flights. These services allow the airport to serve as an initial port of entry for foreign visitors arriving in a country. While the terms airport of entry and international airport are generally used interchangeably, not all international airports qualify as airports of entry since international airports without any immigration or customs facilities exist in the Schengen Area whose members have eliminated border controls with each other. Airports of entry are usually larger than domestic airports and often feature longer runways and facilities to accommodate the heavier aircraft commonly used for international and intercontinental travel. International airports often also host domestic flights, which often help feed both passengers and cargo into international ones (and vice versa). Buildings, operations and management have become increasingly sophisticated since the mid-20th century, when international airports began to provide infrastructure for international civilian flights. Detailed technical standards have been developed to ensure safety and common coding systems implemented to provide global consistency. The physical structures that serve millions of individual passengers and flights are among the most complex and interconnected in the world. By the second decade of the 21st century, there were over 1,200 international airports and almost two billion international passengers along with of cargo passing through them annually.

Border inspections are also meant to protect each country&#x27;s agriculture from pests. National and international phytosanitary authorities maintain databases of border interceptions, occurrences, and establishments. Bebber &quot;et al.&quot;, 2019 analyses such records and finds that they underreport many important pest species, that island nations are more vulnerable because they have lower border-to-area ratios, and that pests are moving poleward to follow humans&#x27; crops as our crops follow global warming.

A &#x27;Quilantan&#x27; or &#x27;Wave Through&#x27; entry is a phenomenon at American border checkpoints authorising a form of non-standard but legal entry without any inspection of travel documents. It occurs when the border security personnel present at a border crossing choose to summarily admit some number of persons without performing a standard interview or document examination. If an individual can prove that they were waved through immigration in this manner, then they are considered to have entered with inspection despite not having answered any questions or received a passport entry stamp. This definition of legal entry only extends to foreigners who entered America at official border crossings and does not provide a path to legal residency for those who did not enter through a recognised crossing.

====Border zones====

Border zones are areas near borders that have special restrictions on movement. Governments may forbid unauthorised entry to or exit from border zones and restrict property ownership in the area. The zones function as buffer zones specifically monitored by border patrols in order to prevent unauthorised cross-border travel. Border zones enable authorities to detain and prosecute individuals suspected of being or aiding undocumented migrants, smugglers, or spies without necessarily having to prove that the individuals in question actually engaged in the suspected unauthorised activity since, as all unauthorised presence in the area is forbidden, the mere presence of an individual permits authorities to arrest them. Border zones between hostile states can be heavily militarised, with minefields, barbed wire, and watchtowers. Some border zones are designed to prevent illegal immigration or emigration and do not have many restrictions but may operate checkpoints to check immigration status. In most places, a border vista is usually included and/or required. In some nations, movement inside a border zone without a licence is an offence and will result in arrest. No probable cause is required as mere presence inside the zone is an offence, if it is intentional. Even with a licence to enter, photography, making fires, and carrying of firearms and hunting are prohibited.

Examples of international border zones are the Border Security Zone of Russia and the Finnish border zone on the Finnish–Russian border. There are also intra-country zones such as the Cactus Curtain surrounding the Guantanamo Bay Naval Base in Cuba, the Korean Demilitarised Zone along the North Korea-South Korea demarcation line and the Frontier Closed Area in Hong Kong. Important historical examples are the Wire of Death set up by the German Empire to control the Belgium–Netherlands border and the Iron Curtain, a set of border zones maintained by the Soviet Union and its satellite states along their borders with Western states. One of the most militarised parts was the restricted zone of the inner German border. While initially and officially the zone was for border security, eventually it was engineered to prevent escape from the Soviet sphere into the West. Ultimately, the Eastern Bloc governments resorted to using lethal countermeasures against those trying to cross the border, such as mined fences and orders to shoot anyone trying to cross into the West. The restrictions on building and habitation made the area a &quot;green corridor&quot;, today established as the European Green Belt.

In the area stretching inwards from its internal border with the mainland, Hong Kong maintains a Frontier Closed Area out of bounds to those without special authorisation. The area was established in the 1950s when Hong Kong was under British administration as a consequence of the Convention for the Extension of Hong Kong Territory prior to the Transfer of sovereignty over Hong Kong in 1997. The purposes of the area were to prevent illegal immigration and smuggling; smuggling had become prevalent as a consequence of the Korean War. Today, under the one country, two systems policy, the area continues to be used to curtail unauthorised migration to Hong Kong and the smuggling of goods in either direction.


As a result of the partition of the Korean peninsula by America and the Soviet Union after World War II, and exacerbated by the subsequent Korean War, there is a Demilitarised Zone (DMZ) spanning the &quot;de facto&quot; border between North and South Korea. The DMZ follows the effective boundaries as of the end of the Korean War in 1953. Similarly to the Frontier Closed Area in Hong Kong, this zone and the defence apparatus that exists on both sides of the border serve to curtail unauthorised passage between the two sides. In South Korea, there is an additional fenced-off area between the Civilian Control Line (CCL) and the start of the Demilitarised Zone. The CCL is a line that designates an additional buffer zone to the Demilitarised Zone within a distance of from the Southern Limit Line of the Demilitarised Zone. Its purpose is to limit and control the entrance of civilians into the area in order to protect and maintain the security of military facilities and operations near the Demilitarised Zone. The commander of the 8th US Army ordered the creation of the CCL and it was activated and first became effective in February 1954. The buffer zone that falls south of the Southern Limit Line is called the Civilian Control Zone. Barbed wire fences and manned military guard posts mark the CCLe. South Korean soldiers typically accompany tourist busses and cars travelling north of the CCL as armed guards to monitor the civilians as well as to protect them from North Korean intruders. Most of the tourist and media photos of the &quot;Demilitarised Zone fence&quot; are actually photos of the CCL fence. The actual Demilitarised Zone fence on the Southern Limit Line is completely off-limits to everybody except soldiers and it is illegal to take pictures of the Demilitarised Zone fence.

Similarly, the whole estuary of the Han River in the Korean Peninsula is deemed a &quot;Neutral Zone&quot; and is officially off-limits to all civilian vessels. Only military vessels are allowed within this neutral zone. In recent years, Chinese fishing vessels have taken advantage of the tense situation in the Han River Estuary Neutral Zone and illegally fished in this area due to both North Korean and South Korean navies never patrolling this area due to the fear of naval battles breaking out. This has led to firefights and sinkings of boats between Chinese fishermen and South Korean Coast Guard. On 30 January 2019, North Korean and South Korean military officials signed a landmark agreement that would open the Han River Estuary to civilian vessels for the first time since the Armistice Agreement in 1953. The agreement was scheduled to take place in April 2019 but the failure of the 2019 Hanoi Summit indefinitely postponed these plans.

The Green Line separating Southern Cyprus and Northern Cyprus is a demilitarised border zone operated by the United Nations Peacekeeping Force in Cyprus operate and patrol within the buffer zone. The buffer zone was established in 1974 due to ethnic tensions between Greek and Turkish Cypriots. The green line is similar in nature to the 38th parallel separating the Republic of Korea and North Korea.
Some border zones, referred to as border vistas, are composed of legally mandated cleared space between two areas of foliage located at an international border intended to provide a clear demarcation line between two jurisdictions. Border vistas are most commonly found along undefended international boundary lines, where border security is not as much of a necessity and a built barrier is undesired, and are a treaty requirement for certain borders. An example of a border vista is a cleared space around unguarded portions of the Canada–United States border. Similar clearings along the border line are provided for by many international treaties. For example, the 2006 border management treaty between Russia and China provides for a cleared strip along the two nations&#x27; border.

In 2024, Egypt announced that they are building a buffer zone Egypt Gaza border.

===Immigration law===

Immigration law refers to the national statutes, regulations, and legal precedents governing immigration into and deportation from a country. Strictly speaking, it is distinct from other matters such as naturalisation and citizenship, although they are often conflated. Immigration laws vary around the world, as well as according to the social and political climate of the times, as acceptance of immigrants sways from the widely inclusive to the deeply nationalist and isolationist. Countries frequently maintain laws which regulate both the rights of entry and exit as well as internal rights, such as the duration of stay, freedom of movement, and the right to participate in commerce or government. National laws regarding the immigration of citizens of that country are regulated by international law. The United Nations&#x27; International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights mandates that all countries allow entry to their own citizens.

===Immigration policies===
====Diaspora communities====
Certain countries adopt immigration policies designed to be favourable towards members of diaspora communities with a connection to the country. For example, the Indian government confers Overseas Citizenship of India (OCI) status on foreign citizens of Indian origin to live and work indefinitely in India. OCI status was introduced in response to demands for dual citizenship by the Indian diaspora, particularly in countries with large populations of Indian origin. It was introduced by &quot;The Citizenship (Amendment) Act, 2005&quot; in August 2005. Similar to OCI status, the UK Ancestry visa exempts members of the British diaspora from usual immigration controls. Poland issued the Karta Polaka to citizens of certain northeast European countries with Polish ancestry, but later expanded it to the worldwide Polonia.

Some nations recognise a right of return for people with ancestry in that country or a connection to a particular ethnic group. A notable example of this is the right of Sephardi Jews to acquire Spanish nationality by virtue of their community&#x27;s Spanish origins. Similar exemptions to immigration controls exist for people of Armenian origin seeking to acquire Armenian citizenship. Ghana, similarly, grants an indefinite right to stay in Ghana to members of the African diaspora regardless of citizenship. Similarly, Israel maintains a policy permitting members of the Jewish diaspora to immigrate to Israel regardless of prior nationality.

South Korean immigration policy is relatively unique in that, as a consequence of its claim over the territory currently administered by North Korea, citizens of North Korea are regarded by the South as its own citizens by birth. Consequently, North Korean refugees in China often attempt to travel to countries such as Thailand which, while not offering asylum to North Koreans, classifies them as unauthorised immigrants and deports them to South Korea instead of North Korea. At the same time, this policy has operated to prevent pro-North Korea Zainichi Koreans recognised by Japan as Chōsen-seki from entering South Korea without special permission from the South Korean authorities as, despite being regarded as citizens of the Republic of Korea and members of the Korean diaspora, they generally refuse to exercise that status.

====Open borders====


An open border is the deregulation and or lack of regulation on the movement of persons between nations and jurisdictions, this does not apply to trade or movement between privately owned land areas. Most nations have open borders for travel within their nation of travel, though more authoritarian states may limit the freedom of internal movement of its citizens, as for example in the former USSR. However, only a handful of nations have deregulated open borders with other nations, an example of this being European countries under the Schengen Agreement or the open Belarus-Russia border. Open borders used to be very common among all nations, however this became less common after the First World War, which led to the regulation of open borders, making them less common and no longer feasible for most industrialised nations.

Open borders are the norm for borders between subdivisions within the boundaries of sovereign states, though some countries do maintain internal border controls (for example between the People&#x27;s Republic of China mainland and the special administrative regions of Hong Kong and Macau; or between the American mainland, the unincorporated territories other than Puerto Rico, and Hawaii. Open borders are also usual between member states of federations, though (very rarely) movement between member states may be controlled in exceptional circumstances. Federations, confederations and similar multi-national unions typically maintain external border controls through a collective border control system, though they sometimes have open borders with other non-member states through special international agreements such as between Schengen Agreement countries as mentioned above.

Presently, open border agreements of various types are in force in several areas around the world, as outlined below:
* &quot;Asia and Oceania&quot;:
** Under the 1950 Indo-Nepal Treaty of Peace and Friendship, India and Nepal maintain a similar arrangement to the CTA and the Union State. Indians and Nepalis are not subject to any migration controls in each other&#x27;s countries and there are few controls on land travel by citizens across the border.
** India and Bhutan also have a similar programme in place The border between Jaigaon, in the Indian state of West Bengal, and the city of Phuentsholing is essentially open, and although there are internal checkpoints, Indians (as outlined under the Visa policy of Bhutan are allowed to proceed throughout Bhutan with a voter&#x27;s ID or an identity slip from the Indian consulate in Phuentsholing. Similarly, Bhutanese passport holders enjoy free movement in India.
** Thailand and Cambodia: Whilst not as liberal as the policies concerning the Indo-Nepalese and Indo-Bhutanese borders, Thailand and Cambodia have begun issuing combined visas to certain categories of tourists applying at specific Thai or Cambodian embassies and consulates in order to enable freer border crossings between the two countries. The policy is currently in force for nationals of America and several European (primarily EU, EEA, and GCC) and Oceanian countries as well as for Indian and Chinese nationals residing in Singapore.
** Australia and New Zealand: Similar to the agreement between India and Nepal, Trans-Tasman Travel Arrangement between Australia and New Zealand is a free movement agreement citizens of each country to travel freely between them and allowing citizens and some permanent residents to reside, visit, work, study in the other country for an indefinite period, with some restrictions. The arrangement came into effect in 1973, and allows citizens of each country to reside and work in the other country, with some restrictions. Other details of the arrangement have varied over time. From 1 July 1981, all people entering Australia (including New Zealand citizens) have been required to carry a passport. Since 1 September 1994 Australia, has had a universal visa requirement, and to specifically cater for the continued free movement of New Zealanders to Australia, the Special Category Visa was introduced for New Zealanders.
* &quot;Central America&quot; :The Central America-4 Border Control Agreement abolishes border controls for land travel between El Salvador, Honduras, Nicaragua, and Guatemala. However, this does not apply to air travel.
* &quot;Europe and the Middle East&quot;
** Union State of Russia and Belarus The Union State of Russia and Belarus is a supranational union of Russia and Belarus, which eliminates all border controls between the two nations. Before a visa agreement was signed in 2020, each country maintained its own visa policies, thus resulting in non-citizens of the two countries generally being barred from travelling directly between the two. However, since the visa agreement was signed, each side recognises the other&#x27;s visas, which means that third-country citizens can enter both countries with a visa from either country.
** Western Europe: The two most significant free travel areas in Western Europe are the Schengen Area, in which very little if any border control is generally visible, and the Common Travel Area (CTA), which partially eliminates such controls for nationals of the United Kingdom and Ireland. Between countries in the Schengen Area, and to an extent within the CTA on the British Isles, internal border control is often virtually unnoticeable, and often only performed by means of random car or train searches in the hinterland, while controls at borders with non-member states may be rather strict.
** Gulf Cooperation Council: Members of the Gulf Cooperation Council, or GCC, allow each other&#x27;s citizens freedom of movement in an arrangement similar to the CTA and to that between India and Nepal. Between 5 June 2017 and 5 January 2021, freedom of movement in Saudi Arabia, the UAE, and Bahrain was suspended for Qataris as a result of the Saudi-led blockade of the country.

====Hostile environment policies====
Certain jurisdictions gear their immigration policies toward creating a hostile environment for undocumented migrants in order to deter migration by creating an unwelcoming atmosphere for potential and existing immigrants. Notably, the British Home Office adopted a set of administrative and legislative measures designed to make staying in the United Kingdom as difficult as possible for people without leave to remain, in the hope that they may &quot;voluntarily leave&quot;. The Home Office policy was first announced in 2012 under the Conservative-Liberal Democrat coalition. The policy was implemented pursuant to the 2010 Conservative Party Election Manifesto. The policy has been criticised for being unclear, has led to many incorrect threats of deportation and has been called &quot;Byzantine&quot; by the England and Wales Court of Appeal for its complexity.

Similarly, anti-immigration movements in America have advocated for policies aimed at creating a hostile environment for intended and existing immigrants at various points in history. Historical examples include the nativist Know Nothing movement of the mid-19th century, which advocated hostile policies against Catholic immigrants; the Workingman&#x27;s Party, which promoted xenophobic attitudes toward Asians in California during the late-19th century, a sentiment that ultimately led to the Chinese Exclusion Act of 1882; the Immigration Restriction League, which advocated xenophobic policies against southern and eastern Europe during the late-19th and early 20th centuries, and the joint congressional Dillingham Commission. Following World War I, these cumulatively resulted in the highly restrictive Emergency Quota Act of 1921 and the Immigration Act of 1924. Over the first two decades of the 21st century, the Republican Party adopted an increasingly nativist platform, advocating against sanctuary cities and in favour of building a wall with Mexico and reducing the number of immigrants permitted to settle in the country. Ultimately, the Trump administration furthered many of these policy goals, including the adoption of harsh policies such as the Remain in Mexico and family separation policies vis à vis refugees and migrants arriving from Central America via Mexico. Islamophobic policies such as the travel ban targeted primarily at Muslim-majority countries also feature prominently in attempts to create a hostile environment for immigrants perceived by populists as not belonging to the predominant WASP culture in the United States.

India&#x27;s citizenship registration policy serves to create a hostile environment for the country&#x27;s Muslim community in the regions in which it has been implemented. The Indian government is presently in the process of building several detention camps throughout India in order to detain people not listed on the register. On 9 January 2019, the Union government released a &#x27;2019 Model Detention Manual&#x27;, which stated that every city or district, having a major immigration check post, must have a detention centre. The guidelines suggest detention centres with high boundary walls covered with barbed wires.

===International zones===

An international zone is any area not fully subject to the border control policies of the state in which it is located. There are several types of international zones ranging from special economic zones and sterile zones at ports of entry exempt from customs rules to concessions over which administration is ceded to one or more foreign states. International zones may also maintain distinct visa policies from the rest of the surrounding state.

==Internal border controls==

Internal border controls are measures implemented to control the flow of people or goods within a given country. Such measures take a variety of forms ranging from the imposition of border checkpoints to the issuance of internal travel documents and vary depending on the circumstances in which they are implemented. Circumstances resulting in internal border controls include increasing security around border areas (e.g. internal checkpoints in America or Bhutan near border regions), preserving the autonomy of autonomous or minority areas (e.g. border controls between Peninsular Malaysia, Sabah, and Sarawak; border controls between Hong Kong, Macau, and mainland China), preventing unrest between ethnic groups (e.g. Northern Ireland&#x27;s peace walls, border controls in Tibet and Northeastern India), and disputes between rival governments (e.g. between the Republic of China and the People&#x27;s Republic of China).

During the COVID-19 pandemic, temporary internal border controls were introduced in jurisdictions across the globe. For instance, travel between Australian states and territories was prohibited or restricted by state governments at various points of the pandemic either in conjunction with sporadic lockdowns or as a stand-alone response to COVID-19 outbreaks in neighbouring states. Internal border controls were also introduced at various stages of Malaysia&#x27;s Movement Control Order, per which interstate travel was restricted depending on the severity of ongoing outbreaks. Similarly, internal controls were introduced by national authorities within the Schengen Area, though the European Union ultimately rejected the idea of suspending the Schengen Agreement per se.

===Asia===
Internal border controls exist in many parts of Asia. For example, travellers visiting minority regions in India and China often require special permits to enter. Internal air and rail travel within non-autonomous portions of India and mainland China also generally require travel documents to be checked by government officials as a form of the interior border checkpoint. For such travel within India, Indian citizens may utilise their Voter ID, National Identity Card, passport, or other proof of Indian citizenship whilst Nepali nationals may present any similar proof of Napali citizenship. Meanwhile, for such travel within mainland China, Chinese nationals from the mainland are required to use their national identity cards.

====China====
Within China, extensive border controls are maintained for those travelling between the mainland, special administrative regions of Hong Kong and Macau. Foreign nationals need to present their passports or other required types of travel documents when travelling between these jurisdictions. For Chinese nationals (including those with British National (Overseas) status), there are special documents for travel between these territories. Internal border controls in China have also resulted in the creation of special permits allowing Chinese citizens to immigrate to or reside in other immigration areas within the country.

China also maintains distinct, relaxed border control policies in the Special Economic Zones of Shenzhen, Zhuhai and Xiamen. Nationals of most countries can obtain a limited area visa upon arrival in these regions, which permit them to stay within these cities without proceeding further into other parts of mainland China. Visas for Shenzhen are valid for 5 days, and visas for Xiamen and Zhuhai are valid for 3 days. The duration of stay starts from the next day of arrival. The visa can only be obtained only upon arrival at Luohu Port, Huanggang Port Control Point, Fuyong Ferry Terminal or Shekou Passenger Terminal for Shenzhen; Gongbei Port of Entry, Hengqin Port or Jiuzhou Port for Zhuhai; and Xiamen Gaoqi International Airport for Xiamen.

Similarly, China permits nationals of non—visa-exempt ASEAN countries to visit Guilin without a visa for a maximum of 6 days if they travel with an approved tour group and enter China from Guilin Liangjiang International Airport. They may not visit other cities within Guangxi or other parts of mainland China.

Neither the People&#x27;s Republic of China nor the Republic of China recognizes the passports issued by the other and neither considers travel between mainland China and areas controlled by the Republic of China
as formal international travel. There are arrangements exist for travel between territories controlled by the Republic of China and territories controlled by the People&#x27;s Republic of China. 

More generally, authorities in mainland China maintain a system of residency registration known as &quot;hukou&quot; (), by which government permission is needed to formally change one&#x27;s place of residence. It is enforced with identity cards. This system of internal border control measures effectively limited internal migration before the 1980s but subsequent market reforms caused it to collapse as a means of migration control. An estimated 150 to 200 million people are part of the &quot;blind flow&quot; and have unofficially migrated, generally from poor, rural areas to wealthy, urban ones. However, unofficial residents are often denied official services such as education and medical care and are sometimes subject to both social and political discrimination. In essence, the denial of social services outside an individual&#x27;s registered area of residence functions as an internal border control measure geared toward dissuading migration within the mainland.

====Bhutan====
Meanwhile, in Bhutan, accessible by road only through India, there are interior border checkpoints (primarily on the Lateral Road) and, additionally, certain areas require special permits to enter, whilst visitors not proceeding beyond the border city of Phuentsholing do not need permits to enter for the day (although such visitors are de facto subject to Indian visa policy since they must proceed through Jaigaon). Individuals who are not citizens of India, Bangladesh, or the Maldives must obtain both their visa and any regional permits required through a licensed tour operator prior to arriving in the country. Citizens of India, Bangladesh, and the Maldives may apply for regional permits for restricted areas online.

====Malaysia====
Another example is the Malaysian states of Sabah and Sarawak, which have maintained their own border controls since joining Malaysia in 1963. The internal border control is asymmetrical; while Sabah and Sarawak impose immigration control on Malaysian citizens from other states, there is no corresponding border control in Peninsular Malaysia, and Malaysians from Sabah and Sarawak have unrestricted right to live and work in the Peninsular. For social and business visits less than three months, Malaysian citizens may travel between the Peninsular, Sabah and Sarawak using the Malaysian identity card (MyKad) or Malaysian passport, while for longer stays in Sabah and Sarawak they are required to have an Internal Travel Document or a passport with the appropriate residential permit.

====North Korea====
The most restrictive internal border controls are in North Korea. Citizens are not allowed to travel outside their areas of residence without explicit authorisation, and access to the capital city of Pyongyang is heavily restricted. Similar restrictions are imposed on tourists, who are only allowed to leave Pyongyang on government-authorised tours to approved tourist sites.

===Europe===
An example from Europe is the implementation of border controls on travel between Svalbard, which maintains a policy of free migration as a result of the Svalbard Treaty and the Schengen Area, which includes the rest of Norway. Other examples of effective internal border controls in Europe include the closed cities of certain CIS members, areas of Turkmenistan that require special permits to enter, restrictions on travel to the Gorno-Badakhshan Autonomous Region in Tajikistan, and (depending on whether Northern and Southern Cyprus are considered separate countries) the Cypriot border. Similarly, Iraq&#x27;s Kurdistan region maintains a separate and more liberal visa and customs area from the rest of the country, even allowing visa free entry for Israelis whilst the rest of the country bans them from entering. Denmark also maintains a complex system of subnational countries which, unlike the Danish mainland, are outside the European Union and maintain autonomous customs policies. In addition to the numerous closed cities of Russia, parts of 19 subjects of the Russian Federation are closed for foreigners without special permits and are consequently subject to internal border controls.

Another complex border control situation in Europe pertains to the United Kingdom. Whilst the crown dependencies are within the Common Travel Area, neither Gibraltar nor the sovereign British military exclaves of Akrotiri and Dhekelia are. The former maintains its own border control policies, thus requiring physical border security at its border with the Schengen Area as well as the implementation of border controls for travellers proceeding directly between Gibraltar and the British mainland. The latter maintains a relatively open border with Southern Cyprus, though not with Northern Cyprus. Consequently, it is a de facto member of the Schengen Area and travel to or from the British mainland requires border controls. On 31 December 2020, Spain and the United Kingdom reached an agreement in principle under which Gibraltar would join the Schengen Area, clearing the way for the European Union and the UK to start formal negotiations on the matter.

In the aftermath of Brexit, border controls for goods flowing between Great Britain and Northern Ireland were introduced in accordance with the Protocol on Ireland/Northern Ireland agreed to as part of the UK&#x27;s withdrawal agreement with the EU. Due to the thirty-year internecine conflict in Northern Ireland, the UK-Ireland border has had a special status since that conflict was ended by the Belfast Agreement/Good Friday Agreement of 1998. As part of the Northern Ireland Peace Process, the border has been largely invisible, without any physical barrier or custom checks on its many crossing points; this arrangement was made possible by both countries&#x27; common membership of both the EU&#x27;s Single Market and Customs Union and of their Common Travel Area. Upon the UK&#x27;s withdrawal from the European Union, the border in Ireland became the only land border between the UK and EU. EU single market and UK internal market provisions require certain customs checks and trade controls at their external borders. The Northern Ireland Protocol is intended to protect the EU single market, while avoiding imposition of a &#x27;hard border&#x27; that might incite a recurrence of conflict and destabilise the relative peace that has held since the end of the Troubles. Under the Protocol, Northern Ireland is formally outside the EU single market, but EU free movement of goods rules and EU Customs Union rules still apply; this ensures there are no customs checks or controls between Northern Ireland and the rest of the island. In place of an Ireland/Northern Ireland land border, the protocol has created a &quot;de facto&quot; customs border down the Irish Sea for customs purposes, separating Northern Ireland from the island of Great Britain, to the disquiet of prominent Unionists. To operate the terms of the protocol, the United Kingdom must provide border control posts at Northern Ireland&#x27;s ports: actual provision of these facilities is the responsibility of Northern Ireland&#x27;s Department of Agriculture, Environment and Rural Affairs (DAERA). Temporary buildings were put in place for 1 January 2021, but in February 2021, the responsible Northern Ireland minister, Gordon Lyons (DUP), ordered officials to stop work on new permanent facilities and to stop recruiting staff for them. In its half yearly financial report 26 August 2021, Irish Continental Group, which operates ferries between Great Britain and the Republic of Ireland, expressed concern at the lack of implementation of checks on goods arriving into Northern Ireland from Great Britain, as required under the protocol. The company said that the continued absence of these checks (on goods destined for the Republic of Ireland) is causing a distortion in the level playing field, since goods that arrive directly into Republic of Ireland ports from Great Britain are checked on arrival. The implementation of border controls between Great Britain and Northern Ireland was the primary catalyst for the 2021 Northern Ireland riots.

An unusual example of internal border controls pertains to customs enforcement within the Schengen area. Even though borders are generally invisible, the existence of areas within the Schengen area but outside the European Union Value Added Tax Area, as well as jurisdictions such as Andorra which are not officially a part of the Schengen area but can not be accessed without passing through it, has resulted in the existence of sporadic internal border controls for customs purposes. Additionally, as per Schengen area rules, hotels and other types of commercial accommodation must register all foreign citizens, including citizens of other Schengen states, by requiring the completion of a registration form by their own hand. The Schengen rules do not require any other procedures; thus, the Schengen states are free to regulate further details on the content of the registration forms, and identity documents which are to be produced, and may also require the persons exempted from registration by Schengen laws to be registered. A Schengen state is also permitted to reinstate border controls with another Schengen country for a short period where there is a serious threat to that state&#x27;s &quot;public policy or internal security&quot; or when the &quot;control of an external border is no longer ensured due to exceptional circumstances&quot;. When such risks arise out of foreseeable events, the state in question must notify the European Commission in advance and consult with other Schengen states. Since the implementation of the Schengen Agreement, this provision has been invoked frequently by member states, especially in response to the European migrant crisis.

===Middle East===
The Israeli military maintains an intricate network of internal border controls within Israeli and Palestinian territory restricting the freedom of movement of Palestinians, composed of permanent, temporary, and random manned checkpoints in the West Bank; the West Bank Barrier; and restrictions on the usage of roads by Palestinians. Spread throughout the State of Israel and the areas of the State of Palestine under &quot;de facto&quot; Israeli control, internal border control measures are a key feature of Israeli and Palestinian life and are among the most restrictive in the world. Additionally, the blockade of the Gaza Strip results in a de facto domestic customs and immigration border for Palestinians. In order to clear internal border controls, Palestinians are required to obtain a variety of permits from Israeli authorities depending on the purpose and area of their travel. The legality and impact of this network of internal border controls is controversial. B&#x27;Tselem, an Israeli non-governmental organisation that monitors human rights in Palestine, argues that they breach the rights guaranteed by the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights—in particular, the right to a livelihood, the right to an acceptable standard of living, the right to satisfactory nutrition, clothing, and housing, and the right to attain the best standard of physical and mental health. B&#x27;Tselem also argues that the restrictions on ill, wounded and pregnant Palestinians seeking acute medical care is in contravention of international law that states that medical professionals and the sick must be granted open passage. While Israeli Supreme Court has deemed the measures acceptable for security reasons, &quot;Haaretz&quot;″s Amira Hass argues this policy defies one of the principles of the Oslo Accords, which states that Gaza and the West Bank constitute a single geographic unit.

Much like relations between Jewish settlers in Israel and the native Palestinian population, strained intercommunal relations in Northern Ireland between Irish Catholics and the descendants of Protestant settlers from England and Scotland have resulted in &quot;de facto&quot; internal checkpoints. The peace lines are an internal border security measure to separate predominantly republican and nationalist Catholic neighbourhoods from predominantly loyalist and unionist Protestant neighbourhoods. They have been in place in some form or another since the end of The Troubles in 1998, with the Good Friday Agreement. The majority of peace walls are located in Belfast, but they also exist in Derry, Portadown, and Lurgan, with more than of walls in Northern Ireland. The peace lines range in length from a few hundred metres to over 5 kilometres. They may be made of iron, brick, steel or a combination of the three and are up to high. Some have gates in them (sometimes staffed by police) that allow passage during daylight but are closed at night.

===North America===

Multiple types of internal border controls exist in the United States. While the American territories of Guam and the Northern Mariana Islands follow the same visa policy as the mainland, together, they also maintain their own visa waiver programme for certain nationalities. Since the two territories are outside the customs territory of the United States, there are customs inspections when travelling between them, and the rest of the U.S. American Samoa has its own customs and immigration regulations, thus travelling between it and other American jurisdictions involves both customs and immigration inspections. The Virgin Islands are a special case, falling within the American immigration zone and solely following American visa policy, but being a customs free territory. As a result, there are no immigration checks between the two, but travellers arriving in Puerto Rico or the American mainland directly from the Virgin Islands are subject to border control for customs inspection. The United States also maintains interior checkpoints, similar to those maintained by Bhutan, along its borders with Mexico and Canada, subjecting people to border controls even after they have entered the country.

The Akwesasne nation; with territory in Ontario, Quebec, and New York; features several de facto internal border controls. As a result of protests by Akwesasne residents on their rights to cross the border unimpeded, as provided under the 1795 Jay Treaty, the Canada Border Services Agency closed its post on Cornwall Island, instead requiring travellers to proceed to the checkpoint in the city of Cornwall. As a consequence of the arrangement, residents of the island are required to clear border controls when proceeding North to the Ontarian mainland, as well as when proceeding South to Akwesasne territory in New York, thus constituting internal controls both from a Canadian perspective and from the perspective of the Akwesasne nation. Similarly, travelling between Canada and the Quebec portion of the Akwesasne nation requires driving through the state of New York, meaning that individuals will be required to clear American controls when leaving Quebec proper and to clear Canadian border controls when entering Quebec proper, though Canada does not impose border controls when entering the Quebec portion of the Akwesasne nation. Nevertheless, for residents who assert a Haudenosaunee national identity distinct from Canadian or American citizenship, the intricate network of Canadian and American border controls are seen as a foreign-imposed system of internal border controls, similar to the Israeli checkpoints in Palestinian territory.

The city of Hyder, Alaska has also been subject to internal border controls since America chose to stop regulating arrivals in Hyder from British Columbia. Since travellers exiting Hyder into Stewart, British Columbia are subject to Canadian border controls, it is theoretically possible for someone to accidentally enter Hyder from Canada without their travel documents and then to face difficulties since both America and Canada would subject them to border controls that require travel documents. At the same time, however, the northern road connecting Hyder to uninhabited mountain regions of British Columbia is equipped with neither American nor Canadian border controls, meaning that tourists from Canada proceeding northwards from Hyder are required to complete Canadian immigration formalities when they return to Stewart despite never having cleared American immigration.

===Historical===
Identification and freedom of internal movement have sometimes been instruments of oppression, for example in Canada&#x27;s pass system, or Apartheid-era South Africa&#x27;s Pass laws.

==Specific requirements==

The degree of strictness of border controls varies across countries and borders. In some countries, controls may be targeted at the traveller&#x27;s religion, ethnicity, nationality, or other countries that have been visited. Others may need to be certain the traveller has paid the appropriate fees for their visas and has future travel planned out of the country. Yet others may concentrate on the contents of the traveller&#x27;s baggage, and imported goods to ensure nothing is being carried that might bring a biosecurity risk into the country.

===Biometrics===
Several countries require all travellers, or all foreign travellers, to be fingerprinted on arrival and refuse admission to or arrest travellers who refuse to comply. In some countries, such as America, this may apply even to transit passengers proceeding to a third country. Many countries also require a photo be taken of people entering the country. The United States, which does not fully implement exit control formalities at its land frontiers (although long mandated by domestic legislation), intends to implement facial recognition for passengers departing from international airports to identify people who overstay their visa. Together with fingerprint and face recognition, iris scanning is one of three biometric identification technologies internationally standardised since 2006 by the International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO) for use in e-passports and the United Arab Emirates conducts iris scanning on visitors who need to apply for a visa.&lt;section end=&quot;full&quot; /&gt;&lt;section begin=&quot;bad&quot; /&gt; The Department of Homeland Security has announced plans to greatly increase the biometric data it collects at American borders. In 2018, Singapore began trials of iris scanning at three land and maritime immigration checkpoints.

===Immigration stamps===
An immigration stamp is an inked impression in a passport or other travel document typically made by rubber stamp upon entering or exiting a territory. Depending on the jurisdiction, a stamp can serve different purposes. For example, in the United Kingdom, an immigration stamp in a passport includes the formal leave to enter granted to a person subject to entry control. In other countries, a stamp activates or acknowledges the continuing leave conferred in the passport bearer&#x27;s entry clearance. Under the Schengen system, a foreign passport is stamped with a date stamp which does not indicate any duration of stay. This means that the person is deemed to have permission to remain either for three months or for the period shown on his visa if specified otherwise. Member states of the European Union are not permitted to place a stamp in the passport of a person who is not subject to immigration control. Stamping is prohibited because it is an imposition of a control to which the person is not subject. Passport stamps may occasionally take the form of sticker stamps, such as entry stamps from Japan. Depending on nationality, a visitor may not receive a stamp at all (unless specifically requested), such as an EU or EFTA citizen travelling to an EU or EFTA country, Albania, or North Macedonia. Most countries issue exit stamps in addition to entry stamps. A few countries issue only entry stamps, including Canada, El Salvador, Ireland, Mexico, New Zealand, Singapore, United Kingdom and the United States of America. Australia, Hong Kong, Israel, Macau and South Korea do not stamp passports upon entry nor exit. These countries or regions issue landing slips instead, with the exception of Australia who do not issue any form of physical evidence of entry. Visas may also take the form of passport stamps.

Immigration authorities usually have different styles of stamps for entries and exits, to make it easier to identify the movements of people. Ink colour might be used to designate mode of transportation (air, land or sea), such as in Hong Kong prior to 1997; while border styles did the same thing in Macau. Other variations include changing the size of the stamp to indicate length of stay, as in Singapore.

In many cases passengers on cruise ships do not receive passport stamps because the entire vessel has been cleared into port. It is often possible to get a souvenir stamp, although this requires finding the immigration office by the dock. In many cases officials are used to such requests and will cooperate. Also, as noted below, some of the smallest European countries will give a stamp on request, either at their border or tourist office charging, at most, a nominal fee.

===Exit controls===

Whilst most countries implement border controls both at entry and exit, some jurisdictions do not. For instance, the United States and Canada do not implement exit controls at land borders and collect exit data on foreign nationals through airlines and through information sharing with neighbouring countries&#x27; entry border controls. These countries consequently do not issue exit stamps even to travellers who require stamps on entry. Similarly, Australia, Singapore and South Korea have eliminated exit stamps even though they continue to implement brief border control checks upon exit for most foreign nationals. In countries where there is no formal control by immigration officials of travel documents upon departure, exit information may be recorded by immigration authorities using the information provided to them by transport operators.

&quot;No exit control&quot;:
* United States of America
* Canada
* Mexico (by air, but entrance declaration coupon is collected)
* Bahamas
* Ireland
* United Kingdom

&quot;Formal exit control without passport stamping&quot;:
* Albania (Entry &amp; Exit stamp may issued upon request)
* Australia (Exit stamp issued upon explicit request)
* China (Exit stamp issued upon request when using e-Gate)
* Costa Rica (only at Costa Rican airports; different entry and exit stamps are made at the border crossing with Panama)
* El Salvador
* Fiji
* Hong Kong (no entry or exit stamps are issued, instead landing slips are issued upon arrival only)
* Iran
* Israel (no entry or exit stamps are issued at Ben Gurion Airport, instead landing slips are issued upon arrival and departure)
* Japan (Exit stamp issued upon request &amp; when not using e-Gate since July 2019)
* Macau (no entry or exit stamps are issued, instead landing slips are issued upon arrival only)
* New Zealand
* South Korea (since 1 November 2016)
* Panama (only at Panamanian airports; stamps are made at the border crossing with Costa Rica)
* Republic of China (exit stamp issued upon request &amp; when not using e-Gate)
* Singapore (no exit stamps since 22 April 2019)
* Saint Kitts and Nevis
* Schengen Area countries (when the Entry Exit System becomes operational in 2022, it is anticipated that the passports of third-country nationals will not be stamped when they enter and leave the Schengen Area)

===Exit permits===
Some countries in Europe maintain controversial exit visa systems in addition to regular border controls. For instance, Uzbekistan requires its own citizens to obtain exit visas prior to leaving for countries other than fellow CIS nations in eastern Europe. Several countries in the Arabian peninsula require exit visas for foreign workers under the Kafala System meaning &quot;sponsorship system&quot;). Russia occasionally requires foreigners who overstay to obtain exit visas since one cannot exit Russia without a valid visa. Czechia has a similar policy. Similarly, a foreign citizen granted a temporary residence permit in Russia needs an exit visa to take a trip abroad (valid for both exit and return). Not all foreign citizens are subject to that requirement. Citizens of Germany, for example, do not require this exit visa. During the Cold War, countries in the Eastern Bloc maintained strict controls on citizens&#x27; ability to travel abroad. Citizens of the Soviet Union, East Germany, and other communist states were typically required to obtain permission prior to engaging in international travel. Unlike most of these states, citizens of Yugoslavia enjoyed a significant freedom of international movement.

Certain Asian countries have policies that similarly require certain categories of citizens to seek official authorisation prior to travelling or emigrating. This is usually either as a way to enforce national service obligations or to protect migrant workers from travelling to places where they may be abused by employers. Singapore, for instance, operates an Exit Permit scheme in order to enforce the national service obligations of its male citizens and permanent residents. These restrictions vary according to age and status. South Korea and Taiwan have similar policies. India, on the other hand, requires citizens who have not met certain educational requirements (and thus may be targeted by human traffickers or be coerced into modern slavery) to apply for approval prior to leaving the country and endorses their passports with &quot;Emigration Check Required&quot;. Nepal similarly requires citizens emigrating to America on an H-1B visa to present an exit permit issued by the Ministry of Labour. This document is called a work permit and needs to be presented to immigration to leave the country. In a bid to increase protection for the large amount of Indian, Bangladeshi, Chinese, and Nepali citizens smuggled through Indian airports to the Middle East as underpaid labourers, many Indian airline companies require travellers to obtain an &#x27;OK to Board&#x27; confirmation sent directly from visa authorities in certain GCC countries directly to the airline and will bar anyone who has not obtained this endorsement from clearing exit immigration.

Eritrea requires the vast majority of its citizens to apply for special authorisation if they wish to leave, or even travel within, the country.

===Travel documents===

Border control policies typically require travellers to present valid travel documents in order to ascertain their identity, nationality or permanent residence status, and eligibility to enter a given jurisdiction. The most common form of travel document is the passport, a booklet-form identity document issued by national authorities or the governments of certain subnational territories containing an individual&#x27;s personal information as well as space for the authorities of other jurisdictions to affix stamps, visas, or other permits authorising the bearer to enter, reside, or travel within their territory. Certain jurisdictions permit individuals to clear border controls using identity cards, which typically contain similar personal information.

===Visas===


A visa is a travel document issued to foreign nationals enabling them to clear border controls. They traditionally take the form of an adhesive sticker or, occasionally, a stamp affixed to a page in an individual&#x27;s passport or equivalent document. Visas policies different purposes depending on the priorities of each jurisdiction, ranging from ensuring that visitors do not pose a national security risk or have sufficient financial resources to simply functioning as a tax on tourists, as is the case with countries like Mauritius and other leisure destinations which issue visas on arrival, electronic visas, or electronic travel authorisations (ETAs) to most or all visitors. Visas may include limits on the duration of the foreigner&#x27;s stay, areas within the state they may enter, the dates they may enter, the number of permitted visits, or an individual&#x27;s right to work in the state in question.

Many countries in Asia have liberalised their visa controls in recent years to encourage transnational business and tourism. For example, India, Myanmar, and Sri Lanka have introduced electronic visas to make border control less arduous for business travellers and tourists. Malaysia has introduced similar eVisa facilities, and has also introduced the eNTRI programme to expedite clearance for Indian citizens and Chinese citizens from the mainland. Thailand regularly issues visas on arrival to many non-exempt visitors at major ports of entry in order to encourage tourism. Indonesia, in recent years, has progressively liberalised its visa regime, no longer requiring visas or on-arrival visas from most nationals, while Singapore has signed visa waiver agreements with many countries in recent years and has introduced electronic visa facilities for Indians, Eastern Europeans, and mainland Chinese. This trend towards visa liberalisation in Asia is part of the regional trend toward social and economic globalisation that has been linked to heightened economic growth.

Certain countries, predominantly but not exclusively in western Europe and the Americas, issue working holiday visas for younger visitors to supplement their travel funds by working minor jobs. These are especially common in members of the European Union, and elsewhere in Europe.

Saudi Arabia issues a special category visa for people on religious pilgrimage. Similar policies are in force in other countries with significant religious sites.

Certain jurisdictions impose special visa requirements on journalists. Countries that require such visas include Cuba, China, North Korea, Saudi Arabia, America and Zimbabwe.

As a consequence of awkward border situations created by the fall of the Soviet Union, certain former members of the USSR and their neighbours maintain special visa exemption policies for travellers transiting across international boundaries between two points in a single country. For instance, Russia permits vehicles to transit across the Saatse Boot between the Estonian villages of Lutepää and Sesniki without any visa or border checkpoint provided that they do not stop. Similar provisions are made for the issuance of Facilitated Rail Transit Documents by Schengen Area members for travel between Kaliningrad Oblast and the Russian mainland, enabling Russian citizens to travel to and from the exclave without a passport or visa.

Many countries let individuals clear border controls using foreign visas. Notably, the Philippines permits nationals of India and China can use any of several foreign visas to clear border controls. In order to encourage tourism by transit passengers, South Korea permits passengers in transit who would otherwise require a South Korean visa to enter for up to thirty days utilising an Australian, Canadian, American, or Schengen visa. Uniquely, the British territory of Bermuda has ceased to issue its own visas and instead requires that travellers either clear immigration visa-free in one of the three countries (Canada, America, and United Kingdom) to/from which it has direct flights, or hold a visa for one of them.

===Electronic visas and electronic travel authorisations===

Beginning in the 2000s, many countries introduced e-visas and electronic travel authorisations (ETAs) as an alternative to traditional visas. An ETA is a kind of pre-arrival registration, which may or may not be officially classified as a visa depending on the issuing jurisdiction, required for foreign travellers who are exempted from obtaining a full visa. In contrast to the procedures that typically apply in regard to proper visas, per which the traveller normally has no recourse if rejected, if an ETA is rejected the traveller can choose to apply for a visa instead. In contrast, an e-visa is simply a visa that travellers can apply for and receive online without visiting the issuing state&#x27;s consular mission or visa agency. The following jurisdictions require certain categories of international travellers to hold an ETA or e-visa in order to clear border controls upon arrival:
* &quot;Australia&quot;:
** Electronic Travel Authority (ETA)
** eVisitor programme
* &quot;East African Community&quot;: From February 2014, Kenya, Rwanda and Uganda issue an East African Tourist Visa.
* &quot;Hong Kong&quot;: Mainland Travel Permit for Taiwan Residents
* &quot;India&quot;: India permits nationals of most jurisdictions to clear border controls using an e-visa.
* &quot;Kenya&quot;: From 1 January 2021, Kenya solely issues e-visas and physical visas are no longer available.
* &quot;New Zealand&quot;: Electronic Travel Authority (NZeTA)
* &quot;North America&quot;: Canadian ETA, US Electronic System for Travel Authorisation
* &quot;Pakistan&quot;: Pakistani ETA.
* &quot;South Korea&quot;: eligible visa-free visitors must obtain Korea Electronic Travel Authorization (K-ETA).
* &quot;Sri Lanka&quot;: Sri Lankan ETA
* &quot;Qatar&quot;: ETA needed for up to 30 days.
* &quot;United Kingdom&quot;: Electronic Visa Waiver, or EVW The Nationality and Borders Bill, before the parliament in Spring 2022, includes a proposal to introduce the Electronic Travel Authorisation system for all non-UK and Irish citizens.

===Nationality and travel history===
Many nations implement border controls restricting the entry of people of certain nationalities or who have visited certain countries. For instance Georgia refuses entry to holders of passports issued by the Republic of China. Similarly, since April 2017, nationals of Bangladesh, Pakistan, Sudan, Syria, Yemen, and Iran have been banned from entering the parts of eastern Libya under the control of the Tobruk government. The majority of Arab countries, as well as Iran and Malaysia, ban Israeli citizens, however exceptional entry to Malaysia is possible with approval from the Ministry of Home Affairs. Certain countries may also restrict entry to those with Israeli stamps or visas in their passports. As a result of tension over the Artsakh dispute, Azerbaijan currently forbids entry to Armenian citizens as well as to individuals with proof of travel to Artsakh.

Between September 2017 and January 2021, the United States did not issue new visas to nationals of Iran, North Korea, Libya, Somalia, Syria, or Yemen pursuant to restrictions imposed by the Trump administration, which were subsequently repealed by the Biden administration on 20 January 2021. While in force, the restrictions were conditional and could be lifted if the countries affected meet the required security standards specified by the Trump administration, and dual citizens of these countries could still enter if they presented a passport from a non-designated country.

===Prescreening===
A significant number of countries maintain prescreening facilities for passengers departing from other jurisdictions to clear border controls prior to arrival and thereby skip checkpoints upon arrival. Aside from simplifying arrival formalities, this enables border control authorities to deny entry to potentially inadmissible travellers prior to their embarking and to reduce congestion at border checkpoints located at ports of arrival.
* Hong Kong and mainland China: There are two border crossings between Hong Kong and the Chinese mainland at which border controls imposed by the two jurisdictions are colocated:
** West Kowloon Railway Station (): A component of the Guangzhou–Shenzhen–Hong Kong Express Rail Link (), West Kowloon Station contains a &quot;Mainland Port Area ()&quot;, essentially enabling passengers and goods to clear mainland Chinese immigration on Hong Kong soil.
** Shenzhen Bay Port (): The land border checkpoint at Shenzhen Bay Port in the mainland contains a Hong Kong Port Area () which enables passengers and goods to clear Hong Kong border controls in the mainland. The checkpoint is located in the Chinese mainland on land leased from the city of Shenzhen in Guangdong province. By enabling travellers to clear both Chinese and Hong Kong border controls in one place, it eliminates any need for a second checkpoint on the Hong Kong side of the Shenzhen Bay Bridge.

* Singapore and Malaysia:
** Woodlands Train Checkpoint (, , ): For cross-border rail passengers, Singaporean exit and Malaysian entry preclearance border controls are co-located at the Woodlands Train Checkpoint in Singapore, whilst Malaysian exit controls are located separately at Johor Bahru Sentral railway station in Malaysia.
** Johor Bahru – Singapore Rapid Transit System (, , , RTS): The upcoming RTS connecting Singapore and Johor Bahru will feature border control preclearance both on the Singaporean side and on the Malaysian side. This will enable passengers arriving in Singapore from Malaysia or vice versa to proceed straight to their connecting transport, since the RTS will link to both the Singapore MRT system (Thomson–East Coast Line) and Johor Bahru Sentral. Unlike the preclearance systems adopted in America and Hong Kong, but similar to the United Kingdom&#x27;s juxtaposed controls, this system will mitigate arrival border controls on both sides of the border.
* Malaysia and Thailand:
** Padang Besar railway station (, ): The Padang Besar railway station in Padang Besar, Malaysia has co-located border control facilities for both Malaysia and Thailand, although the station is wholly located inside Malaysian territory (albeit just 200 metres south of the Malaysia-Thailand border). The facilities for each country operate from separate counters inside the railway station building at the platform level. Passengers entering Thailand clear Malaysian and Thai border formalities here in Malaysian territory before boarding their State Railway of Thailand trains which then cross the actual borderline several minutes after departing the station. Passengers from Thailand entering Malaysia are also processed here, using the same counters as there are no separate counters for processing entries and exits for either country.
* United Kingdom and the Schengen Area: Border control for travel between the United Kingdom and the Schengen Area features significant prescreening under the juxtaposed controls programme for travel both by ferry and rail. This includes customs and immigration prescreening on both sides of the Channel Tunnel, and immigration-only prescreening for ferry passengers and on the Eurostar between the United Kingdom and stations located in Belgium, France, and the Netherlands. Eurostar and Eurotunnel passengers departing from the Schengen area go through both French, Dutch, or Belgian exit border control and British entry border controls before departures, while passengers departing from the United Kingdom, including those departing for Belgium or the Netherlands, undergo French border controls on British soil. For travel by ferry, French entry border control for ferries between Dover and Calais or Dunkerque takes place at the Port of Dover, whilst French exit and British entry border control takes place at Calais and Dunkerque. For travel by rail, twelve juxtaposed border control checkpoints are currently in operation.

* United States: The U.S. government operates border preclearance facilities at a number of ports and airports in foreign territory. They are staffed and operated by U.S. Customs and Border Protection officers. Travellers pass through the U.S. Immigration and Customs, Public Health, and Agriculture inspections before boarding their aircraft, ship, or train. This process is intended to streamline border procedures, reduce congestion at ports of entry, and facilitate travel between the preclearance location and American airports unequipped to handle international travellers. These facilities are present at the majority of major Canadian airports, as well as selected airports in Bermuda, Aruba, the Bahamas, Abu Dhabi and Ireland. Facilities located in Canada accept NEXUS cards and United States Passport cards (land/sea entry only) in lieu of passports. A preclearance facility is currently being planned at Dubai International Airport. Citizens of the Bahamas who enter United States through either of the two preclearance facilities in that country enjoy an exemption from the general requirement to hold a visa as long as they can sufficiently prove that they do not have a significant criminal record in either the Bahamas or the U.S. All Bahamians applying for admission at a port-of-entry other than the preclearance facilities located in Nassau or Freeport International airports are required to be in possession of a valid visa. Preclearance facilities are also operated at Pacific Central Station, the Port of Vancouver, and the Port of Victoria in British Columbia, and there are plans to open one at Montreal Central Station in Quebec.

* Informal prescreening: In some cases countries can introduce controls that function as border controls but are not border controls legally and do not need to be performed by government agencies. Normally they are performed and organised by private companies, based on a law that they have to check that passengers do not travel into a specific country if they are not allowed to. Such controls can take effect in one country based on the law of another country without any formalised border control prescreening agreement in force. Even if they are not border controls function as such. The most prominent example is airlines which check passports and visas before passengers are allowed to board the aircraft. Also for some passenger boats, such checks are performed before boarding.

==Expedited border controls==

Certain countries and trade blocs establish programmes for high-frequency and/or low risk travellers to expedite border controls, subjecting them to lighter or automated checks, or priority border control facilities. In some countries, citizens or residents have access to automated facilities not available to foreigners. The following expedited border control programmes are currently in effect:
* APEC Business Travel Card (ABTC): The APEC Business Travel Card, or ABTC, is an expedited border control programme for business travellers from APEC economies (excluding Canada and America). It provides visa exemptions and access to expedited border control facilities. ABTC holders are eligible for expedited border control at Canadian airports but not for any visa exemptions. ABTCs are generally issued only to citizens of APEC member countries, however Hong Kong issues them to Permanent Residents who are not Chinese citizens, a category primarily consisting of British, Indian, and Pakistani citizens. The use of ABTCs in China is restricted as a result of the One Country, Two Systems and One China policies. Chinese nationals from Hong Kong, Macau, and the Republic of China are required to use special internal travel documents to enter the mainland. Similar restrictions exist on the use of ABTC for Chinese citizens of other regions entering areas administered by the Republic of China. (see: Internal border controls).
* : SmartGates located at major Australian airports allow Australian ePassport holders and ePassport holders of a number of other countries to clear immigration controls more rapidly, and to enhance travel security by performing passport control checks electronically. SmartGate uses facial recognition system to verify the traveller&#x27;s identity against the data stored in the chip in their biometric passport, as well as checking against immigration databases. Travellers require a biometric passport to use SmartGate as it uses information from the passport (such as photograph, name and date of birth) and in the respective countries&#x27; databases (i.e. banned travellers database) to decide whether to grant entry or departure from Australia or to generate a referral to a customs agent. These checks would otherwise require manual processing by a human which is time-consuming, costly and potentially error-prone.
* British Isles: ePassport gates in the British Isles are operated by the UK Border Force and the Irish Naturalisation and Immigration Service, and are located at immigration checkpoints in the arrival halls of some airports across the British Isles, offering an alternative to using desks staffed by immigration officers. The gates use facial recognition system to verify the user&#x27;s identity by comparing the user&#x27;s facial features to those recorded in the photograph stored in the chip in their biometric passport. British citizens, European Economic Area citizens and citizens of Australia, Canada, Japan, New Zealand, Singapore, South Korea, Taiwan and the United States as well as Chinese citizens of Hong Kong who are enrolled in the Registered Traveller Service, can use ePassport gates at 14 ports of entry in the United Kingdom provided that they are aged either 18 and over or 12 and over travelling with an adult and holding valid biometric passports. In Ireland, eGates are available at Dublin Airport for arrivals at Terminal 1 (Piers 1 and 2) and Terminal 2 and, in addition to Irish and British citizens, they are currently available to citizens of Switzerland and the European Economic Area with electronic passports aged 18 or over though there are proposals to extend the service to non-European citizens. Irish passport cards can be used at eGates in Dublin Airport.
* : CARIPASS is a voluntary travel card programme that will provide secure and simple border crossings for citizens and legal residents of participating Caribbean Community jurisdictions. The CARIPASS initiative is coordinated by the Implementation Agency for Crime and Security (CARICOM IMPACS), and seeks to provide standardised border control facilities within participating Caribbean communities. CARIPASS is accepted as a valid travel document within and between participating member states and will allow cardholders to access automated gate facilities at immigration checkpoints that will use biometric technology to verify the user.
* China:
** &quot;Mainland China&quot;: Residents in the PRC, both Chinese citizens and foreign residents (not tourists) can use the Chinese E-Channel after registration, which is done at the border, before leaving the Mainland. Chinese citizens with Hong Kong or Macau Permanent Residence can use their Home Return Permit instead of their passport to enter and leave the Mainland.
** &quot;Hong Kong &amp; Macau&quot;: The Automated Passenger Clearance System (), colloquially known as the e-Channel) is an automated border control facility available at airports in Hong Kong and Macau, and at land borders between the mainland and the Special Administrative Regions. It is open to residents in the appropriate regions, and to selected foreign nationals. In Hong Kong, the is also available to non-residents on departure, without registration, and to registered non-residents who qualify as &quot;frequent travellers&quot;, including Chinese citizens from the Mainland, for both arrival and departure. Finally, Hong Kong&#x27;s and Macau&#x27;s systems recognise each other&#x27;s Permanent Resident ID card, after registration in an automated kiosk at the ferry terminal.
* : Along with the introduction of J-BIS, an &quot;Automated gate&quot; () was set up at Terminal 1 and 2 at Narita Airport, Haneda Airport, Chubu Centrair Airport and Kansai Airport. With this system, when a person enters or leaves the country, rather than having to be processed by an examiner there, a person can use a machine at the gate, thereby making both entry and departure simpler and easier, as well as more convenient. Japanese people with valid passports, foreigners with both valid passports (this includes refugees with valid travel certificates and re-entry permits) and re-entry permits can use this system.
* : Viajero Confiable is a Mexican trusted traveller programme which allows members to pass securely through customs and immigration controls in reduced time, using automated kiosks at participating airports. Viajero Confiable was introduced in three airports in 2014 and has since expanded to additional sites. Like the NEXUS, Global Entry, and TSA PreCheck programs, Viajero Confiable members traveling via participating airports may use designated lanes which allow them to speedily and securely clear customs, because the Mexican government has already performed a background check on them, and they are considered a trusted traveller. At the participating airports, members may use automated kiosks to scan their passport and fingerprints, and complete an electronic immigration form. The programme is targeted at Mexican citizens, as well as U.S. or Canadian citizens who are members of the Global Entry or NEXUS programme and are lawful permanent residents of Mexico.
* : In New Zealand, a SmartGate system exists at Auckland, Wellington, Christchurch and Queenstown airports, enabling holders of biometric passports issued by New Zealand, Australia, Canada, China, France, Germany, Ireland and the Netherlands, the United Kingdom, and America to clear border controls using automated facilities. The system can currently only be used by travellers 12 years of age or older, however a trial is under way that may potentially lower the age of eligibility to use eGate for people with an eligible ePassport from 12 years of age to 10 years of age. New Zealand eGates utilise biometric technology, comparing the picture of your face in your ePassport with the picture it takes of you at the gate in order to confirm your identity. To make sure eGate can do this, travellers must make sure they look as similar to their ePassport photos as possible and remove glasses, scarves and hats that they were not wearing when their passport picture was taken. eGate can handle minor changes in your face, for example if the travellers&#x27; weight or hair has changed. Customs, Biosecurity and Immigration officials utilise information provided at eGates, including photos, to clear travellers and their items across New Zealand&#x27;s border. Biometric information is kept for three months before destruction but other information, including about movements across New Zealand&#x27;s border is kept indefinitely and handled in accordance with the Privacy Act 1993, or as the law authorises. This might include information being used by or shared with other law enforcement or border control authorities. Since 1 July 2019, visitors from the 60 Visa Waiver countries require a New Zealand electronic Travel Authority (NZeTA). This is an online application and a further toolkit and requirements for airlines and travel agents can be downloaded from the New Zealand Immigration website.
* : The enhanced-Immigration Automated Clearance System () is available at all checkpoints for Singapore citizens, permanent residents, foreign residents with long-term passes, APEC Business Travel Card holders, and other registered travellers. Foreign visitors whose fingerprints are registered on arrival may use the lanes for exit clearance. In addition, the Biometric Identification of Motorbikers (BIKES) System is available for eligible motorcyclists at the land border crossings with Malaysia. Meanwhile, all visitors who have been fingerprinted on entry at a manned counter can use the to leave Singapore by air. Additionally, nationals of certain countries may register to use the system on entry, provided they meet prescribed conditions.
* : South Korea maintains a programme known as the Smart Entry Service, open for registration by South Koreans aged 7 or above and by registered foreigners aged 17 or above. Furthermore, visitors aged 17 or older may use the Smart Entry Service on exit at international airports, as long as they have provided their biometrics on arrival.
* Taiwan: An automated entry system, eGate, exists in areas administered by the Republic of China providing expedited border control for ROC nationals as well as certain classes of residents and frequent visitors. Users simply scan their travel documents at the gate and are passed through for facial recognition. As of 2019, there have been instances of foreign non-registered travellers allowed to use the eGate system to depart, notably at Taipei Taoyuan Airport Terminal 1, but not Terminal 2, using a passport scan and fingerprints.
* : The automated passport control (APC) system, which uses a facial recognition system, has been available for Thai nationals since 2012 and more than 20 million have used it. Suvarnabhumi Airport opened 8 automated immigration lanes for foreigners, but only Singaporeans were allowed to use the system initially. Since then, Singaporeans and holders of the Hong Kong SAR passport have been allowed to use the system. Once processed, the foreign travellers can leave the automatic channel and present their passport to a Thai immigration officer to be stamped.
* North America: North America has a wide variety of expedited border control programmes:
** Global Entry: Global Entry is a programme for frequent travellers that enables them to utilise automated border control facilities and priority security screening. In addition to U.S. citizens and Permanent Residents, the programme is open to Indian, Singaporean, and South Korean citizens among others. Global Entry members are eligible to use automated Global Entry facilities at certain airports to clear border control more efficiently. Enrolled users must present their machine-readable passport or permanent residency card, and submit their fingerprints to establish identity. Users then complete an electronic customs declaration, and are issued a receipt instructing them to either proceed to baggage claim, or to a normal inspection booth for an interview. Participants may utilise automated kiosks to clear U.S. border controls at participating airports.
** CANPASS: Canadian citizens and Permanent Residents can apply for CANPASS which, in its present form, provides expedited border controls for individuals entering Canada on corporate and private aircraft.
** NEXUS and FAST: NEXUS is a joint Canadian-U.S. expedited border control programme for low risk travellers holding Canadian or U.S. citizenship or permanent residence. Membership requires approval by Canadian and U.S. authorities and entitles members to dedicated RFID-enabled lanes when crossing the land border. A NEXUS card can also be utilised as a travel document between the two countries and entitles passengers to priority border control facilities in Canada and Global Entry facilities in the U.S. Free and Secure Trade (FAST) is a similar programme for commercial drivers and approved importers, reducing the amount of customs checks conducted at the border and expediting the border control process. When entering the U.S. by air, holders of NEXUS cards may use Global Entry kiosks to clear border controls at participating airports
** SENTRI: SENTRI is a programme similar to NEXUS for U.S. and Mexican citizens that additionally allows members to register their cars for expedited land border controls. Unlike NEXUS, SENTRI is administered solely by the American government and does not provide expedited controls when entering Mexico. When entering United States by land from Canada, it can be used as a NEXUS card, but not the other way around. Individuals holding a NEXUS card may additionally register their cars for expedited land border controls under SENTRI. When entering United States by air, holders of SENTRI cards may use Global Entry kiosks to clear border controls at participating airports

===Local border traffic===

The local border traffic is the flow of travellers that reside within the area surrounding a controlled international or internal border. In many cases local border traffic is subject to special regulations to expedite local border traffic. Depending on the particular border in question, these measures may be restricted to local residents, implemented as a blanket regional visa waiver by one jurisdiction for nationals of the other, restricted to frequent cross-border travellers, or available to individuals lawfully present in one jurisdiction seeking to visit the other.

 Schengen Area: Schengen states which share an external land border with a non-Schengen state are authorised by EU Regulation 1931/2006 to conclude bilateral agreements with neighbouring countries implementing a simplified local border traffic regime. Such agreements define a border area and provide for the issuance of local border traffic permits to residents of the border area that may be used to cross the EU external border within the border area.

===Relaxed control in near-border areas===
* : For example, the relaxed border controls maintained by Bhutan for those not proceeding past Phuentsholing and certain other border cities enable travellers to enter without going through any document check whatsoever.
* America: The Border Crossing Card issued by American authorities to Mexican nationals enables Mexicans to enter border areas without a passport. Both United States and Bhutan maintain interior checkposts to enforce compliance.
* : China maintains relaxed border controls for individuals lawfully in Hong Kong or Macau to visit the surrounding Pearl River Delta visa-free provided that certain conditions are met.
* The &quot;Brest – Grodno&quot; visa free territory, established by a presidential decree signed in August 2019 has permitted local visa free access to most visitors lawfully present in the neighbouring Schengen Area since 10 November 2019. Visitors are allowed to stay without a visa for 15 days. Entry is possible through designated checkpoints with Poland and Lithuania, Brest-Uschodni Railway Station, Grodno Railway Station, Brest Airport and Grodno Airport. Prior to travel, visitors must obtain authorisation from a local travel agency in Belarus.

==Border control organisations by country==
Border control is generally the responsibility of specialised government organisations which oversee various aspects their jurisdiction&#x27;s border control policies, including customs, immigration policy, border guard, biosecurity measures. Official designations, division of responsibilities, and command structures of these organisations vary considerably and some countries split border control functions across multiple agencies.
** Australian Border Force
** Immigration, Refugees and Citizenship Canada
** Canada Border Services Agency (previously Canada Customs and Revenue Agency)
** Canadian Air Transport Security Authority
** National Immigration Administration of Ministry of Public Security
** People&#x27;s Armed Police
** General Administration of Customs
** Immigration Department (Hong Kong)
** Public Security Police Force of Macau
** Border Security Force
** The Assam Rifles
** Indo-Tibetan Border Police
** Directorate General of Immigration (Indonesia)
** Irish Naturalisation and Immigration Service
** Garda National Immigration Bureau
** Revenue Commissioners
** The Immigration &amp; Passport Police Office, a subdivision of Law Enforcement Force of Islamic Republic of Iran
** Islamic Republic of Iran Border Guard Command (&quot;NAJA Border Guard&quot;), a subdivision of Law Enforcement Force of Islamic Republic of Iran
** Immigration Department of Malaysia
** Border Security Command
** Coastal Security Bureau
** Pakistan Rangers
** Frontier Corps
** Gilgit−Baltistan Scouts
** Pakistan Army
** Pakistan Rangers
** Pakistan Customs
* Schengen Area
** European Border and Coast Guard Agency (Frontex)
*** Direction centrale de la police aux frontières (a directorate of the French National Police)
*** Direction générale des douanes et droits indirects (DGDDI)
*** Finnish Border Guard
*** Finnish Customs
*** Federal Police
*** Bundeszollverwaltung
*** Polizia di Stato
*** Guardia di Finanza
*** Arma dei Carabinieri
*** Koninklijke Marechaussee (English: Royal Military Constabulary), a branch of the Dutch Armed Forces
*** Fiscal Information and Investigation Service
*** Cuerpo Nacional de Policia
*** Guardia Civil
*** Customs Surveillance Service
*** Federal Department of Justice and Police
**** Federal Office of Police
*** Federal Department of Finance
**** Swiss Border Guard
*** Swedish Border Police
** Korean Immigration Service, Ministry of Justice
** Korea Customs Service
** Immigration and Checkpoints Authority
** National Immigration Agency
** Customs Administration
** HM Revenue and Customs
** UK Border Force
** Immigration Enforcement
** Department of Homeland Security (DHS)
** U.S. Customs and Border Protection (CBP), a division of the DHS
** United States Border Patrol
** Transportation Security Administration
** U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement, or ICE
** United States Citizenship and Immigration Services

==Controversies==
Certain border control policies of various countries have been the subject of controversy and public debate.

* Australia:
** Offshore detention centres: Beginning in 2001, Australia implemented border control policies featuring the detention of asylum seekers and economic migrants who arrived unlawfully by boat in nearby islands in the Pacific. These policies are controversial and in 2017 the Supreme Court of Papua New Guinea declared the detention centre at Manus Island to be unconstitutional. The adherence of these policies to international human rights law is a matter of controversy.
** Travel restrictions on Australian citizens during the COVID-19 pandemic: During the COVID-19 pandemic, Australia adopted a policy of denying entry to its own citizens arriving from jurisdictions perceived to pose a high risk of COVID-19 transmission. Additionally, Australia adopted a broad policy of restricting entry to the country for all individuals located overseas, including Australian citizens, resulting in a large number of Australian citizens stranded abroad. Australia&#x27;s policies with regard to its own citizens undermined the principle in international law that a state must permit entry to its own citizens, as enshrined in the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights. At the same time, the Australian government prohibited the majority of Australian citizens from exiting the country, even if they ordinarily reside overseas.
* Bhutan: Starting primarily in the 1990s, the Bhutanese government implemented strict restrictions on the country&#x27;s ethnically Nepali Lhotshampa population and implemented internal border control policies to restrict immigration or return of ethnic Nepalis, creating a refugee crisis. This policy shift effectively ended previously liberal immigration policies with regards to Nepalis and counts among the most racialised border control policies in Asia.
* China: China does not currently recognise North Korean defectors as refugees and subjects them to immediate deportation if caught. The China-DPRK border is fortified and both sides aim to deter refugees from crossing. This aspect of Chinese border control policy has been criticised by human rights organisations.
* Cyprus: As a result of Northern Cyprus&#x27;s sovereignty dispute with Southern Cyprus, the South (a member of the European Union) has imposed restrictions on the North&#x27;s airports, and pressure from the European Union has resulted in all countries other than Turkey recognising the South&#x27;s ability to impose a border shutdown on the North, thus negating the right to self determination of the predominantly Turkish Northern Cypriot population and subjecting their airports to border controls imposed by the predominantly Greek South. As a result, Northern Cyprus is heavily dependent on Turkey for economic support and is unable to develop a functioning economy.
* Israel: Border control, both on entry and on exit, at Israeli airports rate passengers&#x27; potential threat to security using factors including nationality, ethnicity, and race. Instances of discrimination against Arabs, people perceived to be Muslim, and Russian Jews among others have been reported in the media. Security at Tel Aviv&#x27;s Ben Gurion Airport relies on a number of fundamentals, including a heavy focus on what Raphael Ron, former director of security at Ben Gurion, terms the &quot;human factor&quot;, which he generalised as &quot;the inescapable fact that terrorist attacks are carried out by people who can be found and stopped by an effective security methodology.&quot; As part of its focus on this so-called &quot;human factor&quot;, Israeli security officers interrogate travellers, profiling those who appear to be Arab based on name or physical appearance. Even as Israeli authorities argue that racist, ethnic, and religious profiling are effective security measures, according to Boaz Ganor, Israel has not undertaken any known empirical studies on the efficacy of the technique of racial profiling.
* United States
** Policies targeting Muslims: Since the implementation of added security measures in the aftermath of the 2001 World Trade Centre attacks, reports of discrimination against people perceived to be Muslim by American border security officers have been prevalent in the media. The travel restrictions implemented during the Trump presidency primarily against Muslim majority countries have provoked controversy over whether such measures are a legitimate Border security measure or unethically discriminatory.
** Separation of families seeking asylum: In April 2018, as part of its &quot;zero tolerance&quot; policy, the American government ordered the separation of the children of refugees and asylum seekers from their parents. As a consequence of popular outrage, and criticism from the medical and religious communities, the policy was put on hold by an executive order signed by Trump on 20 June 2018. Under the policy, federal authorities separated children from their parents, relatives, or other adults who accompanied them in crossing the border, whether apprehended during an illegal crossing or, in numerous reported cases, legally presenting themselves for asylum. The policy involved prosecuting all adults detained at the Mexican border, imprisoning parents, and handing minors to the American Department of Health and Human Services (). The federal government reported that the policy resulted in the separation of over 2300 children from their parents. The Trump administration blamed Congress for the atrocity and labelled the change in policy as &quot;the Democrats&#x27; law&quot;, even though Congress had been overwhelmingly dominated by Republicans since 2016. Regardless, members of both parties criticised the policy and detractors of the Trump administration emphasise the fact there does not seem to be any written law that required the government to implement such a policy. Attorney General Jeff Sessions, in defending the policy, quoted a passage from the Bible, notwithstanding the fact that religious doctrine carries absolutely no weight in American law. Other officials praised the policy as a deterrent to unlawful immigration. The costs of separating migrant children from their parents and keeping them in &quot;tent cities&quot; are higher than keeping them with their parents in detention centres. To handle the large amount of immigration charges brought by the Trump administration, federal prosecutors had to divert resources from other crime cases. It costs $775 per person per night to house the children when they are separated but $256 per person per night when they are held in permanent HHS facilities and $298 per person per night to keep the children with their parents in immigration detention centres. The head of the Justice Department&#x27;s major crimes unit in San Diego diverted staff from drug smuggling cases. Drug smuggling cases were also increasingly pursued in state courts rather than federal courts, as federal prosecutor were increasingly preoccupied with pursuing charges against illegal border crossings. The Kaiser Family Foundation said that costs associated with the policy may also divert resources from programmes within the Department of Health and Human Services. In July 2018, it was reported that HHS had diverted at least $40 million from its health programs to care for and reunify migrant children, and that the HHS was preparing to shift more than $200 million from other HHS accounts.

==Gallery==
==See also==
* Asylum seeker
* Border barrier
* Airspace
* Air sovereignty
* Illegal entry
* United States Border Patrol
* Maritime boundary
* Freedom of movement

==Notes==
==References==
==Further reading==
* Idrees Kahloon, &quot;Border Control: The economics of immigration vs. the politics of immigration&quot;, &quot;The New Yorker&quot;, 12 June 2023, pp. 65–69. &quot;The limits of immigration are not set by economics but by political psychology – by backlash unconcerned with net benefits.&quot; (p. 65.)
* Susan Harbage Page &amp; Inéz Valdez (17 April 2011). &quot;Residues of Border Control&quot;, &quot;Southern Spaces&quot;
* Philippe Legrain (2007). &quot;Immigrants: Your Country Needs Them&quot;, Little Brown, 
* Aristide Zolberg (2006). &quot;A Nation by Design: Immigration Policy in the Fashioning of America&quot;, Harvard University Press, 
* Philippe Legrain (2007). &quot;Immigrants: Your Country Needs Them&quot;, Little Brown, 
* Ruben Rumbaut &amp; Walter Ewing (Spring 2007). &quot;The Myth of Immigrant Criminality and the Paradox of Assimilation: Incarceration Rates among Native and Foreign-Born Men&quot;, The Immigration Policy Center.
* Bryan Balin (2008). &quot;State Immigration Legislation and Immigrant Flows: An Analysis&quot; The Johns Hopkins University
* Douglas S. Massey (September 2005). &quot;Beyond the Border Buildup: Towards a New Approach to Mexico-U.S. Migration&quot;, Immigration Policy Center, the American Immigration Law Foundation
* IPC Special Report (November 2005). &quot;Economic Growth &amp; Immigration: Bridging the Demographic Divide&quot;, Immigration Policy Center, the American Immigration Law Foundation
* American Immigration Council (April 2014). &quot;Immigrant Women in the United States: A Demographic Portrait&quot;
* Jill Esbenshade (Summer 2007). &quot;Division and Dislocation: Regulating Immigration through Local Housing Ordinances&quot;. American Immigration Council
* Jeffrey S. Passel &amp; Roberto Suro (September 2005). &quot;Rise, Peak and Decline: Trends in U.S. Immigration&quot;. Pew Hispanic Center
* Jeffrey S. Passel (March 2005). &quot;Estimates of the Size and Characteristics of the Undocumented Population&quot;. Pew Hispanic Center
* Jeffrey S. Passel (March 2007). &quot;Growing Share of Immigrants Choosing Naturalization&quot;. Pew Hispanic Center
* UNCTAD&#x27;s Classification of Non-Tariff Measures (2012) report

==External links==
* ITC&#x27;s Market Access Map, an online database of customs tariffs and market requirements.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q218719" start="0" end="14" title="Border control" label="Border control"/>
<link wikidata="Q133346" start="153" end="159" title="border" label="border"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="275" end="291" title="#Internal border controls" label="internal borders"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="392" end="399" title="#Customs" label="customs"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="432" end="443" title="#Biosecurity" label="biosecurity"/>
<link wikidata="Q177626" start="471" end="480" title="human migration" label="migration"/>
<link wikidata="Q1969730" start="584" end="597" title="Schengen Area" label="Schengen Area"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="603" end="607" title="#Open borders" label="open"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="806" end="827" title="#Border checkpoints" label="designated checkpoint"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="1397" end="1408" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q323133" start="2150" end="2162" title="Arthashastra" label="Arthashastra"/>
<link wikidata="Q6783050" start="2222" end="2227" title="Masha (unit)" label="masha"/>
<link wikidata="Q7209" start="2544" end="2555" title="Western Han" label="Western Han"/>
<link wikidata="Q7183" start="2588" end="2599" title="Qin dynasty" label="Qin dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q131401" start="2968" end="2985" title="Caliphate" label="Islamic Caliphate"/>
<link wikidata="Q330190" start="3041" end="3048" title="receipt" label="receipt"/>
<link wikidata="Q124058" start="3143" end="3148" title="zakat" label="zakah"/>
<link wikidata="Q47740" start="3160" end="3166" title="Muslim" label="Muslim"/>
<link wikidata="Q461786" start="3178" end="3183" title="jizya" label="jizya"/>
<link wikidata="Q273603" start="3195" end="3201" title="dhimmi" label="dhimmi"/>
<link wikidata="Q131581" start="3421" end="3439" title="Henry V of England" label="Henry V of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q7398463" start="3594" end="3616" title="Safe Conducts Act 1414" label="Safe Conducts Act 1414"/>
<link wikidata="Q123532648" start="3618" end="3635" title="2 Hen. 5. Stat. 1" label="2 Hen. 5. Stat. 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q7246345" start="3711" end="3735" title="Privy Council of England" label="Privy Council of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q14214" start="3881" end="3899" title="Secretary of State (United Kingdom)" label="Secretary of State"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="4503" end="4517" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q729125" start="4807" end="4819" title="Ottoman army" label="Ottoman army"/>
<link wikidata="Q1421432" start="4868" end="4883" title="disease monitoring" label="monitor disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q716815" start="5137" end="5151" title="settler colonialism" label="settler states"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073716" start="5260" end="5281" title="Chinese Exclusion Act" label="Chinese Exclusion Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q988302" start="5333" end="5364" title="Chinese Immigration Act of 1885" label="Chinese Immigration Act of 1885"/>
<link wikidata="Q13405084" start="5417" end="5433" title="Chinese head tax in Canada" label="Chinese head tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q2914928" start="5758" end="5779" title="Australian gold rushes" label="series of gold rushes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1118286" start="5791" end="5798" title="Kanakas" label="Kanakas"/>
<link wikidata="Q178790" start="5909" end="5920" title="trade union" label="trade union"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="6034" end="6059" title="Australia" label="Commonwealth of Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1077496" start="6140" end="6162" title="White Australia Policy" label="White Australia Policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q24526030" start="6214" end="6237" title="Immigration Act of 1891" label="Immigration Act of 1891"/>
<link wikidata="Q6980823" start="6243" end="6269" title="Naturalization Act of 1906" label="Naturalisation Act of 1906"/>
<link wikidata="Q6004996" start="6279" end="6302" title="Immigration Act of 1917" label="Immigration Act of 1917"/>
<link wikidata="Q1077496" start="6471" end="6493" title="White Australia Policy" label="White Australia Policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073716" start="6502" end="6523" title="Chinese Exclusion Act" label="Chinese Exclusion Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q9317" start="6793" end="6812" title="John Maynard Keynes" label="John Maynard Keynes"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="6824" end="6835" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q1203182" start="7004" end="7016" title="Global South" label="Global South"/>
<link wikidata="Q5153888" start="7223" end="7243" title="Commonwealth citizen" label="Commonwealth citizen"/>
<link wikidata="Q918305" start="7289" end="7312" title="British nationality law" label="British nationality law"/>
<link wikidata="Q4971466" start="7366" end="7382" title="British Subjects" label="British Subjects"/>
<link wikidata="Q4970586" start="7384" end="7409" title="British Overseas Citizens" label="British Overseas Citizens"/>
<link wikidata="Q5613380" start="7415" end="7433" title="British National (Overseas)" label="overseas nationals"/>
<link wikidata="Q223050" start="7550" end="7563" title="statelessness" label="statelessness"/>
<link wikidata="Q2925745" start="7657" end="7685" title="British Nationality Act 1981" label="British Nationality Act 1981"/>
<link wikidata="Q743306" start="7736" end="7789" title="Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination" label="Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination"/>
<link wikidata="Q78347457" start="8387" end="8400" title="Second Johnson ministry" label="Boris Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q6510646" start="8556" end="8570" title="Indefinite leave to remain" label="settled status"/>
<link wikidata="Q4944570" start="9048" end="9060" title="Border Force" label="Border Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q81068910" start="9236" end="9253" title="COVID-19 pandemic" label="COVID-19 pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q48231" start="9513" end="9521" title="Idi Amin" label="Idi Amin"/>
<link wikidata="Q4207409" start="9535" end="9553" title="Expulsion of Asians from Uganda" label="Asians from Uganda"/>
<link wikidata="Q11409" start="9746" end="9755" title="Apartheid" label="Apartheid"/>
<link wikidata="Q953068" start="9808" end="9824" title="Southwest Africa" label="Southwest Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q190354" start="9865" end="9874" title="bantustan" label="bantustan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1969688" start="9880" end="9889" title="pass laws" label="pass laws"/>
<link wikidata="Q57274" start="10182" end="10197" title="Yoweri Museveni" label="Yoweri Museveni"/>
<link wikidata="Q1767279" start="10452" end="10475" title="refugee travel document" label="refugee travel document"/>
<link wikidata="Q60433" start="10487" end="10532" title="Convention Relating to the Status of Refugees" label="Convention Relating to the Status of Refugees"/>
<link wikidata="Q2141852" start="10549" end="10580" title="1954 Convention travel document" label="1954 Convention travel document"/>
<link wikidata="Q109524717" start="10671" end="10679" title="Travel restrictions related to the COVID-19 pandemic" label="pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q525512" start="11196" end="11212" title="community spread" label="community spread"/>
<link wikidata="Q96175652" start="11392" end="11405" title="Economic impact of the COVID-19 pandemic" label="economic harm"/>
<link wikidata="Q49389" start="11413" end="11429" title="tourism industry" label="tourism industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q85872065" start="11454" end="11465" title="Social impact of the COVID-19 pandemic" label="social harm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1995666" start="11651" end="11666" title="business travel" label="business travel"/>
<link wikidata="Q88661507" start="11731" end="11747" title="Teleconferencing during the 2019-20 coronavirus pandemic" label="teleconferencing"/>
<link wikidata="Q7935096" start="11752" end="11765" title="virtual event" label="virtual event"/>
<link wikidata="Q1995666" start="11833" end="11848" title="business travel" label="business travel"/>
<link wikidata="Q84263196" start="12029" end="12037" title="COVID-19" label="COVID-19"/>
<link wikidata="Q272730" start="12462" end="12470" title="airspace" label="airspace"/>
<link wikidata="Q213204" start="12475" end="12506" title="territorial waters" label="waters under their jurisdiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q14373" start="12606" end="12610" title="fishing" label="fish"/>
<link wikidata="Q216996" start="12648" end="12695" title="United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea" label="United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q686268" start="12906" end="12922" title="innocent passage" label="innocent passage"/>
<link wikidata="Q93352" start="13091" end="13105" title="coastal waters" label="coastal waters"/>
<link wikidata="Q686268" start="13556" end="13572" title="innocent passage" label="innocent passage"/>
<link wikidata="Q289218" start="13588" end="13603" title="transit passage" label="transit passage"/>
<link wikidata="Q37901" start="13608" end="13614" title="strait" label="strait"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13654" end="13662" title="Airspace#Horizontal boundary" label="airspace"/>
<link wikidata="Q202008" start="14832" end="14855" title="exclusive economic zone" label="exclusive economic zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q96405555" start="15718" end="15729" title="ship arrest" label="ship arrest"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190558" start="16254" end="16266" title="Pedra Branca, Singapore" label="Pedra Branca"/>
<link wikidata="Q272730" start="16334" end="16342" title="airspace" label="airspace"/>
<link wikidata="Q1454302" start="16459" end="16473" title="flyover rights" label="flyover rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q125761" start="16543" end="16584" title="International Civil Aviation Organization" label="International Civil Aviation Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q25855" start="16863" end="16883" title="international waters" label="international waters"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="17134" end="17139" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2009498" start="17207" end="17234" title="Convention on the High Seas" label="Convention on the High Seas"/>
<link wikidata="Q213204" start="17329" end="17344" title="territorial sea" label="territorial sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1663988" start="17355" end="17370" title="internal waters" label="internal waters"/>
<link wikidata="Q3591841" start="17561" end="17571" title="flag state" label="flag state"/>
<link wikidata="Q45393" start="17658" end="17664" title="piracy" label="piracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q928801" start="17725" end="17747" title="universal jurisdiction" label="universal jurisdiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q46970" start="17899" end="17906" title="airline" label="airline"/>
<link wikidata="Q7590" start="17923" end="17932" title="transport" label="transport"/>
<link wikidata="Q111155" start="18019" end="18027" title="cabotage" label="cabotage"/>
<link wikidata="Q869954" start="18368" end="18377" title="Merchant Marine Act of 1920" label="Jones Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q127031" start="18876" end="18889" title="Taiwan Strait" label="Taiwan Strait"/>
<link wikidata="Q1454302" start="19549" end="19559" title="open skies" label="open skies"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="19601" end="19615" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q298" start="19768" end="19773" title="Chile" label="Chile"/>
<link wikidata="Q290329" start="20176" end="20207" title="air defence identification zone" label="air defence identification zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q7239" start="20947" end="20955" title="organism" label="organism"/>
<link wikidata="Q808" start="20963" end="20968" title="virus" label="virus"/>
<link wikidata="Q10876" start="20972" end="20980" title="bacteria" label="bacteria"/>
<link wikidata="Q729" start="20991" end="20997" title="animal" label="animal"/>
<link wikidata="Q756" start="21003" end="21008" title="plant" label="plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q166231" start="21059" end="21077" title="infectious disease" label="infectious disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q11451" start="21082" end="21093" title="agriculture" label="agriculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q235352" start="21134" end="21143" title="food crop" label="food crop"/>
<link wikidata="Q103459" start="21149" end="21158" title="livestock" label="livestock"/>
<link wikidata="Q219174" start="21164" end="21169" title="pest (organism)" label="pests"/>
<link wikidata="Q183368" start="21171" end="21187" title="invasive species" label="invasive species"/>
<link wikidata="Q11188" start="21245" end="21261" title="human population" label="human population"/>
<link wikidata="Q116890" start="21281" end="21299" title="Biological pest control" label="biological threats"/>
<link wikidata="Q12184" start="21332" end="21340" title="pandemic" label="pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q854975" start="21354" end="21366" title="bioterrorism" label="bioterrorism"/>
<link wikidata="Q854975" start="21928" end="21940" title="bioterrorism" label="bioterrorism"/>
<link wikidata="Q183368" start="21944" end="21960" title="invasive species" label="invasive species"/>
<link wikidata="Q39222" start="22136" end="22142" title="rabies" label="rabies"/>
<link wikidata="Q5635110" start="22301" end="22322" title="Her Majesty&amp;#x27;s Customs and Excise" label="HM Customs and Excise"/>
<link wikidata="Q2616578" start="22405" end="22418" title="Pet Passports" label="Pet Passports"/>
<link wikidata="Q134808" start="22531" end="22543" title="vaccine" label="vaccinations"/>
<link wikidata="Q217519" start="22642" end="22656" title="Bubonic Plague" label="Bubonic Plague"/>
<link wikidata="Q12090" start="22661" end="22668" title="Cholera" label="Cholera"/>
<link wikidata="Q182899" start="22709" end="22728" title="Quarantine Act 1710" label="Quarantine Act 1710"/>
<link wikidata="Q118945399" start="22730" end="22736" title="9 Ann." label="9 Ann."/>
<link wikidata="Q39731" start="22972" end="22985" title="Baltic states" label="Baltic states"/>
<link wikidata="Q7269137" start="23019" end="23038" title="Quarantine Act 1721" label="Quarantine Act 1721"/>
<link wikidata="Q131277966" start="23040" end="23048" title="8 Geo. 1" label="8 Geo. 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q23482" start="23101" end="23110" title="Marseille" label="Marseille"/>
<link wikidata="Q101081" start="23131" end="23139" title="Provence, France" label="Provence"/>
<link wikidata="Q466039" start="23196" end="23214" title="continental Europe" label="continental Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q13666" start="23257" end="23264" title="Messina" label="Messina"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="23319" end="23334" title="Levant Act 1752" label="Levant Act 1752"/>
<link wikidata="Q81483" start="23364" end="23374" title="the Levant" label="the Levant"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="23646" end="23677" title="Quarantine and Customs Act 1788" label="Quarantine and Customs Act 1788"/>
<link wikidata="Q122879299" start="23679" end="23688" title="28 Geo. 3" label="28 Geo. 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q683120" start="23903" end="23916" title="Privy Council of the United Kingdom" label="Privy Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q4911509" start="24368" end="24382" title="bill of health" label="bill of health"/>
<link wikidata="Q166" start="24392" end="24401" title="Black Sea" label="Black Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q382113" start="24565" end="24577" title="maritime law" label="maritime law"/>
<link wikidata="Q2995419" start="24788" end="24806" title="contagious disease" label="contagious disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q8051878" start="25006" end="25012" title="Yellow flag (contagion)" label="Q flag"/>
<link wikidata="Q1671640" start="25027" end="25062" title="international maritime signal flags" label="international maritime signal flags"/>
<link wikidata="Q81068910" start="25286" end="25303" title="COVID-19 pandemic" label="COVID-19 pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1626933" start="25365" end="25378" title="Ruby Princess" label="Ruby Princess"/>
<link wikidata="Q44782" start="25475" end="25479" title="port" label="port"/>
<link wikidata="Q2995419" start="25593" end="25611" title="contagious disease" label="contagious disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q3075150" start="25642" end="25648" title="fomite" label="fomite"/>
<link wikidata="Q104187680" start="25819" end="25840" title="Vaccination requirements for international travel" label="mandatory vaccination"/>
<link wikidata="Q154874" start="25875" end="25887" title="Yellow Fever" label="Yellow Fever"/>
<link wikidata="Q16357" start="26017" end="26072" title="International Certificate of Vaccination or Prophylaxis" label="International Certificate of Vaccination or Prophylaxis"/>
<link wikidata="Q8051876" start="26126" end="26146" title="Yellow Fever vaccine" label="Yellow Fever vaccine"/>
<link wikidata="Q84263196" start="26389" end="26397" title="COVID-19" label="COVID-19"/>
<link wikidata="Q712144" start="26455" end="26463" title="de facto" label="de facto"/>
<link wikidata="Q22810230" start="26464" end="26480" title="Immunity passport" label="vaccine passport"/>
<link wikidata="Q12195" start="26583" end="26588" title="Polio" label="Polio"/>
<link wikidata="Q890785" start="26593" end="26617" title="meningococcal meningitis" label="meningococcal meningitis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="26714" end="26737" title="Smallpox#Eradication" label="eradication of Smallpox"/>
<link wikidata="Q81068910" start="26842" end="26859" title="COVID-19 pandemic" label="COVID-19 pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="26983" end="27013" title="Vaccination requirements for international travel#COVID-19" label="mandatory COVID-19 vaccination"/>
<link wikidata="Q96175652" start="27146" end="27163" title="Economic impact of the COVID-19 pandemic" label="negative economic"/>
<link wikidata="Q85872065" start="27168" end="27181" title="Social impact of the COVID-19 pandemic" label="social impact"/>
<link wikidata="Q49389" start="27189" end="27204" title="travel industry" label="travel industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q192864" start="27972" end="27979" title="Science (journal)" label="Science"/>
<link wikidata="Q4118322" start="28156" end="28188" title="infection prevention and control" label="infection prevention and control"/>
<link wikidata="Q112099" start="28415" end="28428" title="island nation" label="island nation"/>
<link wikidata="Q83873548" start="28652" end="28698" title="COVID-19 pandemic in Australia" label="prohibitions on interstate travel in Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q178803" start="28771" end="28777" title="international trade" label="import"/>
<link wikidata="Q182722" start="28782" end="28788" title="export" label="export"/>
<link wikidata="Q159579" start="29042" end="29052" title="excise tax" label="excise tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q52389" start="29115" end="29127" title="customs duty" label="customs duty"/>
<link wikidata="Q52389" start="29133" end="29139" title="tariff" label="tariff"/>
<link wikidata="Q8161" start="29143" end="29146" title="tax" label="tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q4841378" start="29699" end="29711" title="Bag tag" label="Luggage tags"/>
<link wikidata="Q1969730" start="29879" end="29892" title="Schengen Area" label="Schengen Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q5257004" start="30327" end="30343" title="bonded warehouse" label="bonded warehouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q52389" start="30491" end="30505" title="customs duties" label="customs duties"/>
<link wikidata="Q456407" start="30596" end="30609" title="transshipment" label="transshipment"/>
<link wikidata="Q184840" start="30759" end="30768" title="smuggling" label="smuggling"/>
<link wikidata="Q4551312" start="30906" end="30915" title="drug laws" label="drug laws"/>
<link wikidata="Q803874" start="30920" end="30931" title="biosecurity" label="biosecurity"/>
<link wikidata="Q647884" start="30972" end="30981" title="Search and seizure" label="impounded"/>
<link wikidata="Q218819" start="31101" end="31114" title="customs union" label="customs union"/>
<link wikidata="Q218631" start="31118" end="31135" title="customs territory" label="customs territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q4693808" start="31375" end="31442" title="Agreement on the Application of Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures" label="Agreement on the Application of Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136965" start="31461" end="31513" title="Uruguay Round of the Multilateral Trade Negotiations" label="Uruguay Round of the Multilateral Trade Negotiations"/>
<link wikidata="Q815470" start="32487" end="32502" title="Golden Triangle (Southeast Asia)" label="Golden Triangle"/>
<link wikidata="Q475678" start="32789" end="32805" title="Mexican Drug War" label="Mexican Drug War"/>
<link wikidata="Q180089" start="33053" end="33066" title="The Economist" label="The Economist"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="33187" end="33192" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q794" start="33194" end="33198" title="Iran" label="Iran"/>
<link wikidata="Q851" start="33200" end="33212" title="Saudi Arabia" label="Saudi Arabia"/>
<link wikidata="Q881" start="33214" end="33221" title="Vietnam" label="Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q833" start="33223" end="33231" title="Malaysia" label="Malaysia"/>
<link wikidata="Q334" start="33237" end="33246" title="Singapore" label="Singapore"/>
<link wikidata="Q6505103" start="33589" end="33607" title="Lawyers Collective" label="Lawyers Collective"/>
<link wikidata="Q79913" start="33612" end="33615" title="Non-governmental organization" label="NGO"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="33619" end="33624" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q8454" start="33652" end="33670" title="capital punishment" label="capital punishment"/>
<link wikidata="Q940" start="33694" end="33707" title="narcotic drug" label="narcotic drug"/>
<link wikidata="Q3706669" start="33713" end="33725" title="psychotropic" label="psychotropic"/>
<link wikidata="Q884" start="33816" end="33827" title="South Korea" label="South Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q177626" start="34292" end="34301" title="human migration" label="migration"/>
<link wikidata="Q2399139" start="34689" end="34711" title="Bangladesh–India border" label="border with Bangladesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q2723836" start="34796" end="34817" title="Border Security Force" label="Border Security Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q105180889" start="35029" end="35047" title="2021 Myanmar coup d&amp;#x27;état" label="2021 military coup"/>
<link wikidata="Q1502" start="35127" end="35134" title="Mizoram" label="Mizoram"/>
<link wikidata="Q3268413" start="35140" end="35151" title="Non-refoulement" label="refoulement"/>
<link wikidata="Q464529" start="35155" end="35163" title="Rohingya" label="Rohingya"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057263" start="35339" end="35357" title="Mexico–United States border" label="border with Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q119515" start="35525" end="35543" title="Canada–United States border" label="border with Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q167676" start="35786" end="35792" title="sensor" label="sensor"/>
<link wikidata="Q21786841" start="36143" end="36150" title="Frontex" label="Frontex"/>
<link wikidata="Q138775" start="36464" end="36476" title="border guard" label="border guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1576606" start="36556" end="36578" title="Directive 2004/38/EC on the right to move and reside freely" label="right of free movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q1338491" start="36738" end="36765" title="Schengen Information System" label="Schengen Information System"/>
<link wikidata="Q436860" start="37979" end="37987" title="Right-wing populism" label="populist"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="38037" end="38061" title="Bangladesh–India border#India–Bangladesh barrier" label="India-Bangladesh barrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q3088789" start="38423" end="38457" title="Iran–Pakistan border" label="wall on its frontier with Pakistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q140561" start="38632" end="38639" title="Zahedan" label="Zahedan"/>
<link wikidata="Q271110" start="38706" end="38733" title="Iranian Revolutionary Guard" label="Iranian Revolutionary Guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q22686" start="38762" end="38774" title="Donald Trump" label="Donald Trump"/>
<link wikidata="Q2631595" start="38800" end="38827" title="Mexico–United States barrier" label="a new wall along the border"/>
<link wikidata="Q368804" start="39030" end="39062" title="US Customs and Border Protection" label="US Customs and Border Protection"/>
<link wikidata="Q29552" start="39223" end="39233" title="Democratic Party of the United States" label="Democratic"/>
<link wikidata="Q29468" start="39238" end="39248" title="Republican Party of the United States" label="Republican"/>
<link wikidata="Q271730" start="39750" end="39760" title="Abbotsford, British Columbia" label="Abbotsford"/>
<link wikidata="Q156623" start="39784" end="39798" title="Whatcom County, Washington" label="Whatcom County"/>
<link wikidata="Q20857240" start="39904" end="39927" title="European migrant crisis" label="European migrant crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3111513" start="39933" end="39949" title="Melilla border fence" label="walls at Melilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q2339765" start="39954" end="39962" title="Ceuta border fence" label="at Ceuta"/>
<link wikidata="Q21786841" start="40342" end="40349" title="Frontex" label="Frontex"/>
<link wikidata="Q648198" start="40554" end="40563" title="Strongman (politics)" label="strongman"/>
<link wikidata="Q851" start="40589" end="40601" title="Saudi Arabia" label="Saudi Arabia"/>
<link wikidata="Q805" start="40680" end="40685" title="Yemen" label="Yemen"/>
<link wikidata="Q217172" start="40936" end="40960" title="Gulf Cooperation Council" label="Gulf Cooperation Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q5353651" start="41310" end="41322" title="night-vision" label="night-vision"/>
<link wikidata="Q221" start="41404" end="41425" title="Republic of Macedonia" label="Republic of Macedonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q963" start="41503" end="41511" title="Botswana" label="Botswana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1292216" start="41534" end="41548" title="electric fence" label="electric fence"/>
<link wikidata="Q954" start="41571" end="41579" title="Zimbabwe" label="Zimbabwe"/>
<link wikidata="Q152401" start="41640" end="41662" title="foot-and-mouth disease" label="foot-and-mouth disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q2822795" start="42473" end="42491" title="Schengen Agreement" label="Schengen Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q182290" start="42567" end="42574" title="customs" label="customs"/>
<link wikidata="Q131288" start="42579" end="42590" title="immigration" label="immigration"/>
<link wikidata="Q44782" start="42605" end="42613" title="port" label="seaports"/>
<link wikidata="Q644371" start="42615" end="42636" title="international airport" label="international airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075664" start="42649" end="42663" title="port of entry" label="ports of entry"/>
<link wikidata="Q52389" start="42954" end="42961" title="tariffs" label="tariffs"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="42981" end="42988" title="#Customs" label="customs"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="42992" end="43002" title="#Quarantine" label="quarantine"/>
<link wikidata="Q644371" start="43121" end="43142" title="International airport" label="International airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q133346" start="43213" end="43219" title="border" label="border"/>
<link wikidata="Q44782" start="43221" end="43229" title="Port" label="Seaports"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="43280" end="43287" title="#Customs" label="customs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1248784" start="43439" end="43446" title="airport" label="airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q837800" start="43992" end="44008" title="domestic airport" label="domestic airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q184590" start="44035" end="44041" title="runway" label="runway"/>
<link wikidata="Q5290183" start="44194" end="44209" title="domestic flight" label="domestic flight"/>
<link wikidata="Q741701" start="44579" end="44593" title="Airline codes" label="coding systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q219174" start="45030" end="45052" title="agricultural pest" label="agriculture from pests"/>
<link wikidata="Q188956" start="45081" end="45106" title="phytosanitary authorities" label="phytosanitary authorities"/>
<link wikidata="Q8513" start="45116" end="45124" title="database" label="database"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="45129" end="45148" title="border interception" label="border interception"/>
<link wikidata="Q2878495" start="45168" end="45182" title="established species" label="establishments"/>
<link wikidata="Q112099" start="45304" end="45317" title="island nation" label="island nation"/>
<link wikidata="Q183273" start="45412" end="45420" title="geographical pole" label="poleward"/>
<link wikidata="Q235352" start="45444" end="45448" title="crop" label="crop"/>
<link wikidata="Q125928" start="45470" end="45484" title="global warming" label="global warming"/>
<link wikidata="Q7142847" start="46081" end="46092" title="Passport stamp" label="entry stamp"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054581" start="46548" end="46559" title="buffer zone" label="buffer zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q138775" start="46587" end="46601" title="border guard" label="border patrols"/>
<link wikidata="Q178795" start="47123" end="47132" title="minefield" label="minefield"/>
<link wikidata="Q947103" start="47152" end="47162" title="watchtower" label="watchtower"/>
<link wikidata="Q218719" start="47350" end="47362" title="border vista" label="border vista"/>
<link wikidata="Q4366826" start="47764" end="47794" title="Border Security Zone of Russia" label="Border Security Zone of Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q495735" start="47830" end="47852" title="Finnish–Russian border" label="Finnish–Russian border"/>
<link wikidata="Q762570" start="47901" end="47915" title="Cactus Curtain" label="Cactus Curtain"/>
<link wikidata="Q762570" start="47932" end="47957" title="Guantanamo Bay Naval Base" label="Guantanamo Bay Naval Base"/>
<link wikidata="Q331990" start="47971" end="47996" title="Korean Demilitarized Zone" label="Korean Demilitarised Zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q423" start="48007" end="48018" title="North Korea" label="North Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q884" start="48019" end="48030" title="South Korea" label="South Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q986375" start="48056" end="48076" title="Frontier Closed Area" label="Frontier Closed Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q8646" start="48080" end="48089" title="Hong Kong" label="Hong Kong"/>
<link wikidata="Q1545789" start="48129" end="48142" title="Wire of Death" label="Wire of Death"/>
<link wikidata="Q43287" start="48153" end="48170" title="the German Empire" label="the German Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q3088843" start="48186" end="48212" title="Belgium–Netherlands border" label="Belgium–Netherlands border"/>
<link wikidata="Q124425" start="48221" end="48233" title="Iron Curtain" label="Iron Curtain"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="48396" end="48438" title="Inner German border#Restricted zone" label="restricted zone of the inner German border"/>
<link wikidata="Q170541" start="48606" end="48618" title="Eastern Bloc" label="Eastern Bloc"/>
<link wikidata="Q734890" start="48906" end="48925" title="European Green Belt" label="European Green Belt"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="48968" end="48983" title="#Internal border controls" label="internal border"/>
<link wikidata="Q19188" start="48993" end="49001" title="Mainland China" label="mainland"/>
<link wikidata="Q986375" start="49025" end="49045" title="Frontier Closed Area" label="Frontier Closed Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q356936" start="49046" end="49059" title="Exclusion zone" label="out of bounds"/>
<link wikidata="Q278815" start="49210" end="49261" title="Convention for the Extension of Hong Kong Territory" label="Convention for the Extension of Hong Kong Territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q15251" start="49275" end="49313" title="Transfer of sovereignty over Hong Kong" label="Transfer of sovereignty over Hong Kong"/>
<link wikidata="Q8663" start="49454" end="49464" title="Korean War" label="Korean War"/>
<link wikidata="Q723713" start="49483" end="49507" title="one country, two systems" label="one country, two systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q8663" start="49782" end="49792" title="Korean War" label="Korean War"/>
<link wikidata="Q331990" start="49805" end="49823" title="Korean Demilitarized Zone" label="Demilitarised Zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q712144" start="49849" end="49857" title="de facto" label="de facto"/>
<link wikidata="Q423" start="49879" end="49884" title="North Korea" label="North"/>
<link wikidata="Q884" start="49889" end="49900" title="South Korea" label="South Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q163098" start="50682" end="50693" title="Eighth United States Army" label="8th US Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q55500" start="51487" end="51496" title="Han River (Korea)" label="Han River"/>
<link wikidata="Q177597" start="51617" end="51632" title="military vessel" label="military vessel"/>
<link wikidata="Q55500" start="51764" end="51773" title="Han River (Korea)" label="Han River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1363476" start="51841" end="51853" title="Korean People&amp;#x27;s Navy" label="North Korean"/>
<link wikidata="Q488756" start="51858" end="51870" title="Republic of Korea Navy" label="South Korean"/>
<link wikidata="Q876274" start="51968" end="51978" title="Naval combat" label="firefights"/>
<link wikidata="Q488480" start="52031" end="52055" title="South Korean Coast Guard" label="South Korean Coast Guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q60455116" start="52349" end="52366" title="2019 Hanoi Summit" label="2019 Hanoi Summit"/>
<link wikidata="Q116970" start="52408" end="52418" title="United Nations Buffer Zone in Cyprus" label="Green Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q229" start="52430" end="52445" title="Cyprus" label="Southern Cyprus"/>
<link wikidata="Q23681" start="52450" end="52465" title="Northern Cyprus" label="Northern Cyprus"/>
<link wikidata="Q694772" start="52513" end="52556" title="United Nations Peacekeeping Force in Cyprus" label="United Nations Peacekeeping Force in Cyprus"/>
<link wikidata="Q245794" start="52671" end="52676" title="Greek Cypriots" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q245807" start="52681" end="52697" title="Turkish Cypriots" label="Turkish Cypriots"/>
<link wikidata="Q331990" start="52742" end="52755" title="Korean Demilitarized Zone" label="38th parallel"/>
<link wikidata="Q119515" start="53340" end="53367" title="Canada–United States border" label="Canada–United States border"/>
<link wikidata="Q2629888" start="53505" end="53529" title="China–Russia border" label="between Russia and China"/>
<link wikidata="Q820655" start="53740" end="53747" title="statute" label="statute"/>
<link wikidata="Q128693670" start="53750" end="53761" title="Primary and secondary legislation" label="regulations"/>
<link wikidata="Q665141" start="53767" end="53783" title="Precedent" label="legal precedents"/>
<link wikidata="Q131288" start="53794" end="53805" title="immigration" label="immigration"/>
<link wikidata="Q379693" start="53815" end="53826" title="deportation" label="deportation"/>
<link wikidata="Q841440" start="53904" end="53918" title="naturalisation" label="naturalisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q42138" start="53923" end="53934" title="citizenship" label="citizenship"/>
<link wikidata="Q7210268" start="54050" end="54067" title="political climate" label="political climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q6235" start="54156" end="54167" title="Nationalism" label="nationalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q309310" start="54172" end="54184" title="Isolationism" label="isolationist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344824" start="54328" end="54347" title="freedom of movement" label="freedom of movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q4394526" start="54490" end="54507" title="international law" label="international law"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="54513" end="54533" title="United Nations" label="United Nations&amp;#x27;"/>
<link wikidata="Q392119" start="54534" end="54586" title="International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights" label="International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q7170701" start="54895" end="54924" title="Overseas Citizenship of India" label="Overseas Citizenship of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q925034" start="54961" end="54974" title="Non-resident Indian and person of Indian origin" label="Indian origin"/>
<link wikidata="Q756296" start="55068" end="55084" title="Multiple citizenship" label="dual citizenship"/>
<link wikidata="Q7864807" start="55290" end="55306" title="UK Ancestry visa" label="UK Ancestry visa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2600057" start="55398" end="55410" title="Karta Polaka" label="Karta Polaka"/>
<link wikidata="Q28671976" start="55524" end="55531" title="Polish diaspora" label="Polonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3301488" start="55559" end="55574" title="right of return" label="right of return"/>
<link wikidata="Q102251" start="55704" end="55717" title="Sephardi Jews" label="Sephardi Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q385967" start="56002" end="56018" title="African diaspora" label="African diaspora"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412733" start="56109" end="56124" title="Jewish diaspora" label="Jewish diaspora"/>
<link wikidata="Q597260" start="56128" end="56147" title="Aliyah" label="immigrate to Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q533312" start="56731" end="56747" title="Zainichi Koreans" label="Zainichi Koreans"/>
<link wikidata="Q5119004" start="56771" end="56782" title="Chōsen-seki" label="Chōsen-seki"/>
<link wikidata="Q2624670" start="57410" end="57421" title="Propiska in the Soviet Union" label="for example"/>
<link wikidata="Q2822795" start="57581" end="57599" title="Schengen Agreement" label="Schengen Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q2576553" start="57612" end="57633" title="Belarus-Russia border" label="Belarus-Russia border"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="57732" end="57747" title="First World War" label="First World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q202398" start="57850" end="57864" title="Industrialisation" label="industrialised"/>
<link wikidata="Q3624078" start="57959" end="57974" title="sovereign state" label="sovereign state"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="58011" end="58035" title="#Internal border controls" label="internal border controls"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="58061" end="58092" title="People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China" label="People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q779415" start="58110" end="58140" title="Special administrative regions of China" label="special administrative regions"/>
<link wikidata="Q8646" start="58144" end="58153" title="Hong Kong" label="Hong Kong"/>
<link wikidata="Q14773" start="58158" end="58163" title="Macau" label="Macau"/>
<link wikidata="Q43702" start="58319" end="58329" title="federation" label="federation"/>
<link wikidata="Q16986110" start="58921" end="58967" title="1950 Indo-Nepal Treaty of Peace and Friendship" label="1950 Indo-Nepal Treaty of Peace and Friendship"/>
<link wikidata="Q7935353" start="59464" end="59485" title="Visa policy of Bhutan" label="Visa policy of Bhutan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7833572" start="60304" end="60335" title="Trans-Tasman Travel Arrangement" label="Trans-Tasman Travel Arrangement"/>
<link wikidata="Q7574493" start="61092" end="61113" title="Special Category Visa" label="Special Category Visa"/>
<link wikidata="Q5060310" start="61184" end="61226" title="Central America-4 Border Control Agreement" label="Central America-4 Border Control Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q166110" start="61452" end="61485" title="Union State of Russia and Belarus" label="Union State of Russia and Belarus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1969730" start="62081" end="62094" title="Schengen Area" label="Schengen Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q3324796" start="62169" end="62187" title="Common Travel Area" label="Common Travel Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q4354" start="62509" end="62519" title="hinterland" label="hinterland"/>
<link wikidata="Q217172" start="62636" end="62660" title="Gulf Cooperation Council" label="Gulf Cooperation Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q30130610" start="62940" end="62958" title="Qatar diplomatic crisis" label="Saudi-led blockade"/>
<link wikidata="Q763388" start="63257" end="63268" title="Home Office" label="Home Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="63358" end="63372" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q6510646" start="63417" end="63432" title="Indefinite leave to remain" label="leave to remain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1454879" start="63466" end="63483" title="Self-deportation" label="voluntarily leave"/>
<link wikidata="Q763388" start="63495" end="63506" title="Home Office" label="Home Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q1719801" start="63552" end="63591" title="Cameron–Clegg coalition" label="Conservative-Liberal Democrat coalition"/>
<link wikidata="Q9626" start="63641" end="63659" title="Conservative Party (UK)" label="Conservative Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137751" start="63828" end="63861" title="Court of Appeal (England and Wales)" label="England and Wales Court of Appeal"/>
<link wikidata="Q6005118" start="63894" end="63920" title="Immigration reduction in the United States" label="anti-immigration movements"/>
<link wikidata="Q1969722" start="64099" end="64107" title="Nativism (politics)" label="nativist"/>
<link wikidata="Q550678" start="64108" end="64120" title="Know Nothing" label="Know Nothing"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="64196" end="64204" title="Catholic Church" label="Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q8034999" start="64221" end="64244" title="Workingman&amp;#x27;s Party" label="Workingman&amp;#x27;s Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q99" start="64299" end="64309" title="California" label="California"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073716" start="64379" end="64400" title="Chinese Exclusion Act" label="Chinese Exclusion Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q16985744" start="64414" end="64444" title="Immigration Restriction League" label="Immigration Restriction League"/>
<link wikidata="Q7889651" start="64593" end="64614" title="Dillingham Commission" label="Dillingham Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="64626" end="64637" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q1335451" start="64693" end="64712" title="Emergency Quota Act" label="Emergency Quota Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q1434492" start="64729" end="64752" title="Immigration Act of 1924" label="Immigration Act of 1924"/>
<link wikidata="Q29468" start="64806" end="64822" title="Republican Party (United States)" label="Republican Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q3559093" start="64885" end="64901" title="Sanctuary city" label="sanctuary cities"/>
<link wikidata="Q2631595" start="64930" end="64946" title="Mexico–United States barrier" label="wall with Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q108304467" start="65149" end="65165" title="Remain in Mexico" label="Remain in Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q55025660" start="65170" end="65187" title="Trump administration family separation policy" label="family separation"/>
<link wikidata="Q486296" start="65271" end="65283" title="Islamophobia" label="Islamophobic"/>
<link wikidata="Q30949469" start="65305" end="65315" title="Trump travel ban" label="travel ban"/>
<link wikidata="Q436860" start="65461" end="65470" title="Right wing populism" label="populists"/>
<link wikidata="Q256898" start="65507" end="65511" title="White Anglo-Saxon Protestants" label="WASP"/>
<link wikidata="Q79073912" start="65556" end="65587" title="National Register of Citizens" label="citizenship registration policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q843915" start="66231" end="66248" title="extraterritoriality" label="not fully subject"/>
<link wikidata="Q865" start="67542" end="67559" title="Republic of China" label="Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="67568" end="67599" title="People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China" label="People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q81068910" start="67614" end="67631" title="COVID-19 pandemic" label="COVID-19 pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q87773537" start="68070" end="68092" title="Malaysian movement control order" label="Movement Control Order"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="68291" end="68305" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q2822795" start="68353" end="68371" title="Schengen Agreement" label="Schengen Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q17101973" start="68830" end="68838" title="Voter ID (India)" label="Voter ID"/>
<link wikidata="Q12052688" start="68840" end="68862" title="Aadhaar" label="National Identity Card"/>
<link wikidata="Q19188" start="69228" end="69236" title="Mainland China" label="mainland"/>
<link wikidata="Q779415" start="69238" end="69268" title="Special Administrative Region of the People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China" label="special administrative regions"/>
<link wikidata="Q8646" start="69272" end="69281" title="Hong Kong" label="Hong Kong"/>
<link wikidata="Q14773" start="69286" end="69291" title="Macau" label="Macau"/>
<link wikidata="Q5613380" start="69476" end="69503" title="British National (Overseas)" label="British National (Overseas)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2616578" start="69531" end="69540" title="travel document" label="documents"/>
<link wikidata="Q494978" start="69837" end="69858" title="Special Economic Zone" label="Special Economic Zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q15174" start="69863" end="69871" title="Shenzhen" label="Shenzhen"/>
<link wikidata="Q59095" start="69873" end="69879" title="Zhuhai" label="Zhuhai"/>
<link wikidata="Q68744" start="69884" end="69890" title="Xiamen" label="Xiamen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1001376" start="70295" end="70305" title="Luohu" label="Luohu Port"/>
<link wikidata="Q5925913" start="70307" end="70335" title="Huanggang Port Control Point" label="Huanggang Port Control Point"/>
<link wikidata="Q16926219" start="70337" end="70358" title="Fuyong Ferry Terminal" label="Fuyong Ferry Terminal"/>
<link wikidata="Q16925011" start="70362" end="70387" title="Shekou Passenger Terminal" label="Shekou Passenger Terminal"/>
<link wikidata="Q877129" start="70402" end="70423" title="Gongbei Port of Entry" label="Gongbei Port of Entry"/>
<link wikidata="Q5117990" start="70425" end="70432" title="Hengqin" label="Hengqin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1000035" start="70441" end="70453" title="Jiuzhou Port" label="Jiuzhou Port"/>
<link wikidata="Q177216" start="70470" end="70504" title="Xiamen Gaoqi International Airport" label="Xiamen Gaoqi International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q7768" start="70572" end="70577" title="ASEAN" label="ASEAN"/>
<link wikidata="Q189633" start="70597" end="70603" title="Guilin" label="Guilin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1197688" start="70707" end="70746" title="Guilin Liangjiang International Airport" label="Guilin Liangjiang International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q15176" start="70787" end="70794" title="Guangxi" label="Guangxi"/>
<link wikidata="Q245107" start="71001" end="71042" title="Free area of the Republic of China" label="areas controlled by the Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q865" start="71153" end="71170" title="Republic of China" label="Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="71205" end="71236" title="People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China" label="People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q19188" start="71271" end="71285" title="mainland China" label="mainland China"/>
<link wikidata="Q1636218" start="71345" end="71350" title="Hukou system" label="hukou"/>
<link wikidata="Q7315445" start="71472" end="71485" title="resident Identity Card" label="identity card"/>
<link wikidata="Q169207" start="71999" end="72013" title="discrimination" label="discrimination"/>
<link wikidata="Q6495550" start="72352" end="72364" title="Lateral Road" label="Lateral Road"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="72407" end="72422" title="Visa policy of Bhutan#Restricted areas permit" label="special permits"/>
<link wikidata="Q856162" start="72490" end="72503" title="Phuentsholing" label="Phuentsholing"/>
<link wikidata="Q712144" start="72573" end="72581" title="de facto" label="de facto"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026903" start="72644" end="72651" title="Jaigaon" label="Jaigaon"/>
<link wikidata="Q833" start="73003" end="73011" title="Malaysia" label="Malaysia"/>
<link wikidata="Q179029" start="73023" end="73028" title="Sabah" label="Sabah"/>
<link wikidata="Q170462" start="73033" end="73040" title="Sarawak" label="Sarawak"/>
<link wikidata="Q1973345" start="73303" end="73322" title="Peninsular Malaysia" label="Peninsular Malaysia"/>
<link wikidata="Q985846" start="73559" end="73582" title="Malaysian identity card" label="Malaysian identity card"/>
<link wikidata="Q285728" start="73594" end="73612" title="Malaysian passport" label="Malaysian passport"/>
<link wikidata="Q423" start="73841" end="73852" title="North Korea" label="North Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q25231" start="74261" end="74269" title="Svalbard" label="Svalbard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1453988" start="74299" end="74313" title="free migration" label="free migration"/>
<link wikidata="Q461891" start="74333" end="74348" title="Svalbard Treaty" label="Svalbard Treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q211450" start="74482" end="74495" title="closed cities" label="closed cities"/>
<link wikidata="Q7779" start="74507" end="74510" title="Commonwealth of Independent States" label="CIS"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="74520" end="74541" title="Visa policy of Turkmenistan#Special permits" label="areas of Turkmenistan"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="74581" end="74593" title="Visa policy of Tajikistan#Gorno-Badakhshan" label="restrictions"/>
<link wikidata="Q207319" start="74611" end="74645" title="Gorno-Badakhshan Autonomous Region" label="Gorno-Badakhshan Autonomous Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q66711956" start="74794" end="74810" title="Iraqi Kurdistan" label="Kurdistan region"/>
<link wikidata="Q16912320" start="74915" end="74930" title="Visa policy of Iraq" label="visa free entry"/>
<link wikidata="Q185086" start="75476" end="75494" title="crown dependencies" label="crown dependencies"/>
<link wikidata="Q3324796" start="75510" end="75528" title="Common Travel Area" label="Common Travel Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q1410" start="75538" end="75547" title="Gibraltar" label="Gibraltar"/>
<link wikidata="Q37362" start="75595" end="75616" title="Akrotiri and Dhekelia" label="Akrotiri and Dhekelia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="75651" end="75674" title="Visa policies of British Overseas Territories#Gibraltar" label="border control policies"/>
<link wikidata="Q7888194" start="76362" end="76368" title="Brexit" label="Brexit"/>
<link wikidata="Q105474751" start="76486" end="76522" title="Northern Ireland Protocol" label="Protocol on Ireland/Northern Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q60476704" start="76558" end="76578" title="Brexit withdrawal agreement" label="withdrawal agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q815436" start="76603" end="76635" title="The Troubles" label="thirty-year internecine conflict"/>
<link wikidata="Q670200" start="76661" end="76678" title="Republic of Ireland–United Kingdom border" label="UK-Ireland border"/>
<link wikidata="Q208958" start="76741" end="76780" title="Good Friday Agreement" label="Belfast Agreement/Good Friday Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q7058587" start="76805" end="76835" title="Northern Ireland Peace Process" label="Northern Ireland Peace Process"/>
<link wikidata="Q955276" start="77040" end="77063" title="European Single Market" label="EU&amp;#x27;s Single Market"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377619" start="77068" end="77081" title="European Union Customs Union" label="Customs Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q3324796" start="77095" end="77113" title="Common Travel Area" label="Common Travel Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q955276" start="77243" end="77259" title="European Single Market" label="EU single market"/>
<link wikidata="Q99340975" start="77264" end="77282" title="United Kingdom Internal Market Act 2020" label="UK internal market"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="77483" end="77494" title="Brexit and the Irish border#Hard border" label="hard border"/>
<link wikidata="Q815436" start="77610" end="77622" title="the Troubles" label="the Troubles"/>
<link wikidata="Q955276" start="77707" end="77732" title="European Single Market" label="EU free movement of goods"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377619" start="77743" end="77759" title="EU Customs Union" label="EU Customs Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q712144" start="77971" end="77979" title="de facto" label="de facto"/>
<link wikidata="Q105081618" start="77994" end="78019" title="Irish Sea border" label="border down the Irish Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q634805" start="78133" end="78142" title="Ulster Unionism" label="Unionists"/>
<link wikidata="Q1703625" start="78355" end="78411" title="Department of Agriculture, Environment and Rural Affairs" label="Department of Agriculture, Environment and Rural Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q20966622" start="78544" end="78556" title="Gordon Lyons" label="Gordon Lyons"/>
<link wikidata="Q6070650" start="78714" end="78737" title="Irish Continental Group" label="Irish Continental Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q106359325" start="79344" end="79371" title="2021 Northern Ireland riots" label="2021 Northern Ireland riots"/>
<link wikidata="Q966048" start="79588" end="79623" title="European Union Value Added Tax Area" label="European Union Value Added Tax Area"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="79813" end="79837" title="Schengen Area#Internal controls" label="internal border controls"/>
<link wikidata="Q20857240" start="81032" end="81055" title="European migrant crisis" label="European migrant crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q58967" start="81080" end="81096" title="Israel Defense Forces" label="Israeli military"/>
<link wikidata="Q219060" start="81175" end="81196" title="State of Palestine" label="Palestinian territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q7127411" start="81213" end="81248" title="Palestinian freedom of movement" label="freedom of movement of Palestinians"/>
<link wikidata="Q6087607" start="81262" end="81313" title="Israeli checkpoint" label="permanent, temporary, and random manned checkpoints"/>
<link wikidata="Q36678" start="81321" end="81330" title="West Bank" label="West Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q524253" start="81336" end="81353" title="West Bank Barrier" label="West Bank Barrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q801" start="81433" end="81448" title="Israel" label="State of Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q219060" start="81470" end="81488" title="State of Palestine" label="State of Palestine"/>
<link wikidata="Q712144" start="81501" end="81509" title="de facto" label="de facto"/>
<link wikidata="Q653112" start="81683" end="81691" title="Blockade of the Gaza Strip" label="blockade"/>
<link wikidata="Q39760" start="81699" end="81709" title="Gaza Strip" label="Gaza Strip"/>
<link wikidata="Q65118941" start="81863" end="81890" title="Israeli permit regime in the West Bank" label="obtain a variety of permits"/>
<link wikidata="Q1334053" start="82053" end="82066" title="B&amp;#x27;Tselem" label="B&amp;#x27;Tselem"/>
<link wikidata="Q79913" start="82079" end="82108" title="non-governmental organisation" label="non-governmental organisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q8458" start="82123" end="82135" title="human rights" label="human rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q457862" start="82203" end="82265" title="International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights" label="International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q399798" start="82734" end="82755" title="Israeli Supreme Court" label="Israeli Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q446813" start="82835" end="82845" title="Amira Hass" label="Amira Hass"/>
<link wikidata="Q5645960" start="83148" end="83163" title="Irish Catholics" label="Irish Catholics"/>
<link wikidata="Q17017729" start="83168" end="83232" title="Ulster Protestants" label="the descendants of Protestant settlers from England and Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1322838" start="83297" end="83308" title="peace lines" label="peace lines"/>
<link wikidata="Q517372" start="83375" end="83385" title="Irish republicanism" label="republican"/>
<link wikidata="Q2021987" start="83390" end="83401" title="Irish nationalism" label="nationalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q2394819" start="83445" end="83453" title="Ulster loyalism" label="loyalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q634805" start="83458" end="83466" title="Unionism in Ireland" label="unionist"/>
<link wikidata="Q815436" start="83559" end="83571" title="The Troubles" label="The Troubles"/>
<link wikidata="Q208958" start="83590" end="83611" title="Good Friday Agreement" label="Good Friday Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q10686" start="83656" end="83663" title="Belfast" label="Belfast"/>
<link wikidata="Q163584" start="83688" end="83693" title="Derry" label="Derry"/>
<link wikidata="Q768714" start="83695" end="83704" title="Portadown" label="Portadown"/>
<link wikidata="Q1702713" start="83710" end="83716" title="Lurgan" label="Lurgan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1482170" start="83978" end="83984" title="Police Service of Northern Ireland" label="police"/>
<link wikidata="Q16635" start="84173" end="84177" title="Guam" label="Guam"/>
<link wikidata="Q16644" start="84186" end="84210" title="Northern Mariana Islands" label="Northern Mariana Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q2918599" start="84222" end="84254" title="visa policy of the United States" label="same visa policy as the mainland"/>
<link wikidata="Q5468612" start="84386" end="84424" title="customs territory of the United States" label="customs territory of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q16641" start="84511" end="84525" title="American Samoa" label="American Samoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q11703" start="84690" end="84704" title="United States Virgin Islands" label="Virgin Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q7889585" start="85095" end="85115" title="United States Border Patrol interior checkpoints" label="interior checkpoints"/>
<link wikidata="Q424379" start="85282" end="85291" title="Akwesasne" label="Akwesasne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1904" start="85318" end="85325" title="Ontario" label="Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q176" start="85327" end="85333" title="Quebec" label="Quebec"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384" start="85339" end="85347" title="New York (state)" label="New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q1568837" start="85522" end="85532" title="Jay Treaty" label="Jay Treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q532090" start="85538" end="85567" title="Canada Border Services Agency" label="Canada Border Services Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q5171992" start="85587" end="85602" title="Cornwall Island (Ontario)" label="Cornwall Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q956690" start="85677" end="85685" title="Cornwall, Ontario" label="Cornwall"/>
<link wikidata="Q68518" start="86462" end="86475" title="Haudenosaunee" label="Haudenosaunee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1640042" start="86745" end="86750" title="Hyder, Alaska" label="Hyder"/>
<link wikidata="Q22043668" start="87757" end="87768" title="Pass system (Canadian history)" label="pass system"/>
<link wikidata="Q11409" start="87773" end="87799" title="Apartheid-era South Africa" label="Apartheid-era South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1969688" start="87807" end="87816" title="Pass laws" label="Pass laws"/>
<link wikidata="Q170404" start="88156" end="88161" title="visa (document)" label="visas"/>
<link wikidata="Q803874" start="88361" end="88372" title="biosecurity" label="biosecurity"/>
<link wikidata="Q178022" start="88489" end="88500" title="fingerprint" label="fingerprint"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="88817" end="88829" title="#Exit controls" label="exit control"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192553" start="88935" end="88953" title="Facial recognition system" label="facial recognition"/>
<link wikidata="Q1672722" start="89099" end="89112" title="Iris recognition" label="iris scanning"/>
<link wikidata="Q125761" start="89214" end="89255" title="International Civil Aviation Organization" label="International Civil Aviation Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q623045" start="89274" end="89284" title="e-passport" label="e-passport"/>
<link wikidata="Q11231" start="89461" end="89492" title="Department of Homeland Security" label="Department of Homeland Security"/>
<link wikidata="Q43812" start="89761" end="89769" title="passport" label="passport"/>
<link wikidata="Q6510649" start="90024" end="90038" title="leave to enter" label="leave to enter"/>
<link wikidata="Q6005196" start="90200" end="90215" title="Entry Clearance" label="entry clearance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1338491" start="90227" end="90242" title="Schengen Information System" label="Schengen system"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="90509" end="90523" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q1105736" start="90822" end="90827" title="Visa policy of Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="90940" end="90942" title="European Union" label="EU"/>
<link wikidata="Q166546" start="90946" end="90950" title="European Free Trade Association" label="EFTA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1969730" start="90976" end="90994" title="Schengen Area" label="EU or EFTA country"/>
<link wikidata="Q7935343" start="90996" end="91003" title="Visa policy of Albania" label="Albania"/>
<link wikidata="Q7935400" start="91008" end="91023" title="Visa policy of North Macedonia" label="North Macedonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q32173" start="91138" end="91144" title="Visa policy of Canada" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q17080983" start="91146" end="91157" title="Visa policy of El Salvador" label="El Salvador"/>
<link wikidata="Q17087058" start="91159" end="91166" title="Visa policy of Ireland" label="Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q93623" start="91176" end="91187" title="Visa policy of New Zealand" label="New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q334" start="91189" end="91198" title="Singapore" label="Singapore"/>
<link wikidata="Q17087083" start="91200" end="91214" title="Visa policy of the United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q2918599" start="91223" end="91247" title="Visa policy of the United States" label="United States of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q173260" start="91249" end="91258" title="Visa policy of Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5930665" start="91260" end="91269" title="Visa policy of Hong Kong" label="Hong Kong"/>
<link wikidata="Q133703" start="91271" end="91277" title="Visa policy of Israel" label="Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q114899" start="91279" end="91284" title="Visa policy of Macau" label="Macau"/>
<link wikidata="Q7935388" start="91289" end="91300" title="Visa policy of South Korea" label="South Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q170404" start="91490" end="91495" title="Visa (document)" label="Visas"/>
<link wikidata="Q8646" start="91774" end="91783" title="Hong Kong" label="Hong Kong"/>
<link wikidata="Q14773" start="91841" end="91846" title="Macau" label="Macau"/>
<link wikidata="Q334" start="91938" end="91947" title="Singapore" label="Singapore"/>
<link wikidata="Q39804" start="91978" end="91989" title="cruise ship" label="cruise ship"/>
<link wikidata="Q804" start="93811" end="93817" title="Panama" label="Panama"/>
<link wikidata="Q181479" start="93996" end="94014" title="Ben Gurion Airport" label="Ben Gurion Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q800" start="94394" end="94404" title="Costa Rica" label="Costa Rica"/>
<link wikidata="Q1969730" start="94562" end="94575" title="Schengen Area" label="Schengen Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q31837832" start="94596" end="94613" title="Entry-Exit-System" label="Entry Exit System"/>
<link wikidata="Q7779" start="95012" end="95022" title="Commonwealth of Independent States" label="fellow CIS"/>
<link wikidata="Q217172" start="95058" end="95092" title="Gulf Cooperation Council" label="countries in the Arabian peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q1721015" start="95142" end="95155" title="Kafala System" label="Kafala System"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="95260" end="95270" title="Visa policy of Russia#Exit" label="exit visas"/>
<link wikidata="Q8683" start="95637" end="95645" title="Cold War" label="Cold War"/>
<link wikidata="Q170541" start="95664" end="95676" title="Eastern Bloc" label="Eastern Bloc"/>
<link wikidata="Q36704" start="95948" end="95958" title="Yugoslavia" label="Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q580750" start="96218" end="96234" title="conscription" label="national service"/>
<link wikidata="Q5162771" start="96422" end="96438" title="National service in Singapore" label="national service"/>
<link wikidata="Q884" start="96550" end="96561" title="South Korea" label="South Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q865" start="96566" end="96572" title="Taiwan" label="Taiwan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3369955" start="96756" end="96770" title="modern slavery" label="modern slavery"/>
<link wikidata="Q48731328" start="96857" end="96894" title="Emigration Act, 1983" label="&amp;quot;Emigration Check Required&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q837" start="96896" end="96901" title="Nepal" label="Nepal"/>
<link wikidata="Q974595" start="96958" end="96967" title="H-1B visa" label="H-1B visa"/>
<link wikidata="Q7204" start="97275" end="97286" title="Middle East" label="Middle East"/>
<link wikidata="Q986" start="97586" end="97593" title="Eritrea" label="Eritrea"/>
<link wikidata="Q7935375" start="99045" end="99069" title="Visa policy of Mauritius" label="countries like Mauritius"/>
<link wikidata="Q4110894" start="99588" end="99593" title="Visa policy of India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q17069909" start="99595" end="99602" title="Visa policy of Myanmar" label="Myanmar"/>
<link wikidata="Q4110904" start="99608" end="99617" title="Visa policy of Sri Lanka" label="Sri Lanka"/>
<link wikidata="Q14933259" start="99725" end="99733" title="Visa policy of Malaysia" label="Malaysia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4110902" start="99901" end="99926" title="Visa policy of Thailand" label="Thailand regularly issues"/>
<link wikidata="Q4110893" start="100085" end="100100" title="Visa policy of Indonesia" label="its visa regime"/>
<link wikidata="Q4110901" start="100175" end="100184" title="Visa policy of Singapore" label="Singapore"/>
<link wikidata="Q7181" start="100459" end="100472" title="globalisation" label="globalisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147138" start="100621" end="100641" title="working holiday visa" label="working holiday visa"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="100830" end="100851" title="Visa policy of Saudi Arabia#Hajj visas" label="special category visa"/>
<link wikidata="Q11030" start="101030" end="101041" title="journalism" label="journalists"/>
<link wikidata="Q1105702" start="101091" end="101096" title="Visa policy of China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="101125" end="101132" title="Visa policy of the United States#I visa" label="America"/>
<link wikidata="Q4403385" start="101490" end="101501" title="Saatse Boot" label="Saatse Boot"/>
<link wikidata="Q2028146" start="101535" end="101542" title="Lutepää" label="Lutepää"/>
<link wikidata="Q3464343" start="101547" end="101554" title="Sesniki" label="Sesniki"/>
<link wikidata="Q1749" start="101752" end="101770" title="Kaliningrad Oblast" label="Kaliningrad Oblast"/>
<link wikidata="Q7935388" start="102138" end="102149" title="Visa policy of South Korea" label="South Korea"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="103623" end="103626" title="Visa policy of Australia#Electronic visas" label="ETA"/>
<link wikidata="Q337456" start="103658" end="103680" title="East African Community" label="East African Community"/>
<link wikidata="Q114" start="103708" end="103713" title="Kenya" label="Kenya"/>
<link wikidata="Q1037" start="103715" end="103721" title="Rwanda" label="Rwanda"/>
<link wikidata="Q1036" start="103726" end="103732" title="Uganda" label="Uganda"/>
<link wikidata="Q836186" start="103794" end="103837" title="Mainland Travel Permit for Taiwan Residents" label="Mainland Travel Permit for Taiwan Residents"/>
<link wikidata="Q32173" start="104153" end="104165" title="Electronic Travel Authorization (Canada)" label="Canadian ETA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1326160" start="104167" end="104212" title="Electronic System for Travel Authorization" label="US Electronic System for Travel Authorisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7935380" start="104237" end="104250" title="Electronic Travel Authorization (Pakistan)" label="Pakistani ETA"/>
<link wikidata="Q7935388" start="104319" end="104356" title="Korea Electronic Travel Authorization" label="Korea Electronic Travel Authorization"/>
<link wikidata="Q4110904" start="104391" end="104405" title="Electronic Travel Authorization (Sri Lanka)" label="Sri Lankan ETA"/>
<link wikidata="Q107503880" start="104522" end="104550" title="Nationality and Borders Bill" label="Nationality and Borders Bill"/>
<link wikidata="Q85811546" start="104627" end="104658" title="Electronic Travel Authorisation (UK)" label="Electronic Travel Authorisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q17443556" start="105143" end="105160" title="House of Representatives (Libya)" label="Tobruk government"/>
<link wikidata="Q35323" start="105178" end="105182" title="Arab" label="Arab"/>
<link wikidata="Q4294304" start="105319" end="105343" title="Ministry of Home Affairs (Malaysia)" label="Ministry of Home Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q244165" start="105477" end="105484" title="Republic of Artsakh" label="Artsakh"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="105772" end="105784" title="Executive Order 13780#Presidential Proclamation 9645" label="restrictions"/>
<link wikidata="Q27809653" start="105800" end="105820" title="First presidency of Donald Trump" label="Trump administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q101369347" start="105862" end="105882" title="Biden administration" label="Biden administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q756296" start="106079" end="106092" title="Multiple citizenship" label="dual citizens"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="106386" end="106397" title="#Border checkpoints" label="checkpoints"/>
<link wikidata="Q910209" start="106884" end="106930" title="Guangzhou–Shenzhen–Hong Kong Express Rail Link" label="Guangzhou–Shenzhen–Hong Kong Express Rail Link"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="106973" end="106991" title="Hong Kong West Kowloon railway station#Mainland Port Area" label="Mainland Port Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q5972370" start="107156" end="107173" title="Shenzhen Bay Port" label="Shenzhen Bay Port"/>
<link wikidata="Q15174" start="107393" end="107401" title="Shenzhen" label="Shenzhen"/>
<link wikidata="Q15175" start="107405" end="107414" title="Guangdong" label="Guangdong"/>
<link wikidata="Q2916382" start="107590" end="107609" title="Hong Kong–Shenzhen Western Corridor" label="Shenzhen Bay Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q6132101" start="107798" end="107824" title="Woodlands Train Checkpoint" label="Woodlands Train Checkpoint"/>
<link wikidata="Q6132274" start="107896" end="107931" title="Johor Bahru Sentral railway station" label="Johor Bahru Sentral railway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q18359019" start="108019" end="108022" title="Johor Bahru–Singapore Rapid Transit System" label="RTS"/>
<link wikidata="Q40176" start="108322" end="108342" title="Mass Rapid Transit (Singapore)" label="Singapore MRT system"/>
<link wikidata="Q7795883" start="108344" end="108367" title="Thomson–East Coast MRT line" label="Thomson–East Coast Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q6132274" start="108373" end="108392" title="Johor Bahru Sentral railway station" label="Johor Bahru Sentral"/>
<link wikidata="Q1082700" start="108668" end="108696" title="Padang Besar railway station" label="Padang Besar railway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q5255269" start="108700" end="108722" title="Padang Besar, Malaysia" label="Padang Besar, Malaysia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3088964" start="108899" end="108923" title="Malaysia-Thailand border" label="Malaysia-Thailand border"/>
<link wikidata="Q2165702" start="109171" end="109196" title="State Railway of Thailand" label="State Railway of Thailand"/>
<link wikidata="Q6319135" start="109626" end="109645" title="juxtaposed controls" label="juxtaposed controls"/>
<link wikidata="Q10257" start="109763" end="109777" title="Channel Tunnel" label="Channel Tunnel"/>
<link wikidata="Q156013" start="109845" end="109853" title="Eurostar" label="Eurostar"/>
<link wikidata="Q45797" start="110373" end="110382" title="Dunkirk" label="Dunkerque"/>
<link wikidata="Q739207" start="110402" end="110415" title="Port of Dover" label="Port of Dover"/>
<link wikidata="Q6454" start="110484" end="110490" title="Calais" label="Calais"/>
<link wikidata="Q48525" start="110621" end="110636" title="Federal government of the United States" label="U.S. government"/>
<link wikidata="Q3408858" start="110646" end="110676" title="United States border preclearance" label="border preclearance facilities"/>
<link wikidata="Q368804" start="110766" end="110800" title="U.S. Customs and Border Protection" label="U.S. Customs and Border Protection"/>
<link wikidata="Q943091" start="110844" end="110867" title="U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement" label="Immigration and Customs"/>
<link wikidata="Q476322" start="110869" end="110882" title="United States Public Health Service" label="Public Health"/>
<link wikidata="Q501542" start="110888" end="110899" title="United States Department of Agriculture" label="Agriculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q2593864" start="111373" end="111378" title="NEXUS" label="NEXUS"/>
<link wikidata="Q7142851" start="111389" end="111417" title="United States Passport Card" label="United States Passport cards"/>
<link wikidata="Q193439" start="111516" end="111543" title="Dubai International Airport" label="Dubai International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1415006" start="111953" end="111959" title="Nassau International Airport" label="Nassau"/>
<link wikidata="Q2493876" start="111963" end="111985" title="Freeport International Airport" label="Freeport International"/>
<link wikidata="Q1327751" start="112090" end="112113" title="Pacific Central Station" label="Pacific Central Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q1973" start="112166" end="112182" title="British Columbia" label="British Columbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1148666" start="112219" end="112243" title="Montreal Central Station" label="Montreal Central Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q4653276" start="113513" end="113538" title="APEC Business Travel Card" label="APEC Business Travel Card"/>
<link wikidata="Q170481" start="113619" end="113623" title="APEC" label="APEC"/>
<link wikidata="Q723713" start="114142" end="114166" title="One Country, Two Systems" label="One Country, Two Systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q608889" start="114171" end="114180" title="One China Policy" label="One China"/>
<link wikidata="Q2974471" start="114191" end="114208" title="Chinese nationality law" label="Chinese nationals"/>
<link wikidata="Q5895432" start="114214" end="114223" title="Hong Kong residents" label="Hong Kong"/>
<link wikidata="Q4907730" start="114225" end="114230" title="Macau Resident Identity Card" label="Macau"/>
<link wikidata="Q6856667" start="114240" end="114257" title="Taiwanese nationality law" label="Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="114321" end="114333" title="China" label="the mainland"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="114479" end="114503" title="#Internal border controls" label="Internal border controls"/>
<link wikidata="Q2765700" start="114510" end="114519" title="SmartGate" label="SmartGate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1274223" start="114564" end="114584" title="Australian passport" label="Australian ePassport"/>
<link wikidata="Q623045" start="114597" end="114606" title="ePassport" label="ePassport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192553" start="114790" end="114815" title="facial recognition system" label="facial recognition system"/>
<link wikidata="Q623045" start="114901" end="114919" title="biometric passport" label="biometric passport"/>
<link wikidata="Q5323966" start="115448" end="115463" title="ePassport gates" label="ePassport gates"/>
<link wikidata="Q4944570" start="115505" end="115520" title="UK Border Force" label="UK Border Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q6071037" start="115529" end="115573" title="Irish Naturalisation and Immigration Service" label="Irish Naturalisation and Immigration Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192553" start="115768" end="115793" title="facial recognition system" label="facial recognition system"/>
<link wikidata="Q623045" start="115938" end="115956" title="biometric passport" label="biometric passport"/>
<link wikidata="Q918305" start="115958" end="115965" title="British nationality law" label="British"/>
<link wikidata="Q8932" start="115976" end="115998" title="European Economic Area" label="European Economic Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q4825062" start="116024" end="116033" title="Australian nationality law" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1005289" start="116035" end="116041" title="Canadian nationality law" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q3678382" start="116043" end="116048" title="Japanese nationality law" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7016282" start="116050" end="116061" title="New Zealand nationality law" label="New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q7523309" start="116063" end="116072" title="Singaporean nationality law" label="Singapore"/>
<link wikidata="Q7567731" start="116074" end="116085" title="South Korean nationality law" label="South Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q6856667" start="116087" end="116093" title="Taiwanese nationality law" label="Taiwan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054376" start="116102" end="116115" title="United States nationality law" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q2974471" start="116127" end="116134" title="Chinese nationality law" label="Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q8646" start="116147" end="116156" title="Hong Kong" label="Hong Kong"/>
<link wikidata="Q623045" start="116383" end="116402" title="biometric passports" label="biometric passports"/>
<link wikidata="Q178021" start="116440" end="116454" title="Dublin Airport" label="Dublin Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q8932" start="116625" end="116647" title="European Economic Area" label="European Economic Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q1284042" start="116765" end="116784" title="Irish passport card" label="Irish passport card"/>
<link wikidata="Q5008822" start="116831" end="116839" title="CARIPASS" label="CARIPASS"/>
<link wikidata="Q3266588" start="117892" end="117928" title="e-Channel" label="Automated Passenger Clearance System"/>
<link wikidata="Q17704" start="118035" end="118044" title="Hong Kong International Airport" label="Hong Kong"/>
<link wikidata="Q525486" start="118049" end="118054" title="Macau International Airport" label="Macau"/>
<link wikidata="Q6103687" start="118677" end="118682" title="J-BIS" label="J-BIS"/>
<link wikidata="Q36454" start="118751" end="118765" title="Narita Airport" label="Narita Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q204853" start="118767" end="118781" title="Haneda Airport" label="Haneda Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q679345" start="118783" end="118805" title="Chubu Centrair Airport" label="Chubu Centrair Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q193682" start="118810" end="118824" title="Kansai Airport" label="Kansai Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q25196742" start="119271" end="119288" title="Viajero Confiable" label="Viajero Confiable"/>
<link wikidata="Q940145" start="120164" end="120176" title="Global Entry" label="Global Entry"/>
<link wikidata="Q2593864" start="120180" end="120185" title="NEXUS" label="NEXUS"/>
<link wikidata="Q2765700" start="120264" end="120273" title="SmartGate" label="SmartGate"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="121710" end="121726" title="Right to privacy in New Zealand#Privacy Act 1993" label="Privacy Act 1993"/>
<link wikidata="Q4653276" start="122325" end="122350" title="APEC Business Travel Card" label="APEC Business Travel Card"/>
<link wikidata="Q7567731" start="122994" end="123007" title="South Korean nationality law" label="South Koreans"/>
<link wikidata="Q865" start="123238" end="123244" title="Taiwan" label="Taiwan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6856667" start="123373" end="123386" title="Taiwanese nationality law" label="ROC nationals"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192553" start="123836" end="123861" title="facial recognition system" label="facial recognition system"/>
<link wikidata="Q194316" start="123951" end="123971" title="Suvarnabhumi Airport" label="Suvarnabhumi Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q940145" start="124443" end="124455" title="Global Entry" label="Global Entry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048236" start="124904" end="124920" title="Machine-readable medium" label="machine-readable"/>
<link wikidata="Q6676995" start="124933" end="124957" title="Permanent residence (United States)" label="permanent residency card"/>
<link wikidata="Q218569" start="125046" end="125065" title="customs declaration" label="customs declaration"/>
<link wikidata="Q4841567" start="125130" end="125143" title="baggage claim" label="baggage claim"/>
<link wikidata="Q5008709" start="125362" end="125369" title="CANPASS" label="CANPASS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062135" start="125468" end="125498" title="corporate jet" label="corporate and private aircraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q2593864" start="125519" end="125524" title="NEXUS (frequent traveler program)" label="NEXUS"/>
<link wikidata="Q5500181" start="126009" end="126030" title="Free and Secure Trade" label="Free and Secure Trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q3477563" start="126357" end="126363" title="SENTRI" label="SENTRI"/>
<link wikidata="Q1746627" start="127053" end="127073" title="local border traffic" label="local border traffic"/>
<link wikidata="Q4944632" start="127904" end="127915" title="border area" label="border area"/>
<link wikidata="Q4944551" start="128363" end="128383" title="Border Crossing Card" label="Border Crossing Card"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="128534" end="128553" title="#Internal borders" label="interior checkposts"/>
<link wikidata="Q8646" start="128649" end="128658" title="Hong Kong" label="Hong Kong"/>
<link wikidata="Q14773" start="128662" end="128667" title="Macau" label="Macau"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144286" start="128693" end="128710" title="Pearl River Delta" label="Pearl River Delta"/>
<link wikidata="Q27048" start="129194" end="129207" title="Brest Airport" label="Brest Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q27049" start="129212" end="129226" title="Hrodna Airport" label="Grodno Airport"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="129542" end="129549" title="#Customs" label="customs"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="129551" end="129569" title="#Immigration law and policy" label="immigration policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q138775" start="129571" end="129583" title="border guard" label="border guard"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="129585" end="129605" title="#Biosecurity" label="biosecurity measures"/>
<link wikidata="Q17000879" start="129803" end="129826" title="Australian Border Force" label="Australian Border Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q1056074" start="129830" end="129874" title="Immigration, Refugees and Citizenship Canada" label="Immigration, Refugees and Citizenship Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q532090" start="129878" end="129907" title="Canada Border Services Agency" label="Canada Border Services Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q5029345" start="129920" end="129953" title="Canada Customs and Revenue Agency" label="Canada Customs and Revenue Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q2824583" start="129958" end="129999" title="Canadian Air Transport Security Authority" label="Canadian Air Transport Security Authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q10892869" start="130003" end="130038" title="National Immigration Administration" label="National Immigration Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q2346285" start="130042" end="130069" title="Ministry of Public Security (China)" label="Ministry of Public Security"/>
<link wikidata="Q2440398" start="130073" end="130099" title="People&amp;#x27;s Armed Police" label="People&amp;#x27;s Armed Police"/>
<link wikidata="Q5531667" start="130103" end="130136" title="General Administration of Customs" label="General Administration of Customs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860726" start="130140" end="130174" title="Immigration Department (Hong Kong)" label="Immigration Department (Hong Kong)"/>
<link wikidata="Q16926796" start="130178" end="130215" title="Public Security Police Force of Macau" label="Public Security Police Force of Macau"/>
<link wikidata="Q2723836" start="130219" end="130240" title="Border Security Force" label="Border Security Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q3091159" start="130244" end="130260" title="The Assam Rifles" label="The Assam Rifles"/>
<link wikidata="Q3520087" start="130264" end="130290" title="Indo-Tibetan Border Police" label="Indo-Tibetan Border Police"/>
<link wikidata="Q3957044" start="130294" end="130340" title="Directorate General of Immigration (Indonesia)" label="Directorate General of Immigration (Indonesia)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6071037" start="130344" end="130388" title="Irish Naturalisation and Immigration Service" label="Irish Naturalisation and Immigration Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q5522136" start="130392" end="130425" title="Garda National Immigration Bureau" label="Garda National Immigration Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q7317995" start="130429" end="130450" title="Revenue Commissioners" label="Revenue Commissioners"/>
<link wikidata="Q6082591" start="130517" end="130566" title="Law Enforcement Force of Islamic Republic of Iran" label="Law Enforcement Force of Islamic Republic of Iran"/>
<link wikidata="Q6082591" start="130666" end="130715" title="Law Enforcement Force of Islamic Republic of Iran" label="Law Enforcement Force of Islamic Republic of Iran"/>
<link wikidata="Q5260346" start="130719" end="130753" title="Immigration Department of Malaysia" label="Immigration Department of Malaysia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3297607" start="130811" end="130827" title="Pakistan Rangers" label="Pakistan Rangers"/>
<link wikidata="Q4366858" start="130831" end="130845" title="Frontier Corps" label="Frontier Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q18344543" start="130849" end="130872" title="Gilgit−Baltistan Scouts" label="Gilgit−Baltistan Scouts"/>
<link wikidata="Q2078095" start="130876" end="130889" title="Pakistan Army" label="Pakistan Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q3297607" start="130893" end="130909" title="Pakistan Rangers" label="Pakistan Rangers"/>
<link wikidata="Q7125560" start="130913" end="130929" title="Pakistan Customs" label="Pakistan Customs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1969730" start="130932" end="130945" title="Schengen Area" label="Schengen Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q21786841" start="130949" end="130987" title="European Border and Coast Guard Agency" label="European Border and Coast Guard Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q3029453" start="131002" end="131048" title="Direction centrale de la police aux frontières" label="Direction centrale de la police aux frontières"/>
<link wikidata="Q121484" start="131071" end="131093" title="National Police (France)" label="French National Police"/>
<link wikidata="Q3029573" start="131099" end="131149" title="Direction générale des douanes et droits indirects" label="Direction générale des douanes et droits indirects"/>
<link wikidata="Q1418075" start="131162" end="131182" title="Finnish Border Guard" label="Finnish Border Guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q11895136" start="131187" end="131202" title="Finnish Customs" label="Finnish Customs"/>
<link wikidata="Q56026" start="131207" end="131221" title="Federal Police (Germany)" label="Federal Police"/>
<link wikidata="Q1009333" start="131226" end="131246" title="Bundeszollverwaltung" label="Bundeszollverwaltung"/>
<link wikidata="Q897817" start="131251" end="131267" title="Polizia di Stato" label="Polizia di Stato"/>
<link wikidata="Q1552861" start="131272" end="131290" title="Guardia di Finanza" label="Guardia di Finanza"/>
<link wikidata="Q54852" start="131295" end="131315" title="Arma dei Carabinieri" label="Arma dei Carabinieri"/>
<link wikidata="Q1546659" start="131320" end="131344" title="Royal Marechaussee" label="Koninklijke Marechaussee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860" start="131346" end="131353" title="English language" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q327038" start="131401" end="131419" title="Netherlands Armed Forces" label="Dutch Armed Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q2288105" start="131424" end="131468" title="Fiscal Information and Investigation Service" label="Fiscal Information and Investigation Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143194" start="131473" end="131499" title="National Police Corps (Spain)" label="Cuerpo Nacional de Policia"/>
<link wikidata="Q932821" start="131504" end="131517" title="Guardia Civil" label="Guardia Civil"/>
<link wikidata="Q7455868" start="131522" end="131550" title="Customs Surveillance Service" label="Customs Surveillance Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q678586" start="131555" end="131595" title="Federal Department of Justice and Police" label="Federal Department of Justice and Police"/>
<link wikidata="Q478873" start="131601" end="131625" title="Federal Office of Police" label="Federal Office of Police"/>
<link wikidata="Q662317" start="131630" end="131659" title="Federal Department of Finance" label="Federal Department of Finance"/>
<link wikidata="Q870386" start="131665" end="131683" title="Swiss Border Guard" label="Swiss Border Guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q11995938" start="131688" end="131709" title="Swedish Police Authority" label="Swedish Border Police"/>
<link wikidata="Q482789" start="131741" end="131760" title="Ministry of Justice (South Korea)" label="Ministry of Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q11232850" start="131764" end="131785" title="Korea Customs Service" label="Korea Customs Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q6005050" start="131789" end="131826" title="Immigration and Checkpoints Authority" label="Immigration and Checkpoints Authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q6973478" start="131830" end="131857" title="National Immigration Agency" label="National Immigration Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q15899843" start="131861" end="131883" title="Customs Administration, Ministry of Finance" label="Customs Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q166559" start="131887" end="131909" title="HM Revenue and Customs" label="HM Revenue and Customs"/>
<link wikidata="Q4944570" start="131913" end="131928" title="UK Border Force" label="UK Border Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q18351135" start="131932" end="131955" title="Immigration Enforcement" label="Immigration Enforcement"/>
<link wikidata="Q11231" start="131959" end="131990" title="United States Department of Homeland Security" label="Department of Homeland Security"/>
<link wikidata="Q368804" start="132000" end="132034" title="U.S. Customs and Border Protection" label="U.S. Customs and Border Protection"/>
<link wikidata="Q11231" start="132060" end="132063" title="DHS" label="DHS"/>
<link wikidata="Q187954" start="132067" end="132094" title="United States Border Patrol" label="United States Border Patrol"/>
<link wikidata="Q2304163" start="132098" end="132136" title="Transportation Security Administration" label="Transportation Security Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q943091" start="132140" end="132180" title="U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement" label="U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement"/>
<link wikidata="Q2097315" start="132192" end="132242" title="United States Citizenship and Immigration Services" label="United States Citizenship and Immigration Services"/>
<link wikidata="Q1416504" start="132495" end="132544" title="Pacific Solution" label="detention of asylum seekers and economic migrants"/>
<link wikidata="Q7644964" start="132659" end="132692" title="Supreme Court of Papua New Guinea" label="Supreme Court of Papua New Guinea"/>
<link wikidata="Q16950534" start="132726" end="132738" title="Manus Regional Processing Centre" label="Manus Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q392119" start="133507" end="133559" title="International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights" label="International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q1549801" start="133859" end="133869" title="Lhotshampa" label="Lhotshampa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1587780" start="133994" end="134008" title="Bhutanese refugees" label="refugee crisis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="134214" end="134246" title="North Korean defectors#China" label="recognise North Korean defectors"/>
<link wikidata="Q23681" start="134521" end="134536" title="Northern Cyprus" label="Northern Cyprus"/>
<link wikidata="Q229" start="134569" end="134584" title="Republic of Cyprus" label="Southern Cyprus"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="134613" end="134627" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q156595" start="134875" end="134893" title="self determination" label="self determination"/>
<link wikidata="Q35323" start="135389" end="135394" title="Arabs" label="Arabs"/>
<link wikidata="Q181479" start="135518" end="135536" title="Ben Gurion Airport" label="Ben Gurion Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q7283" start="135753" end="135769" title="terrorist attack" label="terrorist attack"/>
<link wikidata="Q1850662" start="135985" end="135994" title="racial profiling" label="profiling"/>
<link wikidata="Q1850662" start="136100" end="136139" title="racial profiling" label="racist, ethnic, and religious profiling"/>
<link wikidata="Q4931558" start="136186" end="136196" title="Boaz Ganor" label="Boaz Ganor"/>
<link wikidata="Q10806" start="136429" end="136460" title="9/11" label="2001 World Trade Centre attacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q30949469" start="136601" end="136620" title="Trump travel ban" label="travel restrictions"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="136775" end="136790" title="#Border security" label="Border security"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156955" start="136908" end="136922" title="zero tolerance" label="zero tolerance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1338798" start="137179" end="137194" title="executive order" label="executive order"/>
<link wikidata="Q6533003" start="137490" end="137496" title="Asylum in the United States" label="asylum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057263" start="137557" end="137571" title="Mexico–United States border" label="Mexican border"/>
<link wikidata="Q942326" start="137629" end="137668" title="United States Department of Health and Human Services" label="Department of Health and Human Services"/>
<link wikidata="Q11268" start="137822" end="137830" title="United States Congress" label="Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q636207" start="138223" end="138239" title="United States Attorney General" label="Attorney General"/>
<link wikidata="Q358443" start="138240" end="138253" title="Jeff Sessions" label="Jeff Sessions"/>
<link wikidata="Q1845" start="138306" end="138311" title="Bible" label="Bible"/>
<link wikidata="Q1721589" start="139397" end="139421" title="Kaiser Family Foundation" label="Kaiser Family Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q564811" start="139815" end="139828" title="Asylum seeker" label="Asylum seeker"/>
<link wikidata="Q1314535" start="139831" end="139845" title="Border barrier" label="Border barrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q272730" start="139848" end="139856" title="Airspace" label="Airspace"/>
<link wikidata="Q964477" start="139859" end="139874" title="Air sovereignty" label="Air sovereignty"/>
<link wikidata="Q5998956" start="139877" end="139890" title="Illegal entry" label="Illegal entry"/>
<link wikidata="Q187954" start="139893" end="139920" title="United States Border Patrol" label="United States Border Patrol"/>
<link wikidata="Q3089219" start="139923" end="139940" title="Maritime boundary" label="Maritime boundary"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344824" start="139943" end="139962" title="Freedom of movement" label="Freedom of movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q217305" start="140123" end="140137" title="The New Yorker" label="The New Yorker"/>
<link wikidata="Q8134" start="140217" end="140226" title="economics" label="economics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1596387" start="140234" end="140254" title="political psychology" label="political psychology"/>
<link wikidata="Q7184851" start="140441" end="140457" title="Philippe Legrain" label="Philippe Legrain"/>
<link wikidata="Q65852167" start="140532" end="140548" title="Aristide Zolberg" label="Aristide Zolberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q7184851" start="140667" end="140683" title="Philippe Legrain" label="Philippe Legrain"/>
<link wikidata="Q7376477" start="140758" end="140771" title="Ruben Rumbaut" label="Ruben Rumbaut"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="247934" wikidata="Q131405" url="?curid=247934" title="Louis Daguerre">
<text>Louis-Jacques-Mandé Daguerre ( ; ; 18 November 1787 – 10 July 1851) was a French scientist, artist and photographer, recognized for his invention of the eponymous daguerreotype process of photography. He became known as one of the fathers of photography. Though he is most famous for his contributions to photography, he was also an accomplished painter, scenic designer, and a developer of the diorama theatre.

== Biography ==
Louis Daguerre was born in Cormeilles-en-Parisis, Val-d&#x27;Oise. He was apprenticed in architecture, theatre design, and panoramic painting to Pierre Prévost, the first French panorama painter. Exceedingly adept at his skill of theatrical illusion, he became a celebrated designer for the theatre, and later came to invent the diorama, which opened in Paris in July 1822.

In 1829, Daguerre partnered with Nicéphore Niépce, an inventor who had produced the world&#x27;s first heliograph in 1822 and the oldest surviving camera photograph in 1826 or 1827. Niépce died suddenly in 1833, but Daguerre continued experimenting, and evolved the process which would subsequently be known as the daguerreotype. After efforts to interest private investors proved fruitless, Daguerre went public with his invention in 1839. At a joint meeting of the French Academy of Sciences and the Académie des Beaux Arts on 7 January of that year, the invention was announced and described in general terms, but all specific details were withheld. Under assurances of strict confidentiality, Daguerre explained and demonstrated the process only to the Academy&#x27;s perpetual secretary François Arago, who proved to be an invaluable advocate. Members of the Academy and other select individuals were allowed to examine specimens at Daguerre&#x27;s studio. The images were enthusiastically praised as nearly miraculous, and news of the daguerreotype quickly spread. Arrangements were made for Daguerre&#x27;s rights to be acquired by the French Government in exchange for lifetime pensions for himself and Niépce&#x27;s son Isidore; then, on 19 August 1839, the French Government presented the invention as a gift from France &quot;free to the world&quot;, and complete working instructions were published. In 1839, he was elected to the National Academy of Design as an Honorary Academician.

Daguerre died, from a heart attack, on 10 July 1851 in Bry-sur-Marne, from Paris. A monument marks his grave there.

Daguerre&#x27;s name is one of the 72 names inscribed on the Eiffel tower.

== Development of the daguerreotype ==

In the mid-1820s, prior to his association with Daguerre, Niépce used a coating of bitumen of Judea to make the first permanent camera photographs. The bitumen was hardened where it was exposed to light and the unhardened portion was then removed with a solvent. A camera exposure lasting for hours or days was required. Niépce and Daguerre later refined this process, but unacceptably long exposures were still needed.

After the death of Niépce in 1833, Daguerre concentrated his attention on the light-sensitive properties of silver salts, which had previously been demonstrated by Johann Heinrich Schultz and others. For the process which was eventually named the daguerreotype, he exposed a thin silver-plated copper sheet to the vapour given off by iodine crystals, producing a coating of light-sensitive silver iodide on the surface. The plate was then exposed in the camera. Initially, this process, too, required a very long exposure to produce a distinct image, but Daguerre made the crucial discovery that an invisibly faint &quot;latent&quot; image created by a much shorter exposure could be chemically &quot;developed&quot; into a visible image. Upon seeing the image, the contents of which are unknown, Daguerre said, &quot;I have seized the light – I have arrested its flight!&quot;

The latent image on a daguerreotype plate was developed by subjecting it to the vapour given off by mercury heated to 75 °C. The resulting visible image was then &quot;fixed&quot; (made insensitive to further exposure to light) by removing the unaffected silver iodide with concentrated and heated salt water. Later, a solution of the more effective &quot;hypo&quot; (hyposulphite of soda, now known as sodium thiosulfate) was used instead.

The resultant plate produced an exact reproduction of the scene. The image was laterally reversed—as images in mirrors are—unless a mirror or inverting prism was used during exposure to flip the image. To be seen optimally, the image had to be lit at a certain angle and viewed so that the smooth parts of its mirror-like surface, which represented the darkest parts of the image, reflected something dark or dimly lit. The surface was subject to tarnishing by prolonged exposure to the air and was so soft that it could be marred by the slightest friction, so a daguerreotype was almost always sealed under glass before being framed (as was commonly done in France) or mounted in a small folding case (as was normal in the UK and US).

Daguerreotypes were usually portraits; the rarer landscape views and other unusual subjects are now much sought-after by collectors and sell for much higher prices than ordinary portraits. At the time of its introduction, the process required exposures lasting ten minutes or more for brightly sunlit subjects, so portraiture was an impractical ordeal. Samuel Morse was astonished to learn that daguerreotypes of the streets of Paris did not show any people, horses or vehicles, until he realized that due to the long exposure times all moving objects became invisible. Within a few years, exposures had been reduced to as little as a few seconds by the use of additional sensitizing chemicals and &quot;faster&quot; lenses such as Petzval&#x27;s portrait lens, the first mathematically calculated lens.

The daguerreotype was the Polaroid film of its day: it produced a unique image which could only be duplicated by using a camera to photograph the original. Despite this drawback, millions of daguerreotypes were produced. The paper-based calotype process, introduced by Henry Fox Talbot in 1841, allowed the production of an unlimited number of copies by simple contact printing, but it had its own shortcomings—the grain of the paper was obtrusively visible in the image, and the extremely fine detail of which the daguerreotype was capable was not possible. The introduction of the wet collodion process in the early 1850s provided the basis for a negative-positive print-making process not subject to these limitations, although it, like the daguerreotype, was initially used to produce one-of-a-kind images—ambrotypes on glass and tintypes on black-lacquered iron sheets—rather than prints on paper. These new types of images were much less expensive than daguerreotypes, and they were easier to view. By 1860 few photographers were still using Daguerre&#x27;s process.

The same small ornate cases commonly used to house daguerreotypes were also used for images produced by the later and very different ambrotype and tintype processes, and the images originally in them were sometimes later discarded so that they could be used to display photographic paper prints. It is now a very common error for any image in such a case to be described as &quot;a daguerreotype&quot;. A true daguerreotype is always an image on a highly polished silver surface, usually under protective glass. If it is viewed while a brightly lit sheet of white paper is held so as to be seen reflected in its mirror-like metal surface, the daguerreotype image will appear as a relatively faint negative—its dark and light areas reversed—instead of a normal positive. Other types of photographic images are almost never on polished metal and do not exhibit this peculiar characteristic of appearing positive or negative depending on the lighting and reflections.

== Competition with Talbot ==
Unbeknownst to either inventor, Daguerre&#x27;s developmental work in the mid-1830s coincided with photographic experiments being conducted by William Henry Fox Talbot in England. Talbot had succeeded in producing a &quot;sensitive paper&quot; impregnated with silver chloride and capturing small camera images on it in the summer of 1835, though he did not publicly reveal this until January 1839. Talbot was unaware that Daguerre&#x27;s late partner Niépce had obtained similar small camera images on silver-chloride-coated paper nearly twenty years earlier. Niépce could find no way to keep them from darkening all over when exposed to light for viewing and had therefore turned away from silver salts to experiment with other substances such as bitumen. Talbot chemically stabilized his images to withstand subsequent inspection in daylight by treating them with a strong solution of common salt.

When the first reports of the French Academy of Sciences announcement of Daguerre&#x27;s invention reached Talbot, with no details about the exact nature of the images or the process itself, he assumed that methods similar to his own must have been used, and promptly wrote an open letter to the Academy claiming priority of invention. Although it soon became apparent that Daguerre&#x27;s process was very unlike his own, Talbot had been stimulated to resume his long-discontinued photographic experiments. The &quot;developed out&quot; daguerreotype process only required an exposure sufficient to create a very faint or completely invisible latent image which was then chemically developed to full visibility. Talbot&#x27;s earlier &quot;sensitive paper&quot; (now known as &quot;salted paper&quot;) process was a &quot;printed out&quot; process that required prolonged exposure in the camera until the image was fully formed, but his later calotype (also known as talbotype) paper negative process, introduced in 1841, also used latent image development, greatly reducing the exposure needed, and making it competitive with the daguerreotype.

Daguerre&#x27;s agent Miles Berry applied for a British patent under the instruction of Daguerre just days before France declared the invention &quot;free to the world&quot;. The United Kingdom was thereby uniquely denied France&#x27;s free gift, and became the only country where the payment of license fees was required. This had the effect of inhibiting the spread of the process there, to the eventual advantage of competing processes which were subsequently introduced into England. Antoine Claudet was one of the few people legally licensed to make daguerreotypes in Britain.

== Diorama theatres ==

In the spring of 1821, Daguerre partnered with Charles Marie Bouton with the common goal of creating a diorama theatre. Daguerre had expertise in lighting and scenic effects, and Bouton was the more experienced painter. However, Bouton eventually withdrew, and Daguerre acquired sole responsibility of the diorama theatre.

The first diorama theatre was built in the Place du Château d&#x27;Eau (now the Place de la République) in Paris. The first exhibit opened 1822 and showed scenes of the Black Forest, the Inauguration of the Temple of Solomon and the Great Fire of Edinburgh. It showed two tableaux, one by Daguerre and one by Bouton. This would become a pattern. Each exhibition would typically have two tableaux, one each by Daguerre and Bouton. Also, one would be an interior depiction, and the other would be a landscape. Daguerre hoped to create a realistic illusion for an audience, and wanted audiences to be not only entertained, but awe-stricken. The diorama theatres were magnificent in size. A large translucent canvas, measuring around 70 ft wide and 45 ft tall, was painted on both sides. These paintings were vivid and detailed pictures, and were lit from different angles. As the lights changed, the scene would transform. The audience would begin to see the painting on the other side of the screen. The effect was awe-inspiring. &quot;Transforming impressions, mood changes, and movements were produced by a system of shutters and screens that allowed light to be projected- from behind- on alternately separate sections of an image painted on a semi-transparent backdrop&quot;.

Because of their size, the screens had to remain stationary. Since the tableaux were stationary, the auditorium revolved from one scene to another. The auditorium was a cylindrical room and had a single opening in the wall, similar to a proscenium arch, through which the audience could watch a &quot;scene&quot;. Audiences would average around 350, and most would stand, though limited seating was provided. Twenty-one diorama paintings were exhibited in the first eight years. These included &#x27;Trinity Chapel in Canterbury Cathedral&#x27;, &#x27;Chartres Cathedral&#x27;, &#x27;City of Rouen&#x27;, and &#x27;Environs of Paris&#x27; by Bouton; &#x27;Valley of Sarnen&#x27;, &#x27;Harbour of Brest&#x27;, &#x27;Holyroodhouse Chapel&#x27;, and &#x27;Roslin Chapel&#x27; by Daguerre.

The Roslin Chapel was known for a few legends involving an unconsuming fire. The legend goes that the Chapel has appeared to be in flames just before a high-status death, but has later shown no damage from any such fire. This chapel was also known for being unique in its architectural beauty. Daguerre was aware of both of these aspects of Roslin Chapel, and this made it a perfect subject for his diorama painting. The legends connected with the chapel would be sure to attract a large audience. Interior of Roslin Chapel in Paris opened 24 September 1824 and closed February 1825. The scene depicted light coming in through a door and a window. Foliage shadows could be seen at the window, and the way the light&#x27;s rays shone through the leaves was breathtaking and seemed to &quot;go beyond the power of painting&quot; (Maggi). Then the light faded on the scene as if a cloud was passing over the sun. The Times dedicated an article to the exhibition, calling it &quot;perfectly magical&quot;.

The dioramas prospered, earning 200,000 francs a year, a very high profit for the 1830s period. The surging demand led to new diorama theatres opening in London and Berlin. However, in 8 March 1839, a fire broke out in the theatre in Paris. Daguerre urged the firefighters to stop the blaze on the fifth floor, where all his daguerreotype specimens, notes, and equipment were kept. He was more interested in the development of daguerreotypes, and later in August 1839, his daguerreotype specimens were debuted. Later in the 1840s, along with increasing attention to motion photography and cinema, people lost interest in dioramas. The fire, along with the waning demand of dioramas caused a decline in the industry.

== Portraits of and works by Louis Daguerre ==
== See also ==
*John Herschel
*List of people considered father or mother of a field
*Palladiotype
*Photographic processes
*Platinotype
*William Willis
*Daguerreotype

== References ==
== Sources ==
* Carl Edwin Lindgren. &quot;Teaching Photography in the Indian School. Photo Trade Directory: 1991.&quot; India International Photographic Council. Edited: N. Sundarraj and K. Ponnuswamy. VII IIPC-SIPATA Intl. Workshop and Conference on Photography – Madras, p. 9.
* R. Colson (ed.), &quot;Mémoires originaux des créateurs de la photographie. Nicéphore Niepce, Daguerre, Bayard, Talbot, Niepce de Saint-Victor&quot;, Poitevin, Paris 1898
* Helmut and Alison Gernsheim, &quot;L.J.M. Daguerre. The History of the Diorama and the Daguerreotype&quot;, London 1956 (revised edition 1968) 
* Beaumont Newhall, &quot;An Historical and Descriptive Account of the Various Processes of the Daguerreotype and the Diorama by Daguerre&quot;, New York, 1971 
* Hans Rooseboom, &quot;What&#x27;s wrong with Daguerre? Reconsidering old and new views on the invention of photography&quot;, Nescio, Amsterdam, 2010 (www.nescioprivatepress.blogspot.com)
* Daniel, Malcolm. &quot;Daguerre (1787–1851) and the Invention of Photography&quot;. The Metropolitan Museum of Art, 2011. Web. 17 January 2012.
* Gale, Thomas. &quot;Louis Jacques Mande Daguerre&quot;. BookRags, Inc., 2012. Web. 14 April 2012.
* Kahane, Henry. &quot;Comparative Literature Studies&quot;. 3rd ed. Vol. 12. Penn State UP, 1975. Print.
* Maggi, Angelo. &quot;Roslin Chapel in Gandy&#x27;s Sketchbook and Daguerre&#x27;s Diorama&quot;. &quot;Architectural History&quot;. 1991 ed. Vol. 42. SAHGB Publications Limited, 1991. Print.
* Szalczer, Eszter. &quot;Nature&#x27;s Dream Play: Modes of Vision and August Strindberg&#x27;s Re-Definition Of the Theatre&quot;. &quot;Theatre Journal&quot;. 1st ed. Vol. 53. Johns Hopkins UP, 2001. Print.
* &quot;Classics of Science: The Daguerreotype&quot;. &quot;The Science News-Letter&quot;. 374th ed. Vol. 13. Society For Science &amp; the Public, 1928. Print.
* Watson, Bruce, &quot;Light: A Radiant History from Creation to the Quantum Age&quot;, (London and NY: Bloomsbury, 2016). Print.
* Wilkinson, Lynn R. &quot;Le Cousin Pons and the Invention of Ideology&quot;. &quot;PMLA&quot;. 2nd ed. Vol. 107. Modern Language Association, 1992. Print.
* Wood, R. Derek. &quot;The Diorama in Great Britain in the 1820s&quot;. &quot;Annals of Science&quot;, Sept 1997, Vol 54, No. 5, pp. 489–506 (Taylor &amp; Francis Group). Web. (Midley History of early Photography) 14 April 2012

== External links ==
* Daguerre (1787–1851) and the Invention of Photography from the Metropolitan Museum of Art
*DIORAMAS
* Louis Daguerre and Bry-sur-Marne
* Louis Daguerre Biography
* Louis Daguerre (1787–1851) from World Wide Art Resources.
* Daguerre, Louis Jacques Mande by Robert Leggat.
* Daguerre and the daguerreotype An array of source texts from the Daguerreian Society web site
* Daguerre&#x27;s Boulevard du Temple photograph – Discussion on daguerreotype&#x27;s making and subsequent history.
* Daguerre Memorial in Washington D.C.
* Louis Daguerre Encyclopædia Britannica
* Daguerre in a historical context
* Daguerreobase – Collective cataloging tool for daguerreotypes
* Official Website of Bry-Sur-Marne&#x27;s Museum – Enhancement of the museum&#x27;s collections, some are related with the work of Louis Daguerre.
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q131405" start="0" end="28" title="Louis Daguerre" label="Louis-Jacques-Mandé Daguerre"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="74" end="80" title="France" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q901" start="81" end="90" title="scientist" label="scientist"/>
<link wikidata="Q483501" start="92" end="98" title="artist" label="artist"/>
<link wikidata="Q33231" start="103" end="115" title="photographer" label="photographer"/>
<link wikidata="Q179744" start="163" end="176" title="daguerreotype" label="daguerreotype"/>
<link wikidata="Q11633" start="188" end="199" title="photography" label="photography"/>
<link wikidata="Q11629" start="346" end="353" title="painter" label="painter"/>
<link wikidata="Q987061" start="355" end="370" title="scenic design" label="scenic designer"/>
<link wikidata="Q207697" start="395" end="402" title="diorama" label="diorama"/>
<link wikidata="Q841957" start="456" end="477" title="Cormeilles-en-Parisis" label="Cormeilles-en-Parisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2026188" start="552" end="570" title="panoramic painting" label="panoramic painting"/>
<link wikidata="Q1987835" start="574" end="588" title="Pierre Prévost (painter)" label="Pierre Prévost"/>
<link wikidata="Q182593" start="670" end="678" title="illusion" label="illusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q207697" start="758" end="765" title="diorama" label="diorama"/>
<link wikidata="Q188342" start="837" end="853" title="Nicéphore Niépce" label="Nicéphore Niépce"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414342" start="907" end="917" title="Heliography" label="heliograph"/>
<link wikidata="Q616159" start="934" end="968" title="View from the Window at Le Gras" label="oldest surviving camera photograph"/>
<link wikidata="Q179744" start="1119" end="1132" title="daguerreotype" label="daguerreotype"/>
<link wikidata="Q188771" start="1271" end="1297" title="French Academy of Sciences" label="French Academy of Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q337531" start="1306" end="1329" title="Académie des Beaux Arts" label="Académie des Beaux Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q154353" start="1596" end="1610" title="François Arago" label="François Arago"/>
<link wikidata="Q502218" start="2247" end="2273" title="National Academy of Design" label="National Academy of Design"/>
<link wikidata="Q369954" start="2358" end="2371" title="Bry-sur-Marne" label="Bry-sur-Marne"/>
<link wikidata="Q162873" start="2455" end="2493" title="The 72 names on the Eiffel Tower" label="72 names inscribed on the Eiffel tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q188342" start="2594" end="2600" title="Joseph Nicéphore Niépce" label="Niépce"/>
<link wikidata="Q4919163" start="2619" end="2635" title="bitumen of Judea" label="bitumen of Judea"/>
<link wikidata="Q76698" start="3121" end="3144" title="Johann Heinrich Schultz" label="Johann Heinrich Schultz"/>
<link wikidata="Q179744" start="3204" end="3217" title="daguerreotype" label="daguerreotype"/>
<link wikidata="Q1103" start="3291" end="3297" title="iodine" label="iodine"/>
<link wikidata="Q19052" start="3347" end="3360" title="silver iodide" label="silver iodide"/>
<link wikidata="Q925" start="3936" end="3943" title="mercury (element)" label="mercury"/>
<link wikidata="Q496805" start="4134" end="4144" title="saline water" label="salt water"/>
<link wikidata="Q339866" start="4239" end="4257" title="sodium thiosulfate" label="sodium thiosulfate"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4430" end="4435" title="prism (optics)#Reflective prisms" label="prism"/>
<link wikidata="Q134307" start="5043" end="5051" title="portrait" label="portrait"/>
<link wikidata="Q75698" start="5368" end="5380" title="Samuel Morse" label="Samuel Morse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1082855" start="5528" end="5541" title="long-exposure photography" label="long exposure"/>
<link wikidata="Q768575" start="5732" end="5738" title="lens (optics)" label="lenses"/>
<link wikidata="Q520053" start="5747" end="5754" title="Petzval" label="Petzval"/>
<link wikidata="Q313702" start="5846" end="5859" title="Instant film" label="Polaroid film"/>
<link wikidata="Q372431" start="6057" end="6065" title="calotype" label="calotype"/>
<link wikidata="Q299565" start="6089" end="6105" title="Henry Fox Talbot" label="Henry Fox Talbot"/>
<link wikidata="Q372487" start="6181" end="6197" title="contact printing" label="contact printing"/>
<link wikidata="Q904614" start="6403" end="6424" title="Collodion process" label="wet collodion process"/>
<link wikidata="Q459832" start="6630" end="6639" title="ambrotype" label="ambrotype"/>
<link wikidata="Q913381" start="6654" end="6661" title="tintype" label="tintype"/>
<link wikidata="Q459832" start="7027" end="7036" title="ambrotype" label="ambrotype"/>
<link wikidata="Q913381" start="7041" end="7048" title="tintype" label="tintype"/>
<link wikidata="Q595597" start="7591" end="7599" title="negative (photography)" label="negative"/>
<link wikidata="Q299565" start="8033" end="8057" title="Henry Fox Talbot" label="William Henry Fox Talbot"/>
<link wikidata="Q216918" start="8151" end="8166" title="silver chloride" label="silver chloride"/>
<link wikidata="Q355645" start="9436" end="9448" title="latent image" label="latent image"/>
<link wikidata="Q172839" start="9475" end="9484" title="photographic processing" label="developed"/>
<link wikidata="Q372431" start="9736" end="9744" title="calotype" label="calotype"/>
<link wikidata="Q2853823" start="10428" end="10443" title="Antoine François Jean Claudet" label="Antoine Claudet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065447" start="10594" end="10614" title="Charles Marie Bouton" label="Charles Marie Bouton"/>
<link wikidata="Q207697" start="10650" end="10657" title="diorama" label="diorama"/>
<link wikidata="Q175055" start="10951" end="10973" title="Place de la République" label="Place de la République"/>
<link wikidata="Q4204" start="11040" end="11052" title="Black Forest" label="Black Forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q223644" start="11078" end="11095" title="Temple Of Solomon" label="Temple of Solomon"/>
<link wikidata="Q17005732" start="11104" end="11127" title="Great Fire of Edinburgh" label="Great Fire of Edinburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q13846427" start="12866" end="12886" title="The Ruins of Holyrood Chapel" label="Holyroodhouse Chapel"/>
<link wikidata="Q49642" start="12942" end="12955" title="Rosslyn Chapel" label="Roslin Chapel"/>
<link wikidata="Q11424" start="14507" end="14525" title="motion photography" label="motion photography"/>
<link wikidata="Q590870" start="14530" end="14536" title="Cinematography" label="cinema"/>
<link wikidata="Q14278" start="14721" end="14734" title="John Herschel" label="John Herschel"/>
<link wikidata="Q4120059" start="14736" end="14789" title="List of people considered father or mother of a field" label="List of people considered father or mother of a field"/>
<link wikidata="Q2098669" start="14791" end="14803" title="Palladiotype" label="Palladiotype"/>
<link wikidata="Q830909" start="14805" end="14827" title="Photographic processes" label="Photographic processes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2098669" start="14829" end="14840" title="Platinotype" label="Platinotype"/>
<link wikidata="Q8020412" start="14842" end="14856" title="William Willis (inventor)" label="William Willis"/>
<link wikidata="Q179744" start="14858" end="14871" title="Daguerreotype" label="Daguerreotype"/>
<link wikidata="Q160236" start="17359" end="17385" title="Metropolitan Museum of Art" label="Metropolitan Museum of Art"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="247935" wikidata="Q598572" url="?curid=247935" title="Aircraft noise pollution">
<text>Aircraft [[noise pollution]] refers to noise produced by aircraft in flight that has been associated with several negative stress-mediated health effects, from sleep disorders to cardiovascular disorders. Governments have enacted extensive controls that apply to aircraft designers, manufacturers, and operators, resulting in improved procedures and cuts in pollution.

==Mechanisms of sound pollution==
Aircraft noise is noise pollution produced by an aircraft or its components, whether on the ground while parked such as auxiliary power units, while taxiing, on run-up from propeller and jet exhaust, during takeoff, underneath and lateral to departure and arrival paths, over-flying while en route, or during landing. A moving aircraft including the jet engine or propeller causes compression and rarefaction of the air, producing motion of air molecules. This movement propagates through the air as pressure waves. If these pressure waves are strong enough and within the audible frequency spectrum, a sensation of hearing is produced. Different aircraft types have different noise levels and frequencies. The noise originates from three main sources:

* Engine and other mechanical noise—rotation of the engine parts, most noticeable when fan blades reach supersonic speeds.
* Aerodynamic noise—from the airflow around the surfaces of the aircraft, especially when flying low at high speeds.
* Noise from aircraft systems—cockpit, cabin pressurization, conditioning systems, and Auxiliary Power units.

=== Engine and other mechanical noise ===

Much of the noise in propeller aircraft comes equally from the propellers and aerodynamics. Helicopter noise is aerodynamically induced noise from the main and tail rotors and mechanically induced noise from the main gearbox and various transmission chains. The mechanical sources produce narrow band high intensity peaks relating to the rotational speed and movement of the moving parts. In computer modelling terms, noise from a moving aircraft can be treated as a line source.

Aircraft gas turbine engines (jet engines) are responsible for much of the aircraft noise during takeoff and climb, such as the &quot;buzzsaw noise&quot; generated when the tips of the fan blades reach supersonic speeds. However, with advances in noise reduction technologies—the airframe is typically more noisy during landing.

The majority of engine noise heard is due to jet noise—although high bypass-ratio turbofans do have considerable fan noise. The high velocity jet leaving the back of the engine has an inherent shear layer instability (if not thick enough) and rolls up into ring vortices. This later breaks down into turbulence. The SPL associated with engine noise is proportional to the jet speed (to a high power). Therefore, even modest reductions in exhaust velocity will produce a large reduction in jet noise.

Engines are the main source of aircraft noise. The geared Pratt &amp; Whitney PW1000G helped reduce the noise levels of the Bombardier CSeries, Mitsubishi MRJ and Embraer E-Jet E2 crossover narrowbody aircraft: the gearbox allows the fan to spin at an optimal speed, which is one third the speed of the LP turbine, for slower fan tip speeds. It has a 75% smaller noise footprint than current equivalents. The PowerJet SaM146 in the Sukhoi Superjet 100 features 3D aerodynamic fan blades and a nacelle with a long mixed duct flow nozzle to reduce noise.

===Aerodynamic noise===
Aerodynamic noise arises from the airflow around the aircraft fuselage and control surfaces. This type of noise increases with aircraft speed and also at low altitudes due to the density of the air. Jet-powered aircraft create intense noise from aerodynamics. Low-flying, high-speed military aircraft produce especially loud aerodynamic noise.

The shape of the nose, windshield or canopy of an aircraft affects the sound produced. Much of the noise of a propeller aircraft is of aerodynamic origin due to the flow of air around the blades. The helicopter main and tail rotors also give rise to aerodynamic noise. This type of aerodynamic noise is mostly low frequency determined by the rotor speed.

Typically noise is generated when flow passes an object on the aircraft, for example, the wings or landing gear. There are broadly two main types of airframe noise:

* Bluff Body Noise – the alternating vortex shedding from either side of a bluff body, creates low-pressure regions (at the core of the shed vortices) which manifest themselves as pressure waves (or sound). The separated flow around the bluff body is quite unstable, and the flow &quot;rolls up&quot; into ring vortices—which later break down into turbulence.
* Edge Noise – when turbulent flow passes the end of an object or gaps in a structure (high lift device clearance gaps) the associated fluctuations in pressure are heard as the sound propagates from the edge of the object (radially downwards).

===Noise from aircraft systems===
Cockpit and cabin pressurization and conditioning systems are often a major contributor within cabins of both civilian and military aircraft. However, one of the most significant sources of cabin noise from commercial jet aircraft, other than the engines, is the Auxiliary Power Unit (APU), an on‑board generator used in aircraft to start the main engines, usually with compressed air, and to provide electrical power while the aircraft is on the ground. Other internal aircraft systems can also contribute, such as specialized electronic equipment in some military aircraft.

==Health effects==

Aircraft engines are the major source of noise and can exceed 140 decibels (dB) during takeoff. While airborne, the main sources of noise are the engines and the high speed turbulence over the fuselage.

There are health consequences of elevated sound levels. Elevated workplace or other noise can cause hearing impairment, hypertension, ischemic heart disease, annoyance, sleep disturbance, and decreased school performance. Although some hearing loss occurs naturally with age, in many developed nations the impact of noise is sufficient to impair hearing over the course of a lifetime. Elevated noise levels can create stress, increase workplace accident rates, and stimulate aggression and other anti-social behaviors. Airport noise has been linked to high blood pressure.
Aircraft noise increases risks of heart attacks.

===German environmental study of aircraft noise===
A large-scale statistical analysis of the health effects of aircraft noise was undertaken in the late 2000s by Bernhard Greiser for the Umweltbundesamt, Germany&#x27;s central environmental office. The health data of over one million residents around the Cologne airport were analysed for health effects correlating with aircraft noise. The results were then corrected for other noise influences in the residential areas, and for socioeconomic factors, to reduce possible skewing of the data.

The German study concluded that aircraft noise clearly and significantly impairs health. For example, a day-time average sound pressure level of 60 decibels increased coronary heart disease by 61% in men and 80% in women. As another indicator, a night-time average sound pressure level of 55 decibels increased the risk of heart attacks by 66% in men and 139% in women. Statistically significant health effects did however start as early as from an average sound pressure level of 40 decibels.

===FAA advice on aircraft noise===
The Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) regulates the maximum noise level that individual civil aircraft can emit through requiring aircraft to meet certain noise certification standards. These standards designate changes in maximum noise level requirements by &quot;stage&quot; designation. The U.S. noise standards are defined in the Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) Title 14 Part 36 – Noise Standards: Aircraft Type and Airworthiness Certification (14 CFR Part 36). The FAA says that a maximum day-night average sound level of 65 dB is incompatible with residential communities. Communities in affected areas may be eligible for mitigation such as soundproofing.

===Cabin noise effects and measurements===
Aircraft noise also affects people within the aircraft: crew and passengers. Cabin noise can be studied to address the occupational exposure and the health and safety of pilots and flight attendants. In 1998, 64 commercial airline pilots were surveyed regarding hearing loss and tinnitus. In 1999, the NIOSH conducted several noise surveys and health hazard evaluations, and found noise levels exceeding its recommended exposure limit of 85 A-weighted decibels as an 8-hr TWA. In 2006, the noise levels inside an Airbus A321 during cruise have been reported as approximately 78 dB(A) and during taxi when the aircraft engines are producing minimal thrust, noise levels in the cabin have been recorded at 65 dB(A). In 2008, a study of Swedish airlines cabin crews found average sound levels between 78 and 84 dB(A) with maximum A-weighted exposure of 114 dB but found no major hearing threshold shifts. In 2018, a study of sound levels measured on 200 flights representing six aircraft groups found media noise level of 83.5 db(A) with levels reaching 110 dB(A) on certain flights, but only 4.5% exceeded the NIOSH recommended 8-hr TWA of 85 dB(A).

===Cognitive effects===

Simulated aircraft noise at 65 dB(A) has been shown to negatively affect individuals’ memory and recall of auditory information. In one study comparing the effect of aircraft noise to the effect of alcohol on cognitive performance, it was found that simulated aircraft noise at 65 dB(A) had the same effect on individuals’ ability to recall auditory information as being intoxicated with a Blood Alcohol Concentration (BAC) level of at 0.10. A BAC of 0.10 is double the legal limit required to operate a motor vehicle in many developed countries such as Australia.

==Noise mitigation programs==

In the United States, since aviation noise became a public issue in the late 1960s, governments have enacted legislative controls. Aircraft designers, manufacturers, and operators have developed quieter aircraft and better operating procedures. Modern high-bypass turbofan engines, for example, are notably more quiet than the turbojets and low-bypass turbofans of the 1960s. FAA Aircraft Certification achieved noise reductions classified as &quot;Stage 3&quot; aircraft; which has been upgraded to &quot;Stage 4&quot; noise certification resulting in quieter aircraft. This has resulted in lower noise exposures in spite of increased traffic growth and popularity.

In the 1980s, the U.S. Congress authorized the FAA to devise programs to insulate homes near airports. While this does not address the external noise, the program has been effective for residential interiors. Some of the airports where the technology was first applied were San Francisco International Airport and San Jose International Airport in California. A computer model is used which simulates the effects of aircraft noise upon building structures. Variations of aircraft type, flight patterns and local meteorology can be studied. Then, the benefits of building retrofit strategies such as roof upgrading, window glazing improvement, fireplace baffling, caulking construction seams can be evaluated.

===Regulations===
Noise stages are defined in the US Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) Title 14 Part 36.

For civil aircraft, the US FAA Stage 1 is the loudest and Stage 4 is the quietest.
Stage 3 was required for all large jet and turboprop aircraft at US civilian airports from the year 2000,
and at least Stage 2 for under MTOW jets until December 31, 2015.
The previous was Stage 4 for large airplanes, equivalent to the ICAO Annex 16, Volume 1 Chapter 4 standards, while the more stringent Chapter 14 became effective July 14, 2014, and was adopted by the FAA as Stage 5 from January 14, 2016, effective for new type certificates from December 31, 2017, or December 31, 2020 depending on weight.
The US allows both the louder Stage 1 and quiet Stage 2 helicopters.
The quietest Stage 3 helicopter noise standard became effective on May 5, 2014, and are consistent with ICAO Chapter 8 and Chapter 11.

==== Night flying restrictions ====
At Heathrow, Gatwick and Stansted airports in London, UK and Frankfurt Airport in Germany, night flying restrictions apply to reduce noise exposure at night.

=== Technological advances ===

==== Engine design ====
Modern high bypass turbofans are not only more fuel efficient, but also much quieter than older turbojet and low-bypass turbofan engines. On newer engines noise-reducing chevrons further reduce the engine&#x27;s noise, while on older engines hush kits are used to help mitigate their excessive noise.

==== Engine location ====
The ability to reduce noise may be limited if engines remain below aircraft&#x27;s wings. NASA expects a cumulative 20–30 dB below Stage 4 limits by 2026–2031, but keeping aircraft noise within airport boundaries requires at least a 40–50 dB reduction. Landing gear, wing slats and wing flaps also produce noise and may have to be shielded from the ground with new configurations. NASA found that over-wing and mid-fuselage nacelles could reduce noise by 30–40 dB to even 40–50 dB for hybrid wing bodies, which may be essential for open rotors.

By 2020, helicopter technologies in development plus new procedures could reduce noise levels by 10 dB and noise footprints by 50%, but more advances are needed to preserve or expand heliports. Package delivery UAS will need to characterize their noise, establish limits and reduce their impact.

==== Satellite-based navigation systems ====
Usage of satellite-based navigation systems can contribute to noise relief, trials in 2013–14 found, though results were not always beneficial due to concentrating flight paths. Changing flight angles and flight paths brought some changes in noise relief for some local people.

==See also==

*Aviation taxation and subsidies
*Electric airplane
*Farley v Skinner
*Hush kit
*Helicopter noise reduction
*Jet noise
*Noise barrier
*Rotor-stator interaction
*Silent Aircraft Initiative
*Toroidal propeller
*Train noise
*XF-84H Thunderscreech, the loudest aircraft ever built.
General:
*Health effects from noise
*Noise pollution
*Noise regulation
*Aviation and the environment

==References==

*&quot;U.S. Noise Control Act of 1972&quot; United States Code Citation: 42 U.S.C. 4901 to 4918
*S. Rosen and P. Olin, &quot;Hearing loss and coronary heart disease, Archives of Otolaryngology&quot;, 82:236 (1965)

==External links==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q598572" start="0" end="28" title="Aircraft noise pollution" label="Aircraft [[noise pollution]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q177190" start="160" end="174" title="sleep disorder" label="sleep disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q389735" start="179" end="202" title="cardiovascular disorder" label="cardiovascular disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q3798668" start="263" end="280" title="aircraft designer" label="aircraft designer"/>
<link wikidata="Q936518" start="283" end="296" title="Aerospace manufacturer" label="manufacturers"/>
<link wikidata="Q92251" start="422" end="437" title="noise pollution" label="noise pollution"/>
<link wikidata="Q11436" start="453" end="461" title="aircraft" label="aircraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q908333" start="524" end="544" title="auxiliary power unit" label="auxiliary power unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1421250" start="553" end="560" title="taxiing" label="taxiing"/>
<link wikidata="Q854248" start="611" end="618" title="takeoff" label="takeoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q178777" start="754" end="764" title="jet engine" label="jet engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q922654" start="768" end="777" title="Propeller (aircraft)" label="propeller"/>
<link wikidata="Q2712821" start="785" end="796" title="Compression (physics)" label="compression"/>
<link wikidata="Q7294544" start="801" end="812" title="rarefaction" label="rarefaction"/>
<link wikidata="Q626707" start="904" end="917" title="pressure wave" label="pressure wave"/>
<link wikidata="Q11652" start="985" end="994" title="frequency" label="frequency"/>
<link wikidata="Q221337" start="1262" end="1278" title="supersonic speed" label="supersonic speed"/>
<link wikidata="Q4698686" start="1310" end="1317" title="airflow" label="airflow"/>
<link wikidata="Q194156" start="1428" end="1435" title="cockpit" label="cockpit"/>
<link wikidata="Q2389519" start="1437" end="1457" title="cabin pressurization" label="cabin pressurization"/>
<link wikidata="Q8424" start="1630" end="1642" title="aerodynamics" label="aerodynamics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1343028" start="1703" end="1707" title="Helicopter rotor" label="main"/>
<link wikidata="Q795064" start="1712" end="1722" title="tail rotor" label="tail rotor"/>
<link wikidata="Q925667" start="1944" end="1958" title="computer model" label="computer model"/>
<link wikidata="Q6553335" start="2019" end="2030" title="line source" label="line source"/>
<link wikidata="Q178777" start="2063" end="2073" title="jet engine" label="jet engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q654051" start="2445" end="2453" title="turbofan" label="turbofan"/>
<link wikidata="Q940491" start="2922" end="2949" title="Pratt &amp;amp; Whitney PW1000G" label="Pratt &amp;amp; Whitney PW1000G"/>
<link wikidata="Q426074" start="2988" end="3006" title="Bombardier CSeries" label="Bombardier CSeries"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153846" start="3008" end="3022" title="Mitsubishi MRJ" label="Mitsubishi MRJ"/>
<link wikidata="Q15266066" start="3027" end="3043" title="Embraer E-Jet E2" label="Embraer E-Jet E2"/>
<link wikidata="Q842262" start="3054" end="3073" title="narrowbody aircraft" label="narrowbody aircraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q1078034" start="3273" end="3288" title="PowerJet SaM146" label="PowerJet SaM146"/>
<link wikidata="Q486066" start="3296" end="3315" title="Sukhoi Superjet 100" label="Sukhoi Superjet 100"/>
<link wikidata="Q8424" start="3328" end="3339" title="aerodynamic" label="aerodynamic"/>
<link wikidata="Q27070220" start="3357" end="3364" title="nacelle" label="nacelle"/>
<link wikidata="Q5420184" start="3377" end="3392" title="Exhaust mixer" label="mixed duct flow"/>
<link wikidata="Q1110579" start="3504" end="3512" title="fuselage" label="fuselage"/>
<link wikidata="Q8424" start="3688" end="3699" title="aerodynamic" label="aerodynamic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736751" start="3824" end="3830" title="canopy (aircraft)" label="canopy"/>
<link wikidata="Q34486" start="3987" end="3997" title="helicopter" label="helicopter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1778961" start="4384" end="4394" title="bluff body" label="bluff body"/>
<link wikidata="Q194156" start="4948" end="4955" title="Cockpit" label="Cockpit"/>
<link wikidata="Q902751" start="4966" end="4980" title="pressurization" label="pressurization"/>
<link wikidata="Q908333" start="5211" end="5231" title="Auxiliary Power Unit" label="Auxiliary Power Unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q131502" start="5251" end="5260" title="Electric generator" label="generator"/>
<link wikidata="Q143746" start="5318" end="5332" title="compressed air" label="compressed air"/>
<link wikidata="Q2478325" start="5586" end="5591" title="Environmental noise" label="noise"/>
<link wikidata="Q12147" start="5759" end="5765" title="health" label="health"/>
<link wikidata="Q2230528" start="5791" end="5802" title="Sound exposure level" label="sound level"/>
<link wikidata="Q179448" start="5833" end="5838" title="noise" label="noise"/>
<link wikidata="Q16035842" start="5849" end="5867" title="hearing impairment" label="hearing impairment"/>
<link wikidata="Q41861" start="5869" end="5881" title="hypertension" label="hypertension"/>
<link wikidata="Q844935" start="5883" end="5905" title="ischemic heart disease" label="ischemic heart disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q256401" start="5907" end="5916" title="annoyance" label="annoyance"/>
<link wikidata="Q177190" start="5918" end="5935" title="sleep disturbance" label="sleep disturbance"/>
<link wikidata="Q12152" start="6356" end="6368" title="heart attack" label="heart attack"/>
<link wikidata="Q2491722" start="6559" end="6574" title="Umweltbundesamt" label="Umweltbundesamt"/>
<link wikidata="Q5329" start="7065" end="7073" title="decibels" label="decibels"/>
<link wikidata="Q5329" start="7209" end="7217" title="decibels" label="decibels"/>
<link wikidata="Q5329" start="7401" end="7409" title="decibels" label="decibels"/>
<link wikidata="Q335357" start="7484" end="7487" title="Federal Aviation Administration" label="FAA"/>
<link wikidata="Q17072363" start="8279" end="8300" title="occupational exposure" label="occupational exposure"/>
<link wikidata="Q16035842" start="8422" end="8434" title="hearing loss" label="hearing loss"/>
<link wikidata="Q192309" start="8439" end="8447" title="tinnitus" label="tinnitus"/>
<link wikidata="Q60346" start="8462" end="8467" title="National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health" label="NIOSH"/>
<link wikidata="Q16002801" start="8541" end="8553" title="Ambient noise level" label="noise levels"/>
<link wikidata="Q4117845" start="8580" end="8588" title="noise exposure" label="exposure"/>
<link wikidata="Q13583781" start="8601" end="8611" title="A-weighted" label="A-weighted"/>
<link wikidata="Q4376583" start="8632" end="8635" title="Time-weighted average (PEL)" label="TWA"/>
<link wikidata="Q654051" start="10195" end="10203" title="turbofan" label="turbofan"/>
<link wikidata="Q723916" start="10258" end="10266" title="turbojet" label="turbojet"/>
<link wikidata="Q11268" start="10617" end="10630" title="U.S. Congress" label="U.S. Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q335357" start="10646" end="10649" title="FAA" label="FAA"/>
<link wikidata="Q8688" start="10873" end="10908" title="San Francisco International Airport" label="San Francisco International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1257392" start="10913" end="10943" title="San Jose International Airport" label="San Jose International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q25261" start="11111" end="11122" title="meteorology" label="meteorology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1037104" start="11221" end="11228" title="insulated glazing" label="glazing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1411795" start="11262" end="11270" title="caulking" label="caulking"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065972" start="11362" end="11389" title="Code of Federal Regulations" label="Code of Federal Regulations"/>
<link wikidata="Q11436" start="11425" end="11433" title="aircraft" label="aircraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q335357" start="11442" end="11445" title="FAA" label="FAA"/>
<link wikidata="Q938476" start="11635" end="11639" title="maximum takeoff weight" label="MTOW"/>
<link wikidata="Q125761" start="11734" end="11738" title="International Civil Aviation Organization" label="ICAO"/>
<link wikidata="Q1418690" start="11926" end="11942" title="type certificate" label="type certificate"/>
<link wikidata="Q34486" start="12066" end="12076" title="helicopter" label="helicopter"/>
<link wikidata="Q8691" start="12254" end="12262" title="Heathrow Airport" label="Heathrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q8703" start="12264" end="12271" title="Gatwick Airport" label="Gatwick"/>
<link wikidata="Q8709" start="12276" end="12284" title="Stansted Airport" label="Stansted"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="12297" end="12303" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q46033" start="12312" end="12329" title="Frankfurt Airport" label="Frankfurt Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q353128" start="12342" end="12367" title="night flying restrictions" label="night flying restrictions"/>
<link wikidata="Q1973494" start="12473" end="12484" title="high bypass" label="high bypass"/>
<link wikidata="Q5507145" start="12513" end="12527" title="fuel economy in aircraft" label="fuel efficient"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12621" end="12644" title="Turbofan#Noise" label="noise-reducing chevrons"/>
<link wikidata="Q1476975" start="12708" end="12716" title="hush kit" label="hush kit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1248784" start="12988" end="12995" title="airport" label="airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q263421" start="13047" end="13059" title="Landing gear" label="Landing gear"/>
<link wikidata="Q2534008" start="13061" end="13070" title="wing slat" label="wing slat"/>
<link wikidata="Q18407944" start="13076" end="13085" title="wing flap" label="wing flap"/>
<link wikidata="Q883757" start="13279" end="13297" title="hybrid wing body" label="hybrid wing bodies"/>
<link wikidata="Q34486" start="13349" end="13359" title="helicopter" label="helicopter"/>
<link wikidata="Q502074" start="13523" end="13531" title="heliport" label="heliport"/>
<link wikidata="Q484000" start="13551" end="13554" title="Unmanned aircraft system" label="UAS"/>
<link wikidata="Q2136893" start="13976" end="14007" title="Aviation taxation and subsidies" label="Aviation taxation and subsidies"/>
<link wikidata="Q519302" start="14009" end="14026" title="Electric airplane" label="Electric airplane"/>
<link wikidata="Q5435444" start="14028" end="14044" title="Farley v Skinner" label="Farley v Skinner"/>
<link wikidata="Q1476975" start="14046" end="14054" title="Hush kit" label="Hush kit"/>
<link wikidata="Q5705218" start="14056" end="14082" title="Helicopter noise reduction" label="Helicopter noise reduction"/>
<link wikidata="Q6188942" start="14084" end="14093" title="Jet noise" label="Jet noise"/>
<link wikidata="Q601510" start="14095" end="14108" title="Noise barrier" label="Noise barrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q7370612" start="14110" end="14134" title="Rotor-stator interaction" label="Rotor-stator interaction"/>
<link wikidata="Q7514529" start="14136" end="14162" title="Silent Aircraft Initiative" label="Silent Aircraft Initiative"/>
<link wikidata="Q118109790" start="14164" end="14182" title="Toroidal propeller" label="Toroidal propeller"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414021" start="14184" end="14195" title="Train noise" label="Train noise"/>
<link wikidata="Q1569239" start="14197" end="14218" title="XF-84H Thunderscreech" label="XF-84H Thunderscreech"/>
<link wikidata="Q4117845" start="14263" end="14288" title="Health effects from noise" label="Health effects from noise"/>
<link wikidata="Q92251" start="14290" end="14305" title="Noise pollution" label="Noise pollution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1538155" start="14307" end="14323" title="Noise regulation" label="Noise regulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q295013" start="14325" end="14353" title="Aviation and the environment" label="Aviation and the environment"/>
<link wikidata="Q188889" start="14429" end="14433" title="Code" label="Code"/>
<link wikidata="Q16035842" start="14496" end="14508" title="Hearing loss" label="Hearing loss"/>
<link wikidata="Q844935" start="14513" end="14535" title="coronary heart disease" label="coronary heart disease"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="247939" wikidata="Q352157" url="?curid=247939" title="Den Briel">
<text>Briel may refer to:

* Briel (parish), a parish in the municipality of Buggenhout and the sub-municipality of Baasrode in the town Dendermonde in Flanders
* Brielle, a town in the Netherlands</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3068474" start="23" end="37" title="Briel (parish)" label="Briel (parish)"/>
<link wikidata="Q33426218" start="157" end="164" title="Brielle" label="Brielle"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="247945" wikidata="Q8528" url="?curid=247945" title="Rems-Murr-Kreis">
<text>Rems-Murr is a (district) in the middle of Baden-Württemberg, Germany. Neighboring districts are (from north clockwise) Heilbronn, Schwäbisch Hall, Ostalbkreis, Göppingen, Esslingen, the district-free city Stuttgart and the district Ludwigsburg.

==History==
The district was created in 1973 when Waiblingen was merged with most of the Backnang district and a few municipalities from the district Schwäbisch Gmünd.

==Geography==
The largest part of the district is located in the Swabian-Franconian Forest (&quot;Schwäbisch-Fränkischer Wald&quot;), of which the Mainhardt Forest forms a part. The two rivers Rems and Murr gave the district its name.

==Coat of arms==
The coat of arms shows a deer antler in the middle, the symbol of the former state of Württemberg. The two wavy blue lines above and below symbolize the rivers Murr (in the north) and Rems (in the south) after which the district was named.

==Twinning==
Rems-Murr-Kreis is twinned with:
* Southampton, United Kingdom, (since 1991)

==Cities and towns==

==References==
==External links==

* Official website (German)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q8528" start="0" end="9" title="Rems-Murr-Kreis" label="Rems-Murr"/>
<link wikidata="Q985" start="43" end="60" title="Baden-Württemberg" label="Baden-Württemberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="62" end="69" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q7166" start="120" end="129" title="Heilbronn (district)" label="Heilbronn"/>
<link wikidata="Q8520" start="131" end="146" title="Schwäbisch Hall (district)" label="Schwäbisch Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q8522" start="148" end="159" title="Ostalbkreis" label="Ostalbkreis"/>
<link wikidata="Q8525" start="161" end="170" title="Göppingen (district)" label="Göppingen"/>
<link wikidata="Q8533" start="172" end="181" title="Esslingen (district)" label="Esslingen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1022" start="206" end="215" title="Stuttgart" label="Stuttgart"/>
<link wikidata="Q8541" start="233" end="244" title="Ludwigsburg (district)" label="Ludwigsburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1709088" start="481" end="506" title="Swabian-Franconian Forest" label="Swabian-Franconian Forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q1885625" start="563" end="579" title="Mainhardt Forest" label="Mainhardt Forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q558704" start="609" end="613" title="Rems (river)" label="Rems"/>
<link wikidata="Q510496" start="618" end="622" title="Murr (river)" label="Murr"/>
<link wikidata="Q159626" start="755" end="766" title="Württemberg" label="Württemberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q510496" start="829" end="833" title="Murr (river)" label="Murr"/>
<link wikidata="Q558704" start="853" end="857" title="Rems (river)" label="Rems"/>
<link wikidata="Q184711" start="942" end="949" title="Town twinning" label="twinned"/>
<link wikidata="Q79848" start="958" end="969" title="Southampton" label="Southampton"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="971" end="985" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="247947" wikidata="Q1341804" url="?curid=247947" title="Larry Levan">
<text>Lawrence Philpot (July 20, 1954 – November 8, 1992), known as Larry Levan ( ), was an American DJ best known for his decade-long residency at the New York City night club Paradise Garage, which has been described as the prototype of the modern dance club. He developed a cult following who referred to his sets as &quot;Saturday Mass&quot;. Influential post-disco DJ François Kevorkian credits Levan with introducing the dub aesthetic into dance music. Along with Kevorkian, Levan experimented with drum machines and synthesizers in his productions and live sets, ushering in an electronic, post-disco sound that presaged the ascendence of house music. He DJ&#x27;d at Club Zanzibar in the 1980s as well, home to the Jersey Sound brand of deep house or garage house.

==Early life==
Levan was born at Brooklyn Jewish Hospital, New York, to Minnie (née Levan) and Lawrence Philpot. He has an older brother Isaac and sister Minnie who are biological twins. He was born with a congenital heart condition and suffered from asthma from a very young age which would make him prone to fainting in class. Although a fragile young boy, he excelled in math and physics, leaving an impression on his teachers that he would become an inventor one day. He inherited his love for music from his mother who loved blues, jazz, and gospel music, and he was able to use a record player from the age of three. As his mother reflects, &quot;I&#x27;d make him put records on so that we could dance together.&quot; While attending Erasmus Hall High School in the late 1960s and early 1970s, as the neighborhood of Flatbush transitioned to a predominantly African-American population amid white flight, the flamboyantly vanguard Levan (who dyed his hair orange nearly a decade before the ascendance of punk rock), was frequently bullied by his classmates. Eventually, he dropped out of high school and found assuagement in Harlem&#x27;s longstanding ball culture as a dressmaker, where he first became acquainted with fellow designer and lifelong best friend Frankie Knuckles.

He became infatuated with an idea of making the &quot;music that would never stop&quot; during a brief affair with hippie DJ David Mancuso, who introduced Levan to Manhattan&#x27;s burgeoning underground downtown dance culture. Mancuso was the proprietor of The Loft, a minimally decorated, members-only dance club (uniquely situated in his home) where &quot;punch, fruit and candy&quot; were served in lieu of alcohol and music was processed by a state-of-the-art sound system. According to the pseudonymous &quot;Apollo,&quot; an acquaintance of Levan and Knuckles, &quot;You could only get into the Loft by private invitation. This was not because Mancuso wanted to create an elitist environment; he intentionally wanted to bring together diverse groups of gays who wouldn&#x27;t ordinarily party together to create a democratic, integrated venue. David was powerfully attracted to black music and culture as well as men, so this Loft party was instrumental in bringing together wealthy, white gay men, many of them music executives, with this black musical dance culture he adored.&quot;

==Musical career==
Levan got his start alongside Frankie Knuckles at the Continental Baths, as a replacement for the DJ from The Gallery, Nicky Siano, who briefly employed both men as decorators at The Gallery and taught them his pioneering three turntable technique. Accordingly, Levan&#x27;s DJing style was influenced by Siano&#x27;s penchant for Philadelphia soul and upbeat rock and Mancuso&#x27;s jazz-inflected eclecticism; as with Mancuso, he briefly dated Siano during the epoch. While Knuckles was still trying to make his way in the New York club scene, Levan soon became a popular attraction at venues such as SoHo Place due to his &quot;diva persona,&quot; which he had previously developed in the city&#x27;s notoriously competitive black drag &quot;houses&quot;.

At the height of the disco boom in 1977, Levan was offered a residency at the Paradise Garage. Although owner Michael Brody—who employed Levan at the defunct Reade Street in 1976, where he &quot;developed the techniques as well as the sound – the deep, dark bass, the queasy, dubby emotion that he would extract from records – that would make him a legend&quot;—intended to create a downtown facsimile of Studio 54 catering to an upscale white gay clientele, the new venue initially drew an improbable mix of streetwise Blacks, Latinos, and punks after a disastrous opening night alienated the target demographic; according to West End Records founder Mel Cheren, Brody&#x27;s former companion and a silent partner in the venture, &quot;The sound equipment got stuck in a blizzard at an airport in Louisville, Kentucky. And people were kept outside in 17-degree weather. Some of them never came back... the club didn&#x27;t really take on the atmosphere that people remember it for until 1980.&quot;

Open only to a select membership and housed in an otherwise unadorned building on King Street in Greenwich Village, the club and Levan&#x27;s DJing slowly entered the mainstream. Influential WBLS DJ/programming director Frankie Crocker often mentioned the club on air and based his playlists around Levan&#x27;s sets. The Richard Long &amp; Associates Sound system (RLA) of the club included custom-designed &quot;McLaughlin&quot; bass speakers.

Filling the void left by leading DJ/remixer Walter Gibbons following his conversion to evangelical Christianity, Levan became a prolific producer and mixer in the 1980s, with many of his efforts crossing over onto the national dance music charts. Among the records that received Levan&#x27;s touch were his remixes of &quot;Ain&#x27;t No Mountain High Enough&quot; by Inner Life, &quot;Ain&#x27;t Nothin&#x27; Goin On But The Rent&quot; by Gwen Guthrie and &quot;Heartbeat&quot; by Taana Gardner, as well as his production work on the long-awaited &quot;Don&#x27;t Make Me Wait&quot; by the Peech Boys, a group that Levan formed and was part of (and who became the New York Citi Peech Boys when the Beach Boys threatened a lawsuit due to the similar sound of the name). With a strong gospel tinge in the vocal arrangements and driven by a tinkling piano, the latter song is a quintessential example of his soulful aesthetic. One of the first dance releases to incorporate influences from dub music and an appended vocal-only edit, Levan tinkered with the song for nearly a year despite the looming bankruptcy of West End Records. When it was finally released, much of the song&#x27;s word-of-mouth momentum had been lost, leading it to stall in the lower reaches of the charts.

As the popularity of the Garage soared in the mid-1980s just as many patrons and friends succumbed to AIDS, Levan became increasingly dependent upon PCP and heroin. While performing, he began to ensconce himself within a protective entourage of drag queens and younger acolytes. At the Paradise Garage, Levan was described as being &quot;worshipped, almost like a god.&quot; As beat-matching and ideological stylistic adherence became the norm among club DJs, Levan&#x27;s idiosyncratic sets (running the gamut from Evelyn &quot;Champagne&quot; King, Chaka Khan and Deodato with Camille to Kraftwerk, Manuel Göttsching, and British synthpop) elicited criticism from some quarters. Nevertheless, he remained at the forefront of dance music; recordings of Levan&#x27;s final sets at the Garage demonstrate his affinity for the insurgent sounds of Chicago house and hip-hop.

The Garage ended its run with a 48-hour-long party in September 1987, weeks before Brody died from AIDS-related complications. The club&#x27;s closure and Brody&#x27;s death devastated Levan, who knew that few club owners would tolerate his quirks and drug dependencies. Although Brody had verbally bequeathed the club&#x27;s sound and lighting systems to Levan, they were instead left to Brody&#x27;s mother in his will. This change was reportedly instigated by the late impresario&#x27;s lover and manager, who reportedly despised Levan.

Despite protestations and pleas to the Brody family from Mel Cheren, the systems remained in storage as their property. Unable to secure a long-term residency after a stay at the short-lived Choice in the East Village alongside DJ/proprietor Richard Vasquez and Joey Llanos, Levan began to sell his valuable records for drug money. Friends like Danny Krivit would buy them back for him out of sympathy.

As the 1990s dawned, Levan was on the brink of a comeback. Dismissed as a relic in New York despite managing occasional appearances at the au courant Sound Factory, his popularity had nonetheless soared among connoisseurs of disco and early American electronic dance music in Europe and Japan. In 1991, he was brought over to London for a weekend by Justin Berkmann to DJ at the Ministry of Sound nightclub. To the mutual surprise of both parties, he ended up staying for three months; during this period, he remixed and produced tracks for the club&#x27;s record label and helped to tune the venue&#x27;s acclaimed sound system.

Although he was still dependent on heroin, Levan&#x27;s 1992 tour of Japan garnered gushing accolades in the local press. Encouraged by Cheren, he entered rehab and continued his tentative recording forays. François Kevorkian described Levan&#x27;s final Japanese sets as nostalgic and inspirational, imbued with an air of bittersweetness and closure.

==Later months and death==
Levan informed his mother in June 1992 that he had &quot;lived a good life&quot; and was &quot;ready to die&quot;. Having been mildly injured on the Japanese tour, he was voluntarily hospitalized at Beth Israel Medical Center following his return to New York. Three days after being released into the care of his mother, he was re-hospitalized at Beth Israel with hemorrhage symptoms. He died, aged 38, of heart failure caused by endocarditis at 6:15 p.m. EST, on Sunday, November 8, 1992.

==Personal life==
Levan was openly gay. He was previously romantically involved with Nicky Siano (a fellow Brooklynite and Mancuso disciple who had been in a relationship with Mel Cheren). Frankie Knuckles and Levan were lifetime friends who were introduced to each other by a &quot;drag queen called Gerald&quot; when Levan was 15 years old; Levan and Knuckles were both active in the local drag scene.

==Legacy==
In September 2004, Levan was inducted into the Dance Music Hall of Fame for his outstanding achievement as a DJ.

Levan&#x27;s significance to the history of disco music is discussed in Episode 3 of the 2024 PBS series &quot;Disco: Soundtrack of a Revolution&quot;.

==Tributes==
* &quot;Anything Goes!&quot; (1994), the second album by dance group C+C Music Factory, contains a tribute to Levan titled &quot;A Moment of Silence for Larry Levan.&quot; (It also contains a track &quot;A Moment of Silence for Chep Nunez&quot;; Nunez was an American music producer, editor, and mixer who reached chart success with the group 2 Puerto Ricans, a Blackman, and a Dominican.)
* The album &quot;The Rose Has Teeth in the Mouth of a Beast&quot; (2006), by the electronic music duo Matmos, contains a tribute to Levan titled &quot;Steam and Sequins for Larry Levan&quot;.
* The 2003 documentary Maestro, directed by Josell Ramos, tells the story of the underground dance music movement and the importance of Larry Levan as one of its key figures.
* In 2019, Corrado Rizza directed and produced a documentary movie titled &quot;Larry&#x27;s Garage&quot; about Larry Levan.
* The LCD Soundsystem song &quot;Losing My Edge&quot; (2002) mentions both Levan and the Paradise Garage.

==See also==
* LGBT culture in New York City
* List of LGBT people from New York City

==References==
==Bibliography==
* 

==External links==
* West End Records – Larry Levan&#x27;s associated label
* Larry Levan featured on the free Emancipation podcast (October 2008)
* Larry Levan at SoundCloud
* &quot;Legends of the dance floor: A piece of Paradise&quot; (&quot;Garage-Gate-Tape&quot;) – Larry Levan 1979, full five hour show at BBC Radio 6
* &quot;Legends of the dance floor: A piece of Paradise&quot; (&quot;Garage-Gate-Tape&quot;) – Larry Levan 1979, full five hour show at SoundCloud</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1341804" start="0" end="16" title="Larry Levan" label="Lawrence Philpot"/>
<link wikidata="Q1341804" start="62" end="73" title="Larry Levan" label="Larry Levan"/>
<link wikidata="Q130857" start="95" end="97" title="Disk jockey" label="DJ"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="146" end="159" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q622425" start="160" end="170" title="night club" label="night club"/>
<link wikidata="Q2339843" start="171" end="186" title="Paradise Garage" label="Paradise Garage"/>
<link wikidata="Q209672" start="271" end="285" title="cult following" label="cult following"/>
<link wikidata="Q6783971" start="329" end="333" title="Mass (liturgy)" label="Mass"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190485" start="353" end="363" title="post-disco" label="post-disco"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135695" start="367" end="385" title="François Kevorkian" label="François Kevorkian"/>
<link wikidata="Q212688" start="421" end="424" title="Dub music" label="dub"/>
<link wikidata="Q831698" start="499" end="511" title="drum machine" label="drum machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q163829" start="517" end="528" title="synthesizer" label="synthesizer"/>
<link wikidata="Q20502" start="640" end="651" title="house music" label="house music"/>
<link wikidata="Q54954355" start="669" end="682" title="Club Zanzibar" label="Club Zanzibar"/>
<link wikidata="Q35869" start="1019" end="1025" title="asthma" label="asthma"/>
<link wikidata="Q9759" start="1298" end="1303" title="blues" label="blues"/>
<link wikidata="Q8341" start="1305" end="1309" title="jazz" label="jazz"/>
<link wikidata="Q180268" start="1315" end="1327" title="gospel music" label="gospel music"/>
<link wikidata="Q5384959" start="1509" end="1533" title="Erasmus Hall High School" label="Erasmus Hall High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q840381" start="1592" end="1600" title="Flatbush, Brooklyn" label="Flatbush"/>
<link wikidata="Q2989605" start="1666" end="1678" title="white flight" label="white flight"/>
<link wikidata="Q3071" start="1779" end="1788" title="punk rock" label="punk rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q189074" start="1900" end="1906" title="Harlem" label="Harlem"/>
<link wikidata="Q28130022" start="1927" end="1939" title="ball culture" label="ball culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q205322" start="2036" end="2052" title="Frankie Knuckles" label="Frankie Knuckles"/>
<link wikidata="Q339747" start="2170" end="2176" title="hippie" label="hippie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1996310" start="2180" end="2193" title="David Mancuso" label="David Mancuso"/>
<link wikidata="Q3521621" start="2313" end="2321" title="The Loft (New York City)" label="The Loft"/>
<link wikidata="Q205322" start="3197" end="3213" title="Frankie Knuckles" label="Frankie Knuckles"/>
<link wikidata="Q5165255" start="3221" end="3238" title="Continental Baths" label="Continental Baths"/>
<link wikidata="Q3876071" start="3286" end="3297" title="Nicky Siano" label="Nicky Siano"/>
<link wikidata="Q1546028" start="3498" end="3515" title="Philadelphia soul" label="Philadelphia soul"/>
<link wikidata="Q3410369" start="3901" end="3905" title="drag (clothing)" label="drag"/>
<link wikidata="Q2339843" start="4005" end="4020" title="Paradise Garage" label="Paradise Garage"/>
<link wikidata="Q607212" start="4332" end="4341" title="Studio 54" label="Studio 54"/>
<link wikidata="Q3304836" start="4579" end="4589" title="Mel Cheren" label="Mel Cheren"/>
<link wikidata="Q43668" start="4725" end="4745" title="Louisville, Kentucky" label="Louisville, Kentucky"/>
<link wikidata="Q205380" start="5025" end="5042" title="Greenwich Village" label="Greenwich Village"/>
<link wikidata="Q7947274" start="5119" end="5123" title="WBLS" label="WBLS"/>
<link wikidata="Q15504460" start="5148" end="5163" title="Frankie Crocker" label="Frankie Crocker"/>
<link wikidata="Q113504777" start="5250" end="5262" title="Richard Long (sound designer)" label="Richard Long"/>
<link wikidata="Q7964942" start="5419" end="5433" title="Walter Gibbons" label="Walter Gibbons"/>
<link wikidata="Q194253" start="5462" end="5486" title="evangelical Christianity" label="evangelical Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q3151372" start="5743" end="5753" title="Inner Life" label="Inner Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q4597579" start="5815" end="5827" title="Gwen Guthrie" label="Gwen Guthrie"/>
<link wikidata="Q7672810" start="5857" end="5870" title="Taana Gardner" label="Taana Gardner"/>
<link wikidata="Q16873268" start="5966" end="5976" title="Peech Boys" label="Peech Boys"/>
<link wikidata="Q183048" start="6074" end="6084" title="Beach Boys" label="Beach Boys"/>
<link wikidata="Q212688" start="6363" end="6372" title="dub music" label="dub music"/>
<link wikidata="Q12199" start="6756" end="6760" title="AIDS" label="AIDS"/>
<link wikidata="Q407324" start="6803" end="6806" title="Phencyclidine" label="PCP"/>
<link wikidata="Q60168" start="6811" end="6817" title="heroin" label="heroin"/>
<link wikidata="Q290468" start="7170" end="7203" title="Evelyn &amp;quot;Champagne&amp;quot; King" label="Evelyn &amp;quot;Champagne&amp;quot; King"/>
<link wikidata="Q229498" start="7205" end="7215" title="Chaka Khan" label="Chaka Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q571260" start="7220" end="7227" title="Eumir Deodato" label="Deodato"/>
<link wikidata="Q18921725" start="7233" end="7240" title="Camille (American singer)" label="Camille"/>
<link wikidata="Q44892" start="7244" end="7253" title="Kraftwerk" label="Kraftwerk"/>
<link wikidata="Q427429" start="7255" end="7272" title="Manuel Göttsching" label="Manuel Göttsching"/>
<link wikidata="Q1298934" start="7286" end="7294" title="synthpop" label="synthpop"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071961" start="7499" end="7512" title="Chicago house" label="Chicago house"/>
<link wikidata="Q11401" start="7517" end="7524" title="Hip hop music" label="hip-hop"/>
<link wikidata="Q1043326" start="8273" end="8285" title="East Village, Manhattan" label="East Village"/>
<link wikidata="Q7765400" start="8622" end="8635" title="The Sound Factory Bar" label="Sound Factory"/>
<link wikidata="Q851213" start="8722" end="8744" title="electronic dance music" label="electronic dance music"/>
<link wikidata="Q16194964" start="8822" end="8837" title="Justin Berkmann" label="Justin Berkmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q97623539" start="8851" end="8868" title="Ministry of Sound" label="Ministry of Sound"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135695" start="9310" end="9328" title="François Kevorkian" label="François Kevorkian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2575019" start="9682" end="9708" title="Beth Israel Medical Center" label="Beth Israel Medical Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q181754" start="9889" end="9902" title="heart failure" label="heart failure"/>
<link wikidata="Q82504" start="9913" end="9925" title="endocarditis" label="endocarditis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3876071" start="10059" end="10070" title="Nicky Siano" label="Nicky Siano"/>
<link wikidata="Q205322" start="10163" end="10179" title="Frankie Knuckles" label="Frankie Knuckles"/>
<link wikidata="Q3410369" start="10366" end="10370" title="Drag (clothing)" label="drag"/>
<link wikidata="Q1159313" start="10437" end="10461" title="Dance Music Hall of Fame" label="Dance Music Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q130857" start="10499" end="10501" title="DJ" label="DJ"/>
<link wikidata="Q215616" start="10598" end="10601" title="PBS" label="PBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1024639" start="10739" end="10756" title="C+C Music Factory" label="C+C Music Factory"/>
<link wikidata="Q4633367" start="10898" end="10908" title="Chep Nunez" label="Chep Nunez"/>
<link wikidata="Q4633367" start="11013" end="11057" title="2 Puerto Ricans, a Blackman, and a Dominican" label="2 Puerto Ricans, a Blackman, and a Dominican"/>
<link wikidata="Q7761541" start="11078" end="11120" title="The Rose Has Teeth in the Mouth of a Beast" label="The Rose Has Teeth in the Mouth of a Beast"/>
<link wikidata="Q1256138" start="11163" end="11169" title="Matmos" label="Matmos"/>
<link wikidata="Q3694306" start="11439" end="11452" title="Corrado Rizza" label="Corrado Rizza"/>
<link wikidata="Q45752" start="11559" end="11574" title="LCD Soundsystem" label="LCD Soundsystem"/>
<link wikidata="Q3259804" start="11586" end="11600" title="Losing My Edge" label="Losing My Edge"/>
<link wikidata="Q18148561" start="11675" end="11704" title="LGBT culture in New York City" label="LGBT culture in New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q85777920" start="11707" end="11745" title="List of LGBT people from New York City" label="List of LGBT people from New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q568769" start="11947" end="11957" title="SoundCloud" label="SoundCloud"/>
<link wikidata="Q795600" start="12094" end="12105" title="BBC Radio 6" label="BBC Radio 6"/>
<link wikidata="Q568769" start="12242" end="12252" title="SoundCloud" label="SoundCloud"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="247955" wikidata="Q690638" url="?curid=247955" title="Jim Furyk">
<text>James Michael Furyk (born May 12, 1970) is an American professional golfer who plays on the PGA Tour and the PGA Tour Champions. In 2010, he was the FedEx Cup champion and PGA Tour Player of the Year. He has won one major championship, the 2003 U.S. Open. Furyk holds the record for the lowest score in PGA Tour history, a round of 58 which he shot during the final round of the 2016 Travelers Championship, and has earned notoriety for his unorthodox golf swing.

In September 2006 he reached a career high of second in the Official World Golf Ranking. He ranked in the top-10 for over 440 weeks between 1999 and 2016.

==Early life==
Furyk was born on May 12, 1970, in West Chester, Pennsylvania. His ancestry is Czech and Polish on his mother&#x27;s side and Ukrainian and Hungarian on his father&#x27;s side. His father, Mike, was an assistant pro at the Edgmont Country Club and later also spent time as a pro at West Chester Golf and Country Club as well as Hidden Springs Golf Course in Horsham, Pennsylvania. His early years were spent in the Pittsburgh suburbs learning the game from his father, who was also head pro at Uniontown Country Club in Uniontown, Pennsylvania.

Furyk graduated from Manheim Township High School in Lancaster County in 1988, where he played basketball in addition to being a state champion golfer. He played his junior golf at Meadia Heights Golf Club just south of Lancaster city. He played college golf at the University of Arizona in Tucson, where he was an All-American twice, and led the Wildcats to their first (and only) NCAA title in 1992.

==Professional career==

Furyk turned professional in 1992. He won the Nike Mississippi Gulf Coast Classic on the Nike Tour in 1993. He joined the PGA Tour in 1994 and won at least one tournament each year between 1998 and 2003. At the time, this was the second-best streak of winning seasons behind Tiger Woods and he made the top ten in the Official World Golf Ranking. Furyk&#x27;s biggest win to date came on June 15, 2003, when he tied the record for the lowest 72-hole score in U.S. Open history to win his first major championship.

In 2004, he only played in 14 events after missing three months due to surgery to repair cartilage damage in his wrist; he missed six cuts and his highest finish was T6, which caused him to fall out of the top hundred on the money list. He returned to good form in 2005 and regained his top ten ranking, winning a PGA Tour event in that year and two in 2006. In the 2006 season, he finished a career-high second on the money list and won the Vardon Trophy for the first time. He had 13 top-10 finishes, including nine top-3s, four second-place finishes, and two victories.

The 2010 season was a banner one for Furyk. After going more than two seasons winless, he won a career-best three tournaments on Tour in 2010: The Transitions Championship, the Verizon Heritage, and the season-ending Tour Championship. His victory in the Tour Championship also earned him the 2010 FedEx Cup after winning by one stroke. His accomplishments in 2010 won him both the PGA Player of the Year and PGA Tour Player of the Year for the first time.

Since 2012, Furyk has come close on several occasions to winning more titles. At the 2012 U.S. Open, Furyk led after 54 holes and was still the leader deep into the final day, before snap hooking his drive into the trees at the 16th which led to a bogey and was followed by another at the 18th. He finished in a tie for fourth, two strokes behind Webb Simpson. At the 2012 WGC-Bridgestone Invitational, Furyk led after the first three rounds and looked set to win the championship as he held a one-stroke lead going into the final hole, but a double-bogey cost him the title to Keegan Bradley. At the 2013 PGA Championship, Furyk led by one stroke going into the final day over Jason Dufner, but this time his lead was overturned on the front nine and he was unable to reduce the deficit as Dufner won by two strokes. Furyk&#x27;s caddy from 1999–2024 was Mike &quot;Fluff&quot; Cowan, who was Tiger Woods&#x27; caddy for Woods&#x27;s first two years as a professional.

On September 13, 2013, Furyk shot a 12-under-par 59 in the second round of the BMW Championship at Conway Farms Golf Club in Lake Forest, Illinois, becoming just the sixth player to shoot 59 in a PGA Tour event.

In July 2014, Furyk held the 54-hole lead at the RBC Canadian Open, with a three stroke advantage over his nearest competitor Tim Clark. However Clark produced five birdies in his last eight holes to claim the title, after Furyk missed a 12 footer on the 18th green to force a playoff.

In February 2015, Furyk held a one shot lead at the AT&amp;T Pebble Beach National Pro-Am going into the final round, but shot a two over round of 74 to finish six strokes behind Brandt Snedeker. Furyk&#x27;s round was the worst of any player to finish within the top 50 on the final day. Since Furyk&#x27;s last victory at The Tour Championship in 2010, he is 0-for-9 with a lead/co-lead after 54 holes. On April 19, 2015, Furyk ended the long slump when he defeated Kevin Kisner with birdie on the second playoff hole at the RBC Heritage. The victory was his second at the event and his 17th victory on the PGA Tour.

In 2015, at the BMW Championship, Furyk withdrew with a wrist injury. This was his first withdrawal since 1995, it also came at the same course he had shot a 59 two years before. Furyk qualified for the 2015 Presidents Cup team but could not play due to the same injury and instead became an assistant captain. J. B. Holmes replaced him on the team.

Furyk missed the early part of the 2016 season after undergoing wrist surgery. This caused him to miss the 2016 Masters Tournament and brought to end a run of 47 consecutive major championship appearances. In June 2016, at the 2016 U.S. Open, Furyk finished in a tie for second, three shots behind Dustin Johnson at one under par. He shot a four-under round of 66 in the final round to vault up the leaderboard. This was the third time during his career Furyk had been runner-up at the U.S. Open.

On August 7, 2016, Furyk shot a 12-under-par 58 in the final round of the Travelers Championship at TPC at River Highlands in Cromwell, Connecticut, becoming the first player to shoot 58 in a PGA Tour event. This also made Furyk the first PGA Tour pro to card two rounds under 60.

On January 11, 2017, Furyk was named as the United States Ryder Cup captain for 2018. At the 2018 Ryder Cup, the U.S. lost to the Europe team by 17½ points to 10½ at Le Golf National in France. Following the matches, Furyk was subject to criticism from Masters champion Patrick Reed. Reed criticized Furyk&#x27;s manner of making pairings and, more specifically, his decision to break up the previously successful Reed-Jordan Spieth pairing.

The 2017–18 season was the first time Furyk was not fully exempt on the PGA Tour, playing the season with only past champion status. He started the 2018–19 season out of the 126–150 category.

On March 17, 2019, Furyk finished second in The Players Championship, one stroke behind Rory McIlroy. It was a welcome result for 48-year-old Furyk, who barely qualified for the tournament and who had struggled with injury and poor play in 2017 and 2018.

On May 2, 2024 it was announced that Furyk and long time caddy Mike &quot;Fluff&quot; Cowan, would split amicably after 25 years.

==PGA Tour Champions (2020–present)==
On August 2, 2020, Furyk made his debut on the PGA Tour Champions, after having turned 50 years old in May 2020. He won The Ally Challenge in his first start on the tour.

In his second start on the PGA Tour Champions, on September 20, 2020, Furyk won the PURE Insurance Championship at Pebble Beach Golf Links in a playoff over Jerry Kelly. He joined Arnold Palmer and Bruce Fleisher as the only golfers to win their first two starts on tour.

In July 2021, Furyk won his first senior major tournament, the U.S. Senior Open at Omaha Country Club. Furyk defeated Mike Weir and Retief Goosen by three strokes. The win automatically qualifies him for the 2022 U.S. Open.

==Swing==
As Mike Furyk describes in a &quot;Golf Digest&quot; issue in 2001, Jim Furyk&#x27;s hips &quot;underturn&quot; during the backswing and &quot;overturn&quot; coming down. On the downswing, he draws the club in a large arc behind his body (viewing from his right hand side), then pastes his elbow against his right hip at impact. David Feherty described Furyk&#x27;s swing as &quot;an octopus falling out of a tree&quot;. Gary McCord said that it evokes the image of &quot;a one-armed golfer using an axe to kill a snake in a telephone booth.&quot;

==Personal life==
Furyk is married to his wife Tabitha, and they have two children. He owns homes in the Kapalua Resort and in Ponte Vedra Beach.

==Professional wins (29)==
===PGA Tour wins (17)===

PGA Tour playoff record (4–8)
===Sunshine Tour wins (1)===
===Nike Tour wins (1)===
Nike Tour playoff record (1–1)
===South American Tour wins (1)===
===Other wins (6)===
Other playoff record (2–1)
===PGA Tour Champions wins (3)===

PGA Tour Champions playoff record (1–0)
==Major championships==
===Wins (1)===
===Results timeline===
&quot;Results not in chronological order in 2020.&quot;



CUT = missed the half-way cut&lt;br&gt;
&quot;T&quot; indicates a tie for a place&lt;br&gt;
NT = No tournament due to COVID-19 pandemic

===Summary===

*Most consecutive cuts made – 13 (1994 U.S. Open – 1998 Open Championship)
*Longest streak of top-10s – 4 (1997 U.S. Open – 1998 Masters)

==Results in The Players Championship==

CUT = missed the halfway cut
&quot;T&quot; indicates a tie for a place

==Results in World Golf Championships==
&quot;Results not in chronological order before 2015.&quot;

1Cancelled due to 9/11&lt;br&gt;
QF, R16, R32, R64 = Round in which player lost in match play&lt;br&gt;
&quot;T&quot; = Tied&lt;br&gt;
NT = No tournament&lt;br&gt;
Note that the HSBC Champions did not become a WGC event until 2009.

==Senior major championships==
===Wins (1)===
===Results timeline===

&quot;T&quot; indicates a tie for a place

==PGA Tour career summary==

&quot;*As of the 2020 season.&quot;

==U.S. national team appearances==
Professional
*Ryder Cup: 1997, 1999 (winners), 2002, 2004, 2006, 2008 (winners), 2010, 2012, 2014, 2018 (non-playing captain)
*Presidents Cup: 1998, 2000 (winners), 2003 (tie), 2005 (winners), 2007 (winners), 2009 (winners), 2011 (winners), 2024 (non-playing captain, winners)
**Presidents Cup record W–L–H: 20–10–3
*World Cup: 2003
*Wendy&#x27;s 3-Tour Challenge (representing PGA Tour): 2002 (winners)

==See also==
*1993 PGA Tour Qualifying School graduates
*List of golfers with most PGA Tour wins
*Lowest rounds of golf

==References==
==External links==
*
*Site featuring Jim&#x27;s instructional Short Game video</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q690638" start="0" end="19" title="Jim Furyk" label="James Michael Furyk"/>
<link wikidata="Q490253" start="55" end="74" title="professional golfer" label="professional golfer"/>
<link wikidata="Q910409" start="92" end="100" title="PGA Tour" label="PGA Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061312" start="109" end="127" title="PGA Tour Champions" label="PGA Tour Champions"/>
<link wikidata="Q1399835" start="149" end="158" title="FedEx Cup" label="FedEx Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q910409" start="172" end="199" title="PGA Tour Player of the Year" label="PGA Tour Player of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q268554" start="216" end="234" title="Men&amp;#x27;s major golf championships" label="major championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q4601923" start="240" end="254" title="2003 U.S. Open (golf)" label="2003 U.S. Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q85771238" start="323" end="334" title="Jim Furyk&amp;#x27;s round of 58" label="round of 58"/>
<link wikidata="Q1776505" start="384" end="406" title="Travelers Championship" label="Travelers Championship"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="441" end="462" title="Jim Furyk#Swing" label="unorthodox golf swing"/>
<link wikidata="Q175074" start="525" end="552" title="Official World Golf Ranking" label="Official World Golf Ranking"/>
<link wikidata="Q60519526" start="571" end="596" title="List of male golfers who have been in the world top 10" label="top-10 for over 440 weeks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1010244" start="671" end="697" title="West Chester, Pennsylvania" label="West Chester, Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q10751864" start="994" end="1015" title="Horsham, Pennsylvania" label="Horsham, Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q1342" start="1051" end="1061" title="Pittsburgh" label="Pittsburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1187047" start="1156" end="1179" title="Uniontown, Pennsylvania" label="Uniontown, Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q6749337" start="1203" end="1231" title="Manheim Township High School" label="Manheim Township High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q142369" start="1235" end="1251" title="Lancaster County, Pennsylvania" label="Lancaster County"/>
<link wikidata="Q503419" start="1448" end="1469" title="University of Arizona" label="University of Arizona"/>
<link wikidata="Q18575" start="1473" end="1479" title="Tucson, Arizona" label="Tucson"/>
<link wikidata="Q762853" start="1497" end="1508" title="All-America" label="All-America"/>
<link wikidata="Q3174614" start="1529" end="1537" title="Arizona Wildcats" label="Wildcats"/>
<link wikidata="Q3330908" start="1564" end="1574" title="NCAA Division I Men&amp;#x27;s Golf Championships" label="NCAA title"/>
<link wikidata="Q2037679" start="1656" end="1691" title="Nike Mississippi Gulf Coast Classic" label="Nike Mississippi Gulf Coast Classic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1777663" start="1699" end="1708" title="Nike Tour" label="Nike Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q910409" start="1732" end="1740" title="PGA Tour" label="PGA Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q4589658" start="1744" end="1748" title="1994 PGA Tour" label="1994"/>
<link wikidata="Q4593895" start="1799" end="1803" title="1998 PGA Tour" label="1998"/>
<link wikidata="Q4601716" start="1808" end="1812" title="2003 PGA Tour" label="2003"/>
<link wikidata="Q10993" start="1885" end="1896" title="Tiger Woods" label="Tiger Woods"/>
<link wikidata="Q175074" start="1928" end="1955" title="Official World Golf Ranking" label="Official World Golf Ranking"/>
<link wikidata="Q4601923" start="2069" end="2078" title="2003 U.S. Open (golf)" label="U.S. Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q268554" start="2104" end="2122" title="Men&amp;#x27;s major golf championships" label="major championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q4603187" start="2128" end="2132" title="2004 PGA Tour" label="2004"/>
<link wikidata="Q502730" start="2214" end="2223" title="cartilage" label="cartilage"/>
<link wikidata="Q185706" start="2238" end="2243" title="wrist" label="wrist"/>
<link wikidata="Q4604735" start="2390" end="2394" title="2005 PGA Tour" label="2005"/>
<link wikidata="Q2321209" start="2478" end="2482" title="2006 PGA Tour" label="2006"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2544" end="2554" title="PGA Tour#Money winners and most wins leaders" label="money list"/>
<link wikidata="Q1973671" start="2567" end="2580" title="Vardon Trophy" label="Vardon Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3359660" start="2703" end="2707" title="2010 PGA Tour" label="2010"/>
<link wikidata="Q653966" start="2846" end="2870" title="Transitions Championship" label="Transitions Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q961714" start="2876" end="2892" title="Verizon Heritage" label="Verizon Heritage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1619413" start="2916" end="2933" title="Tour Championship" label="Tour Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q4617282" start="2992" end="3006" title="2010 FedEx Cup Playoffs" label="2010 FedEx Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q910409" start="3081" end="3103" title="PGA Player of the Year" label="PGA Player of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q910409" start="3108" end="3135" title="PGA Tour Player of the Year" label="PGA Tour Player of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q2461021" start="3242" end="3256" title="2012 U.S. Open (golf)" label="2012 U.S. Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q2304774" start="3405" end="3410" title="bogey (golf)" label="bogey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1771182" start="3504" end="3516" title="Webb Simpson" label="Webb Simpson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2208919" start="3525" end="3558" title="2012 WGC-Bridgestone Invitational" label="2012 WGC-Bridgestone Invitational"/>
<link wikidata="Q1353905" start="3735" end="3749" title="Keegan Bradley" label="Keegan Bradley"/>
<link wikidata="Q4629740" start="3758" end="3779" title="2013 PGA Championship" label="2013 PGA Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q1649818" start="3835" end="3847" title="Jason Dufner" label="Jason Dufner"/>
<link wikidata="Q6846429" start="4013" end="4041" title="Mike Cowan" label="Mike &amp;quot;Fluff&amp;quot; Cowan"/>
<link wikidata="Q10993" start="4051" end="4062" title="Tiger Woods" label="Tiger Woods"/>
<link wikidata="Q2505370" start="4207" end="4223" title="BMW Championship (PGA Tour)" label="BMW Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q5166704" start="4227" end="4249" title="Conway Farms Golf Club" label="Conway Farms Golf Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q575355" start="4253" end="4274" title="Lake Forest, Illinois" label="Lake Forest, Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q1772985" start="4390" end="4407" title="RBC Canadian Open" label="RBC Canadian Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q713594" start="4467" end="4476" title="Tim Clark (golfer)" label="Tim Clark"/>
<link wikidata="Q298589" start="4680" end="4717" title="AT&amp;amp;T Pebble Beach National Pro-Am" label="AT&amp;amp;T Pebble Beach National Pro-Am"/>
<link wikidata="Q898333" start="4807" end="4822" title="Brandt Snedeker" label="Brandt Snedeker"/>
<link wikidata="Q1619413" start="4952" end="4973" title="The Tour Championship" label="The Tour Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q6396707" start="5096" end="5108" title="Kevin Kisner" label="Kevin Kisner"/>
<link wikidata="Q961714" start="5155" end="5167" title="RBC Heritage" label="RBC Heritage"/>
<link wikidata="Q910409" start="5237" end="5245" title="PGA Tour" label="PGA Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q16956579" start="5451" end="5470" title="2015 Presidents Cup" label="2015 Presidents Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q717598" start="5559" end="5571" title="J. B. Holmes" label="J. B. Holmes"/>
<link wikidata="Q19864940" start="5706" end="5729" title="2016 Masters Tournament" label="2016 Masters Tournament"/>
<link wikidata="Q20714151" start="5826" end="5840" title="2016 U.S. Open (golf)" label="2016 U.S. Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q1002293" start="5897" end="5911" title="Dustin Johnson" label="Dustin Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q85771238" start="6129" end="6144" title="Jim Furyk&amp;#x27;s round of 58" label="12-under-par 58"/>
<link wikidata="Q1776505" start="6171" end="6193" title="Travelers Championship" label="Travelers Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q2476740" start="6197" end="6219" title="TPC at River Highlands" label="TPC at River Highlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q402839" start="6223" end="6244" title="Cromwell, Connecticut" label="Cromwell, Connecticut"/>
<link wikidata="Q854376" start="6437" end="6446" title="Ryder Cup" label="Ryder Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q2936283" start="6472" end="6486" title="2018 Ryder Cup" label="2018 Ryder Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q3058615" start="6545" end="6561" title="Le Golf National" label="Le Golf National"/>
<link wikidata="Q30621491" start="6632" end="6639" title="2018 Masters Tournament" label="Masters"/>
<link wikidata="Q15905139" start="6649" end="6661" title="Patrick Reed" label="Patrick Reed"/>
<link wikidata="Q2287947" start="6798" end="6811" title="Jordan Spieth" label="Jordan Spieth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1971029" start="7059" end="7083" title="The Players Championship" label="The Players Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q380613" start="7103" end="7115" title="Rory McIlroy" label="Rory McIlroy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6846429" start="7334" end="7362" title="Mike Cowan" label="Mike &amp;quot;Fluff&amp;quot; Cowan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061312" start="7487" end="7505" title="PGA Tour Champions" label="PGA Tour Champions"/>
<link wikidata="Q55635023" start="7560" end="7578" title="The Ally Challenge" label="The Ally Challenge"/>
<link wikidata="Q5453872" start="7696" end="7723" title="PURE Insurance Championship" label="PURE Insurance Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q534974" start="7727" end="7750" title="Pebble Beach Golf Links" label="Pebble Beach Golf Links"/>
<link wikidata="Q6183869" start="7769" end="7780" title="Jerry Kelly" label="Jerry Kelly"/>
<link wikidata="Q9434" start="7792" end="7805" title="Arnold Palmer" label="Arnold Palmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q4977471" start="7810" end="7824" title="Bruce Fleisher" label="Bruce Fleisher"/>
<link wikidata="Q1779476" start="7948" end="7964" title="U.S. Senior Open" label="U.S. Senior Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q14704999" start="7968" end="7986" title="Omaha Country Club" label="Omaha Country Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q707994" start="8003" end="8012" title="Mike Weir" label="Mike Weir"/>
<link wikidata="Q707225" start="8017" end="8030" title="Retief Goosen" label="Retief Goosen"/>
<link wikidata="Q3110173" start="8155" end="8166" title="Golf Digest" label="Golf Digest"/>
<link wikidata="Q960618" start="8449" end="8462" title="David Feherty" label="David Feherty"/>
<link wikidata="Q5525555" start="8541" end="8552" title="Gary McCord" label="Gary McCord"/>
<link wikidata="Q6366430" start="8774" end="8788" title="Kapalua Resort" label="Kapalua Resort"/>
<link wikidata="Q81068910" start="9381" end="9398" title="COVID-19 pandemic" label="COVID-19 pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q10806" start="9786" end="9790" title="September 11, 2001 attacks" label="9/11"/>
<link wikidata="Q854376" start="10229" end="10238" title="Ryder Cup" label="Ryder Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q3453914" start="10240" end="10244" title="1997 Ryder Cup" label="1997"/>
<link wikidata="Q3453913" start="10246" end="10250" title="1999 Ryder Cup" label="1999"/>
<link wikidata="Q3453915" start="10262" end="10266" title="2002 Ryder Cup" label="2002"/>
<link wikidata="Q1933260" start="10268" end="10272" title="2004 Ryder Cup" label="2004"/>
<link wikidata="Q1852176" start="10274" end="10278" title="2006 Ryder Cup" label="2006"/>
<link wikidata="Q919786" start="10280" end="10284" title="2008 Ryder Cup" label="2008"/>
<link wikidata="Q788186" start="10296" end="10300" title="2010 Ryder Cup" label="2010"/>
<link wikidata="Q602293" start="10302" end="10306" title="2012 Ryder Cup" label="2012"/>
<link wikidata="Q3866803" start="10308" end="10312" title="2014 Ryder Cup" label="2014"/>
<link wikidata="Q2936283" start="10314" end="10318" title="2018 Ryder Cup" label="2018"/>
<link wikidata="Q1647788" start="10342" end="10356" title="Presidents Cup" label="Presidents Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q104841067" start="10358" end="10362" title="1998 Presidents Cup" label="1998"/>
<link wikidata="Q4597776" start="10364" end="10368" title="2000 Presidents Cup" label="2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q4601748" start="10380" end="10384" title="2003 Presidents Cup" label="2003"/>
<link wikidata="Q4604777" start="10392" end="10396" title="2005 Presidents Cup" label="2005"/>
<link wikidata="Q4609156" start="10408" end="10412" title="2007 Presidents Cup" label="2007"/>
<link wikidata="Q4614632" start="10424" end="10428" title="2009 Presidents Cup" label="2009"/>
<link wikidata="Q2682297" start="10440" end="10444" title="2011 Presidents Cup" label="2011"/>
<link wikidata="Q129176222" start="10456" end="10460" title="2024 Presidents Cup" label="2024"/>
<link wikidata="Q524624" start="10532" end="10541" title="World Cup (men&amp;#x27;s golf)" label="World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q4601980" start="10543" end="10547" title="2003 WGC-World Cup" label="2003"/>
<link wikidata="Q7982566" start="10549" end="10578" title="Wendy&amp;#x27;s 3-Tour Challenge" label="Wendy&amp;#x27;s 3-Tour Challenge"/>
<link wikidata="Q28454267" start="10634" end="10675" title="1993 PGA Tour Qualifying School graduates" label="1993 PGA Tour Qualifying School graduates"/>
<link wikidata="Q6621761" start="10677" end="10716" title="List of golfers with most PGA Tour wins" label="List of golfers with most PGA Tour wins"/>
<link wikidata="Q7168095" start="10718" end="10739" title="Lowest rounds of golf" label="Lowest rounds of golf"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="247957" wikidata="Q49204" url="?curid=247957" title="Smith College">
<text>Smith College is a private liberal arts women&#x27;s college in Northampton, Massachusetts, United States. It was chartered in 1871 by Sophia Smith and opened in 1875. It is a member of the historic Seven Sisters colleges, a group of women&#x27;s colleges in the Northeastern United States. Smith is also a member of the Five College Consortium with four other institutions in the Pioneer Valley: Mount Holyoke College, Amherst College, Hampshire College, and the University of Massachusetts Amherst; students of each college are allowed to attend classes at any other member institution. On campus are Smith&#x27;s Museum of Art and Botanic Garden, the latter designed by Frederick Law Olmsted.

Smith has 50 academic departments and programs and is structured around an open curriculum, with requirements being a writing intensive class during the first year and the fulfillment of a major. Examinations vary from self-scheduled exams, scheduled exams, and take-home exams. Undergraduate admissions are exclusively restricted to women, although Smith announced a trans-inclusive admissions policy in 2015. Smith offers several graduate degrees, all of which accept applicants regardless of gender, and co-administers programs alongside other Five College Consortium members. The college was the first historically women&#x27;s college to offer an undergraduate engineering degree. Admissions are considered selective. It was the first women&#x27;s college to join the NCAA, and its sports teams are known as the Pioneers.

Smith alumnae include notable authors, journalists, activists, feminists, politicians, investors, philanthropists, actresses, filmmakers, academics, businesswomen, CEOs, two First Ladies of the United States, and recipients of the Pulitzer Prize, Rhodes Scholarship, Academy Award, Emmy Award, MacArthur Grant, Peabody Award, and Tony Award.

==History==
=== Early history ===

The college was chartered in 1871 by a bequest of Sophia Smith and opened its doors in 1875 with 14 students and 6 faculty. When Smith inherited a fortune from her father when she was age 65, she decided that leaving her inheritance to found a women&#x27;s college was the best way for her to fulfill the moral obligation she expressed in her will:

The campus was planned and planted in the 1890s as a botanical garden and arboretum, designed by noted American landscape architect, Frederick Law Olmsted. By 1915, the student enrollment was 1,724, and the faculty numbered 163.

During the 1920s, two students at the college went missing: junior Alice Corbett disappeared on November 13, 1925, and was never found; freshman Frances Smith disappeared on January 13, 1928—her body was recovered from the Connecticut River months later.

By 2010, the school had 2,600 undergraduates on campus and 250 students studying elsewhere. The campus landscape now encompasses and includes more than 1,200 varieties of trees and shrubs. Smith is the largest privately endowed college for women in the United States.

=== United States Naval Reserve Midshipmen&#x27;s School ===
The United States Naval Reserve Midshipmen&#x27;s School at Smith College was training grounds for junior officers of the Women&#x27;s Reserve of the U.S. Naval Reserve (WAVES) and was nicknamed &quot;USS Northampton&quot;. On August 28, 1942, a total of 120 women reported to the school for training.

=== 21st century ===
In April 2015, the faculty adopted an open-access policy to make its scholarship publicly accessible online.

On September 15, 2022, the Board of Trustees announced Sarah Willie-LeBreton had been selected as the 12th president of Smith College, effective July 1, 2023.

=== Presidents ===
Smith has been led by 11 presidents and two acting presidents. (Elizabeth Cutter Morrow was the first acting president of Smith College and the first female head of the college, but she did not use the title of president.) For the 1975 centennial, the college inaugurated its first woman president, Jill Ker Conway, who came to Smith from Australia by way of Harvard and the University of Toronto. Since President Conway&#x27;s term, all Smith presidents have been women, with the exception of John M. Connolly&#x27;s one-year term as acting president in the interim after President Simmons left to lead Brown University.

== Campus ==
=== Environmental sustainability ===
Smith has a contract with Zipcar in efforts to reduce individually owned-cars on campus. The college has also promoted sustainability through academics and through the arts.

For Smith&#x27;s efforts regarding sustainability, the institution earned a grade of A− on the &quot;College Sustainability Report Card 2010&quot; administered by the Sustainable Endowments Institute. Smith was lauded for many of the indicator categories, including student involvement, green building, and transportation, but was marked down for endowment transparency.

==Academics==

Smith College has 285 professors in 50 academic departments and programs, for a faculty-student ratio of 1:9. It was the first women&#x27;s college in the United States to grant its own undergraduate degrees in engineering. The Picker Engineering Program offers a single ABET accredited Bachelor of Science in engineering science, combining the fundamentals of multiple engineering disciplines.

In 2008, Smith joined the SAT optional movement for undergraduate admission.

Smith runs its own junior year abroad (JYA) programs in four European cities: Paris, Hamburg, Florence, and Geneva. These programs are notable for requiring all studies to be conducted in the language of the host country (with both Paris and Geneva programs conducted in French). In some cases, students live in homestays with local families. Nearly half of Smith&#x27;s juniors study overseas, either through Smith JYA programs or at more than 40 other locations around the world.

Junior math majors from other undergraduate institutions are invited to study at Smith College for one year through the Center for Women in Mathematics. Established in the fall of 2007 by Professors Ruth Haas and Jim Henle, the program aims to allow young women to improve their mathematical abilities through classwork, research, and involvement in a department centered on women. The Center also offers a post-baccalaureate year of math study to women who did not major in mathematics as undergraduates or whose mathematics major was not strong.

The Louise W. and Edmund J. Kahn Liberal Arts Institute supports collaborative research without regard to the traditional boundaries of academic departments and programs. Each year the institute supports long-term and short-term projects proposed, planned, and organized by members of the Smith College faculty. By becoming Kahn Fellows, students get involved in interdisciplinary research projects and work alongside faculty and visiting scholars for a year.

Students can develop leadership skills through Smith&#x27;s two-year Phoebe Reese Lewis Leadership Program. Participants train in public speaking, analytical thinking, teamwork strategies, and the philosophical aspects of leadership.

Through Smith&#x27;s internship program, &quot;Praxis: The Liberal Arts at Work,&quot; all undergraduates are guaranteed access to one college-funded internship during their years at the college. This program enables students to access interesting self-generated internship positions in social welfare and human services, the arts, media, health, education, and other fields.

Its most popular undergraduate majors, based on 2021 graduates, were:
*Research &amp; Experimental Psychology (49)
*Biology/Biological Sciences (48)
*Political Science &amp; Government (45)
*Engineering Science (36)
*History (30)
*English Language &amp; Literature (25)
*Mathematics (23)
*Economics (23)
*Computer Science (22)

===Ada Comstock Scholars Program===

The Ada Comstock Scholars Program is an undergraduate degree program that serves Smith students of nontraditional college age. The program accommodates approximately 100 women ranging in age from mid-twenties to over sixty. Ada Comstock Scholars attend the same classes as traditional undergraduates, either full or part-time, and participate fully in a variety of extracurricular activities. They may live on or off campus. Financial aid is available to each Ada Comstock Scholar with demonstrated need.

Beginning in 1968, with the approval of the Committee on Educational Policy, Smith College initiated a trial program loosely titled &quot;The Continuing Education Degree&quot; for several women of non-traditional age who were looking to complete their unfinished degrees. Their successes inspired President Thomas C. Mendenhall and Dean Alice Dickinson to officially expand the program. In January 1975, the Ada Comstock Scholars Program has formally established under President Jill Ker Conway and in the fall of that year, forty-five women were enrolled. The students range in age, background, and geographical location. The growth of the program peaked at just over 400 students in 1988.

The program is named for Ada Louise Comstock Notestein (1876–1973), an 1897 Smith graduate, professor of English and dean of Smith from 1912 to 1923, and president of Radcliffe College from 1923 to 1943. Ada Comstock Notestein devoted much of her life to the academic excellence of women. Considering education and personal growth to be a lifelong process, she stayed actively involved in women&#x27;s higher education until her death at the age of 97.

=== Graduate degrees and study options ===

Smith&#x27;s graduate program is open to applicants of any gender. Degrees offered are Master of Arts in teaching (elementary, middle or high school), master of fine arts, master of education of the deaf, Master of Science in biological sciences, Master of Science in exercise and sport studies and master and Ph.D. in social work. In special one-year programs, international students may qualify for a certificate of graduate studies or a diploma in American studies. Each year approximately 100 men and women pursue advanced graduate work at Smith.

Also offered as a non-degree studies program is the Diploma in American Studies. This is a highly competitive one-year program open only to international students of advanced undergraduate or graduate standing. It is designed primarily, although not exclusively, for those who are teaching or who plan to teach some aspect of American culture and institutions.

The Smith College School for Social Work is nationally recognized for its specialization in clinical social work and puts a heavy emphasis on direct field work practice. The program is accredited by the Council on Social Work Education. The school offers a Master of Social Work (M.S.W.) degree as well as a Ph.D. program designed to prepare MSWs for leadership positions in clinical research education and practice.

The college has a limited number of other programs leading to Ph.D.s and is part of a cooperative doctoral program co-administered by Amherst College, Hampshire College, Mount Holyoke College and the University of Massachusetts Amherst.

== Admissions and rankings ==

===Admissions===
The 2022 annual ranking of &quot;U.S. News &amp; World Report&quot; categorizes Smith as &#x27;most selective&#x27;.

For the Class of 2027 (enrolling fall 2023), Smith received 9,868 applications (reflecting a 36 percent increase over last year), accepted 1,875 (19.0%), and enrolled 630. Smith’s applicant pool has increased 36 percent over the past year, which the college attributes to the decision to move to ‘loan-free’ financial aid. The middle 50% range of SAT scores was 670–750 for critical reading and 670–770 for math, while the middle 50% range for the ACT composite score was 31–34 for enrolled first-year students. The average SAT for Smith College is 1430 even though Smith is also a test-optional college.

===Rankings===
&quot;U.S. News &amp; World Report&quot;&#x27;s 2025 rankings placed Smith tied for the 14th overall best liberal arts college in the U.S., and rated it 24th for &quot;Best Value&quot;, tied for 15th in &quot;Best Undergraduate Engineering Program&quot; at schools where doctorate not offered, 21st in &quot;Best Undergraduate Teaching&quot;, and tied for 18th in &quot;Top Performers on Social Mobility&quot;. In 2025, &quot;Forbes&quot; rated Smith 135th overall in its America&#x27;s Top Colleges ranking of 500 military academies, national universities, and liberal arts colleges. &quot;Kiplinger&#x27;s Personal Finance&quot; places Smith 16th in its 2019 ranking of 149 best value liberal arts colleges in the United States. For 2020, &quot;Washington Monthly&quot; ranked Smith 23rd among 218 liberal arts colleges in the U.S. based on its contribution to the public good, as measured by social mobility, research, and promoting public service. Smith College is accredited by the New England Commission of Higher Education.

==Traditions==

===Residential culture and student life===
Smith requires most undergraduate students to live in on-campus houses unless they reside locally with their families. This policy is intended to add to the camaraderie and social cohesion of its students. Unlike most institutions of its type, Smith College does not have dorms, but rather 41 separate houses, ranging in architectural style from 18th-century to contemporary. It is rumored the architecture of Chapin House was the inspiration for the Tara Plantation House in &quot;Gone with the Wind&quot;. (Author Margaret Mitchell went to Smith for one year and lived in Chapin.) A novelty of Smith&#x27;s homelike atmosphere is the continuing popularity of Sophia Smith&#x27;s recipe for molasses cookies. These are often served at the traditional Friday afternoon tea held in each house, where students, faculty and staff members, and alumnae socialize.

Two cultural spaces on campus are used by students of color to build their community: the Mwangi Cultural Center and Unity House. Mwangi originally opened as the Afro-American Cultural Center in 1968 but was later renamed in honor of the first female physician in Kenya, and Smith alum, Dr. Ng’endo Mwangi (&#x27;61). After loaning Mwangi to the other cultural organizations on campus for four years, the Black Students’ Alliance decided to reclaim Mwangi in April 1990. Leaders, members, and supporters of cultural organizations got together to form a group called UNITY, in October of the same year, to demand a space for other cultural organizations. Today, Unity House serves as a home to the 11 cultural organizations on campus.

Two recent additions to the campus, both of which enhance its sense of community, are the architecturally dramatic Julia McWilliams Child &#x27;34 Campus Center and the state-of-the-art Olin Fitness Center.

In 2009, construction was also completed on Ford Hall, a new science and engineering facility. According to the Smith College website, Ford Hall is a &quot;...facility that will intentionally blur the boundaries between traditional disciplines, creating an optimum environment for students and faculty to address key scientific and technological developments of our time.&quot; The building was officially dedicated on October 16, 2009.

The campus also boasts a botanic garden that includes a variety of specialty gardens including a rock garden and historic glass greenhouses dating back to 1895. The botanic garden formerly featured a Japanese tea hut, which was removed in October 2015 following concerns over &quot;issues of safety and vandalism.&quot;

Smith offers &quot;panel discussions and seminars for lesbian, bisexual, and transgender students on subjects such as coming out as transgender at work.&quot; In 2003, Smith students voted to remove pronouns from the language of the Student Government Association constitution, in order to make that document inclusive of transgender students who don&#x27;t identify with the pronouns &quot;she&quot; and &quot;her.&quot;

Until 2013, transgender women were not allowed to attend Smith unless all their legal documentation consistently stated they were female. This policy came to public attention in March 2013 when Smith rejected the application of a trans woman named Calliope Wong. In the rejection letter, Smith&#x27;s Dean of Admission Debra Shaver wrote &quot;Your FAFSA indicates your gender as male. Therefore, Smith cannot process your application.&quot; This policy was changed in 2013 to only require all nonlegal application materials to indicate a female identity, including references. Not satisfied with the change, students as well as various alumni formed the group Q&amp;A (&quot;Queers and Allies&quot;) to advocate for more trans-inclusive policies. Q&amp;A subsequently protested the policy on Facebook and other social media websites, as well as staging protests on campus that garnered significant media attention. In 2014, Smith formed an Admissions Policy Study Group, co-chaired by Daphne Lamothe and Audrey Smith, who at the time were an associate professor of Afro-American studies and vice president for enrollment, respectively. The group recommended that to be considered for admission to Smith, applicants live and/or identify as a woman, check the &quot;female&quot; box when applying and that the President establish a working group to support all trans and non-binary students at Smith. These recommendations went to the faculty and the Board of Trustees and in 2015, Smith announced a new policy that only required female identification on the common application. Under the policy, transgender men and non-binary or genderqueer applicants are not eligible for admission. This new policy also affirms that any student who, once admitted, transitions to another identity other than &quot;female&quot; and, who completes the college&#x27;s graduation requirements, will be awarded a Smith degree. The Resource Center for Sexuality and Gender; The Office for Equity and Inclusion and its Trans/Non-binary Working Group; Transcending Gender, a student group focused on support and education; and the Transgender Support Group run by Counseling Services work to support trans and non-binary students at Smith across the gender identity spectrum.

In the fall of 2018, students at Smith protested after a Smith employee called the police on a black student working at Smith over the summer when the employee saw her in a common space. Organized by the Black Students’ Alliance and the Smith African &amp; Caribbean Students Association, students protested and walked out of the annual Smith convocation. While the incident received national attention and news coverage, Smith conducted an independent investigation and investigators found that there was no bias in the incident. In response to the incident, Smith hosted an Inclusion and Diversity Conference on April 10, 2019, featuring workshops and presenters run by various members of the Smith community. However, during that time another controversy arose: the hiring of Mount Holyoke College and Smith&#x27;s joint police chief, Daniel Hect. Students from both campuses brought to their administrators&#x27; attention the fact that Hect had &quot;liked&quot; right-wing tweets on Twitter, such as Donald Trump tweeting &quot;Build that Wall!&quot; and a tweet from the National Rifle Association of America, before deleting his account once the conflict with students began. At the conference, students protested a presentation from the campus police, including Hect, about policing in a diverse community. Protests continued the next day when hundreds of students participated in a sit-in organized by the group Students for Social Justice and Institutional Change outside of John M. Greene Hall. The coalition presented a broad list of demands to the administration, proposing reform to many sectors of campus life, including curriculum, health and counseling services, accessibility, policing, admissions policies, and affinity housing. In response to the demands, Smith launched a working group charged with identifying key themes in response to the day of inclusion and ensuing protests and revamped the Office of Equity and Inclusion, adding programmatic changes, new or modified positions, training and development opportunities and new events to promote inclusion and equity.

In October 2020, Smith alumna Jodi Shaw, then Student Support Coordinator in the Department of Residence Life, began posting videos commenting on mandated diversity training for staff at Smith College on her YouTube channel. Shaw characterized the training as contributing to a climate of &quot;harassment, discrimination, and hostility&quot; at the college, especially for staff. On February 19, 2021, columnist Bari Weiss published Shaw&#x27;s resignation letter on Weiss&#x27;s Substack blog. In it, Shaw described the implementation of the training as &quot;psychologically abusive&quot; and the culture as &quot;deeply hostile and fearful.&quot; She alleged that the college had &quot;offered a settlement in exchange for my silence, but I turned it down&quot;. On February 22, Smith College published a letter from President Kathleen McCartney alleging that an unnamed former employee had accused the college of &quot;creating a racially hostile environment for white people, a baseless claim that the college flatly denies,&quot; and that &quot;it was the employee herself who demanded payment of an exceptionally large sum in exchange for dropping a threatened legal claim and agreeing to standard confidentiality provisions.&quot; McCartney affirmed that the college&#x27;s &quot;commitment to, and strategies for, advancing equity and inclusion are grounded in evidence.&quot;

On February 24, 2021, the &quot;New York Times&quot; reported on worsening tensions between students, staff, and administrators around issues of racial justice and the college&#x27;s diversity training. President McCartney stated that &quot;Good training is never about making people too uncomfortable or to feel ashamed or anything. I think our staff is content and are embracing it.&quot; A former janitor told the paper that he had gone through numerous training sessions in race and intersectionality at Smith and that they had left staff workers cynical.

====Houses====

Smith College has many different houses serving as dormitories. Each house is self-governing. While many students remain in the same house for the entirety of their four years at Smith, they are not obligated to do so and may move to different houses on campus as space allows. While houses previously collected dues, in the 2019–2020 school year they were eradicated to avoid placing financial pressure on low-income students or students who were otherwise unable to pay without sacrificing funding for the House.

Houses are found in four main regions of campus: Upper and Lower Elm Street, Green Street, Center Campus, and the Quadrangle. Each part can, in turn, be divided into smaller areas to more precisely provide the location of the house in question. In 2019, the college shifted from officially recognizing the four main areas of campus to instead categorizing houses in four neighborhoods: Ivy, Paradise, Mountain, and Garden. This change was largely internal and categorizes houses by size rather than location.

=====Green Street houses=====
* Hubbard House – Hubbard House is the residence of fictional President Selina Meyer from the HBO Show &quot;Veep&quot;. Julia Child resided in this house during her time at Smith.
* Lawrence House – Sylvia Plath resided in this house during her time at Smith.
* Morris House – Morris was built in 1891, with its sister house Lawrence to help accommodate the growing student body. It is named after Kate Morris Cone, Smith College class of 1879.
* Tyler House – Named after William Seymour Tyler, one of the original trustees of the college. Former First Lady Barbara Bush lived here before she left to marry George Bush.
* Washburn House – Washburn is named for former trustee and senator William B. Washburn. During the Second World War, the house served as a Spanish-speaking residence for students unable to study abroad.
* 44 Green Street
* 54 Green Street

=====Center Campus houses=====
* Cutter House
* Chapin House – Author Margaret Mitchell lived here. Chapin&#x27;s staircase served as the inspiration for the staircase of Scarlett O&#x27;Hara&#x27;s Tara in &quot;Gone With the Wind&quot;.
* Haven/Wesley Houses
* Hopkins House
* Park Complex
**Park Annex – one of two new Affinity houses at Smith College, houses that cater to minority identities on campus.
* Sessions Complex – the oldest house on the Smith campus. It has a secret passageway.
* Tenney House
* Ziskind House

=====Upper Elm Street houses=====

* Capen House – Built in 1825 by Samuel Howe, the founder of Northampton Law School, it became part of the Capen School in 1883 and was willed to the college by the school&#x27;s founder in 1921. It is designed in the Classical Revival style. It is named after the founder of the Capen School, Bessie Talbot Capen.
* Gillett House – Connected to Northrop house via a breezeway, Gillett houses the only vegan/vegetarian dining hall on campus.
* Lamont House – Built in 1955, Lamont House was the first house constructed after the construction of the Quad houses in 1936. Named for alumna Florence Corliss Lamont, who earned her A.B. in 1893 and later an M.A. from Columbia. She married Harvard graduate and future Smith Trustee Thomas Lamont and had four children. Throughout her life, she would continue to give generously to her alma mater. Lamont House is just across Elm Street, tucked behind Northrop and Gillett Houses. Lamont houses 83 students.
* Northrop House
* Parsons Complex
**Parsons Annex – one of two new Affinity houses at Smith College, houses that cater to minority identities on campus.
* Talbot House – Built in 1909 as part of the Capen School, it was willed to the college in 1921. Its mascot is the moose. US First Lady Nancy Reagan &#x27;43 lived here during her time at Smith. It is also named for Bessie Talbot Capen.

=====Lower Elm Street houses=====
* Albright House
* Baldwin House – U.S. Senator Tammy Baldwin (&#x27;84) was a Baldwin House resident during her time at Smith College.
* Chase House – Once a school for girls from the 1870s until 1968 when it was acquired as housing for the college. It was once a Junior &amp; Senior only house and now serves as a substance-free residence. Named after Mary Ellen Chase, a writer, and English professor.
* Conway House – A residence for Ada Comstock Scholars and their families, named after Smith President Jill Ker Conway
* Duckett House - built in 1803, Duckett house is one of the oldest buildings on campus. Aside from affinity housing and special housing (Friedman’s, family complexes, co-ops, etc.) it is the smallest traditional house, with only 36 residents. Residents in Duckett are known as “Ducks”, which is also the official mascot of the house. There is also a “duck shrine” in the common room, where small miniature ducks face a larger stuffed-animal duck. It is a long-held tradition for alums to leave small rubber ducks with their class year and initials on the table of the shrine, often the rubber duck you were gifted in your first year. The house is named for Eleanor Duckett, who taught in the English department at Smith in the 20th century. Per Eleanor Duckett’s journals and writing, recovered in the Smith special collections, Duckett was the &quot;life-long partner: of fellow English professor, Mary Ellen Chase. Many students joke that this is why Chase and Duckett houses are conjoined, existing together, but separately, in one building complex.
* 150 Elm Street

=====East Quadrangle houses=====
* Cushing House – named for math professor Eleanor P. Cushing; Gloria Steinem resided here during her time at Smith.
* Emerson House
* Jordan House – Built in 1922 and named for the longtime head of the Smith English Department, Mary Augusta Jordan.
* King House – Named for Franklin King, who served as the superintendent of building and grounds at Smith for 50 years
* Scales House -King&#x27;s &quot;sister house,&quot; was named after Laura Woolsey Lord Scales, who graduated from Smith in 1901 and was the school&#x27;s first dean of students

=====West Quadrangle houses=====
* Comstock House – Named after Ada Comstock class of 1897, former dean of the college and president of Radcliffe College
* Gardiner House
* Morrow House – Named after Elizabeth Cutter Morrow, class of 1896 and former acting president of the college
* Haynes House - Originally named Wilder House, this house was renamed in 2024 in recognition of the mathematician Euphemia Haynes after concerns were raised about the scholarly legacy of Harris Hawthorne Wilder and Inez Whipple Wilder, Smith-affiliated zoologists for whom the house was originally named
* Wilson House – Named after Martha Wilson, class of 1895
* Paradise Apartments – each complex is named after a notable Smith Alum

====Campus folklore====
Smith has numerous folk tales and ghost stories emerging from the histories of some of its historic buildings. It was named the most haunted college in America by College Consensus. One such tale holds Sessions House is inhabited by the ghost of Lucy Hunt, who died of a broken heart after being separated from her lover, General Burgoyne. Reports of a ghost in Sessions House predate its history as a campus house. Built in 1751 by the Hunt family, the house has a secret staircase where, according to legend, the Hunt&#x27;s eldest daughter Lucy would rendezvous with her lover, General Burgoyne. The two were ultimately driven apart, and in the 1880s it was believed the ghost of a heartbroken Burgoyne haunted the staircase. Since Sessions House became part of college housing in the 20th century, the specter has taken on a decidedly feminine identity, and some former residents of Sessions claim to have seen Lucy&#x27;s ghost in the stairwell.

====Clubs, sports, and organizations====
In addition to its 11 varsity sports, there are currently more than 120 clubs and organizations.

=====Athletics=====
Smith&#x27;s athletic teams have been known as the Pioneers since 1986. The name expresses the spirit of Smith&#x27;s students and the college&#x27;s leading role in women&#x27;s athletics (the first women&#x27;s basketball game was played at Smith in 1893).

A new spirit mark was unveiled to the Smith community in December 2008. The new visual identity for Smith&#x27;s sports teams marks the culmination of a yearlong project to promote visibility and enthusiasm for Smith&#x27;s intercollegiate and club teams—and to generate school spirit broadly. The spirit mark is used for athletics uniforms, casual apparel, and promotional items for clubs and organizations. As Smith was the first women&#x27;s college to join the NCAA, the new mark is seen as linking the college&#x27;s pioneering alumnae athletes to their equally determined and competitive counterparts today. Smith athletes won some of the early national intercollegiate women&#x27;s tennis championships in singles (Louise Raymond, 1938 and 1939) and doubles (1933, 1935, 1938 and 1948).

Smith College does not have college colors in the usual sense. Its official color is white, trimmed with gold, but the official college logo is blue and yellow (a previous logo was burgundy and white). NCAA athletic teams have competed in blue and white (or blue and yellow, in the case of the soccer, crew, swimming, and squash teams) uniforms since the 1970s and selected Pioneers as the official name and mascot in 1986. Popular club sports are free to choose their own colors and mascot; both Rugby and Fencing have chosen red and black.

Smith has a rotating system of class colors dating back to the 1880s when intramural athletics and other campus competitions were usually held by class. Today, class colors are yellow, red, blue, and green, with incoming first-year classes assigned the color of the previous year&#x27;s graduating class; their color then &quot;follows&quot; them through to graduation. Alumnae classes, particularly at reunions, continue to identify with and use their class color thereafter.

=====Cultural organizations=====
There are 11 chartered cultural organizations that fall under the UNITY title: the Asian Students’ Association (ASA), Black Students’ Alliance (BSA), Chinese Interregional Student Cultural Org (CISCO), South Asian Student Association of Smith (EKTA), Indigenous Smith Students and Allies (ISSA), International Students Organization (ISO), Korean Students Association (KSA), the Latin American Students Organization (LASO), Multiethnic Interracial Smith College (MISC), Smithies of Caribbean Ancestry (SOCA), and the Vietnamese Students Association (VSA). Smith College Website Multicultural Affairs The Black Students’ Alliance is the oldest of all Unity organizations. In the Fall of 2012, as an effort to document the history of students of color on the Smith campus, the Weaving Voices Archives Project was created.

===Academic year events===
Convocation signals the start of the fall semester. For new students, it is the first chance to experience Smith College&#x27;s tradition and spirit. Likewise, for some returning students, the annual event is like a big, welcome-home party as well as an occasion for celebration and an opportunity for creative attire. House communities develop imaginative themes for group fashion, and Smith seniors put special touches on favorite hats to create their own unique &quot;senior hats,&quot; to be worn for the first time at Convocation.

Mountain Day is observed early in the fall semester. The president of the college selects a crisp, sunny, beautiful autumn day when the leaves are in full color, and announces the cancellation of classes by having bells rung on campus at 7:15 AM on the chosen day. The eager anticipation of Mountain Day leads to intense speculation about meteorology by students in the weeks leading up to the surprise announcement. Traditional observance of Mountain Day by students might involve New England road trips or outdoor pursuits, and college dining services provides box lunches to be taken off-campus. Many of the Houses go apple-picking together. In recent years, on Mountain Day, it is customary to wear flannel.

Cromwell Day, named for Smith&#x27;s first African-American student, Otelia Cromwell, and her niece Adelaide Cromwell, began in 1989 to provide students with an in-depth program specifically addressing issues of racism and diversity. Afternoon classes are canceled, and students are invited to participate in lectures, workshops, symposia, and cultural events focused on a different theme each year. In 2020, Otelia Cromwell Day was renamed &quot;Cromwell Day&quot; to simultaneously honor Otelia Cromwell&#x27;s niece Adelaide Cromwell, Smith College&#x27;s first African-American faculty member.

Rally Day In February 1876, the college began an annual observance of George Washington&#x27;s birthday. In 1894, a rally became part of the day&#x27;s events, and the focus of the celebration became primarily patriotic rather than exclusively social—though always with a women&#x27;s college twist. Students that year staged a mock debate on the subject, &quot;Does Higher Education Unfit a Man for Domestic Life?&quot; In 1906 the celebration was first referred to as Rally Day (although the name was not used officially by the college until 1992). In 1944, seniors made Rally Day the first public wearing of their graduation caps and gowns; since then, mortarboards have been replaced by wacky, often homemade hats. Today, the Rally Day Convocation is centered on a historical theme and features a distinguished keynote speaker and the awarding of Smith College Medals to accomplished alumnae.

===Reunions and commencement events===
The Alumnae Association of Smith College hosts official class reunions every five years. All alumnae from all classes are welcome to return in any year; &quot;off-year&quot; alumnae attend campus-wide events as the &quot;Class of 1776.&quot;

Traditional reunion and Commencement events are linked, and celebrate the close ties between Smith&#x27;s alumnae and its graduating seniors and their families. At the conclusion of final exams, most underclassmen leave the campus, while seniors remain in their houses for a week to celebrate and prepare for Commencement. Alumnae arrive for reunions later in the week, and many alumnae arrange for official accommodations in the campus houses, right alongside senior residents.

Ivy Day, the day before Commencement, is the high point of reunion and a significant event for seniors as well. Junior ushers lead a parade through campus, carrying vines of ivy to be planted by the departing seniors as a symbol of their lifelong connection to the college. Alumnae (and, often, their children), dressed in white and wearing sashes in their class color, line up in reverse order by class along both sides of the route. Seniors line up nearest the end of the parade route, wearing traditional white outfits and each carrying a single red rose. All cheer each alumnae class as it marches past, then fall in to join the end of the parade. Many alumnae classes carry signs with humorous poems or slogans, or hold balloons or wear hats in their class color. Ivy Day festivities conclude in the Quad, where the seniors plant their ivy and speakers address alumnae on the progress of fundraising and the state of the college.

Illumination Night, beginning at dusk on the Saturday evening before Commencement, is a celebration of the campus and a send-off of sorts for graduating seniors. Throughout the central campus, electric street lights are replaced for one night by multicolored Japanese-style paper lanterns, lit with real candles. These hang on both sides of every walking path and cast a soft glow over the buildings and lawns. Student a cappella singing groups and improv comedy troupes roam the campus, stopping occasionally to entertain the crowds. A jazz band, hired by the college, turns the science building&#x27;s courtyard into a dance floor. Seniors, alumnae, faculty, and their families spend the evening on walking tours of the illuminated campus and Botanic Gardens. The major official event of the night is the Senior Step Sing: seniors gather on the steps of Neilson Library, where they are serenaded by members of the Sophomore Push committee and then are physically pushed off the stairs and &quot;into the real world.&quot;

Until the early 1990s, all alumnae reunions were held during Commencement weekend. However, as the number of returning alumnae grew beyond the capacity of the campus, reunions were split into Reunion I/Commencement Weekend and Reunion II, held the following weekend. &quot;Significant&quot; reunions (50-, 25- and 10- year, but also 2-year) and the earliest reunion classes (65-year and prior) are assigned to Reunion I; other reunions (5-, 15-, 20-, 30-year, and so on) are assigned to Reunion II.

There have been several controversies surrounding commencement over the years. See Smith College commencement controversies to learn more.

==Notable alumnae==


Among the more notable of Smith College&#x27;s alumnae in chronological order are:
* Otelia Cromwell (class of 1900): first African-American graduate of Smith College and the first African American woman to receive a doctorate from Yale
* Blanche Hinman Dow (class of 1913): former president of the American Association of University Women
*Clara Savage Littledale (Class of 1913): writer and war reporter for &quot;Good Housekeeping&quot;, and &quot;Parents&quot; editor for over thirty years.
* Eunice Carter (class of 1921): first female African-American assistant district attorney for the state of New York, active in the prosecution of mob boss Charles &quot;Lucky&quot; Luciano
* Margaret Mitchell (class of 1922): author of &quot;Gone with the Wind&quot;, did not graduate from Smith
* Mary Watson Weaver (class of 1925): composer and poet
* Julia Child (class of 1934): chef, author, and television personality
* Madeleine L&#x27;Engle (class of 1941): author best known for &quot;A Wrinkle in Time&quot;
* Betty Friedan (class of 1942): feminist and author of &quot;The Feminine Mystique&quot;
* Nancy Reagan (class of 1943): First Lady of the United States from 1981 to 1989
* Penny Chenery (class of 1943): sportswoman, racehorse breeder, and owner, horse racing advocate
* Jean Harris (class of 1945): headmistress of the Madeira School who murdered her ex-lover Herman Tarnower in a jealous rage
* Rhoda Dorsey (class of 1946): historian and first woman president of Goucher College
* Barbara Bush (class of 1947): former First Lady of the United States, did not graduate from Smith
* Mary Otis Stevens (class of 1949): American architect
* Natalie Babbitt (class of 1954): notable illustrator and author of &quot;Tuck Everlasting&quot;
* Sylvia Plath (class of 1955): poet, novelist, and short story author
* Gloria Steinem (class of 1956): founder of &quot;Ms.&quot; magazine and noted feminist, activist, and journalist
* Lynden B. Miller (class of 1960): public garden designer, park advocate, and author
* Jane Yolen (class of 1960): children&#x27;s book author
* Susan Hiller (class of 1961): conceptual artist
* Ng&#x27;endo (Florence) Mwangi (class of 1961): Kenya&#x27;s first woman physician
* Anne Mollegen Smith (née Anne Rush Mollegen), (class of 1961), first woman editor-in-chief of Redbook
* Halina Poświatowska (class of 1961): Polish poet and writer
* Jane Harman (class of 1966): U.S. Representative for California&#x27;s 36th Congressional District
* Molly Ivins (class of 1966): journalist, political commentator, and humorist
* Shelly Lazarus (class of 1968): former CEO and chairman of Ogilvy &amp; Mather
* Niki Tsongas (class of 1968): U.S. Representative for Massachusetts&#x27; 3rd Congressional District
* Catharine MacKinnon (class of 1968): notable proponent of radical feminism, scholar, lawyer, teacher and activist
* Laura D&#x27;Andrea Tyson (class of 1969): economist; Director of the National Economic Council
* Yolanda King (class of 1976): activist
* Christine McCarthy (class of 1977): Chief Financial Officer of The Walt Disney Company
* Ann M. Martin (class of 1978): author of &quot;The Babysitter&#x27;s Club&quot;
* Phebe Novakovic (class of 1979): Chairman and CEO of General Dynamics
* Ruth Ozeki (class of 1980): author of &quot;A Tale for the Time Being&quot;
* Margaret Edson (class of 1983): winner of a Pulitzer Prize for Drama
* Tammy Baldwin (class of 1984): United States Senator; first openly LGBT person to be elected to congress
* Tori Murden (class of 1985): the first woman to row solo across the Atlantic Ocean, and to ski to the geographic South Pole
* Thelma Golden (class of 1987): Director and Chief Curator of The Studio Museum in Harlem
* Nancy La Vigne (class of 1987): criminologist and director of the National Institute of Justice
* Durreen Shahnaz (class of 1989): founder of Impact Investment Exchange (IIX)
*Becca Balint (class of 1990): current member of the United States House of Representatives from Vermont
* Jennifer Chrisler (class of 1992): executive director of the Family Equality Council
* Piper Kerman (class of 1992): &quot;Orange Is the New Black&quot; author, lived in Chapin House
* Deborah Archer (class of 1993): first Black person to be elected President of American Civil Liberties Union (ACLU)
* Kim Janey (class of 1994): first woman and first Black person to serve as mayor of the City of Boston
* Hanya Yanagihara (class of 1995): author and editor
* Emily W. Murphy (class of 1995) Administrator of the General Services Administration under Donald Trump
* Dorie Clark, (class of 1997): author and executive education professor
* Luma Mufleh (class of 1997): founder and director of Fugees Family, Inc.
* Cass Bird (class of 1999): fashion photographer
* Erin Morgenstern (class of 2000): &quot;The Night Circus&quot; author
* Sara Haines (class of 2000): co-host of &quot;The View&quot;, ABC News correspondent
* Rubaiyat Hossain (class of 2002): filmmaker of feature films &quot;Under Construction&quot; and &quot;Made in Bangladesh&quot;
* Sharmeen Obaid-Chinoy (class of 2002): documentarian, winner of two Academy Awards
* Lydia Jett (class of 2002): investor, board member and Founding Partner of Softbank Vision Fund
* Julia Scott (class of 2002): NPR and &quot;New York Times&quot; journalist
* Kimberly Drew (class of 2012): art curator and cultural critic
==Notable staff==

* Herbert Baxter Adams (1850–1901), educator, historian, and cofounder of the American Historical Association taught history at Smith from 1878 to 1881.
* Newton Arvin, American literary critic and academic
* Leonard Baskin, an artist who taught at Smith from 1953 to 1974
* Mary Ellen Chase, educator and author, taught English at Smith from 1926 to 1955.
* Emily Hale, speech and drama teacher, and muse of T.S. Eliot
* Louise Holland (1893–1990), academic, philologist and archaeologist, taught here from 1957 to 1964
* Daphne Lamothe, provost and professor of Africana studies
* Yusef Abdul Lateef, an American jazz multi-instrumentalist and composer, thought to be one of the most influential musicians of the 20th century, taught at Smith during the early 2000s.
* Sylvia Plath (1932–1963), an American poet and erudite, was an English professor from 1957 to 1958.
* Kurt Vonnegut, served as Writer-in-Residence during the 2000–2001 school year
* Jane Zielonko, translator of &quot;The Captive Mind&quot; (1953), taught English at Smith from 1946.

In 1960, three Smith professors, one who had been there for 38 years, were fired or &quot;allowed to retire&quot; for being gay. This was chronicled in a book (&quot;The Scarlet Professor—Newton Arvin: A Literary Life Shattered by Scandal&quot; (Doubleday, 2001), by Barry Werth), and the PBS Independent Lens film, &quot;The Great Pink Scare&quot;. It was also depicted in an opera based on Werth&#x27;s book in 2017 at Amherst College. In 2002, Smith acknowledged a wrong from four decades earlier by creating a lecture series and a small scholarship—the $100,000 Dorius/Spofford Fund for the Study of Civil Liberties and Freedom of Expression, and the Newton Arvin Prize in American Studies, a $500 annual stipend. But despite faculty appeals, there was no apology.

==See also==
* Cambridge School of Architecture and Landscape Architecture
* College Archives (Smith College)
* Smith College commencement controversies
* SS Smith Victory – a cargo ship named after Smith College
* Tofu Curtain

==References==
==Bibliography==

* Horowitz, Helen Lefkowitz (1993). &quot;Alma Mater: Design and Experience in the Women&#x27;s Colleges from Their Nineteenth-Century Beginnings to the 1930s&quot; (2nd ed.—link is to the 1st ed.). Amherst, Mass.: Univ. of Massachusetts Press. . .
* Olsen, Deborah M. (Winter 2000). &quot;Remaking the Image: Promotional Literature of Mount Holyoke, Smith, and Wellesley Colleges in the Mid-to-Late 1940s&quot;. &quot;History of Education Quarterly&quot; 40#4, pp. 418–59. . .
* Solomon, Barbara Miller (1985). &quot;In the Company of Educated Women: A History of Women and Higher Education in America&quot;. New Haven, Conn.: Yale University Press.
==External links==
* 
* &quot;The Sophian&quot;, Smith&#x27;s student newspaper</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q49204" start="0" end="13" title="Smith College" label="Smith College"/>
<link wikidata="Q902104" start="19" end="26" title="Private university" label="private"/>
<link wikidata="Q6540832" start="27" end="39" title="Liberal arts colleges in the United States" label="liberal arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q8031137" start="40" end="60" title="Women&amp;#x27;s colleges in the United States" label="women&amp;#x27;s college"/>
<link wikidata="Q49186" start="64" end="90" title="Northampton, Massachusetts" label="Northampton, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q7562922" start="135" end="147" title="Sophia Smith (Smith College)" label="Sophia Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q1886223" start="199" end="212" title="Seven Sisters (colleges)" label="Seven Sisters"/>
<link wikidata="Q1331248" start="321" end="344" title="Five College Consortium" label="Five College Consortium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140542" start="397" end="418" title="Mount Holyoke College" label="Mount Holyoke College"/>
<link wikidata="Q49165" start="420" end="435" title="Amherst College" label="Amherst College"/>
<link wikidata="Q1706859" start="437" end="454" title="Hampshire College" label="Hampshire College"/>
<link wikidata="Q15142" start="464" end="499" title="University of Massachusetts Amherst" label="University of Massachusetts Amherst"/>
<link wikidata="Q14715853" start="616" end="629" title="Smith College Museum of Art" label="Museum of Art"/>
<link wikidata="Q7719467" start="634" end="648" title="The Botanic Garden of Smith College" label="Botanic Garden"/>
<link wikidata="Q364187" start="673" end="694" title="Frederick Law Olmsted" label="Frederick Law Olmsted"/>
<link wikidata="Q271805" start="1470" end="1474" title="National Collegiate Athletic Association" label="NCAA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1816883" start="1699" end="1732" title="list of first ladies of the United States" label="First Ladies of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q46525" start="1756" end="1770" title="Pulitzer Prize" label="Pulitzer Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q1204346" start="1772" end="1790" title="Rhodes Scholarship" label="Rhodes Scholarship"/>
<link wikidata="Q19020" start="1792" end="1805" title="Academy Award" label="Academy Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q123737" start="1807" end="1817" title="Emmy Award" label="Emmy Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q1543268" start="1819" end="1834" title="MacArthur Grant" label="MacArthur Grant"/>
<link wikidata="Q838121" start="1836" end="1849" title="Peabody Award" label="Peabody Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q191874" start="1855" end="1865" title="Tony Award" label="Tony Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q7562922" start="1953" end="1965" title="Sophia Smith (Smith College)" label="Sophia Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q167346" start="2306" end="2322" title="botanical garden" label="botanical garden"/>
<link wikidata="Q272231" start="2327" end="2336" title="arboretum" label="arboretum"/>
<link wikidata="Q364187" start="2386" end="2407" title="Frederick Law Olmsted" label="Frederick Law Olmsted"/>
<link wikidata="Q56291120" start="2550" end="2563" title="Disappearance of Alice Corbett" label="Alice Corbett"/>
<link wikidata="Q5478953" start="2628" end="2641" title="Frances Smith (missing person)" label="Frances Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q379648" start="2706" end="2723" title="Connecticut River" label="Connecticut River"/>
<link wikidata="Q7890800" start="3073" end="3125" title="United States Naval Reserve Midshipmen&amp;#x27;s School" label="United States Naval Reserve Midshipmen&amp;#x27;s School"/>
<link wikidata="Q830971" start="3191" end="3245" title="WAVES" label="Women&amp;#x27;s Reserve of the U.S. Naval Reserve (WAVES)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2000006" start="3431" end="3449" title="open-access policy" label="open-access policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q232932" start="3474" end="3493" title="open access" label="publicly accessible"/>
<link wikidata="Q112516560" start="3558" end="3579" title="Sarah Willie-LeBreton" label="Sarah Willie-LeBreton"/>
<link wikidata="Q5362653" start="3746" end="3769" title="Elizabeth Cutter Morrow" label="Elizabeth Cutter Morrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q1395966" start="3981" end="3996" title="Jill Ker Conway" label="Jill Ker Conway"/>
<link wikidata="Q13371" start="4041" end="4048" title="Harvard University" label="Harvard"/>
<link wikidata="Q180865" start="4057" end="4078" title="University of Toronto" label="University of Toronto"/>
<link wikidata="Q49114" start="4286" end="4302" title="Brown University" label="Brown University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069924" start="4381" end="4387" title="Zipcar" label="Zipcar"/>
<link wikidata="Q16933584" start="4697" end="4729" title="Sustainable Endowments Institute" label="Sustainable Endowments Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q11023" start="5128" end="5139" title="engineering" label="engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q4650304" start="5188" end="5192" title="ABET" label="ABET"/>
<link wikidata="Q787674" start="5204" end="5223" title="Bachelor of Science" label="Bachelor of Science"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5339" end="5360" title="Liberal arts colleges in the United States#SAT optional movement" label="SAT optional movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q90" start="5469" end="5474" title="Paris" label="Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055" start="5476" end="5483" title="Hamburg" label="Hamburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q2044" start="5485" end="5493" title="Florence" label="Florence"/>
<link wikidata="Q71" start="5499" end="5505" title="Geneva" label="Geneva"/>
<link wikidata="Q5059921" start="5994" end="6025" title="Center for Women in Mathematics" label="Center for Women in Mathematics"/>
<link wikidata="Q47535932" start="6073" end="6082" title="Ruth Haas" label="Ruth Haas"/>
<link wikidata="Q5059921" start="6260" end="6266" title="Center for Women in Mathematics" label="Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q7049063" start="7960" end="7986" title="Non-traditional student" label="nontraditional college age"/>
<link wikidata="Q7788152" start="8674" end="8694" title="Thomas C. Mendenhall (historian)" label="Thomas C. Mendenhall"/>
<link wikidata="Q1395966" start="8846" end="8861" title="Jill Ker Conway" label="Jill Ker Conway"/>
<link wikidata="Q4678235" start="9084" end="9113" title="Ada Comstock" label="Ada Louise Comstock Notestein"/>
<link wikidata="Q49124" start="9226" end="9243" title="Radcliffe College" label="Radcliffe College"/>
<link wikidata="Q7545098" start="10475" end="10511" title="Smith College School for Social Work" label="Smith College School for Social Work"/>
<link wikidata="Q5176574" start="10674" end="10706" title="Council on Social Work Education" label="Council on Social Work Education"/>
<link wikidata="Q49165" start="11023" end="11038" title="Amherst College" label="Amherst College"/>
<link wikidata="Q1706859" start="11040" end="11057" title="Hampshire College" label="Hampshire College"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140542" start="11059" end="11080" title="Mount Holyoke College" label="Mount Holyoke College"/>
<link wikidata="Q15142" start="11089" end="11124" title="University of Massachusetts Amherst" label="University of Massachusetts Amherst"/>
<link wikidata="Q848629" start="11208" end="11236" title="U.S. News &amp;amp; World Report" label="U.S. News &amp;amp; World Report"/>
<link wikidata="Q334113" start="11640" end="11650" title="SAT scores" label="SAT scores"/>
<link wikidata="Q288826" start="11741" end="11744" title="ACT (test)" label="ACT"/>
<link wikidata="Q848629" start="11920" end="11948" title="U.S. News &amp;amp; World Report" label="U.S. News &amp;amp; World Report"/>
<link wikidata="Q25161472" start="12340" end="12346" title="Forbes" label="Forbes"/>
<link wikidata="Q6414652" start="12505" end="12538" title="Kiplinger&amp;#x27;s Personal Finance" label="Kiplinger&amp;#x27;s Personal Finance"/>
<link wikidata="Q7972062" start="12661" end="12679" title="Washington Monthly" label="Washington Monthly"/>
<link wikidata="Q5758323" start="12883" end="12893" title="Higher education accreditation in the United States" label="accredited"/>
<link wikidata="Q105952670" start="12901" end="12943" title="New England Commission of Higher Education" label="New England Commission of Higher Education"/>
<link wikidata="Q2870" start="13487" end="13505" title="Gone with the Wind (novel)" label="Gone with the Wind"/>
<link wikidata="Q173540" start="13521" end="13538" title="Margaret Mitchell" label="Margaret Mitchell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052281" start="16220" end="16231" title="trans woman" label="trans woman"/>
<link wikidata="Q5424324" start="16339" end="16344" title="FAFSA" label="FAFSA"/>
<link wikidata="Q355" start="16783" end="16791" title="Facebook" label="Facebook"/>
<link wikidata="Q202833" start="16802" end="16814" title="social media" label="social media"/>
<link wikidata="Q189125" start="17350" end="17355" title="Transgender" label="trans"/>
<link wikidata="Q48270" start="17360" end="17370" title="Non-binary gender" label="non-binary"/>
<link wikidata="Q55648728" start="17489" end="17499" title="Transgender admissions policies at women&amp;#x27;s colleges" label="new policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2449503" start="17586" end="17601" title="transgender men" label="transgender men"/>
<link wikidata="Q48270" start="17620" end="17631" title="genderqueer" label="genderqueer"/>
<link wikidata="Q48264" start="18218" end="18233" title="gender identity" label="gender identity"/>
<link wikidata="Q3765035" start="18588" end="18599" title="convocation" label="convocation"/>
<link wikidata="Q742736" start="18754" end="18758" title="bias" label="bias"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140542" start="19024" end="19045" title="Mount Holyoke College" label="Mount Holyoke College"/>
<link wikidata="Q918" start="19234" end="19241" title="Twitter" label="Twitter"/>
<link wikidata="Q22686" start="19251" end="19263" title="Donald Trump" label="Donald Trump"/>
<link wikidata="Q863259" start="19323" end="19360" title="National Rifle Association of America" label="National Rifle Association of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147337" start="19637" end="19643" title="sit-in" label="sit-in"/>
<link wikidata="Q39086707" start="20752" end="20762" title="Bari Weiss" label="Bari Weiss"/>
<link wikidata="Q63435709" start="20820" end="20828" title="Substack" label="Substack"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="21759" end="21773" title="New York Times" label="New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q15507489" start="23432" end="23444" title="Selina Meyer" label="Selina Meyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q74801" start="23469" end="23473" title="Veep" label="Veep"/>
<link wikidata="Q214477" start="23481" end="23492" title="Julia Child" label="Julia Child"/>
<link wikidata="Q8018297" start="23834" end="23855" title="William Seymour Tyler" label="William Seymour Tyler"/>
<link wikidata="Q190628" start="23920" end="23932" title="Barbara Bush" label="Barbara Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q387116" start="24050" end="24069" title="William B. Washburn" label="William B. Washburn"/>
<link wikidata="Q173540" start="24293" end="24310" title="Margaret Mitchell" label="Margaret Mitchell"/>
<link wikidata="Q2870" start="24436" end="24454" title="Gone with the Wind (novel)" label="Gone With the Wind"/>
<link wikidata="Q7057624" start="24846" end="24868" title="Northampton Law School" label="Northampton Law School"/>
<link wikidata="Q54111" start="25003" end="25020" title="Neoclassical architecture" label="Classical Revival"/>
<link wikidata="Q40628" start="26212" end="26225" title="Tammy Baldwin" label="Tammy Baldwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1395966" start="26672" end="26687" title="Jill Ker Conway" label="Jill Ker Conway"/>
<link wikidata="Q108852897" start="27836" end="27854" title="Eleanor P. Cushing" label="Eleanor P. Cushing"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="28022" end="28041" title="List of feminist rhetoricians#Mary Augusta Jordan" label="Mary Augusta Jordan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6499408" start="28232" end="28257" title="Laura Scales" label="Laura Woolsey Lord Scales"/>
<link wikidata="Q4678235" start="28406" end="28418" title="Ada Comstock" label="Ada Comstock"/>
<link wikidata="Q49124" start="28478" end="28495" title="Radcliffe College" label="Radcliffe College"/>
<link wikidata="Q5362653" start="28542" end="28565" title="Elizabeth Cutter Morrow" label="Elizabeth Cutter Morrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q5410328" start="28739" end="28754" title="Euphemia Haynes" label="Euphemia Haynes"/>
<link wikidata="Q42574179" start="28812" end="28835" title="Harris Hawthorne Wilder" label="Harris Hawthorne Wilder"/>
<link wikidata="Q27045141" start="28840" end="28859" title="Inez Whipple Wilder" label="Inez Whipple Wilder"/>
<link wikidata="Q436775" start="29666" end="29682" title="John Burgoyne" label="General Burgoyne"/>
<link wikidata="Q271805" start="30921" end="30925" title="National Collegiate Athletic Association" label="NCAA"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="31116" end="31165" title="NCAA Division I Women&amp;#x27;s Tennis Championship#Singles and Doubles Championships (1922–1982)" label="intercollegiate women&amp;#x27;s tennis championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q3765035" start="33152" end="33163" title="Convocation" label="Convocation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2996756" start="33689" end="33701" title="Mountain Day" label="Mountain Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q18389" start="34171" end="34182" title="New England" label="New England"/>
<link wikidata="Q7108504" start="34402" end="34410" title="Otelia Cromwell" label="Cromwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q28528823" start="34921" end="34938" title="Adelaide Cromwell" label="Adelaide Cromwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q23" start="35071" end="35088" title="George Washington" label="George Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054021" start="36205" end="36217" title="Graduation" label="Commencement"/>
<link wikidata="Q17027498" start="36661" end="36668" title="Ivy stone" label="Ivy Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q7719467" start="38342" end="38357" title="The Botanic Garden of Smith College" label="Botanic Gardens"/>
<link wikidata="Q20708963" start="39205" end="39245" title="Smith College commencement controversies" label="Smith College commencement controversies"/>
<link wikidata="Q7108504" start="39369" end="39384" title="Otelia Cromwell" label="Otelia Cromwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q55720700" start="39523" end="39541" title="Blanche Hinman Dow" label="Blanche Hinman Dow"/>
<link wikidata="Q463416" start="39583" end="39623" title="American Association of University Women" label="American Association of University Women"/>
<link wikidata="Q55720648" start="39625" end="39648" title="Clara Littledale" label="Clara Savage Littledale"/>
<link wikidata="Q174941" start="39700" end="39717" title="Good Housekeeping" label="Good Housekeeping"/>
<link wikidata="Q7136816" start="39735" end="39742" title="Parents (magazine)" label="Parents"/>
<link wikidata="Q5409738" start="39781" end="39794" title="Eunice Carter" label="Eunice Carter"/>
<link wikidata="Q173540" start="39971" end="39988" title="Margaret Mitchell" label="Margaret Mitchell"/>
<link wikidata="Q2870" start="40022" end="40040" title="Gone with the Wind (novel)" label="Gone with the Wind"/>
<link wikidata="Q100724118" start="40078" end="40096" title="Mary Watson Weaver" label="Mary Watson Weaver"/>
<link wikidata="Q214477" start="40134" end="40145" title="Julia Child" label="Julia Child"/>
<link wikidata="Q257261" start="40206" end="40228" title="Madeleine L&amp;#x27;Engle" label="Madeleine L&amp;#x27;Engle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2268391" start="40274" end="40291" title="A Wrinkle in Time" label="A Wrinkle in Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q234604" start="40300" end="40313" title="Betty Friedan" label="Betty Friedan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2438791" start="40360" end="40381" title="The Feminine Mystique" label="The Feminine Mystique"/>
<link wikidata="Q193426" start="40390" end="40402" title="Nancy Reagan" label="Nancy Reagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7166256" start="40420" end="40451" title="First Lady of the United States" label="First Lady of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q7164356" start="40472" end="40485" title="Penny Chenery" label="Penny Chenery"/>
<link wikidata="Q15492494" start="40570" end="40581" title="Jean Harris" label="Jean Harris"/>
<link wikidata="Q6726842" start="40619" end="40633" title="Madeira School" label="Madeira School"/>
<link wikidata="Q3134092" start="40660" end="40675" title="Herman Tarnower" label="Herman Tarnower"/>
<link wikidata="Q49022824" start="40696" end="40708" title="Rhoda Dorsey" label="Rhoda Dorsey"/>
<link wikidata="Q4134258" start="40765" end="40780" title="Goucher College" label="Goucher College"/>
<link wikidata="Q190628" start="40783" end="40795" title="Barbara Bush" label="Barbara Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q7166256" start="40820" end="40851" title="First Lady of the United States" label="First Lady of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q19564438" start="40883" end="40900" title="Mary Otis Stevens" label="Mary Otis Stevens"/>
<link wikidata="Q514080" start="40939" end="40954" title="Natalie Babbitt" label="Natalie Babbitt"/>
<link wikidata="Q2920661" start="41012" end="41028" title="Tuck Everlasting" label="Tuck Everlasting"/>
<link wikidata="Q133054" start="41037" end="41049" title="Sylvia Plath" label="Sylvia Plath"/>
<link wikidata="Q231178" start="41108" end="41122" title="Gloria Steinem" label="Gloria Steinem"/>
<link wikidata="Q3656351" start="41157" end="41160" title="Ms. (magazine)" label="Ms."/>
<link wikidata="Q82512826" start="41223" end="41239" title="Lynden B. Miller" label="Lynden B. Miller"/>
<link wikidata="Q2394387" start="41309" end="41319" title="Jane Yolen" label="Jane Yolen"/>
<link wikidata="Q292115" start="41367" end="41379" title="Susan Hiller" label="Susan Hiller"/>
<link wikidata="Q23091954" start="41417" end="41447" title="Ng&amp;#x27;endo Mwangi" label="Ng&amp;#x27;endo (Florence) Mwangi"/>
<link wikidata="Q115037380" start="41502" end="41521" title="Anne Mollegen Smith" label="Anne Mollegen Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q3430019" start="41596" end="41603" title="Redbook" label="Redbook"/>
<link wikidata="Q445719" start="41606" end="41625" title="Halina Poświatowska" label="Halina Poświatowska"/>
<link wikidata="Q272628" start="41668" end="41679" title="Jane Harman" label="Jane Harman"/>
<link wikidata="Q454110" start="41769" end="41780" title="Molly Ivins" label="Molly Ivins"/>
<link wikidata="Q13533573" start="41848" end="41862" title="Rochelle Lazarus" label="Shelly Lazarus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1937850" start="41907" end="41926" title="Ogilvy &amp;amp; Mather" label="Ogilvy &amp;amp; Mather"/>
<link wikidata="Q440246" start="41929" end="41941" title="Niki Tsongas" label="Niki Tsongas"/>
<link wikidata="Q528159" start="42032" end="42051" title="Catharine MacKinnon" label="Catharine MacKinnon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2914207" start="42090" end="42106" title="radical feminism" label="radical feminism"/>
<link wikidata="Q460911" start="42148" end="42173" title="Laura D&amp;#x27;Andrea Tyson" label="Laura D&amp;#x27;Andrea Tyson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2232634" start="42218" end="42243" title="National Economic Council (United States)" label="National Economic Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q458994" start="42246" end="42258" title="Yolanda King" label="Yolanda King"/>
<link wikidata="Q20714442" start="42287" end="42305" title="Christine McCarthy" label="Christine McCarthy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7414" start="42350" end="42373" title="The Walt Disney Company" label="The Walt Disney Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q1446683" start="42376" end="42389" title="Ann M. Martin" label="Ann M. Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3108867" start="42423" end="42449" title="The Babysitter&amp;#x27;s Club" label="The Babysitter&amp;#x27;s Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q4970379" start="42458" end="42473" title="Phebe Novakovic" label="Phebe Novakovic"/>
<link wikidata="Q502940" start="42511" end="42527" title="General Dynamics" label="General Dynamics"/>
<link wikidata="Q7383160" start="42530" end="42540" title="Ruth Ozeki" label="Ruth Ozeki"/>
<link wikidata="Q16149397" start="42574" end="42599" title="A Tale for the Time Being" label="A Tale for the Time Being"/>
<link wikidata="Q516100" start="42608" end="42622" title="Margaret Edson" label="Margaret Edson"/>
<link wikidata="Q46525" start="42652" end="42666" title="Pulitzer Prize" label="Pulitzer Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q40628" start="42679" end="42692" title="Tammy Baldwin" label="Tammy Baldwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q17884" start="42746" end="42750" title="LGBT" label="LGBT"/>
<link wikidata="Q7825758" start="42786" end="42797" title="Tori Murden" label="Tori Murden"/>
<link wikidata="Q7781067" start="42912" end="42925" title="Thelma Golden" label="Thelma Golden"/>
<link wikidata="Q903403" start="42973" end="43000" title="The Studio Museum in Harlem" label="The Studio Museum in Harlem"/>
<link wikidata="Q124654686" start="43003" end="43017" title="Nancy La Vigne" label="Nancy La Vigne"/>
<link wikidata="Q11054570" start="43069" end="43098" title="National Institute of Justice" label="National Institute of Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q41694028" start="43101" end="43116" title="Durreen Shahnaz" label="Durreen Shahnaz"/>
<link wikidata="Q28137193" start="43179" end="43191" title="Becca Balint" label="Becca Balint"/>
<link wikidata="Q6178200" start="43285" end="43302" title="Jennifer Chrisler" label="Jennifer Chrisler"/>
<link wikidata="Q5433107" start="43346" end="43369" title="Family Equality Council" label="Family Equality Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q7197303" start="43372" end="43384" title="Piper Kerman" label="Piper Kerman"/>
<link wikidata="Q7099650" start="43408" end="43431" title="Orange Is the New Black" label="Orange Is the New Black"/>
<link wikidata="Q105215625" start="43470" end="43484" title="Deborah Archer" label="Deborah Archer"/>
<link wikidata="Q21637" start="43548" end="43578" title="American Civil Liberties Union" label="American Civil Liberties Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q70494400" start="43588" end="43597" title="Kim Janey" label="Kim Janey"/>
<link wikidata="Q100" start="43675" end="43689" title="City of Boston" label="City of Boston"/>
<link wikidata="Q20902324" start="43692" end="43708" title="Hanya Yanagihara" label="Hanya Yanagihara"/>
<link wikidata="Q42282721" start="43746" end="43761" title="Emily W. Murphy" label="Emily W. Murphy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501657" start="43799" end="43830" title="General Services Administration" label="General Services Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q22686" start="43837" end="43849" title="Donald Trump" label="Donald Trump"/>
<link wikidata="Q101130818" start="43852" end="43863" title="Dorie Clark" label="Dorie Clark"/>
<link wikidata="Q6702999" start="43925" end="43936" title="Luma Mufleh" label="Luma Mufleh"/>
<link wikidata="Q16214751" start="44000" end="44009" title="Cass Bird" label="Cass Bird"/>
<link wikidata="Q1354608" start="44050" end="44066" title="Erin Morgenstern" label="Erin Morgenstern"/>
<link wikidata="Q10594892" start="44090" end="44106" title="The Night Circus" label="The Night Circus"/>
<link wikidata="Q7421650" start="44122" end="44133" title="Sara Haines" label="Sara Haines"/>
<link wikidata="Q1197928" start="44168" end="44176" title="The View (U.S. TV series)" label="The View"/>
<link wikidata="Q287171" start="44184" end="44192" title="ABC News (United States)" label="ABC News"/>
<link wikidata="Q23013651" start="44209" end="44225" title="Rubaiyat Hossain" label="Rubaiyat Hossain"/>
<link wikidata="Q30612293" start="44270" end="44300" title="Under Construction (film)" label="&amp;quot;Under Construction&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q66589280" start="44305" end="44335" title="Made in Bangladesh (2019 film)" label="&amp;quot;Made in Bangladesh&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q3563826" start="44338" end="44359" title="Sharmeen Obaid-Chinoy" label="Sharmeen Obaid-Chinoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q19020" start="44406" end="44420" title="Academy Awards" label="Academy Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q124804899" start="44423" end="44433" title="Lydia Jett" label="Lydia Jett"/>
<link wikidata="Q201653" start="44498" end="44506" title="Softbank" label="Softbank"/>
<link wikidata="Q19666114" start="44521" end="44532" title="Julia Scott" label="Julia Scott"/>
<link wikidata="Q671510" start="44550" end="44553" title="NPR" label="NPR"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="44564" end="44578" title="The New York Times" label="New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q27909222" start="44598" end="44611" title="Kimberly Drew" label="Kimberly Drew"/>
<link wikidata="Q966708" start="44682" end="44702" title="Herbert Baxter Adams" label="Herbert Baxter Adams"/>
<link wikidata="Q464915" start="44758" end="44789" title="American Historical Association" label="American Historical Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q1983783" start="44835" end="44847" title="Newton Arvin" label="Newton Arvin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2601617" start="44889" end="44903" title="Leonard Baskin" label="Leonard Baskin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1337504" start="44955" end="44971" title="Mary Ellen Chase" label="Mary Ellen Chase"/>
<link wikidata="Q81225988" start="45039" end="45049" title="Emily Hale" label="Emily Hale"/>
<link wikidata="Q37767" start="45089" end="45099" title="T.S. Eliot" label="T.S. Eliot"/>
<link wikidata="Q21524574" start="45102" end="45116" title="Louise Holland" label="Louise Holland"/>
<link wikidata="Q126684825" start="45203" end="45217" title="Daphne Lamothe" label="Daphne Lamothe"/>
<link wikidata="Q539832" start="45263" end="45281" title="Yusef Lateef" label="Yusef Abdul Lateef"/>
<link wikidata="Q133054" start="45451" end="45463" title="Sylvia Plath" label="Sylvia Plath"/>
<link wikidata="Q49074" start="45553" end="45566" title="Kurt Vonnegut" label="Kurt Vonnegut"/>
<link wikidata="Q57776825" start="45633" end="45646" title="Jane Zielonko" label="Jane Zielonko"/>
<link wikidata="Q249657" start="45668" end="45684" title="The Captive Mind" label="The Captive Mind"/>
<link wikidata="Q6636" start="45859" end="45862" title="Homosexual" label="gay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1983783" start="45923" end="45935" title="Newton Arvin" label="Newton Arvin"/>
<link wikidata="Q48795815" start="46109" end="46117" title="The Scarlet Professor" label="an opera"/>
<link wikidata="Q21015643" start="46520" end="46579" title="Cambridge School of Architecture and Landscape Architecture" label="Cambridge School of Architecture and Landscape Architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q19877805" start="46582" end="46614" title="College Archives (Smith College)" label="College Archives (Smith College)"/>
<link wikidata="Q20708963" start="46617" end="46657" title="Smith College commencement controversies" label="Smith College commencement controversies"/>
<link wikidata="Q110442990" start="46660" end="46676" title="SS Smith Victory" label="SS Smith Victory"/>
<link wikidata="Q29791510" start="46720" end="46732" title="Tofu Curtain" label="Tofu Curtain"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="247958" wikidata="Q694068" url="?curid=247958" title="Battle of Fraustadt">
<text>The Battle of Fraustadt was fought on 2 February 1706 (O.S.) / 3 February 1706 (Swedish calendar) / 13 February 1706 (N.S.) between Sweden and Saxony-Poland and their Russian allies near Fraustadt (now Wschowa) in Poland. During the Battle of Fraustadt on February 3, August II was only 120 km away, with a cavalry force about 8,000 men strong. According to Cathal Nolan that caused Swedish General Rehnskiöld to rush to engage Schulenburg. The Swedes were outnumbered by more than two to one by Saxons, mercenaries, and Russians. Ignoring the odds, Rehnsköld attacked the enemy&#x27;s well-entrenched position. He sent cavalry to drive off defending Saxon horse on either wing and complete a classic double envelopment. The manoeuvre meant they could attack from behind into the center rear of the enemy&#x27;s main line. The result was 8,000 Russian deaths and 5,000 Saxons and German mercenaries taken prisoner. The battle is a textbook example of a perfect pincer movement and was one of Sweden&#x27;s key victories in the Great Northern War.

==Background==

After King Karl XII&#x27;s of Sweden victory against the Saxon-Russian army in the Battle of Düna, he was able to begin his campaign against Poland. After the victory at the Battle of Kliszów in July 1702, Karl XII negotiated to depose August II from the throne of Poland, but to no avail. The Swedish army then subjected the well-fortified city of Thorn (Torun) on the river Weichsel to a long-term blockade from May to October 1703. The city fell and its entire garrison of 4,800 Saxon soldiers was taken prisoner. The strength of the Swedish army, combined with August&#x27;s agreement with Tsar Peter I, caused many Polish nobles to defect to the pro-Swedish opposition. In February 1704, August was declared no longer king of Poland, and in July of the same year Stanisław Leszczyński was elected king.

However, August II was not defeated and the Russians had an interest in supporting him. The Russo-Saxon strategic plan was for a Saxon army under Johann Matthias von der Schulenburg to break into Poland to join a larger cavalry force led by August II himself and then with the main Russian force, which was in Livonia, defeat the Swedish main army. In western Poland, however, there was a Swedish army corps under Rehnskiöld, which either had to be bypassed or fought by Schulenburg before the unification could take place.

In early March 1705, the Russian field marshal Boris Sheremetev organized a meeting with the Saxon general Otto Arnold von Paijkull to agree on a joint plan of action to defeat Charles XII. The basis of the strategy was a plan drawn up by the nobleman Johann Patkul as early as 1703, which included a combined attack that would neutralize the Swedish army. Von Paijkull was impressed by Patkul&#x27;s plans, and advocated that the plan could be used as a way to lure Charles XII and the main Swedish army out of Greater Poland and move east towards Brest-Litovsk. This was to be achieved by the convergence of the main Russian army under Georg Benedikt von Ogilvy and von Paijkull&#x27;s troops stationed at Brest, forcing Charles XII to meet them in battle. At the same time, the main Saxon army from Saxony would march past Poland and attack Charles XII from the rear. Patkul considered the plan too risky and suggested that the Allies should first crush Lewenhaupt&#x27;s Courland army, before Ogilvy&#x27;s troops would face Charles XII. Otherwise, Ogilvy&#x27;s back would be threatened. A compromise was made between the two strategies, in which it was agreed that Sheremetev would engage Lewenhaupt while Ogilvy marched on the fortified city of Grodno. There, the allies believed that Ogilvy could hold out against Charles XII&#x27;s troops long enough for the main Saxon army to arrive from Kraków. Meanwhile, von Paykull would attack with his combined Saxon-Polish troops on Warsaw to interrupt Stanisław&#x27;s coronation.

==Deployment==
The Saxon army had not chosen its position carefully; Schulenburg had been maneuvered into a position chosen by the Swedes. Rehnskiöld withdrew his forces from Schlawa to Fraustadt. Rehnskiöld later stated in his journals, &quot;“Så resolverade jag att draga mig till Fraustadt tillbaka i den tanken att locka till mig fienden efter mig utur sin fördel, inbillandes honom att jag ville alldeles draga mig av”&quot; roughly translated as &quot;”Thus I resolved to withdraw to Fraustadt with the thought to lure the enemy to me away from his advantageous position, deceiving him into thinking I was in full retreat”&quot;.

The Saxons, superior in numbers regarding infantry (9,000 Saxons and 6,300 Russians), but with less cavalry (4,000 Saxons) than the Swedes, took a strong defensive position behind lines of chevaux de frise littered by artillery. In two lines, with cavalry on both flanks, between the villages of Geyersdorf and Röhrsdorf and ahead of the town of Fraustadt, entrenched behind frozen lakes and marshes opposing the Saxon-Russian army, Rehnskiöld placed his infantry of 3,700 men in the center in three columns and his cavalry consisting of 5,700 units on both flanks.

==Battle==

On the left flank, the Swedish cavalry under Alexander Hummerhielm had some trouble passing through a frozen swamp, but the Saxon cavalry did not use that advantage. After regrouping, the Swedes charged the Saxon Garde du Corps and Chevaliers Garde regiments three times, utterly routing them. Colonel von Krassow, commander of the Swedish cavalry on the right flank, passed outside the left Russian flank with 12 dragoon squadrons, near the village of Röhrsdorf, and engaged the Saxon Cavalry covering the Russian flank. After witnessing the destruction of the Saxon right flank, the left flank fled, and were routed by the Swedish dragoons. Colonel von Krassow&#x27;s cavalry then wheeled clock-wise into the Saxon-Russian rear, which caused several of the Saxon regiments to break formation.
On the Saxon left flank, facing Rehnskiöld&#x27;s infantry, the Russians were deployed with their uniforms inside-out so they would look more like Saxons with their red colors instead of the Russian-standard green. This was however an order from Schulenburg who questioned their battle skills to reveal the weakness of the flank. The Swedish infantry assaulted the Saxon-Russian line frontally, under heavy cannon and musket fire. Upon discovering that the left wing of the enemy line was held by the Russian troops, Rehnskiöld directed his infantry to assault their positions, which were also being attacked from the rear by colonel von Krassow&#x27;s cavalry. The Russian infantry were quickly surrounded and dispersed.

The Saxon middle had its flank and rear exposed, and its regiments buckled and broke formation in short order under the pressure along its left flank. The Saxon right flank initially held, inflicting some damage to the Swedish infantry until the cavalry in the frozen swamp attacked their rear. The Saxon-Russian army fell apart and the main body fled to the south through Fraustadt. The Swedish cavalry, previously bogged down in the swamp, raced ahead on the open terrain, and met the fleeing Saxons and Russians on the far outskirts of the town. Trapped by Swedish cavalry to their front and infantry to their rear, the defeated Saxon-Russian forces surrendered en masse.

===Casualties and losses===
In the end 7,377 Saxons and Russians had been killed and over 7,300 taken prisoner where of 2,000 of them were wounded. The Swedes suffered some 400 killed, (amongst them, commander of the Kronoberg Regiment, colonel Gabriel Lilliehöök) and 1,000 wounded. Schulenburg managed to escape, despite having suffered a bullet wound to his hip. 71 banners, the whole Saxon artillery, 11,000 rapiers and equally as many muskets had also been captured. Rehnskiöld executed about 500 Russian prisoners; it is debated whether he did this in retaliation for Russian atrocities in Courland or because he believed their inside-out coats were an attempt to be recognized as Saxons, who were given better terms in captivity. Hiding your own identity and claiming to be something else was frowned upon at the time, and sometimes considered reason enough to be denied quarter.

==Analysis==

The Swedish success in the battle was mainly due to Rehnskiöld effectively neutralising the Saxon infantry, who were superior in number at the start of the battle, combined with the pincer movement performed by the Swedish cavalry under Hummerhielm and von Krassow. Schulenburg also made two grave mistakes: first by being lured into terrain not to his advantage and then underestimating the mobility of the Swedish cavalry, especially on the flanks. It is known from Rehnskiöld&#x27;s personal journals that he had intended a double envelopment from the beginning. The Battle of Fraustadt is one of the most classic double envelopments in military history. It is probable that Rehnskiöld had studied the Battle of Cannae 216 BC although it is uncertain if he intended to copy it.

==Aftermath==
The captured Russians (some 500) were, according to some historians, executed by an order from Rehnskiöld, although involvement of the latter has been disputed. The authors further quotes Lieutenant Colonel Nils Gyllenstierna of the Norra Skånska cavalry regiment about the fate of the Russian infantry, &quot;“på några 100 när massakrerat, emedan vi inte i begynnelsen kunde giva kvarter, eftersom vår vänstra flygel ännu stod i full eld”&quot; roughly translated as &quot;“all but a few hundred were massacred, as initially quarters could not be given, since our left flank was still in full assault”&quot;.

From Alexander Magnus Dahlberg&#x27;s (Dragoon at Buchwalds dragoonregiment) diary:

Roughly translated to:

The road to Saxony was open for King Charles XII of Sweden. King August II of Poland gave up his claim on the Polish crown, although he remained Elector Frederick Augustus I of Saxony. He would later regain the Polish throne in 1709. The prisoners taken by the Swedes during the battle that were of German, French and Swiss nationality were immediately reorganized into the ranks of the Swedish army. The Saxon prisoners were shipped to Sweden, where they formed a regiment and three battalions. This regiment made a good effort at the Battle of Helsingborg in 1710.

==See also==
*Campaign of Grodno
*Swedish invasion of Poland (1701–1706)
==Sources==
==Notes==
== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q694068" start="4" end="23" title="Battle of Fraustadt" label="Battle of Fraustadt"/>
<link wikidata="Q11184" start="55" end="59" title="Julian calendar" label="O.S."/>
<link wikidata="Q1130275" start="80" end="96" title="Swedish calendar" label="Swedish calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q12138" start="118" end="122" title="Gregorian calendar" label="N.S."/>
<link wikidata="Q215443" start="132" end="138" title="Swedish Empire" label="Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q156199" start="143" end="149" title="Electorate of Saxony" label="Saxony"/>
<link wikidata="Q172107" start="150" end="156" title="Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth" label="Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q186096" start="167" end="173" title="Russian Tsardom" label="Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q717938" start="202" end="209" title="Wschowa" label="Wschowa"/>
<link wikidata="Q53437" start="268" end="277" title="August II of Poland" label="August II"/>
<link wikidata="Q434380" start="399" end="409" title="Carl Gustaf Rehnskiöld" label="Rehnskiöld"/>
<link wikidata="Q70910" start="428" end="439" title="Johann Matthias von der Schulenburg" label="Schulenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q146889" start="961" end="976" title="pincer movement" label="pincer movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q151616" start="1027" end="1045" title="Great Northern War" label="Great Northern War"/>
<link wikidata="Q52934" start="1070" end="1090" title="Charles XII" label="King Karl XII&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q826133" start="1147" end="1161" title="Crossing of the Düna" label="Battle of Düna"/>
<link wikidata="Q704762" start="1238" end="1255" title="Battle of Kliszów" label="Battle of Kliszów"/>
<link wikidata="Q36" start="1329" end="1335" title="Poland" label="Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q47554" start="1413" end="1418" title="Toruń" label="Thorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q8479" start="1658" end="1670" title="Peter the Great" label="Tsar Peter I"/>
<link wikidata="Q53437" start="1757" end="1763" title="Augustus II the Strong" label="August"/>
<link wikidata="Q54022" start="1832" end="1853" title="Stanisław Leszczyński" label="Stanisław Leszczyński"/>
<link wikidata="Q70910" start="2019" end="2054" title="Johann Matthias von der Schulenburg" label="Johann Matthias von der Schulenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q183464" start="2183" end="2190" title="Livonia" label="Livonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q434380" start="2287" end="2297" title="Carl Gustav Rehnskiöld" label="Rehnskiöld"/>
<link wikidata="Q312536" start="2445" end="2461" title="Boris Sheremetev" label="Boris Sheremetev"/>
<link wikidata="Q507025" start="2505" end="2529" title="Otto Arnold von Paijkull" label="Otto Arnold von Paijkull"/>
<link wikidata="Q52934" start="2575" end="2586" title="Charles XII of Sweden" label="Charles XII"/>
<link wikidata="Q705427" start="2650" end="2663" title="Johann Patkul" label="Johann Patkul"/>
<link wikidata="Q140147" start="2947" end="2960" title="Brest-litovsk" label="Brest-Litovsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q75774" start="3036" end="3061" title="Georg Benedikt von Ogilvy" label="Georg Benedikt von Ogilvy"/>
<link wikidata="Q181376" start="3650" end="3656" title="Grodno" label="Grodno"/>
<link wikidata="Q1005492" start="4107" end="4114" title="Sława" label="Schlawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q89657" start="4758" end="4774" title="chevaux de frise" label="chevaux de frise"/>
<link wikidata="Q5321055" start="4865" end="4875" title="Geyersdorf" label="Geyersdorf"/>
<link wikidata="Q2034538" start="4880" end="4889" title="Röhrsdorf" label="Röhrsdorf"/>
<link wikidata="Q13587285" start="5171" end="5186" title="Swedish cavalry" label="Swedish cavalry"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5193" end="5214" title="Alexander Hummerhielm" label="Alexander Hummerhielm"/>
<link wikidata="Q104680" start="5442" end="5449" title="Colonel" label="Colonel"/>
<link wikidata="Q4239802" start="5450" end="5461" title="Ernst Detlof von Krassow" label="von Krassow"/>
<link wikidata="Q194199" start="5562" end="5569" title="dragoon" label="dragoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2034538" start="5601" end="5610" title="Röhrsdorf" label="Röhrsdorf"/>
<link wikidata="Q29171" start="5993" end="6001" title="infantry" label="infantry"/>
<link wikidata="Q4239802" start="6577" end="6588" title="Ernst Detlof von Krassow" label="von Krassow"/>
<link wikidata="Q6438952" start="7559" end="7577" title="Kronoberg Regiment" label="Kronoberg Regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q806880" start="7711" end="7717" title="banner" label="banner"/>
<link wikidata="Q185072" start="7938" end="7946" title="Courland" label="Courland"/>
<link wikidata="Q4239802" start="8497" end="8508" title="Ernst Detlof von Krassow" label="von Krassow"/>
<link wikidata="Q146889" start="8861" end="8879" title="double envelopment" label="double envelopment"/>
<link wikidata="Q179591" start="8949" end="8965" title="Battle of Cannae" label="Battle of Cannae"/>
<link wikidata="Q52934" start="9797" end="9818" title="Charles XII of Sweden" label="Charles XII of Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q53437" start="9825" end="9844" title="August II of Poland" label="August II of Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q22722" start="9905" end="9912" title="Prince-elector" label="Elector"/>
<link wikidata="Q705409" start="10296" end="10317" title="Battle of Helsingborg" label="Battle of Helsingborg"/>
<link wikidata="Q16931042" start="10342" end="10360" title="Campaign of Grodno" label="Campaign of Grodno"/>
<link wikidata="Q10543737" start="10362" end="10400" title="Swedish invasion of Poland (1701–1706)" label="Swedish invasion of Poland (1701–1706)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="247959" wikidata="Q215211" url="?curid=247959" title="Willow tit">
<text>The willow tit (Poecile montanus) is a passerine bird in the tit family, Paridae. It is a widespread and common resident breeder throughout temperate and subarctic Europe and across the Palearctic. The plumage is grey-brown and off-white with a black cap and bib. It is more of a conifer specialist than the closely related marsh tit, which explains it breeding much further north. It is resident, and most birds do not migrate.

==Taxonomy==
The willow tit was described in 1827 by the Swiss naturalist Thomas Conrad von Baldenstein under the trinomial name &quot;Parus cinereus montanus&quot;. The type locality is the mountain forests in the Canton of Grisons, Switzerland. The willow tit is now placed in the genus &quot;Poecile&quot; that was erected by the German naturalist Johann Jakob Kaup in 1829. The genus name, &quot;Poecile&quot;, is the Ancient Greek name for a now unidentifiable small bird, and the specific &quot;montanus&quot; is Latin for &quot;of the mountains&quot;.

&quot;Poecile&quot; was at one time treated as a subgenus within the genus &quot;Parus&quot; but molecular taxonomic analysis, using both nuclear and mitochondrial genes, supports &quot;Poecile&quot; as a distinct clade. Within &quot;Poecile&quot;, most of the Old World species (including the willow tit) form a separate clade from the New World chickadees. The taxonomic analysis has shown that the willow tit is sister to the Caspian tit (&quot;Poecile hyrcanus&quot;).

There are 14 recognised subspecies:

* &quot;P. m. kleinschmidti&quot; (Hellmayr, 1900) – Britain
* &quot;P. m. rhenanus&quot; (Kleinschmidt, 1900) – northwest France to west Germany, north Switzerland and north Italy
* &quot;P. m. montanus&quot; (Conrad von Baldenstein, 1827) – southeast France to Romania, Bulgaria and Greece
* &quot;P. m. salicarius&quot; (Brehm, CL, 1831) – Germany and west Poland to northeast Switzerland and Austria
* &quot;P. m. borealis&quot; (de Sélys-Longchamps, 1843) – Scandinavia south to Ukraine
* &quot;P. m. uralensis&quot; (Grote, 1927) – southeast European Russia, west Siberia and Kazakhstan
* &quot;P. m. baicalensis&quot; Swinhoe, 1871 – central east, east Siberia, north Mongolia, north China and north Korea
* &quot;P. m. anadyrensis&quot; (Belopolski, 1932) – northeast Siberia
* &quot;P. m. kamtschatkensis&quot; Bonaparte, 1850 – Kamchatka Peninsula and north Kuril Islands
* &quot;P. m. sachalinensis&quot; (Lönnberg, 1908) – Sakhalin and south Kuril Islands
* &quot;P. m. restrictus&quot; (Hellmayr, 1900) – Japan
* &quot;P. m. songarus&quot; (Severtsov, 1873) – southeast Kazakhstan to Kyrgyzstan and northwest China
* &quot;P. m. affinis&quot; Przevalski, 1876 – central north China
* &quot;P. m. stoetzneri&quot; (Kleinschmidt, 1921) – northeast China

The Sichuan tit (&quot;Poecile weigoldicus&quot;) was formerly treated as a subspecies of the willow tit. It was promoted to species status based on a 2002 phylogenetic analysis that compared DNA sequences from the mitochondrial cytochrome-&quot;b&quot; gene. The single locus results were later confirmed by a larger multi-locus analysis published in 2017.

==Description==

The willow tit is in length, has a wingspan of and weighs around . It has a large head, a thin bill, a long dull black cap that descends to the and a black bib. The sides of the face are white, the back is grey-brown and the underparts are buff. The sexes are similar in appearance.

In the east of its range it is much paler than marsh tit, but as one goes west the various races become increasingly similar, so much so that it was not recognised as a breeding bird in Great Britain until the end of the 19th century, despite being widespread.

The willow tit is distinguished from the marsh tit by a sooty brown instead of a glossy blue black cap; the general colour is otherwise similar, though the under parts are more buff and the flanks distinctly more rufous; the pale buff edgings to the secondaries form a light patch on the closed wing. The feathers of the crown and the black bib under the bill are longer, but this is not an easily noticed character.

The commonest call is a nasal &quot;&quot;, &quot;, &quot;, but the notes of the bird evidently vary considerably. Occasionally a double note, &quot;, &quot;, is repeated four or five times.

==Behaviour and ecology==
===Breeding===

The willow tit excavates its own nesting hole, even piercing hard bark; this is usually in a rotten stump or in a tree, more or less decayed. Most nests are cups of felted material, such as fur, hair and wood chips, but feathers are sometimes used. The eggs are laid daily. The clutch is typically between six and nine eggs. The eggs have a white background and are marked with red-brown speckles and spots which are often concentrated at the broader end. They measure around and weigh . The eggs are incubated by the female alone and hatch after 13–15 days. The chicks are then cared for and fed by both parents but only the female broods the young. The nestlings fledge after 17–20 days. Only a single brood is raised each season.

In a study using ring-recovery data carried out in northern Finland, the survival rate for juveniles for their first year was 0.58, and the subsequent adult annual survival rate was 0.64. For birds that survive the first year the typical lifespan is thus only three years. The maximum recorded age is 11 years; this has been recorded for a bird in Finland and for another near Nottingham in England.

===Food and feeding===
Birds feed on insects, caterpillars, and seeds, much like other tits. This species is parasitised by the moorhen flea, &quot;Dasypsyllus gallinulae&quot;.

==Status==
The willow tit has an extremely large range with an estimated population of between 175 and 253 million mature individuals. This large population appears to be slowly decreasing but the decline is not sufficiently rapid to approach the threshold of vulnerability. The species is therefore classed as of least-concern by the International Union for Conservation of Nature. In contrast, the number in the United Kingdom declined by 83% between 1995 and 2017. There was also a contraction in the range. The rapid decline is believed be due to three factors: habitat loss, competition for nest holes by other tits particularly blue tits, and nest predation by the great spotted woodpecker. Over the same period, the number of great spotted woodpeckers increased fourfold.

==References==
==Sources==


==External links==

* Xeno-canto: audio recordings of the willow tit</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q215211" start="4" end="14" title="Willow tit" label="willow tit"/>
<link wikidata="Q25341" start="39" end="48" title="passerine" label="passerine"/>
<link wikidata="Q5113" start="49" end="53" title="bird" label="bird"/>
<link wikidata="Q168473" start="61" end="64" title="tit (bird)" label="tit"/>
<link wikidata="Q106447" start="186" end="196" title="Palearctic" label="Palearctic"/>
<link wikidata="Q132825" start="280" end="287" title="conifer" label="conifer"/>
<link wikidata="Q207838" start="324" end="333" title="marsh tit" label="marsh tit"/>
<link wikidata="Q216507" start="420" end="427" title="bird migration" label="migrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1361864" start="462" end="471" title="species description" label="described"/>
<link wikidata="Q3525001" start="504" end="533" title="Thomas Conrad von Baldenstein" label="Thomas Conrad von Baldenstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q1650061" start="544" end="558" title="trinomial name" label="trinomial name"/>
<link wikidata="Q3707858" start="600" end="613" title="type locality (biology)" label="type locality"/>
<link wikidata="Q11925" start="645" end="662" title="Canton of Grisons" label="Canton of Grisons"/>
<link wikidata="Q34740" start="713" end="718" title="genus" label="genus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075355" start="725" end="732" title="Poecile" label="Poecile"/>
<link wikidata="Q31651" start="781" end="798" title="Johann Jakob Kaup" label="Johann Jakob Kaup"/>
<link wikidata="Q35497" start="852" end="865" title="Ancient Greek" label="Ancient Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="949" end="954" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2007033" start="1087" end="1106" title="molecular phylogenetics" label="molecular taxonomic"/>
<link wikidata="Q39572" start="1140" end="1153" title="mitochondrion" label="mitochondrial"/>
<link wikidata="Q1567633" start="1405" end="1411" title="sister taxon" label="sister"/>
<link wikidata="Q4967039" start="1419" end="1430" title="Caspian tit" label="Caspian tit"/>
<link wikidata="Q68947" start="1488" end="1498" title="subspecies" label="subspecies"/>
<link wikidata="Q78757" start="1536" end="1544" title="Carl Eduard Hellmayr" label="Hellmayr"/>
<link wikidata="Q67934" start="1592" end="1604" title="Otto Kleinschmidt" label="Kleinschmidt"/>
<link wikidata="Q3525001" start="1712" end="1734" title="Thomas Conrad von Baldenstein" label="Conrad von Baldenstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q21112" start="1825" end="1834" title="Christian Ludwig Brehm" label="Brehm, CL"/>
<link wikidata="Q59638" start="1935" end="1954" title="Edmond de Sélys Longchamps" label="de Sélys-Longchamps"/>
<link wikidata="Q3134158" start="2024" end="2029" title="Hermann Grote" label="Grote"/>
<link wikidata="Q232" start="2083" end="2093" title="Kazakhstan" label="Kazakhstan"/>
<link wikidata="Q468149" start="2126" end="2133" title="Robert Swinhoe" label="Swinhoe"/>
<link wikidata="Q28665598" start="2247" end="2257" title="Lev Belopolsky" label="Belopolski"/>
<link wikidata="Q157521" start="2321" end="2330" title="Charles Lucien Bonaparte" label="Bonaparte"/>
<link wikidata="Q993" start="2339" end="2358" title="Kamchatka Peninsula" label="Kamchatka Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q80389" start="2369" end="2382" title="Kuril Islands" label="Kuril Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q977041" start="2418" end="2426" title="Einar Lönnberg" label="Lönnberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q7792" start="2436" end="2444" title="Sakhalin" label="Sakhalin"/>
<link wikidata="Q80389" start="2455" end="2468" title="Kuril Islands" label="Kuril Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q461129" start="2555" end="2564" title="Nikolai Severtzov" label="Severtsov"/>
<link wikidata="Q232" start="2584" end="2594" title="Kazakhstan" label="Kazakhstan"/>
<link wikidata="Q813" start="2598" end="2608" title="Kyrgyzstan" label="Kyrgyzstan"/>
<link wikidata="Q192442" start="2657" end="2667" title="Nikolay Przhevalsky" label="Przevalski"/>
<link wikidata="Q18358379" start="2771" end="2782" title="Sichuan tit" label="Sichuan tit"/>
<link wikidata="Q39572" start="2982" end="2995" title="mitochondrial" label="mitochondrial"/>
<link wikidata="Q106227" start="3038" end="3043" title="Locus (genetics)" label="locus"/>
<link wikidata="Q7377969" start="3902" end="3908" title="rufous" label="rufous"/>
<link wikidata="Q5442640" start="4506" end="4512" title="felted" label="felted"/>
<link wikidata="Q81025" start="4561" end="4568" title="feather" label="feather"/>
<link wikidata="Q319436" start="5092" end="5105" title="Bird ringing" label="ring-recovery"/>
<link wikidata="Q41262" start="5452" end="5462" title="Nottingham" label="Nottingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q1390" start="5513" end="5519" title="insect" label="insect"/>
<link wikidata="Q81825" start="5522" end="5533" title="caterpillar" label="caterpillar"/>
<link wikidata="Q40763" start="5540" end="5545" title="Seed" label="seeds"/>
<link wikidata="Q6908392" start="5604" end="5616" title="moorhen flea" label="moorhen flea"/>
<link wikidata="Q211005" start="5969" end="5982" title="Least-concern species" label="least-concern"/>
<link wikidata="Q48268" start="5990" end="6036" title="International Union for Conservation of Nature" label="International Union for Conservation of Nature"/>
<link wikidata="Q26209" start="6326" end="6350" title="great spotted woodpecker" label="great spotted woodpecker"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="247960" wikidata="Q199570" url="?curid=247960" title="Mikoyan-Gurevich MiG-25">
<text>The Mikoyan-Gurevich MiG-25 (; NATO reporting name: Foxbat) is a supersonic interceptor and reconnaissance aircraft that is among the fastest military aircraft to enter service. Designed by the Soviet Union&#x27;s Mikoyan-Gurevich bureau, it is an aircraft built primarily using stainless steel. It was to be the last plane designed by Mikhail Gurevich, before his retirement.

The first prototype flew in 1964 and the aircraft entered service in 1970. Although it was capable of reaching Mach 3.2+, this would result in the engines accelerating out of control and needing replacement, therefore the operational top speed was limited to Mach 2.83. The MiG-25 features a powerful radar and four air-to-air missiles, and it still has the world record for reached altitude of .

When first seen in reconnaissance photography, the large wings suggested an enormous and highly manoeuvrable fighter, at a time when U.S. design theories were also evolving towards higher manoeuvrability due to combat experience in the Vietnam War. The appearance of the MiG-25 sparked serious concern in the West and prompted dramatic increases in performance requirements for the American F-X fighter programme that lead to the McDonnell Douglas F-15 Eagle in the late 1960s. The capabilities of the MiG-25 were better understood by the West in 1976 when Soviet pilot Viktor Belenko defected in a MiG-25 to the United States via Japan. It turned out that the aircraft&#x27;s weight necessitated its large wings.

Production of the MiG-25 series ended in 1984 after completion of 1,186 aircraft. A symbol of the Cold War, the MiG-25 flew with Soviet allies and former Soviet republics, remaining in limited service in several export customers. It is one of the highest-flying military aircraft, one of the fastest serially produced interceptor aircraft, and the second-fastest serially produced aircraft after the SR-71 reconnaissance aircraft, which was built in very small numbers compared to the MiG-25. , the MiG-25 remains the fastest manned serially produced aircraft in operational use and the fastest plane that was offered for supersonic flights and edge-of-space flights to civilian customers.

==Design and development==

===Background===
During the Cold War, Soviet Air Defence Forces, PVO (not to be confused with Soviet Air Force, VVS) was given the task of strategic air defence of the USSR. This meant not only dealing with accidental border violations but more importantly defending the vast airspace of the USSR against US reconnaissance aircraft and strategic bombers carrying free-fall nuclear bombs. The performance of these types of aircraft was steadily improved. In the late 1950s, the very high altitude overflights of Soviet territory by the Lockheed U-2 revealed the need for a higher altitude interceptor aircraft than available at that time.

In addition, the subsonic Boeing B-47 Stratojet and Boeing B-52 Stratofortress strategic bombers were followed by the Mach 2 Convair B-58 Hustler, with the Mach 3 North American B-70 Valkyrie being developed at that time. A major upgrade in the PVO defence system was required in order to meet the higher and faster American strategic bombers. At the start of 1958, a requirement was issued for manned interceptors capable of reaching and heights of up to . Mikoyan and Sukhoi responded.
The Mikoyan-Gurevich OKB had been working on a series of interceptors during the second half of the 1950s: the I-1, I-3U, I-7U, I-75, Ye-150, Ye-150A, Ye-152, Ye-152A, Ye-152P, and Ye-152M. The Ye-150 was noteworthy because it was built specifically to test the Tumansky R-15 engine, two of which would later be used for the MiG-25. This led to Ye-152, alternatively known as Ye-166, which set several world records. The Ye-152M (converted from one of the two Ye-152 aircraft) was intended to be the definite heavy interceptor design. But before it was finished, the PVO had selected the Tupolev Tu-128. As the work on the MiG-25 was well under way, the single-engine Ye-152M was abandoned.

===Development===
Work on the new Soviet interceptor that became the MiG-25 started in mid-1959, a year before Soviet intelligence learned of the American Mach 3 A-12 reconnaissance aircraft. It is not clear if the design was influenced by the American XF-108 Rapier and the A-5 Vigilante.

The design bureau studied several possible layouts for the new aircraft. One had the engines located side by side, as on the MiG-19. The second had a stepped arrangement with one engine amidships, with exhaust under the fuselage, and another in the aft fuselage. The third project had an engine arrangement similar to that of the English Electric Lightning, with two engines stacked vertically. Options two and three were both rejected because the size of the engines meant that either of them would result in a very tall aircraft, which would complicate maintenance.

The idea of placing the engines in underwing nacelles was also rejected because of the dangers of any thrust asymmetry during flight. Having decided on engine configuration, there was thought of giving the machine variable-sweep wings and a second crew member, a navigator. Variable geometry would improve manoeuvrability at subsonic speed, but at the cost of decreased fuel tank capacity. Because the reconnaissance aircraft would operate at high speed and high altitude, the idea was soon dropped. Another interesting but impractical idea was to improve the field performance using two RD36-35 lift-jets. Vertical takeoff and landing would allow for use of damaged runways during wartime and was studied on both sides of the Iron Curtain. The perennial problem with engines dedicated to vertical lift is they become mere dead weight in horizontal flight and also occupy space in the airframe needed for fuel. The MiG interceptor would need all the fuel it could get, so the idea was abandoned.
The first prototype was a reconnaissance variant, designated Ye-155-R1, that made its first flight on 6 March 1964. It had some characteristics that were unique to that prototype, and some of these were visually very evident: the wings had fixed wingtip tanks with a capacity, to which small winglets were attached for stability purposes, but when it was found that fuel sloshing around in the tanks caused vibrations, they were eliminated. The aircraft also had attachments for movable foreplanes, canards, to help with pitch control at high speed (provisions for canards had previously been installed, but not used, on the Ye-152P).

The first flight of the interceptor prototype, Ye-155-P1, took place on 9 September 1964. Development of the MiG-25, which represented a major step forward in Soviet aerodynamics, engineering and metallurgy, took several more years to complete.

On 9 July 1967, the new aircraft was first shown to the public at the Domodedovo air show, with four prototypes (three fighters and a reconnaissance aircraft) making a flypast.

====Aviation records====
The Mikoyan-Gurevich design bureau soon realized that the performance of the new aircraft gave it great potential to set new flight records. In addition to their normal duties, the prototypes Ye-155-P1, Ye-155-R1, Ye-155-R3 were made lighter by removing some unneeded equipment and were used for these attempts. Under Federation Aeronautique Internationale (FAI) classification, the Ye-155 type belonged to class C1 (III), which specifies jet-powered land planes with unlimited maximum take-off weight. Records set included:
* The first claim was for world speed records with no payload and payloads of . MiG OKB Chief Test Pilot Aleksandr Vasilyevich Fedotov reached an average speed of over a circuit on 16 March 1965.
* For pure speed, with no payload, test pilot Mikhail M. Komarov averaged over a closed circuit on 5 October 1967. On the same day, Fedotov reached an altitude of with a payload. The MiG eventually became the first aircraft to go higher than .
* Time to height records were recorded on 4 June 1973 when Boris A. Orlov climbed to in 2 min 49.8 s. The same day, Pyotr M. Ostapenko reached in 3 min 12.6 s and in 4 min 3.86 s.
* On 25 July 1973, Fedotov reached with payload and with no load (an absolute world record). In the thin air, the engines flamed out, and the aircraft coasted in a ballistic trajectory by inertia alone. At the apex the speed had dropped to .
* On 31 August 1977, Ye-266M again flown by Fedotov, set the recognized absolute altitude record for a jet aircraft under its own power. He reached at Podmoskovnoye, USSR in zoom climb (the absolute altitude record is different from the record for sustained altitude in horizontal flight). The aircraft was actually a MiG-25RB re-engined with the powerful R-15BF2-300. It had earlier been part of the program to improve the aircraft&#x27;s top speed that resulted in the MiG-25M prototype.

In all, 29 records were claimed, of which seven were all-time world records for time to height, altitudes of and higher, and speed. Several records still stand.

====Technical description====
Because of the thermal stresses incurred in flight above Mach 2, the Mikoyan-Gurevich OKB had difficulties choosing what materials to use for the aircraft. They had to use E-2 heat-resistant Plexiglas for the canopy and high-strength stainless steel for the wings and fuselage. Using titanium rather than steel would have been ideal, but it was expensive and difficult to work with. The problem of cracks in welded titanium structures with thin walls could not be solved, so the heavier nickel steel was used instead. It cost far less than titanium and allowed for welding, along with heat-resistant seals. The MiG-25 was constructed from 80% nickel-steel alloy, 11% aluminium, and 9% titanium. The steel components were formed by a combination of spot welding, automatic machine welding, and hand arc welding methods.

Initially, the interceptor version was equipped with the TL-25 &quot;Smerch-A&quot; (also referred to as &quot;Product 720&quot;) radar, a development of the system carried by the earlier Tu-128. While powerful and thus long-ranged and resistant to jamming, the system—due to the age of its design and its intended purpose (tracking and targeting high- and fast-flying US bombers and reconnaissance aircraft)—lacked look-down/shoot-down capability, which limited its effectiveness against low-flying targets. (This is one of the reasons why it was replaced with the Mikoyan-Gurevich MiG-31, whose Zaslon radar has that capability.) By the time the MiG-25 entered service in 1969, this was a serious shortcoming, as strategic bombing doctrine was shifting towards low-level penetration of enemy territory. After Belenko&#x27;s defection to Japan exposed this flaw to the West, a government decree issued on 4 November 1976 called for urgent development of a more advanced radar. This resulted in the pulse-Doppler radar &quot;Sapphire-25&quot; system fitted to the MiG-25PD variant.

As an interceptor, typical armament includes four R-40 long-range air-to-air missiles, each fitted with either an infrared seeker (R-40T/TD) or a semi-active radar homing seeker (R-40R/RD) and a maximum range of against a high-flying target on a collision course. A fuel tank could be suspended under the fuselage. The aircraft could carry unguided gravity bombs to fulfill a rudimentary strike role by using a delivery system developed for nuclear weapons. As the bombs would weigh no more and incur no more drag than its regular load of R-40 missiles, its performance was not impaired, leading to some impressive bombing feats; when released at an altitude of and a speed above Mach 2, a bomb would have a range of several tens of kilometres.

The MiG-25 was theoretically capable of a maximum speed exceeding Mach 3 and a ceiling of . Its high speed was problematic: Although sufficient thrust was available to reach Mach 3.2, a limit of Mach 2.83 had to be imposed as the engines tended to overspeed and overheat at higher airspeeds, possibly damaging them beyond repair.

The design cruising speed is Mach 2.35 (2,500 km/h) with partial afterburner in operation. The maximum speed of Mach 2.83 (3,000 km/h) is allowed to maintain no more than 5 minutes due to the danger of overheating of the airframe and fuel in the tanks. When the airframe temperature reaches , the warning lamp lights up, and the pilot must reduce airspeed. The use of a partial afterburner and a cruising flight altitude makes it possible to have a range only less than when flying Mach 0.9 at altitudes . The maximum altitude of flight without an afterburner in operation is . The poor fuel consumption in the subsonic regime, and hence range, is due to the engines having extremely low pressure ratio of just 4.75 at subsonic speeds. The specific fuel consumption (SFC) of the engines is 1.12lb/(h·lbf) in cruise and 2.45lb/(h·lbf) with afterburners. For comparison purposes, this is 50% worse in cruise than the first generation of F100 engines from the F-15 Eagle, but the SFC with afterburners is actually nearly equal, though the F100 is a far newer engine design.

===Production===
Full-scale production of the &quot;MiG-25R&quot; (&quot;Foxbat-B&quot;) began in 1969 at the Gorkii aircraft factory (Plant No. 21). The &quot;MiG-25P&quot; (&quot;Foxbat-A&quot;) followed in 1971, and 460 of this variant were built until production ended in 1982. The improved PD variant that replaced it was built from 1978 to 1984, with 104 aircraft completed. Subsequently, the Gorkii factory switched over production to the new MiG-31.

===Western intelligence and the MiG-25===
Western intelligence first encountered the MiG-25 at the Moscow air show on 8 and 9 July 1967, where it was assessed as a fighter-bomber and all-weather interceptor capable of speeds in excess of Mach 2.5. It was not believed at that time to have been in series production.

NATO obtained a better understanding of the MiG-25&#x27;s capabilities on 6 September 1976, when a Soviet Air Defence Forces pilot, Lt. Viktor Belenko, defected, landing his MiG-25P at Hakodate Airport in Japan. The pilot overshot the runway on landing and damaged the front landing gear. Despite Soviet protests, the Japanese invited U.S. Air Force personnel to investigate the aircraft. On 25 September, it was moved by a C-5A transport to a base in central Japan, where it was carefully dismantled and analyzed. After 67 days, the aircraft was returned by ship to the Soviets, in pieces. The aircraft was reassembled and is now on display at the Sokol plant in Nizhny Novgorod.

The analysis, based on technical manuals and ground tests of its engines and avionics, revealed unusual technical information:
* Belenko&#x27;s particular aircraft was brand new, representing the latest Soviet technology.
* The aircraft was assembled quickly and was essentially built around its massive Tumansky R-15(B) turbojets.
* Welding was done by hand. Rivets with non-flush heads were used in areas that would not cause adverse aerodynamic drag.
* The aircraft was built of a nickel-steel alloy and not titanium, as was assumed (although some titanium was used in heat-critical areas). The steel construction contributed to the craft&#x27;s high unarmed weight.
* Maximum acceleration (&quot;g&quot;-load) rating was just 2.2 &quot;g&quot; (21.6 m/s2) with full fuel tanks, with an absolute limit of 4.5 &quot;g&quot; (44.1 m/s2). One MiG-25 withstood an inadvertent 11.5 &quot;g&quot; (112.8 m/s2) pull during low-altitude dogfight training, but the resulting deformation damaged the airframe beyond repair.
* Combat radius was , and maximum range on internal fuel (at subsonic speeds) was only at low altitude, less than .
* The airspeed indicator was redlined at Mach 2.8, with typical intercept speeds near Mach 2.5 in order to extend the service life of the engines. A MiG-25 was tracked flying over the Sinai Peninsula at Mach 3.2 in the early 1970s, but the flight caused the engines to be damaged beyond repair.
* The majority of the on-board avionics were based on vacuum tube technology, more specifically nuvistors, not solid-state electronics. Although they represented aging technology, vacuum tubes were more tolerant of temperature extremes, thereby removing the need for environmental controls in the avionics bays. With the use of vacuum tubes, the MiG-25P&#x27;s original &quot;Smerch-A&quot; (&quot;Tornado&quot;, NATO reporting name &quot;Foxfire&quot;) radar had enormous power, about 600 kilowatts. As with most Soviet aircraft, the MiG-25 was designed to be as robust as possible. Use of nuvistors was speculated to be part of an effort to harden the aircraft against electromagnetic pulse, but it may simply have been due to adoption of semiconductor technology in the Soviet Union.

===Later versions===
As the result of Belenko&#x27;s defection and the compromise of the MiG-25P&#x27;s radar and missile systems, beginning in 1976, the Soviets developed an updated version with a new fire control system, the &quot;MiG-25PD&quot; (&quot;Foxbat-E&quot;). The MiG-25PD replaced the Smerch-A radar of the MiG-25P with the Saphir-25, based on the MiG-23&#x27;s Saphir-23, supplemented by an Infrared search and track (IRST) system. The ability to carry R-60 air-to-air missiles was added. A total of 104 MiG-25PDs were built from 1978 to 1984, while existing MiG-25Ps were modified to a similar standard to the PD as the &quot;MiG-25PDS&quot;.

Work was also carried out to improve the MiG-25&#x27;s performance, with a revised version of the R15 engine, the R15BF2-300, designed with an extra compression stage and running at higher temperatures to give greater power and better fuel consumption. A MiG-25P was fitted with the new engines, with testing of the modified aircraft, unofficially known as the MiG-25M (Ye-155M) beginning in 1974. Planned production aircraft would have received improved radar and armament, but production orders never followed, as the coming MiG-31 showed more promise. Three MiG-25RB reconnaissance/strike aircraft were also modified with the R15BF2-300, which were used to set a series of time-to-height world records (under the designation Ye-266M) on 17 May 1975, and two altitude world records in 1977.

==Operational history==

===Soviet Union===
The unarmed &quot;B&quot; version had greater impact than the interceptor when the USSR sent two MiG-25R and two MiG-25RB to Egypt in March 1971, which stayed until July 1972. They were operated by the Soviet 63rd Independent Air Detachment (Det 63), which was established for this mission. Det 63 flew over Israeli-held territory in Sinai on reconnaissance missions roughly 20 times. The flights were in pairs at maximum speed and high altitude, between . On 6 November 1971, a Soviet MiG-25 operating out of Egypt flying at Mach 2.5 was met by Israeli F-4Es and fired upon unsuccessfully. A MiG-25 was tracked flying over Sinai at Mach 3.2 during this period. The MiG-25 engines went into overspeed, which caused them to be scrapped. Det 63 was sent back home in 1972. Soviet-operated reconnaissance Foxbats returned to Egypt in 19–20 October 1973, during the Yom Kippur War. Det 154 remained in Egypt until late 1974.

During the 1970s, the Soviet air force conducted reconnaissance overflights across Iran using its MiG-25RBSh aircraft in response to joint U.S.–Iran reconnaissance operations.

The Swedish Air Force observed Soviet Air Defence MiG-25s via radar regularly performing intercepts at and behind the Lockheed SR-71 Blackbird at over the Baltic Sea in the 1980s.

===Syria===
On 13 February 1981, the Israeli Air Force sent two RF-4Es over Lebanon as decoys for Syrian MiG-25 interceptors. As the MiGs scrambled, the RF-4Es turned back delivering chaff and using ECM pods. Two IDF/AF F-15As were waiting for the MiGs and shot one of them down with AIM-7F Sparrow missiles. The other MiG was able to escape. In a similar engagement, on 29 July 1981, a Syrian MiG-25 was again downed by an Israeli F-15A, after which a second MiG-25 launched its R-40 missiles at the F-15 and its wingman, but they missed.

The first reported activity of Syrian MiG-25 aircraft in the civil war was on 8 February 2014, when two Turkish Air Force F-16s were scrambled to intercept a Syrian MiG-25 which was approaching the Turkish border.

===Iraq===
====Iran–Iraq War====

All confirmed air-to-air kills by the MiG-25 were made by Iraq.

The MiG-25 was in service with the Iraqi Air Force during the Iran–Iraq War. Iraqi claimed their MiG-25s shot down at least 15 Iranian aircraft during the war, while only one MiG-25 was lost in air combat (one more lost by SAM)

* On 19 March 1982, an Iranian F-4E was badly damaged by a missile fired by an Iraqi MiG-25.
* On 24 November 1982, an Iraqi MiG-25PD over Eivan shot down an Iranian F-5F.
* In December 1982, an Iraqi MiG-25PD over Baghdad shot down an Iranian F-5E.
* In February 1983, an Iraqi MiG-25PD shot down an Iranian C-130.
* In April 1984, an Iraqi MiG-25PD shot down an Iranian F-5E.
* On 21 March 1985, an Iraqi MiG-25PD shot down an Iranian F-4E (Iranian pilots Hossein Khalatbari and Mohammad Zadeh were killed).
* On 5 June 1985, an Iraqi MiG-25PD shot down a second Iranian F-4E.
* On 17 February 1986, an Iraqi MiG-25PD shot down an Iranian Fokker F-27. All 53 people, including crew and high-ranked officers, were killed.
* On 23 February 1986, an Iraqi MiG-25PD shot down an Iranian EC-130E.
* On 10 June 1986, an Iraqi MiG-25PD shot down an Iranian RF-4E.
* In October 1986, an Iraqi MiG-25PDS shot down a second RF-4E.
* On 17 January 1987, an Iraqi MiG-25PDS shot down an Iranian F-14A with an R-40 missile. Iranian pilot Major Bahram Ghaneie was rescued, and operator Lieutenant Reza Vadtalab was killed. For a long time, it was believed that this air victory had been achieved by a MiG-23ML.

The most successful Iraqi MiG-25 pilot of the war was Colonel Mohommed Rayyan, who was credited with ten kills. Eight of these kills were achieved while he flew the MiG-25PD from 1981 to 1986. In 1986, after attaining the rank of colonel, Rayyan was shot down and killed by Iranian F-14s. For the majority of the air combat Iraqi pilots used R-40 missiles.

* On 3 May 1981, an Iraqi MiG-25PD shot down an Algerian Gulfstream II.
* On 2 October 1986, an Iraqi MiG-25PD shot down a Syrian MiG-21RF.

According to research by journalist Tom Cooper, Iran claimed that ten MiG-25s (nine reconnaissance and one fighter) may have been shot down by Iranian F-14s (one kill was shared with an F-5) during the Iran–Iraq war. Only three MiG-25 losses (to ground fire or air combat) were confirmed by Iraq.

Confirmed MiG-25 combat losses during the Iran–Iraq war:
* In June 1983, an Iraqi MiG-25R piloted by Colonel Abdullah Faraj Mohammad was shot down by an Iranian F-14A.
* On 25 February 1987, an Iraqi MiG-25RB piloted by Lieutenant Sayer Sobhi Ahmad was shot down by an Iranian SAM HQ-2 and was captured.
The MiG-25 was also used as a strike aircraft during the war, targeting Iranian cities.

====Persian Gulf War====
During the Persian Gulf War, a U.S. Navy F/A-18, piloted by Lieutenant Commander Scott Speicher, was shot down on the first night of the war in the early hours of 17 January 1991 by a missile fired by a MiG-25. The kill was reportedly made with a Bisnovat R-40TD missile fired from a MiG-25PDS flown by Lt. Zuhair Dawood of the 84th squadron of the IQAF,

Two IQAF MiG-25s were shot down by U.S. Air Force F-15s on 19 January. The MiGs attempted to hide from the F-15s by using chaff and electronic jammers in order to engage the F-15s untargeted. However the F-15 pilots were able to reacquire the two Iraqi MiG-25s and shot both down with AIM-7 Sparrow missiles. In another incident, an Iraqi MiG-25PD, after eluding eight USAF F-15s at long range, fired three missiles at General Dynamics EF-111A Raven electronic warfare aircraft, forcing them to abort their mission and leave attacking aircraft without electronic jamming support.

In a different incident, two MiG-25s approached a pair of F-15s, fired missiles at long range which were evaded by the F-15s, and then outran the American fighters. Two more F-15s joined the pursuit, and a total of 10 air-to-air missiles were fired at the MiG-25s, though none reached them.

On 30 January 1991, an IQAF MiG-25 damaged a USAF F-15C with a R-40 missile in the Samurra Air Battle. Iraq claims it was shot down and fell in Saudi Arabia.

After the war, on 27 December 1992, a U.S. F-16D downed an IQAF MiG-25 that violated the no-fly zone in southern Iraq with an AIM-120 AMRAAM missile. It was the first USAF F-16 air-to-air victory and the first AMRAAM kill.

On 23 December 2002, an Iraqi MiG-25 shot down a U.S. Air Force unmanned MQ-1 Predator drone, which was performing armed reconnaissance over Iraq. This was the first time in history that an aircraft and an unmanned drone had engaged in combat. Predators had been armed with AIM-92 Stinger air-to-air missiles and were being used to &quot;bait&quot; Iraqi fighter aircraft, then run. In this incident, the Predator did not run, but instead fired one of the Stingers, which missed, while the MiG&#x27;s missile did not.

No Iraqi aircraft were deployed in the U.S. invasion of Iraq in 2003, with most Iraqi aircraft being hidden or destroyed on the ground. In August 2003, several dozen Iraqi aircraft were discovered buried in the sand.

===India===
The MiG-25 was kept a guarded secret in India, designated &quot;Garuda&quot; after the large mythical bird of Vishnu from Hindu scriptures. It was used extensively in the Kargil War and Operation Parakram, conducting aerial reconnaissance sorties over Pakistan.

In May 1997, an Indian Air Force Mikoyan MiG-25RB reconnaissance aircraft created a furore when the pilot flew faster than Mach 3 over Pakistani territory following a reconnaissance mission into Pakistan airspace. The MiG-25 broke the sound barrier while flying at an altitude of around , otherwise the mission would have remained covert, at least to the general public. The Pakistani Government contended that the breaking of the sound barrier was a deliberate attempt to make the point that the Pakistan Air Force (PAF) had no aircraft in its inventory that could come close to the MiG-25&#x27;s cruising altitude (up to ). India denied the incident but Pakistan&#x27;s Foreign Minister, Gohar Ayub Khan, believed that the Foxbat photographed strategic installations near the capital, Islamabad.

Lack of spare parts and India&#x27;s acquisition of unmanned aerial vehicles and satellite imagery eventually led to its retirement in 2006.

Subsequently, six out of the seven surviving MiG-25s (the eighth aircraft was lost in a crash in 1994) have been preserved at various locations in India.

An aerial observation of the solar eclipse of 24 October 1995 over India was conducted by a MiG-25, which took images of the eclipse at an altitude of .

===Libya===
Libya was a major user of the MiG-25 as it imported 96 MiG-25PD interceptor, MiG-25PU trainer and MiG-25RBK reconnaissance aircraft in the late 1970s and early 1980s.

During the 1980s, Libya confronted the United States over some claims over the extension of its territorial waters. These incidents prompted a number of encounters between the opposing forces as it happened during the Gulf of Sidra incident (1981) with the Libyan MiG-25s taking part in them.

During the following years, the Libyan MiG-25 fleet was grounded, lacking maintenance. As MiG-25s had been grounded for several years, NATO attacks spared them during the Libyan Civil War (2011).

In 2014 and 2015, the Libyan forces under the New General National Congress controlled a number of former LARAF airframes, that were retired and stored before the Libyan Civil War in 2011, among them a number of MiG-25s. Technicians started working on some of the airframes to press them back to service in the fight against the opposing internationally recognized Libyan government forces.

On 6 May 2015, a New General National Congress MiG-25PU crashed near Zintan while attacking the civilian airport controlled by the opposing internationally recognized Libyan government, the pilot ejected and was captured by opposing forces which also claimed they downed the jet. The jet may have been on one of its first flights after re-entering service.

==Variants==

===Prototypes===
;Ye-155R
: Reconnaissance prototypes. Two prototypes (&quot;Ye-155R-1&quot; and &quot;Ye-155R-2&quot;) followed by four pre-production aircraft fitted with reconnaissance equipment.
;Ye-155P
: Interceptor fighter prototypes. Two prototypes (&quot;Ye-155P-1&quot; and &quot;Ye-155P02&quot;) followed by nine pre-production aircraft.
;Ye-266
: Designation applied to prototypes and pre-production aircraft (&quot;Ye-155R-1&quot;, &quot;Ye-155R-3&quot; and &quot;Ye-155P-1&quot;) used for record breaking purposes in official documentation supplied to the Fédération Aéronautique Internationale.

===Interceptors===
;MiG-25P
:It is a single-seat all-weather interceptor of which 460 were produced since 1971. It is equipped with two Soyuz Tumansky R-15BD-300 turbojet engines (dry thrust 8,790 kg, afterburner thrust 11,190 kg x 2), and the RP-25 Smerch-A1 radar and is armed with four R-40 air-to-air missiles. Its NATO designation is Foxbat A.
;MiG-25PD
:An improved single-seat all-weather interceptor of which 104 were produced between 1978 and 1984. It entered service in 1979. An overall improvement in many aspects, the MiG-25PD is equipped with improved R-15BD-300 engines, avionics, and the Safir-25 (RP-25M). A greatly improved version of the original RP-25 Radar the RP-25M is equipped with a Moving target indication system providing a limited Look-down/shoot-down capability. The outermost pylons can carry four R-60 air-to-air missiles instead of two R-40 air-to-air missiles. NATO designation Foxbat-E.
;MiG-25PDS
:It is an upgraded version of 459 MiG-25Ps to the newly built MiG-25PD specification from 1979. NATO designation &quot;Foxbat-E&quot;.
;MiG-25PDSL
:A test aircraft that was modified from one MiG-25PD and additionally equipped with an electronic countermeasure system (ECM).
;MiG-25PDZ
:An aerial refueling test aircraft created by modifying a MiG-25PD. A probe dedicated to mid-air refueling has been added to the nose of the aircraft.
;MiG-25M
:Two testbeds (one converted from a MiG-25RB and one from a MiG-25PD) for more powerful ( dry, with afterburner) engines.
;Ye-266M
: Designation applied to MiG-25M when used for record breaking in 1975 and 1977, including setting an absolute altitude record for a jet aircraft of on 31 August 1977.
;Izdelye 99
: Two aircraft used as testbeds for Soloviev D-30F turbofan as later used in MiG-31.

===Reconnaissance and strike versions===

;MiG-25R
: Single-seat high-altitude daylight reconnaissance aircraft, fitted with cameras and ELINT equipment. NATO codename &quot;Foxbat-B&quot;.
;MiG-25RB
: Single-seat reconnaissance-bomber derivative of MiG-25R, fitted with improved reconnaissance systems and a Peleng automatic bombing system. The aircraft can carry a bombload of eight bombs. Entered service in 1970. NATO codename &quot;Foxbat-B&quot;.
;MiG-25RBV
: Modernised single-seat reconnaissance-bomber with revised ELINT equipment (SRS-9 &quot;Virazh&quot;). NATO codename &quot;Foxbat-B&quot;.
;MiG-25RBT
: Further improved reconnaissance-bomber, with &quot;Tangazh&quot; ELINT equipment. NATO codename &quot;Foxbat-B&quot;.
;MiG-25RBN
:Dedicated night reconnaissance aircraft, carrying 10 photoflash bombs under the fuselage. Only single prototype built. NATO codename &quot;Foxbat-B&quot;.
;MiG-25RR
: Conversion of eight reconnaissance aircraft for high-altitude radiation sampling role. Used to monitor Chinese nuclear tests between 1970 and 1980. NATO codename &quot;Foxbat-B&quot;.
;MiG-25RBK
: Single-seat dedicated ELINT aircraft, with &quot;Kub-3K&quot; ELINT system. Bombing capability retained but cameras not fitted. NATO codename &quot;Foxbat-D&quot;.
;MiG-25RBF
: Conversion of MiG-25RBK with new &quot;Shar-25&quot; ELINT equipment. NATO codename &quot;Foxbat-D&quot;.
;MiG-25RBS
: Single-seat radar-reconnaissance aircraft, with &quot;Sablya-E&quot; side looking airborne radar (SLAR). Cameras not fitted but bombing capability retained. NATO codename &quot;Foxbat-D&quot;.
;MiG-25RBSh
: MiG-25RBS fitted with more capable &quot;Shompol&quot; SLAR. NATO codename &quot;Foxbat-D&quot;.
;MiG-25BM &quot;Foxbat-F&quot;: Single-seat air defence-suppression aircraft, armed with Kh-58 or Kh-31 air-to-surface missiles.

===Conversion trainers===
;MiG-25PU
: Two-seat conversion trainer for MiG-25P interceptors. Fitted with a new nose section with two separate cockpits. It has no radar and no combat capability. NATO codename &quot;Foxbat-C&quot;.
;MiG-25RU
: Two-seat conversion trainer for reconnaissance versions. Fitted with MiG-25R navigation system. NATO codename &quot;Foxbat-C&quot;.
;Ye-133
: Designation given to single MiG-25PU used by Svetlana Savitskaya to establish a number of women&#x27;s speed and height records, starting with speed over a course of on 22 June 1975.

==Former operators==

;
*Algerian Air Force Beginning in 1979, a total of at least 36 MiG-25s were received, including at least 18 MiG-25P interceptors, 10 MiG-25RB reconnaissance/strike aircraft, and 6 operational conversion trainers. The last were retired in July 2022. Flown again for a military parade in November 2024, further status unknown.
*Armenian Air Force − Operated a MiG-25 as late as 2011
*Bulgarian Air Force – Three MiG-25RBTs (#731, #736 and #754) and one MiG-25RU (#51) aircraft were delivered in 1982. On 12 April 1984, #736 crashed near Balchik Airfield. The pilot ejected successfully. They were operated by the 26th Reconnaissance Aviation Regiment at Tolbukhin Airfield (today Dobrich) until their withdrawal. In May 1991, the surviving MiG-25s were returned to the USSR in exchange for five MiG-23MLDs.
*Belarus Air Force – Had up to 50 MiG-25s, including 13 MiG-25PDs; by 1995 the type had been withdrawn.
*Indian Air Force – Took delivery of six MiG-25RBKs and two MiG-25RUs in 1981. They were operated by No. 102 Squadron &quot;Trisonics&quot; based at Bakshi Ka Talab AB in Lucknow, Uttar Pradesh. One RBK crashed on 3 August 1994. Retired from service in May 2006. The Trishul air-base in Bareilly had Foxbats capable of flying up to .
*Iraqi Air Force – Had seven MiG-25PUs, nine MiG-25RBs, and 19 MiG-25PD/PDSs as of January 1991. During the Gulf War (Operation Desert Storm) most of them were destroyed on the ground, two were shot down in air-to-air combat against the Coalition forces. The remaining MiG-25s in service were buried in the sand or concealed with camouflage nettings during the 2003 invasion of Iraq
;
*Libyan Air Force – It was estimated that Libya had 94 MiG-25s and 3 MiG-25PUs. By mid-2008, Libya had 3 MiG-25PUs and 7 MiG-25RBs in service
*Russian Air Force – 40 MiG-25R and 30 MiG-25 for conversion training in 2011
*Soviet Air Forces and Soviet Air Defence Forces – The largest combined operator historically. Soviet aircraft were passed on to its successor states in 1991.
*Syrian Air Force – had 2 MiG-25Rs in service as of December 2022; further 16 MiG-25PDs, 8 MiG-25RBs and 2 MiG-25PUs trainers were received.
*Military of Turkmenistan − 24 MiG-25 in 1995
*Ukrainian Air Force – Inherited 79 aircraft after the breakup of the USSR. They have been withdrawn from service soon after Ukrainian independence.

==Aircraft on display==
;Belarus
* 02053164 – MiG-25RBS on static display at the Stalin Line Museum in Loshany, Minsk.

;Estonia
* N02050740 – MiG-25RBS on static display at the Estonian Aviation Museum in Lange, Tartu.

;India
* DS-361 – MiG-25U on static display at Kalaikunda Air Force Station in Kharagpur, West Bengal.
* DS-362 – MiG-25U on static display at the Indian Air Force Academy in Dundigal, Telangana.
* KP-355 – MiG-25R on static display at the Indian Air Force Museum in Palam, Delhi.
* KP-351 – MiG-25R on static display at the National Defence Academy in Pune, Maharashtra.
* KP-3106 – MiG-25 on static display at Trishul Air Force Base at Bareilly Airport in Bareilly, Uttar Pradesh.
* MiG-25 on static display at Trishul Air Force Base at Bareilly Airport in Bareilly, Uttar Pradesh.

;Latvia
* 0200004 – MiG-25RBS on static display at the Riga Aviation Museum in Riga.

;Russia
* 0200001 – MiG-25R on static display at the Central Air Force Museum in Moscow.
* 66001012 – MiG-25BM on static display at the Taganrog Aviation Museum in Taganrog, Rostov.
* 84008895 – MiG-25PD on static display at the Central Armed Forces Museum in Moscow.
* 84030112 – MiG-25PD on static display at the Central Air Force Museum in Moscow.

;Ukraine
* MiG-25RB on static display at the Ukraine State Aviation Museum in Kyiv.

;United States
* 020657 – MiG-25RB in storage at the National Museum of the United States Air Force in Dayton, Ohio. This aircraft was found in 2003 during the opening months of Operation Iraqi Freedom by American forces, buried in the sand near Al Taqaddum Airbase. The aircraft had been buried to prevent its destruction on the ground by coalition aircraft. When uncovered, the MiG-25RB was incomplete, as the wings could not be located. This aircraft was one of two MiG-25s transported by a Lockheed C-5A Galaxy from Iraq to Wright-Patterson Air Force Base for examination. It was donated to the National Museum of the United States Air Force in December 2006.

==Specifications (MiG-25P / MiG-25PD)==


==See also==

==References==
;Notes
;Citations
;Bibliography

* Aloni, Shlomo. &quot;Israeli F-15 Eagle Units in Combat&quot;. Oxford: Osprey Publishing, 2006. .
* Atkinson, Rick. &quot;Crusade: The Untold History of the Persian Gulf War&quot;. New York: Houghton Mifflin Company, 1993. .
* Barron, John. &quot;MiG Pilot: The Final Escape of Lt. Belenko&quot;. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1980. .
* Belyakov, R.A. and J. Marmain. &quot;MiG: Fifty Years of Secret Aircraft Design&quot;. Shrewsbury, UK: Airlife Publishing, 1994. .
* Bhonsle, Brig. Rahul K. &quot;India: Security Scope 2006 The New Great Game&quot;. Delhi, India: Kalpaz Publications, 2006. .
* Cooper, Tom and Farzad Bishop. &quot;Iranian F-14 Units in Combat.&quot; London: Osprey Publishing, 2004. .
* Davies, Steve. &quot;Combat Legend, F-15 Eagle and Strike Eagle&quot;. London: Airlife Publishing, Ltd., 2002. .
* Eden, Paul, ed. &quot;Mikoyan MiG-25 &#x27;Foxbat&#x27;&quot;. &quot;Mikoyan MiG-31 &#x27;Foxhound&#x27;&quot;. &quot;Encyclopedia of Modern Military Aircraft&quot;. London: Amber Books, 2004. .
* Frawley, Gerald. &quot;Mikoyan MiG-25.&quot; &quot;The International Directory of Military Aircraft, 2002/2003&quot;. Fyshwick, ACT, Australia: Aerospace Publications, 2002. .
* Gordon, Yefim. &quot;MiG-25 &#x27;Foxbat&#x27; &amp; MiG-31 &#x27;Foxhound&#x27;: Russia&#x27;s Defensive Front Line&quot;. Leicester, UK: Midland Publishing Ltd., 1997. .
* Gordon, Yefim. &quot;Mikoyan MiG-25 Foxbat: Guardian of the Soviet Borders&quot; (Red Star Vol. 34). Hinckley, UK: Midland Publishing Ltd., 2007. .
* Gordon, Yefim and Bill Gunston. &quot;Soviet X-Planes.&quot; Earl Shilton, Leicester, UK: Midland Publishing Ltd., 2000. .
* Green, William and Gordon Swanborough. &quot;The Great Book of Fighters&quot;. St. Paul, Minnesota: Motorbooks International Publishing, 2001. .
* Gunston, Bill. &quot;An Illustrated Guide to Modern Fighters and Attack Aircraft.&quot; London: Salamander Books, 1980. .
* Gunston, Bill and Mike Spick. &quot;Mikoyan/Gurevich MiG-25.&quot; &quot;Modern Air Combat: The Aircraft, Tactics and Weapons Employed in Aerial Combat Today.&quot; New York: Crescent Books, 1983. .
* Hoyle, Craig. &quot;World Air Forces&quot;. &quot;Flight International&quot;, Vol. 188, No. 5517, 8–14 December 2015. pp. 22–53. .
* Hoyle, Craig. &quot;World Air Forces Directory&quot;. &quot;Flight International&quot;, Vol. 190, No. 5566, 6–12 December 2016. pp. 26–53. .
* Jenkins, Dennis R. &quot;McDonnell Douglas F-15 Eagle: Supreme Heavy-Weight Fighter&quot;. Hinckley, UK: Midland Publishing, 1998. .
* Lake, Jon. &quot;Variant Briefing: MiG-25 &#x27;Foxbat&#x27; and MiG-31 &#x27;Foxhound&#x27;&quot;. &quot;World Air Power Journal&quot;, Volume 34, Autumn/Fall 1998, pp. 98–123. London: Aerospace Publishing. . ISSN 0959-7050.
* Nicolle, David and Tom Cooper. &quot;Arab MiG-19 and MiG-21 Units in Combat&quot; (Osprey Combat Aircraft 044). Oxford, UK: Osprey Publishing, 2004. .
* Rich, Ben and Leo Janos. &quot;Skunk Works: A Personal Memoir of My Years of Lockheed&quot;. New York: Little, Brown &amp; Company, 1994. .
* Spick, Mike. &quot;The Great Book of Modern Warplanes&quot;. St. Paul, Minnesota: Motorbooks International Publishing, 2000. .
* Wilson, Stewart. &quot;Combat Aircraft since 1945&quot;. Fyshwick, Australia: Aerospace Publications, 2000. .


==External links==
*Foxbat and Foxhound – Australian Aviation
*Recce Incursion – Famous incident of IAF MiG-25 intruding into Pakistan airspace</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q199570" start="4" end="27" title="Mikoyan-Gurevich MiG-25" label="Mikoyan-Gurevich MiG-25"/>
<link wikidata="Q221403" start="31" end="50" title="NATO reporting name" label="NATO reporting name"/>
<link wikidata="Q199570" start="52" end="58" title="Mikoyan-Gurevich MiG-25" label="Foxbat"/>
<link wikidata="Q170007" start="65" end="75" title="Supersonic aircraft" label="supersonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q320018" start="76" end="87" title="Interceptor aircraft" label="interceptor"/>
<link wikidata="Q3041792" start="92" end="115" title="reconnaissance aircraft" label="reconnaissance aircraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q1038621" start="134" end="159" title="Flight airspeed record" label="fastest military aircraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="194" end="206" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q188508" start="214" end="230" title="Mikoyan" label="Mikoyan-Gurevich"/>
<link wikidata="Q172587" start="279" end="294" title="stainless steel" label="stainless steel"/>
<link wikidata="Q353552" start="336" end="352" title="Mikhail Gurevich (aircraft designer)" label="Mikhail Gurevich"/>
<link wikidata="Q160669" start="637" end="641" title="Mach number" label="Mach"/>
<link wikidata="Q47528" start="679" end="684" title="radar" label="radar"/>
<link wikidata="Q243249" start="694" end="712" title="air-to-air missile" label="air-to-air missile"/>
<link wikidata="Q5377230" start="914" end="979" title="Energy–maneuverability theory" label="design theories were also evolving towards higher manoeuvrability"/>
<link wikidata="Q8740" start="1012" end="1023" title="Vietnam War" label="Vietnam War"/>
<link wikidata="Q160381" start="1085" end="1089" title="Western world" label="West"/>
<link wikidata="Q29251" start="1206" end="1234" title="McDonnell Douglas F-15 Eagle" label="McDonnell Douglas F-15 Eagle"/>
<link wikidata="Q11337199" start="1346" end="1369" title="Defection of Viktor Belenko" label="Viktor Belenko defected"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="1407" end="1412" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q215768" start="1791" end="1808" title="Mass production" label="serially produced"/>
<link wikidata="Q190114" start="1891" end="1896" title="Lockheed SR-71 Blackbird" label="SR-71"/>
<link wikidata="Q631009" start="2248" end="2273" title="Soviet Air Defence Forces" label="Soviet Air Defence Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q921432" start="2304" end="2320" title="Soviet Air Force" label="Soviet Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="2502" end="2506" title="Soviet Union" label="USSR"/>
<link wikidata="Q3041792" start="2518" end="2541" title="reconnaissance aircraft" label="reconnaissance aircraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q507720" start="2546" end="2562" title="strategic bomber" label="strategic bomber"/>
<link wikidata="Q189064" start="2745" end="2757" title="Lockheed U-2" label="Lockheed U-2"/>
<link wikidata="Q467649" start="2875" end="2896" title="Boeing B-47 Stratojet" label="Boeing B-47 Stratojet"/>
<link wikidata="Q174534" start="2901" end="2927" title="Boeing B-52 Stratofortress" label="Boeing B-52 Stratofortress"/>
<link wikidata="Q599891" start="2974" end="2994" title="Convair B-58 Hustler" label="Convair B-58 Hustler"/>
<link wikidata="Q729056" start="3012" end="3040" title="North American XB-70 Valkyrie" label="North American B-70 Valkyrie"/>
<link wikidata="Q507437" start="3358" end="3361" title="OKB" label="OKB"/>
<link wikidata="Q1238386" start="3488" end="3494" title="Mikoyan-Gurevich Ye-152" label="Ye-152"/>
<link wikidata="Q2551425" start="3599" end="3612" title="Tumansky R-15" label="Tumansky R-15"/>
<link wikidata="Q616409" start="3925" end="3939" title="Tupolev Tu-128" label="Tupolev Tu-128"/>
<link wikidata="Q1238386" start="4005" end="4012" title="Mikoyan-Gurevich Ye-150 family" label="Ye-152M"/>
<link wikidata="Q959030" start="4191" end="4195" title="Lockheed A-12" label="A-12"/>
<link wikidata="Q926860" start="4282" end="4295" title="North American XF-108 Rapier" label="XF-108 Rapier"/>
<link wikidata="Q858769" start="4304" end="4317" title="North American A-5 Vigilante" label="A-5 Vigilante"/>
<link wikidata="Q153307" start="4445" end="4451" title="MiG-19" label="MiG-19"/>
<link wikidata="Q19381" start="4650" end="4676" title="English Electric Lightning" label="English Electric Lightning"/>
<link wikidata="Q838974" start="5103" end="5122" title="variable-sweep wing" label="variable-sweep wing"/>
<link wikidata="Q124425" start="5616" end="5628" title="Iron Curtain" label="Iron Curtain"/>
<link wikidata="Q826939" start="6384" end="6391" title="Canard (aeronautics)" label="canards"/>
<link wikidata="Q1238386" start="6510" end="6517" title="Mikoyan-Gurevich Ye-152" label="Ye-152P"/>
<link wikidata="Q8424" start="6687" end="6699" title="aerodynamics" label="aerodynamics"/>
<link wikidata="Q3798668" start="6701" end="6712" title="Aerospace engineering" label="engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q11467" start="6717" end="6727" title="metallurgy" label="metallurgy"/>
<link wikidata="Q17054809" start="6837" end="6856" title="Soviet air shows" label="Domodedovo air show"/>
<link wikidata="Q214130" start="7288" end="7326" title="Federation Aeronautique Internationale" label="Federation Aeronautique Internationale"/>
<link wikidata="Q348399" start="7600" end="7629" title="Aleksandr Vasilyevich Fedotov" label="Aleksandr Vasilyevich Fedotov"/>
<link wikidata="Q8074167" start="8531" end="8541" title="zoom climb" label="zoom climb"/>
<link wikidata="Q2551425" start="8713" end="8724" title="Tumansky R-15" label="R-15BF2-300"/>
<link wikidata="Q6583695" start="9055" end="9071" title="Thermal expansion" label="thermal stresses"/>
<link wikidata="Q160669" start="9097" end="9103" title="Mach number" label="Mach 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q146123" start="9231" end="9240" title="Plexiglas" label="Plexiglas"/>
<link wikidata="Q744" start="9527" end="9533" title="nickel" label="nickel"/>
<link wikidata="Q903965" start="9683" end="9701" title="nickel-steel alloy" label="nickel-steel alloy"/>
<link wikidata="Q663" start="9707" end="9716" title="aluminium" label="aluminium"/>
<link wikidata="Q716" start="9725" end="9733" title="titanium" label="titanium"/>
<link wikidata="Q2327972" start="9788" end="9800" title="spot welding" label="spot welding"/>
<link wikidata="Q131172" start="9812" end="9827" title="Welding" label="machine welding"/>
<link wikidata="Q422937" start="9838" end="9849" title="arc welding" label="arc welding"/>
<link wikidata="Q47528" start="9990" end="9995" title="radar" label="radar"/>
<link wikidata="Q616409" start="10048" end="10054" title="Tu-128" label="Tu-128"/>
<link wikidata="Q3041792" start="10244" end="10267" title="reconnaissance aircraft" label="reconnaissance aircraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q1413386" start="10276" end="10296" title="look-down/shoot-down" label="look-down/shoot-down"/>
<link wikidata="Q150050" start="10426" end="10449" title="Mikoyan MiG-31" label="Mikoyan-Gurevich MiG-31"/>
<link wikidata="Q2855733" start="10457" end="10463" title="Zaslon" label="Zaslon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1029151" start="10859" end="10878" title="pulse-Doppler radar" label="pulse-Doppler radar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072287" start="10993" end="10997" title="R-40 (missile)" label="R-40"/>
<link wikidata="Q243249" start="11009" end="11027" title="air-to-air missile" label="air-to-air missile"/>
<link wikidata="Q1366032" start="11057" end="11072" title="Infrared homing" label="infrared seeker"/>
<link wikidata="Q1187984" start="11089" end="11113" title="semi-active radar homing" label="semi-active radar homing"/>
<link wikidata="Q2994681" start="12760" end="12785" title="Thrust-specific fuel consumption" label="specific fuel consumption"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154115" start="12955" end="12959" title="Pratt &amp;amp; Whitney F100" label="F100"/>
<link wikidata="Q1572992" start="13202" end="13225" title="Sokol Aircraft Plant" label="Gorkii aircraft factory"/>
<link wikidata="Q150050" start="13542" end="13548" title="MiG-31" label="MiG-31"/>
<link wikidata="Q7184" start="13868" end="13872" title="NATO" label="NATO"/>
<link wikidata="Q631009" start="13967" end="13992" title="Soviet Air Defence Forces" label="Soviet Air Defence Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q504070" start="14004" end="14018" title="Viktor Belenko" label="Viktor Belenko"/>
<link wikidata="Q11337199" start="14020" end="14028" title="Defection of Viktor Belenko" label="defected"/>
<link wikidata="Q1155685" start="14053" end="14069" title="Hakodate Airport" label="Hakodate Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q2551425" start="14854" end="14867" title="Tumansky R-15" label="Tumansky R-15"/>
<link wikidata="Q131172" start="14884" end="14891" title="Welding" label="Welding"/>
<link wikidata="Q206621" start="14986" end="15002" title="drag (physics)" label="aerodynamic drag"/>
<link wikidata="Q716" start="15061" end="15069" title="titanium" label="titanium"/>
<link wikidata="Q284602" start="15244" end="15262" title="g-force" label="&amp;quot;g&amp;quot;-load"/>
<link wikidata="Q599112" start="15689" end="15707" title="airspeed indicator" label="airspeed indicator"/>
<link wikidata="Q36755" start="15867" end="15882" title="Sinai Peninsula" label="Sinai Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q221329" start="16009" end="16017" title="avionics" label="avionics"/>
<link wikidata="Q3574371" start="16032" end="16043" title="vacuum tube" label="vacuum tube"/>
<link wikidata="Q687482" start="16074" end="16082" title="nuvistor" label="nuvistor"/>
<link wikidata="Q611957" start="16089" end="16112" title="solid-state electronics" label="solid-state electronics"/>
<link wikidata="Q47528" start="16432" end="16437" title="radar" label="radar"/>
<link wikidata="Q25236" start="16468" end="16477" title="watt" label="kilowatts"/>
<link wikidata="Q64122" start="16649" end="16670" title="electromagnetic pulse" label="electromagnetic pulse"/>
<link wikidata="Q155679" start="17127" end="17133" title="Mikoyan-Gurevich MiG-23" label="MiG-23"/>
<link wikidata="Q2319665" start="17171" end="17196" title="Infrared search and track" label="Infrared search and track"/>
<link wikidata="Q930873" start="17233" end="17237" title="R-60 (missile)" label="R-60"/>
<link wikidata="Q150050" start="17952" end="17958" title="Mikoyan MiG-31" label="MiG-31"/>
<link wikidata="Q36755" start="18597" end="18602" title="Sinai Peninsula" label="Sinai"/>
<link wikidata="Q3754723" start="18954" end="18963" title="overspeed" label="overspeed"/>
<link wikidata="Q49100" start="19125" end="19139" title="Yom Kippur War" label="Yom Kippur War"/>
<link wikidata="Q7249057" start="19318" end="19359" title="Project Dark Gene" label="joint U.S.–Iran reconnaissance operations"/>
<link wikidata="Q113525" start="19366" end="19383" title="Swedish Air Force" label="Swedish Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q190114" start="19480" end="19504" title="Lockheed SR-71 Blackbird" label="Lockheed SR-71 Blackbird"/>
<link wikidata="Q545" start="19517" end="19527" title="Baltic Sea" label="Baltic Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q462211" start="19580" end="19597" title="Israeli Air Force" label="Israeli Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19607" end="19611" title="List of McDonnell Douglas F-4 Phantom II variants#Variants" label="RF-4"/>
<link wikidata="Q822" start="19619" end="19626" title="Lebanon" label="Lebanon"/>
<link wikidata="Q29251" start="19763" end="19767" title="F-15" label="F-15"/>
<link wikidata="Q293810" start="19827" end="19841" title="AIM-7 Sparrow" label="AIM-7F Sparrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q2443729" start="20433" end="20448" title="Iraqi Air Force" label="Iraqi Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q82664" start="20460" end="20473" title="Iran–Iraq War" label="Iran–Iraq War"/>
<link wikidata="Q151432" start="20658" end="20662" title="McDonnell Douglas F-4 Phantom II" label="F-4E"/>
<link wikidata="Q308940" start="20871" end="20875" title="Northrop F-5" label="F-5E"/>
<link wikidata="Q182027" start="20936" end="20941" title="C-130" label="C-130"/>
<link wikidata="Q308940" start="20999" end="21003" title="Northrop F-5" label="F-5E"/>
<link wikidata="Q24004590" start="21085" end="21103" title="Hossein Khalatbari" label="Hossein Khalatbari"/>
<link wikidata="Q506736" start="21268" end="21279" title="Fokker_F27_Friendship" label="Fokker F-27"/>
<link wikidata="Q2573675" start="21412" end="21419" title="EC-130E" label="EC-130E"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072287" start="21626" end="21630" title="R-40 (missile)" label="R-40"/>
<link wikidata="Q6894286" start="21889" end="21904" title="Mohommed Rayyan" label="Mohommed Rayyan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072287" start="22169" end="22173" title="R-40 (missile)" label="R-40"/>
<link wikidata="Q37643" start="23053" end="23069" title="Gulf War" label="Persian Gulf War"/>
<link wikidata="Q11220" start="23073" end="23082" title="United States Navy" label="U.S. Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q46397" start="23083" end="23089" title="McDonnell Douglas F/A-18 Hornet" label="F/A-18"/>
<link wikidata="Q348211" start="23123" end="23137" title="Scott Speicher" label="Scott Speicher"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072287" start="23289" end="23302" title="Bisnovat R-40" label="Bisnovat R-40"/>
<link wikidata="Q11223" start="23433" end="23447" title="U.S. Air Force" label="U.S. Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q293810" start="23683" end="23696" title="AIM-7 Sparrow" label="AIM-7 Sparrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q987367" start="23817" end="23847" title="General Dynamics EF-111A Raven" label="General Dynamics EF-111A Raven"/>
<link wikidata="Q28162754" start="23984" end="24002" title="Samurra Air Battle" label="different incident"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072287" start="24334" end="24338" title="R-40 (missile)" label="R-40"/>
<link wikidata="Q28162754" start="24354" end="24372" title="Samurra Air Battle" label="Samurra Air Battle"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="24379" end="24385" title="Samurra Air Battle#Result" label="claims"/>
<link wikidata="Q100026" start="24473" end="24478" title="General Dynamics F-16 Fighting Falcon" label="F-16D"/>
<link wikidata="Q899657" start="24519" end="24530" title="Iraqi no-fly zones" label="no-fly zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q293743" start="24556" end="24570" title="AIM-120 AMRAAM" label="AIM-120 AMRAAM"/>
<link wikidata="Q198024" start="24727" end="24740" title="MQ-1 Predator" label="MQ-1 Predator"/>
<link wikidata="Q1041627" start="24928" end="24942" title="AIM-92 Stinger" label="AIM-92 Stinger"/>
<link wikidata="Q188676" start="25467" end="25473" title="Garuda" label="Garuda"/>
<link wikidata="Q404517" start="25574" end="25584" title="Kargil War" label="Kargil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2992587" start="25589" end="25607" title="2001–2002 India–Pakistan standoff" label="Operation Parakram"/>
<link wikidata="Q330658" start="25682" end="25698" title="Indian Air Force" label="Indian Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q1362" start="26453" end="26462" title="Islamabad" label="Islamabad"/>
<link wikidata="Q484000" start="26517" end="26540" title="unmanned aerial vehicle" label="unmanned aerial vehicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q725252" start="26546" end="26563" title="satellite imagery" label="satellite imagery"/>
<link wikidata="Q1640337" start="26791" end="26823" title="solar eclipse of October 24, 1995" label="solar eclipse of 24 October 1995"/>
<link wikidata="Q2604253" start="27314" end="27343" title="Gulf of Sidra incident (1981)" label="Gulf of Sidra incident (1981)"/>
<link wikidata="Q81545" start="27561" end="27584" title="Libyan Civil War (2011)" label="Libyan Civil War (2011)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414558" start="27633" end="27662" title="New General National Congress" label="New General National Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q17443556" start="27925" end="27969" title="House of Representatives (Libya)" label="internationally recognized Libyan government"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414558" start="27996" end="28025" title="New General National Congress" label="New General National Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q61102" start="28048" end="28054" title="Zintan" label="Zintan"/>
<link wikidata="Q17443556" start="28119" end="28163" title="House of Representatives (Libya)" label="internationally recognized Libyan government"/>
<link wikidata="Q214130" start="28921" end="28959" title="Fédération Aéronautique Internationale" label="Fédération Aéronautique Internationale"/>
<link wikidata="Q446180" start="29669" end="29693" title="Moving target indication" label="Moving target indication"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="30603" end="30615" title="Flight altitude record#Jet aircraft" label="jet aircraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049409" start="30686" end="30699" title="Soloviev D-30" label="Soloviev D-30"/>
<link wikidata="Q654051" start="30701" end="30709" title="turbofan" label="turbofan"/>
<link wikidata="Q836610" start="30873" end="30878" title="ELINT" label="ELINT"/>
<link wikidata="Q831483" start="32212" end="32239" title="side looking airborne radar" label="side looking airborne radar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1310978" start="32491" end="32514" title="Suppression of Enemy Air Defenses" label="air defence-suppression"/>
<link wikidata="Q255560" start="32536" end="32541" title="Kh-58" label="Kh-58"/>
<link wikidata="Q297043" start="32545" end="32550" title="Kh-31" label="Kh-31"/>
<link wikidata="Q152318" start="33005" end="33024" title="Svetlana Savitskaya" label="Svetlana Savitskaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q923346" start="33169" end="33187" title="Algerian Air Force" label="Algerian Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q1834601" start="33493" end="33511" title="Armenian Air Force" label="Armenian Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q591198" start="33549" end="33568" title="Bulgarian Air Force" label="Bulgarian Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q2902106" start="33702" end="33718" title="Balchik Airfield" label="Balchik Airfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q5286732" start="33819" end="33837" title="Dobrich Air Base" label="Tolbukhin Airfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q155679" start="33960" end="33966" title="MiG-23" label="MiG-23"/>
<link wikidata="Q570232" start="33973" end="33990" title="Belarus Air Force" label="Belarus Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q330658" start="34077" end="34093" title="Indian Air Force" label="Indian Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q24940130" start="34177" end="34193" title="No. 102 Squadron IAF" label="No. 102 Squadron"/>
<link wikidata="Q4849558" start="34225" end="34240" title="Bakshi Ka Talab" label="Bakshi Ka Talab"/>
<link wikidata="Q47916" start="34247" end="34254" title="Lucknow" label="Lucknow"/>
<link wikidata="Q1498" start="34256" end="34269" title="Uttar Pradesh" label="Uttar Pradesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q213026" start="34363" end="34371" title="Bareilly" label="Bareilly"/>
<link wikidata="Q2443729" start="34411" end="34426" title="Iraqi Air Force" label="Iraqi Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q1347042" start="34796" end="34812" title="Libyan Air Force" label="Libyan Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q209833" start="34938" end="34955" title="Russian Air Force" label="Russian Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q921432" start="35016" end="35033" title="Soviet Air Forces" label="Soviet Air Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q631009" start="35038" end="35063" title="Soviet Air Defence Forces" label="Soviet Air Defence Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q1416238" start="35175" end="35191" title="Syrian Air Force" label="Syrian Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q544456" start="35316" end="35340" title="Military of Turkmenistan" label="Military of Turkmenistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q648653" start="35362" end="35381" title="Ukrainian Air Force" label="Ukrainian Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q12361289" start="35689" end="35713" title="Estonian Aviation Museum" label="Estonian Aviation Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q3454918" start="35717" end="35729" title="Lange, Estonia" label="Lange, Tartu"/>
<link wikidata="Q6350188" start="35779" end="35807" title="Kalaikunda Air Force Station" label="Kalaikunda Air Force Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q588477" start="35811" end="35833" title="Kharagpur, West Bengal" label="Kharagpur, West Bengal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2272848" start="35879" end="35903" title="Air Force Academy (India)" label="Indian Air Force Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5314876" start="35907" end="35926" title="Dundigal" label="Dundigal, Telangana"/>
<link wikidata="Q15228644" start="35972" end="35995" title="Indian Air Force Museum, Palam" label="Indian Air Force Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q15265131" start="35999" end="36011" title="Palam, Delhi" label="Palam, Delhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3630909" start="36057" end="36081" title="National Defence Academy (India)" label="National Defence Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1538" start="36085" end="36102" title="Pune, Maharashtra" label="Pune, Maharashtra"/>
<link wikidata="Q2788745" start="36170" end="36186" title="Bareilly Airport" label="Bareilly Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q213026" start="36190" end="36213" title="Bareilly, Uttar Pradesh" label="Bareilly, Uttar Pradesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q81993" start="36372" end="36392" title="Riga Aviation Museum" label="Riga Aviation Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1773" start="36396" end="36400" title="Riga" label="Riga"/>
<link wikidata="Q190445" start="36456" end="36480" title="Central Air Force Museum" label="Central Air Force Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q649" start="36484" end="36490" title="Moscow" label="Moscow"/>
<link wikidata="Q4449574" start="36539" end="36563" title="Taganrog Aviation Museum" label="Taganrog Aviation Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q170513" start="36567" end="36583" title="Taganrog" label="Taganrog, Rostov"/>
<link wikidata="Q190689" start="36632" end="36659" title="Central Armed Forces Museum" label="Central Armed Forces Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q913880" start="36800" end="36829" title="Ukraine State Aviation Museum" label="Ukraine State Aviation Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1422977" start="36893" end="36939" title="National Museum of the United States Air Force" label="National Museum of the United States Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q34739" start="36943" end="36955" title="Dayton, Ohio" label="Dayton, Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q545449" start="37018" end="37041" title="Operation Iraqi Freedom" label="Operation Iraqi Freedom"/>
<link wikidata="Q4703278" start="37086" end="37105" title="Al Taqaddum Airbase" label="Al Taqaddum Airbase"/>
<link wikidata="Q182012" start="37334" end="37354" title="Lockheed C-5 Galaxy" label="Lockheed C-5A Galaxy"/>
<link wikidata="Q730187" start="37368" end="37399" title="Wright-Patterson Air Force Base" label="Wright-Patterson Air Force Base"/>
<link wikidata="Q1422977" start="37439" end="37485" title="National Museum of the United States Air Force" label="National Museum of the United States Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q1428742" start="39773" end="39793" title="Flight International" label="Flight International"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="247961" wikidata="Q347133" url="?curid=247961" title="George Boleyn, Viscount Rochford">
<text>George Boleyn, Viscount Rochford ( – 17 May 1536) was an English courtier and nobleman who played a prominent role in the politics of the early 1530s as the brother of Anne Boleyn, second wife of King Henry VIII. George was the maternal uncle of Queen Elizabeth I, although he died long before his niece ascended the throne. Following his father&#x27;s promotion in the peerage in 1529 to Earl of Wiltshire and Earl of Ormond, he adopted his father&#x27;s junior title Viscount Rochford (created in 1525) as a courtesy title. He was accused of incest with his sister Anne during the period of her trial for high treason, as a result of which both were executed.

==Early years and family==

George was the son of Thomas Boleyn, later Earl of Wiltshire and Earl of Ormond, and his wife, Elizabeth Howard, the daughter of Thomas Howard, then Earl of Surrey and future 2nd Duke of Norfolk, and his first wife Elizabeth Tilney, therefore George was the nephew of the future 3rd Duke of Norfolk, and first cousin of poet and soldier Henry Howard, Earl of Surrey, of Mary Howard, future wife of King Henry VIII&#x27;s illegitimate son, Henry FitzRoy, Duke of Richmond, as well as Henry VIII&#x27;s future fifth wife, Catherine Howard, daughter of George&#x27;s uncle, Lord Edmund Howard. George and his sisters were probably born in Norfolk at his family&#x27;s home of Blickling Hall. However, they spent most of their childhood at another of the family&#x27;s homes, Hever Castle in Kent, which became their chief residence in 1505 when Thomas inherited the property from his father, Sir William Boleyn.

Thomas and Elizabeth had a number of children, including two sons named Thomas and Henry who failed to reach adulthood. Three children survived: Mary, Anne and George. There has been much debate over the centuries as to the age of the three Boleyn siblings, but there is general agreement that George was born c. 1504. This stems from a number of different sources. George Cavendish says in a poem that George was about 27 when he gained a place on the Privy Council in 1529. Cavendish gives this as a maximum age in order to make his tortuous verses more rhythmic (such as &quot;thrice nine&quot;). In addition to Cavendish&#x27;s verses, foreign diplomats believed George was too young to be appointed as Ambassador to France in October 1529. Mary&#x27;s date of birth is again generally accepted as being c. 1500 but there is some disagreement as to Anne&#x27;s date of birth with arguments for 1501 and others for 1507. However, following the executions of Anne and George in 1536 their father wrote to Thomas Cromwell and in his letter he stated that upon his marriage his wife gave him a child every year. As Thomas and Elizabeth were married between 1498 and 1499, if Thomas is to be believed this indicates that all five Boleyn children, including the two who failed to reach adulthood, were born between 1500 and 1504, and if we accept as the evidence suggests that George was born in 1504 this is persuasive evidence for suggesting he was the youngest Boleyn child. This is the current thinking of the vast majority of modern historians with only one notable exception.

Like his father, it was understood that George would have a career as a courtier, politician and diplomat. The monarchy was the font of all patronage and potential wealth and it was only through service to the Royal Family that a family could hope to achieve or protect their greatness and social position. With this in mind, George was introduced to Henry VIII&#x27;s court at the age of ten, when he attended the Christmas festivities of 1514–15. He attended an indoor melee with his father and acted in a mummery with his father, and the much older Charles Brandon and Nicholas Carew. Thanks to his family&#x27;s influence and the fact he obviously impressed Henry at an early age, he became one of the King&#x27;s pageboys shortly afterwards.

Since learning was highly praised at Court and essential for a career as a diplomat, George received an excellent education, speaking fluent French together with some Italian and Latin. His two sisters are known to have been educated abroad (Mary from 1514 to 1519, Anne from the spring of 1513 to late 1521). George is thought to have remained in England throughout his early years, although George&#x27;s first biographer suggests George may have spent time in France as a child when his father was on embassy from January 1519, as an explanation for how George could speak such perfect French from a young age, and why Anne and George remained so close during their formative years. However, this is pure speculation. Whatever the case, there is a long-standing tradition that George attended the University of Oxford when he was not in attendance at Court, although he does not appear in any of the University&#x27;s records – a relatively frequent occurrence in the period before the English Civil War, when few of the aristocrats who attended either technically matriculated or graduated.

==Personal life==

Less is known about George&#x27;s personal life than about his celebrated court career, but what is known is that he married Jane Parker sometime during 1524. They were certainly married by January 1524 because a note of that date in Cardinal Thomas Wolsey&#x27;s hand confirms that an extra £20 a year had been awarded to &quot;young Boleyn for him and his wife to live on&quot;.

There has always been much speculation as to whether the marriage of George and Jane was happy but there is no way to know for certain, as the state papers are virtually silent with regard to Jane. There is no mention of the couple having any children, which as the brother-in-law and sister-in-law to the king, there surely would have been had such a child existed. It had been thought that George Boleyn, Dean of Lichfield, may have been their son; but it is more likely that he was a distant cousin. There is no record of the couple having a child, and Jane makes no mention of a child for whom she is responsible when she wrote a begging letter to Cromwell following George&#x27;s death.

Whether or not the marriage of George and Jane was happy, George had a reputation as a womaniser. George Cavendish, gentleman usher to Cardinal Wolsey, in his poetry entitled &quot;Metrical Visions&quot; lambastes the young man for his womanising, saying:

Yet in the same poem Cavendish, who was a staunch Catholic and hated the Boleyns and what they stood for, acknowledges George&#x27;s good looks and charm, saying:

Thomas Wyatt in his poetry recognises George&#x27;s &quot;Great wit&quot; (although wit in the 16th century could suggest that a person was witty and charming, it mainly meant intelligence, and it is George&#x27;s intelligence that Wyatt was referring to.) Wyatt&#x27;s verse with respect to George reads:

Historian David Starkey referred to George as having &quot;many of Anne&#x27;s talents and all of her pride&quot;.

For all George&#x27;s good looks and talent, as can be seen from the above verse, Wyatt, who was a friend of the Boleyns, also says that George was too proud. Although Wyatt&#x27;s poem is often used to suggest George was hated for his arrogance, there is nothing to support this. Despite George&#x27;s pride, Wyatt acknowledges that at his death many considered his death to be a great loss. It may also be that the allegations of George&#x27;s womanising are exaggerated, since there was no scandal surrounding the Boleyns&#x27; marriage, and none of the Boleyns&#x27; enemies felt that George&#x27;s behaviour towards women was base enough to comment on. Likewise, neither Cavendish nor the Imperial Ambassador, Eustace Chapuys, who was actively looking for faults in order to demonise the Boleyns, make any mention of him being particularly arrogant. Chapuys&#x27; only complaint was that George could not resist entering into Lutheran discussion whenever he was being entertained by him.

One modern historian, Retha Warnicke, believes that the men accused of being Anne&#x27;s lovers were chosen because of ambiguity over their sexuality. This has led to an increasingly enduring myth that the men were charged with sodomy as well as treason. In fact, none of them was charged with sodomy, and there were no extant rumours of homosexuality relating to any of them. Warnicke&#x27;s theory was put forth in her 1989 biography of Anne Boleyn, but has been criticised by many other historians for lack of evidence to substantiate it.

However, more recently Alison Weir has resurrected the theory regarding George&#x27;s sexuality by using the same arguments that Warnicke used 20 years previously. In addition to this, Weir also suggests that by his use of the phrase &quot;forced widows&quot;, Cavendish was insinuating that George was a rapist. As with the theory of George&#x27;s sexuality, there is no evidence to support the notion that he was a rapist. If he had been guilty of the criminal offences of rape or homosexuality, and if Cavendish knew about it, then so did the rest of the court. Yet no one ever commented on George&#x27;s supposed bisexuality, or even hinted at it, not even enemies of the Boleyns, such as Chapuys.

&quot;Metrical Visions&quot; are Cavendish&#x27;s interpretation of George&#x27;s scaffold speech, when George said he was &quot;a wretched sinner deserving of death&quot;. Despite the current enthusiasm for believing that Cavendish was referring to homosexuality, his 16th-century interpretation was that George was apologising for his promiscuity, of which he may or may not have been guilty. To use &quot;Metrical Visions&quot; and George&#x27;s scaffold speech as the lone pieces of evidence to support an argument for homosexual behaviour is problematic. The verses in &quot;Metrical Visions&quot; are based merely on Cavendish&#x27;s interpretation of George&#x27;s scaffold speech, with Warnicke and Weir solely re-interpreting George&#x27;s final words on the basis of Cavendish&#x27;s writings.

==Appointments and career==
George is first mentioned as an adult in 1522 when he and his father received a joint grant of various manor houses in Kent. The grant was made in April, suggesting that George was born in April 1504 and that this grant was an 18th-birthday gift. He received the first grant in his sole name in 1524, when at the age of 20 he received from the King a country mansion, Grimston Manor in Norfolk. It is supposed that this was an early wedding present made to a young man who was rapidly coming into favour. He was a firm favourite of the King and is regularly mentioned in the Privy Purse expenses as playing the King at bowls, tennis, card games and archery. He also hunted with the King and bet large sums of money with him. He won huge sums off the King but probably lost just as much, if not more. Gambling was one of the European aristocracy&#x27;s favourite pastimes in the period.

In 1525, George was appointed gentleman of the Privy Chamber, functioning as the male equivalent to the King of what a lady-in-waiting was to the Queen. As part of a reorganisation of the Court structure, known as the Eltham Ordinance, Cardinal Wolsey, an opponent of the Boleyns, ensured that George lost this position six months later when he halved the number of gentlemen in the Privy Chamber. Wolsey used the reorganisation to get rid of those whom he perceived as a threat, which was something of a backhanded compliment to the 21-year-old Boleyn whose court prominence was already being acknowledged. As compensation, George was appointed Royal Cupbearer in January 1526 in addition to his award of an additional £20 a year for him and his wife to live on.

Following her return to England in 1519, Mary Boleyn became Henry VIII&#x27;s mistress. It is not known when that relationship started or when it ended or indeed for how long it lasted. It was certainly over by 1526 when the King&#x27;s eyes turned to another Boleyn sibling, Anne, and by 1527 he was seeking to marry her. Much of George Boleyn&#x27;s career was in furtherance to the king&#x27;s desire for a divorce from his first wife to enable him to marry Anne.

In June 1528, George contracted the disease known as sweating sickness while with the King and Catherine of Aragon at Waltham Abbey. In a letter to Anne, who also contracted the disease while at Hever Castle, Henry told her of her brother&#x27;s illness and recovery.

Later that year, George was appointed Esquire of the Body and Master of the Buckhounds in 1528. Throughout the late 1520s grants continued to be bestowed upon him. On 15 November 1528 he became keeper of the Palace of Beaulieu and on 1 February 1529 was appointed chief steward of Beaulieu (later in October 1533 he would be granted a life interest in the Palace). On 29 July 1529 he was appointed Governor of Bethlehem Hospital (Bedlam), which was a profitable sinecure.

George&#x27;s diplomatic career took off in late 1529 when he was knighted and regained his former position as a member of the Privy chamber. It was also in December 1529 that he became known by the courtesy title of Viscount Rochford when his father was created Earl of Wiltshire and Earl of Ormond, and undertook his first assignment as a diplomat to France as ambassador. Because of his youth, (he was only 25), it is believed that Anne&#x27;s influence secured him this post, although there is no evidence that he lacked the ability to undertake the role. The French ambassador, Jean du Bellay, commented that George was considerably younger than many of the other foreign diplomats and that the appointment of a man barely out of his teens would cause amusement. But he also goes on to say that George should be shown more honour than was ordinarily necessary, and that his reception would be well weighted.

Irrespective of his age, George quickly established a good relationship with King Francis I of France and did well in his first embassy. George attended a total of six foreign embassies to France. The first was between late October 1529 and late February 1530. George attended with John Stokesley, the Dean of the Chapel Royal. Their mission was to encourage the universities of France to support Henry VIII&#x27;s divorce from Catherine of Aragon. The universities&#x27; response was initially negative, but George encouraged King Francis to write a strong letter in favour of the divorce, which was later used to reverse the universities&#x27; decision.
The second was in March 1533 when he informed the King of France of his sister&#x27;s marriage to the King of England. George was also instructed to encourage Francis into giving Henry more support, and following a lengthy debate George succeeded in obtaining a letter from Francis asking the Pope to concede to Henry&#x27;s wishes. Not everyone was happy with George&#x27;s success. The Bishop of Paris, who had found George&#x27;s youth so amusing, described him as &quot;the most unreasonable young man who ever crossed the sea&quot;. Yet despite the criticism Du Bellay grudgingly gave praise for the respect George Boleyn inspired at the meeting and the strength with which he argued the case.

George&#x27;s third embassy was between May and August 1533 when he travelled to France with his uncle the Duke of Norfolk to be present at a proposed meeting between the King of France and Pope Clement VII. It was during this mission that news reached them that the Pope had excommunicated Henry. It was George who returned to England to inform Henry of the Pope&#x27;s actions.

On 10 September 1533, George carried the canopy over his royal niece the Princess Elizabeth (later Queen Elizabeth I) at her christening, along with his uncles Lord Thomas Howard and William Howard, 1st Baron Howard of Effingham as well as John Hussey, 1st Baron Hussey of Sleaford.

His fourth embassy was in April 1534 when George was again appointed to encourage the French King to give more support to Henry&#x27;s cause, to pass similar legislation against the Pope as had been passed in England, and to arrange a meeting between the two Kings and Anne.

In July 1534, George once again attended the French court, this time to rearrange the meeting that had been arranged between the kings as a result of Anne&#x27;s pregnancy (she later miscarried). In George&#x27;s instructions is a passage stating he is one who the King &quot;specially loveth and trustith&quot;.

George&#x27;s final embassy was in May 1535 when he and his uncle were appointed by the King to negotiate a marriage contract between the King of France&#x27;s third son and the baby Princess Elizabeth, George&#x27;s niece.

When George was not abroad, he often escorted foreign diplomats and ambassadors into the King&#x27;s presence. Chapuys in particular regularly refers in his dispatches to meeting &quot;the ladies brother&quot;. In October 1529, immediately prior to George&#x27;s first embassy abroad, he was instructed to escort Chapuys on his first audience with the King. Chapuys refers to meeting &quot;a civil gentleman named Boleyn&quot;. Ironically, Chapuys had liked George, before he became aware of who he was.

In addition to his diplomatic career, George was an acknowledged court poet of considerable merit, and was also much admired as a talented linguist and translator. He was passionate about religious reform and translated from French into English two magnificent religious texts as presents for his sister Anne, which he dedicates &quot;To the right honourable lady, the Lady Marchiness of Pembroke, her most loving and friendly brother sendeth greetings.&quot; The translations codify the Lutheran doctrine which both Anne and George were so immersed in, and emphasise the joint commitment of both siblings to reform of the Church. When Anne was sent a religious pamphlet by Simon Fish, &quot;A Supplication for the Beggars&quot;, it was George, according to Fish&#x27;s wife, who encouraged Anne to show it to the King. On religious matters, the Boleyn siblings formed a team and although they were originally baptized and raised as Roman Catholics, they were identified with the new religious ideas. Though Anne had far greater influence owing to the King&#x27;s infatuation with her, her brother clearly identified both of them with the ideas.

George&#x27;s own religious views resulted in him having an influential role in the Reformation Parliament between its conception in late 1529 and his death in 1536. Both siblings were talented debaters on the issues of religious philosophy and it was George whom Henry chose in 1531 to argue the case for royal supremacy over the Church, before the Church&#x27;s advisory body, Convocation.

On 5 February 1533, George was formally called to Parliament and his attendance rate was higher than any other Lord despite his other onerous duties, clearly indicating his commitment. He obviously voted in favour of the statutes which brought to an end the Pope&#x27;s powers in England, and his commitment to religious reform earned him many enemies who held true to the Catholic faith. Various peers who were opposed to the legislation were excused attendance provided they appoint a proxy. George twice held the proxy vote of Thomas West, 9th Baron De La Warr, an adherent to the old religion. Unfortunately for George, De La Warr later sat on the jury which tried him.

In 1535 he was one of the special commissioners at the trial of Sir Thomas More and at the trial of three Carthusian Monks, all of whom, because of their religious convictions, refused to swear allegiance to the Act of Succession and Supremacy which had been passed the previous year. George, his father, the King&#x27;s illegitimate son Henry Fitzroy and all other courtiers of rank were present at the monks&#x27; executions, which took place on 4 May 1535.

In June 1534, George was appointed Lord Warden of the Cinque Ports and Constable of Dover Castle. These were among the highest appointments in the realm and, as usual, he committed to them with zeal. He is regularly referred to in the State Papers in his position as Warden sitting at the Warden&#x27;s court at Dover. From Thomas Cromwell&#x27;s point of view, George&#x27;s influence as Lord Warden was a thorn in his side. On 26 November 1534, George wrote to Cromwell expressing fury that Cromwell had undermined one of his orders made as Lord Warden.

==Trial and execution: 1536==
In 1536, Anne Boleyn miscarried a son. This loss of the much desired son and male heir coincided with Henry&#x27;s infatuation with Jane Seymour, one of his wife&#x27;s maids-of-honour. To rid himself of his wife, Henry and his chief advisor, Thomas Cromwell, devised a plot whereby Anne was accused of adultery with five men, one of whom was her brother, George. George was charged with incest with the Queen and plotting with Anne to kill the King. During a conversation with Chapuys following the Boleyns&#x27; deaths, Cromwell boasted that he had gone to a great deal of trouble arranging the plot, suggesting he did so in order to assist an alliance with Spain. Yet despite his boasts, during the same conversation he greatly praised both Anne and her brother for their &quot;sense, wit, and courage&quot;.

On 23 April 1536 George was expected to be chosen to receive the Order of the Garter, but the honour went to a known opponent of the Boleyns instead, Sir Nicholas Carew. The following day, Henry gave instructions to Cromwell to set up a special commission looking into various treasons.

Anne and George were arrested on 2 May 1536, the day after the May Day joust at which George was one of the principal jousters.

The four others implicated in the plot, Sir Henry Norris, Sir Francis Weston, Sir William Brereton, and Mark Smeaton were tried on Friday 12 May. Only Smeaton confessed, probably after torture, but certainly emotional pressure. Despite lack of evidence all four men were found guilty. Thomas Howard, Duke of Norfolk sat on the jury and effectively condemned his own niece by finding the men guilty.

Anne was pre-judged for the earlier convictions of the men found guilty of adultery with her; therefore she stood trial before her brother. George stood trial a few hours after Anne on Monday 15 May. As Anne had been found guilty before George had stood trial, he too was pre-judged because he could hardly be acquitted when his sister had already been found guilty of incest. The order of the trials had been arranged to ensure the difficult case against George could not realistically fail. Everyone who witnessed George&#x27;s trial, including the Imperial Ambassador Eustace Chapuys, considered that he put up a magnificent defence and many thought that he would be acquitted. Chapuys reported that those watching were betting 10 to 1 that he would be acquitted, and the court chronicler Charles Wriothesley said that his evidence was a marvel to hear.

There was no evidence of incest. Chapuys says he was convicted merely on a presumption. George&#x27;s wife has been accused of providing evidence to support the incest charge, but this is unlikely to be correct. None of the evidence relating to the trials makes any mention of George&#x27;s wife as providing evidence, save for the fact that she told in a letter that Anne had told her Henry was &quot;not able to satisfy a woman and he had neither capacity nor virility&quot;. It seems that the majority of the courtiers believed in George&#x27;s innocence, as can be seen from the wagers they were making in favour of acquittal.

Irrespective of what those at court thought, he was unanimously found guilty and the sentence of the court was that he be hanged, drawn, and quartered (the sentence was later commuted to beheading). He asked for his debts be paid out of his confiscated assets so that no one would suffer from his death, and he continued to be distressed about his debts while awaiting death. In fact his distress was so acute that the Constable of the Tower, Sir William Kingston wrote to Cromwell twice begging him to help ease George&#x27;s conscience.

George Boleyn and the other four men were beheaded on Tower Hill on the morning of 17 May 1536. George&#x27;s scaffold speech was extremely long and exemplified the orator&#x27;s linguistic skills. For it to have been recorded in as much detail as it was, the vast crowd who witnessed the executions must have been virtually silent, and there could have been little booing or jeering as with normal state executions. His scaffold speech was primarily concerned with defending his religious beliefs and his passion for reform. It was not the honourable thing to deny guilt once a guilty verdict had been given in a court of law, and therefore he followed the conventions of the day by admitting he was a sinner deserving of death. He begged forgiveness of anyone he may have offended and begged for God&#x27;s forgiveness. He came close to denying his guilt by declaring, &quot;beware, trust not in the vanity of the world or the flatteries of the court, or the favour and treacheries of fortune&quot;. He said he would be alive if he had not done so. By blaming fortune for his fall he came as close as he dared to denying his guilt (i.e., he was dying because luck had been against him, not because he was guilty). He then went on to speak of his religious convictions before calmly submitting his neck to the axe. Anne was beheaded two days later.

==Titles==
* George Boleyn (1504–1529)
* Sir George Boleyn (c. October 1529)
* Baron Rochford (between 1530 and 1533 – May 1536)
* Viscount Rochford (by courtesy until 5 February 1533) (8 December 1529 – May 1536)

==Fictional portrayals==
In the 1830 tragic opera &quot;Anna Bolena&quot; by Gaetano Donizetti, the character of Lord Rochfort is based on George Boleyn, Viscount Rochford.

George Boleyn was portrayed by Michael Johnson in the 1969 film &quot;Anne of the Thousand Days&quot; and by Jonathan Newth in the 1970 television series &quot;The Six Wives of Henry VIII&quot;.

Following his prominence within &quot;The Other Boleyn Girl&quot;, the 2001 novel by Philippa Gregory, he was portrayed in the 2003 television film &quot;The Other Boleyn Girl&quot; by Steven Mackintosh and by Jim Sturgess in the 2008 cinema film &quot;The Other Boleyn Girl&quot;. Gregory portrayed George Boleyn as at least gay and possibly bisexual. However, the film adaptations of the book do not portray George as bisexual.

Boleyn was portrayed by Pádraic Delaney in the 2007 television series &quot;The Tudors&quot;. The writers of &quot;The Tudors&quot; not only portrayed George as bisexual, but also portrayed his relationship with his wife as abusive.

George Boleyn is one of two protagonists (along with sister Anne) in a play by British writer Joanna Carrick, &quot;Fallen in Love&quot;. It was originally produced in 2011 in the grounds of Gippeswyk Hall in Ipswich in Suffolk, and subsequently reprised for performances at the Tower of London and Gippeswyk Hall in May 2013, directed by Carrick as artistic director of Red Rose Chain theatre company. In the 2013 production, George was portrayed by Scott Ellis and Anne by Emma Connell.

In the 2015 BBC Two adaptation of Hilary Mantel&#x27;s &quot;Wolf Hall&quot;, George Boleyn is portrayed by Edward Holcroft.

In the 2021 Channel 5 series &quot;Anne Boleyn&quot;, he was played by Paapa Essiedu.

In the 2022 BBC Two three-part series The Boleyns: A Scandalous Family, George is portrayed by Sam Retford.

==References==
===Bibliography===
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 

* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q347133" start="0" end="32" title="George Boleyn, Viscount Rochford" label="George Boleyn, Viscount Rochford"/>
<link wikidata="Q1511216" start="65" end="73" title="courtier" label="courtier"/>
<link wikidata="Q134737" start="78" end="86" title="nobleman" label="nobleman"/>
<link wikidata="Q80823" start="168" end="179" title="Anne Boleyn" label="Anne Boleyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q3408870" start="181" end="192" title="Wives of Henry VIII" label="second wife"/>
<link wikidata="Q38370" start="201" end="211" title="Henry VIII" label="Henry VIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q7207" start="252" end="263" title="Elizabeth I" label="Elizabeth I"/>
<link wikidata="Q1790928" start="389" end="406" title="Earl of Wiltshire" label="Earl of Wiltshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q193985" start="411" end="425" title="Earl of Ormond (Ireland)" label="Earl of Ormond"/>
<link wikidata="Q7935837" start="469" end="486" title="Viscount Rochford" label="Viscount Rochford"/>
<link wikidata="Q2304081" start="510" end="524" title="courtesy title" label="courtesy title"/>
<link wikidata="Q127683" start="544" end="550" title="incest" label="incest"/>
<link wikidata="Q160128" start="607" end="619" title="high treason" label="high treason"/>
<link wikidata="Q312398" start="713" end="726" title="Thomas Boleyn, 1st Earl of Wiltshire" label="Thomas Boleyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1790928" start="734" end="751" title="Earl of Wiltshire" label="Earl of Wiltshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q193985" start="756" end="770" title="Earl of Ormond (Ireland)" label="Earl of Ormond"/>
<link wikidata="Q236905" start="786" end="802" title="Elizabeth Boleyn, Countess of Wiltshire" label="Elizabeth Howard"/>
<link wikidata="Q709340" start="820" end="833" title="Thomas Howard, 2nd Duke of Norfolk" label="Thomas Howard"/>
<link wikidata="Q3435025" start="906" end="922" title="Elizabeth Tilney, Countess of Surrey" label="Elizabeth Tilney"/>
<link wikidata="Q503816" start="970" end="989" title="Thomas Howard, 3rd Duke of Norfolk" label="3rd Duke of Norfolk"/>
<link wikidata="Q49757" start="1011" end="1015" title="poet" label="poet"/>
<link wikidata="Q372211" start="1028" end="1056" title="Henry Howard, Earl of Surrey" label="Henry Howard, Earl of Surrey"/>
<link wikidata="Q2663072" start="1061" end="1072" title="Mary FitzRoy, Duchess of Richmond and Somerset" label="Mary Howard"/>
<link wikidata="Q358863" start="1130" end="1161" title="Henry FitzRoy, Duke of Richmond and Somerset" label="Henry FitzRoy, Duke of Richmond"/>
<link wikidata="Q188926" start="1211" end="1227" title="Catherine Howard" label="Catherine Howard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1090279" start="1262" end="1280" title="Lord Edmund Howard" label="Lord Edmund Howard"/>
<link wikidata="Q23109" start="1327" end="1334" title="Norfolk" label="Norfolk"/>
<link wikidata="Q17535638" start="1364" end="1378" title="Blickling Hall" label="Blickling Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132683" start="1463" end="1475" title="Hever Castle" label="Hever Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2578087" start="1580" end="1598" title="Sir William Boleyn" label="Sir William Boleyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q209502" start="1746" end="1750" title="Mary Boleyn" label="Mary"/>
<link wikidata="Q80823" start="1752" end="1756" title="Anne Boleyn" label="Anne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1226237" start="1967" end="1983" title="George Cavendish (writer)" label="George Cavendish"/>
<link wikidata="Q6528244" start="2054" end="2067" title="Privy Council" label="Privy Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q294435" start="2608" end="2623" title="Thomas Cromwell" label="Thomas Cromwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q337635" start="3734" end="3749" title="Charles Brandon, 1st Duke of Suffolk" label="Charles Brandon"/>
<link wikidata="Q537639" start="3754" end="3768" title="Nicholas Carew (courtier)" label="Nicholas Carew"/>
<link wikidata="Q34433" start="4730" end="4750" title="University of Oxford" label="University of Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q80330" start="4919" end="4936" title="English Civil War" label="English Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193162" start="4998" end="5010" title="Matriculation" label="matriculated"/>
<link wikidata="Q179278" start="5170" end="5181" title="Jane Boleyn, Viscountess Rochford" label="Jane Parker"/>
<link wikidata="Q45722" start="5279" end="5287" title="Cardinal (Catholic Church)" label="Cardinal"/>
<link wikidata="Q206512" start="5288" end="5301" title="Thomas Wolsey" label="Thomas Wolsey"/>
<link wikidata="Q5537087" start="5819" end="5832" title="George Boleyn (priest)" label="George Boleyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q5246641" start="5834" end="5851" title="Dean of Lichfield" label="Dean of Lichfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q294435" start="6079" end="6087" title="Thomas Cromwell" label="Cromwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q5533726" start="6236" end="6251" title="gentleman usher" label="gentleman usher"/>
<link wikidata="Q314325" start="6541" end="6553" title="Thomas Wyatt (poet)" label="Thomas Wyatt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1176720" start="6858" end="6871" title="David Starkey" label="David Starkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q602596" start="7679" end="7694" title="Eustace Chapuys" label="Eustace Chapuys"/>
<link wikidata="Q75809" start="7895" end="7903" title="Lutheran" label="Lutheran"/>
<link wikidata="Q1264968" start="7980" end="7994" title="Retha Warnicke" label="Retha Warnicke"/>
<link wikidata="Q206426" start="8186" end="8192" title="sodomy" label="sodomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1788781" start="8524" end="8535" title="Alison Weir" label="Alison Weir"/>
<link wikidata="Q23298" start="10156" end="10160" title="Kent" label="Kent"/>
<link wikidata="Q5609359" start="10405" end="10419" title="Grimston Manor" label="Grimston Manor"/>
<link wikidata="Q3376011" start="10612" end="10623" title="Privy Purse" label="Privy Purse"/>
<link wikidata="Q895471" start="10656" end="10661" title="bowls" label="bowls"/>
<link wikidata="Q16933738" start="10971" end="10984" title="Privy Chamber" label="Privy Chamber"/>
<link wikidata="Q715222" start="11043" end="11058" title="lady-in-waiting" label="lady-in-waiting"/>
<link wikidata="Q5367802" start="11142" end="11158" title="Eltham Ordinance" label="Eltham Ordinance"/>
<link wikidata="Q206512" start="11160" end="11175" title="Cardinal Wolsey" label="Cardinal Wolsey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075791" start="11570" end="11585" title="Cup-bearer" label="Royal Cupbearer"/>
<link wikidata="Q209502" start="11730" end="11741" title="Mary Boleyn" label="Mary Boleyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q80823" start="11965" end="11969" title="Anne Boleyn" label="Anne"/>
<link wikidata="Q920766" start="12210" end="12227" title="sweating sickness" label="sweating sickness"/>
<link wikidata="Q162819" start="12252" end="12271" title="Catherine of Aragon" label="Catherine of Aragon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3603291" start="12275" end="12288" title="Waltham Abbey (abbey)" label="Waltham Abbey"/>
<link wikidata="Q15132701" start="12464" end="12483" title="Esquire of the Body" label="Esquire of the Body"/>
<link wikidata="Q3851591" start="12488" end="12512" title="Master of the Buckhounds" label="Master of the Buckhounds"/>
<link wikidata="Q2714774" start="12634" end="12652" title="Palace of Beaulieu" label="Palace of Beaulieu"/>
<link wikidata="Q831377" start="12836" end="12854" title="Bethlehem Hospital" label="Bethlehem Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q833163" start="12965" end="12973" title="Knight Bachelor" label="knighted"/>
<link wikidata="Q2304081" start="13098" end="13112" title="courtesy title" label="courtesy title"/>
<link wikidata="Q7935837" start="13116" end="13133" title="Viscount Rochford" label="Viscount Rochford"/>
<link wikidata="Q1790928" start="13162" end="13179" title="Earl of Wiltshire" label="Earl of Wiltshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q193985" start="13184" end="13198" title="Earl of Ormond (Ireland)" label="Earl of Ormond"/>
<link wikidata="Q70972" start="13252" end="13258" title="Kingdom of France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q518967" start="13482" end="13496" title="Jean du Bellay" label="Jean du Bellay"/>
<link wikidata="Q129857" start="13890" end="13914" title="King Francis I of France" label="King Francis I of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062692" start="14127" end="14139" title="Chapel Royal" label="Chapel Royal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1242250" start="14857" end="14872" title="Bishop of Paris" label="Bishop of Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q503816" start="15276" end="15291" title="Thomas Howard, 3rd Duke of Norfolk" label="Duke of Norfolk"/>
<link wikidata="Q83159" start="15359" end="15375" title="Pope Clement VII" label="Pope Clement VII"/>
<link wikidata="Q49822" start="15445" end="15459" title="Excommunication" label="excommunicated"/>
<link wikidata="Q7207" start="15623" end="15641" title="Elizabeth I of England" label="Princess Elizabeth"/>
<link wikidata="Q201153" start="15710" end="15728" title="Lord Thomas Howard" label="Lord Thomas Howard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1337469" start="15733" end="15778" title="William Howard, 1st Baron Howard of Effingham" label="William Howard, 1st Baron Howard of Effingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q6240511" start="15790" end="15831" title="John Hussey, 1st Baron Hussey of Sleaford" label="John Hussey, 1st Baron Hussey of Sleaford"/>
<link wikidata="Q958378" start="16584" end="16593" title="Charles II de Valois, Duke of Orléans" label="third son"/>
<link wikidata="Q602596" start="16760" end="16767" title="Eustace Chapuys" label="Chapuys"/>
<link wikidata="Q2287472" start="17828" end="17838" title="Simon Fish" label="Simon Fish"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="18087" end="18102" title="Roman Catholics" label="Roman Catholics"/>
<link wikidata="Q5378356" start="18385" end="18407" title="English Reformation Parliament" label="Reformation Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q82708" start="18632" end="18638" title="Church of England" label="Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q3765035" start="18680" end="18691" title="Convocation" label="Convocation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3990737" start="19224" end="19257" title="Thomas West, 9th Baron De La Warr" label="Thomas West, 9th Baron De La Warr"/>
<link wikidata="Q42544" start="19433" end="19448" title="Sir Thomas More" label="Sir Thomas More"/>
<link wikidata="Q220979" start="19475" end="19485" title="Carthusian" label="Carthusian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1340420" start="19581" end="19598" title="First Succession Act" label="Act of Succession"/>
<link wikidata="Q358863" start="19707" end="19720" title="Henry FitzRoy, Duke of Richmond and Somerset" label="Henry Fitzroy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1809853" start="19865" end="19896" title="Lord Warden of the Cinque Ports" label="Lord Warden of the Cinque Ports"/>
<link wikidata="Q950970" start="19914" end="19926" title="Dover Castle" label="Dover Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q294435" start="20154" end="20169" title="Thomas Cromwell" label="Thomas Cromwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q182637" start="20549" end="20561" title="Jane Seymour" label="Jane Seymour"/>
<link wikidata="Q6735310" start="20586" end="20601" title="maids-of-honour" label="maids-of-honour"/>
<link wikidata="Q294435" start="20660" end="20675" title="Thomas Cromwell" label="Thomas Cromwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q215248" start="21295" end="21314" title="Order of the Garter" label="Order of the Garter"/>
<link wikidata="Q537639" start="21380" end="21398" title="Nicholas Carew (courtier)" label="Sir Nicholas Carew"/>
<link wikidata="Q1607100" start="21687" end="21703" title="Henry Norris (courtier)" label="Sir Henry Norris"/>
<link wikidata="Q507840" start="21705" end="21723" title="Sir Francis Weston" label="Sir Francis Weston"/>
<link wikidata="Q1797053" start="21725" end="21745" title="William Brereton (courtier)" label="Sir William Brereton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1234647" start="21751" end="21763" title="Mark Smeaton" label="Mark Smeaton"/>
<link wikidata="Q5083730" start="22839" end="22858" title="Charles Wriothesley" label="Charles Wriothesley"/>
<link wikidata="Q877524" start="23659" end="23687" title="hanged, drawn, and quartered" label="hanged, drawn, and quartered"/>
<link wikidata="Q8014029" start="23980" end="24000" title="Sir William Kingston" label="Sir William Kingston"/>
<link wikidata="Q499565" start="24131" end="24141" title="Tower Hill" label="Tower Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q13108106" start="25578" end="25589" title="courtesy titles in the United Kingdom" label="by courtesy"/>
<link wikidata="Q559848" start="25699" end="25710" title="Anna Bolena" label="Anna Bolena"/>
<link wikidata="Q101698" start="25720" end="25737" title="Donizetti" label="Gaetano Donizetti"/>
<link wikidata="Q910226" start="25887" end="25912" title="Anne of the Thousand Days" label="Anne of the Thousand Days"/>
<link wikidata="Q6274007" start="25926" end="25940" title="Jonathan Newth" label="Jonathan Newth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1248039" start="25977" end="26004" title="The Six Wives of Henry VIII (BBC TV series)" label="The Six Wives of Henry VIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q470044" start="26051" end="26072" title="The Other Boleyn Girl" label="The Other Boleyn Girl"/>
<link wikidata="Q240212" start="26098" end="26114" title="Philippa Gregory" label="Philippa Gregory"/>
<link wikidata="Q744843" start="26167" end="26188" title="The Other Boleyn Girl (2003 film)" label="The Other Boleyn Girl"/>
<link wikidata="Q1339924" start="26198" end="26215" title="Steven Mackintosh" label="Steven Mackintosh"/>
<link wikidata="Q512577" start="26223" end="26235" title="Jim Sturgess" label="Jim Sturgess"/>
<link wikidata="Q470073" start="26266" end="26287" title="The Other Boleyn Girl (2008 film)" label="The Other Boleyn Girl"/>
<link wikidata="Q433499" start="26468" end="26483" title="Pádraic Delaney" label="Pádraic Delaney"/>
<link wikidata="Q326731" start="26520" end="26530" title="The Tudors" label="The Tudors"/>
<link wikidata="Q184775" start="26887" end="26894" title="Ipswich" label="Ipswich"/>
<link wikidata="Q62378" start="26957" end="26972" title="Tower of London" label="Tower of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q216108" start="27180" end="27187" title="BBC Two" label="BBC Two"/>
<link wikidata="Q465700" start="27202" end="27215" title="Hilary Mantel" label="Hilary Mantel"/>
<link wikidata="Q17039455" start="27229" end="27238" title="Wolf Hall (miniseries)" label="Wolf Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q21592498" start="27276" end="27291" title="Edward Holcroft" label="Edward Holcroft"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062280" start="27306" end="27315" title="Channel 5 (British TV channel)" label="Channel 5"/>
<link wikidata="Q106670233" start="27329" end="27340" title="Anne Boleyn (TV series)" label="Anne Boleyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q23882712" start="27365" end="27378" title="Paapa Essiedu" label="Paapa Essiedu"/>
<link wikidata="Q58975312" start="27476" end="27487" title="Sam Retford" label="Sam Retford"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="247964" wikidata="Q2699842" url="?curid=247964" title="Ethan of Athos">
<text>Ethan of Athos is a 1986 science fiction novel by American author Lois McMaster Bujold. The title character is Dr. Ethan Urquhart, Chief of Biology at the Sevarin District Reproduction Centre on the planet Athos, who is sent to find out what happened to a shipment of vital ovarian tissue cultures. Set in the fictional universe of Bujold&#x27;s Vorkosigan Saga, the novel mentions but does not feature her usual protagonist Miles Vorkosigan. To date, Bujold has never revisited the settings of Athos or Kline Station in her many subsequent novels, but the events of &quot;Ethan of Athos&quot; are later referred to indirectly in the novels &quot;Borders of Infinity&quot; (1989) and &quot;Cetaganda&quot; (1995).

Bujold had written her first novel &quot;Shards of Honor&quot; and its sequel &quot;The Warrior&#x27;s Apprentice&quot; — both unpublished — when she wrote &quot;Ethan of Athos&quot;, a standalone work that was purposely short &quot;because the current cargo-cult rumor amongst the wanna-be-published back then was that editors would be more likely to read a short manuscript.&quot; All three novels were subsequently sold, and published in 1986.

Bujold named Athos, a planet founded and maintained as an exclusively male-populated colony with a planetary religion and ideology supporting this single-sex structure, after the Greek Mount Athos, which has prohibited the entry of women for religious reasons since even before the ban was officially proclaimed by the Byzantine emperor Constantine Monomachos in 1046.

&quot;Ethan of Athos&quot; has been reprinted several times, and appeared in the 2001 Bujold omnibus &quot;Miles, Mystery and Mayhem&quot; alongside &quot;Cetaganda&quot; and the novella &quot;Labyrinth&quot;. The novel was released on audio cassette in September 1999 narrated by Michael Hanson and Carol Cowan, and as a digital audiobook in March 2009 narrated by Grover Gardner.

==Plot summary==
Dr. Ethan Urquhart, Chief of Biology at the Sevarin District Reproduction Centre on Athos, is upset to find that his long-awaited shipment of ovarian tissue cultures from off-planet consists of an unusable mixture of dead and animal tissues. An all-male planetary colony, Athos relies on uterine replicator technology for reproduction, but the centuries-old cultures introduced by the original colonists have recently begun deteriorating into senescence. The Population Council of Athos sends a reluctant Ethan to the planet Jackson&#x27;s Whole, where the shipment originated, in search of a fresh batch of tissue cultures and (if possible) a refund from the supplier, House Bharaputra, one of the crime syndicates which rule Jackson&#x27;s Whole. This already difficult assignment is made more so because it means dealing with women, whom Athosians are taught to view as demonic and terrifying.

Ethan arrives at the interstellar hub of Kline Station and immediately encounters his first woman, Commander Elli Quinn, a rather unorthodox intelligence officer with the Dendarii Free Mercenary Fleet (and a subordinate of Admiral Naismith&#x27;s). Though she is pleasant and even helpful, Ethan is wary of her. He is soon abducted and interrogated by military agents from Cetaganda who are seeking a fugitive named Terrence Cee, as well as their own lost tissue cultures. They refuse to believe that Ethan is not an opposing intelligence operative. Elli rescues Ethan from certain execution. They become reluctant allies; Elli explains that she has actually been hired by House Bharaputra to track the Cetagandans, and for her own reasons determine what their interest is in the tissue cultures and how it relates to a secret Cetagandan research project.

Terrence approaches Ethan with a request for asylum, revealing himself to be the last survivor of a Cetagandan genetic project to create telepaths. Although his telepathy is reliable, it has a small range and can only be triggered for a short amount of time by ingesting large doses of the amino acid tyramine. Terrance&#x27;s female counterpart, Janine, had been killed in their escape, but he managed to preserve her body and transport it to Jackson&#x27;s Whole, where he paid House Bharaputra to splice her genes into the ovarian cultures that were intended for Athos. Terrence had planned to also emigrate to Athos with the cultures, but had been delayed on his way to Kline Station, and is now horrified to learn that the cultures were stolen.

The Cetagandans had tracked Terrence to Jackson&#x27;s Whole; arriving after his departure, they killed the Bharaputra researchers who had worked with him and destroyed their records. They then traced the tissue shipment to Kline Station, knowing Terrence would eventually come for it, though they have no knowledge of what happened to the original cultures and are desperate to reclaim them. Elli and Ethan manage to have the Cetagandans seized by Kline Station security, just as they discover that a minor official at the station had, for petty personal reasons, &quot;thrown out&quot; the Bharaputran tissue cultures that contained Janine&#x27;s genes and replaced them with the useless biological material. Elli attempts to recruit Terrence for the Dendarii; he refuses, but gives Elli a small genetic sample. Meanwhile, Ethan asks Elli for (and receives) one of her ovaries to create a new tissue culture. After her departure, the original Bharaputran shipment unexpectedly turns up intact and usable, not destroyed. Ethan buys a new set of ovarian cultures from Beta Colony anyway as a cover, uses their packaging to relabel the cultures with Janine&#x27;s genes, and returns with them and Terrence to Athos.

===Athos===
In the novel, the planet Athos is an all-male colony with a self-sustaining economy that is virtually independent of interstellar trade. Called a &quot;monastery&quot; planet by Bujold, it had been settled some 200 years earlier as a sanctuary away from women, who had become mythologized as &quot;demonic&quot; due to the &quot;madness&quot; they cause in men. With the planetary religion and ideology supporting this single-sex structure, all incoming information is screened so that all references to — and images of — women are removed. Athos is remote, and physical contact with the rest of human civilization is limited to an annual interstellar census courier that brings information, supplies and the rare immigrant.

The population is sustained using uterine replicator technology, and by design only male offspring are conceived. Through military and community service, Athosians earn &quot;Social Duty Credits&quot; towards reproduction. Regulations also allow for a &quot;Designated Alternate Parent&quot; who can earn Social Duty Credits by coparenting a partner&#x27;s sons. Homosexuality is generally the norm on Athos, and while partnerships are typically romantic and sexual, some are merely mutually beneficial arrangements based on finances and child-rearing.

As much as Athosians are innately misogynistic, homophobia still exists elsewhere in the universe and is sometimes casually directed at the population of Athos.
Athos is named after the Greek Mount Athos monastery where no females, including female animals, are allowed.

==Critical reception==
Saying that &quot;it would be hard to imagine a more unlikely hero for an SF adventure novel than a homosexual obstetrician,&quot; &quot;Booklist&quot; called &quot;Ethan of Athos&quot; &quot;Bujold&#x27;s third remarkable novel in a year&quot; with &quot;a compellingly attractive protagonist&quot;, going on to declare the novel &quot;highly recommended for all SF collections.&quot; Noting that &quot;Ethan of Athos&quot; is nothing like Bujold&#x27;s previous two books, Jo Walton wrote of the novel:

Walton also writes that &quot;I couldn&#x27;t have imagined what a feminist notion a planet of men is, and how tied up with nurturing children Athos is, accounting for the costs in a way that doesn&#x27;t dismiss it as &#x27;women’s work.&#x27;&quot; &quot;Library Journal&quot; noted that &quot;the plot-driven story moves swiftly and will engage SF fans of all subgenres&quot;. Nicki Gerlach of SF Site wrote, &quot;Bujold&#x27;s got an uncanny ability to create multidimensional, flawed, and loveable characters in a very short space. Even though Ethan is almost painfully naïve throughout the book, it&#x27;s hard not to sympathize with him and cheer for him right from the beginning.&quot; She also praises Bujold&#x27;s dialogue, which blends humor and &quot;snarky wit&quot; with &quot;the action, the politics, and the emotional pathos that make up the rest of the story.&quot; Gerlach also praises Bujold&#x27;s deftness at &quot;introducing more serious topics in her fiction, without having the story become entirely about The Issues.&quot; She writes:
==See also==
* LGBT themes in speculative fiction
* Reproduction and pregnancy in speculative fiction
* Sex and sexuality in speculative fiction

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q24925" start="25" end="40" title="science fiction" label="science fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q229369" start="66" end="86" title="Lois McMaster Bujold" label="Lois McMaster Bujold"/>
<link wikidata="Q421621" start="346" end="361" title="Vorkosigan Saga" label="Vorkosigan Saga"/>
<link wikidata="Q2726964" start="425" end="441" title="Miles Vorkosigan" label="Miles Vorkosigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q421621" start="647" end="666" title="Borders of Infinity" label="Borders of Infinity"/>
<link wikidata="Q2253255" start="690" end="699" title="Cetaganda" label="Cetaganda"/>
<link wikidata="Q2705377" start="756" end="771" title="Shards of Honor" label="Shards of Honor"/>
<link wikidata="Q261636" start="786" end="792" title="sequel" label="sequel"/>
<link wikidata="Q676256" start="799" end="828" title="The Warrior&amp;#x27;s Apprentice" label="The Warrior&amp;#x27;s Apprentice"/>
<link wikidata="Q130321" start="1348" end="1359" title="Mount Athos" label="Mount Athos"/>
<link wikidata="Q128866" start="1482" end="1499" title="Byzantine emperor" label="Byzantine emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q30594" start="1500" end="1522" title="Constantine Monomachos" label="Constantine Monomachos"/>
<link wikidata="Q421621" start="1726" end="1735" title="Labyrinth (novella)" label="Labyrinth"/>
<link wikidata="Q2070979" start="2376" end="2386" title="senescence" label="senescence"/>
<link wikidata="Q2726964" start="3054" end="3070" title="Admiral Naismith" label="Admiral Naismith"/>
<link wikidata="Q421621" start="3204" end="3213" title="Cetaganda (fictional empire)" label="Cetaganda"/>
<link wikidata="Q170612" start="3825" end="3833" title="telepath" label="telepath"/>
<link wikidata="Q165930" start="3989" end="3997" title="tyramine" label="tyramine"/>
<link wikidata="Q7572638" start="5784" end="5802" title="space trade" label="interstellar trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q308857" start="6981" end="6993" title="misogyny" label="misogynistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q33487" start="6995" end="7005" title="homophobia" label="homophobia"/>
<link wikidata="Q130321" start="7139" end="7150" title="Mount Athos" label="Mount Athos"/>
<link wikidata="Q4943246" start="7379" end="7387" title="Booklist" label="Booklist"/>
<link wikidata="Q438330" start="7717" end="7726" title="Jo Walton" label="Jo Walton"/>
<link wikidata="Q6542511" start="8005" end="8020" title="Library Journal" label="Library Journal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2544665" start="8145" end="8152" title="SF Site" label="SF Site"/>
<link wikidata="Q3110674" start="8827" end="8861" title="LGBT themes in speculative fiction" label="LGBT themes in speculative fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q7314294" start="8864" end="8913" title="Reproduction and pregnancy in speculative fiction" label="Reproduction and pregnancy in speculative fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q7458476" start="8916" end="8956" title="Sex and sexuality in speculative fiction" label="Sex and sexuality in speculative fiction"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="247968" wikidata="Q2622694" url="?curid=247968" title="Timeline of operating systems">
<text>This article presents a timeline of events in the history of computer operating systems from 1951 to the current day. For a narrative explaining the overall developments, see the History of operating systems.

==1950s==
* 1951
** LEO I &#x27;Lyons Electronic Office&#x27; was the commercial development of EDSAC computing platform, supported by British firm J. Lyons and Co.
* 1953
** DYSEAC - an early machine capable of distributing computing
* 1955
** General Motors Operating System made for IBM 701
** MIT&#x27;s Tape Director operating system made for UNIVAC 1103
* 1956
** GM-NAA I/O for IBM 704, based on General Motors Operating System
* 1957
** Atlas Supervisor (Manchester University) (&quot;Atlas computer project start&quot;)
** BESYS (Bell Labs), for IBM 704, later IBM 7090 and IBM 7094
* 1958
** University of Michigan Executive System (UMES), for IBM 704, 709, and 7090
* 1959
** SHARE Operating System (SOS), based on GM-NAA I/O

==1960s==
* 1960
** IBSYS (IBM for its 7090 and 7094)
* 1961
** CTSS demonstration (MIT&#x27;s Compatible Time-Sharing System for the IBM 7094)
** MCP (Burroughs Master Control Program) for B5000

* 1962
** Atlas Supervisor (Manchester University) (&quot;Atlas computer commissioned&quot;)
** BBN Time-Sharing System
** GCOS (GE&#x27;s General Comprehensive Operating System, originally GECOS, General Electric Comprehensive Operating Supervisor)
* 1963
** ADMIRAL
** AN/FSQ-32, another early time-sharing system begun
** CTSS becomes operational (MIT&#x27;s Compatible Time-Sharing System for the IBM 7094)
** JOSS, an interactive time-shared system that did not distinguish between operating system and language
** Titan Supervisor, early time-sharing system begun
* 1964
** Berkeley Timesharing System (for Scientific Data Systems&#x27; SDS 940)
** Chippewa Operating System (for CDC 6600 supercomputer)
** Dartmouth Time-Sharing System (Dartmouth College&#x27;s DTSS for GE computers)
** EXEC 8 (UNIVAC)
** KDF9 Timesharing Director (English Electric) – an early, fully hardware secured, fully pre-emptive process switching, multi-programming operating system for KDF9 (originally announced in 1960)
** OS/360 (IBM&#x27;s primary OS for its S/360 series) (&quot;announced&quot;)
** PDP-6 Monitor (DEC) descendant renamed TOPS-10 in 1970
** SCOPE (CDC 3000 series)
* 1965
** BOS/360 (IBM&#x27;s Basic Operating System)
** DECsys
** TOS/360 (IBM&#x27;s Tape Operating System)
** Livermore Time Sharing System (LTSS)
** Multics (MIT, GE, Bell Labs for the GE-645) (&quot;announced&quot;)
** Pick operating system
** SIPROS 66 (Simultaneous Processing Operating System)
** THE multiprogramming system (Technische Hogeschool Eindhoven) development
** TSOS (later VMOS) (RCA)
* 1966
** DOS/360 (IBM&#x27;s Disk Operating System)
** GEORGE 1 &amp; 2 for ICT 1900 series
** Mod 1
** Mod 2
** Mod 8
** MS/8 (Richard F. Lary&#x27;s DEC PDP-8 system)
** MSOS (Mass Storage Operating System)
** OS/360 (IBM&#x27;s primary OS for its S/360 series) PCP and MFT (&quot;shipped&quot;)
** RAX
** Remote Users of Shared Hardware (RUSH), a time-sharing system developed by Allen-Babcock for the IBM 360/50
** SODA for Elwro&#x27;s Odra 1204
** Universal Time-Sharing System (XDS Sigma series)
* 1967
** CP-40, predecessor to CP-67 on modified IBM System/360 Model 40
** CP-67 (IBM, also known as CP/CMS)
** Conversational Programming System (CPS), an IBM time-sharing system under OS/360
** Michigan Terminal System (MTS) (time-sharing system for the IBM S/360-67 and successors)
** ITS (MIT&#x27;s Incompatible Timesharing System for the DEC PDP-6 and PDP-10)
** OS/360 MVT
** ORVYL (Stanford University&#x27;s time-sharing system for the IBM S/360-67)
** TSS/360 (IBM&#x27;s Time-sharing System for the S/360-67, never officially released, canceled in 1969 and again in 1971)
** WAITS (SAIL, Stanford Artificial Intelligence Laboratory, time-sharing system for DEC PDP-6 and PDP-10, later TOPS-10)
* 1968
** Airline Control Program (ACP) (IBM)
** B1 (NCR Century series)
** CALL/360, an IBM time-sharing system for System/360
** Real-Time Executive (RTE) – Hewlett-Packard
** THE multiprogramming system (Eindhoven University of Technology) publication
** TSS/8 (DEC for the PDP-8)
** VP/CSS
* 1969
** B2 (NCR Century series)
** B3 (NCR Century series)
** GEORGE 3 For ICL 1900 series
** Multics (MIT, GE, Bell Labs for the GE-645 and later the Honeywell 6180) (&quot;opened for paying customers in October&quot;)
** RC 4000 Multiprogramming System (RC)
** TENEX (Bolt, Beranek and Newman for DEC systems, later TOPS-20)
** Unics (later Unix) (AT&amp;T, initially on DEC computers)
** Xerox Operating System

==1970s==
* 1970
** DOS-11 (PDP-11)
* 1971
** EMAS
** Kronos
** RSTS-11 2A-19 (&quot;First released version; PDP-11&quot;)
** RSX-15
** OS/8
* 1972
** B4 (NCR Century series)
** COS-300
** Data General RDOS
** Edos
** MUSIC/SP
** OS/4
** OS 1100
** Operating System/Virtual Storage 1 (OS/VS1)
** Operating System/Virtual Storage 2 R1 (OS/VS2 SVS)
** PRIMOS (written in FORTRAN IV, that didn&#x27;t have pointers, while later versions, around version 18, written in a version of PL/I, called PL/P)
** Virtual Machine/Basic System Extensions Program Product (BSEPP or VM/SE)
** Virtual Machine/System Extensions Program Product (SEPP or VM/BSE)
** Virtual Machine Facility/370 (VM/370), sometimes known as VM/CMS
* 1973
** Эльбрус-1 (Elbrus-1) – Soviet computer – created using high-level language uЭль-76 (AL-76/ALGOL 68)
** Alto OS
** CP-V (Control Program V)
** RSX-11D
** RT-11
** VME – implementation language S3 (ALGOL 68)
* 1974
** ACOS-2 (NEC)
** ACOS-4
** ACOS-6
** CP/M
** DOS-11 V09-20C (&quot;Last stable release, June 1974&quot;)
** Hydra – capability-based, multiprocessing OS kernel
** MONECS
** Multi-Programming Executive (MPE) – Hewlett-Packard
** Operating System/Virtual Storage 2 R2 (MVS)
** OS/7
** OS/16
** OS/32
** Sintran III
* 1975
** BS2000 V2.0 (&quot;First released version&quot;)
** COS-350
** ISIS
** NOS (Control Data Corporation)
** OS/3 (Univac)
** VS/9 (formerly RCA&#x27;s TSOS, later named VMOS)
** Version 6 Unix
** XVM/DOS
** XVM/RSX
* 1976
** Cambridge CAP computer – all operating system procedures written in ALGOL 68C, with some closely associated protected procedures in BCPL
** Cray Operating System
** DX10
** FLEX
** TOPS-20
** TX990/TXDS
** Tandem Nonstop OS v1
** Thoth
* 1977
** 1BSD
** AMOS
** KERNAL
** OASIS operating system
** OS68
** OS4000
** RMX-80
** System Support Program (IBM System/34 and System/36)
** TRSDOS
** Virtual Memory System (VMS) V1.0 (&quot;Initial commercial release, October 25&quot;)
** VRX (Virtual Resource eXecutive)
** VS Virtual Memory Operating System
* 1978
** 2BSD
** Apple DOS
** Control Program Facility (IBM System/38)
** Cray Time Sharing System (CTSS)
** DPCX (IBM)
** DPPX (IBM)
** HDOS
** KSOS – secure OS design from Ford Aerospace
** KVM/370 – security retro-fit of IBM VM/370
** Lisp machine (CADR)
** MVS/System Extensions (MVS/SE)
** OS4 (Naked Mini 4)
** PTDOS
** TRIPOS
** UCSD p-System (&quot;First released version&quot;)
* 1979
** Atari DOS
** 3BSD
** CP-6
** Idris
** MP/M
** MVS/System Extensions R2 (MVS/SE2)
** NLTSS
** POS
** Sinclair BASIC
** Transaction Processing Facility (TPF) (IBM)
** UCLA Secure UNIX – an early secure UNIX OS based on security kernel
** UNIX/32V
** DOS/VSE
** Version 7 Unix

==1980s==
* 1980
** 86-DOS
** AOS/VS (Data General)
** Business Operating System
** CTOS
** MVS/System Product (MVS/SP) V1
** NewDos/80
** OS-9
** RMX-86
** RS-DOS
** SOS
** Virtual Machine/System Product (VM/SP)
** Xenix
* 1981
** Acorn MOS
** Aegis SR1 (&quot;First Apollo/DOMAIN systems shipped on March 27&quot;)
** CP/M-86
** iMAX – OS for Intel&#x27;s iAPX 432 capability machine
** MCS (Multi-user Control System)
** MS-DOS
** PC DOS
** Pilot (&quot;Xerox Star operating system&quot;)
** UNOS
** UTS
** V
** VERSAdos
** VRTX
** VSOS (Virtual Storage Operating System)
** Xinu first release
* 1982
** Commodore DOS
** LDOS (By Logical Systems, Inc. – for the Radio Shack TRS-80 Models I, II &amp; III)
** pSOS
** QNX
** Stratus VOS
** Sun UNIX (later SunOS) 0.7
** Ultrix
** Unix System III
** VAXELN
* 1983
** Coherent
** DNIX
** EOS
** GNU (&quot;project start&quot;)
** Lisa Office System 7/7
** LOCUS – UNIX compatible, high reliability, distributed OS
** MVS/System Product V2 (MVS/Extended Architecture, MVS/XA)
** Novell NetWare (S-Net)
** PERPOS
** ProDOS
** RTU (Real-Time Unix)
** STOP – TCSEC A1-class, secure OS for SCOMP hardware
** SunOS 1.0
** VSE/System Package (VSE/SP) Version 1
* 1984
** AMSDOS
** CTIX (Unix variant)
** DYNIX
** Mac OS (&quot;System 1.0&quot;)
** MSX-DOS
** NOS/VE
** PANOS
** PC/IX
** ROS
** Sinclair QDOS
** QNX
** SINIX
** UNICOS
** Venix 2.0
** Virtual Machine/Extended Architecture Migration Assistance (VM/XA MA)
* 1985
** AmigaOS
** Atari TOS
** DG/UX
** DOS Plus
** Graphics Environment Manager
** Harmony
** MIPS RISC/os
** Oberon – written in Oberon
** SunOS 2.0
** Version 8 Unix
** Virtual Machine/Extended Architecture System Facility (VM/XA SF)
** Windows 1.0
** Windows 1.01 
** Xenix 2.0
* 1986
** AIX 1.0
** Cronus distributed OS
** FlexOS
** GEMSOS – TCSEC A1-class, secure kernel for BLACKER VPN &amp; GTNP
** GEOS
** Genera 7.0
** HP-UX
** SunOS 3.0
** TR-DOS
** TRIX
** Version 9 Unix
* 1987
** Arthur (much improved version came in 1989 under the name RISC OS)
** BS2000 V9.0
** IRIX (&quot;3.0 is first SGI version&quot;)
** MDOS
** MINIX 1.0
** OS/2 (1.0)
** PC-MOS/386
** Topaz – semi-distributed OS for DEC Firefly workstation written in Modula-2+ and garbage collected
** Windows 2.0 
* 1988
** A/UX (Apple Computer)
** AOS/VS II (Data General)
** CP/M rebranded as DR-DOS
** Flex machine – tagged, capability machine with OS and other software written in ALGOL 68RS
** GS/OS
** HeliOS 1.0
** KeyKOS – capability-based microkernel for IBM mainframes with automated persistence of app data
** LynxOS
** Mac OS (&quot;System 6&quot;)
** MVS/System Product V3 (MVS/Enterprise Systems Architecture, MVS/ESA)
** OS/2 (1.1)
** OS/400
** RISC iX
** SpartaDOS X
** SunOS 4.0
** TOPS-10 7.04 (&quot;Last stable release, July 1988&quot;)
** Virtual Machine/Extended Architecture System Product (VM/XA SP)
** VAX VMM – TCSEC A1-class, VMM for VAX computers (limited use before cancellation)
* 1989
** Army Secure Operating System (ASOS) – TCSEC A1-class secure, real-time OS for Ada applications
** EPOC (EPOC16)
** NeXTSTEP (1.0)
** OS/2 (1.2)
** RISC OS (&quot;First release was to be called Arthur 2, but was renamed to RISC OS 2, and was first sold as RISC OS 2.00 in April 1989&quot;)
** SCO UNIX (&quot;Release 3&quot;)
** TSX-32
** Version 10 Unix
** Xenix 2.3.4 (&quot;Last stable release&quot;)

==1990s==
* 1990
** AIX 3.0
** AmigaOS 2.0
** BeOS (v1)
** DOS/V
** Genera 8.0
** iS-DOS
** LOCK – TCSEC A1-class secure system with kernel and hardware support for type enforcement
** MVS/ESA SP Version 4 
** Novell NetWare 3
** OS/2 1.3
** OSF/1
** RTEMS
** PC/GEOS
** Windows 3.0 
** Virtual Machine/Enterprise Systems Architecture (VM/XA ESA)
** VSE/Enterprise Systems Architecture (VSE/ESA) Version 1
* 1991
** Amoeba – microkernel-based, POSIX-compliant, distributed OS
** GNO/ME
** Linux 0.01-0.1
** Mac OS (&quot;System 7&quot;)
** MINIX 1.5
** PenPoint OS
** RISC OS 3
** SUNMOS
** Trusted Xenix – rewritten &amp; security enhanced Xenix evaluated at TCSEC B2-class
* 1992
** 386BSD 0.1
** Amiga Unix 2.01 (&quot;Latest stable release&quot;)
** AmigaOS 3.0
** BSD/386, by BSDi and later known as BSD/OS.
** LGX
** OpenVMS V1.0 (&quot;First OpenVMS AXP (Alpha) specific version, November 1992&quot;)
** OS/2 2.0 (First i386 32-bit based version)
** Plan 9 First Edition (&quot;First public release was made available to universities&quot;)
** RSTS/E 10.1 (&quot;Last stable release, September 1992&quot;)
** SLS
** Solaris 2.0 (&quot;Successor to SunOS 4.x; based on SVR4 instead of BSD&quot;)
** Windows 3.1 
* 1993
** IBM 4690 Operating System
** FreeBSD
** NetBSD
** Novell NetWare 4
** Newton OS
** Nucleus RTOS
** Open Genera 1.0
** OS 2200 (Unisys)
** OS/2 2.1
** PTS-DOS
** Slackware 1.0
** Spring
** Windows NT 3.1 (&quot;First Windows NT kernel public release&quot;)
* 1994
** AIX 4.0, 4.1
** IBM MVS/ESA SP Version 5 
** NetBSD 1.0 (&quot;First multi-platform release, October 1994&quot;)
** OS/2 Warp 3.0
** Red Hat
** RISC OS 3.5
** SPIN – extensible OS written in Modula-3
* 1995
** Digital UNIX (&quot;aka&quot; Tru64 UNIX)
** OpenBSD
** OS/390
** Plan 9 Second Edition (&quot;Commercial second release version was made available to the general public.&quot;)
** Ultrix 4.5 (&quot;Last major release&quot;)
** Windows 95
* 1996
** AIX 4.2
** Debian 1.1
** JN – microkernel OS for embedded, Java apps
** Mac OS 7.6 (&quot;First officially-named Mac OS&quot;)
** OS/2 Warp 4.0
** Palm OS
** RISC OS 3.6
** Windows NT 4.0
** Windows CE 1.0
* 1997
** AIX 4.3
** DR-WebSpyder 1.0
** EPOC (EPOC32)
** Inferno
** Mac OS 8
** MINIX 2.0
** Nemesis
** RISC OS 3.7
** SkyOS
** Windows CE 2.0
* 1998
** DR-WebSpyder 2.0
** Junos
** Novell NetWare 5
** RT-11 5.7 (&quot;Last stable release, October 1998&quot;)
** Solaris 7 (&quot;first 64-bit Solaris release – names from this point drop &quot;2.&quot;, otherwise would&#x27;ve been Solaris 2.7&quot;)
** Windows 98
* 1999
** AROS (&quot;Boot for the first time in Stand Alone version&quot;)
** Inferno Second Edition (&quot;Last distribution (Release 2.3, ) from Lucent&#x27;s Inferno Business Unit&quot;)
** Mac OS 9
** OS/2 Warp 4.5
** RISC OS 4
** Windows 98 (2nd edition)

==2000s==
==2010s==
==2020s==

==See also==
* Comparison of operating systems
* List of operating systems
* Comparison of real-time operating systems
* Timeline of DOS operating systems
* Timeline of Linux distributions (Diagram 1992–2010)

==References==
==External links==
* UNIX History – a timeline of UNIX 1969 and its descendants at present
* Concise Microsoft O.S. Timeline – a color-coded concise timeline for various Microsoft operating systems (1981–present)
*Bitsavers – an effort to capture, salvage, and archive historical computer software and manuals from minicomputers and mainframes of the 1950s, 1960s, 1970s, and 1980s
* A brief history of operating systems
* Microsoft operating system time-line</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q130788" start="24" end="32" title="Chronology" label="timeline"/>
<link wikidata="Q9135" start="70" end="86" title="operating system" label="operating system"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143393" start="179" end="207" title="History of operating systems" label="History of operating systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q2991842" start="230" end="235" title="LEO (computer)" label="LEO I"/>
<link wikidata="Q863565" start="306" end="311" title="EDSAC" label="EDSAC"/>
<link wikidata="Q6106384" start="358" end="374" title="J. Lyons and Co." label="J. Lyons and Co."/>
<link wikidata="Q4036953" start="385" end="391" title="DYSEAC" label="DYSEAC"/>
<link wikidata="Q3093244" start="455" end="486" title="GM-NAA I/O" label="General Motors Operating System"/>
<link wikidata="Q1653104" start="496" end="503" title="IBM 701" label="IBM 701"/>
<link wikidata="Q49108" start="507" end="510" title="Massachusetts Institute of Technology" label="MIT"/>
<link wikidata="Q684957" start="558" end="569" title="UNIVAC 1103" label="UNIVAC 1103"/>
<link wikidata="Q3093244" start="580" end="590" title="GM-NAA I/O" label="GM-NAA I/O"/>
<link wikidata="Q25826" start="595" end="602" title="IBM 704" label="IBM 704"/>
<link wikidata="Q5710907" start="655" end="671" title="Atlas Supervisor" label="Atlas Supervisor"/>
<link wikidata="Q230899" start="673" end="694" title="University of Manchester" label="Manchester University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1152431" start="742" end="747" title="BESYS" label="BESYS"/>
<link wikidata="Q217365" start="749" end="758" title="Bell Labs" label="Bell Labs"/>
<link wikidata="Q25826" start="765" end="772" title="IBM 704" label="IBM 704"/>
<link wikidata="Q2701019" start="780" end="788" title="IBM 7090" label="IBM 7090"/>
<link wikidata="Q2701019" start="793" end="801" title="IBM 7094" label="IBM 7094"/>
<link wikidata="Q7895756" start="812" end="851" title="University of Michigan Executive System" label="University of Michigan Executive System"/>
<link wikidata="Q548219" start="873" end="876" title="IBM 709" label="709"/>
<link wikidata="Q2701019" start="882" end="886" title="IBM 7090" label="7090"/>
<link wikidata="Q7390171" start="897" end="919" title="SHARE Operating System" label="SHARE Operating System"/>
<link wikidata="Q620465" start="968" end="973" title="IBM 7090/94 IBSYS" label="IBSYS"/>
<link wikidata="Q37156" start="975" end="978" title="IBM" label="IBM"/>
<link wikidata="Q2701019" start="987" end="991" title="IBM 7090" label="7090"/>
<link wikidata="Q2701019" start="996" end="1000" title="IBM 7094" label="7094"/>
<link wikidata="Q1121396" start="1012" end="1016" title="Compatible Time-Sharing System" label="CTSS"/>
<link wikidata="Q49108" start="1032" end="1042" title="Massachusetts Institute of Technology" label="MIT&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q2701019" start="1082" end="1090" title="IBM 7094" label="IBM 7094"/>
<link wikidata="Q1326534" start="1095" end="1098" title="Burroughs MCP" label="MCP"/>
<link wikidata="Q256593" start="1100" end="1109" title="Burroughs Corporation" label="Burroughs"/>
<link wikidata="Q3359776" start="1138" end="1143" title="B5000" label="B5000"/>
<link wikidata="Q5710907" start="1155" end="1171" title="Atlas Supervisor" label="Atlas Supervisor"/>
<link wikidata="Q230899" start="1173" end="1194" title="University of Manchester" label="Manchester University"/>
<link wikidata="Q63862312" start="1241" end="1264" title="BBN Time-Sharing System" label="BBN Time-Sharing System"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501565" start="1268" end="1272" title="General Comprehensive Operating System" label="GCOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q54173" start="1274" end="1283" title="General Electric" label="GE&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q5893980" start="1405" end="1412" title="Honeywell 800" label="ADMIRAL"/>
<link wikidata="Q2819287" start="1416" end="1425" title="AN/FSQ-32" label="AN/FSQ-32"/>
<link wikidata="Q1121396" start="1470" end="1474" title="Compatible Time-Sharing System" label="CTSS"/>
<link wikidata="Q49108" start="1496" end="1506" title="Massachusetts Institute of Technology" label="MIT&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q2701019" start="1546" end="1554" title="IBM 7094" label="IBM 7094"/>
<link wikidata="Q974083" start="1559" end="1563" title="JOSS" label="JOSS"/>
<link wikidata="Q3529476" start="1665" end="1681" title="Titan (1963 computer)" label="Titan Supervisor"/>
<link wikidata="Q4892120" start="1725" end="1752" title="Berkeley Timesharing System" label="Berkeley Timesharing System"/>
<link wikidata="Q3475808" start="1758" end="1781" title="Scientific Data Systems" label="Scientific Data Systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q4391523" start="1788" end="1795" title="SDS 940" label="SDS 940"/>
<link wikidata="Q5101674" start="1800" end="1825" title="Chippewa Operating System" label="Chippewa Operating System"/>
<link wikidata="Q683851" start="1831" end="1839" title="CDC 6600" label="CDC 6600"/>
<link wikidata="Q4348530" start="1858" end="1887" title="Dartmouth Time-Sharing System" label="Dartmouth Time-Sharing System"/>
<link wikidata="Q49116" start="1889" end="1906" title="Dartmouth College" label="Dartmouth College"/>
<link wikidata="Q7073066" start="1940" end="1946" title="EXEC 8" label="EXEC 8"/>
<link wikidata="Q1443793" start="1948" end="1954" title="UNIVAC" label="UNIVAC"/>
<link wikidata="Q5378246" start="1959" end="1984" title="English Electric KDF9" label="KDF9 Timesharing Director"/>
<link wikidata="Q1342845" start="1986" end="2002" title="English Electric" label="English Electric"/>
<link wikidata="Q1690495" start="2155" end="2161" title="OS/360 and successors" label="OS/360"/>
<link wikidata="Q690079" start="2249" end="2252" title="Digital Equipment Corporation" label="DEC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1670222" start="2273" end="2280" title="TOPS-10" label="TOPS-10"/>
<link wikidata="Q4035590" start="2292" end="2297" title="CDC SCOPE" label="SCOPE"/>
<link wikidata="Q4836225" start="2326" end="2333" title="BOS/360" label="BOS/360"/>
<link wikidata="Q1270176" start="2373" end="2379" title="DECsys" label="DECsys"/>
<link wikidata="Q3487917" start="2383" end="2390" title="IBM TOS/360" label="TOS/360"/>
<link wikidata="Q6658258" start="2429" end="2458" title="Livermore Time Sharing System" label="Livermore Time Sharing System"/>
<link wikidata="Q739186" start="2469" end="2476" title="Multics" label="Multics"/>
<link wikidata="Q217365" start="2487" end="2496" title="Bell Labs" label="Bell Labs"/>
<link wikidata="Q55612177" start="2505" end="2511" title="GE 645" label="GE-645"/>
<link wikidata="Q3382499" start="2540" end="2561" title="Pick operating system" label="Pick operating system"/>
<link wikidata="Q683851" start="2565" end="2574" title="CDC 6600" label="SIPROS 66"/>
<link wikidata="Q2629686" start="2621" end="2648" title="THE multiprogramming system" label="THE multiprogramming system"/>
<link wikidata="Q280824" start="2650" end="2681" title="Eindhoven University of Technology" label="Technische Hogeschool Eindhoven"/>
<link wikidata="Q2384995" start="2698" end="2702" title="Time Sharing Operating System" label="TSOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q218038" start="2717" end="2720" title="RCA" label="RCA"/>
<link wikidata="Q3487917" start="2732" end="2739" title="DOS/360" label="DOS/360"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2778" end="2794" title="GEORGE (operating system)#GEORGE 1 &amp;amp; 2" label="GEORGE 1 &amp;amp; 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q10536232" start="2799" end="2802" title="International Computers and Tabulators" label="ICT"/>
<link wikidata="Q5969786" start="2803" end="2814" title="ICT 1900 series" label="1900 series"/>
<link wikidata="Q5893982" start="2818" end="2823" title="Honeywell 200" label="Mod 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q5893982" start="2827" end="2832" title="Honeywell 200" label="Mod 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q5893982" start="2836" end="2841" title="Honeywell 200" label="Mod 8"/>
<link wikidata="Q15924637" start="2845" end="2849" title="MS/8" label="MS/8"/>
<link wikidata="Q99747053" start="2851" end="2866" title="Richard F. Lary" label="Richard F. Lary"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2895" end="2899" title="CDC 3000 series#Software" label="MSOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1690495" start="2935" end="2941" title="OS/360 and successors" label="OS/360"/>
<link wikidata="Q106829221" start="3024" end="3027" title="IBM Remote Access Computing" label="RAX"/>
<link wikidata="Q4731476" start="3106" end="3119" title="Allen-Babcock" label="Allen-Babcock"/>
<link wikidata="Q9295720" start="3128" end="3138" title="IBM System/360 Model 50" label="IBM 360/50"/>
<link wikidata="Q7078339" start="3142" end="3146" title="SODA (operating system)" label="SODA"/>
<link wikidata="Q3051868" start="3151" end="3156" title="Elwro" label="Elwro"/>
<link wikidata="Q7078339" start="3164" end="3173" title="Odra (computer)" label="Odra 1204"/>
<link wikidata="Q7894085" start="3177" end="3206" title="Universal Time-Sharing System" label="Universal Time-Sharing System"/>
<link wikidata="Q3475808" start="3208" end="3211" title="Scientific Data Systems" label="XDS"/>
<link wikidata="Q5968785" start="3236" end="3241" title="IBM CP-40" label="CP-40"/>
<link wikidata="Q3088121" start="3276" end="3299" title="IBM System/360 Model 40" label="IBM System/360 Model 40"/>
<link wikidata="Q5013581" start="3303" end="3308" title="CP-67" label="CP-67"/>
<link wikidata="Q5013590" start="3329" end="3335" title="CP/CMS" label="CP/CMS"/>
<link wikidata="Q4944225" start="3340" end="3373" title="Conversational Programming System" label="Conversational Programming System"/>
<link wikidata="Q1690495" start="3414" end="3420" title="OS/360" label="OS/360"/>
<link wikidata="Q6837755" start="3424" end="3448" title="Michigan Terminal System" label="Michigan Terminal System"/>
<link wikidata="Q1660989" start="3516" end="3519" title="Incompatible Timesharing System" label="ITS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1690495" start="3604" end="3607" title="OS/MVT" label="MVT"/>
<link wikidata="Q7072951" start="3611" end="3616" title="ORVYL and WYLBUR" label="ORVYL"/>
<link wikidata="Q15956143" start="3690" end="3697" title="TSS (operating system)" label="TSS/360"/>
<link wikidata="Q7946483" start="3814" end="3819" title="WAITS" label="WAITS"/>
<link wikidata="Q2931153" start="3821" end="3825" title="Stanford Artificial Intelligence Laboratory" label="SAIL"/>
<link wikidata="Q3146515" start="3943" end="3972" title="IBM Airline Control Program" label="Airline Control Program (ACP)"/>
<link wikidata="Q17070997" start="3982" end="3984" title="NCR Century 100" label="B1"/>
<link wikidata="Q1616633" start="4064" end="4083" title="HP 2100" label="Real-Time Executive"/>
<link wikidata="Q2629686" start="4111" end="4138" title="THE multiprogramming system" label="THE multiprogramming system"/>
<link wikidata="Q280824" start="4140" end="4174" title="Eindhoven University of Technology" label="Eindhoven University of Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q7671637" start="4191" end="4196" title="TSS/8" label="TSS/8"/>
<link wikidata="Q7907414" start="4220" end="4226" title="VP/CSS" label="VP/CSS"/>
<link wikidata="Q17070997" start="4237" end="4239" title="NCR Century 100" label="B2"/>
<link wikidata="Q17070997" start="4264" end="4266" title="NCR Century 100" label="B3"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4291" end="4299" title="GEORGE (operating system)#GEORGE 3 &amp;amp; 4" label="GEORGE 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q1413338" start="4304" end="4307" title="International Computers Limited" label="ICL"/>
<link wikidata="Q5969786" start="4308" end="4319" title="ICT 1900 series" label="1900 series"/>
<link wikidata="Q739186" start="4323" end="4330" title="Multics" label="Multics"/>
<link wikidata="Q55612177" start="4359" end="4365" title="GE 645" label="GE-645"/>
<link wikidata="Q5893978" start="4380" end="4394" title="Honeywell 6000 series" label="Honeywell 6180"/>
<link wikidata="Q7276156" start="4452" end="4483" title="RC 4000 Multiprogramming System" label="RC 4000 Multiprogramming System"/>
<link wikidata="Q928216" start="4485" end="4487" title="Regnecentralen" label="RC"/>
<link wikidata="Q2992529" start="4492" end="4497" title="TENEX (operating system)" label="TENEX"/>
<link wikidata="Q891612" start="4499" end="4523" title="BBN Technologies" label="Bolt, Beranek and Newman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1481861" start="4547" end="4554" title="TOPS-20" label="TOPS-20"/>
<link wikidata="Q11368" start="4559" end="4577" title="Unix" label="Unics (later Unix)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2843047" start="4579" end="4587" title="AT&amp;amp;T Corporation" label="AT&amp;amp;T"/>
<link wikidata="Q8043904" start="4620" end="4642" title="Xerox Operating System" label="Xerox Operating System"/>
<link wikidata="Q3499440" start="4664" end="4670" title="DEC BATCH-11/DOS-11" label="DOS-11"/>
<link wikidata="Q5338225" start="4690" end="4694" title="Edinburgh Multiple Access System" label="EMAS"/>
<link wikidata="Q4035589" start="4698" end="4704" title="CDC Kronos" label="Kronos"/>
<link wikidata="Q2366908" start="4708" end="4715" title="RSTS/E" label="RSTS-11"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4770" end="4776" title="PDP-15#RSX-15" label="RSX-15"/>
<link wikidata="Q7072964" start="4780" end="4784" title="OS/8" label="OS/8"/>
<link wikidata="Q17070997" start="4795" end="4797" title="NCR Century 100" label="B4"/>
<link wikidata="Q48977074" start="4822" end="4829" title="Commercial Operating System" label="COS-300"/>
<link wikidata="Q4047826" start="4833" end="4850" title="Data General RDOS" label="Data General RDOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q5322860" start="4854" end="4858" title="Edos" label="Edos"/>
<link wikidata="Q629795" start="4862" end="4870" title="MUSIC/SP" label="MUSIC/SP"/>
<link wikidata="Q118874565" start="4874" end="4878" title="OS/4" label="OS/4"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4882" end="4889" title="OS 2200#History" label="OS 1100"/>
<link wikidata="Q7072966" start="4893" end="4927" title="OS/VS1" label="Operating System/Virtual Storage 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q7072968" start="4940" end="4977" title="OS/VS2 (SVS)" label="Operating System/Virtual Storage 2 R1"/>
<link wikidata="Q2109710" start="4994" end="5000" title="PRIMOS" label="PRIMOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q83303" start="5013" end="5023" title="FORTRAN IV" label="FORTRAN IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q118155" start="5047" end="5055" title="Pointer (computer programming)" label="pointers"/>
<link wikidata="Q223433" start="5122" end="5126" title="PL/I" label="PL/I"/>
<link wikidata="Q1270618" start="5135" end="5139" title="PL/P" label="PL/P"/>
<link wikidata="Q5013572" start="5290" end="5318" title="VM (operating system)" label="Virtual Machine Facility/370"/>
<link wikidata="Q1089223" start="5376" end="5384" title="Elbrus (computer)" label="Elbrus-1"/>
<link wikidata="Q2166735" start="5449" end="5463" title="ALGOL 68" label="AL-76/ALGOL 68"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140061" start="5468" end="5475" title="Xerox Alto" label="Alto OS"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5479" end="5483" title="SDS Sigma series#Operating systems" label="CP-V"/>
<link wikidata="Q1637948" start="5507" end="5513" title="RSX-11" label="RSX-11"/>
<link wikidata="Q305216" start="5518" end="5523" title="RT-11" label="RT-11"/>
<link wikidata="Q4052546" start="5527" end="5530" title="ICL VME" label="VME"/>
<link wikidata="Q7388288" start="5557" end="5559" title="S3 (programming language)" label="S3"/>
<link wikidata="Q2166735" start="5561" end="5569" title="ALGOL 68" label="ALGOL 68"/>
<link wikidata="Q4686161" start="5581" end="5587" title="Advanced Comprehensive Operating System" label="ACOS-2"/>
<link wikidata="Q219203" start="5589" end="5592" title="NEC" label="NEC"/>
<link wikidata="Q4686161" start="5597" end="5603" title="Advanced Comprehensive Operating System" label="ACOS-4"/>
<link wikidata="Q4686161" start="5607" end="5613" title="Advanced Comprehensive Operating System" label="ACOS-6"/>
<link wikidata="Q219528" start="5617" end="5621" title="CP/M" label="CP/M"/>
<link wikidata="Q3499440" start="5625" end="5631" title="DEC BATCH-11/DOS-11" label="DOS-11"/>
<link wikidata="Q6717061" start="5743" end="5749" title="MONECS" label="MONECS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1429846" start="5753" end="5780" title="HP Multi-Programming Executive" label="Multi-Programming Executive"/>
<link wikidata="Q781443" start="5808" end="5845" title="MVS" label="Operating System/Virtual Storage 2 R2"/>
<link wikidata="Q56281870" start="5855" end="5859" title="OS/7" label="OS/7"/>
<link wikidata="Q6046034" start="5863" end="5868" title="Interdata" label="OS/16"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5872" end="5877" title="Interdata 7/32 and 8/32#Operating systems" label="OS/32"/>
<link wikidata="Q7525148" start="5881" end="5892" title="Sintran III" label="Sintran III"/>
<link wikidata="Q338229" start="5903" end="5909" title="BS2000" label="BS2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q48977074" start="5955" end="5962" title="Commercial Operating System" label="COS-350"/>
<link wikidata="Q5973993" start="5966" end="5970" title="ISIS (operating system)" label="ISIS"/>
<link wikidata="Q3338564" start="5974" end="5977" title="NOS (operating system)" label="NOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q7865330" start="6008" end="6012" title="UNIVAC Series 90" label="OS/3"/>
<link wikidata="Q7907539" start="6025" end="6029" title="VS/9" label="VS/9"/>
<link wikidata="Q2384995" start="6051" end="6055" title="Time Sharing Operating System" label="TSOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q3547270" start="6078" end="6092" title="Version 6 Unix" label="Version 6 Unix"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6096" end="6103" title="PDP-15#Software" label="XVM/DOS"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6107" end="6114" title="PDP-15#XVM/RSX" label="XVM/RSX"/>
<link wikidata="Q5008778" start="6125" end="6147" title="CAP computer" label="Cambridge CAP computer"/>
<link wikidata="Q4652353" start="6193" end="6202" title="ALGOL 68C" label="ALGOL 68C"/>
<link wikidata="Q810009" start="6257" end="6261" title="BCPL" label="BCPL"/>
<link wikidata="Q844259" start="6265" end="6286" title="Cray Operating System" label="Cray Operating System"/>
<link wikidata="Q5206575" start="6290" end="6294" title="DX10" label="DX10"/>
<link wikidata="Q16993476" start="6298" end="6302" title="FLEX (operating system)" label="FLEX"/>
<link wikidata="Q1481861" start="6306" end="6313" title="TOPS-20" label="TOPS-20"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6317" end="6327" title="TI-990#Operating systems" label="TX990/TXDS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1783846" start="6331" end="6351" title="Tandem Computers" label="Tandem Nonstop OS v1"/>
<link wikidata="Q100251723" start="6355" end="6360" title="Thoth (operating system)" label="Thoth"/>
<link wikidata="Q34264" start="6371" end="6375" title="Berkeley Software Distribution" label="1BSD"/>
<link wikidata="Q4735081" start="6379" end="6383" title="Alpha Microsystems" label="AMOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1362489" start="6387" end="6393" title="KERNAL" label="KERNAL"/>
<link wikidata="Q7670242" start="6397" end="6419" title="OASIS operating system" label="OASIS operating system"/>
<link wikidata="Q108749920" start="6423" end="6427" title="Smoke Signal Broadcasting" label="OS68"/>
<link wikidata="Q7072970" start="6431" end="6437" title="OS4000" label="OS4000"/>
<link wikidata="Q285845" start="6441" end="6447" title="RMX (operating system)" label="RMX-80"/>
<link wikidata="Q5969041" start="6451" end="6473" title="System Support Program" label="System Support Program"/>
<link wikidata="Q3512353" start="6507" end="6513" title="TRSDOS" label="TRSDOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q479882" start="6517" end="6544" title="OpenVMS" label="Virtual Memory System (VMS)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2615989" start="6606" end="6609" title="NCR VRX" label="VRX"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6642" end="6676" title="Wang Laboratories#Software" label="VS Virtual Memory Operating System"/>
<link wikidata="Q34264" start="6687" end="6691" title="Berkeley Software Distribution" label="2BSD"/>
<link wikidata="Q621234" start="6695" end="6704" title="Apple DOS" label="Apple DOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129169" start="6708" end="6732" title="Control Program Facility" label="Control Program Facility"/>
<link wikidata="Q5183024" start="6752" end="6776" title="Cray Time Sharing System" label="Cray Time Sharing System"/>
<link wikidata="Q5968740" start="6787" end="6791" title="IBM 8100 DPCX" label="DPCX"/>
<link wikidata="Q5968743" start="6801" end="6805" title="IBM DPPX" label="DPPX"/>
<link wikidata="Q913744" start="6815" end="6819" title="HDOS" label="HDOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1653376" start="6916" end="6928" title="Lisp machine" label="Lisp machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q5157416" start="6973" end="6976" title="Computer Automation" label="OS4"/>
<link wikidata="Q7120961" start="6995" end="7000" title="PTDOS" label="PTDOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q2140719" start="7004" end="7010" title="TRIPOS" label="TRIPOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q176984" start="7014" end="7027" title="UCSD Pascal" label="UCSD p-System"/>
<link wikidata="Q753609" start="7075" end="7084" title="Atari DOS" label="Atari DOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q34264" start="7088" end="7092" title="Berkeley Software Distribution" label="3BSD"/>
<link wikidata="Q18148810" start="7096" end="7100" title="Honeywell CP-6" label="CP-6"/>
<link wikidata="Q427593" start="7104" end="7109" title="Idris (operating system)" label="Idris"/>
<link wikidata="Q3317219" start="7113" end="7117" title="MP/M" label="MP/M"/>
<link wikidata="Q6954684" start="7159" end="7164" title="NLTSS" label="NLTSS"/>
<link wikidata="Q3359650" start="7168" end="7171" title="PERQ" label="POS"/>
<link wikidata="Q2074777" start="7175" end="7189" title="Sinclair BASIC" label="Sinclair BASIC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1426122" start="7193" end="7230" title="Transaction Processing Facility" label="Transaction Processing Facility (TPF)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3066702" start="7311" end="7319" title="UNIX/32V" label="UNIX/32V"/>
<link wikidata="Q289345" start="7323" end="7330" title="VSE (operating system)" label="DOS/VSE"/>
<link wikidata="Q2740168" start="7334" end="7348" title="Version 7 Unix" label="Version 7 Unix"/>
<link wikidata="Q1550345" start="7370" end="7376" title="86-DOS" label="86-DOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q5227169" start="7380" end="7386" title="AOS/VS" label="AOS/VS"/>
<link wikidata="Q5001770" start="7405" end="7430" title="Business Operating System (software)" label="Business Operating System"/>
<link wikidata="Q1024509" start="7434" end="7438" title="Convergent Technologies Operating System" label="CTOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q7005105" start="7476" end="7485" title="NewDos/80" label="NewDos/80"/>
<link wikidata="Q2008085" start="7489" end="7493" title="OS-9" label="OS-9"/>
<link wikidata="Q285845" start="7497" end="7503" title="RMX (operating system)" label="RMX-86"/>
<link wikidata="Q5148548" start="7507" end="7513" title="Color BASIC" label="RS-DOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q352106" start="7517" end="7520" title="Apple SOS" label="SOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q5013572" start="7524" end="7554" title="VM (operating system)" label="Virtual Machine/System Product"/>
<link wikidata="Q589680" start="7566" end="7571" title="Xenix" label="Xenix"/>
<link wikidata="Q4674556" start="7582" end="7591" title="Acorn MOS" label="Acorn MOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q5289795" start="7595" end="7600" title="Domain/OS" label="Aegis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2706791" start="7670" end="7677" title="CP/M-86" label="CP/M-86"/>
<link wikidata="Q971102" start="7681" end="7685" title="Intel iAPX 432" label="iMAX"/>
<link wikidata="Q109297386" start="7739" end="7742" title="Wicat Systems" label="MCS"/>
<link wikidata="Q47604" start="7774" end="7780" title="MS-DOS" label="MS-DOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q863568" start="7784" end="7790" title="IBM PC DOS" label="PC DOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q4046962" start="7794" end="7799" title="Pilot (operating system)" label="Pilot"/>
<link wikidata="Q978826" start="7807" end="7817" title="Xerox Star" label="Xerox Star"/>
<link wikidata="Q8083992" start="7845" end="7849" title="UNOS (operating system)" label="UNOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q7876034" start="7853" end="7856" title="Amdahl UTS" label="UTS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1030951" start="7860" end="7861" title="V (operating system)" label="V"/>
<link wikidata="Q7922612" start="7865" end="7873" title="VERSAdos" label="VERSAdos"/>
<link wikidata="Q372163" start="7877" end="7881" title="Versatile Real-Time Executive" label="VRTX"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7885" end="7889" title="CDC Cyber#CDC CYBER 205" label="VSOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q615787" start="7928" end="7932" title="Xinu" label="Xinu"/>
<link wikidata="Q353116" start="7957" end="7970" title="Commodore DOS" label="Commodore DOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q3512353" start="7974" end="7978" title="Logical Disk Operating System" label="LDOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q7120741" start="8061" end="8065" title="pSOS (real-time operating system)" label="pSOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q676052" start="8069" end="8072" title="QNX" label="QNX"/>
<link wikidata="Q7622298" start="8076" end="8087" title="Stratus VOS" label="Stratus VOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1208460" start="8107" end="8112" title="SunOS" label="SunOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q542726" start="8121" end="8127" title="Ultrix" label="Ultrix"/>
<link wikidata="Q1664482" start="8131" end="8146" title="Unix System III" label="Unix System III"/>
<link wikidata="Q7906552" start="8150" end="8156" title="VAXELN" label="VAXELN"/>
<link wikidata="Q380473" start="8167" end="8175" title="Coherent (operating system)" label="Coherent"/>
<link wikidata="Q5205789" start="8179" end="8183" title="DNIX" label="DNIX"/>
<link wikidata="Q110275885" start="8187" end="8190" title="EOS (8-bit operating system)" label="EOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q44571" start="8194" end="8197" title="GNU" label="GNU"/>
<link wikidata="Q371482" start="8229" end="8251" title="Apple Lisa" label="Lisa Office System 7/7"/>
<link wikidata="Q691990" start="8377" end="8391" title="NetWare" label="Novell NetWare"/>
<link wikidata="Q7064566" start="8393" end="8398" title="Novell S-Net" label="S-Net"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8403" end="8409" title="Computer Consoles Inc.#PERPOS, Perpetual Processing Operating System" label="PERPOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q621328" start="8413" end="8419" title="Apple ProDOS" label="ProDOS"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8423" end="8426" title="Concurrent Computer Corporation#Merger with MASSCOMP" label="RTU"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191521" start="8454" end="8459" title="Trusted Computer System Evaluation Criteria" label="TCSEC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1208460" start="8502" end="8507" title="SunOS" label="SunOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q289345" start="8515" end="8533" title="VSE (operating system)" label="VSE/System Package"/>
<link wikidata="Q577303" start="8563" end="8569" title="AMSDOS" label="AMSDOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129419" start="8573" end="8577" title="Convergent Technologies" label="CTIX"/>
<link wikidata="Q1973127" start="8596" end="8601" title="DYNIX" label="DYNIX"/>
<link wikidata="Q13522376" start="8605" end="8611" title="Classic Mac OS" label="Mac OS"/>
<link wikidata="Q2445525" start="8640" end="8647" title="MSX-DOS" label="MSX-DOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q17136341" start="8651" end="8657" title="NOS/VE" label="NOS/VE"/>
<link wikidata="Q7131535" start="8661" end="8666" title="Panos (operating system)" label="PANOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q3146778" start="8670" end="8675" title="PC/IX" label="PC/IX"/>
<link wikidata="Q120767236" start="8679" end="8682" title="Ridge Computers" label="ROS"/>
<link wikidata="Q2712090" start="8686" end="8699" title="Sinclair QDOS" label="Sinclair QDOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q676052" start="8703" end="8706" title="QNX" label="QNX"/>
<link wikidata="Q1361960" start="8710" end="8715" title="SINIX" label="SINIX"/>
<link wikidata="Q1752081" start="8719" end="8725" title="UNICOS" label="UNICOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q4052638" start="8729" end="8734" title="Venix" label="Venix"/>
<link wikidata="Q5013572" start="8742" end="8800" title="VM (operating system)" label="Virtual Machine/Extended Architecture Migration Assistance"/>
<link wikidata="Q380526" start="8822" end="8829" title="AmigaOS" label="AmigaOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1574899" start="8833" end="8842" title="Atari TOS" label="Atari TOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1172217" start="8846" end="8851" title="DG/UX" label="DG/UX"/>
<link wikidata="Q5205892" start="8855" end="8863" title="DOS Plus" label="DOS Plus"/>
<link wikidata="Q849246" start="8867" end="8895" title="GEM (desktop environment)" label="Graphics Environment Manager"/>
<link wikidata="Q99485424" start="8899" end="8906" title="Harmony (operating system)" label="Harmony"/>
<link wikidata="Q3433109" start="8910" end="8922" title="MIPS RISC/os" label="MIPS RISC/os"/>
<link wikidata="Q1999119" start="8926" end="8932" title="Oberon (operating system)" label="Oberon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1323362" start="8946" end="8952" title="Oberon (programming language)" label="Oberon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1208460" start="8956" end="8961" title="SunOS" label="SunOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q2666693" start="8969" end="8983" title="Version 8 Unix" label="Version 8 Unix"/>
<link wikidata="Q5013572" start="8987" end="9040" title="VM (operating system)" label="Virtual Machine/Extended Architecture System Facility"/>
<link wikidata="Q58378" start="9055" end="9066" title="Windows 1.0" label="Windows 1.0"/>
<link wikidata="Q58378" start="9070" end="9081" title="Windows 1.0" label="Windows 1.0"/>
<link wikidata="Q589680" start="9087" end="9092" title="Xenix" label="Xenix"/>
<link wikidata="Q269856" start="9107" end="9110" title="IBM AIX" label="AIX"/>
<link wikidata="Q2560413" start="9143" end="9149" title="FlexOS" label="FlexOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191521" start="9162" end="9167" title="Trusted Computer System Evaluation Criteria" label="TCSEC"/>
<link wikidata="Q572117" start="9222" end="9226" title="GEOS (8-bit operating system)" label="GEOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q3100483" start="9230" end="9236" title="Genera (operating system)" label="Genera"/>
<link wikidata="Q847593" start="9244" end="9249" title="HP-UX" label="HP-UX"/>
<link wikidata="Q1208460" start="9253" end="9258" title="SunOS" label="SunOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1963389" start="9266" end="9272" title="TR-DOS" label="TR-DOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q3539757" start="9276" end="9280" title="TRIX (operating system)" label="TRIX"/>
<link wikidata="Q2666693" start="9284" end="9298" title="Version 9 Unix" label="Version 9 Unix"/>
<link wikidata="Q5866147" start="9309" end="9315" title="History of RISC OS" label="Arthur"/>
<link wikidata="Q1202514" start="9367" end="9374" title="RISC OS" label="RISC OS"/>
<link wikidata="Q338229" start="9379" end="9385" title="BS2000" label="BS2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q627611" start="9394" end="9398" title="IRIX" label="IRIX"/>
<link wikidata="Q3841260" start="9441" end="9445" title="Myarc Disk Operating System" label="MDOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q187906" start="9449" end="9454" title="MINIX" label="MINIX"/>
<link wikidata="Q189794" start="9462" end="9466" title="OS/2" label="OS/2"/>
<link wikidata="Q1420923" start="9476" end="9486" title="PC-MOS/386" label="PC-MOS/386"/>
<link wikidata="Q485021" start="9592" end="9603" title="Windows 2.0" label="Windows 2.0"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140097" start="9615" end="9619" title="A/UX" label="A/UX"/>
<link wikidata="Q4653162" start="9640" end="9649" title="AOS/VS II" label="AOS/VS II"/>
<link wikidata="Q219528" start="9668" end="9672" title="CP/M" label="CP/M"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046873" start="9686" end="9692" title="DR-DOS" label="DR-DOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q5458927" start="9696" end="9708" title="Flex machine" label="Flex machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q352308" start="9790" end="9795" title="Apple GS/OS" label="GS/OS"/>
<link wikidata="Q17152696" start="9799" end="9805" title="HeliOS" label="HeliOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q6398001" start="9813" end="9819" title="KeyKOS" label="KeyKOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1878937" start="9912" end="9918" title="LynxOS" label="LynxOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q13522376" start="9922" end="9928" title="Classic Mac OS" label="Mac OS"/>
<link wikidata="Q420785" start="9936" end="9944" title="System 6" label="System 6"/>
<link wikidata="Q189794" start="10027" end="10031" title="OS/2" label="OS/2"/>
<link wikidata="Q15637561" start="10041" end="10047" title="IBM i" label="OS/400"/>
<link wikidata="Q4047860" start="10051" end="10058" title="RISC iX" label="RISC iX"/>
<link wikidata="Q7573817" start="10062" end="10073" title="SpartaDOS X" label="SpartaDOS X"/>
<link wikidata="Q1208460" start="10077" end="10082" title="SunOS" label="SunOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1670222" start="10090" end="10097" title="TOPS-10" label="TOPS-10"/>
<link wikidata="Q5013572" start="10151" end="10203" title="VM (operating system)" label="Virtual Machine/Extended Architecture System Product"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191521" start="10228" end="10233" title="Trusted Computer System Evaluation Criteria" label="TCSEC"/>
<link wikidata="Q3266778" start="10244" end="10247" title="Virtual Machine Manager" label="VMM"/>
<link wikidata="Q960616" start="10252" end="10255" title="VAX" label="VAX"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191521" start="10348" end="10353" title="Trusted Computer System Evaluation Criteria" label="TCSEC"/>
<link wikidata="Q154755" start="10388" end="10391" title="Ada (programming language)" label="Ada"/>
<link wikidata="Q200647" start="10408" end="10412" title="EPOC (operating system)" label="EPOC"/>
<link wikidata="Q831367" start="10425" end="10433" title="NeXTSTEP" label="NeXTSTEP"/>
<link wikidata="Q189794" start="10443" end="10447" title="OS/2" label="OS/2"/>
<link wikidata="Q1202514" start="10457" end="10464" title="RISC OS" label="RISC OS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1755887" start="10602" end="10610" title="OpenServer" label="SCO UNIX"/>
<link wikidata="Q7671762" start="10638" end="10644" title="TSX-32" label="TSX-32"/>
<link wikidata="Q2666693" start="10648" end="10663" title="Version 10 Unix" label="Version 10 Unix"/>
<link wikidata="Q589680" start="10667" end="10672" title="Xenix" label="Xenix"/>
<link wikidata="Q269856" start="10734" end="10737" title="IBM AIX" label="AIX"/>
<link wikidata="Q380526" start="10745" end="10752" title="AmigaOS" label="AmigaOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q62563" start="10760" end="10764" title="BeOS" label="BeOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049628" start="10773" end="10778" title="DOS/V" label="DOS/V"/>
<link wikidata="Q3100483" start="10782" end="10788" title="Genera (operating system)" label="Genera"/>
<link wikidata="Q1939543" start="10796" end="10802" title="iS-DOS" label="iS-DOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191521" start="10813" end="10818" title="Trusted Computer System Evaluation Criteria" label="TCSEC"/>
<link wikidata="Q2463060" start="10879" end="10895" title="type enforcement" label="type enforcement"/>
<link wikidata="Q691990" start="10924" end="10938" title="NetWare" label="Novell NetWare"/>
<link wikidata="Q189794" start="10944" end="10948" title="OS/2" label="OS/2"/>
<link wikidata="Q11237594" start="10956" end="10961" title="OSF/1" label="OSF/1"/>
<link wikidata="Q1600588" start="10965" end="10970" title="RTEMS" label="RTEMS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1210707" start="10974" end="10981" title="GEOS (16-bit operating system)" label="PC/GEOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q491546" start="10985" end="10996" title="Windows 3.0" label="Windows 3.0"/>
<link wikidata="Q5013572" start="11001" end="11048" title="VM (operating system)" label="Virtual Machine/Enterprise Systems Architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q289345" start="11064" end="11099" title="VSE (operating system)" label="VSE/Enterprise Systems Architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q473800" start="11130" end="11136" title="Amoeba (operating system)" label="Amoeba"/>
<link wikidata="Q5513970" start="11193" end="11199" title="GNO/ME" label="GNO/ME"/>
<link wikidata="Q14579" start="11203" end="11208" title="Linux kernel" label="Linux"/>
<link wikidata="Q13522376" start="11221" end="11227" title="Classic Mac OS" label="Mac OS"/>
<link wikidata="Q420384" start="11235" end="11243" title="System 7" label="System 7"/>
<link wikidata="Q187906" start="11254" end="11259" title="MINIX" label="MINIX"/>
<link wikidata="Q7162080" start="11267" end="11278" title="PenPoint OS" label="PenPoint OS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1202514" start="11282" end="11289" title="RISC OS" label="RISC OS"/>
<link wikidata="Q3943975" start="11295" end="11301" title="SUNMOS" label="SUNMOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191521" start="11374" end="11379" title="Trusted Computer System Evaluation Criteria" label="TCSEC"/>
<link wikidata="Q228413" start="11399" end="11405" title="386BSD" label="386BSD"/>
<link wikidata="Q295179" start="11413" end="11423" title="Amiga Unix" label="Amiga Unix"/>
<link wikidata="Q380526" start="11468" end="11475" title="AmigaOS" label="AmigaOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q336773" start="11483" end="11490" title="BSD/OS" label="BSD/386"/>
<link wikidata="Q629470" start="11495" end="11499" title="Berkeley Software Design" label="BSDi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1420363" start="11530" end="11533" title="Yggdrasil Linux/GNU/X" label="LGX"/>
<link wikidata="Q479882" start="11537" end="11544" title="OpenVMS" label="OpenVMS"/>
<link wikidata="Q189794" start="11625" end="11629" title="OS/2" label="OS/2"/>
<link wikidata="Q725779" start="11671" end="11677" title="Plan 9 from Bell Labs" label="Plan 9"/>
<link wikidata="Q2366908" start="11765" end="11771" title="RSTS/E" label="RSTS/E"/>
<link wikidata="Q1757001" start="11830" end="11833" title="Softlanding Linux System" label="SLS"/>
<link wikidata="Q14646" start="11837" end="11844" title="Oracle Solaris" label="Solaris"/>
<link wikidata="Q495432" start="11919" end="11930" title="Windows 3.1" label="Windows 3.1"/>
<link wikidata="Q5968682" start="11942" end="11967" title="4690 Operating System" label="IBM 4690 Operating System"/>
<link wikidata="Q34236" start="11971" end="11978" title="FreeBSD" label="FreeBSD"/>
<link wikidata="Q34225" start="11982" end="11988" title="NetBSD" label="NetBSD"/>
<link wikidata="Q691990" start="11992" end="12006" title="NetWare" label="Novell NetWare"/>
<link wikidata="Q1185591" start="12012" end="12021" title="Newton OS" label="Newton OS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144225" start="12025" end="12037" title="Nucleus RTOS" label="Nucleus RTOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q3100483" start="12041" end="12052" title="Genera (operating system)" label="Open Genera"/>
<link wikidata="Q7073066" start="12060" end="12067" title="OS 2200" label="OS 2200"/>
<link wikidata="Q518016" start="12069" end="12075" title="Unisys" label="Unisys"/>
<link wikidata="Q189794" start="12080" end="12084" title="OS/2" label="OS/2"/>
<link wikidata="Q2044798" start="12092" end="12099" title="PTS-DOS" label="PTS-DOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q58436" start="12103" end="12112" title="Slackware" label="Slackware"/>
<link wikidata="Q4049965" start="12120" end="12126" title="Spring (operating system)" label="Spring"/>
<link wikidata="Q748319" start="12130" end="12144" title="Windows NT 3.1" label="Windows NT 3.1"/>
<link wikidata="Q269856" start="12208" end="12211" title="IBM AIX" label="AIX"/>
<link wikidata="Q34225" start="12253" end="12259" title="NetBSD" label="NetBSD"/>
<link wikidata="Q189794" start="12324" end="12328" title="OS/2" label="OS/2"/>
<link wikidata="Q220182" start="12341" end="12348" title="Red Hat Linux" label="Red Hat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1202514" start="12352" end="12359" title="RISC OS" label="RISC OS"/>
<link wikidata="Q16314510" start="12367" end="12371" title="SPIN (operating system)" label="SPIN"/>
<link wikidata="Q204214" start="12418" end="12430" title="Tru64 UNIX" label="Digital UNIX"/>
<link wikidata="Q34215" start="12463" end="12470" title="OpenBSD" label="OpenBSD"/>
<link wikidata="Q1726891" start="12474" end="12480" title="OS/390" label="OS/390"/>
<link wikidata="Q725779" start="12484" end="12490" title="Plan 9 from Bell Labs" label="Plan 9"/>
<link wikidata="Q542726" start="12599" end="12605" title="Ultrix" label="Ultrix"/>
<link wikidata="Q83370" start="12646" end="12656" title="Windows 95" label="Windows 95"/>
<link wikidata="Q269856" start="12667" end="12670" title="IBM AIX" label="AIX"/>
<link wikidata="Q7715973" start="12678" end="12684" title="Debian" label="Debian"/>
<link wikidata="Q13522376" start="12739" end="12749" title="Classic Mac OS" label="Mac OS 7.6"/>
<link wikidata="Q189794" start="12797" end="12801" title="OS/2" label="OS/2"/>
<link wikidata="Q274582" start="12814" end="12821" title="Palm OS" label="Palm OS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1202514" start="12825" end="12832" title="RISC OS" label="RISC OS"/>
<link wikidata="Q488978" start="12840" end="12854" title="Windows NT 4.0" label="Windows NT 4.0"/>
<link wikidata="Q488244" start="12858" end="12872" title="Windows Embedded Compact" label="Windows CE 1.0"/>
<link wikidata="Q269856" start="12883" end="12886" title="IBM AIX" label="AIX"/>
<link wikidata="Q11196260" start="12894" end="12906" title="DR-WebSpyder" label="DR-WebSpyder"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12914" end="12918" title="EPOC (operating system)#EPOC32 (1997–2000)" label="EPOC"/>
<link wikidata="Q908615" start="12931" end="12938" title="Inferno (operating system)" label="Inferno"/>
<link wikidata="Q1343889" start="12942" end="12950" title="Mac OS 8" label="Mac OS 8"/>
<link wikidata="Q187906" start="12954" end="12959" title="MINIX" label="MINIX"/>
<link wikidata="Q6991133" start="12967" end="12974" title="Nemesis (operating system)" label="Nemesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1202514" start="12978" end="12985" title="RISC OS" label="RISC OS"/>
<link wikidata="Q726395" start="12993" end="12998" title="SkyOS" label="SkyOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q488244" start="13002" end="13016" title="Windows Embedded Compact" label="Windows CE 2.0"/>
<link wikidata="Q11196260" start="13027" end="13039" title="DR-WebSpyder" label="DR-WebSpyder"/>
<link wikidata="Q4041744" start="13047" end="13052" title="Junos" label="Junos"/>
<link wikidata="Q691990" start="13056" end="13070" title="Novell NetWare" label="Novell NetWare"/>
<link wikidata="Q305216" start="13076" end="13081" title="RT-11" label="RT-11"/>
<link wikidata="Q14646" start="13137" end="13144" title="Solaris (operating system)" label="Solaris"/>
<link wikidata="Q252132" start="13160" end="13166" title="64-bit computing" label="64-bit"/>
<link wikidata="Q483132" start="13279" end="13289" title="Windows 98" label="Windows 98"/>
<link wikidata="Q296818" start="13300" end="13304" title="AROS Research Operating System" label="AROS"/>
<link wikidata="Q908615" start="13369" end="13376" title="Inferno (operating system)" label="Inferno"/>
<link wikidata="Q904519" start="13484" end="13492" title="Mac OS 9" label="Mac OS 9"/>
<link wikidata="Q189794" start="13496" end="13500" title="OS/2" label="OS/2"/>
<link wikidata="Q1202514" start="13513" end="13520" title="RISC OS" label="RISC OS"/>
<link wikidata="Q483132" start="13526" end="13550" title="Windows 98 Second Edition" label="Windows 98 (2nd edition)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3345986" start="13598" end="13629" title="Comparison of operating systems" label="Comparison of operating systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q756435" start="13632" end="13657" title="List of operating systems" label="List of operating systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q3254807" start="13660" end="13701" title="Comparison of real-time operating systems" label="Comparison of real-time operating systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q7805706" start="13704" end="13737" title="Timeline of DOS operating systems" label="Timeline of DOS operating systems"/>
<link wikidata="" start="13740" end="13791" title=":File:Gldt1009.svg" label="Timeline of Linux distributions (Diagram 1992–2010)"/>
<link wikidata="Q11368" start="13858" end="13862" title="Unix" label="UNIX"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="247969" wikidata="Q25404" url="?curid=247969" title="Eurasian blue tit">
<text>The Eurasian blue tit (Cyanistes caeruleus) is a small passerine bird in the tit family, Paridae. It is easily recognizable by its blue and yellow plumage and small size.

Eurasian blue tits, usually resident and non-migratory birds, are widespread and a common resident breeder throughout temperate and subarctic Europe and the western Palearctic in deciduous or mixed woodlands with a high proportion of oak. They usually nest in tree holes, although they easily adapt to nest boxes where necessary. Their main rival for nests and in the search for food is the larger and more common great tit (&quot;Parus major&quot;).

The Eurasian blue tit prefers insects and spiders for its diet. Outside the breeding season, they also eat seeds and other vegetable-based foods. The birds are famed for their acrobatic skills, as they can hold on to the outermost branches of trees and shrubs and hang upside down when looking for food.

== Taxonomy ==
The Eurasian blue tit was described by Carl Linnaeus in 1758 in the 10th edition of his &quot;Systema Naturae&quot; under the binomial name &quot;Parus caeruleus&quot;. &quot;Parus&quot; is the classical Latin for a tit and &quot;caeruleus&quot; is the Latin for dark blue or cerulean. Two centuries earlier, before the introduction of the binomial nomenclature, the same Latin name had been used by the Swiss naturalist Conrad Gesner when he described and illustrated the blue tit in his &quot;Historiae animalium&quot; of 1555.

In 2005, analysis of the mtDNA cytochrome &quot;b&quot; sequences of the Paridae indicated that &quot;Cyanistes&quot; was an early offshoot from the lineage of other tits, and more accurately regarded as a genus rather than a subgenus of &quot;Parus&quot;. The current genus name, &quot;Cyanistes&quot;, is from the Ancient Greek , &quot;dark blue&quot;. The African blue tit (&quot;Cyanistes teneriffae&quot;) was formerly considered conspecific.

=== Subspecies ===
There are currently at least nine recognised subspecies:

* &quot;C. c. caeruleus&quot; – : the nominate subspecies, occurring in Continental Europe to northern Spain, Sicily, northern Turkey and northern Urals
* &quot;C. c. obscurus&quot; – : found in Ireland, Britain and Channel Islands
* &quot;C. c. ogliastrae&quot; – : found in Portugal, southern Spain, Corsica and Sardinia
* &quot;C. c. balearicus&quot; – : native to Majorca Island (Balearic Islands)
* &quot;C. c. calamensis&quot; – : found in southern Greece, Pelopónnisos, Cyclades, Crete and Rhodes
* &quot;C. c. orientalis&quot; – : found in southern European Russia (Volga River to central and southern Urals)
* &quot;C. c. satunini&quot; – : found in the Crimean Peninsula, Caucasus, Transcaucasia and northwestern Iran to eastern Turkey
* &quot;C. c. raddei&quot; – : found in northern Iran
* &quot;C. c. persicus&quot; – : found in the Zagros Mountains

=== Hybrids ===
&quot; tit&quot;&#x27; (&quot;Cyanistes × pleskei&quot;) is a common interspecific hybrid between this species and the azure tit (&quot;Cyanistes cyanus&quot;), in western Russia. Such birds can look like azure, but with less white on the tail and a bit of yellow on the chest or like blue tit but with whiteish bottom.

== Description ==
The Eurasian blue tit is usually long with a wingspan of for both sexes, and weighs about .
A typical blue tit has an intensively blue crown and dark blue line passing through the eye, and encircling the white cheeks to the chin, giving the bird a very distinctive appearance. The forehead and a bar on the wing are white. The nape, wings and tail are blue, and the back is yellowish green. The underparts are mostly Sulphur-yellow with a dark line down the abdomen—the yellowness is indicative of the number of yellowy-green caterpillars eaten, due to high levels of carotene pigments in the diet. The bill is black, the legs bluish grey, and the irises dark brown. The sexes are similar and often indistinguishable to human eyes, but under ultraviolet light, males have a brighter blue crown. Juvenile birds are more yellowish and have fewer contrasting colors. They become similar to mature ones in September, although some parts of the wings are kept until May/June next year.

Blue tits can also see in ultraviolet light, which is one of the ways they can distinguish whether the bird they&#x27;re seeing is a male, female or juvenile. A male&#x27;s cap is more intensively blue than a female&#x27;s or chick&#x27;s.

== Distribution and habitat ==
There are currently around 20 to 44 million pairs in Europe.

The Eurasian blue tit and the related hybrids are considered native species in areas of the European continent with a mainly temperate or Mediterranean climate, and in parts of the Middle East. These areas include Ireland, the United Kingdom and most of the European Union and EFTA (except Malta, where they are considered vagrant, and Iceland, where they are absent), plus: Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Armenia, Azerbaijan, Belarus, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Georgia, Iran, Iraq, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Lebanon, Libya, Moldova, Montenegro, Morocco, North Macedonia, Russia, San Marino, Serbia, Syria, Tunisia, Turkey, Vatican City and Ukraine.

In Great Britain the Eurasian blue tit can be found in a variety of environments, and is typically found in deciduous woodland, parks, gardens and even in the centre of towns.

== Behaviour and ecology ==
Eurasian blue and great tits form mixed winter flocks, and the former are perhaps the better gymnasts in the slender twigs. A Eurasian blue tit will often ascend a trunk in short jerky hops, reminiscent of a treecreeper. As a rule the bird roosts in ivy or evergreens, but in harsh winters will roost wherever there is a suitable small hole, be it in a tree or nesting box. They are very agile and can hang from almost anywhere.

This is a common and popular European garden bird, due to its perky acrobatic performances as it visits garden bird feeders. It swings beneath the holder, calling &quot;tee, tee, tee&quot; or a scolding &quot;churr&quot;.

=== Breeding ===
The Eurasian blue tit will nest in any suitable hole in a tree, wall, or stump, or an artificial nest box, often competing with house sparrows or great tits for the site. Few birds more readily accept the shelter of a nesting box; the same hole is returned to year after year, and when one pair dies another takes possession. It is estimated by the RSPB that there are 3,535,000 breeding pairs in the UK.

During the incubation period, female blue tits perform all of the incubation, however the male feeds the female during this time. During the nestling period, both female nest attendance and male feeding rate are higher in the morning, declining throughout the day. Although socially monogamous, blue tits regularly engage in extra-pair copulations with other individuals.

Eggs are long and wide. Egg size appears to depend mostly on the size of individual females and secondarily on habitat, with smaller eggs found at higher altitudes. The clutch&#x27;s total weight can be 1.5 times as heavy as the female bird.A study found that the timing of breeding in blue tits is related to the expression of nestling carotenoid‐based coloration, which could play a role in offspring–parent communication.

The bird is a close sitter, hissing and biting at an intruding finger. In the southwest of England, such behaviour has earned the Eurasian blue tit the colloquial nickname &quot;Little Billy Biter&quot; or &quot;Billy Biter.&quot; When protecting its eggs, it raises its crest, but this is a sign of excitement rather than anger, for it is also elevated during nuptial display. The nesting material is usually moss, wool, hair, and feathers, and the eggs are laid in April or May. The number in the clutch is often very large, but seven or eight eggs are normal. Clutch size varies with latitude and other geographic parameters. Some bigger clutches may be laid by two or even more hens in some locations, but single hen clutches of 14 have been verified in the UK. It is not unusual for a single bird to feed the chicks in the nest at a rate of one feeding every 90 seconds during the height of the breeding season. In winter, they form flocks with other tit species.

In an analysis carried out using ring-recovery data in Britain, the survival rate for juveniles in their first year was 38%, while the adult annual survival rate was 53%. From these figures the typical lifespan is only three years. Within Britain, the maximum recorded age is 10 years and 3 months for a bird that was ringed in Bedfordshire. The maximum recorded age overall is 11 years and 7 months for a bird in the Czech Republic.However, 

=== Diet ===
The Eurasian blue tit feeds on many insects, other small invertebrates and their larvae, though it is fond of young buds and fruits of various trees, especially when insect prey is scarce, and may pull them to bits in the hope of finding insects. It is a well-known predator of many Lepidoptera species including the Wood Tiger moth. No species, however, destroys more coccids and aphids, the worst foes of many plants. It takes leaf miner grubs and green tortrix moths (Tortricidae). In common with all members of the family, seeds are also eaten.

=== Voice ===
Eurasian blue tits use songs and calls throughout the year. Songs are mostly used in late winter and spring to defend the territory or to attract mates. Calls are used for multiple reasons. Communication with other Eurasian blue tits is the most important motivation for the use of calls. They inform one another of their location in trees by means of contact-calls. They use alarm-calls to warn others (including birds of other species such as the great tit, the European robin or the treecreeper) about the presence of predators in the neighbourhood. Scolding, for example, is used when a ground predator (e.g. fox, cat or dog), a low flying predator or a perched owl are noticed. Sometimes this is followed by mobbing behaviour in which birds gather together in flocks to counter a predator. The alarm-whistle warns other birds about the proximity of a Eurasian sparrowhawk, a northern goshawk, a common buzzard or other flying predators that form a potential danger in the air. A series of high-pitched &quot; notes are given by both partners before and during copulation. The begging-call is used by juveniles to beg for food from parents.

=== Learnt behaviours ===
An interesting example of culturally transmitted learning in birds was the phenomenon dating from the 1920s of blue tits teaching one another how to open traditional British milk bottles with foil tops, to get at the cream underneath. Such behaviour has since been gradually suppressed as a result of the declining popularity of both full-fat milk and milk delivery. In addition, the instinct to strip bark from trees in search of insects has developed into a tendency to peel building materials such as thatch, wallpaper, stucco and window putty.

=== Predators and natural threats ===
The small size of the Eurasian blue tit makes it vulnerable to prey by larger birds such as jays who catch the vulnerable fledglings when they leave the nest. The most important predator is probably the Eurasian sparrowhawk, closely followed by the domestic cat. Nests may be robbed by mammals such as weasels and red squirrels, as well as introduced grey squirrels in the UK.

The successful breeding of chicks is dependent on sufficient supply of green caterpillars as well as satisfactory weather. Breeding seasons may be affected badly if the weather is cold and wet between May and July, particularly if this coincides with the emergence of the caterpillars on which the nestlings are fed.

=== Parasites ===
Eurasian blue tits are known to be host to feather mites, and rarely lice and flat flies. In Europe, the only feather mite species known to live on the blue tit host is &quot;Proctophyllodes stylifer&quot;. However, this mite seems to be of no concern to the bird as, until now, it is only known to feed on dead feather tissue. &quot;P. stylifer&quot; lives all its developmental stages, i.e. egg, larva, protonymph, tritonymph and adult, within the plumage of the same host. The usual sites where &quot;P. stylifer&quot; is encountered are the remiges and the rectrices of the bird where they can be found tandemly positioned between the barbs of the rachis.

== Status and conservation ==
The Eurasian blue tit is classified as a least concern species on the IUCN Red List (version 3.1), and as a Green Status species, since 1996, by the Royal Society for the Protection of Birds in the United Kingdom.

== Cultural significance ==
The Eurasian blue tit has appeared on many stamps and ornaments. Its most recent appearance on a British stamp was the 2010 &quot;Birds of Britain&quot; series.

== References ==
== External links ==
* Feathers of Eurasian blue tit (Parus caeruleus) 
* 
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q25404" start="4" end="21" title="Eurasian blue tit" label="Eurasian blue tit"/>
<link wikidata="Q25341" start="55" end="64" title="passerine" label="passerine"/>
<link wikidata="Q5113" start="65" end="69" title="bird" label="bird"/>
<link wikidata="Q168473" start="77" end="80" title="tit (bird)" label="tit"/>
<link wikidata="Q168473" start="89" end="96" title="Paridae" label="Paridae"/>
<link wikidata="Q216507" start="200" end="208" title="resident bird" label="resident"/>
<link wikidata="Q216507" start="213" end="226" title="bird migration" label="non-migratory"/>
<link wikidata="Q46" start="314" end="320" title="Europe" label="Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q106447" start="337" end="347" title="Palearctic" label="Palearctic"/>
<link wikidata="Q12004" start="406" end="409" title="oak" label="oak"/>
<link wikidata="Q25485" start="586" end="595" title="great tit" label="great tit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1043" start="983" end="996" title="Carl Linnaeus" label="Carl Linnaeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q4547210" start="1012" end="1024" title="10th edition of Systema Naturae" label="10th edition"/>
<link wikidata="Q29270" start="1038" end="1053" title="Systema Naturae" label="Systema Naturae"/>
<link wikidata="Q36642" start="1070" end="1083" title="Binomial nomenclature" label="binomial name"/>
<link wikidata="Q313120" start="1220" end="1228" title="cerulean" label="cerulean"/>
<link wikidata="Q36642" start="1284" end="1305" title="binomial nomenclature" label="binomial nomenclature"/>
<link wikidata="Q60116" start="1365" end="1378" title="Conrad Gesner" label="Conrad Gesner"/>
<link wikidata="Q3849598" start="1439" end="1458" title="Historiae animalium (Gesner)" label="Historiae animalium"/>
<link wikidata="Q27075" start="1500" end="1505" title="mtDNA" label="mtDNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q3774486" start="1506" end="1530" title="cytochrome b" label="cytochrome &amp;quot;b&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q863908" start="1531" end="1540" title="DNA sequence" label="sequences"/>
<link wikidata="Q719380" start="1719" end="1724" title="Parus" label="Parus"/>
<link wikidata="Q35497" start="1791" end="1804" title="Ancient Greek" label="Ancient Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q10546857" start="1834" end="1850" title="African blue tit" label="African blue tit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1782625" start="1910" end="1921" title="conspecific" label="conspecific"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156895" start="2039" end="2047" title="nominate" label="nominate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1460" start="2111" end="2117" title="Sicily" label="Sicily"/>
<link wikidata="Q8828" start="2369" end="2383" title="Mallorca" label="Majorca Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q5765" start="2385" end="2401" title="Balearic Islands" label="Balearic Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q78967" start="2464" end="2476" title="Peloponnese" label="Pelopónnisos"/>
<link wikidata="Q171132" start="2478" end="2486" title="Cyclades" label="Cyclades"/>
<link wikidata="Q34374" start="2488" end="2493" title="Crete" label="Crete"/>
<link wikidata="Q43048" start="2498" end="2504" title="Rhodes" label="Rhodes"/>
<link wikidata="Q626" start="2575" end="2586" title="Volga" label="Volga River"/>
<link wikidata="Q35600" start="2611" end="2616" title="Ural Mountains" label="Urals"/>
<link wikidata="Q7835" start="2664" end="2681" title="Crimean Peninsula" label="Crimean Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q200173" start="2693" end="2706" title="South Caucasus" label="Transcaucasia"/>
<link wikidata="Q167021" start="2847" end="2863" title="Zagros Mountains" label="Zagros Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2950" end="2970" title="Hybrid (biology)#Mechanisms of reproductive isolation" label="interspecific hybrid"/>
<link wikidata="Q499283" start="3000" end="3009" title="azure tit" label="azure tit"/>
<link wikidata="Q290" start="3286" end="3289" title="sex" label="sex"/>
<link wikidata="Q9597" start="3678" end="3685" title="abdomen" label="abdomen"/>
<link wikidata="Q81825" start="3746" end="3757" title="caterpillar" label="caterpillar"/>
<link wikidata="Q190156" start="3788" end="3796" title="carotene" label="carotene"/>
<link wikidata="Q161179" start="3797" end="3804" title="pigment" label="pigment"/>
<link wikidata="Q11391" start="4228" end="4245" title="Ultraviolet" label="ultraviolet light"/>
<link wikidata="Q46" start="4628" end="4634" title="Europe" label="Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q167466" start="4661" end="4670" title="temperate climate" label="temperate"/>
<link wikidata="Q13996" start="4674" end="4695" title="Mediterranean climate" label="Mediterranean climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q7204" start="4717" end="4728" title="Middle East" label="Middle East"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="4794" end="4808" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q166546" start="4813" end="4817" title="European Free Trade Association" label="EFTA"/>
<link wikidata="Q233" start="4826" end="4831" title="Malta" label="Malta"/>
<link wikidata="Q189" start="4872" end="4879" title="Iceland" label="Iceland"/>
<link wikidata="Q23666" start="5178" end="5191" title="Great Britain" label="Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q25485" start="5398" end="5407" title="great tit" label="great tit"/>
<link wikidata="Q205938" start="5588" end="5599" title="treecreeper" label="treecreeper"/>
<link wikidata="Q26771" start="5630" end="5633" title="ivy" label="ivy"/>
<link wikidata="Q190489" start="5637" end="5646" title="evergreen" label="evergreen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1441616" start="5921" end="5932" title="bird feeder" label="bird feeder"/>
<link wikidata="Q14683" start="6178" end="6191" title="house sparrow" label="house sparrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q1892802" start="6399" end="6403" title="RSPB" label="RSPB"/>
<link wikidata="Q24962730" start="6781" end="6802" title="extra-pair copulation" label="extra-pair copulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q191907" start="7166" end="7176" title="carotenoid" label="carotenoid"/>
<link wikidata="Q319436" start="8258" end="8271" title="Bird ringing" label="ring-recovery"/>
<link wikidata="Q23143" start="8553" end="8565" title="Bedfordshire" label="Bedfordshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q28319" start="8965" end="8976" title="Lepidoptera" label="Lepidoptera"/>
<link wikidata="Q101212772" start="8999" end="9014" title="Parasemia plantaginis" label="Wood Tiger moth"/>
<link wikidata="Q183350" start="9063" end="9068" title="aphid" label="aphid"/>
<link wikidata="Q28953" start="9153" end="9164" title="Tortricidae" label="Tortricidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q25485" start="9695" end="9704" title="great tit" label="great tit"/>
<link wikidata="Q25334" start="9710" end="9724" title="European robin" label="European robin"/>
<link wikidata="Q205938" start="9732" end="9743" title="treecreeper" label="treecreeper"/>
<link wikidata="Q25380" start="10102" end="10122" title="Eurasian sparrowhawk" label="Eurasian sparrowhawk"/>
<link wikidata="Q121076142" start="10126" end="10142" title="northern goshawk" label="northern goshawk"/>
<link wikidata="Q25385" start="10146" end="10160" title="common buzzard" label="common buzzard"/>
<link wikidata="Q978" start="10444" end="10475" title="meme" label="culturally transmitted learning"/>
<link wikidata="Q2995020" start="10592" end="10603" title="milk bottle" label="milk bottle"/>
<link wikidata="Q278138" start="10770" end="10783" title="milk delivery" label="milk delivery"/>
<link wikidata="Q874531" start="10922" end="10928" title="thatch" label="thatch"/>
<link wikidata="Q191529" start="10930" end="10939" title="wallpaper" label="wallpaper"/>
<link wikidata="Q33526" start="10941" end="10947" title="stucco" label="stucco"/>
<link wikidata="Q1337073" start="10959" end="10964" title="putty" label="putty"/>
<link wikidata="Q25354" start="11097" end="11101" title="Eurasian jay" label="jays"/>
<link wikidata="Q25380" start="11208" end="11228" title="Eurasian sparrowhawk" label="Eurasian sparrowhawk"/>
<link wikidata="Q146" start="11254" end="11266" title="Cat" label="domestic cat"/>
<link wikidata="Q28521" start="11307" end="11313" title="weasel" label="weasel"/>
<link wikidata="Q4388" start="11319" end="11331" title="red squirrel" label="red squirrel"/>
<link wikidata="Q468500" start="11356" end="11370" title="Eastern gray squirrel" label="grey squirrels"/>
<link wikidata="Q81825" start="11460" end="11471" title="caterpillar" label="caterpillar"/>
<link wikidata="Q81825" start="11655" end="11666" title="caterpillar" label="caterpillar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2441993" start="11770" end="11775" title="Mite" label="mites"/>
<link wikidata="Q6481228" start="11788" end="11792" title="Louse" label="lice"/>
<link wikidata="Q256346" start="11797" end="11807" title="Hippoboscidae" label="flat flies"/>
<link wikidata="Q211005" start="12451" end="12472" title="Least-concern species" label="least concern species"/>
<link wikidata="Q32059" start="12480" end="12493" title="IUCN Red List" label="IUCN Red List"/>
<link wikidata="Q1892802" start="12559" end="12600" title="Royal Society for the Protection of Birds" label="Royal Society for the Protection of Birds"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="247971" wikidata="Q14270" url="?curid=247971" title="PhpBB">
<text>phpBB is an Internet forum package written in the PHP scripting language. The name &quot;phpBB&quot; is an abbreviation of &quot;PHP Bulletin Board&quot;. Available under the GNU General Public License, phpBB is free and open-source.

Features of phpBB include support for multiple database engines (MariaDB, Microsoft SQL Server, MySQL, PostgreSQL, SQLite, Oracle Database), flat message structure (as opposed to threaded), hierarchical subforums, topic split/merge/lock, user groups, multiple attachments per post, full-text search, plugins and various notification options (e-mail, Jabber instant messaging, ATOM feeds).

==History==

phpBB was founded by James Atkinson as a simple UBB-like forum for his own website on June 17, 2000. Nathan Codding and John Abela joined the development team after phpBB&#x27;s CVS repository was moved to SourceForge.net, and work on version 1.0.0 began. A fully functional, pre-release version of phpBB was made available in July.

===phpBB 1.0.0===

phpBB 1.0.0 was released on December 16, 2000, with subsequent improvements to the 1.x codebase coming in two more major installments. The final release in the 1.x line was phpBB 1.4.4, released on November 6, 2001. During the lifetime of the 1.x series, Bart van Bragt, Paul S. Owen (former co-manager of the project), Jonathan Haase, and Frank Feingold joined the team. phpBB 1.x is no longer supported, and virtually no websites continue to use it.

===phpBB 2.0.x===

In February 2001, phpBB 2.0.x began development entirely from scratch; the developer&#x27;s ambitions for phpBB had outgrown the original codebase. Doug Kelly joined the team shortly afterward. After a year of development and extensive testing, phpBB 2.0.0, dubbed the &quot;Super Furry&quot; version, was released on April 4, 2002, three days later than intended.

phpBB2 was the predecessor of the present-day phpBB3. Developed during 2001–2002, the source code was written primarily to run on PHP 3.0 and 4.0 (version 2.0.13 upped the minimum requirement to PHP 4.0.3 due to a necessary security fix), and by the time that phpBB3 was released in late 2007, the developers and other team members felt that it no longer met their quality coding standards, and announced plans for the retirement/end of support of 2.0.x within a few months of 3.0.0&#x27;s release. phpBB2 was never officially supported under PHP 5. Although many users had no problems running it after making a few changes to PHP 5&#x27;s default configuration settings, the teams chose not to offer support for this configuration.

Official support for phpBB2 ended on January 1, 2009, and the 2.0.x support forums have been locked. Furthermore, all development for phpBB2, including security patches, has ceased as of February 1, 2009. However, a number of unofficial support sites for phpBB2 have formed to fill the void.

Many administrators still prefer to run phpBB2 because it provides a much simpler administration interface and has a thriving ecosystem of MODs (modifications) and styles that allow admins many options for customizing the software to their liking. Others still run phpBB2 because they have installed many MODs, none of which are compatible with phpBB3.

The default theme in phpBB2 is named subSilver (The predecessor to SubSilver2, the default in phpBB3), and was designed by Tom &quot;subBlue&quot; Beddard. At the time that it premiered in 2001, it was a revolutionary new design for bulletin boards, and many bulletin board themes since have borrowed many cues and design elements from subSilver.

Some of phpBB2&#x27;s major features included the following:

* A templated style system intended to simplify customisation and keep the PHP code separate from the HTML.
* Support for internationalisation through a language pack system; 48 translations are available for phpBB2 as of 2007.
* Compatibility with multiple database management systems including MySQL, PostgreSQL, Microsoft SQL Server, and Microsoft Access,
* Code and interface customizations, termed MODs and styles.

The last official release of the 2.0.x line is 2.0.23, released on February 17, 2008. However, the code for phpBB 2.0.24 still remains, unreleased, in the Git repository.

===phpBB 3.0.x===

Work on phpBB 3.0.x began in late 2002. It was originally intended to be released as phpBB 2.2, and the first planned feature list was announced on May 25, 2003. However, as development progressed, the developers realised that phpBB 2.1.x (the development release cycle for 2.2) had eliminated virtually all compatibility with the 2.0.x line, so the version number for release was changed to 3.0.0, in keeping with the Linux kernel versioning scheme, which phpBB followed at the time. In September 2005, Paul Owen resigned as the Development Team Leader and Meik Sievertsen was promoted to the role.

In March 2007, the phpBB team launched their new website, powered by phpBB3 with the new prosilver style. The prosilver style was originally not intended to be revealed until the final release of phpBB 3.0.0.

On April 30, 2007, phpBB founder and co-Project Manager James Atkinson officially resigned from his duties towards phpBB, citing personal circumstances. With the announcement also came the announcement that phpBB was now newly independent and that the team leaders would be collectively taking charge of the decisions in the future of the project. At the end of May, an announcement was made that Jonathan &quot;SHS`&quot; Stanley, the other co-Project Manager, was stepping down as well for personal reasons.

The first beta of phpBB3 was released in June 2006, and the first release candidate was released in May 2007. The phpBB3 codebase received an external security audit in September, which was done by SektionEins. Finally, phpBB 3.0.0 &quot;Olympus&quot; (also dubbed the Gold release) was published on December 13, 2007.

On July 7, 2007, the teams announced that phpBB had been nominated as a finalist for the SourceForge.net Community Choice Awards in the category of &quot;Best Project for Communications&quot;. At the end of the month, SourceForge.net announced that phpBB had won the award for &quot;Best Project for Communications&quot;, and in honour of the award, SourceForge.net donated $1000 in phpBB&#x27;s name to Marie Curie Cancer Care. phpBB also won a &quot;Thingamagoop&quot; from Bleep Labs, and &quot;bragging rights for a full year.&quot;

In September 2007, the teams launched an official phpBB podcast. It was recorded by a rotating group of phpBB team members with occasional guests, and discussed a number of phpBB-related topics, as well as answering questions e-mailed in from listeners. However, the podcast only lasted for a few episodes and production ceased the following spring. Its successor is generally considered to be the new phpBB weblog, which launched in July 2008. The blog is written by phpBB team members (with occasional guest posts by community members) on various topics related to phpBB and provide users with a unique inside look at the activities of the phpBB teams.

The phpBB teams held their first-ever phpBB users&#x27; conference in London on July 20, 2008, which was titled &quot;Londonvasion 2008.&quot; Londonvasion featured presentations by phpBB team members on various topics important to the phpBB community, MOD authors, and developers. Londonvasion provided a unique opportunity to socialize with members of the phpBB teams. The event also represented the first time that most members of the teams had a chance to meet each other in person.

The phpBB teams underwent numerous changes in 2009. On January 1, the teams formally ended support for phpBB2. Many of the non-development teams released betas and release candidates of side projects during this time. The first beta of AutoMOD, an automatic installer of phpBB MODifications, was released by the Extensions Team (formerly known as the MOD Team) on December 22, 2008. The first release candidate of the Unified MOD Install Library (UMIL), a framework for allowing MOD authors to design simple database installation scripts, was released by the Extensions Team on January 12, 2009. The first release candidate of the Support Toolkit, a package of tools to diagnose and fix common support-related issues with phpBB, was released by the Support Team on June 24.

On June 10, 2009, the phpBB Development Team broke with their precedent of keeping future development plans under wraps and publicly previewed a series of new features that would be coming in phpBB 3.0.6. After four RC releases, phpBB 3.0.6 was released on November 17. The most notable new features included a bare-bones quick reply editor (a feature which the teams had historically been firmly opposed to), support for ACM (cache) plugins, ATOM feed support, and a plugin-based CAPTCHA system, including built-in support for reCAPTCHA among others. The modularization of phpBB&#x27;s CAPTCHA also provided an API for MOD authors to write CAPTCHA plugins, allowing for greater diversification of the CAPTCHAs used in phpBB installations. The Extensions Team also ran a competition to encourage CAPTCHA plugin development.

On June 10, 2009, phpBB&#x27;s Development Team revealed that the next phpBB3 release, 3.0.6, would include a significant number of new features. This is unusual for a minor release which is typically limited to bug and security fixes. New features would include support for new CAPTCHA plugins, ATOM feeds, support for new cache plugins (XCache, Alternative PHP Cache, eAccelerator, Memcache, and a &quot;null&quot; no-cache plugin), and quick reply (an often-requested feature by a subset of phpBB users) among other minor feature additions. phpBB 3.0.6 has had four RC releases, and its final release was on November 17, 2009.

The final stable release of phpBB 3.0 was 3.0.14, released May 4, 2015. End of Life for phpBB 3.0.x was November 2015.

===phpBB 3.1.x===

In 2009 the phpBB Development Team had begun working on phpBB 3.1, formerly versioned as phpBB 3.2. (Before July 29, 2009, phpBB followed the original Linux kernel versioning scheme, in which the middle number represents a development version if it is odd and a stable version if it is even). The developers previewed their planned feature list at Londonvasion, and new features include a complete overhaul of the Moderator Control Panel (MCP) and moderation capabilities, implementation of AJAX where it is applicable and helpful, a trigger-based event system, a completely rewritten BBCode system, RSS feed support, enhancements to custom profile fields, enhancements to private messaging, a new authentication system with OpenID support, and numerous other small changes and features. The phpBB teams maintain a website for phpBB development named &quot;Area51&quot;. In keeping with the tradition to codename every new phpBB3 release after Martian mountains, phpBB 3.1 was code-named &quot;Ascraeus&quot;, named after Ascraeus Mons, the second-tallest mountain on Mars. (Olympus Mons, which 3.0 was named after, is the tallest.)

On July 29, 2009, the Development Team announced &quot;significant changes&quot; to the phpBB&#x27;s development process and release cycle. Chief among these was the decision to abandon the former Linux kernel versioning scheme, meaning that whether part of the version number was even or odd no longer was significant. As such, Ascraeus (the successor to 3.0.0 Olympus) is to become phpBB 3.1.0. (The original versioning scheme dictated that 3.1.x would be a development branch, meaning that Ascraeus would have been released as 3.2.0.) Subsequent feature releases of phpBB3 will be versioned as 3.2.0, 3.3.0, etc. phpBB 4.0.0 will represent a fundamentally redesigned version of phpBB. The strategy also committed the teams to continue supporting an older &quot;stable&quot; branch for at least 6–9 months after a newer &quot;feature&quot; branch was released. However, an exception was made for 3.0.6, which was already in development. Although it contained enough significant new features that it could have been considered a 3.1.0 release, it remained a part of the 3.0.x branch, which also meant that the teams did not have to simultaneously continue supporting 3.0.5 after 3.0.6&#x27;s release.

In January 2010, Meik Sievertsen stepped down as Lead Developer, instead taking on the roles of developer and &quot;Server Manager&quot;. Nils Adermann was then promoted to Lead Developer. Since then phpBB have been working on moving over to the Symfony web framework and released phpBB 3.1.0 on October 28, 2014
In March 2010, phpBB moved source code versioning from Subversion to Git in order to improve developer workflow and better involve the community.

On April 26, 2013, phpBB 3.1 entered the stage of feature freeze. &quot;Ascraeus&quot; was finalized and released on October 28, 2014 after several release candidates.
A future release &quot;Rhea&quot; (3.2.x) will be made January 7, 2017.

On October 12, 2016, phpBB released the latest stable &quot;Ascraeus&quot; version: 3.1.10. Due to the late release of 3.2, it was announced that end of maintenance for 3.1 would be extended to June 2017, and end of life for 3.1 extended to December 2017.

In addition to the development of phpBB 3.1, other phpBB teams also are in the process of developing numerous other tools for use by the community. Development for these tools was followed on the &quot;phpBB Code Forge&quot;, which contained the Subversion repositories for these tools and the main phpBB development trunk.

===phpBB 3.2.x===
The first of two release candidates for 3.2.x &quot;Rhea&quot; was made available on June 27, 2016, the second on December 9, 2016. It was announced on December 25, 2016, that the official launch for phpBB 3.2.0 would be on January 7, 2017. phpBB 3.2 introduces major changes and new functionality. Among the new features are a completely revised installer including CLI (Command-Line Interface) support, a new BBCode system that adds more power to quotes and supports emojis, and full support for PHP 7.1.

===phpBB 3.3.x===
The first release candidate for 3.3.x &quot;Proteus&quot; was made available on December 23, 2019. On January 6, 2020, phpBB officially launched phpBB 3.3.0. It was built upon 3.2 &quot;Rhea&quot; and it&#x27;s their big step towards a more modern base while maintaining a clear update path. Starting in version 3.3.3, phpBB began supporting installations using PHP 8 and MySQL 8. The latest updates to the branch focus on stability improvements and user interface enhancements.

==MODs==

MODs are code modifications created by the phpBB community, often used to extend the functionality of or change the display of phpBB. The term is capitalized to distinguish code modifications from forum moderators, the latter of which is often abbreviated as &quot;mods&quot;. Modifications referred to in this manner are not authored by the phpBB developers and do not enjoy the same level of support as unmodified official code. The phpBB Extensions Team (formerly known as the phpBB MOD Team), headed by David Colón (known as DavidIQ in the community), accepts modifications from community sources for validation, and modifications that meet the Extensions Team&#x27;s standards are made available for download from the phpBB &quot;Customisations Database&quot;. Other sites also provide phpBB2 and phpBB3 modifications for download. Some of the sites have their own standards, which they validate to, and other sites do not do any validation, however, the phpBB teams do not offer support for boards using MODs downloaded from sites other than phpBB.com. Documentation for phpBB3 MODding is provided by the Extensions Team. MODs are not accepted for the 3.1.x line of phpBB since Extensions have taken their place from that version forward.

===MODX===

MODX is an XML-based document format developed by the phpBB Extensions Team that is used to describe the steps required to modify the source code of a web application in order to install a modification. Although it can theoretically be utilised for any web application, it was developed for and is primarily used by MODs for phpBB. The phpBB Extensions Team requires that MODs submitted to its database conform to the MODX specifications and other policies. The primary purpose of using an XML-based format is to better allow automatic installation tools, such as AutoMOD, to read and complete the installation instructions. MODX files can be viewed in a web browser using an included XSLT file. The latest revision of the MODX spec is 1.2.6, released on December 15, 2012.

===AutoMOD===

AutoMOD is a tool developed by the phpBB Extensions Team that parses and automatically installs phpBB3 MODs distributed in the MODX format. Users simply have to upload the contents of a MOD download to their phpBB source directory and run AutoMOD, which will parse the MOD instructions and make the necessary file changes. Depending on the server configurations, it will either automatically merge the changes into place using FTP, or will create a compressed archive of the changed files for the user to copy into place. AutoMOD is also used by the MOD Team members during validation to ensure that the MODX files are valid and the MOD can be successfully installed on a vanilla phpBB installation.

The current version of AutoMOD is 1.0.2. AutoMOD can be downloaded from the AutoMOD information page and support can be obtained in the AutoMOD support forum.

AutoMOD is the successor to EasyMOD, a tool for phpBB2 which was also developed by the phpBB Extensions Team and performed essentially the same task. The last version of EasyMOD was 0.4.0, released on June 30, 2008. Support for EasyMOD is no longer provided since phpBB2 is retired.

===Unified MOD Installation Library (UMIL)===

The Unified MOD Installation Library is a library designed to simplify the installation and uninstallation of the database side of MODs.&lt;ref name=&quot;https://www.phpbb.com/mods/umil&quot;&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; It is designed to be useful for configuring the forum for the new MOD, performing database actions such as adding and removing tables and columns and purging the forum&#x27;s cache. UMIL is GPL licensed and the latest version is 1.0.5. It can be downloaded from the UMIL page. To create a UMI-file automatically, a MOD author can use the Unified MOD Installation File creation tool.

==Security==
In December 2004, a large number of Web sites were defaced by the Santy worm, which used vulnerabilities in outdated versions of phpBB2 to overwrite PHP and HTML pages. There have also been a few times where new releases of phpBB have come out a few days apart, most recently with version 3.2.7 in May 2019. The phpBB Group, attempting to learn from previous failures, performed a codebase security audit before the release of 2.0.18. The phpBB3 codebase received an external security audit in September 2007, which was done by SektionEins. The sixth release candidate of phpBB3 was published following the results of the security audit.

Changes were made to phpBB2 to avoid problems in the future, such as a re-authentication system for the administration panel, backported from phpBB3. This was introduced after a cookie verification issue allowed attackers to gain administrator access.

In November 2005, the phpBB Group announced a new Incident Investigation Team (IIT), a sub-team of their Support Team, which is responsible for assisting users in the cleanup and repair of an attacked phpBB installation and investigating reports of new exploits. The team announced a tracker the following January where administrators of attacked bulletin boards could report an attack, and receive support from the IIT.

The CAPTCHA system in phpBB2 has proven vulnerable to automated registrations, with numerous phpBB-based forums being swamped by forum spam. phpBB3 has improved its anti-spam options available to forum administrators, including a new CAPTCHA system, suspensions, user logging, and other various features. The phpBB team has published recommendations on protecting the boards from spam. Currently the best method is to use a Q&amp;A (question-answer) challenge, which was introduced into phpBB 3.0.6. phpBB3 has a much stronger CAPTCHA system, however during the phpBB3 development/beta phase it was frequently criticised for being difficult to read. The development team has been working on improving its readability prior to phpBB3&#x27;s final release.

Additionally, the teams have announced that each minor release of phpBB3 (3.0.1, 3.0.2, etc.) will be preceded by individual release candidates in an effort to prevent instances where subsequent releases would be only days apart (as happened a couple of times during the 2.0.x line).

phpBB 3 notifies the administrator of new releases via the Administration Control Panel.

==phpBB community==
phpBB has a community of users who contribute to the overall project with content such as Extensions, MODs, and Styles. They also provide supplementary support as assistance to the phpBB Support Team. Community users are encouraged to participate in these support requests and to contribute to the overall betterment of phpBB core code.

==See also==

*Comparison of Internet forum software

==References==
==Further reading==
* Douglass, Robert T., Mike Little, Jared W. Smith, 2005. &quot;Building Online Communities With Drupal, phpBB, and WordPress&quot;, Apress. 
* Stefanov Stoyan, Jeremy Rogers, Mike Lothar, 2005. &quot;Building Online Communities with phpBB 2&quot;, Packt Publishing. 
* Stefanov, Stoyan, Jeremy Rogers, 2006. &quot;phpBB: A User Guide&quot;, Packt Publishing. 

==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q14270" start="0" end="5" title="PhpBB" label="phpBB"/>
<link wikidata="Q168210" start="12" end="26" title="Internet forum" label="Internet forum"/>
<link wikidata="Q59" start="50" end="53" title="PHP" label="PHP"/>
<link wikidata="Q187432" start="54" end="72" title="scripting language" label="scripting language"/>
<link wikidata="Q7603" start="175" end="201" title="GNU General Public License" label="GNU General Public License"/>
<link wikidata="Q506883" start="212" end="232" title="Free and open-source software" label="free and open-source"/>
<link wikidata="Q8513" start="282" end="290" title="database" label="database"/>
<link wikidata="Q787177" start="300" end="307" title="MariaDB" label="MariaDB"/>
<link wikidata="Q215819" start="309" end="329" title="Microsoft SQL Server" label="Microsoft SQL Server"/>
<link wikidata="Q850" start="331" end="336" title="MySQL" label="MySQL"/>
<link wikidata="Q192490" start="338" end="348" title="PostgreSQL" label="PostgreSQL"/>
<link wikidata="Q319417" start="350" end="356" title="SQLite" label="SQLite"/>
<link wikidata="Q185524" start="358" end="373" title="Oracle Database" label="Oracle Database"/>
<link wikidata="Q188951" start="585" end="591" title="Extensible Messaging and Presence Protocol" label="Jabber"/>
<link wikidata="Q467252" start="816" end="819" title="Concurrent Versions System" label="CVS"/>
<link wikidata="Q165400" start="844" end="859" title="SourceForge.net" label="SourceForge.net"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1262" end="1274" title="Paul S. Owen" label="Paul S. Owen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2425187" start="1601" end="1609" title="codebase" label="codebase"/>
<link wikidata="Q128751" start="1915" end="1926" title="source code" label="source code"/>
<link wikidata="Q59" start="1959" end="1962" title="PHP" label="PHP"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3333" end="3364" title="Tom Beddard" label="Tom &amp;quot;subBlue&amp;quot; Beddard"/>
<link wikidata="Q7978623" start="3624" end="3633" title="template engine (web)" label="templated"/>
<link wikidata="Q59" start="3695" end="3698" title="PHP" label="PHP"/>
<link wikidata="Q8811" start="3722" end="3726" title="HTML" label="HTML"/>
<link wikidata="Q3141064" start="3742" end="3762" title="internationalisation" label="internationalisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q8513" start="3878" end="3904" title="database management system" label="database management system"/>
<link wikidata="Q850" start="3916" end="3921" title="MySQL" label="MySQL"/>
<link wikidata="Q192490" start="3923" end="3933" title="PostgreSQL" label="PostgreSQL"/>
<link wikidata="Q215819" start="3935" end="3955" title="Microsoft SQL Server" label="Microsoft SQL Server"/>
<link wikidata="Q80689" start="3961" end="3977" title="Microsoft Access" label="Microsoft Access"/>
<link wikidata="Q14579" start="4651" end="4663" title="Linux kernel" label="Linux kernel"/>
<link wikidata="Q10859422" start="4664" end="4681" title="Software versioning" label="versioning scheme"/>
<link wikidata="Q2578632" start="5705" end="5719" title="security audit" label="security audit"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5752" end="5763" title="SektionEins" label="SektionEins"/>
<link wikidata="Q165400" start="5963" end="5978" title="SourceForge.net" label="SourceForge.net"/>
<link wikidata="Q16997351" start="6278" end="6301" title="Marie Curie Cancer Care" label="Marie Curie Cancer Care"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6350" end="6360" title="Bleep Labs" label="Bleep Labs"/>
<link wikidata="Q20899" start="6468" end="6475" title="podcast" label="podcast"/>
<link wikidata="Q30849" start="6820" end="6826" title="weblog" label="weblog"/>
<link wikidata="Q991293" start="8758" end="8763" title="web cache" label="cache"/>
<link wikidata="Q267956" start="8774" end="8783" title="ATOM feed" label="ATOM feed"/>
<link wikidata="Q484598" start="8812" end="8819" title="CAPTCHA" label="CAPTCHA"/>
<link wikidata="Q188054" start="8859" end="8868" title="reCAPTCHA" label="reCAPTCHA"/>
<link wikidata="Q165194" start="8943" end="8946" title="API" label="API"/>
<link wikidata="Q484598" start="9435" end="9442" title="CAPTCHA" label="CAPTCHA"/>
<link wikidata="Q267956" start="9452" end="9456" title="Atom (web standard)" label="ATOM"/>
<link wikidata="Q991293" start="9480" end="9485" title="web cache" label="cache"/>
<link wikidata="Q6593252" start="9503" end="9524" title="Alternative PHP Cache" label="Alternative PHP Cache"/>
<link wikidata="Q288699" start="9526" end="9538" title="eAccelerator" label="eAccelerator"/>
<link wikidata="Q306661" start="9540" end="9548" title="Memcache" label="Memcache"/>
<link wikidata="Q75699628" start="10077" end="10107" title="Linux version history" label="Linux kernel versioning scheme"/>
<link wikidata="Q134471" start="10417" end="10421" title="AJAX" label="AJAX"/>
<link wikidata="Q617770" start="10511" end="10517" title="BBCode" label="BBCode"/>
<link wikidata="Q45432" start="10526" end="10529" title="RSS" label="RSS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1844938" start="10599" end="10616" title="private messaging" label="private messaging"/>
<link wikidata="Q212108" start="10624" end="10638" title="authentication" label="authentication"/>
<link wikidata="Q244371" start="10651" end="10657" title="OpenID" label="OpenID"/>
<link wikidata="Q499164" start="10948" end="10961" title="Ascraeus Mons" label="Ascraeus Mons"/>
<link wikidata="Q111" start="10994" end="10998" title="Mars" label="Mars"/>
<link wikidata="Q520" start="11001" end="11013" title="Olympus Mons" label="Olympus Mons"/>
<link wikidata="Q14579" start="11257" end="11269" title="Linux kernel" label="Linux kernel"/>
<link wikidata="Q10859422" start="11270" end="11287" title="Software versioning" label="versioning scheme"/>
<link wikidata="Q1322933" start="12509" end="12516" title="Symfony" label="Symfony"/>
<link wikidata="Q1330336" start="12517" end="12530" title="web framework" label="web framework"/>
<link wikidata="Q186055" start="12645" end="12648" title="Git (software)" label="Git"/>
<link wikidata="Q1105534" start="12773" end="12787" title="feature freeze" label="feature freeze"/>
<link wikidata="Q46794" start="13467" end="13477" title="Subversion (software)" label="Subversion"/>
<link wikidata="Q189053" start="13936" end="13958" title="Command-line interface" label="Command-Line Interface"/>
<link wikidata="Q617770" start="13975" end="13981" title="BBCode" label="BBCode"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14062" end="14069" title="PHP#PHP 7" label="PHP 7.1"/>
<link wikidata="Q168210" start="14777" end="14792" title="forum moderator" label="forum moderator"/>
<link wikidata="Q2115" start="15849" end="15852" title="XML" label="XML"/>
<link wikidata="Q189210" start="15989" end="16004" title="web application" label="web application"/>
<link wikidata="Q6368" start="16493" end="16504" title="web browser" label="web browser"/>
<link wikidata="Q32110" start="16523" end="16527" title="XSLT" label="XSLT"/>
<link wikidata="Q42283" start="17055" end="17058" title="FTP" label="FTP"/>
<link wikidata="Q3809412" start="17300" end="17307" title="Vanilla (computing)" label="vanilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q991293" start="18204" end="18209" title="web cache" label="cache"/>
<link wikidata="Q901705" start="18492" end="18497" title="Santy" label="Santy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2578632" start="18902" end="18916" title="security audit" label="security audit"/>
<link wikidata="Q484598" start="19744" end="19751" title="CAPTCHA" label="CAPTCHA"/>
<link wikidata="Q3140915" start="19869" end="19879" title="forum spam" label="forum spam"/>
<link wikidata="Q5155745" start="21244" end="21281" title="Comparison of Internet forum software" label="Comparison of Internet forum software"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="247977" wikidata="Q207831" url="?curid=247977" title="Crested tit">
<text>The crested tit or European crested tit (Lophophanes cristatus) (formerly &quot;Parus cristatus&quot;), is a passerine bird in the tit family Paridae. It is a widespread and common resident breeder in coniferous forests throughout central and northern Europe and in deciduous woodland in France and the Iberian Peninsula. In Great Britain, it is chiefly restricted to the ancient pinewoods of Inverness and Strathspey in Scotland, and seldom strays far from its haunts. A few vagrant crested tits have been seen in England. It is resident, and most individuals do not migrate.

==Taxonomy==
The crested tit was formally described in 1758 by the Swedish naturalist Carl Linnaeus in the tenth edition of his &quot;Systema Naturae&quot; under the binomial name &quot;Parus cristatus&quot;. Linnaeus specified the type locality as Europe but this was restricted to Sweden by German naturalist Johann Jakob Kaup in 1905. The crested tit is now placed together with grey-crested tit in the genus &quot;Lophophanes&quot; that was introduced in 1829 by the German naturalist Johann Jakob Kaup. The current genus name, &quot;Lophophanes&quot;, is from the Ancient Greek &quot;lophos&quot;, &quot;crest&quot;, and 
&quot;phaino&quot;, &quot;to show&quot;. The specific &quot;cristatus&quot; is Latin for &quot;crested&quot;.

This species was formerly placed in &quot;Parus&quot;, but the distinctness of &quot;Lophophanes&quot; is well supported, and it is now recognised by the American Ornithologists&#x27; Union and the British Ornithologists&#x27; Union as a distinct genus.

Seven subspecies are recognised:
* &quot;L. c. scoticus&quot; Pražák, 1897 – central north Scotland
* &quot;L. c. abadiei&quot; (Jouard, 1929) – west France
* &quot;L. c. weigoldi&quot; (Tratz, 1914) – west, south Iberian Peninsula
* &quot;L. c. cristatus&quot; (Linnaeus, 1758) – north, east Europe to the Carpathian Mts.
* &quot;L. c. baschkirikus&quot; Snigirewski, 1931 – southwest, central Ural Mountains
* &quot;L. c. mitratus&quot; (Brehm, CL, 1831) – central Europe to northeast Spain, the Alps and north Balkans
* &quot;L. c. bureschi&quot; (von Jordans, 1940) – Albania to Bulgaria and Greece

==Behaviour and ecology==

It is an easy tit to recognise, for besides its erectile crest, the tip of which is often recurved, its gorget and collar are distinctive. It is, like other tits, talkative, and birds keep up a constant &quot;zee, zee, zee&quot; , similar to that of the coal tit.

It makes a nest in a hole in rotting stumps. This bird often feeds low down in trees, but although not shy, it is not always easily approached. It will join winter tit flocks with other species.

Like other tits it is found in pairs and it feeds on insects (including caterpillars) and seeds.

==Gallery==
==References==
==External links==
*Crested tit videos, photos &amp; sounds on the Internet Bird Collection
*Song of the crested tit (Real Audio soundfile from Sveriges Radio P2)
*Ageing and sexing (PDF; 2.3 MB) by Javier Blasco-Zumeta &amp; Gerd-Michael Heinze</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q207831" start="4" end="15" title="Crested tit" label="crested tit"/>
<link wikidata="Q207831" start="19" end="39" title="Crested tit" label="European crested tit"/>
<link wikidata="Q25341" start="109" end="118" title="passerine" label="passerine"/>
<link wikidata="Q5113" start="119" end="123" title="bird" label="bird"/>
<link wikidata="Q168473" start="131" end="134" title="Tit (bird)" label="tit"/>
<link wikidata="Q132825" start="201" end="208" title="conifer" label="conifer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131316" start="266" end="275" title="deciduous" label="deciduous"/>
<link wikidata="Q3241565" start="276" end="284" title="woodland" label="woodland"/>
<link wikidata="Q12837" start="303" end="320" title="Iberian Peninsula" label="Iberian Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q23666" start="325" end="338" title="Great Britain" label="Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q216507" start="568" end="575" title="bird migration" label="migrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1361864" start="611" end="629" title="Species description" label="formally described"/>
<link wikidata="Q1043" start="664" end="677" title="Carl Linnaeus" label="Carl Linnaeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q4547210" start="685" end="698" title="10th edition of Systema Naturae" label="tenth edition"/>
<link wikidata="Q29270" start="712" end="727" title="Systema Naturae" label="Systema Naturae"/>
<link wikidata="Q36642" start="744" end="757" title="binomial nomenclature" label="binomial name"/>
<link wikidata="Q3707858" start="810" end="823" title="type locality (biology)" label="type locality"/>
<link wikidata="Q31651" start="889" end="906" title="Johann Jakob Kaup" label="Johann Jakob Kaup"/>
<link wikidata="Q2665643" start="960" end="976" title="grey-crested tit" label="grey-crested tit"/>
<link wikidata="Q663244" start="996" end="1007" title="Lophophanes" label="Lophophanes"/>
<link wikidata="Q31651" start="1067" end="1084" title="Johann Jakob Kaup" label="Johann Jakob Kaup"/>
<link wikidata="Q35497" start="1147" end="1160" title="Ancient Greek" label="Ancient Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="1284" end="1289" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q465985" start="1470" end="1505" title="American Ornithologists&amp;#x27; Union" label="American Ornithologists&amp;#x27; Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q640771" start="1514" end="1548" title="British Ornithologists&amp;#x27; Union" label="British Ornithologists&amp;#x27; Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q68947" start="1577" end="1587" title="subspecies" label="subspecies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1705495" start="1633" end="1639" title="Josef Prokop Pražák" label="Pražák"/>
<link wikidata="Q3131355" start="1700" end="1706" title="Henri Jouard" label="Jouard"/>
<link wikidata="Q75441" start="1758" end="1763" title="Eduard Paul Tratz" label="Tratz"/>
<link wikidata="Q12837" start="1785" end="1802" title="Iberian Peninsula" label="Iberian Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q1043" start="1834" end="1842" title="Carl Linnaeus" label="Linnaeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q96738835" start="1927" end="1938" title="Sergey Snigirewski" label="Snigirewski"/>
<link wikidata="Q21112" start="2011" end="2020" title="Christian Ludwig Brehm" label="Brehm, CL"/>
<link wikidata="Q191096" start="2456" end="2464" title="coal tit" label="coal tit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1390" start="2716" end="2722" title="insect" label="insect"/>
<link wikidata="Q81825" start="2735" end="2746" title="caterpillar" label="caterpillar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1810677" start="2932" end="2949" title="SR P2" label="Sveriges Radio P2"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="247978" wikidata="Q355356" url="?curid=247978" title="Adele ring">
<text>In mathematics, the adele ring of a global field (also adelic ring, ring of adeles or ring of adèles) is a central object of class field theory, a branch of algebraic number theory. It is the restricted product of all the completions of the global field and is an example of a self-dual topological ring.

An adele derives from a particular kind of [[idele]]. &quot;Idele&quot; derives from the French &quot;idèle&quot; and was coined by the French mathematician Claude Chevalley. The word stands for &#x27;ideal element&#x27; (abbreviated: id.el.). Adele (French: &quot;adèle&quot;) stands for &#x27;additive idele&#x27; (that is, additive ideal element).

The ring of adeles allows one to describe the Artin reciprocity law, which is a generalisation of quadratic reciprocity, and other reciprocity laws over finite fields. In addition, it is a classical theorem from Weil that formula_1-bundles on an algebraic curve over a finite field can be described in terms of adeles for a reductive group formula_1. Adeles are also connected with the adelic algebraic groups and adelic curves.

The study of geometry of numbers over the ring of adeles of a number field is called adelic geometry.

==Definition==

Let formula_3 be a global field (a finite extension of formula_4 or the function field of a curve formula_5 over a finite field). The adele ring of formula_3 is the subring
:formula_7
consisting of the tuples formula_8 where formula_9 lies in the subring formula_10 for all but finitely many places formula_11. Here the index formula_11 ranges over all valuations of the global field formula_3, formula_14 is the completion at that valuation and formula_15 the corresponding valuation ring.

=== Motivation ===
The ring of adeles solves the technical problem of &quot;doing analysis on the rational numbers formula_4.&quot; The classical solution was to pass to the standard metric completion formula_17 and use analytic techniques there. But, as was learned later on, there are many more absolute values other than the Euclidean distance, one for each prime number formula_18, as classified by Ostrowski&#x27;s theorem. The Euclidean absolute value, denoted formula_19, is only one among many others, formula_20, but the ring of adeles makes it possible to comprehend and . This has the advantage of enabling analytic techniques while also retaining information about the primes, since their structure is embedded by the restricted infinite product.

The purpose of the adele ring is to look at all completions of formula_3 at once. The adele ring is defined with the restricted product, rather than the Cartesian product. There are two reasons for this:
* For each element of formula_3 the valuations are zero for almost all places, i.e., for all places except a finite number. So, the global field can be embedded in the restricted product.
* The restricted product is a locally compact space, while the Cartesian product is not. Therefore, there cannot be any application of harmonic analysis to the Cartesian product. This is because local compactness ensures the existence (and uniqueness) of Haar measure, a crucial tool in analysis on groups in general.

==== Why the restricted product? ====
The restricted infinite product is a required technical condition for giving the number field formula_4 a lattice structure inside of formula_24, making it possible to build a theory of Fourier analysis (cf. Harmonic analysis) in the adelic setting. This is analogous to the situation in algebraic number theory where the ring of integers of an algebraic number field embedsformula_25as a lattice. With the power of a new theory of Fourier analysis, Tate was able to prove a special class of L-functions and the Dedekind zeta functions were meromorphic on the complex plane. Another natural reason for why this technical condition holds can be seen by constructing the ring of adeles as a tensor product of rings. If defining the ring of integral adeles formula_26 as the ringformula_27then the ring of adeles can be equivalently defined asformula_28The restricted product structure becomes transparent after looking at explicit elements in this ring. The image of an element formula_29 inside of the unrestricted product formula_30 is the element formula_31 The factor formula_32 lies in formula_33 whenever formula_34 is not a prime factor of formula_35, which is the case for all but finitely many primes formula_34.

=== Origin of the name ===
The term &quot;idele&quot; () is an invention of the French mathematician Claude Chevalley (1909–1984) and stands for &quot;ideal element&quot; (abbreviated: id.el.). The term &quot;adele&quot; (French: ) stands for additive idele. Thus, an adele is an additive ideal element.

==Examples==

=== Ring of adeles for the rational numbers ===
The rationals formula_37 have a valuation for every prime number formula_34, with formula_39, and one infinite valuation &quot;∞&quot; with formula_40. Thus an element of
:formula_41
is a real number along with a &quot;p&quot;-adic rational for each &quot;formula_34&quot; of which all but finitely many are &quot;p&quot;-adic integers.

=== Ring of adeles for the function field of the projective line ===
Secondly, take the function field formula_43 of the projective line over a finite field. Its valuations correspond to points formula_44 of formula_45, i.e. maps over formula_46
:formula_47
For instance, there are formula_48 points of the form formula_49. In this case formula_50 is the completed stalk of the structure sheaf at formula_44 (i.e. functions on a formal neighbourhood of formula_44) and formula_53 is its fraction field. Thus
:formula_54
The same holds for any smooth proper curve formula_5 over a finite field, the restricted product being over all points of formula_56.

==Related notions==

The group of units in the adele ring is called the idele group
:formula_57.
The quotient of the ideles by the subgroup formula_58 is called the idele class group
:formula_59
The integral adeles are the subring
:formula_60

==Applications==

=== Stating Artin reciprocity ===
The Artin reciprocity law says that for a global field formula_3,
:formula_62
where formula_63 is the maximal abelian algebraic extension of formula_3 and formula_65 means the profinite completion of the group.

=== Giving adelic formulation of Picard group of a curve ===
If &quot;formula_5&quot; is a smooth proper curve then its Picard group is
:formula_67
and its divisor group is formula_68. Similarly, if formula_1 is a semisimple algebraic group (e.g. formula_70, it also holds for formula_71) then Weil uniformisation says that
:formula_72
Applying this to formula_73 gives the result on the Picard group.

=== Tate&#x27;s thesis ===
There is a topology on formula_74 for which the quotient formula_75 is compact, allowing one to do harmonic analysis on it. John Tate in his thesis &quot;Fourier analysis in number fields and Hecke Zeta functions&quot; proved results about Dirichlet L-functions using Fourier analysis on the adele ring and the idele group. Therefore, the adele ring and the idele group have been applied to study the Riemann zeta function and more general zeta functions and the L-functions.

=== Proving Serre duality on a smooth curve ===
If formula_76 is a smooth proper curve &quot;over the complex numbers&quot;, one can define the adeles of its function field formula_77 exactly as the finite fields case. John Tate proved that Serre duality on &quot;formula_76&quot;
:formula_79
can be deduced by working with this adele ring formula_80. Here &quot;L&quot; is a line bundle on &quot;formula_76&quot;.

== Notation and basic definitions ==

=== Global fields ===
Throughout this article, formula_3 is a global field, meaning it is either a number field (a finite extension of formula_83) or a global function field (a finite extension of formula_84 for formula_34 prime and formula_86). By definition a finite extension of a global field is itself a global field.

=== Valuations ===
For a valuation formula_87 of formula_3 it can be written formula_89 for the completion of formula_3 with respect to formula_91 If formula_87 is discrete it can be written formula_93 for the valuation ring of formula_89 and formula_95 for the maximal ideal of formula_96 If this is a principal ideal denoting the uniformising element by formula_97 A non-Archimedean valuation is written as formula_98 or formula_99 and an Archimedean valuation as formula_100 Then assume all valuations to be non-trivial.

There is a one-to-one identification of valuations and absolute values. Fix a constant formula_101 the valuation formula_87 is assigned the absolute value formula_103 defined as:

:formula_104

Conversely, the absolute value formula_105 is assigned the valuation formula_106 defined as:

:formula_107

A place of formula_3 is a representative of an equivalence class of valuations (or absolute values) of formula_109 Places corresponding to non-Archimedean valuations are called &quot;finite&quot;, whereas places corresponding to Archimedean valuations are called &quot;infinite&quot;. Infinite places of a global field form a finite set, which is denoted by formula_110

Define formula_111 and let formula_112 be its group of units. Then formula_113

=== Finite extensions ===
Let formula_114 be a finite extension of the global field formula_109 Let formula_116 be a place of formula_117 and formula_87 a place of formula_109 If the absolute value formula_120 restricted to formula_3 is in the equivalence class of formula_87, then formula_116 lies above formula_124 which is denoted by formula_125 and defined as: 

:formula_126

(Note that both products are finite.)

If formula_127, formula_89 can be embedded in formula_129 Therefore, formula_89 is embedded diagonally in formula_131 With this embedding formula_132 is a commutative algebra over formula_89 with degree

:formula_134

==The adele ring==

The set of finite adeles of a global field formula_135 denoted formula_136 is defined as the restricted product of formula_89 with respect to the formula_138

:formula_139

It is equipped with the restricted product topology, the topology generated by restricted open rectangles, which have the following form:

:formula_140

where formula_141 is a finite set of (finite) places and formula_142 are open. With component-wise addition and multiplication formula_143 is also a ring.

The adele ring of a global field formula_3 is defined as the product of formula_143 with the product of the completions of formula_3 at its infinite places. The number of infinite places is finite and the completions are either formula_147 or formula_148 In short:

:formula_149

With addition and multiplication defined as component-wise the adele ring is a ring. The elements of the adele ring are called adeles of formula_109 In the following, it is written as

:formula_151

although this is generally not a restricted product.

Remark. Global function fields do not have any infinite places and therefore the finite adele ring equals the adele ring.

:Lemma. There is a natural embedding of formula_3 into formula_153 given by the diagonal map: formula_154

Proof. If formula_155 then formula_156 for almost all formula_91 This shows the map is well-defined. It is also injective because the embedding of formula_3 in formula_89 is injective for all formula_91

Remark. By identifying formula_3 with its image under the diagonal map it is regarded as a subring of formula_162 The elements of formula_3 are called the principal adeles of formula_162

Definition. Let formula_165 be a set of places of formula_109 Define the set of the formula_165-adeles of formula_3 as

: formula_169

Furthermore, if 

:formula_170

the result is: formula_171

===The adele ring of rationals===

By Ostrowski&#x27;s theorem the places of formula_83 are formula_173 it is possible to identify a prime formula_34 with the equivalence class of the formula_34-adic absolute value and formula_176 with the equivalence class of the absolute value formula_19 defined as:

:formula_178

The completion of formula_83 with respect to the place formula_34 is formula_181 with valuation ring formula_182 For the place formula_176 the completion is formula_184 Thus:

:formula_185

Or for short

: formula_186

the difference between restricted and unrestricted product topology can be illustrated using a sequence in formula_187:

:Lemma. Consider the following sequence in formula_187:
::formula_189
:In the product topology this converges to formula_190, but it does not converge at all in the restricted product topology.
Proof. In product topology convergence corresponds to the convergence in each coordinate, which is trivial because the sequences become stationary. The sequence doesn&#x27;t converge in restricted product topology. For each adele formula_191 and for each restricted open rectangle formula_192 it has: formula_193 for formula_194 and therefore formula_193 for all formula_196 As a result formula_197 for almost all formula_198 In this consideration, formula_141 and formula_200 are finite subsets of the set of all places.

===Alternative definition for number fields===

Definition (profinite integers). The profinite integers are defined as the profinite completion of the rings formula_201 with the partial order formula_202 i.e.,

:formula_203

:Lemma. formula_204

Proof. This follows from the Chinese Remainder Theorem.

:Lemma. formula_205

Proof. Use the universal property of the tensor product. Define a formula_206-bilinear function

:formula_207

This is well-defined because for a given formula_208 with formula_209 co-prime there are only finitely many primes dividing formula_210 Let formula_211 be another formula_206-module with a formula_206-bilinear map formula_214 It must be the case that formula_215 factors through formula_216 uniquely, i.e., there exists a unique formula_206-linear map formula_218 such that formula_219 formula_220 can be defined as follows: for a given formula_221 there exist formula_222 and formula_223 such that formula_224 for all formula_225 Define formula_226 One can show formula_220 is well-defined, formula_206-linear, satisfies formula_229 and is unique with these properties.

:Corollary. Define formula_230 This results in an algebraic isomorphism formula_231

Proof. formula_232

:Lemma. For a number field formula_233

Remark. Using formula_234 where there are formula_235 summands, give the right side receives the product topology and transport this topology via the isomorphism onto formula_236

===The adele ring of a finite extension===

If formula_114 be a finite extension, then formula_117 is a global field. Thus formula_239 is defined, and formula_240 formula_153 can be identified with a subgroup of formula_242 Map formula_243 to formula_244 where formula_245 for formula_246 Then formula_247 is in the subgroup formula_248 if formula_249 for formula_250 and formula_251 for all formula_252 lying above the same place formula_87 of formula_109

:Lemma. If formula_114 is a finite extension, then formula_256 both algebraically and topologically.

With the help of this isomorphism, the inclusion formula_257 is given by

:formula_258

Furthermore, the principal adeles in formula_153 can be identified with a subgroup of principal adeles in formula_239 via the map

:formula_261

Proof. Let formula_262 be a basis of formula_117 over formula_109 Then for almost all formula_124

:formula_266

Furthermore, there are the following isomorphisms:

: formula_267

For the second use the map:

:formula_268

in which formula_269 is the canonical embedding and formula_270 The restricted product is taken on both sides with respect to formula_271

: formula_272

:Corollary. As additive groups formula_273 where the right side has formula_274 summands.

The set of principal adeles in formula_239 is identified with the set formula_276 where the left side has formula_274 summands and formula_3 is considered as a subset of formula_162

===The adele ring of vector-spaces and algebras===

:Lemma. Suppose formula_280 is a finite set of places of formula_3 and define
::formula_282
:Equip formula_283 with the product topology and define addition and multiplication component-wise. Then formula_283 is a locally compact topological ring.

Remark. If formula_285 is another finite set of places of formula_3 containing formula_287 then formula_283 is an open subring of formula_289

Now, an alternative characterisation of the adele ring can be presented. The adele ring is the union of all sets formula_283:

:formula_291

Equivalently formula_153 is the set of all formula_293 so that formula_294 for almost all formula_295 The topology of formula_153 is induced by the requirement that all formula_283 be open subrings of formula_162 Thus, formula_153 is a locally compact topological ring.

Fix a place formula_87 of formula_109 Let formula_287 be a finite set of places of formula_135 containing formula_87 and formula_305 Define

:formula_306

Then:

:formula_307

Furthermore, define

:formula_308

where formula_287 runs through all finite sets containing formula_310 Then:

:formula_311

via the map formula_312 The entire procedure above holds with a finite subset formula_313 instead of formula_314

By construction of formula_315 there is a natural embedding: formula_316 Furthermore, there exists a natural projection formula_317

====The adele ring of a vector-space====

Let formula_141 be a finite dimensional vector-space over formula_3 and formula_320 a basis for formula_141 over formula_109 For each place formula_87 of formula_3:

:formula_325

The adele ring of formula_141 is defined as

:formula_327

This definition is based on the alternative description of the adele ring as a tensor product equipped with the same topology that was defined when giving an alternate definition of adele ring for number fields. Next, formula_328 is equipped with the restricted product topology. Then formula_329 and formula_141 is embedded in formula_328 naturally via the map formula_332

An alternative definition of the topology on formula_328 can be provided. Consider all linear maps: formula_334 Using the natural embeddings formula_335 and formula_336 extend these linear maps to: formula_337 The topology on formula_328 is the coarsest topology for which all these extensions are continuous.

The topology can be defined in a different way. Fixing a basis for formula_141 over formula_3 results in an isomorphism formula_341 Therefore fixing a basis induces an isomorphism formula_342 The left-hand side is supplied with the product topology and transport this topology with the isomorphism onto the right-hand side. The topology doesn&#x27;t depend on the choice of the basis, because another basis defines a second isomorphism. By composing both isomorphisms, a linear homeomorphism which transfers the two topologies into each other is obtained. More formally

:formula_343

where the sums have formula_344 summands. In case of formula_345 the definition above is consistent with the results about the adele ring of a finite extension formula_346

====The adele ring of an algebra====

Let formula_347 be a finite-dimensional algebra over formula_109 In particular, formula_347 is a finite-dimensional vector-space over formula_109 As a consequence, formula_351 is defined and formula_352 Since there is multiplication on formula_153 and formula_354 a multiplication on formula_355 can be defined via:

:formula_356

As a consequence, formula_351 is an algebra with a unit over formula_162 Let formula_359 be a finite subset of formula_354 containing a basis for formula_347 over formula_109 For any finite place formula_87 , formula_364 is defined as the formula_93-module generated by formula_359 in formula_367 For each finite set of places, formula_368 define

:formula_369

One can show there is a finite set formula_370 so that formula_371 is an open subring of formula_372 if formula_373 Furthermore formula_351 is the union of all these subrings and for formula_375 the definition above is consistent with the definition of the adele ring.

===Trace and norm on the adele ring===

Let formula_114 be a finite extension. Since formula_377 and formula_378 from the Lemma above, formula_153 can be interpreted as a closed subring of formula_242 For this embedding, write formula_381. Explicitly for all places formula_116 of formula_117 above formula_87 and for any formula_385

Let formula_386 be a tower of global fields. Then:

:formula_387

Furthermore, restricted to the principal adeles formula_388 is the natural injection formula_389

Let formula_320 be a basis of the field extension formula_346 Then each formula_392 can be written as formula_393 where formula_394 are unique. The map formula_395 is continuous. Define formula_396 depending on formula_397 via the equations:

:formula_398

Now, define the trace and norm of formula_397 as:

:formula_400

These are the trace and the determinant of the linear map

:formula_401

They are continuous maps on the adele ring, and they fulfil the usual equations:

: formula_402

Furthermore, for formula_403formula_404 and formula_405 are identical to the trace and norm of the field extension formula_346 For a tower of fields formula_407 the result is:

: formula_408

Moreover, it can be proven that:

:formula_409

===Properties of the adele ring===

:Theorem. For every set of places formula_410 is a locally compact topological ring.

Remark. The result above also holds for the adele ring of vector-spaces and algebras over formula_109

:Theorem. formula_3 is discrete and cocompact in formula_162 In particular, formula_3 is closed in formula_162

Proof. Prove the case formula_416 To show formula_417 is discrete it is sufficient to show the existence of a neighbourhood of formula_418 which contains no other rational number. The general case follows via translation. Define

:formula_419

formula_420 is an open neighbourhood of formula_421 It is claimed that formula_422 Let formula_423 then formula_424 and formula_425 for all formula_34 and therefore formula_427 Additionally, formula_428 and therefore formula_429 Next, to show compactness, define:

:formula_430

Each element in formula_431 has a representative in formula_432 that is for each formula_433 there exists formula_424 such that formula_435 Let formula_436 be arbitrary and formula_34 be a prime for which formula_438 Then there exists formula_439 with formula_440 and formula_441 Replace formula_397 with formula_443 and let formula_444 be another prime. Then:

:formula_445 Therefore, formula_446 is surjective.

The other equations follow similarly.

====Characterisation of the idele group====

:Theorem. Let formula_3 be a number field. There exists a finite set of places formula_448 such that:
::formula_449

Proof. The class number of a number field is finite so let formula_450 be the ideals, representing the classes in formula_451 These ideals are generated by a finite number of prime ideals formula_452 Let formula_165 be a finite set of places containing formula_454 and the finite places corresponding to formula_452 Consider the isomorphism:

:formula_456

induced by

:formula_457

At infinite places the statement is immediate, so the statement has been proved for finite places. The inclusion ″formula_458″ is obvious. Let formula_459 The corresponding ideal formula_460 belongs to a class formula_461 meaning formula_462 for a principal ideal formula_463 The idele formula_464 maps to the ideal formula_465 under the map formula_466 That means formula_467 Since the prime ideals in formula_465 are in formula_448 it follows formula_470 for all formula_471 that means formula_472 for all formula_473 It follows, that formula_474 therefore formula_475

==Applications==

===Finiteness of the class number of a number field===

In the previous section the fact that the class number of a number field is finite had been used. Here this statement can be proved:

:Theorem (finiteness of the class number of a number field). Let formula_3 be a number field. Then formula_477

Proof. The map

:formula_478

is surjective and therefore formula_479 is the continuous image of the compact set formula_480 Thus, formula_479 is compact. In addition, it is discrete and so finite.

Remark. There is a similar result for the case of a global function field. In this case, the so-called divisor group is defined. It can be shown that the quotient of the set of all divisors of degree formula_418 by the set of the principal divisors is a finite group.

===Group of units and Dirichlet&#x27;s unit theorem===

Let formula_483 be a finite set of places. Define

:formula_484

Then formula_485 is a subgroup of formula_486 containing all elements formula_487 satisfying formula_488 for all formula_489 Since formula_490 is discrete in formula_491 formula_485 is a discrete subgroup of formula_493 and with the same argument, formula_485 is discrete in formula_495

An alternative definition is: formula_496 where formula_497 is a subring of formula_3 defined by

:formula_499

As a consequence, formula_497 contains all elements formula_501 which fulfil formula_502 for all formula_489

:Lemma 1. Let formula_504 The following set is finite:
::formula_505

Proof. Define

:formula_506

formula_507 is compact and the set described above is the intersection of formula_507 with the discrete subgroup formula_509 in formula_510 and therefore finite.

:Lemma 2. Let formula_141 be set of all formula_512 such that formula_513 for all formula_91 Then formula_515 the group of all roots of unity of formula_109 In particular it is finite and cyclic.

Proof. All roots of unity of formula_3 have absolute value formula_518 so formula_519 For converse note that Lemma 1 with formula_520 and any formula_287 implies formula_141 is finite. Moreover formula_523 for each finite set of places formula_524 Finally suppose there exists formula_525 which is not a root of unity of formula_109 Then formula_527 for all formula_528 contradicting the finiteness of formula_529

:Unit Theorem. formula_485 is the direct product of formula_141 and a group isomorphic to formula_532 where formula_533 if formula_534 and formula_535 if formula_536

:Dirichlet&#x27;s Unit Theorem. Let formula_3 be a number field. Then formula_538 where formula_539 is the finite cyclic group of all roots of unity of formula_540 is the number of real embeddings of formula_3 and formula_542 is the number of conjugate pairs of complex embeddings of formula_109 It stands, that formula_544

Remark. The Unit Theorem generalises Dirichlet&#x27;s Unit Theorem. To see this, let formula_3 be a number field. It is already known that formula_546 set formula_547 and note formula_548 

Then there is:

: formula_549

===Approximation theorems===

:Weak Approximation Theorem. Let formula_550 be inequivalent valuations of formula_109 Let formula_552 be the completion of formula_3 with respect to formula_554 Embed formula_3 diagonally in formula_556 Then formula_3 is everywhere dense in formula_556 In other words, for each formula_559 and for each formula_560 there exists formula_501 such that:
::formula_562

:Strong Approximation Theorem. Let formula_563 be a place of formula_109 Define
::formula_565
:Then formula_3 is dense in formula_567

Remark. The global field is discrete in its adele ring. The strong approximation theorem tells us that, if one place (or more) is omitted, the property of discreteness of formula_3 is turned into a denseness of formula_109

===Hasse principle===

:Hasse-Minkowski Theorem. A quadratic form on formula_3 is zero, if and only if, the quadratic form is zero in each completion formula_571

Remark. This is the Hasse principle for quadratic forms. For polynomials of degree larger than 2 the Hasse principle isn&#x27;t valid in general. The idea of the Hasse principle (also known as local–global principle) is to solve a given problem of a number field formula_3 by doing so in its completions formula_89 and then concluding on a solution in formula_109

===Characters on the adele ring===

Definition. Let formula_1 be a locally compact abelian group. The character group of formula_1 is the set of all characters of formula_1 and is denoted by formula_578 Equivalently formula_579 is the set of all continuous group homomorphisms from formula_1 to formula_581 Equip formula_579 with the topology of uniform convergence on compact subsets of formula_583 One can show that formula_579 is also a locally compact abelian group.

:Theorem. The adele ring is &quot;self-dual&quot;: formula_585

Proof. By reduction to local coordinates, it is sufficient to show each formula_89 is self-dual. This can be done by using a fixed character of formula_571 The idea has been illustrated by showing formula_147 is self-dual. Define:

:formula_589

Then the following map is an isomorphism which respects topologies:

:formula_590

:Theorem (algebraic and continuous duals of the adele ring). Let formula_591 be a non-trivial character of formula_248 which is trivial on formula_109 Let formula_141 be a finite-dimensional vector-space over formula_109 Let formula_596 and formula_597 be the algebraic duals of formula_141 and formula_599 Denote the topological dual of formula_328 by formula_601 and use formula_602 and formula_603 to indicate the natural bilinear pairings on formula_604 and formula_605 Then the formula formula_606 for all formula_607 determines an isomorphism formula_608 of formula_597 onto formula_610 where formula_611 and formula_612 Moreover, if formula_613 fulfils formula_614 for all formula_615 then formula_616

===Tate&#x27;s thesis===

With the help of the characters of formula_248 Fourier analysis can be done on the adele ring. John Tate in his thesis &quot;Fourier analysis in Number Fields and Hecke Zeta Functions&quot; proved results about Dirichlet L-functions using Fourier analysis on the adele ring and the idele group. Therefore, the adele ring and the idele group have been applied to study the Riemann zeta function and more general zeta functions and the L-functions. Adelic forms of these functions can be defined and represented as integrals over the adele ring or the idele group, with respect to corresponding Haar measures. Functional equations and meromorphic continuations of these functions can be shown. For example, for all formula_618 with formula_619

:formula_620

where formula_621 is the unique Haar measure on formula_622 normalised such that formula_623 has volume one and is extended by zero to the finite adele ring. As a result, the Riemann zeta function can be written as an integral over (a subset of) the adele ring.

===Automorphic forms===

The theory of automorphic forms is a generalisation of Tate&#x27;s thesis by replacing the idele group with analogous higher dimensional groups. To see this note:

:formula_624

Based on these identification a natural generalisation would be to replace the idele group and the 1-idele with:

:formula_625

And finally

:formula_626

where formula_627 is the centre of formula_628 Then it define an automorphic form as an element of formula_629 In other words an automorphic form is a function on formula_630 satisfying certain algebraic and analytic conditions. For studying automorphic forms, it is important to know the representations of the group formula_631 It is also possible to study automorphic L-functions, which can be described as integrals over formula_631

Generalise even further is possible by replacing formula_83 with a number field and formula_634 with an arbitrary reductive algebraic group.

===Further applications===

A generalisation of Artin reciprocity law leads to the connection of representations of formula_635 and of Galois representations of formula_3 (Langlands program).

The idele class group is a key object of class field theory, which describes abelian extensions of the field. The product of the local reciprocity maps in local class field theory gives a homomorphism of the idele group to the Galois group of the maximal abelian extension of the global field. The Artin reciprocity law, which is a sweeping generalisation of the Gauss quadratic reciprocity law, states that the product vanishes on the multiplicative group of the number field. Thus, the global reciprocity map of the idele class group to the abelian part of the absolute Galois group of the field will be obtained.

The self-duality of the adele ring of the function field of a curve over a finite field easily implies the Riemann–Roch theorem and the duality theory for the curve.

==References==
==Sources==
* 366 pages.
* 595 pages.
* 294 pages.
* 250 pages.

== External links ==

* What problem do the adeles solve?
* Some good books on adeles</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q395" start="3" end="14" title="mathematics" label="mathematics"/>
<link wikidata="Q355356" start="20" end="30" title="Adele ring" label="adele ring"/>
<link wikidata="Q1531713" start="36" end="48" title="global field" label="global field"/>
<link wikidata="Q355356" start="55" end="66" title="Adele ring" label="adelic ring"/>
<link wikidata="Q355356" start="68" end="82" title="Adele ring" label="ring of adeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q355356" start="86" end="100" title="Adele ring" label="ring of adèles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1744580" start="125" end="143" title="class field theory" label="class field theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q613048" start="157" end="180" title="algebraic number theory" label="algebraic number theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q7316304" start="192" end="210" title="restricted product" label="restricted product"/>
<link wikidata="Q848569" start="222" end="233" title="Complete metric space" label="completions"/>
<link wikidata="Q1755512" start="277" end="286" title="Duality (mathematics)" label="self-dual"/>
<link wikidata="Q922339" start="287" end="303" title="topological ring" label="topological ring"/>
<link wikidata="Q355356" start="349" end="358" title="Adele ring" label="[[idele]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q634850" start="463" end="479" title="Claude Chevalley" label="Claude Chevalley"/>
<link wikidata="Q355356" start="550" end="555" title="Adele ring" label="Adele"/>
<link wikidata="Q713069" start="704" end="725" title="Artin reciprocity law" label="Artin reciprocity law"/>
<link wikidata="Q472883" start="756" end="777" title="quadratic reciprocity" label="quadratic reciprocity"/>
<link wikidata="Q7302492" start="789" end="804" title="reciprocity law" label="reciprocity law"/>
<link wikidata="Q728368" start="811" end="817" title="List of mathematical jargon" label="finite"/>
<link wikidata="Q65943" start="857" end="864" title="theorem" label="theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q323232" start="870" end="874" title="André Weil" label="Weil"/>
<link wikidata="Q17104225" start="880" end="897" title="Torsor (algebraic geometry)" label="formula_1-bundles"/>
<link wikidata="Q266237" start="904" end="919" title="algebraic curve" label="algebraic curve"/>
<link wikidata="Q1006450" start="982" end="997" title="reductive group" label="reductive group"/>
<link wikidata="Q17104225" start="998" end="1007" title="Torsor (algebraic geometry)" label="formula_1"/>
<link wikidata="Q525964" start="1044" end="1066" title="adelic algebraic group" label="adelic algebraic group"/>
<link wikidata="Q1466519" start="1101" end="1120" title="geometry of numbers" label="geometry of numbers"/>
<link wikidata="Q616608" start="1150" end="1162" title="number field" label="number field"/>
<link wikidata="Q355356" start="1173" end="1188" title="Adele ring" label="adelic geometry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1531713" start="1226" end="1238" title="global field" label="global field"/>
<link wikidata="Q929536" start="1372" end="1379" title="subring" label="subring"/>
<link wikidata="Q613048" start="1499" end="1505" title="Place (mathematics)" label="places"/>
<link wikidata="Q852757" start="1560" end="1570" title="Valuation (algebra)" label="valuations"/>
<link wikidata="Q3685258" start="1620" end="1630" title="Completion of a ring" label="completion"/>
<link wikidata="Q12013681" start="1682" end="1696" title="valuation ring" label="valuation ring"/>
<link wikidata="Q4669840" start="1996" end="2011" title="Absolute value (algebra)" label="absolute values"/>
<link wikidata="Q847073" start="2027" end="2045" title="Euclidean distance" label="Euclidean distance"/>
<link wikidata="Q2919401" start="2102" end="2126" title="Ostrowski&amp;#x27;s theorem" label="Ostrowski&amp;#x27;s theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q173740" start="2612" end="2629" title="Cartesian product" label="Cartesian product"/>
<link wikidata="Q583034" start="2881" end="2902" title="locally compact space" label="locally compact space"/>
<link wikidata="Q876215" start="2986" end="3003" title="harmonic analysis" label="harmonic analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1162676" start="3106" end="3118" title="Haar measure" label="Haar measure"/>
<link wikidata="Q7316304" start="3212" end="3239" title="Restricted product" label="restricted infinite product"/>
<link wikidata="Q876215" start="3416" end="3433" title="Harmonic analysis" label="Harmonic analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q351822" start="3658" end="3662" title="John Tate (mathematician)" label="Tate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1789063" start="3700" end="3710" title="L-function" label="L-function"/>
<link wikidata="Q1182160" start="3720" end="3742" title="Dedekind zeta function" label="Dedekind zeta function"/>
<link wikidata="Q217616" start="3749" end="3760" title="Meromorphic function" label="meromorphic"/>
<link wikidata="Q634850" start="4530" end="4546" title="Claude Chevalley" label="Claude Chevalley"/>
<link wikidata="Q311627" start="5009" end="5027" title="P-adic number" label="&amp;quot;p&amp;quot;-adic"/>
<link wikidata="Q764115" start="5255" end="5270" title="projective line" label="projective line"/>
<link wikidata="Q3685258" start="5489" end="5498" title="Completion of a ring" label="completed"/>
<link wikidata="Q168344" start="5512" end="5527" title="structure sheaf" label="structure sheaf"/>
<link wikidata="Q713069" start="6089" end="6110" title="Artin reciprocity law" label="Artin reciprocity law"/>
<link wikidata="Q318705" start="6195" end="6222" title="Abelian extension" label="abelian algebraic extension"/>
<link wikidata="Q1428923" start="6261" end="6270" title="Profinite group" label="profinite"/>
<link wikidata="Q2042963" start="6417" end="6429" title="Picard group" label="Picard group"/>
<link wikidata="Q106323967" start="6511" end="6521" title="Semi-simplicity" label="semisimple"/>
<link wikidata="Q351822" start="6851" end="6860" title="John T. Tate" label="John Tate"/>
<link wikidata="Q2264419" start="6967" end="6988" title="Dirichlet L-function" label="Dirichlet L-functions"/>
<link wikidata="Q351822" start="7423" end="7432" title="John T. Tate" label="John Tate"/>
<link wikidata="Q11095962" start="7445" end="7458" title="Serre duality" label="Serre duality"/>
<link wikidata="Q1509762" start="7580" end="7591" title="line bundle" label="line bundle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1531713" start="7720" end="7732" title="global field" label="global field"/>
<link wikidata="Q616608" start="7757" end="7769" title="algebraic number field" label="number field"/>
<link wikidata="Q5508773" start="7810" end="7831" title="Function field of an algebraic variety" label="global function field"/>
<link wikidata="Q852757" start="8007" end="8016" title="Valuation (algebra)" label="valuation"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8811" end="8816" title="Algebraic number theory#Places" label="place"/>
<link wikidata="Q852757" start="8877" end="8887" title="Valuation (algebra)" label="valuations"/>
<link wikidata="Q2919401" start="11788" end="11812" title="Ostrowski&amp;#x27;s theorem" label="Ostrowski&amp;#x27;s theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q23018462" start="13185" end="13203" title="profinite integers" label="profinite integers"/>
<link wikidata="Q23018462" start="13210" end="13228" title="profinite integers" label="profinite integers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1428923" start="13248" end="13268" title="profinite completion" label="profinite completion"/>
<link wikidata="Q193878" start="13400" end="13425" title="Chinese remainder theorem" label="Chinese Remainder Theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q912083" start="22849" end="22861" title="Ideal class group" label="class number"/>
<link wikidata="Q673444" start="27051" end="27067" title="Everywhere-dense set" label="everywhere dense"/>
<link wikidata="Q1938251" start="27579" end="27603" title="Hasse–Minkowski theorem" label="Hasse-Minkowski Theorem."/>
<link wikidata="Q2115578" start="27738" end="27753" title="Hasse principle" label="Hasse principle"/>
<link wikidata="Q351822" start="29779" end="29788" title="John T. Tate" label="John Tate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1393253" start="31814" end="31831" title="Langlands program" label="Langlands program"/>
<link wikidata="Q1744580" start="31876" end="31894" title="class field theory" label="class field theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q318705" start="31912" end="31930" title="Abelian extension" label="abelian extensions"/>
<link wikidata="Q3526829" start="31990" end="32014" title="local class field theory" label="local class field theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q713069" start="32133" end="32154" title="Artin reciprocity law" label="Artin reciprocity law"/>
<link wikidata="Q379048" start="32559" end="32579" title="Riemann–Roch theorem" label="Riemann–Roch theorem"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="247982" wikidata="Q7316304" url="?curid=247982" title="Restricted product">
<text>In mathematics, the restricted product is a construction in the theory of topological groups.

Let formula_1 be an index set; formula_2 a finite subset of formula_1. If formula_4 is a locally compact group for each formula_5, and formula_6 is an open compact subgroup for each formula_7, then the restricted product 
: formula_8
is the subset of the product of the formula_9&#x27;s consisting of all elements formula_10 such that formula_11 for all but finitely many formula_7. 

This group is given the topology whose basis of open sets are those of the form
: formula_13
where formula_14 is open in formula_4 and formula_16 for all but finitely many formula_17.

One can easily prove that the restricted product is itself a locally compact group. The best known example of this construction is that of the adele ring and idele group of a global field.
==See also==
*Direct sum
==References==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q395" start="3" end="14" title="mathematics" label="mathematics"/>
<link wikidata="Q7316304" start="20" end="38" title="Restricted product" label="restricted product"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046291" start="74" end="91" title="topological group" label="topological group"/>
<link wikidata="Q21285678" start="115" end="124" title="index set" label="index set"/>
<link wikidata="Q272404" start="138" end="144" title="Finite set" label="finite"/>
<link wikidata="Q177646" start="145" end="151" title="subset" label="subset"/>
<link wikidata="Q2147620" start="184" end="205" title="locally compact group" label="locally compact group"/>
<link wikidata="Q1887083" start="251" end="258" title="Compact group" label="compact"/>
<link wikidata="Q466109" start="259" end="267" title="subgroup" label="subgroup"/>
<link wikidata="Q179899" start="504" end="512" title="Topological space" label="topology"/>
<link wikidata="Q810214" start="519" end="524" title="Basis (topology)" label="basis"/>
<link wikidata="Q213363" start="528" end="536" title="open set" label="open set"/>
<link wikidata="Q355356" start="808" end="818" title="adele ring" label="adele ring"/>
<link wikidata="Q525964" start="823" end="834" title="idele group" label="idele group"/>
<link wikidata="Q1531713" start="840" end="852" title="global field" label="global field"/>
<link wikidata="Q13582243" start="868" end="878" title="Direct sum" label="Direct sum"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="247987" wikidata="Q213453" url="?curid=247987" title="Bignoniaceae">
<text>Bignoniaceae () is a family of flowering plants in the order Lamiales commonly known as the bignonias or trumpet vines. It is not known to which of the other families in the order it is most closely related.

Nearly all of the Bignoniaceae are woody plants, but a few are subwoody, either as vines or subshrubs. A few more are herbaceous plants of high-elevation montane habitats, in three exclusively herbaceous genera: &quot;Tourrettia&quot;, &quot;Argylia&quot;, and &quot;Incarvillea&quot;. The family includes many lianas, climbing by tendrils, by twining, or rarely, by aerial roots. The largest tribe in the family, called Bignonieae, consists mostly of lianas and is noted for its unique wood anatomy.

The family has a nearly cosmopolitan distribution, but is mostly tropical, with a few species native to the temperate zones. Its greatest diversity is in northern South America. The family has been covered in some major floristic projects, such as Flora of China, Flora Malesiana, and Flora Neotropica. It has not yet been covered in some others, such as Flora of Australia, and Flora of North America.

Bignoniaceae are most noted for ornamentals, such as &quot;Jacaranda&quot;, &quot;Tabebuia&quot; and &quot;Spathodea&quot;, grown for their conspicuous, tubular flowers. A great many species are known in cultivation. Various other uses have been made of members of this family. Several species were of great importance to the indigenous peoples of the American tropics. &quot;Fridericia elegans&quot;, &quot;Tanaecium bilabiata&quot;, and &quot;Tanaecium excitosum&quot; are poisonous to livestock and have caused severe losses.

According to different accounts, the number of species in the family is about 810 or about 860. The last monograph of the entire family was published in 2004. In that work, 104 genera were recognized. Since that time, molecular phylogenetic studies have greatly clarified relationships within the family, and the number of accepted genera is now between 80 and 85.

== Description ==
Members of this family are mostly trees or lianas, sometimes shrubs, and rarely subshrubs or herbs.

Lianas of the tribe Bignonieae have a unique vascular structure, in which phloem arms extend downward into the xylem because certain segments of the cambium cease the production of xylem at an early stage of development. The number of these arms is four or a multiple thereof, up to 32. When four, the phloem arms appear as a cross, hence, the common name &quot;cross vine&quot;. The phloem in the arms has wider sieve tubes and less parenchyma than the ordinary phloem.

The leaves are petiolate. Leaf arrangement usually is opposite, or rarely alternate or verticillate (in whorls). Leaves are usually compound, bifoliate, trifoliate, pinnate, or palmate, or rarely simple. Stipules are absent, but persistent; enlarged axillary bud scales (pseudostipules) are often present. Domatia occur in some genera.

Flowers are solitary or in inflorescences in a raceme or a helicoid or dichasial cyme. Inflorescences bear persistent or deciduous bracts or bractlets.
The flowers are hypogynous, zygomorphic, bisexual, and usually conspicuous. The calyx and corolla are distinct. The calyx is synsepalous, with five sepals. The corolla is sympetalous, with five petals, often bilabiate. Corolla lobes are imbricate in bud, or rarely valvate, and usually much shorter than the corolla tube. Stamens are inserted on the corolla tube, alternating with corolla lobes. The four stamens are didynamous, members of each pair often connivent, the adaxial stamen is usually staminodial or absent; rarely with five fertile stamens or with two fertile and three staminodial stamens. The stigma is bilobed, and usually sensitive; a style is present. The ovary is superior, usually surrounded by a nectary disk, composed of two carpels, bilocular and with a septum, except unilocular in &quot;Tourrettia&quot; and quadrilocular in &quot;Eccremocarpus&quot;. Placentation is axile, except parietal in &quot;Tourrettia&quot;. Ovules are numerous.

The fruit is usually a bivalved capsule, often with a replum. Dehiscence is septicidal or loculicidal. The three exceptions are the genera &quot;Kigelia&quot;, &quot;Crescentia&quot; and their close relatives, and &quot;Colea&quot; and its close relatives. In these, the fruit is indehiscent, not a capsule, and the seeds are not winged. The fruit is a berry in these genera. Seeds are usually flat and winged. Aril is absent. Endosperm usually absent, and sometimes sparse.

Lapachol, a yellow, skin-irritating naphthoquinone, is often found in the wood. Other naphthoquinones, as well as anthraquinones, are also present in various parts of the plant. Jacaranone is a quinonoid from &quot;Jacaranda&quot;. True tannins are not present. Pigments are mostly flavones, anthocyanins, and carotenoids. Iridoids are usually present. Other compounds detected in Bignoniaceae include verbascosides, cornoside, quercetin, ursolic acid, saponins, and catalpic acid.

The chromosome number does not vary much in Bignoniaceae. The haploid (base chromosome number) is 20 for nearly every species sampled, but some species have very small chromosomes, making an accurate count difficult. B chromosomes are common in Bignoniaceae.

Pollination is either entomophilous (via insects), ornithophilous (via birds), or chiropterophilous (via bats).

== Taxonomy ==
The family Bignoniaceae was first validly published in the botanical literature (as Bignonieae) by Antoine Laurent de Jussieu in 1789 in his classic work, &quot;Genera Plantarum&quot;. The type genus for this family is &quot;Bignonia&quot;, which was validated by Linnaeus in &quot;Species Plantarum&quot; in 1753. The name originated with Joseph Pitton de Tournefort, who named it for his benefactor, Jean-Paul Bignon, in 1694, in his influential &quot;Eléments de botanique ou méthode pour connaître les plantes&quot;.

Important groundwork for future study of the family was laid down from 1789 to 1837, mostly by Jussieu, Kunth, Bojer and G.Don (George Don (1798–1856) not George Don the elder (1764–1814). Bentham and Hooker surveyed the family in their &quot;Genera Plantarum&quot; in 1876. Karl Moritz Schumann wrote a monograph on Bignoniaceae in 1894 for Engler and Prantl&#x27;s &quot;Die Natürlichen Pflanzenfamilien&quot;. After Schumann&#x27;s monograph, no taxonomic treatment of the entire family was published until 2004.

As the number of known species gradually increased, a great deal of confusion developed over the delimitation of genera. New genera were frequently erected for species that did not clearly belong to any of the previously described genera. This resulted in a proliferation of monotypic genera. Gentry reduced the number of genera in 1973, 1976, and 1979. Nevertheless, the revision of 2004 described 104 genera, 38 of them monotypic.

This problem was especially acute in the tribe Bignonieae. In that tribe, many species of uncertain affinity were assigned to a vaguely defined &quot;Arrabidaea&quot;, turning that genus into a dumping ground of about 100 species.

Since 2004, molecular phylogenetic studies have shown a substantial revision of the genera is necessary. Much work toward this goal can be viewed online, but little of it has yet been published in scientific papers.

A detailed taxonomic history of Bignoniaceae was published in 1980. A summary of this history was published in 1999.

=== Classification ===
In the APG IV system of classification for flowering plants, Bignoniaceae is one of the 24 families in the order Lamiales. (Lamiales has 25 families if Rehmanniaceae are accepted). Within the order, Bignoniaceae is in a group of eight families consisting of Thomandersiaceae, Pedaliaceae, Martyniaceae, Schlegeliaceae, Bignoniaceae, Verbenaceae, Acanthaceae, and Lentibulariaceae. This group is described as a polytomy, meaning no two of its members are known to be more closely related to each other than to any of the others. Statistical support for this group remains weak, indicating insufficient data have been applied, or the group is an artifact of some phylogenetic method.

The composition of Bignoniaceae has been relatively stable and has not varied at all in the 21st century. In the 20th century, the only issues of circumscription were whether Paulowniaceae and Schlegeliaceae should be merged into Bignoniaceae, or accepted as separate families. The Paulowniaceae consist of one to four genera: &quot;Paulownia&quot;, &quot;Shiuyinghua&quot;, &quot;Wightia&quot;, and &quot;Brandisia&quot;. Whatever their circumscription, Paulowniaceae are now known to be close to Phrymaceae and Orobanchaceae, rather than to Bignoniaceae. The family Schlegeliaceae has been included in Bignoniaceae, as tribe Schlegelieae, as recently as 1980. It is now accepted as a distinct family, but its relationships with several other families remain unresolved.

In molecular phylogenetic analyses, Bignoniaceae has surprisingly weak bootstrap support, given its morphological coherence. The tribe Jacarandeae (&quot;Digomphia&quot; and &quot;Jacaranda&quot;) is sister to the rest of the family, which is known as the Core Bignoniaceae. The Core Bignoniaceae is strongly supported in all molecular phylogenetic analyses, but has no known morphological synapomorphy.

No subfamilies have been proposed for Bignoniaceae in recent taxonomy, but in 2004, Fischer &quot;et al.&quot; divided the family into seven tribes: Tourrettieae, Eccremocarpeae, Tecomeae (&quot;sensu lato&quot;), Bignonieae, Oroxyleae, Crescentieae, and Coleeae. Since that time, Tourrettieae and Eccremocarpeae have been merged under the name Tourrettieae. Tecomeae&quot; sensu lato&quot; has been shown to be polyphyletic, consisting of the following groups: &quot;Astianthus&quot;, Jacarandeae, &quot;Argylia&quot;, &quot;Delostoma&quot;, &quot;Perianthomega&quot;, Catalpeae, Tecomeae &quot;sensu stricto&quot;, and all of Crescentiina except those genera placed in Crescentieae or Coleeae. All of these groups are monophyletic except Crescentiina &quot;pro parte&quot;. The whole Crescentiina is monophyletic. Crescentiina is one of a type of name with no definite taxonomic rank. Crescentiina is composed of two strongly supported clades, informally named the &quot;Tabebuia&quot; alliance and the Paleotropical clade. The tribe Crescentieae is embedded in the &quot;Tabebuia&quot; alliance and might be expanded to include &quot;Spirotecoma&quot;. Coleeae &quot;sensu&quot; Fischer &quot;et al.&quot; (2004) is polyphyletic because of the inclusion of &quot;Kigelia&quot;, and it is nested within the Paleotropical clade. &quot;Perianthomega&quot; has been transferred from Tecomeae &quot;sensu stricto&quot; to Bignonieae, where it is sister to the remainder of the tribe. Thus, Bignoniaceae can be divided into 10 monophyletic groups.

=== Phylogeny ===
The phylogenetic tree shown below is based on the results of four phylogenetic studies. For all clades, posterior probability is at least 0.95 and bootstrap support is at least 70%, except where indicated otherwise.

=== Genera ===
In the last taxonomic revision of Bignoniaceae, 104 genera were described in &quot;The Families and Genera of Vascular Plants&quot;. Twenty-five of these genera, all in the tribe Bignonieae, were later synonymized under other genera, based on a cladistic analysis of DNA sequences, published in 2006. &quot;Roseodendron&quot; and &quot;Handroanthus&quot; were resurrected from &quot;Tabebuia&quot; in 2007. &quot;Mayodendron&quot; and &quot;Pachyptera&quot; have been resurrected.

In 2009, Six of these groups have been recognized as tribes at one time or another, and are represented by their tribal names. Two of the groups are monogeneric and are designated by their constituent genera, &quot;Argylia&quot; and &quot;Delostoma&quot;. The other two groups are given informal names, pending a formal revision of the infrafamilial classification.

&quot;Astianthus&quot; has never been sampled for DNA and its systematic position within the family remains obscure. Likewise, the placement of &quot;Romeroa&quot; in the &quot;Tabebuia&quot; alliance and the placement of &quot;Sphingiphila&quot; in Bignonieae are in doubt.

&quot;Tecomaria&quot; is not included in the list below, and its recognition is controversial. It is monotypic (&quot;Tecomaria capensis&quot;), and had been long accepted, but was returned to &quot;Tecoma&quot; in 1980. A molecular phylogenetic study resolved it as sister to another South African genus, &quot;Podranea&quot;, but with only weak bootstrap support. &quot;Tecomaria&quot; has not yet been resurrected or transferred to another genus.

The tribe Bignonieae has been the subject of considerable revision since 2006. Fischer &quot;et al.&quot; placed 46 genera in this tribe. Afterward, &quot;Perianthomega&quot; was transferred to it from Tecomeae &quot;sensu lato&quot; and &quot;Pachyptera&quot; was resurrected from &quot;Mansoa&quot;. Twenty-five of the genera of Fischer have been subsumed into other genera as follows: &quot;Gardnerodoxa&quot; into &quot;Neojobertia&quot;; &quot;Memora&quot; into &quot;Adenocalymma&quot;; &quot;Leucocalantha&quot; into &quot;Pachyptera&quot;; &quot;Pseudocatalpa, Paragonia, Periarrabidaea, Spathicalyx,&quot; and &quot;Ceratophytum&quot; into &quot;Tanaecium&quot;; &quot;Arrabidaea&quot; and &quot;Piriadacus&quot; into &quot;Fridericia&quot;; &quot;Clytostoma, Cydista, Macranthisiphon, Mussatia, Phryganocydia, Potamoganos, Roentgenia&quot; and &quot;Saritaea&quot; into &quot;Bignonia&quot;; also &quot;Distictis, Glaziovia, Haplolophium,&quot; and &quot;Pithecoctenium&quot; into &quot;Amphilophium&quot;. Thus, 23 genera are now recognized in Bignonieae.
;Incertae sedis
* &quot;Astianthus&quot;
;Tribe Jacarandeae
* &quot;Jacaranda&quot; (synonym &quot;Digomphia&quot;)
;Tribe Tourrettieae
* &quot;Eccremocarpus&quot;
* &quot;Tourrettia&quot;
:Genus &quot;Argylia&quot;
;Tribe Tecomeae
* &quot;Campsidium&quot;
* &quot;Campsis&quot;
* &quot;Deplanchea&quot;
* &quot;Dinklageodoxa&quot;
* &quot;Incarvillea&quot;
* &quot;Lamiodendron&quot;
* &quot;Neosepicaea&quot;
* &quot;Pandorea&quot;
* &quot;Podranea&quot;
* &quot;Tecoma&quot;
* &quot;Tecomanthe&quot;
:Genus &quot;Delostoma&quot;
===Tribe Bignonieae===

* &quot;Adenocalymma&quot;
* &quot;Amphilophium&quot; (synonym &quot;Distictella&quot;)
* &quot;Anemopaegma&quot;
* &quot;Bignonia&quot;
* &quot;Callichlamys&quot;
* &quot;Cuspidaria&quot;
* &quot;Dolichandra&quot;
* &quot;Fridericia&quot;
* &quot;Lundia&quot;
* &quot;Manaosella&quot;
* &quot;Mansoa&quot;
* &quot;Martinella&quot;
* &quot;Neojobertia&quot;
* &quot;Pachyptera&quot;
* &quot;Perianthomega&quot;
* &quot;Pleonotoma&quot;
* &quot;Pyrostegia&quot;
* &quot;Stizophyllum&quot;
* &quot;Tanaecium&quot; (synonym &quot;Sphingiphila&quot;)
* &quot;Tynanthus&quot;
* &quot;Xylophragma&quot;

;Tribe Oroxyleae
* &quot;Hieris&quot;
* &quot;Millingtonia&quot;
* &quot;Nyctocalos&quot;
* &quot;Oroxylum&quot;
;Tribe Catalpeae
* &quot;Chilopsis&quot;
* &quot;Catalpa&quot;

===Crescentiina group===
====&quot;Tabebuia&quot; alliance====

* &quot;Amphitecna&quot;
* &quot;Crescentia&quot;
* &quot;Cybistax&quot;
* &quot;Ekmanianthe&quot;
* &quot;Godmania&quot;
* &quot;Handroanthus&quot;
* &quot;Paratecoma&quot;
* &quot;Parmentiera&quot;
* &quot;Romeroa&quot;
* &quot;Roseodendron&quot;
* &quot;Sparattosperma&quot;
* &quot;Spirotecoma&quot;
* &quot;Tabebuia&quot;
* &quot;Zeyheria&quot;
====Paleotropical clade====

* &quot;Catophractes&quot;
* &quot;Colea&quot; (synonym &quot;Ophiocolea&quot;)
* &quot;Dolichandrone&quot;
* &quot;Fernandoa&quot; (synonym &quot;Haplophragma&quot;)
* &quot;Heterophragma&quot;
* &quot;Kigelia&quot;
* &quot;Markhamia&quot;
* &quot;Mayodendron&quot;
* &quot;Newbouldia&quot;
* &quot;Pajanelia&quot;
* &quot;Pauldopia&quot;
* &quot;Perichlaena&quot;
* &quot;Phyllarthron&quot;
* &quot;Phylloctenium&quot;
* &quot;Radermachera&quot;
* &quot;Rhigozum&quot;
* &quot;Rhodocolea&quot;
* &quot;Tecomella&quot;
* &quot;Santisukia&quot;
* &quot;Spathodea&quot;
* &quot;Stereospermum&quot;
===Obsolete genera===

* &quot;Arrabidaea&quot;
* &quot;Ceratophytum&quot;
* &quot;Clytostoma&quot;
* &quot;Cydista&quot;
* &quot;Distictis&quot;
* &quot;Gardnerodoxa&quot;
* &quot;Glaziovia&quot;
* &quot;Haplolophium&quot;
* &quot;Leucocalantha&quot;
* &quot;Macfadyena&quot;
* &quot;Macranthisiphon&quot;
* &quot;Melloa&quot;
* &quot;Memora&quot;
* &quot;Mussatia&quot;
* &quot;Parabignonia&quot;
* &quot;Paragonia&quot;
* &quot;Periarrabidaea&quot;
* &quot;Phryganocydia&quot;
* &quot;Piriadacus&quot;
* &quot;Pithecoctenium&quot;
* &quot;Potamoganos&quot;
* &quot;Pseudocatalpa&quot;
* &quot;Roentgenia&quot;
* &quot;Saritaea&quot;
* &quot;Spathicalyx&quot;
== Uses ==
Many species of Bignoniaceae have some use, either commercially or ethnobotanically, but the most important, by far, are those planted as ornamentals, especially the flowering trees. &quot;Jacaranda, Campsis, Pyrostegia, Tabebuia, Catalpa, Roseodendron, Handroanthus&quot; and &quot;Crescentia&quot; all have species of horticultural significance, at least in warm climates. Several others, including &quot;Tecoma, Podranea, Pandorea, Bignonia&quot; and &quot;Mansoa&quot; are frequently grown as ornamentals, at least in certain areas of the tropics. A great many species are known in cultivation, if only rarely.

&quot;Jacaranda mimosifolia&quot; is common as an avenue tree. The winged petiole and trifoliate leaf of &quot;Crescentia alata&quot; resembles a crucifixion cross, so is sometimes planted in the Philippines as a religious symbol.

&quot;Handroanthus&quot; and the unrelated &quot;Guaiacum&quot; (Zygophyllaceae) have the hardest, heaviest, and most durable wood of the American tropics. Important timber trees in &quot;Handroanthus&quot; include &quot;H. heptaphyllus&quot;, &quot;H. serratifolius&quot;, &quot;H. guayacan&quot;, &quot;H. chrysanthus&quot;, and &quot;H. billbergii&quot;. &quot;Tabebuia rosea&quot; (including &quot;Tabebuia pentaphylla&quot;) is harvested for lumber throughout the New World tropics. &quot;Tabebuia heterophylla&quot;, and &quot;Tabebuia angustata&quot; are important sources of lumber for some of the Caribbean islands. Several species of &quot;Catalpa&quot; are also important timber trees.

&quot;Paratecoma&quot; was once the most important timber tree of the Rio de Janeiro area, but relentless exploitation has brought it to the verge of extinction. Several of the rare species of Bignoniaceae produce excellent wood, but are often not recognized by lumberjacks.

Several uses of plants in Bignoniaceae are known locally. &quot;Parmentiera aculeata&quot; is grown for its edible fruit in Central America and southern Mexico. The powdered seeds and sometimes the fruit pulp of &quot;Crescentia cujete&quot; and &quot;Crescentia alata&quot; are used in Nicaragua to make a refresco called &quot;semilla de jicaro&quot;. Onion-scented species of &quot;Mansoa&quot; and clove-scented species of &quot;Tynanthus&quot; are used as condiments.

In northern Colombia, shavings of the stems of &quot;Dolichandra quadrivalvis&quot; are added to bait which is left overnight near the burrows of crabs. The crabs are paralyzed for a few hours after eating the bait and are picked up by crabbers in the morning. The crabs recover before they reach market, and no harm from eating them has been reported.

&quot;Tanaecium nocturnum&quot; is the source of a hallucinogenic drug. Its crushed leaves and stems are used to enervate bees while gathering honey.

&quot;Fridericia chica&quot; is the source of a red pigment used in the Amazon Basin for body paint and for dye in basketry. &quot;Cybistax antisyphilitica&quot; is the source of a blue dye commonly used in Peru. The bark of &quot;Sparattosperma leucantha&quot; is used in Bolivia to produce a brown dye for staining cotton thread.

Medical claims are innumerable and usually spurious. Gentry describes an especially ludicrous example.

Misidentification of plants, even by botanists, continues to be a big problem for ethnobotany, and it is especially severe for Bignoniaceae. Voucher specimens are often sterile and fragmentary, making them nearly impossible to identify. False medical claims are often based on mistaken identification.

The bark of several species of &quot;Handroanthus&quot; is sold in South American markets. Similar-looking bark is often fraudulently passed off as &quot;Handroanthus&quot;. It is used in various ways to relieve certain symptoms of certain cancers. No evidence shows it prevents the disease or slows its progression, as is often claimed.

&quot;Adenocalymma flavida&quot; has been used to relieve the aching of joints and muscles. A root extract from &quot;Martinella&quot; is useful in the treatment of conjunctivitis and possibly other conditions of the eye.

== References ==
== Sources ==
* Alwyn H. Gentry. 1992. &quot;Bignoniaceae: Part II (Tecomeae)&quot;. &quot;Flora Neotropica&quot; Monograph 25(2):1-150. (See &quot;External links&quot; below).

== External links ==
* Bignoniaceae in L. Watson and M. J. Dallwitz (1992 onwards), &quot;The families of flowering plants&quot;.
* Distribution Map Genus List Bignoniaceae Lamiales Trees APweb botanical databases About Science &amp; Conservation Missouri Botanical Garden
* Crescentieae and Tourrettieae At: Flora Neotropica 25(1) At: Flora Neotropica At: Organization for Flora Neotropica
* tribe Tecomeae At: Flora Neotropica 25(2) At: Flora Neotropica At: Organization for Flora Neotropica
* Bignoniaceae economic botany
* List of genera in family Bignoniaceae At: Dicotyledons At: List Genera within a Family At: Vascular Plant Families and Genera At: About the Checklist At: World Checklist of Selected Plant Families At: Data Sources At: ePIC At: Scientific Databases At: Kew Gardens
* Bignoniaceae At: Advanced Search At: Search Tool At: iplants
* section B In: A checklist of suprageneric names (Alphabetical Listing by Genera) At: Home page of James L. Reveal &amp; C. Rose Broome
* &quot;Bignonia&quot; Plant Names IPNI
* CRC World Dictionary of Plant Names: A-C At: Botany &amp; Plant Science At: Life Science At: CRC Press
* Bignoniaceae &quot;Genera Plantarum&quot; vol. 2 part 2 (Bentham &amp; Hooker) View Record Titles beginning with &quot;G&quot; Titles Biodiversity Heritage Library
* Spangler &amp; Olmstead (1999)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q213453" start="0" end="12" title="Bignoniaceae" label="Bignoniaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q35409" start="21" end="27" title="Family (biology)" label="family"/>
<link wikidata="Q25314" start="31" end="46" title="flowering plant" label="flowering plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q36602" start="55" end="60" title="Order (biology)" label="order"/>
<link wikidata="Q21742" start="61" end="69" title="Lamiales" label="Lamiales"/>
<link wikidata="Q213453" start="92" end="101" title="Bignoniaceae" label="bignonias"/>
<link wikidata="Q213453" start="105" end="118" title="Bignoniaceae" label="trumpet vines"/>
<link wikidata="Q757163" start="244" end="255" title="woody plant" label="woody plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q917284" start="292" end="296" title="vine" label="vine"/>
<link wikidata="Q12867502" start="301" end="309" title="subshrub" label="subshrub"/>
<link wikidata="Q190903" start="327" end="343" title="herbaceous plant" label="herbaceous plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q2633778" start="353" end="362" title="elevation" label="elevation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141462" start="363" end="370" title="Montane ecology" label="montane"/>
<link wikidata="Q52105" start="371" end="378" title="habitat" label="habitat"/>
<link wikidata="Q34740" start="413" end="419" title="genera" label="genera"/>
<link wikidata="Q735462" start="427" end="437" title="Tourrettia" label="Tourrettia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4789840" start="451" end="458" title="Argylia" label="Argylia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2697376" start="476" end="487" title="Incarvillea" label="Incarvillea"/>
<link wikidata="Q14079" start="520" end="525" title="liana" label="liana"/>
<link wikidata="Q165859" start="540" end="547" title="tendril" label="tendril"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065886" start="576" end="587" title="aerial root" label="aerial root"/>
<link wikidata="Q227936" start="602" end="607" title="Tribe (biology)" label="tribe"/>
<link wikidata="Q4021" start="696" end="708" title="Plant anatomy" label="wood anatomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q215402" start="735" end="760" title="cosmopolitan distribution" label="cosmopolitan distribution"/>
<link wikidata="Q42530" start="776" end="784" title="tropical" label="tropical"/>
<link wikidata="Q7432" start="797" end="804" title="species" label="species"/>
<link wikidata="Q169480" start="805" end="811" title="Indigenous (ecology)" label="native"/>
<link wikidata="Q167466" start="819" end="834" title="Temperateness" label="temperate zones"/>
<link wikidata="Q47041" start="849" end="858" title="Biodiversity" label="diversity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1372905" start="931" end="940" title="Floristics" label="floristic"/>
<link wikidata="Q5460442" start="959" end="973" title="Flora of China (series)" label="Flora of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q5460332" start="975" end="990" title="Flora Malesiana" label="Flora Malesiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q8563892" start="996" end="1012" title="Flora Neotropica" label="Flora Neotropica"/>
<link wikidata="Q3073852" start="1066" end="1084" title="Flora of Australia (series)" label="Flora of Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1429295" start="1090" end="1112" title="Flora of North America" label="Flora of North America"/>
<link wikidata="Q199182" start="1147" end="1158" title="Ornamental plant" label="ornamentals"/>
<link wikidata="Q311105" start="1174" end="1183" title="Jacaranda" label="Jacaranda"/>
<link wikidata="Q312284" start="1197" end="1205" title="Tabebuia" label="Tabebuia"/>
<link wikidata="Q16034822" start="1222" end="1231" title="Spathodea" label="Spathodea"/>
<link wikidata="Q124946" start="1319" end="1330" title="Gardening" label="cultivation"/>
<link wikidata="Q103817" start="1441" end="1459" title="indigenous peoples" label="indigenous peoples"/>
<link wikidata="Q217151" start="1467" end="1483" title="Neotropical realm" label="American tropics"/>
<link wikidata="Q15549308" start="1491" end="1509" title="Fridericia elegans" label="Fridericia elegans"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1523" end="1542" title="Tanaecium bilabiata" label="Tanaecium bilabiata"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1560" end="1579" title="Tanaecium excitosum" label="Tanaecium excitosum"/>
<link wikidata="Q40867" start="1590" end="1599" title="poisonous" label="poisonous"/>
<link wikidata="Q103459" start="1603" end="1612" title="livestock" label="livestock"/>
<link wikidata="Q7261147" start="1636" end="1642" title="Pure economic loss" label="losses"/>
<link wikidata="Q193495" start="1750" end="1759" title="monograph" label="monograph"/>
<link wikidata="Q384515" start="1812" end="1816" title="Treatise" label="work"/>
<link wikidata="Q2007033" start="1863" end="1885" title="molecular phylogenetic" label="molecular phylogenetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q42240" start="1886" end="1893" title="Research" label="studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q10884" start="2063" end="2067" title="tree" label="tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q14079" start="2072" end="2077" title="liana" label="liana"/>
<link wikidata="Q42295" start="2090" end="2095" title="shrub" label="shrub"/>
<link wikidata="Q12867502" start="2109" end="2117" title="subshrub" label="subshrub"/>
<link wikidata="Q190903" start="2122" end="2127" title="Herbaceous plant" label="herbs"/>
<link wikidata="Q968604" start="2175" end="2183" title="Vascular tissue" label="vascular"/>
<link wikidata="Q183252" start="2184" end="2193" title="Morphology (biology)" label="structure"/>
<link wikidata="Q185138" start="2204" end="2210" title="phloem" label="phloem"/>
<link wikidata="Q122811" start="2241" end="2246" title="xylem" label="xylem"/>
<link wikidata="Q5025089" start="2279" end="2286" title="Cambium (botany)" label="cambium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1044484" start="2338" end="2349" title="Evolutionary developmental biology" label="development"/>
<link wikidata="Q502895" start="2474" end="2485" title="common name" label="common name"/>
<link wikidata="Q2359239" start="2543" end="2554" title="Sieve tube element" label="sieve tubes"/>
<link wikidata="Q270524" start="2564" end="2574" title="parenchyma" label="parenchyma"/>
<link wikidata="Q33971" start="2606" end="2612" title="Leaf" label="leaves"/>
<link wikidata="Q10289985" start="2617" end="2626" title="Petiole (botany)" label="petiolate"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2656" end="2664" title="Leaf#Arrangement on the stem" label="opposite"/>
<link wikidata="Q839659" start="2676" end="2685" title="Phyllotaxis" label="alternate"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2689" end="2701" title="Glossary of botanical terms#verticillate" label="verticillate"/>
<link wikidata="Q937039" start="2706" end="2712" title="Whorl (botany)" label="whorls"/>
<link wikidata="Q33971" start="2734" end="2742" title="compound leaf" label="compound"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2744" end="2753" title="Glossary of botanical terms#bifoliate" label="bifoliate"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2755" end="2765" title="Leaf#Divisions of the blade" label="trifoliate"/>
<link wikidata="Q3756157" start="2767" end="2774" title="pinnate" label="pinnate"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2779" end="2786" title="Leaf#Divisions of the blade" label="palmate"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2798" end="2804" title="Leaf#Divisions of the blade" label="simple"/>
<link wikidata="Q304216" start="2806" end="2813" title="Stipule" label="Stipule"/>
<link wikidata="Q33971" start="2852" end="2856" title="axil" label="axil"/>
<link wikidata="Q189838" start="2861" end="2864" title="bud" label="bud"/>
<link wikidata="Q1125215" start="2865" end="2871" title="Trichome" label="scales"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2873" end="2887" title="Glossary of botanical terms#pseudostipule" label="pseudostipules"/>
<link wikidata="Q1236841" start="2908" end="2915" title="Domatia" label="Domatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q506" start="2939" end="2945" title="Flower" label="Flower"/>
<link wikidata="Q156428" start="2966" end="2979" title="inflorescence" label="inflorescence"/>
<link wikidata="Q158583" start="2986" end="2992" title="raceme" label="raceme"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2998" end="3006" title="Inflorescence#Determinate or Cymose" label="helicoid"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3010" end="3019" title="Inflorescence#Determinate or Cymose" label="dichasial"/>
<link wikidata="Q156428" start="3020" end="3024" title="Cyme (botany)" label="cyme"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131316" start="3060" end="3069" title="deciduous" label="deciduous"/>
<link wikidata="Q729496" start="3070" end="3075" title="bract" label="bract"/>
<link wikidata="Q148515" start="3107" end="3117" title="Ovary (plants)" label="hypogynous"/>
<link wikidata="Q556965" start="3119" end="3130" title="Floral symmetry" label="zygomorphic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1608538" start="3132" end="3140" title="Plant sexuality" label="bisexual"/>
<link wikidata="Q107216" start="3171" end="3176" title="Calyx (botany)" label="calyx"/>
<link wikidata="Q107412" start="3181" end="3188" title="Corolla (flower)" label="corolla"/>
<link wikidata="Q7662641" start="3216" end="3227" title="synsepalous" label="synsepalous"/>
<link wikidata="Q107216" start="3239" end="3244" title="sepal" label="sepal"/>
<link wikidata="Q649332" start="3262" end="3273" title="sympetalous" label="sympetalous"/>
<link wikidata="Q107412" start="3285" end="3290" title="petal" label="petal"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3299" end="3308" title="Glossary of botanical terms#bilabiate" label="bilabiate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1777443" start="3328" end="3337" title="Aestivation (botany)" label="imbricate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1777443" start="3356" end="3363" title="Aestivation (botany)" label="valvate"/>
<link wikidata="Q103129" start="3413" end="3419" title="Stamen" label="Stamen"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3508" end="3518" title="Stamen#Descriptive terms" label="didynamous"/>
<link wikidata="Q5161315" start="3547" end="3556" title="Connation" label="connivent"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3562" end="3569" title="Glossary of plant morphology#General plant terms" label="adaxial"/>
<link wikidata="Q2348006" start="3588" end="3599" title="staminode" label="staminodial"/>
<link wikidata="Q1427245" start="3699" end="3705" title="Stigma (botany)" label="stigma"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3730" end="3739" title="Glossary of botanical terms#sensitive" label="sensitive"/>
<link wikidata="Q1546595" start="3743" end="3748" title="Style (botany)" label="style"/>
<link wikidata="Q148515" start="3765" end="3770" title="Ovary (plants)" label="ovary"/>
<link wikidata="Q148515" start="3774" end="3782" title="superior ovary" label="superior"/>
<link wikidata="Q171934" start="3808" end="3815" title="nectary" label="nectary"/>
<link wikidata="Q588964" start="3838" end="3844" title="carpel" label="carpel"/>
<link wikidata="Q3818113" start="3847" end="3856" title="Locule" label="bilocular"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3968" end="3980" title="Placentation#Placentation in plants" label="Placentation"/>
<link wikidata="Q380138" start="4034" end="4039" title="Ovule" label="Ovule"/>
<link wikidata="Q3314483" start="4060" end="4065" title="fruit" label="fruit"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4079" end="4087" title="Glossary of botanical terms#valve" label="bivalved"/>
<link wikidata="Q147768" start="4088" end="4095" title="Capsule (fruit)" label="capsule"/>
<link wikidata="Q148529" start="4110" end="4116" title="replum" label="replum"/>
<link wikidata="Q3704821" start="4118" end="4128" title="Dehiscence (botany)" label="Dehiscence"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4132" end="4142" title="Dehiscence (botany)#Septicidal and loculicidal dehiscence" label="septicidal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3009148" start="4201" end="4208" title="Kigelia" label="Kigelia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321860" start="4222" end="4232" title="Crescentia" label="Crescentia"/>
<link wikidata="Q288590" start="4276" end="4281" title="Colea" label="Colea"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4386" end="4392" title="Glossary of botanical terms#W" label="winged"/>
<link wikidata="Q13184" start="4409" end="4414" title="berry (botany)" label="berry"/>
<link wikidata="Q40763" start="4432" end="4436" title="Seed" label="Seed"/>
<link wikidata="Q661390" start="4467" end="4471" title="Aril" label="Aril"/>
<link wikidata="Q25624" start="4483" end="4492" title="Endosperm" label="Endosperm"/>
<link wikidata="Q739601" start="4532" end="4540" title="Lapachol" label="Lapachol"/>
<link wikidata="Q287" start="4606" end="4610" title="wood" label="wood"/>
<link wikidata="Q574302" start="4646" end="4659" title="natural anthraquinone" label="anthraquinone"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4710" end="4720" title="Jacaranone" label="Jacaranone"/>
<link wikidata="Q7272334" start="4726" end="4735" title="Quinonoid zwitterion" label="quinonoid"/>
<link wikidata="Q187607" start="4769" end="4775" title="tannin" label="tannin"/>
<link wikidata="Q161179" start="4794" end="4801" title="Pigment" label="Pigment"/>
<link wikidata="Q424525" start="4814" end="4822" title="flavones" label="flavones"/>
<link wikidata="Q262547" start="4824" end="4835" title="anthocyanin" label="anthocyanin"/>
<link wikidata="Q191907" start="4842" end="4852" title="carotenoid" label="carotenoid"/>
<link wikidata="Q416840" start="4855" end="4863" title="Iridoids" label="Iridoids"/>
<link wikidata="Q11173" start="4891" end="4900" title="chemical compound" label="compounds"/>
<link wikidata="Q411426" start="4934" end="4946" title="verbascoside" label="verbascoside"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4949" end="4958" title="cornoside" label="cornoside"/>
<link wikidata="Q409478" start="4960" end="4969" title="quercetin" label="quercetin"/>
<link wikidata="Q416260" start="4971" end="4983" title="ursolic acid" label="ursolic acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q207653" start="4985" end="4992" title="saponin" label="saponin"/>
<link wikidata="Q646902" start="4999" end="5012" title="catalpic acid" label="catalpic acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q118406" start="5019" end="5036" title="chromosome number" label="chromosome number"/>
<link wikidata="Q118406" start="5077" end="5084" title="haploid" label="haploid"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5086" end="5108" title="base chromosome number" label="base chromosome number"/>
<link wikidata="Q37748" start="5183" end="5193" title="chromosome" label="chromosome"/>
<link wikidata="Q900901" start="5232" end="5244" title="B chromosome" label="B chromosome"/>
<link wikidata="Q134624" start="5275" end="5286" title="Pollination" label="Pollination"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063308" start="5297" end="5310" title="Entomophily" label="entomophilous"/>
<link wikidata="Q1390" start="5316" end="5322" title="insect" label="insect"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5326" end="5340" title="List of plant morphology terms#Ornithophilous" label="ornithophilous"/>
<link wikidata="Q5113" start="5346" end="5350" title="bird" label="bird"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5357" end="5374" title="Pollination syndrome#Bat pollination (chiropterophily)" label="chiropterophilous"/>
<link wikidata="Q28425" start="5380" end="5383" title="bat" label="bat"/>
<link wikidata="Q17134993" start="5437" end="5454" title="valid publication" label="validly published"/>
<link wikidata="Q223963" start="5502" end="5528" title="Antoine Laurent de Jussieu" label="Antoine Laurent de Jussieu"/>
<link wikidata="Q2976603" start="5544" end="5551" title="classic" label="classic"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5558" end="5586" title="Antoine Laurent de Jussieu#Work" label="&amp;quot;Genera Plantarum&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q3707858" start="5592" end="5596" title="Type (biology)" label="type"/>
<link wikidata="Q1043" start="5667" end="5675" title="Carl Linnaeus" label="Linnaeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q849308" start="5685" end="5702" title="Species Plantarum" label="Species Plantarum"/>
<link wikidata="Q312959" start="5743" end="5770" title="Joseph Pitton de Tournefort" label="Joseph Pitton de Tournefort"/>
<link wikidata="Q3168368" start="5805" end="5821" title="Jean-Paul Bignon" label="Jean-Paul Bignon"/>
<link wikidata="Q77074" start="6029" end="6034" title="Karl Sigismund Kunth" label="Kunth"/>
<link wikidata="Q637799" start="6036" end="6041" title="Wenceslas Bojer" label="Bojer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1381245" start="6053" end="6063" title="George Don" label="George Don"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6080" end="6100" title="George Don the elder" label="George Don the elder"/>
<link wikidata="Q731808" start="6114" end="6121" title="George Bentham" label="Bentham"/>
<link wikidata="Q157501" start="6126" end="6132" title="Joseph Dalton Hooker" label="Hooker"/>
<link wikidata="Q63545" start="6200" end="6220" title="Karl Moritz Schumann" label="Karl Moritz Schumann"/>
<link wikidata="Q193495" start="6229" end="6238" title="monograph" label="monograph"/>
<link wikidata="Q60718" start="6267" end="6273" title="Heinrich Gustav Adolf Engler" label="Engler"/>
<link wikidata="Q64995" start="6278" end="6284" title="Karl Anton Eugen Prantl" label="Prantl"/>
<link wikidata="Q14931236" start="6298" end="6330" title="Die Natürlichen Pflanzenfamilien" label="Die Natürlichen Pflanzenfamilien"/>
<link wikidata="Q449930" start="6735" end="6741" title="Alwyn Howard Gentry" label="Gentry"/>
<link wikidata="Q962530" start="7070" end="7084" title="Wastebasket taxon" label="dumping ground"/>
<link wikidata="Q5868368" start="7336" end="7353" title="History of plant systematics" label="taxonomic history"/>
<link wikidata="Q24895148" start="7473" end="7486" title="APG IV system" label="APG IV system"/>
<link wikidata="Q8269924" start="7490" end="7504" title="Biological classification" label="classification"/>
<link wikidata="Q713623" start="7686" end="7691" title="Clade" label="group"/>
<link wikidata="Q132796" start="7724" end="7740" title="Thomandersiaceae" label="Thomandersiaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q161187" start="7742" end="7753" title="Pedaliaceae" label="Pedaliaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q53477" start="7755" end="7767" title="Martyniaceae" label="Martyniaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q131980" start="7769" end="7783" title="Schlegeliaceae" label="Schlegeliaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q156960" start="7799" end="7810" title="Verbenaceae" label="Verbenaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q53475" start="7812" end="7823" title="Acanthaceae" label="Acanthaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q161952" start="7829" end="7845" title="Lentibulariaceae" label="Lentibulariaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q7227113" start="7876" end="7884" title="polytomy" label="polytomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1170431" start="7994" end="8013" title="Resampling (statistics)" label="Statistical support"/>
<link wikidata="Q42848" start="8067" end="8071" title="data" label="data"/>
<link wikidata="Q141495" start="8127" end="8146" title="Mathematical optimization" label="phylogenetic method"/>
<link wikidata="Q5121761" start="8153" end="8164" title="Circumscription (taxonomy)" label="composition"/>
<link wikidata="Q1896257" start="8324" end="8337" title="Paulowniaceae" label="Paulowniaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q131980" start="8342" end="8356" title="Schlegeliaceae" label="Schlegeliaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q165173" start="8482" end="8491" title="Paulownia" label="Paulownia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5222145" start="8530" end="8537" title="Wightia (plant)" label="Wightia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4956716" start="8555" end="8564" title="Brandisia" label="Brandisia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061384" start="8647" end="8657" title="Phrymaceae" label="Phrymaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q156192" start="8662" end="8675" title="Orobanchaceae" label="Orobanchaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q1567633" start="9122" end="9128" title="Sister group" label="sister"/>
<link wikidata="Q962872" start="9312" end="9324" title="synapomorphy" label="synapomorphy"/>
<link wikidata="Q8269924" start="9388" end="9396" title="Taxonomy (biology)" label="taxonomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q217743" start="9739" end="9751" title="polyphyletic" label="polyphyletic"/>
<link wikidata="Q427626" start="10198" end="10212" title="taxonomic rank" label="taxonomic rank"/>
<link wikidata="Q502895" start="10273" end="10289" title="Common name" label="informally named"/>
<link wikidata="Q208755" start="10379" end="10387" title="Paraphyly" label="embedded"/>
<link wikidata="Q1087319" start="10497" end="10502" title="sensu" label="sensu"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10835" end="10870" title="Bignoniaceae#Genera" label="divided into 10 monophyletic groups"/>
<link wikidata="Q242125" start="10895" end="10912" title="phylogenetic tree" label="phylogenetic tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q278079" start="10995" end="11016" title="posterior probability" label="posterior probability"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138178" start="11135" end="11144" title="Plant taxonomy" label="taxonomic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3489024" start="11200" end="11254" title="Kubitzki system" label="&amp;quot;The Families and Genera of Vascular Plants&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1040689" start="11325" end="11336" title="Synonym (biology)" label="synonymized"/>
<link wikidata="Q192210" start="11368" end="11377" title="cladistic" label="cladistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q863908" start="11390" end="11402" title="DNA sequence" label="DNA sequence"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11483" end="11494" title="Resurrection (taxonomy)" label="resurrected"/>
<link wikidata="Q310890" start="11754" end="11765" title="Monotypic taxon" label="monogeneric"/>
<link wikidata="Q8269924" start="11955" end="11969" title="Biological classification" label="classification"/>
<link wikidata="Q485146" start="12010" end="12017" title="Sample (material)" label="sampled"/>
<link wikidata="Q7430" start="12022" end="12025" title="DNA" label="DNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q5868368" start="12034" end="12053" title="Plant systematics" label="systematic position"/>
<link wikidata="Q310890" start="12349" end="12358" title="monotypic taxon" label="monotypic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1567633" start="12515" end="12521" title="sister taxon" label="sister"/>
<link wikidata="Q258" start="12533" end="12545" title="South Africa" label="South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q301990" start="12595" end="12604" title="Bootstrapping (statistics)" label="bootstrap"/>
<link wikidata="Q1087319" start="12916" end="12926" title="sensu lato" label="sensu lato"/>
<link wikidata="Q235536" start="13767" end="13781" title="Incertae sedis" label="Incertae sedis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2917889" start="13790" end="13800" title="Astianthus" label="Astianthus"/>
<link wikidata="Q311105" start="13814" end="13825" title="Jacarandeae" label="Jacarandeae"/>
<link wikidata="Q311105" start="13834" end="13843" title="Jacaranda" label="Jacaranda"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13889" end="13901" title="Tourrettieae" label="Tourrettieae"/>
<link wikidata="Q144938" start="13910" end="13923" title="Eccremocarpus" label="Eccremocarpus"/>
<link wikidata="Q735462" start="13938" end="13948" title="Tourrettia" label="Tourrettia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4789840" start="13968" end="13975" title="Argylia" label="Argylia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1317457" start="13989" end="13997" title="Tecomeae" label="Tecomeae"/>
<link wikidata="Q13512633" start="14006" end="14016" title="Campsidium" label="Campsidium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1148029" start="14031" end="14038" title="Campsis" label="Campsis"/>
<link wikidata="Q605392" start="14053" end="14063" title="Deplanchea" label="Deplanchea"/>
<link wikidata="Q16744492" start="14078" end="14091" title="Dinklageodoxa" label="Dinklageodoxa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2697376" start="14106" end="14117" title="Incarvillea" label="Incarvillea"/>
<link wikidata="Q16744498" start="14132" end="14144" title="Lamiodendron" label="Lamiodendron"/>
<link wikidata="Q150387" start="14159" end="14170" title="Neosepicaea" label="Neosepicaea"/>
<link wikidata="Q2705580" start="14185" end="14193" title="Pandorea" label="Pandorea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1506951" start="14208" end="14216" title="Podranea" label="Podranea"/>
<link wikidata="Q2307801" start="14231" end="14237" title="Tecoma" label="Tecoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q7692778" start="14252" end="14262" title="Tecomanthe" label="Tecomanthe"/>
<link wikidata="Q3008093" start="14282" end="14291" title="Delostoma" label="Delostoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q213453" start="14307" end="14317" title="Bignonieae" label="Bignonieae"/>
<link wikidata="Q2505463" start="14330" end="14342" title="Adenocalymma" label="Adenocalymma"/>
<link wikidata="Q8197787" start="14357" end="14369" title="Amphilophium" label="Amphilophium"/>
<link wikidata="Q2338825" start="14418" end="14429" title="Anemopaegma" label="Anemopaegma"/>
<link wikidata="Q794756" start="14444" end="14452" title="Bignonia" label="Bignonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2839724" start="14467" end="14479" title="Callichlamys (plant)" label="Callichlamys"/>
<link wikidata="Q2890026" start="14494" end="14504" title="Cuspidaria (plant)" label="Cuspidaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q8561475" start="14519" end="14530" title="Dolichandra" label="Dolichandra"/>
<link wikidata="Q5869575" start="14545" end="14555" title="Fridericia (plant)" label="Fridericia"/>
<link wikidata="Q9025560" start="14570" end="14576" title="Lundia (plant)" label="Lundia"/>
<link wikidata="Q10323505" start="14591" end="14601" title="Manaosella" label="Manaosella"/>
<link wikidata="Q6061526" start="14616" end="14622" title="Mansoa (plant)" label="Mansoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q141397" start="14637" end="14647" title="Martinella (plant)" label="Martinella"/>
<link wikidata="Q2505463" start="14662" end="14673" title="Neojobertia" label="Neojobertia"/>
<link wikidata="Q16744576" start="14688" end="14698" title="Pachyptera" label="Pachyptera"/>
<link wikidata="Q9058465" start="14713" end="14726" title="Perianthomega" label="Perianthomega"/>
<link wikidata="Q6080636" start="14741" end="14751" title="Pleonotoma" label="Pleonotoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q2704524" start="14766" end="14776" title="Pyrostegia" label="Pyrostegia"/>
<link wikidata="Q10374240" start="14791" end="14803" title="Stizophyllum" label="Stizophyllum"/>
<link wikidata="Q9081729" start="14818" end="14827" title="Tanaecium" label="Tanaecium"/>
<link wikidata="Q9090743" start="14877" end="14886" title="Tynanthus" label="Tynanthus"/>
<link wikidata="Q10294386" start="14901" end="14912" title="Xylophragma" label="Xylophragma"/>
<link wikidata="Q6053305" start="14927" end="14936" title="Oroxyleae" label="Oroxyleae"/>
<link wikidata="Q16744493" start="14945" end="14951" title="Hieris" label="Hieris"/>
<link wikidata="Q16744557" start="14966" end="14978" title="Millingtonia" label="Millingtonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5673122" start="14993" end="15003" title="Nyctocalos" label="Nyctocalos"/>
<link wikidata="Q3245941" start="15018" end="15026" title="Oroxylum" label="Oroxylum"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15040" end="15049" title="Catalpeae" label="Catalpeae"/>
<link wikidata="Q16744460" start="15058" end="15067" title="Chilopsis" label="Chilopsis"/>
<link wikidata="Q158072" start="15082" end="15089" title="Catalpa" label="Catalpa"/>
<link wikidata="Q213453" start="15100" end="15112" title="Crescentiina" label="Crescentiina"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15126" end="15155" title="Tabebuia alliance" label="&amp;quot;Tabebuia&amp;quot; alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q4748379" start="15169" end="15179" title="Amphitecna" label="Amphitecna"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321860" start="15194" end="15204" title="Crescentia" label="Crescentia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5197884" start="15219" end="15227" title="Cybistax" label="Cybistax"/>
<link wikidata="Q8772796" start="15242" end="15253" title="Ekmanianthe" label="Ekmanianthe"/>
<link wikidata="Q8964556" start="15268" end="15276" title="Godmania" label="Godmania"/>
<link wikidata="Q5647550" start="15291" end="15303" title="Handroanthus" label="Handroanthus"/>
<link wikidata="Q9055545" start="15318" end="15328" title="Paratecoma" label="Paratecoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q5223475" start="15343" end="15354" title="Parmentiera" label="Parmentiera"/>
<link wikidata="Q1327728" start="15369" end="15376" title="Romeroa" label="Romeroa"/>
<link wikidata="Q7368623" start="15391" end="15403" title="Roseodendron" label="Roseodendron"/>
<link wikidata="Q9079230" start="15418" end="15432" title="Sparattosperma" label="Sparattosperma"/>
<link wikidata="Q5235950" start="15447" end="15458" title="Spirotecoma" label="Spirotecoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q312284" start="15473" end="15481" title="Tabebuia" label="Tabebuia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1323444" start="15496" end="15504" title="Zeyheria" label="Zeyheria"/>
<link wikidata="Q2942979" start="15548" end="15560" title="Catophractes" label="Catophractes"/>
<link wikidata="Q288590" start="15575" end="15580" title="Colea" label="Colea"/>
<link wikidata="Q5250395" start="15628" end="15641" title="Dolichandrone" label="Dolichandrone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1334848" start="15656" end="15665" title="Fernandoa" label="Fernandoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q150930" start="15715" end="15728" title="Heterophragma" label="Heterophragma"/>
<link wikidata="Q3009148" start="15743" end="15750" title="Kigelia" label="Kigelia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2710480" start="15765" end="15774" title="Markhamia" label="Markhamia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6757405" start="15789" end="15800" title="Mayodendron" label="Mayodendron"/>
<link wikidata="Q9049792" start="15815" end="15825" title="Newbouldia" label="Newbouldia"/>
<link wikidata="Q9054271" start="15840" end="15849" title="Pajanelia" label="Pajanelia"/>
<link wikidata="Q16744578" start="15864" end="15873" title="Pauldopia" label="Pauldopia"/>
<link wikidata="Q9058476" start="15888" end="15899" title="Perichlaena" label="Perichlaena"/>
<link wikidata="Q309655" start="15914" end="15926" title="Phyllarthron" label="Phyllarthron"/>
<link wikidata="Q10349261" start="15941" end="15954" title="Phylloctenium" label="Phylloctenium"/>
<link wikidata="Q134841" start="15969" end="15981" title="Radermachera" label="Radermachera"/>
<link wikidata="Q144637" start="15996" end="16004" title="Rhigozum" label="Rhigozum"/>
<link wikidata="Q149897" start="16019" end="16029" title="Rhodocolea" label="Rhodocolea"/>
<link wikidata="Q16744591" start="16044" end="16053" title="Tecomella" label="Tecomella"/>
<link wikidata="Q9074341" start="16068" end="16078" title="Santisukia" label="Santisukia"/>
<link wikidata="Q16034822" start="16093" end="16102" title="Spathodea" label="Spathodea"/>
<link wikidata="Q256221" start="16117" end="16130" title="Stereospermum" label="Stereospermum"/>
<link wikidata="Q8197787" start="16650" end="16664" title="Pithecoctenium" label="Pithecoctenium"/>
<link wikidata="Q26643" start="16861" end="16873" title="Commerce" label="commercially"/>
<link wikidata="Q777671" start="16937" end="16944" title="Sowing" label="planted"/>
<link wikidata="Q199182" start="16948" end="16959" title="Ornamental plant" label="ornamentals"/>
<link wikidata="Q48803" start="17130" end="17143" title="Horticulture" label="horticultural"/>
<link wikidata="Q1479412" start="17298" end="17303" title="Plant propagation" label="grown"/>
<link wikidata="Q838818" start="17432" end="17453" title="Jacaranda mimosifolia" label="Jacaranda mimosifolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q125537257" start="17512" end="17522" title="trifoliate" label="trifoliate"/>
<link wikidata="Q5184448" start="17537" end="17553" title="Crescentia alata" label="Crescentia alata"/>
<link wikidata="Q3235597" start="17572" end="17583" title="crucifixion" label="crucifixion"/>
<link wikidata="Q928" start="17622" end="17633" title="Philippines" label="Philippines"/>
<link wikidata="Q60469796" start="17639" end="17655" title="religious symbol" label="religious symbol"/>
<link wikidata="Q5647550" start="17664" end="17676" title="Handroanthus" label="Handroanthus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1429385" start="17707" end="17715" title="Guaiacum" label="Guaiacum"/>
<link wikidata="Q155982" start="17723" end="17737" title="Zygophyllaceae" label="Zygophyllaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q3695281" start="18022" end="18036" title="Tabebuia rosea" label="Tabebuia rosea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370714" start="18105" end="18111" title="lumber" label="lumber"/>
<link wikidata="Q127834" start="18127" end="18136" title="New World" label="New World"/>
<link wikidata="Q3512744" start="18152" end="18173" title="Tabebuia heterophylla" label="Tabebuia heterophylla"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18191" end="18209" title="Tabebuia angustata" label="Tabebuia angustata"/>
<link wikidata="Q3834414" start="18264" end="18281" title="Caribbean islands" label="Caribbean islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370714" start="18341" end="18347" title="timber" label="timber"/>
<link wikidata="Q9055545" start="18362" end="18372" title="Paratecoma" label="Paratecoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q8678" start="18426" end="18440" title="Rio de Janeiro" label="Rio de Janeiro"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124183" start="18618" end="18628" title="lumberjack" label="lumberjack"/>
<link wikidata="Q11697812" start="18696" end="18716" title="Parmentiera aculeata" label="Parmentiera aculeata"/>
<link wikidata="Q27611" start="18756" end="18771" title="Central America" label="Central America"/>
<link wikidata="Q214542" start="18850" end="18867" title="Crescentia cujete" label="Crescentia cujete"/>
<link wikidata="Q5184448" start="18884" end="18900" title="Crescentia alata" label="Crescentia alata"/>
<link wikidata="Q811" start="18919" end="18928" title="Nicaragua" label="Nicaragua"/>
<link wikidata="Q2889371" start="18961" end="18978" title="semilla de jicaro" label="semilla de jicaro"/>
<link wikidata="Q23485" start="18986" end="18991" title="Onion" label="Onion"/>
<link wikidata="Q26736" start="19034" end="19039" title="clove" label="clove"/>
<link wikidata="Q2596997" start="19093" end="19102" title="condiment" label="condiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q739" start="19118" end="19126" title="Colombia" label="Colombia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19159" end="19183" title="Dolichandra quadrivalvis" label="Dolichandra quadrivalvis"/>
<link wikidata="Q40802" start="19252" end="19256" title="crab" label="crab"/>
<link wikidata="Q107231" start="19273" end="19282" title="Paralysis" label="paralyzed"/>
<link wikidata="Q15548329" start="19466" end="19485" title="Tanaecium nocturnum" label="Tanaecium nocturnum"/>
<link wikidata="Q194270" start="19511" end="19525" title="hallucinogenic" label="hallucinogenic"/>
<link wikidata="Q8386" start="19526" end="19530" title="drug" label="drug"/>
<link wikidata="Q7391" start="19582" end="19586" title="bees" label="bees"/>
<link wikidata="Q10987" start="19603" end="19608" title="honey" label="honey"/>
<link wikidata="Q15549346" start="19617" end="19633" title="Fridericia chica" label="Fridericia chica"/>
<link wikidata="Q161179" start="19663" end="19670" title="pigment" label="pigment"/>
<link wikidata="Q244451" start="19683" end="19695" title="Amazon Basin" label="Amazon Basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q189720" start="19719" end="19722" title="dye" label="dye"/>
<link wikidata="Q5197884" start="19742" end="19766" title="Cybistax antisyphilitica" label="Cybistax antisyphilitica"/>
<link wikidata="Q419" start="19818" end="19822" title="Peru" label="Peru"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19842" end="19866" title="Sparattosperma leucantha" label="Sparattosperma leucantha"/>
<link wikidata="Q750" start="19884" end="19891" title="Bolivia" label="Bolivia"/>
<link wikidata="Q11457" start="19928" end="19934" title="cotton" label="cotton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2039217" start="20048" end="20065" title="Identification (biology)" label="Misidentification"/>
<link wikidata="Q441" start="20085" end="20093" title="botanist" label="botanist"/>
<link wikidata="Q689044" start="20189" end="20196" title="Voucher" label="Voucher"/>
<link wikidata="Q2075980" start="20197" end="20205" title="Biological specimen" label="specimen"/>
<link wikidata="Q179399" start="20217" end="20224" title="Infertility" label="sterile"/>
<link wikidata="Q112965645" start="20571" end="20578" title="symptom" label="symptom"/>
<link wikidata="Q12078" start="20591" end="20597" title="cancer" label="cancer"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20696" end="20716" title="Adenocalymma flavida" label="Adenocalymma flavida"/>
<link wikidata="Q1259977" start="20789" end="20796" title="extract" label="extract"/>
<link wikidata="Q141397" start="20808" end="20818" title="Martinella (plant)" label="Martinella"/>
<link wikidata="Q167844" start="20855" end="20869" title="conjunctivitis" label="conjunctivitis"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="247989" wikidata="Q262677" url="?curid=247989" title="Lactobacillus delbrueckii subsp. bulgaricus">
<text>Lactobacillus bulgaricus is the main bacterium used for the production of yogurt. It also plays a crucial role in the ripening of some cheeses, as well as in other processes involving naturally fermented products. It is defined as homofermentive lactic acid bacteria due to lactic acid being the single end product of its carbohydrate digestion. It is also considered a probiotic.

It is a gram-positive rod that may appear long and filamentous. It is non-motile and does not form spores. It is also non-pathogenic. It is regarded as aciduric or acidophilic, since it requires a low pH (around 5.4–4.6) to grow effectively. In addition, it is anaerobic. As it grows on raw dairy products, it creates and maintains the acidic environment that it needs to thrive via its production of lactic acid. In addition, it grows optimally at temperatures of 40–44 °C under anaerobic conditions. It has complex nutritional requirements which vary according to the environment. These include carbohydrates, unsaturated fatty acids, amino acids, and vitamins.

First identified in 1905 by the Bulgarian doctor Stamen Grigorov by isolating what later termed &quot;Lactobacillus Bulgaricus&quot; from a Bulgarian yogurt sample, the bacteria can be found naturally in the gastrointestinal tract of mammals living in Sofia region and along the Balkan Mountain (Stara Planina) mesoregion of Balkan peninsula. One strain, &quot;Lactobacillus bulgaricus&quot; GLB44, is extracted from the leaves of the &quot;Galanthus nivalis&quot; (snowdrop flower) in Bulgaria. The bacterium is also grown artificially in many countries.

== Use ==
&quot;Lactobacillus delbrueckii&quot; subsp. &quot;bulgaricus&quot; is commonly used alongside &quot;Streptococcus thermophilus&quot; as a starter for making yogurt. The &quot;Lb. bulgaricus&quot; 2038 strain has been used for decades for yogurt fermentation. The two species work in synergy, with &quot;L. d. bulgaricus&quot; producing amino acids from milk proteins, which are then used by &quot;S. thermophilus&quot;. This relationship is considered to be symbiotic. Both species produce lactic acid, which gives yogurt its tart flavor and acts as a preservative. The resulting decrease in pH also partially coagulates the milk proteins, such as casein, resulting in yogurt&#x27;s thickness. While fermenting milk, &quot;L. d. bulgaricus&quot; produces acetaldehyde, one of the main yogurt aroma components. Some strains of &quot;L. d. bulgaricus&quot;, such as &quot;L. bulgaricus&quot; GLB44, also produce bacteriocins, which have been shown to kill undesired bacteria &quot;in vitro&quot;. The viability of &quot;Lactobacillus delbrueckii&quot; subsp. &quot;bulgaricus&quot; is extremely important in that it is necessary for it to be efficient at fermentation and to effectively keep the food products it produces from spoiling. Freeze-drying is the preferred method of preserving the viability of the cells, but not all cells survive this process.

Due to its usefulness in natural fermentation processes, specifically in how it makes fermented food products out of cow&#x27;s milk, it has great economic importance. Some of the biggest importers of the bacterium are Japan, the United States, and the European Union.

It has also been considered a contaminant of beer due to its homofermentative production of lactic acid, an off-flavor in many styles of beer. In other styles of beer, however, lactic acid bacteria can contribute to the overall appearance, aroma, taste, and/or mouthfeel, and generally produce an otherwise pleasing sourness.

== History ==
&quot;Lactobacillus delbrueckii&quot; subsp. &quot;bulgaricus&quot; was first identified in 1905 by Stamen Grigorov, who named it &quot;Bacillus bulgaricus&quot;.

Ilya Metchnikoff, a professor at the Pasteur Institute in Paris, researched the relationship between the longevity of Bulgarians and their consumption of yogurt. He had the idea that aging is caused by putrefactive activity, or proteolysis, by microbes that produce toxic substances in the intestine.

Proteolytic bacteria such as clostridia, which are part of the normal intestinal flora, produce toxic substances including phenols, ammonia and indols by digestion of proteins. These compounds are responsible for what Metchnikoff called &quot;intestinal auto-intoxication&quot;, which, according to him, was the cause of the physical changes associated with old age. It was already known at that time that fermentation with lactic acid bacteria inhibits the deterioration of milk because of its low pH.

Metchnikoff&#x27;s research also noted that rural populations in Southeastern Europe and the Russian steppes daily consume milk fermented with lactic acid bacteria and live relatively longer than other populations. Based on these data Metchnikoff proposed that consumption of fermented milk seeds the intestine with harmless lactic acid bacteria increasing intestinal acidity and suppressing the growth of proteolytic bacteria. His results were questioned after a 1920 study showed that the bacterium could not survive in the human intestines, but the idea nevertheless started the research into actually useful probiotics.

&quot;Lactobacillus bulgaricus&quot; is a constituent in VSL#3.

In 2012 it was declared India&#x27;s national microbe.

=== Taxonomic history ===
In bacterial taxonomy, the basionym for &quot;L. d. bulgaricus&quot; was &quot;Thermobacterium bulgaricum&quot; . The entity became &quot;Lactobacillus bulgaricus&quot; in 1973 with the work of Rugosa and Hansen, and was reclassified as a subspecies under &quot;Lactobacillus delbrueckii&quot; in 1984.

== Research ==

=== Quantification in cow&#x27;s milk cheese via real-time polymerase chain reaction assay ===
In 2017, there was a study involving the development of a real-time polymerase chain reaction (qPCR) assay for quantifying &quot;Lactobacillus delbrueckii&quot; subsp. &quot;bulgaricus&quot; as well as &quot;Streptococcus thermophilus&quot; in cow&#x27;s milk cheese. The goal of this study was to create a way to identify and quantify &quot;Lactobacillus delbrueckii&quot; subsp. &quot;bulgaricus&quot; and &quot;Streptococcus thermophilus,&quot; two lactic acid producing species crucial to the fermentation and ripening of cheese, in a timely manner through the use of qPCR. Two essays using &quot;lacZ&quot; gene targeting PCR primers resulted from this study and were deemed compatible with the two lactic acid bacteria (LAB) species. This allowed for the direct quantification of &quot;Lactobacillus delbrueckii&quot; subsp. &quot;bulgaricus&quot; and &quot;Streptococcus thermophilus&quot; in cheese produced from unpasteurized cow&#x27;s milk.

=== Effects on antigenicity of milk proteins ===
A study in 2012 posed the question of whether or not &quot;Lactobacillus delbrueckii&quot; subsp. &quot;bulgaricus&quot; had any effect on the antigenicity of four kinds of milk proteins, being α-lactalbumin (α-LA), β-lactoglobulin (β-LG), α-casein (α-CN), and β-casein (β-CN). These proteins are the main proteins found in cow&#x27;s milk and are known to have antigenic properties in humans, especially young children and infants. 2–5% of young children and infants experience cow&#x27;s milk protein allergy (CMPA), which has harmful effects on their development and may even result in death. This allergy is facilitated through the antigenicity of the milk proteins, which is the ability of the proteins to trigger an immune response in the body that can result in a number of possible allergic reactions. The study was performed by simulating digestion of unfermented milk and milk that was fermented through exposure to &quot;Lactobacillus delbrueckii subsp. bulgaricus&quot; to compare their antigenicities in order to see if fermentation had any effect on the antigenicity of the proteins. The antigenicities were measured through an enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA). The results claimed that the fermentation of cow&#x27;s milk by &quot;Lactobacillus delbrueckii subsp. bulgaricus&quot; reduced the antigenicity of α-LA and β-CN. However, it also increased the antigenicity of α-CN while β-LG was not impacted.

=== Subcellular membrane fluidity under cold and osmotic stress ===
The efficiency of lactic acid bacteria cryopreservation is not consistent and may lead to cell death. &quot;Lactobacillus delbrueckii&quot; subsp. &quot;bulgaricus&quot; has adapted to defend against cold stress. The way most cells react to the cold is by changing the fluidity of the cellular membrane, but this particular bacterium has acquired different tactics to fight against cold stress. The first way to cope with the cold is to increase viscosity by taking in compounds such as disaccharides, polysaccharides, amino acids and antioxidants. The second strategy used is performed by inducing active responses during the fermentation or post-fermentation processes. By modifying these it will change the temperature, pH and medium composition. This results in specific metabolic pathways becoming active, with the synthesis of cold shock proteins.

=== Survival during freeze-drying processes ===
In 2017, a study was done to see the effects of six different substances on the growth and freeze- drying of Lactobacillus. Using Lactobacillus as starter cultures for the dairy industry depends on the number of viable and active cells. Currently, the preferred method to preserve the bacterial cells is through freeze-drying, however this also results in some strains being killed. This is due to various complications of freeze-drying, including the formation of ice crystals, loss of membrane fluidity, and the denaturation of important macromolecules. Regardless, freeze-drying has been used for decades in microbiological research as a way to store and stabilize cultures. Six substances, being sodium chloride, sorbitol, mannitol, mannose, monosodium glutamate, and betaine were tested to determine if they had any effect on the survivability of the cells after freeze-drying. Three of the six substances added had a positive effect on the growth and freeze-drying of Lactobacillus, being sodium chloride, sorbitol, and sodium glutamate. The results suggest that these substances have protective effects on &quot;Lactobacillus delbrueckii&quot; subsp. &quot;bulgaricus&quot; in small concentrations, but have little effect or even some harmful effects in higher concentrations. The optimal concentrations for sorbitol, sodium chloride and sodium glutamate for the desired protective effects were 0.15%, 0.6%, and 0.09% respectively. This was shown to increase cell viability drastically.

=== Immunotherapy for cancer ===

According to Helen Nauts from Cancer Research Institute, on a monograph reviewing the effects of bacterial infections on multiple types of cancer, Ivan Bogdanov, a Bulgarian physician, allegedly produced a vaccine consisting of lactobacillus bulgaricus and used it to treat two patients with myeloma, inducing remission in the two cases, one dying 18 months later due to influenza, and another living 45 months (survival median at the time was about 12–18 months). However, references are internal documents and conversations among hospitals; there&#x27;s no mention in English medical literature. An article from a commercial site and an alleged documentary are available (in Bulgarian).

== References ==
== Bibliography ==
* 

== External links ==
* Type strain of &quot;Lactobacillus delbrueckii subsp. bulgaricus&quot; at Bac&quot;Dive&quot; - the Bacterial Diversity Metadatabase</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q10876" start="37" end="46" title="bacterium" label="bacterium"/>
<link wikidata="Q13317" start="74" end="80" title="yogurt" label="yogurt"/>
<link wikidata="Q10943" start="135" end="141" title="cheese" label="cheese"/>
<link wikidata="Q41760" start="194" end="203" title="Fermentation" label="fermented"/>
<link wikidata="Q161249" start="274" end="285" title="lactic acid" label="lactic acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1816730" start="370" end="379" title="probiotic" label="probiotic"/>
<link wikidata="Q857288" start="390" end="403" title="gram-positive" label="gram-positive"/>
<link wikidata="Q33596" start="452" end="462" title="Motility" label="non-motile"/>
<link wikidata="Q196188" start="546" end="557" title="Acidophile (organisms)" label="acidophilic"/>
<link wikidata="Q40936" start="583" end="585" title="pH" label="pH"/>
<link wikidata="Q189790" start="643" end="652" title="Anaerobic organism" label="anaerobic"/>
<link wikidata="Q133255" start="1079" end="1088" title="Bulgarian people" label="Bulgarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q382140" start="1096" end="1111" title="Stamen Grigorov" label="Stamen Grigorov"/>
<link wikidata="Q18344721" start="1402" end="1444" title="Lactobacillus bulgaricus GLB44" label="&amp;quot;Lactobacillus bulgaricus&amp;quot; GLB44"/>
<link wikidata="Q109995" start="1488" end="1505" title="Galanthus nivalis" label="Galanthus nivalis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1041276" start="1715" end="1741" title="Streptococcus thermophilus" label="Streptococcus thermophilus"/>
<link wikidata="Q13317" start="1772" end="1778" title="yogurt" label="yogurt"/>
<link wikidata="Q161249" start="2105" end="2116" title="lactic acid" label="lactic acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q61457" start="2370" end="2382" title="acetaldehyde" label="acetaldehyde"/>
<link wikidata="Q18344721" start="2479" end="2510" title="Lactobacillus bulgaricus GLB44" label="&amp;quot;L. bulgaricus&amp;quot; GLB44"/>
<link wikidata="Q183119" start="2525" end="2536" title="bacteriocin" label="bacteriocin"/>
<link wikidata="Q382140" start="3682" end="3697" title="Stamen Grigorov" label="Stamen Grigorov"/>
<link wikidata="Q172254" start="3746" end="3762" title="Ilya Metchnikoff" label="Ilya Metchnikoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q391083" start="3783" end="3800" title="Pasteur Institute" label="Pasteur Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q133255" start="3864" end="3874" title="Bulgarians" label="Bulgarians"/>
<link wikidata="Q33123" start="3974" end="3985" title="proteolysis" label="proteolysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q132809" start="4077" end="4087" title="clostridia" label="clostridia"/>
<link wikidata="Q407142" start="4171" end="4178" title="phenols" label="phenols"/>
<link wikidata="Q4087" start="4180" end="4187" title="ammonia" label="ammonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q319541" start="4192" end="4197" title="indol" label="indol"/>
<link wikidata="Q8054" start="4215" end="4222" title="protein" label="protein"/>
<link wikidata="Q13360072" start="4472" end="4492" title="lactic acid bacteria" label="lactic acid bacteria"/>
<link wikidata="Q40936" start="4547" end="4549" title="pH" label="pH"/>
<link wikidata="Q263686" start="4617" end="4636" title="Southeastern Europe" label="Southeastern Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q113245837" start="5234" end="5239" title="VSL(3)" label="VSL#3"/>
<link wikidata="Q810198" start="5351" end="5359" title="basionym" label="basionym"/>
<link wikidata="Q856198" start="5834" end="5838" title="qPCR" label="qPCR"/>
<link wikidata="Q311359" start="6340" end="6344" title="lacZ" label="lacZ"/>
<link wikidata="Q176996" start="6366" end="6369" title="Polymerase chain reaction" label="PCR"/>
<link wikidata="Q13360072" start="6465" end="6468" title="Lactic acid bacteria" label="LAB"/>
<link wikidata="Q14897677" start="6935" end="6948" title="Alpha-lactalbumin" label="α-lactalbumin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3827578" start="6957" end="6972" title="Beta-lactoglobulin" label="β-lactoglobulin"/>
<link wikidata="Q103537" start="7103" end="7110" title="antigen" label="antigen"/>
<link wikidata="Q970203" start="7220" end="7251" title="cow&amp;#x27;s milk protein allergy" label="cow&amp;#x27;s milk protein allergy"/>
<link wikidata="Q332126" start="7883" end="7916" title="ELISA" label="enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144664" start="8278" end="8294" title="cryopreservation" label="cryopreservation"/>
<link wikidata="Q173600" start="8726" end="8738" title="disaccharide" label="disaccharide"/>
<link wikidata="Q134219" start="8741" end="8755" title="polysaccharide" label="polysaccharide"/>
<link wikidata="Q8066" start="8758" end="8768" title="amino acid" label="amino acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q133948" start="8774" end="8785" title="antioxidant" label="antioxidant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061596" start="9251" end="9264" title="Lactobacillus" label="Lactobacillus"/>
<link wikidata="Q6815129" start="9629" end="9646" title="membrane fluidity" label="membrane fluidity"/>
<link wikidata="Q273186" start="9656" end="9668" title="Denaturation (biochemistry)" label="denaturation"/>
<link wikidata="Q178593" start="9682" end="9696" title="Macromolecule" label="macromolecules"/>
<link wikidata="Q2314" start="9842" end="9857" title="sodium chloride" label="sodium chloride"/>
<link wikidata="Q245280" start="9859" end="9867" title="sorbitol" label="sorbitol"/>
<link wikidata="Q407646" start="9869" end="9877" title="mannitol" label="mannitol"/>
<link wikidata="Q10809118" start="9879" end="9886" title="mannose" label="mannose"/>
<link wikidata="Q179678" start="9888" end="9908" title="monosodium glutamate" label="monosodium glutamate"/>
<link wikidata="Q72052841" start="9914" end="9921" title="betaine" label="betaine"/>
<link wikidata="Q16920764" start="10701" end="10726" title="Cancer Research Institute" label="Cancer Research Institute"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="247990" wikidata="Q1393316" url="?curid=247990" title="Tove">
<text>Tove is a Scandinavian given name that derives from the Old Norse name Tófa. The name is usually given to girls but occasionally to boys. It is also an alternative English spelling of the Hebrew name more commonly spelled Tovah or Tova.

== Origins ==
Some believe the name to be a shortening of &quot;Þorfríðr&quot;, whose elements are the deity-name Thor and Old Norse &quot;fríðr&quot; &#x27;beautiful&#x27;. Tófa and Tófi appear to have been relatively popular names in the 10th and 11th centuries and are found in Anglo-Scandinavian court witness lists and later in the Domesday Book in their Latinised form. The personal name became a surname in medieval England, with spellings of Tovi, Tovie (16th century) and Tovey recorded in wills and church documents.

== Notable women ==
* Tove of the Obotrites, 10th-century Wendish princess
* Tove Alexandersson, Swedish orienteer
* Tove Ditlevsen, Danish poet and author
* Tove Edfeldt, Swedish actress
* Tove Fergo, Danish vicar and politician
* Tove Jansson, Finnish artist and author
* Tove Lindbo Larsen, Danish politician
* Tove Lo, Swedish singer
* Tove Midelfart, Norwegian lawyer and businesswoman
* Tove Maës, Danish actress
* Tove Nilsen, Norwegian writer
* Tove Nielsen, Danish politician
* Tove Skutnabb-Kangas (1940-2023), Finnish linguist and educator
* Tove Styrke, Swedish singer
* Birte Tove (1945–2016), Danish actress and nude model

== Notable men ==
* Tove (sculptor), 12th-century Scanian sculptor
* Tove Christensen, Canadian actor and producer

== Fictional characters ==
* a legendary young woman, mistress of the Danish King Waldemar, and subject of a poem by Jens Peter Jacobsen best known for its musical setting as the Gurre-Lieder of Arnold Schoenberg
* a fictional, slithy creature created by Lewis Carroll that appears in his poem Jabberwocky

==See also==
* High Tove, a mountain in the English Lake District
* River Tove, tributary of the Great Ouse in England
* TOVE Project, an ontology for modelling enterprises
* &quot;Tove&quot; (film), a 2020 biopic about Tove Jansson

*Tova (disambiguation)

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1393316" start="0" end="4" title="Tove" label="Tove"/>
<link wikidata="Q21195" start="10" end="21" title="Scandinavia" label="Scandinavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q202444" start="23" end="33" title="given name" label="given name"/>
<link wikidata="Q16965697" start="71" end="75" title="Tofa (Poetic Edda)" label="Tófa"/>
<link wikidata="Q104841574" start="231" end="235" title="Tova" label="Tova"/>
<link wikidata="Q42952" start="352" end="356" title="Thor" label="Thor"/>
<link wikidata="Q16965697" start="412" end="416" title="Tofa (Poetic Edda)" label="Tófa"/>
<link wikidata="Q7829486" start="421" end="425" title="Tovi the Proud" label="Tófi"/>
<link wikidata="Q19867" start="575" end="588" title="Domesday Book" label="Domesday Book"/>
<link wikidata="Q3352994" start="788" end="809" title="Tove of the Obotrites" label="Tove of the Obotrites"/>
<link wikidata="Q113200" start="843" end="861" title="Tove Alexandersson" label="Tove Alexandersson"/>
<link wikidata="Q270333" start="883" end="897" title="Tove Ditlevsen" label="Tove Ditlevsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q436458" start="924" end="936" title="Tove Edfeldt" label="Tove Edfeldt"/>
<link wikidata="Q3081203" start="956" end="966" title="Tove Fergo" label="Tove Fergo"/>
<link wikidata="Q102071" start="998" end="1010" title="Tove Jansson" label="Tove Jansson"/>
<link wikidata="Q4568690" start="1040" end="1058" title="Tove Lindbo Larsen" label="Tove Lindbo Larsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q15948790" start="1080" end="1087" title="Tove Lo" label="Tove Lo"/>
<link wikidata="Q12007232" start="1106" end="1120" title="Tove Kvammen Midelfart" label="Tove Midelfart"/>
<link wikidata="Q438574" start="1159" end="1168" title="Tove Maës" label="Tove Maës"/>
<link wikidata="Q2306413" start="1187" end="1198" title="Tove Nilsen" label="Tove Nilsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q4969440" start="1219" end="1231" title="Tove Nielsen (politician)" label="Tove Nielsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q546837" start="1253" end="1273" title="Tove Skutnabb-Kangas" label="Tove Skutnabb-Kangas"/>
<link wikidata="Q454567" start="1319" end="1330" title="Tove Styrke" label="Tove Styrke"/>
<link wikidata="Q12303573" start="1349" end="1359" title="Birte Tove" label="Birte Tove"/>
<link wikidata="Q25351662" start="1424" end="1439" title="Tove (sculptor)" label="Tove (sculptor)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7829466" start="1473" end="1489" title="Tove Christensen" label="Tove Christensen"/>
<link wikidata="Q297194" start="1602" end="1610" title="Valdemar I of Denmark" label="Waldemar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1555250" start="1699" end="1711" title="Gurre-Lieder" label="Gurre-Lieder"/>
<link wikidata="Q38082" start="1775" end="1788" title="Lewis Carroll" label="Lewis Carroll"/>
<link wikidata="Q250371" start="1814" end="1825" title="Jabberwocky" label="Jabberwocky"/>
<link wikidata="Q5757320" start="1842" end="1851" title="High Tove" label="High Tove"/>
<link wikidata="Q7337893" start="1895" end="1905" title="River Tove" label="River Tove"/>
<link wikidata="Q12071317" start="1948" end="1960" title="TOVE Project" label="TOVE Project"/>
<link wikidata="Q96628864" start="2002" end="2025" title="Tove (film)" label="&amp;quot;Tove&amp;quot; (film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q20100069" start="2062" end="2083" title="Tova (disambiguation)" label="Tova (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="247991" wikidata="Q202444" url="?curid=247991" title="Given name">
<text>A given name (also known as a forename or first name) is the part of a personal name that identifies a person, potentially with a middle name as well, and differentiates that person from the other members of a group (typically a family or clan) who have a common surname. The term &quot;given name&quot; refers to a name usually bestowed at or close to the time of birth, usually by the parents of the newborn. A &quot;Christian name&quot; is the first name which is given at baptism, in Christian custom.

In informal situations, given names are often used in a familiar and friendly manner. In more formal situations, a person&#x27;s surname is more commonly used. The idioms &quot; and &#x27;being on first-name terms&#x27; refer to the familiarity inherent in addressing someone by their given name.

By contrast, a surname (also known as a family name, last name, or &quot;gentile&quot; name) is normally inherited and shared with other members of one&#x27;s immediate family. Regnal names and religious or monastic names are special given names bestowed upon someone receiving a crown or entering a religious order; such a person then typically becomes known chiefly by that name.

==Name order==

The order &quot;given name – family name&quot;, commonly known as &quot;Western name order&quot;, is used throughout most European countries and in countries that have cultures predominantly influenced by European culture, including North and South America; North, East, Central and West India; Australia, New Zealand, and the Philippines.

The order &quot;family name – given name&quot;, commonly known as &quot;Eastern name order&quot;, is primarily used in East Asia (for example in China, Japan, Korea, Taiwan, Singapore, and Vietnam, among others, and by Malaysian Chinese), as well as in Southern and North-Eastern parts of India, and as a standard in Hungary. This order is also used to various degrees and in specific contexts in other European countries, such as Austria and adjacent areas of Germany (that is, Bavaria), and in France, Switzerland, Belgium, Greece and Italy, possibly because of the influence of bureaucracy, which commonly puts the family name before the given name. In China and Korea, part of the given name may be shared among all members of a given generation within a family and extended family or families, in order to differentiate those generations from other generations.

The order &quot;given name – father&#x27;s family name – mother&#x27;s family name&quot; is commonly used in several Spanish-speaking countries to acknowledge the families of both parents.

The order &quot;given name – mother&#x27;s family name – father&#x27;s family name&quot; is commonly used in Portuguese-speaking countries to acknowledge the families of both parents. Today, people in Spain and Uruguay can rearrange the order of their names legally to this order.

The order &quot;given name – father&#x27;s given name – grandfather&#x27;s given name&quot; (often referred to as &quot;triple name&quot;) is the official naming order used in Arabic countries (for example Saudi Arabia, Iraq and United Arab Emirates).

==Compound==

In many Western cultures, people often have multiple given names. Most often the first one in sequence is the one that a person goes by, although exceptions are not uncommon, such as in the cases of John Edgar Hoover (J. Edgar) and Dame Mary Barbara Hamilton Cartland (Barbara).
The given name might also be used in compound form, as in, for example, John Paul or a hyphenated style like Bengt-Arne. A middle name might be part of a compound given name or might be, instead, a maiden name, a patronymic, or a baptismal name.

In England, it was unusual for a person to have more than one given name until the seventeenth century when Charles James Stuart (King Charles I) was baptised with two names. That was a French fashion, which spread to the English aristocracy, following the royal example, then spread to the general population and became common by the end of the eighteenth century.

Some double-given names for women were used at the start of the eighteenth century but were used together as a unit: Anna Maria, Mary Anne and Sarah Jane. Those became stereotyped as the typical names of servants and so became unfashionable in the nineteenth century.

Double names remain popular in the Southern United States.

Double names are also common among Vietnamese names to make repeated name in the family. For example, Đặng Vũ Minh Anh and Đặng Vũ Minh Ánh, are two sisters with the given names Minh Anh and Minh Ánh.

===Initials===
Sometimes, a given name is used as just an initial, especially in combination with the middle initial (such as with H. G. Wells), and more rarely as an initial while the middle name is not one (such as with L. Ron Hubbard).

== Legal status ==
A child&#x27;s given name or names are usually chosen by the parents soon after birth. If a name is not assigned at birth, one may be given at a naming ceremony, with family and friends in attendance. In most jurisdictions, a child&#x27;s name at birth is a matter of public record, inscribed on a birth certificate, or its equivalent. In Western cultures, people normally retain the same given name throughout their lives. However, in some cases these names may be changed by following legal processes or by repute. People may also change their names when immigrating from one country to another with different naming conventions.

In certain jurisdictions, a government-appointed registrar of births may refuse to register a name for the reasons that it may cause a child harm, that it is considered offensive, or if it is deemed impractical. In France, the agency can refer the case to a local judge. Some jurisdictions, such as Sweden, restrict the spelling of names. In Denmark, one does not need to register a given name for the child until the child is six months old, and in some cases, one can even wait a little longer than this before the child gets an official name.

==Origins and meanings==

Parents may choose a name because of its meaning. This may be a personal or familial meaning, such as giving a child the name of an admired person, or it may be an example of nominative determinism, in which the parents give the child a name that they believe will be lucky or favourable for the child. Given names most often derive from the following categories:
* Aspirational personal traits (external and internal). For example, the male names:
**Clement (&quot;merciful&quot;); as popularised by Pope Clement I (88–98), saint, and his many papal successors of that name;
**Augustus (&quot;consecrated, holy&quot;), first popularised by the first Roman Emperor; later (as Augustine) by two saints;
**English examples include numerous female names such as Faith, Prudence, Amanda (Latin: worthy of love); Blanche (white (pure));
* Occupations, for example George means &quot;earth-worker&quot;, &quot;i.e.&quot;, &quot;farmer&quot;.
* Circumstances of birth, for example:
**Thomas meaning &quot;twin&quot;;
**&quot;Quintus&quot; (Latin: &quot;fifth&quot;), which was traditionally given to the fifth male child.
* Objects, for example Peter means &quot;rock&quot; and Edgar means &quot;rich spear&quot;.
* Physical characteristics, for example Calvin means &quot;bald&quot;.
* Variations on another name, especially to change the sex of the name (Pauline, Georgia) or to adapt from another language (for instance, the names Francis or Francisco that come from the name Franciscus meaning &quot;Frank or Frenchman&quot;).
* Surnames, Such names can honour other branches of a family, where the surname would not otherwise be passed down (e.g., the mother&#x27;s maiden surname). Modern examples include:
**Winston, 
**Harrison, 
**Ross.
: Many were adopted from the 17th century in England to show respect to notable ancestry, usually given to nephews or male grandchildren of members of the great families concerned, from which the usage spread to general society. This was regardless of whether the family name concerned was in danger of dying out, for example with Howard, a family with many robust male lines over history. Notable examples include
**Howard, from the Howard family, Dukes of Norfolk;
**Courtenay, from the surname of the Earls of Devon;
**Trevor, from the Welsh chieftain Tudor Trevor, lord of Hereford;
**Clifford, from the Barons Clifford;
**Digby, from the family of Baron Digby/Earl of Bristol;
**Shirley (originally a man&#x27;s forename), from the Shirley family, Earls Ferrer;
**Percy, from the Percy Earls and Dukes of Northumberland;
**Lindsay, from that noble Scottish family, Earls of Crawford;
**Graham, from that noble Scottish family, Dukes of Montrose;
**Eliot, from the Eliot family, Earls of St Germans;
**Herbert, from the Herbert family, Earls of Pembroke;
**Russell, from the Russell family, Earls and Dukes of Bedford;
**Stanley, from the Stanley family, Earls of Derby;
**Vernon, Earl of Shipbrook
**Dillon, the Irish family of Dillon, Viscount Dillon
* Places, for example Brittany and Lorraine.
* Time of birth, for example, day of the week, as in Kofi Annan, whose given name means &quot;born on Friday&quot;, or the holiday on which one was born, for example, the name Natalie meaning &quot;born on Christmas day&quot; in Latin (Noel (French &quot;Christmas&quot;), a name given to males born at Christmas); also April, May, or June.
* Combination of the above, for example the Armenian name Sirvart means &quot;love rose&quot;.

In many cultures, given names are reused, especially to commemorate ancestors or those who are particularly admired, resulting in a limited repertoire of names that sometimes vary by orthography.

The most familiar example of this, to Western readers, is the use of Biblical and saints&#x27; names in most of the Christian countries (with Ethiopia, in which names were often ideals or abstractions—Haile Selassie, &quot;power of the Trinity&quot;; Haile Miriam, &quot;power of Mary&quot;—as the most conspicuous exception). However, the name Jesus is considered taboo or sacrilegious in some parts of the Christian world, though this taboo does not extend to the cognate Joshua or related forms which are common in many languages even among Christians. In some Spanish-speaking countries, the name Jesus is considered a normal given name.

Similarly, the name Mary, now popular among Christians, particularly Roman Catholics, was considered too holy for secular use until about the 12th century. In countries that particularly venerated Mary, this remained the case much longer; in Poland, until the arrival in the 17th century of French queens named Marie.

Most common given names in English (and many other European languages) can be grouped into broad categories based on their origin:
* Hebrew names, most often from the Bible, are very common in, or are elements of names used in historically Christian countries. Some have elements meaning &quot;God&quot;, especially &quot;Eli&quot;. Examples: Michael, Joshua, Daniel, Joseph, David, Adam, Samuel, Elizabeth, Hannah and Mary. There are also a handful of names in use derived from the Aramaic, particularly the names of prominent figures in the New Testament—such as Thomas, Martha and Bartholomew.
** All of the Semitic peoples of history and the present day use at least some names constructed like these in Hebrew (and the ancient Hebrews used names not constructed like these—such as Moses, probably an Egyptian name related to the names of Pharaohs like Thutmose and Ahmose). The Muslim world is the best-known example (with names like Saif-al-din, &quot;sword of the faith&quot;, or Abd-Allah, &quot;servant of God&quot;), but even the Carthaginians had similar names: cf. Hannibal, &quot;the grace of god&quot; (in this case not the Abrahamic deity God, but the deity—probably Melkart—whose title is normally left untranslated, as Baal).
* Germanic names are characteristically warlike; roots with meanings like &quot;glory&quot;, &quot;strength&quot;, and &quot;will&quot; are common. The &quot;-bert&quot; element common in many such names comes from &quot;beraht&quot;, which means &quot;&quot;. Examples: Robert, Edward, Roger, Richard, Albert, Carl, Alfred, Rosalind, Emma, Emmett, Eric and Matilda.
* French forms of Germanic names. Since the Norman conquest of England, many English-given names of Germanic origin are used in their French forms. Examples: Charles, Henry, William.

*Slavic names may be of peaceful character, the compounds being derived from the word roots meaning &quot;to protect&quot;, &quot;to love&quot;, &quot;peace&quot;, &quot;to praise [gods]&quot;, or &quot;to give&quot;. Examples: Milena, Vesna, Bohumil, Dobromir, Svetlana, Vlastimil. Other names have a warlike character and are built of words meaning &quot;fighter&quot;, &quot;war&quot;, or &quot;anger&quot;. Examples: Casimir, Vladimir, Sambor, Wojciech and Zbigniew. Many of them derive from the root word &quot;slava&quot; (&quot;glory&quot;): Boleslav, Miroslav, Vladislav, Radoslav, Slavomir and Stanislav. Those derived from root word &quot;mir&quot; (&quot;world, peace&quot;) are also popular: Casimir, Slavomir, Radomir, Vladimir, Miroslav, Jaczemir.
* Celtic names are sometimes anglicised versions of Celtic forms, but the original form may also be used. Examples: Alan, Brian, Brigid, Mórag, Ross, Logan, Ciarán, Jennifer, and Seán. These names often have origins in Celtic words, as Celtic versions of the names of internationally known Christian saints, as names of Celtic mythological figures, or simply as long-standing names whose ultimate etymology is unclear.
* Greek names may be derived from the history and mythology of Classical Antiquity or be derived from the New Testament and early Christian traditions. Such names are often, but not always, anglicised. Examples: Helen, Stephen, Alexander, Andrew, Peter, Gregory, George, Christopher, Margaret, Nicholas, Jason, Timothy, Chloe, Zoë, Katherine, Penelope and Theodore.
*Latin names can also be adopted unchanged, or modified; in particular, the inflected element can be dropped, as often happens in borrowings from Latin to English. Examples: Laura, Victoria, Mark (Latin &quot;Marcus&quot;), Justin (Latin &quot;Justinus&quot;), Paul (Lat. &quot;Paulus&quot;), Julius, Julia, Cecilia, Felix, Vivian, Pascal (not a traditional-type Latin name, but the adjective-turned-name &quot;paschalis&quot;, meaning &#x27;of Easter&#x27; (&quot;Pascha&quot;)).
* Word names come from English vocabulary words. Feminine names of this sort—in more languages than English, and more cultures than Europe alone—frequently derive from nature, flowers, birds, colours, or gemstones. Examples include Jasmine, Lavender, Dawn, Daisy, Rose, Iris, Petunia, Rowan, Jade, and Violet. Male names of this sort are less common—examples like Hunter and Fischer, or names associated with strong animals, such as Bronco and Wolf. (This is more common in some other languages, such as Northern Germanic and Turkish).
* Trait names most conspicuously include the Christian virtues, mentioned above, and normally used as feminine names (such as the three Christian virtues—Faith, Hope, and Charity).
* Diminutives are sometimes used to distinguish between two or more people with the same given name. In English, Robert may be changed to &quot;Robbie&quot; or Thomas changed to &quot;Tommy&quot;. In German the names Hänsel and Gretel (as in the famous fairy tale) are the diminutive forms of Johann and Margarete. Examples: Vicky, Cindy, Tommy, Abby, Allie.
* Shortened names (see nickname) are generally nicknames of a longer name, but they are instead given as a person&#x27;s entire given name. For example, a man may simply be named &quot;Jim&quot;, and it is not short for James. Examples: Beth, Ben, Zach, Tom.
* Feminine variations exist for many masculine names, often in multiple forms. Examples: Charlotte, Stephanie, Victoria, Philippa, Jane, Jacqueline, Josephine, Danielle, Paula, Pauline, Patricia, Francesca.

Frequently, a given name has versions in many languages. For example, the biblical name &quot;Susanna&quot; also occurs in its original biblical Hebrew version, &quot;Shoshannah&quot;, its Spanish and Portuguese version &quot;Susana&quot;, its French version, &quot;Suzanne&quot;, its Polish version, &quot;Zuzanna&quot;, or its Hungarian version, &quot;Zsuzsanna&quot; .
===East Asia===
Despite the uniformity of Chinese surnames, some Chinese given names are fairly original because Chinese characters can be combined extensively. Unlike European languages, with their Biblical and Greco-Roman heritage, the Chinese language does not have a particular set of words reserved for given names: any combination of Chinese characters can theoretically be used as a given name. Nonetheless, a number of popular characters commonly recur, including &quot;Strong&quot; (, &quot;Wěi&quot;), &quot;Learned&quot; (, &quot;Wén&quot;), &quot;Peaceful&quot; (, &quot;Ān&quot;), and &quot;Beautiful&quot; (, &quot;Měi&quot;). Despite China&#x27;s increasing urbanization, several names such as &quot;Pine&quot; (, &quot;Sōng&quot;) or &quot;Plum&quot; (, &quot;Méi&quot;) also still reference nature.

Most Chinese given names are two characters long and—despite the examples above—the two characters together may mean nothing at all. Instead, they may be selected to include particular sounds, tones, or radicals; to balance the Chinese elements of a child&#x27;s birth chart; or to honor a generation poem handed down through the family for centuries. Traditionally, it is considered an affront, not an honor, to have a newborn named after an older relative and so full names are rarely passed down through a family in the manner of American English &quot;Seniors,&quot; &quot;Juniors&quot;, &quot;III&quot;, etc. Similarly, it is considered disadvantageous for the child to bear a name already made famous by someone else through romanizations, where a common name like Liu Xiang may be borne by tens of thousands.

Korean names and Vietnamese names are often simply conventions derived from Classical Chinese counterparts.

Many female Japanese names end in &quot;-ko&quot; (), usually meaning &quot;child&quot; on its own. However, the character when used in given names can have a feminine (adult) connotation.

In many Westernised Asian locations, many Asians also have an unofficial or even registered Western (typically English) given name, in addition to their Asian given name. This is also true for Asian students at colleges in countries such as the United States, Canada, and Australia as well as among international businesspeople. 
==Gender==
Most names in English are traditionally masculine (Hugo, James, Harold) or feminine (Daphne, Charlotte, Jane), but there are unisex names as well, such as Jordan, Jamie, Jesse, Morgan, Leslie/Lesley, Joe/Jo, Jackie, Pat, Dana, Alex, Chris/Kris, Randy/Randi, Lee, etc. Often, use for one gender is predominant. Also, a particular spelling is often more common for either men or women, even if the pronunciation is the same. 

Many culture groups, past and present, did not or do not gender their names strongly; thus, many or all of their names are unisex. On the other hand, in many languages including most Indo-European languages (but not English), gender is inherent in the grammar. Some countries have laws preventing unisex names, requiring parents to give their children sex-specific names. Names may have different gender connotations from country to country or language to language.

Within anthroponymic classification, names of human males are called &quot;andronyms&quot; (from Ancient Greek ἀνήρ / man, and ὄνυμα [ὄνομα] / name), while names of human females are called &quot;gynonyms&quot; (from Ancient Greek γυνή / woman, and ὄνυμα [ὄνομα] / name).

==Popularity==

The popularity (frequency) distribution of given names typically follows a power law distribution.

Since about 1800 in England and Wales and in the U.S., the popularity distribution of given names has been shifting so that the most popular names are losing popularity. For example, in England and Wales, the most popular female and male names given to babies born in 1800 were Mary and John, with 24% of female babies and 22% of male babies receiving those names, respectively. In contrast, the corresponding statistics for England and Wales in 1994 were Emily and James, with 3% and 4% of names, respectively. Not only have Mary and John gone out of favour in the English-speaking world, but the overall distribution of names has also changed significantly over the last 100years for females, but not for males. This has led to an increasing amount of diversity for female names.

===Choice of names===
Education, ethnicity, religion, class and political ideology affect parents&#x27; choice of names. Politically conservative parents choose common and traditional names, while politically liberal parents may choose the names of literary characters or other relatively obscure cultural figures. Devout members of religions often choose names from their religious scriptures. For example, Hindu parents may name a daughter Saanvi after the goddess, Jewish parents may name a boy Isaac after one of the earliest ancestral figures, and Muslim parents may name a boy Mohammed after the prophet Mohammed.

There are many tools parents can use to choose names, including books, websites and applications. An example is the Baby Name Game that uses the Elo rating system to rank parents preferred names and help them select one.

===Influence of popular culture===

Popular culture appears to have an influence on naming trends, at least in the United States and United Kingdom. Newly famous celebrities and public figures may influence the popularity of names. For example, in 2004, the names &quot;Keira&quot; and &quot;Kiera&quot; (anglicisation of Irish name Ciara) respectively became the 51st and 92nd most popular girls&#x27; names in the UK, following the rise in popularity of British actress Keira Knightley. In 2001, the use of Colby as a boys&#x27; name for babies in the United States jumped from 233rd place to 99th, just after Colby Donaldson was the runner-up on &quot;&quot;. Also, the female name &quot;Miley&quot; which before was not in the top 1000 was 278th most popular in 2007, following the rise to fame of singer-actress Miley Cyrus (who was named Destiny at birth).

Characters from fiction also seem to influence naming. After the name Kayla was used for a character on the American soap opera &quot;Days of Our Lives&quot;, the name&#x27;s popularity increased greatly. The name Tammy, and the related Tamara became popular after the movie &quot;Tammy and the Bachelor&quot; came out in 1957. Some names were established or spread by being used in literature. Notable examples include Pamela, invented by Sir Philip Sidney for a pivotal character in his epic prose work, &quot;The Countess of Pembroke&#x27;s Arcadia&quot;; Jessica, created by William Shakespeare in his play &quot;The Merchant of Venice&quot;; Vanessa, created by Jonathan Swift; Fiona, a character from James Macpherson&#x27;s spurious cycle of Ossian poems; Wendy, an obscure name popularised by J. M. Barrie in his play &quot;Peter Pan, or The Boy Who Wouldn&#x27;t Grow Up&quot;; and Madison, a character from the movie &quot;Splash&quot;. Lara and Larissa were rare in America before the appearance of &quot;Doctor Zhivago,&quot; and have become fairly common since.

Songs can influence the naming of children. Jude jumped from 814th most popular male name in 1968 to 668th in 1969, following the release of the Beatles&#x27; &quot;Hey Jude&quot;. Similarly, Layla charted as 969th most popular in 1972 after the Eric Clapton song. It had not been in the top 1,000 before. Kayleigh became a particularly popular name in the United Kingdom following the release of a song by the British rock group Marillion. Government statistics in 2005 revealed that 96% of Kayleighs were born after 1985, the year in which Marillion released &quot;Kayleigh&quot;. 

Popular culture figures need not be admirable in order to influence naming trends. For example, Peyton came into the top 1000 as a female given name for babies in the United States for the first time in 1992 (at #583), immediately after it was featured as the name of an evil nanny in the film &quot;The Hand That Rocks the Cradle&quot;. On the other hand, historical events can influence child-naming. For example, the given name Adolf has fallen out of use since the end of World War II in 1945.

In contrast with this anecdotal evidence, a comprehensive study of Norwegian first name datasets shows that the main factors that govern first name dynamics are endogenous. Monitoring the popularity of 1,000 names over 130 years, the authors have identified only five cases of exogenous effects, three of them are connected to the names given to the babies of the Norwegian royal family.

===20th century African-American names===
Since the civil rights movement of 1950–1970, African-American names given to children have strongly mirrored sociopolitical movements and philosophies in the African-American community. Since the 1970s neologistic (creative, inventive) practices have become increasingly common and the subject of academic study.

==See also==

* Hypocorism or pet name
* List of most popular given names (in many countries and cultures)
* Maiden and married names
* Name day
* Onomastics
* Personal name
* Praenomen
* Pseudonym
* Saint&#x27;s name
** Calendar of saints
* Slave name
* Thai name – somewhat special treatment of given names
* Theophoric name
** Theophory in the Bible
* Unisex name
* Bilingual tautological given names
== Notes ==
==References==
==Sources==
* 
* 
* 
==External links==

* 
* Given Name Frequency Project — Analysis of long-term trends in given names in England and Wales. Includes downloadable datasets of names for people interested in studying given name trends.
* NameVoyager — Visualization showing the frequency of the Top 1000 American baby names throughout history.
* U.S. Census Bureau: Distribution of Names Files — Large ranked list of male and female given names in addition to last names.
* Popular Baby Names — The Social Security Administration page for Popular U.S. Baby Names.
* Muslim Names — Islamic names with Audio Voice for pronunciation of Arabic names.
* Why Most European Names Ending in A Are Female — Article on Namepedia about gender and naming.
* Name Design — How to make unique name design and create name art.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q202444" start="2" end="12" title="Given name" label="given name"/>
<link wikidata="Q202444" start="30" end="38" title="Given name" label="forename"/>
<link wikidata="Q202444" start="42" end="52" title="Given name" label="first name"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071027" start="71" end="84" title="personal name" label="personal name"/>
<link wikidata="Q245025" start="130" end="141" title="middle name" label="middle name"/>
<link wikidata="Q8436" start="229" end="235" title="family" label="family"/>
<link wikidata="Q211503" start="239" end="243" title="clan" label="clan"/>
<link wikidata="Q101352" start="263" end="270" title="surname" label="surname"/>
<link wikidata="Q82799" start="316" end="320" title="name" label="name"/>
<link wikidata="Q2396897" start="419" end="433" title="Christian name" label="Christian name"/>
<link wikidata="Q35856" start="476" end="483" title="baptism" label="baptism"/>
<link wikidata="Q217438" start="872" end="896" title="Gentile name" label="&amp;quot;gentile&amp;quot; name"/>
<link wikidata="Q1200976" start="982" end="993" title="Regnal name" label="Regnal name"/>
<link wikidata="Q1417657" start="999" end="1026" title="Religious name" label="religious or monastic names"/>
<link wikidata="Q46" start="1326" end="1332" title="Europe" label="Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q49" start="1437" end="1442" title="North America" label="North"/>
<link wikidata="Q18" start="1447" end="1460" title="South America" label="South America"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058785" start="1462" end="1467" title="North India" label="North"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151572" start="1469" end="1473" title="East India" label="East"/>
<link wikidata="Q29024970" start="1475" end="1482" title="Central India" label="Central"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151567" start="1487" end="1497" title="Western India" label="West India"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="1499" end="1508" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q664" start="1510" end="1521" title="New Zealand" label="New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q928" start="1531" end="1542" title="Philippines" label="Philippines"/>
<link wikidata="Q27231" start="1664" end="1673" title="East Asia" label="East Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="1690" end="1695" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="1697" end="1702" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q18097" start="1704" end="1709" title="Korea" label="Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q865" start="1711" end="1717" title="Taiwan" label="Taiwan"/>
<link wikidata="Q334" start="1719" end="1728" title="Singapore" label="Singapore"/>
<link wikidata="Q881" start="1734" end="1741" title="Vietnam" label="Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1200528" start="1764" end="1781" title="Malaysian Chinese" label="Malaysian Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q542146" start="1798" end="1806" title="South India" label="Southern"/>
<link wikidata="Q863038" start="1811" end="1824" title="Northeast India" label="North-Eastern"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="1834" end="1839" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q28" start="1862" end="1869" title="Hungary" label="Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q40" start="1976" end="1983" title="Austria" label="Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="2006" end="2013" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q980" start="2024" end="2031" title="Bavaria" label="Bavaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="2041" end="2047" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q39" start="2049" end="2060" title="Switzerland" label="Switzerland"/>
<link wikidata="Q31" start="2062" end="2069" title="Belgium" label="Belgium"/>
<link wikidata="Q41" start="2071" end="2077" title="Greece" label="Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="2082" end="2087" title="Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1037731" start="2218" end="2240" title="generation name" label="part of the given name"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321" start="2530" end="2537" title="Spanish language" label="Spanish"/>
<link wikidata="Q5146" start="2712" end="2722" title="Portuguese language" label="Portuguese"/>
<link wikidata="Q13955" start="3061" end="3067" title="Arabic" label="Arabic"/>
<link wikidata="Q851" start="3091" end="3103" title="Saudi Arabia" label="Saudi Arabia"/>
<link wikidata="Q796" start="3105" end="3109" title="Iraq" label="Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q878" start="3114" end="3134" title="United Arab Emirates" label="United Arab Emirates"/>
<link wikidata="Q478958" start="3160" end="3175" title="Western culture" label="Western culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q210435" start="3351" end="3368" title="John Edgar Hoover" label="John Edgar Hoover"/>
<link wikidata="Q235965" start="3384" end="3419" title="Dame Mary Barbara Hamilton Cartland" label="Dame Mary Barbara Hamilton Cartland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124825" start="3503" end="3512" title="John Paul (given name)" label="John Paul"/>
<link wikidata="Q817200" start="3540" end="3550" title="Bengt-Arne Wallin" label="Bengt-Arne"/>
<link wikidata="Q245025" start="3554" end="3565" title="middle name" label="middle name"/>
<link wikidata="Q20455914" start="3629" end="3640" title="maiden name" label="maiden name"/>
<link wikidata="Q110874" start="3644" end="3654" title="patronymic" label="patronymic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2396897" start="3661" end="3675" title="baptismal name" label="baptismal name"/>
<link wikidata="Q81506" start="3808" end="3822" title="Charles I of England" label="King Charles I"/>
<link wikidata="Q49042" start="4349" end="4371" title="Southern United States" label="Southern United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066033" start="4409" end="4425" title="Vietnamese names" label="Vietnamese names"/>
<link wikidata="Q42511" start="4707" end="4718" title="H. G. Wells" label="H. G. Wells"/>
<link wikidata="Q216896" start="4798" end="4812" title="L. Ron Hubbard" label="L. Ron Hubbard"/>
<link wikidata="Q3534263" start="4980" end="4995" title="naming ceremony" label="naming ceremony"/>
<link wikidata="Q83900" start="5133" end="5150" title="birth certificate" label="birth certificate"/>
<link wikidata="Q29043579" start="6216" end="6238" title="nominative determinism" label="nominative determinism"/>
<link wikidata="Q42887" start="6542" end="6556" title="Pope Clement I" label="Pope Clement I"/>
<link wikidata="Q5410500" start="6800" end="6805" title="Faith" label="Faith"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165788" start="6807" end="6815" title="Prudence" label="Prudence"/>
<link wikidata="Q453722" start="6817" end="6823" title="Amanda" label="Amanda"/>
<link wikidata="Q15921732" start="6900" end="6906" title="George (given name)" label="George"/>
<link wikidata="Q16428906" start="7018" end="7024" title="Thomas (name)" label="Thomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q17983455" start="7059" end="7066" title="Quintus" label="Quintus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2793400" start="7179" end="7184" title="Peter (name)" label="Peter"/>
<link wikidata="Q62735136" start="7212" end="7217" title="Edgar" label="Edgar"/>
<link wikidata="Q5024307" start="7288" end="7294" title="Calvin (given name)" label="Calvin"/>
<link wikidata="Q18009833" start="7391" end="7398" title="Pauline (name)" label="Pauline"/>
<link wikidata="Q1441346" start="7468" end="7475" title="Francis (given name)" label="Francis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7201446" start="7479" end="7488" title="Francisco" label="Francisco"/>
<link wikidata="Q17126213" start="7513" end="7523" title="Franciscus" label="Franciscus"/>
<link wikidata="Q43482" start="7538" end="7543" title="Franks" label="Frank"/>
<link wikidata="Q123479537" start="7761" end="7769" title="Harrison (name)" label="Harrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q908629" start="7774" end="7778" title="Ross (name)" label="Ross"/>
<link wikidata="Q327" start="9059" end="9067" title="Brittany" label="Brittany"/>
<link wikidata="Q155019" start="9072" end="9080" title="Duchy of Lorraine" label="Lorraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1254" start="9135" end="9145" title="Kofi Annan" label="Kofi Annan"/>
<link wikidata="Q14899148" start="9258" end="9265" title="Natalie (given name)" label="Natalie"/>
<link wikidata="Q19809" start="9288" end="9297" title="Christmas" label="Christmas"/>
<link wikidata="Q621915" start="9402" end="9407" title="April (given name)" label="April"/>
<link wikidata="Q1746523" start="9409" end="9412" title="May (given name)" label="May"/>
<link wikidata="Q1152453" start="9417" end="9421" title="June (given name)" label="June"/>
<link wikidata="Q8785" start="9467" end="9475" title="Armenian language" label="Armenian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2607563" start="9572" end="9596" title="namesake" label="to commemorate ancestors"/>
<link wikidata="Q43091" start="9702" end="9713" title="orthography" label="orthography"/>
<link wikidata="Q1845" start="9785" end="9793" title="Biblical" label="Biblical"/>
<link wikidata="Q43115" start="9798" end="9810" title="saint" label="saints&amp;#x27;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1158269" start="10061" end="10066" title="Jesus (name)" label="Jesus"/>
<link wikidata="Q171180" start="10081" end="10086" title="taboo" label="taboo"/>
<link wikidata="Q180362" start="10090" end="10102" title="sacrilege" label="sacrilegious"/>
<link wikidata="Q641707" start="10124" end="10139" title="Christian world" label="Christian world"/>
<link wikidata="Q7734" start="10190" end="10196" title="Joshua" label="Joshua"/>
<link wikidata="Q345" start="10379" end="10383" title="Mary, the mother of Jesus" label="Mary"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="10428" end="10443" title="Roman Catholic Church" label="Roman Catholics"/>
<link wikidata="Q2916264" start="10811" end="10822" title="Hebrew name" label="Hebrew name"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501358" start="10939" end="10943" title="Theophoric name" label="Some"/>
<link wikidata="Q1328791" start="11000" end="11003" title="Eli (name)" label="Eli"/>
<link wikidata="Q4927524" start="11021" end="11028" title="Michael (given name)" label="Michael"/>
<link wikidata="Q7734" start="11030" end="11036" title="Joshua" label="Joshua"/>
<link wikidata="Q171724" start="11038" end="11044" title="Daniel (biblical figure)" label="Daniel"/>
<link wikidata="Q145746" start="11046" end="11052" title="Joseph (Hebrew Bible)" label="Joseph"/>
<link wikidata="Q41370" start="11054" end="11059" title="David" label="David"/>
<link wikidata="Q347181" start="11061" end="11065" title="Adam (name)" label="Adam"/>
<link wikidata="Q6577515" start="11067" end="11073" title="Samuel" label="Samuel"/>
<link wikidata="Q385468" start="11075" end="11084" title="Elizabeth (given name)" label="Elizabeth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1554377" start="11086" end="11092" title="Hannah (given name)" label="Hannah"/>
<link wikidata="Q734578" start="11097" end="11101" title="Mary (given name)" label="Mary"/>
<link wikidata="Q28602" start="11161" end="11168" title="Aramaic language" label="Aramaic"/>
<link wikidata="Q43669" start="11243" end="11249" title="Thomas the Apostle" label="Thomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q232453" start="11251" end="11257" title="Martha" label="Martha"/>
<link wikidata="Q43982" start="11262" end="11273" title="Bartholomew" label="Bartholomew"/>
<link wikidata="Q62928" start="11289" end="11303" title="Semitic people" label="Semitic people"/>
<link wikidata="Q9077" start="11464" end="11469" title="Moses" label="Moses"/>
<link wikidata="Q37110" start="11521" end="11528" title="Pharaoh" label="Pharaoh"/>
<link wikidata="Q843408" start="11860" end="11867" title="Melkart" label="Melkart"/>
<link wikidata="Q590467" start="11914" end="11918" title="Baal" label="Baal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3974881" start="11923" end="11937" title="Germanic names" label="Germanic names"/>
<link wikidata="Q613014" start="12080" end="12084" title="Bert (name)" label="bert"/>
<link wikidata="Q4927937" start="12192" end="12198" title="Robert" label="Robert"/>
<link wikidata="Q278835" start="12200" end="12206" title="Edward" label="Edward"/>
<link wikidata="Q4925304" start="12208" end="12213" title="Roger" label="Roger"/>
<link wikidata="Q1249148" start="12215" end="12222" title="Richard" label="Richard"/>
<link wikidata="Q12788459" start="12270" end="12274" title="Eric" label="Eric"/>
<link wikidata="Q2054021" start="12279" end="12286" title="Matilda (name)" label="Matilda"/>
<link wikidata="Q21200" start="12306" end="12314" title="Germanic languages" label="Germanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q200485" start="12332" end="12358" title="Norman conquest of England" label="Norman conquest of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q21200" start="12388" end="12396" title="Germanic languages" label="Germanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3342922" start="12422" end="12434" title="French name" label="French forms"/>
<link wikidata="Q2958359" start="12446" end="12453" title="Charles" label="Charles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1158477" start="12455" end="12460" title="Henry (given name)" label="Henry"/>
<link wikidata="Q12344159" start="12462" end="12469" title="William" label="William"/>
<link wikidata="Q157692" start="12473" end="12485" title="Slavic names" label="Slavic names"/>
<link wikidata="Q111029" start="12558" end="12563" title="root (linguistics)" label="roots"/>
<link wikidata="Q1759001" start="12700" end="12706" title="Milena (name)" label="Milena"/>
<link wikidata="Q1520457" start="12708" end="12713" title="Vesna (name)" label="Vesna"/>
<link wikidata="Q833463" start="12715" end="12722" title="Bohumil" label="Bohumil"/>
<link wikidata="Q5286802" start="12724" end="12732" title="Dobromir (given name)" label="Dobromir"/>
<link wikidata="Q54483354" start="12734" end="12742" title="Svetlana" label="Svetlana"/>
<link wikidata="Q3564245" start="12744" end="12753" title="Vlastimil" label="Vlastimil"/>
<link wikidata="Q931986" start="12893" end="12900" title="Casimir" label="Casimir"/>
<link wikidata="Q2253934" start="12902" end="12910" title="Vladimir (name)" label="Vladimir"/>
<link wikidata="Q2217001" start="12912" end="12918" title="Sambor (disambiguation)" label="Sambor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2588339" start="12920" end="12928" title="Wojciech" label="Wojciech"/>
<link wikidata="Q10998835" start="12933" end="12941" title="Zbigniew" label="Zbigniew"/>
<link wikidata="Q373257" start="13021" end="13029" title="Boleslaus" label="Boleslav"/>
<link wikidata="Q6948510" start="13031" end="13039" title="Miroslav (given name)" label="Miroslav"/>
<link wikidata="Q19826494" start="13041" end="13050" title="Vladislav" label="Vladislav"/>
<link wikidata="Q106421453" start="13052" end="13060" title="Radoslav (disambiguation)" label="Radoslav"/>
<link wikidata="Q12802910" start="13062" end="13070" title="Slavomir" label="Slavomir"/>
<link wikidata="Q1294670" start="13075" end="13084" title="Stanislav (given name)" label="Stanislav"/>
<link wikidata="Q931986" start="13176" end="13183" title="Casimir" label="Casimir"/>
<link wikidata="Q12802910" start="13185" end="13193" title="Slavomir" label="Slavomir"/>
<link wikidata="Q600552" start="13195" end="13202" title="Radomir (given name)" label="Radomir"/>
<link wikidata="Q2253934" start="13204" end="13212" title="Vladimir (name)" label="Vladimir"/>
<link wikidata="Q6948510" start="13214" end="13222" title="Miroslav (given name)" label="Miroslav"/>
<link wikidata="Q25293" start="13236" end="13242" title="Celtic languages" label="Celtic"/>
<link wikidata="Q540885" start="13263" end="13273" title="anglicisation" label="anglicised"/>
<link wikidata="Q25293" start="13286" end="13298" title="Celtic language" label="Celtic forms"/>
<link wikidata="Q294833" start="13350" end="13354" title="Alan (name)" label="Alan"/>
<link wikidata="Q15930574" start="13356" end="13361" title="Brian" label="Brian"/>
<link wikidata="Q255459" start="13363" end="13369" title="Brigid" label="Brigid"/>
<link wikidata="Q6666923" start="13384" end="13389" title="Logan (given name)" label="Logan"/>
<link wikidata="Q18978299" start="13391" end="13397" title="Ciarán" label="Ciarán"/>
<link wikidata="Q4677161" start="13399" end="13407" title="Jennifer (given name)" label="Jennifer"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13413" end="13417" title="John (name)#Evolution of the name John" label="Seán"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043" start="13524" end="13533" title="Christianity" label="Christian"/>
<link wikidata="Q43115" start="13534" end="13539" title="saint" label="saint"/>
<link wikidata="Q1106575" start="13554" end="13581" title="Celtic mythology" label="Celtic mythological figures"/>
<link wikidata="Q11711834" start="13655" end="13666" title="Greek names" label="Greek names"/>
<link wikidata="Q486761" start="13716" end="13735" title="Classical Antiquity" label="Classical Antiquity"/>
<link wikidata="Q18813" start="13759" end="13772" title="New Testament" label="New Testament"/>
<link wikidata="Q13376892" start="13865" end="13870" title="Helen (given name)" label="Helen"/>
<link wikidata="Q4927100" start="13872" end="13879" title="Stephen" label="Stephen"/>
<link wikidata="Q923" start="13881" end="13890" title="Alexander" label="Alexander"/>
<link wikidata="Q18042461" start="13892" end="13898" title="Andrew" label="Andrew"/>
<link wikidata="Q2793400" start="13900" end="13905" title="Peter (name)" label="Peter"/>
<link wikidata="Q922983" start="13907" end="13914" title="Gregory (given name)" label="Gregory"/>
<link wikidata="Q15921732" start="13916" end="13922" title="George (given name)" label="George"/>
<link wikidata="Q1084472" start="13924" end="13935" title="Christopher (name)" label="Christopher"/>
<link wikidata="Q4963612" start="13937" end="13945" title="Margaret (name)" label="Margaret"/>
<link wikidata="Q42771" start="13947" end="13955" title="Nicholas" label="Nicholas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2630093" start="13957" end="13962" title="Jason (name)" label="Jason"/>
<link wikidata="Q15885954" start="13964" end="13971" title="Timothy (name)" label="Timothy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2668516" start="13973" end="13978" title="Chloe" label="Chloe"/>
<link wikidata="Q168233" start="13980" end="13983" title="Zoe (name)" label="Zoë"/>
<link wikidata="Q131913837" start="13985" end="13994" title="Katherine (given name)" label="Katherine"/>
<link wikidata="Q165769" start="13996" end="14004" title="Penelope" label="Penelope"/>
<link wikidata="Q58213997" start="14009" end="14017" title="Theodore (given name)" label="Theodore"/>
<link wikidata="Q272851" start="14020" end="14031" title="Roman naming conventions" label="Latin names"/>
<link wikidata="Q429948" start="14193" end="14198" title="Laura (name)" label="Laura"/>
<link wikidata="Q63430720" start="14200" end="14208" title="Victoria (name)" label="Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q13610143" start="14210" end="14214" title="Mark (given name)" label="Mark"/>
<link wikidata="Q4642" start="14228" end="14234" title="Marcus (name)" label="Marcus"/>
<link wikidata="Q11166731" start="14243" end="14249" title="Justin (given name)" label="Justin"/>
<link wikidata="Q4925623" start="14280" end="14284" title="Paul (name)" label="Paul"/>
<link wikidata="Q2737173" start="14320" end="14325" title="Julia (given name)" label="Julia"/>
<link wikidata="Q971545" start="14336" end="14341" title="Felix (name)" label="Felix"/>
<link wikidata="Q650494" start="14343" end="14349" title="Vivian (personal name)" label="Vivian"/>
<link wikidata="Q256463" start="14351" end="14357" title="Pascal (name)" label="Pascal"/>
<link wikidata="Q83437" start="14704" end="14712" title="gemstone" label="gemstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q82014" start="14732" end="14739" title="Jasmine" label="Jasmine"/>
<link wikidata="Q171892" start="14741" end="14749" title="Lavender" label="Lavender"/>
<link wikidata="Q11326182" start="14751" end="14755" title="Dawn" label="Dawn"/>
<link wikidata="Q25400" start="14757" end="14762" title="Asteraceae" label="Daisy"/>
<link wikidata="Q34687" start="14764" end="14768" title="Rose" label="Rose"/>
<link wikidata="Q156901" start="14770" end="14774" title="Iris (plant)" label="Iris"/>
<link wikidata="Q161103" start="14776" end="14783" title="Petunia" label="Petunia"/>
<link wikidata="Q12646464" start="14785" end="14790" title="Rowan" label="Rowan"/>
<link wikidata="Q175089" start="14792" end="14796" title="Jade" label="Jade"/>
<link wikidata="Q146095" start="14802" end="14808" title="Violet (plant)" label="Violet"/>
<link wikidata="Q16563753" start="14864" end="14870" title="Hunter (given name)" label="Hunter"/>
<link wikidata="Q11231408" start="14875" end="14882" title="Fischer" label="Fischer"/>
<link wikidata="Q60740406" start="14933" end="14939" title="Bronco" label="Bronco"/>
<link wikidata="Q18498" start="14944" end="14948" title="Wolf" label="Wolf"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147007" start="15166" end="15189" title="Theological virtues" label="three Christian virtues"/>
<link wikidata="Q1577278" start="15190" end="15195" title="Faith in Christianity" label="Faith"/>
<link wikidata="Q1812977" start="15197" end="15201" title="Hope (virtue)" label="Hope"/>
<link wikidata="Q456673" start="15207" end="15214" title="Charity (virtue)" label="Charity"/>
<link wikidata="Q108709" start="15219" end="15229" title="Diminutive" label="Diminutive"/>
<link wikidata="Q4927937" start="15330" end="15336" title="Robert" label="Robert"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15434" end="15440" title="John (name)#Evolution of the name John" label="Hänsel"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15445" end="15451" title="Margaret (name)#Name Margaret in other languages" label="Gretel"/>
<link wikidata="Q11829" start="15470" end="15480" title="Hansel &amp;amp; Gretel" label="fairy tale"/>
<link wikidata="Q63430720" start="15542" end="15547" title="Victoria (name)" label="Vicky"/>
<link wikidata="Q16275207" start="15549" end="15554" title="Cindy (given name)" label="Cindy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4416778" start="15563" end="15567" title="Abigail" label="Abby"/>
<link wikidata="Q16154105" start="15569" end="15574" title="Alison (name)" label="Allie"/>
<link wikidata="Q49614" start="15599" end="15607" title="nickname" label="nickname"/>
<link wikidata="Q677191" start="15796" end="15801" title="James (name)" label="James"/>
<link wikidata="Q264002" start="15924" end="15933" title="Charlotte (given name)" label="Charlotte"/>
<link wikidata="Q1291472" start="15935" end="15944" title="Stephanie" label="Stephanie"/>
<link wikidata="Q63430720" start="15946" end="15954" title="Victoria (name)" label="Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q19961860" start="15956" end="15964" title="Philippa" label="Philippa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1682564" start="15966" end="15970" title="Jane (given name)" label="Jane"/>
<link wikidata="Q391321" start="15972" end="15982" title="Jacqueline (name)" label="Jacqueline"/>
<link wikidata="Q666954" start="15984" end="15993" title="Josephine (name)" label="Josephine"/>
<link wikidata="Q18040452" start="15995" end="16003" title="Danielle" label="Danielle"/>
<link wikidata="Q847179" start="16005" end="16010" title="Paula (given name)" label="Paula"/>
<link wikidata="Q18009833" start="16012" end="16019" title="Pauline (name)" label="Pauline"/>
<link wikidata="Q1231089" start="16021" end="16029" title="Patricia" label="Patricia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2695945" start="16031" end="16040" title="Francesca" label="Francesca"/>
<link wikidata="Q4118707" start="16137" end="16144" title="Susanna (disciple)" label="Susanna"/>
<link wikidata="Q1982248" start="16179" end="16194" title="biblical Hebrew language" label="biblical Hebrew"/>
<link wikidata="Q1093580" start="16457" end="16472" title="Chinese surname" label="Chinese surname"/>
<link wikidata="Q22809413" start="16480" end="16498" title="Chinese given name" label="Chinese given name"/>
<link wikidata="Q8201" start="16528" end="16545" title="Chinese character" label="Chinese character"/>
<link wikidata="Q7850" start="16653" end="16669" title="Chinese language" label="Chinese language"/>
<link wikidata="Q12372598" start="17171" end="17175" title="plum tree" label="Plum"/>
<link wikidata="Q3407478" start="17425" end="17430" title="Chinese tones" label="tones"/>
<link wikidata="Q849778" start="17435" end="17443" title="radical (Chinese characters)" label="radicals"/>
<link wikidata="Q218652" start="17460" end="17476" title="five elements (China)" label="Chinese elements"/>
<link wikidata="Q724950" start="17495" end="17506" title="Chinese astrology" label="birth chart"/>
<link wikidata="Q1037731" start="17522" end="17537" title="generation poem" label="generation poem"/>
<link wikidata="Q871246" start="17619" end="17626" title="naming taboo" label="affront"/>
<link wikidata="Q117073" start="17963" end="17976" title="romanization of Chinese" label="romanizations"/>
<link wikidata="Q403900" start="18003" end="18012" title="Liu Xiang (disambiguation)" label="Liu Xiang"/>
<link wikidata="Q498782" start="18049" end="18061" title="Korean names" label="Korean names"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066033" start="18066" end="18082" title="Vietnamese names" label="Vietnamese names"/>
<link wikidata="Q37041" start="18125" end="18142" title="Classical Chinese" label="Classical Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q877834" start="18170" end="18184" title="Japanese names" label="Japanese names"/>
<link wikidata="Q3409032" start="18814" end="18825" title="unisex name" label="unisex name"/>
<link wikidata="Q17485430" start="18844" end="18850" title="Jordan (name)" label="Jordan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1674029" start="18852" end="18857" title="Jamie" label="Jamie"/>
<link wikidata="Q2227398" start="18859" end="18864" title="Jesse (given name)" label="Jesse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058731" start="18866" end="18872" title="Morgan (given name)" label="Morgan"/>
<link wikidata="Q249760" start="18881" end="18887" title="Lesley (disambiguation)" label="Lesley"/>
<link wikidata="Q471788" start="18889" end="18892" title="Joseph (name)" label="Joe"/>
<link wikidata="Q336878" start="18893" end="18895" title="Jo (given name)" label="Jo"/>
<link wikidata="Q16277237" start="18897" end="18903" title="Jackie (given name)" label="Jackie"/>
<link wikidata="Q351660" start="18905" end="18908" title="Pat (disambiguation)" label="Pat"/>
<link wikidata="Q339346" start="18922" end="18927" title="Chris" label="Chris"/>
<link wikidata="Q1430023" start="18928" end="18932" title="Kris (name)" label="Kris"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215702" start="18934" end="18939" title="Randy" label="Randy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2130696" start="18940" end="18945" title="Randi" label="Randi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2061957" start="18947" end="18950" title="Lee (given name)" label="Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q19860" start="19297" end="19320" title="Indo-European languages" label="Indo-European languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q3409032" start="19411" end="19423" title="unisex names" label="unisex names"/>
<link wikidata="Q1973833" start="19588" end="19601" title="anthroponymic" label="anthroponymic"/>
<link wikidata="Q35497" start="19678" end="19691" title="Ancient Greek" label="Ancient Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q35497" start="19798" end="19811" title="Ancient Greek" label="Ancient Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q3351025" start="19945" end="19967" title="Zipf–Mandelbrot law" label="power law distribution"/>
<link wikidata="Q131443" start="21195" end="21201" title="Saanvi" label="Saanvi"/>
<link wikidata="Q671872" start="21251" end="21256" title="Isaac" label="Isaac"/>
<link wikidata="Q5837762" start="21336" end="21344" title="Mohammed (name)" label="Mohammed"/>
<link wikidata="Q9458" start="21351" end="21371" title="Muhammad" label="the prophet Mohammed"/>
<link wikidata="Q105955" start="21519" end="21536" title="Elo rating system" label="Elo rating system"/>
<link wikidata="Q131265" start="21632" end="21647" title="Popular culture" label="Popular culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q42581" start="22068" end="22083" title="Keira Knightley" label="Keira Knightley"/>
<link wikidata="Q5142021" start="22208" end="22223" title="Colby Donaldson" label="Colby Donaldson"/>
<link wikidata="Q4235" start="22413" end="22424" title="Miley Cyrus" label="Miley Cyrus"/>
<link wikidata="Q4963168" start="22530" end="22535" title="Kayla (name)" label="Kayla"/>
<link wikidata="Q2708683" start="22549" end="22560" title="Kayla Brady" label="a character"/>
<link wikidata="Q23739" start="22577" end="22587" title="soap opera" label="soap opera"/>
<link wikidata="Q185059" start="22594" end="22611" title="Days of Our Lives" label="Days of Our Lives"/>
<link wikidata="Q7681562" start="22674" end="22679" title="Tammy (given name)" label="Tammy"/>
<link wikidata="Q936646" start="22697" end="22703" title="Tamara (given name)" label="Tamara"/>
<link wikidata="Q4353019" start="22741" end="22763" title="Tammy and the Bachelor" label="Tammy and the Bachelor"/>
<link wikidata="Q262119" start="22880" end="22886" title="Pamela (name)" label="Pamela"/>
<link wikidata="Q315509" start="22904" end="22917" title="Philip Sidney" label="Philip Sidney"/>
<link wikidata="Q4069405" start="22972" end="23011" title="The Countess of Pembroke&amp;#x27;s Arcadia" label="The Countess of Pembroke&amp;#x27;s Arcadia"/>
<link wikidata="Q630846" start="23019" end="23026" title="Jessica (given name)" label="Jessica"/>
<link wikidata="Q206400" start="23077" end="23099" title="The Merchant of Venice" label="The Merchant of Venice"/>
<link wikidata="Q951694" start="23107" end="23114" title="Vanessa (name)" label="Vanessa"/>
<link wikidata="Q41166" start="23127" end="23141" title="Jonathan Swift" label="Jonathan Swift"/>
<link wikidata="Q662373" start="23143" end="23148" title="Fiona" label="Fiona"/>
<link wikidata="Q312562" start="23167" end="23183" title="James Macpherson" label="James Macpherson"/>
<link wikidata="Q15837802" start="23209" end="23215" title="Ossian" label="Ossian"/>
<link wikidata="Q4018995" start="23223" end="23228" title="Wendy" label="Wendy"/>
<link wikidata="Q81796" start="23261" end="23273" title="J. M. Barrie" label="J. M. Barrie"/>
<link wikidata="Q3435337" start="23292" end="23339" title="Peter Pan, or The Boy Who Wouldn&amp;#x27;t Grow Up" label="Peter Pan, or The Boy Who Wouldn&amp;#x27;t Grow Up"/>
<link wikidata="Q1424362" start="23351" end="23358" title="Madison (name)" label="Madison"/>
<link wikidata="Q1127184" start="23393" end="23399" title="Splash (film)" label="Splash"/>
<link wikidata="Q1465272" start="23407" end="23411" title="Lara (name)" label="Lara"/>
<link wikidata="Q1415400" start="23416" end="23423" title="Larissa (given name)" label="Larissa"/>
<link wikidata="Q323827" start="23476" end="23490" title="Doctor Zhivago (1965 film)" label="Doctor Zhivago"/>
<link wikidata="Q1299" start="23677" end="23688" title="the Beatles" label="the Beatles"/>
<link wikidata="Q607742" start="23701" end="23709" title="Hey Jude" label="Hey Jude"/>
<link wikidata="Q923966" start="23728" end="23733" title="Layla" label="Layla"/>
<link wikidata="Q48187" start="23782" end="23794" title="Eric Clapton" label="Eric Clapton"/>
<link wikidata="Q678410" start="23966" end="23975" title="Marillion" label="Marillion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1737450" start="24103" end="24111" title="Kayleigh" label="Kayleigh"/>
<link wikidata="Q536676" start="24421" end="24451" title="The Hand That Rocks the Cradle (film)" label="The Hand That Rocks the Cradle"/>
<link wikidata="Q18145837" start="24552" end="24557" title="Adolf" label="Adolf"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="24597" end="24609" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q285982" start="24781" end="24791" title="endogenous" label="endogenous"/>
<link wikidata="Q293000" start="24897" end="24906" title="exogenous" label="exogenous"/>
<link wikidata="Q16002012" start="25097" end="25119" title="African-American names" label="African-American names"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130279" start="25382" end="25392" title="Hypocorism" label="Hypocorism"/>
<link wikidata="Q6629080" start="25407" end="25439" title="List of most popular given names" label="List of most popular given names"/>
<link wikidata="Q20455914" start="25475" end="25499" title="Maiden and married names" label="Maiden and married names"/>
<link wikidata="Q216584" start="25502" end="25510" title="Name day" label="Name day"/>
<link wikidata="Q175156" start="25513" end="25523" title="Onomastics" label="Onomastics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071027" start="25526" end="25539" title="Personal name" label="Personal name"/>
<link wikidata="Q1240901" start="25542" end="25551" title="Praenomen" label="Praenomen"/>
<link wikidata="Q61002" start="25554" end="25563" title="Pseudonym" label="Pseudonym"/>
<link wikidata="Q7400535" start="25566" end="25583" title="Saint&amp;#x27;s name" label="Saint&amp;#x27;s name"/>
<link wikidata="Q688564" start="25587" end="25605" title="Calendar of saints" label="Calendar of saints"/>
<link wikidata="Q13567255" start="25608" end="25618" title="Slave name" label="Slave name"/>
<link wikidata="Q282955" start="25621" end="25630" title="Thai name" label="Thai name"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501358" start="25677" end="25692" title="Theophoric name" label="Theophoric name"/>
<link wikidata="Q846467" start="25696" end="25718" title="Theophory in the Bible" label="Theophory in the Bible"/>
<link wikidata="Q3409032" start="25721" end="25732" title="Unisex name" label="Unisex name"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="25735" end="25769" title="Pleonasm#Bilingual tautological expressions" label="Bilingual tautological given names"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="247993" wikidata="Q1965925" url="?curid=247993" title="Wadden Sea National Parks">
<text>The Wadden Sea National Parks in Denmark, Germany and the Netherlands are located along the German Bight of the North Sea. In Germany and Denmark they also mark the area of the UNESCO World Heritage Site of the Wadden Sea. Divided from each other by administrative borders, they form a single ecological entity. The purpose of the national parks is the protection of the Wadden Sea ecoregion.

== Denmark ==
* Wadden Sea National Park (Nationalpark Vadehavet), from Blåvandshuk to Rudbøl in Denmark

== Germany ==
* Schleswig-Holstein Wadden Sea National Park, comprising the west coast of Schleswig-Holstein and the North Frisian Islands
* Hamburg Wadden Sea National Park, extending from the mouth of the Elbe to the tiny islands of Neuwerk and Scharhörn, part of Hamburg
* Lower Saxony Wadden Sea National Park, comprising the northern coast of Lower Saxony and including the East Frisian Islands

== Netherlands ==
* Lauwersmeer National Park consists of the southern and eastern parts of the Lauwersmeer in the Netherlands
* Schiermonnikoog National Park covers the majority of the island Schiermonnikoog
* Dunes of Texel National Park is located on the Dutch island of Texel and includes dune systems.

== Gallery ==
== See also ==
*Wadden Sea / UNESCO Official Website 
*Wadden Sea</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1965925" start="4" end="29" title="Wadden Sea National Parks" label="Wadden Sea National Parks"/>
<link wikidata="Q35" start="33" end="40" title="Denmark" label="Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="42" end="49" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q55" start="58" end="69" title="Netherlands" label="Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q321837" start="92" end="104" title="German Bight" label="German Bight"/>
<link wikidata="Q1693" start="112" end="121" title="North Sea" label="North Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q7809" start="177" end="183" title="UNESCO" label="UNESCO"/>
<link wikidata="Q9259" start="184" end="203" title="World Heritage Site" label="World Heritage Site"/>
<link wikidata="Q26080" start="211" end="221" title="Wadden Sea" label="Wadden Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q46169" start="331" end="344" title="national park" label="national park"/>
<link wikidata="Q3351830" start="410" end="459" title="Wadden Sea National Park, Denmark" label="Wadden Sea National Park (Nationalpark Vadehavet)"/>
<link wikidata="Q44391" start="466" end="477" title="Blåvandshuk" label="Blåvandshuk"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="481" end="487" title="Rudbøl" label="Rudbøl"/>
<link wikidata="Q35" start="491" end="498" title="Denmark" label="Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q706721" start="516" end="559" title="Schleswig-Holstein Wadden Sea National Park" label="Schleswig-Holstein Wadden Sea National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194" start="590" end="608" title="Schleswig-Holstein" label="Schleswig-Holstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q27937" start="617" end="638" title="North Frisian Islands" label="North Frisian Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q686539" start="641" end="673" title="Hamburg Wadden Sea National Park" label="Hamburg Wadden Sea National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q1644" start="707" end="711" title="Elbe" label="Elbe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1622" start="735" end="742" title="Neuwerk" label="Neuwerk"/>
<link wikidata="Q3073" start="747" end="756" title="Scharhörn" label="Scharhörn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055" start="766" end="773" title="Hamburg" label="Hamburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q661217" start="776" end="813" title="Lower Saxony Wadden Sea National Park" label="Lower Saxony Wadden Sea National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q1197" start="848" end="860" title="Lower Saxony" label="Lower Saxony"/>
<link wikidata="Q27769" start="879" end="899" title="East Frisian Islands" label="East Frisian Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q1651298" start="921" end="946" title="Lauwersmeer National Park" label="Lauwersmeer National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q525364" start="997" end="1008" title="Lauwersmeer" label="Lauwersmeer"/>
<link wikidata="Q55" start="1016" end="1027" title="Netherlands" label="Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q1651381" start="1030" end="1059" title="Schiermonnikoog National Park" label="Schiermonnikoog National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q208011" start="1094" end="1109" title="Schiermonnikoog" label="Schiermonnikoog"/>
<link wikidata="Q1702843" start="1112" end="1140" title="Dunes of Texel National Park" label="Dunes of Texel National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q9966" start="1175" end="1180" title="Texel" label="Texel"/>
<link wikidata="Q26080" start="1278" end="1288" title="Wadden Sea" label="Wadden Sea"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="247994" wikidata="Q706721" url="?curid=247994" title="Schleswig-Holstein Wadden Sea National Park">
<text>The Schleswig-Holstein Wadden Sea National Park () is a national park in the Schleswig-Holstein area of the German Wadden Sea. It was founded by the Parliament of Schleswig-Holstein on 1 October 1985 by the National Park Act of 22 July 1985 and expanded significantly in 1999. Together with the Lower Saxon Wadden Sea National Park, the Hamburg Wadden Sea National Park and those parts of Elbe estuary which are not nature reserves, it forms the German part of the Wadden Sea.

The national park extends from the German-Danish maritime border in the north down to the Elbe estuary in the south. In the North Frisian area, it includes the mudflats around the geest-based and marsh islands and the &quot;Halligen&quot; (undyked islands). There, the mudflats are 40 km wide in places. Further south lie areas of mudflats which contain particularly large sandbanks. In addition to the plants and animals that are typical of the entire Wadden Sea, especially large numbers of porpoise, shelduck and eelgrass may be seen in the Schleswig-Holstein part.

With an area of 4410 km ² it is by far the largest national park in Germany. Some 68% of its area is permanently under water and 30% is periodically dry. The land element consists mainly of salt marshes. Since 1990, the national park, including the North Frisian &quot;Halligen&quot;, has been designated as a UNESCO recognised biosphere. Together with other German and Dutch Wadden Sea areas it became a UNESCO World Heritage Site on 26 June 2009 because of its relatively undisturbed intertidal ecosystem and its unique biodiversity.

== Geography ==

=== National park area ===

The national park covers an area from the North Sea coast of Schleswig-Holstein by the Danish border in the north to the Elbe estuary in the south. In the northern area (roughly as far as Amrum), the national park boundary extends to the twelve mile territorial limit; to the south it reaches to about the three mile line. On the land side it runs in the sea 150 metres off the coast. Sea dykes and the foreland immediately in front of the dykes are not part of the national park; beaches are thus largely excluded from the protected zone. Also excluded from the national park are the inhabited areas in the sea, including the five German North Frisian Islands and the larger &quot;Halligen&quot; islands of Langeness, Hooge, Gröde, Oland and Nordstrandischmoor. Part of the park comprises uninhabited islands, islets and &quot;Halligen&quot;, such as Trischen, Blauort or the North Frisian Barrier Island. Under the classification of the natural regions of Germany the national park area belongs to the &quot;Schleswig-Holstein Wadden Sea, Islands and Halligen&quot; region within the Schleswig-Holstein Marshes, and to the major unit of the German Bight.

The national park can be divided into two areas. In the north, between the Danish border and the peninsula of Eiderstedt is the North Frisian part; on the south coast of Eiderstedt up to the Elbe estuary is the Dithmarschen part. The North Frisian Wadden Sea, together with the Danish Wadden Sea, belongs to the North Sea. It is screened from the open sea by the North Frisian Islands and the &quot;Halligen&quot;. The islands were mainly formed from elements of the mainland, which became separated, mainly as a result of flood disasters. The mudflats are protected and the transition between the flats and the sea is often clearer, because the former lie to the east of the large islands and the latter to the west of them. There are no major river estuaries and the tidal range is relatively low at less than two metres. In the northern Wadden Sea there are still geest cliffs formed in the ice ages, so that the highest elevations occur here on the coast in an otherwise very flat area. The Dithmarschen part and the south coast between the Elbe and Eider estuaries form the central part of the Wadden Sea. A tidal range of over three metres has largely prevented the formation of islands. Some sandbars emerge from the sea, but only Trischen is high enough and safe enough from storm surges, to allow saltwater-loving vegetation to grow. Compared to the geologically similar East Frisian Islands of the southern Wadden Sea, Trischen is considerably smaller and younger. All attempts by human inhabitants to fortify the island have failed. With several large estuaries the salinity in the central Wadden Sea is lower than in the rest of the Wadden Sea and is subject to higher fluctuations.

=== Protection areas of the National Park ===
The national park divides into two zones that correspond to different levels of protection. Zone 1 has a size of 162.000 ha and covers a third of the whole national park. The zone consists of 12 bigger units which all contain marshland, intertidal estuarine mudflat, mixed sediment mudflat, sand flat, tidal creeks as well as deep and flat areas that are permanently under water (sublittoral). Additionally there are smaller units around sensible places like breeding areas of coastal birds, sandbars of seals, places where migratory birds moult or geomorphological meaningful areas with natural surface structure. Zone 1 is principally closed for the public. Exceptions are made for the mudflat areas directly bordering the coastline, some routes for guided mudflat hiking tours and fishery. South of the Hindenburgdamm, facing the landside of Sylt, a human use of the first zone is completely prohibited (Zero use zone). This part is 12.500 ha big, whereof 3500 ha are permanently covered with water.

Zone 2 forms a ‘buffer’ around the first zone, in which a sustainable use is possible. In protection zone 2 west of Sylt´s coast locates a protection area for small whales, e.g. the common porpoise, with a size of 124.000 ha. It is an important reproduction area of the porpoise, whose population declined about 90 per cent in the North Sea during the 20th century. Activities like swimming, sailing or traditional crab fishing are still allowed in the area, while international industry fishing, jet-skis, ship velocities over 12 knots, military activities and resource exploitation (sand, grit, gas, oil) should be prevented.

=== Land, sea and mudflats ===

The North Sea coast is very flat; in places the ocean floor only descends a few centimetres per kilometre. Twice a day the high tide carries sand, clay and silt into the Wadden Sea. The tidal range in Schleswig-Holstein´s part of the Wadden Sea accounts for between 1.5 m and 3.7 m, increasing from north to south. The lowest tidal ranges occur on Sylt&#x27;s north coast, the highest in southern Dithmarschen. Everywhere in the Wadden Sea the amount of time the water needs to stream in is only 85% of the time it needs to run off again. Therefore the current of the water coming in, is much stronger and the low tide does not have the power to remove the sediments the high tide accumulated.

Over 2/3 of the national park are covered with water permanently (sublittoral), 30% of mudflat that is lying dry during low tide and gets flooded with water during high tide (eulittoral). The rest is land area that only gets flooded under certain conditions (supralittoral). The water areas contain the offshore part of the park as well as huge tidal currents like the Lister Tief, the Heverstrom, the Purrenstrom, the Wesselburener Loch or the Piep. Outside the mudflat area runs a constantly strong current from south to north, coming from the southern North Sea and going on to the Norwegian Trench. Owing to the river mouths of several big European waters (like the Rhine or Elbe), the current´s salinity of 20–30 psu lies below that of the ocean, and above that of the river mouths.

Since inhabited regions are not part of the national park, the land areas are nearly completely covered with salt marshes and a small part contains sandbars and dunes. The salt marshes cover over 10.000 ha, of which 70% developed on land protected by breakwaters, 10% are situated on the downwind side of the islands and the remainder formed around the Hallig Islands. Between 1988 and 2001 the area of the salt marshes expanded about 700 ha. Widely natural and use-free salt marshes can be found around the islands and ashore around Schobüll and St. Peter-Ording.

The whole Wadden Sea is ruled by an Atlantic climate. Strong westerlies and the heat storage capacity are determining factors which often generate strong winds, but at the same time balance the temperatures. Thus occur cold summers (July: 14,5 °C) and mild winters (January: 1,8 °C).

== Flora and fauna ==

Saltwater, tide and strong winds characterize the environment in the Wadden Sea area. Only extremely specialized organisms can cope with the conditions. Fishes, breeding birds and most of the marine mammals living in the Wadden Sea use it as nursery. Besides that, giant flocks of migratory birds visit the Wadden Sea regularly in spring and fall using it as a food source. In the Wadden Sea of Schleswig-Holstein you can find about 700 plant and 2500 animal species, of which 10% are endemic.

=== Plants ===
Eelgrass is the only flowering plant in the Wadden Sea which is capable of living under water. In 1930 most of the eelgrass in the Atlantic Ocean was killed by an epidemic. The eelgrass stocks haven&#x27;t regenerated since. The plants are mainly located in the northern part of Schleswig-Holstein’s Wadden Sea and cover an area of 6000 ha. Compared to 705 ha in Lower Saxony and 130 ha in the Netherlands, it is quite large. Also in contrast to the worldwide trend of decreasing eelgrass stocks, the stocks in the Frisian Wadden Sea area are increasing. During the maximum spatial extent in August eelgrass covers up to 13% of the North Frisian Wadden Sea. Eelgrass areas provide habitats for marine organisms and are an important food source for barnacle geese (&quot;Branta leucopsis&quot;).

Salt marshes are the dominant landscape in the transition zone between open sea and inland. They are regularly flooded between 10 and 250 times a year depending on the tidal range. Salt marshes build different zones relative to the local salinity. The lower marsh zone which is flooded the most has a higher salinity than the upper marsh zone which is less frequently flooded because of the higher elevation. In total about 50 species of flowering plants can be found in the local salt marshes. In low elevation areas plants like common salt marsh grass (&quot;Puccinellia maritima&quot;), sea-aster (&quot;Hordeum marinum&quot;), sea-blite (&quot;Sueda maritima&quot;) and sea-purslane (&quot;Halimione portulacoides&quot;) are characteristic. High elevation areas are a lot more diverse in plant species. Common plants are seaside centaury (&quot;Centaurium littorale&quot;), red eyebright (&quot;Odontites rubra&quot;), see plantain (&quot;Plantago maritima&quot;) and distant sedge (&quot;Carex distans&quot;).

In the dunes small amounts of plants can be found; due to the extreme conditions only some dune heaths grow there. The rain-laden dune valleys resemble the vegetation of a marsh, with plants like cotton grass (&quot;Eriophorum angustifolium&quot;), drosera or marsh gentian (&quot;Gentiana pneumonanthe&quot;).

=== Animals ===
==== Mammals ====
A great number of harbour porpoises live in the national park. The Wadden Sea is also home to harbour seals and grey seals. According to the official counting of the National park Administration, about 13.000 harbour seals are living in the Wadden Sea of Schleswig-Holstein (2017). Nearly half of the seal population died during the &quot;Seehundstaupe&quot; epidemic in 1988 and 2002. The National Park Administration assumed that one third of the harbour seal population was swimming or hunting during the counting so the number had to be adjusted. The grey seal population consists of 140 animals and is mainly located on the &quot;Jungnamensand&quot; sand bar and the &quot;Knobsand&quot; sand bars near the island Amrum.

==== Insects ====
The Wadden Sea only has a few places where insects are found. Nearly all of the 2000 highly specialized species which are known to live in the national park can be found in salt marshes. Due to the difficult environmental conditions (for example salinity or frequent flooding), it is hard to survive for insects, especially in the larval state. The main survival strategy is hiding in the soil or inside plants. As nutrition they prefer parts of the plants that have already released the saltwater. Relatively well-known examples are the &quot;Halligflieder-Spitzmaus-Rüsselkäfer&quot; or the &quot;Strandwegerichgallrüsselkäfer&quot; (Mecinus collaris) that live in the particular plant. In contrast the magnificent salt beetle (Bledius spectabilis) digs a tube in the mudflat.

Sea lavender serves the caterpillar of the seldom seen Salzwiesen-Kleinspanner (Scopula emutaria) as nutrition. Its existence can only be proven in the coastal area of Sylt and Amrum.

==== Birds ====
The avifauna of the national park is comparable with avifaunae of other Wadden Sea regions. With over 10 million birds in spring and autumn the trilateral Wadden Sea accommodates the most birds in Europe. The nutrition-rich area is visited by migratory birds regularly. Due to the ongoing changes in the Wadden Sea the effects of the national park on the avifauna are hard to quantify. From 1994 to 2004 only three bird species (European spoonbill, Great cormorant, common ringed plover) increased in number. In the same period, the stock of 18 other species shrank including barnacle goose, common greenshank, Eurasian curlew, black-headed gull, lesser black-backed gull, Eurasian oystercatcher, pied avocet and dark bellied brent goose.

The reason why the stocks are decreasing is unknown. It is presumed that trawling damages the food source of the birds permanently. Species which are mainly living inland seem to have advantage over species which mostly live in salt marshes. They prefer dyked areas, which are cut off from salt water intrusion (polders), so the fresh water environment is dominating. Examples for newly-dyked polders in Schleswig-Holstein are Beltringharder Koog, Hauke-Haien-Koog, Speicherkoog, Rickelsbüller Koog. Since 2000, breeding eagle pairs settled permanently in the Wadden Sea area.

The population of the northwest-European common shelduck, which numbers 180,000 birds, spends the time of moulting between July and September in the Wadden Sea, mainly around the protected island of Trischen. There gathers over 80% of the northwest-European population. This phenomenon of a &quot;mass moulting&quot; is unique in the world.

About 200,000 eider ducks spend their moulting time here; about 1000 eider duck couples use the mudflats of the North Sea as breeding area. Most can be found on the island of Amrum. Huge stocks of barnacle geese (about 60,000) or brant geese (about 84,000) exist solely on the islands and Halligen. It has been noted that the barnacle goose is steadily extending its stay in the Wadden Sea. Around the North Frisian Islands at water depths of 2–10 m the common scoter appears in internationally meaningful stocks.

==== Fishes, mussels and shellfish ====
The typical mussels of the Wadden Sea are the common cockle (&quot;Cerastoderma edule&quot;) and the blue mussel (&quot;Mytilus edulis&quot;). While the common cockle is omnipresent, wild growing blue mussels are less common than in the southern Wadden Sea. They suffer from the expansion of the Pacific oyster which benefit from the warmer winters. The sand gaper was probably introduced by the Vikings from America; the American piddock arrived at the end of the 19th century, while the appearance of the Atlantic jackknife clam in the Wadden Sea is known since 1976.

Of the shellfish, the common shore crab (&quot;Carcinus maenas&quot;) is of huge importance, because it devours 10% of the whole Wadden Sea´s biomass. Also, numerous brown shrimp and barnacles can be found. Besides the seal the lugworm is probably the most famous animal in the Wadden Sea.

Only some small fishes are completely domestic in the mudflat, e.g. eelpout (&quot;Zoarces viviparus)&quot;&quot;,&quot; sand goby (&quot;Pomatoschistus minutus&quot;) and sea scorpion (&quot;Myoxocephalus scorpius&quot;). Many other species use the area rich in food and oxygen and protected from predatory fish as spawning grounds. Flatfish like plaice are important to name, but also the garfish (&quot;Belone belone&quot;) is active in the eastern part of the Atlantic.

== The National Park ==
=== History ===
The protection of the Wadden Sea of Schleswig-Holstein is a target on nature conservation since the 20th century. In the 1920s, the first concerns were the protection of areas in the Wadden Sea e.g. &quot;Sylt-Nord&quot; and the Morsum cliff (Sylt). Since 1940, 11 conservation areas were established in North Frisia targeting mainly the protection of animal species, especially birds.

During the development of the conservation areas, protecting biotopes became more and more important. In the 1960s, plans were first made for conserving the entire area of the Wadden Sea. In 1963 the Wadden Sea Conservation Station demanded a &quot;Großschutzgebiet Halligmeer&quot; (protection of the area around the small undyked islands off the coast of Schleswig-Holstein). The local hunting association firstly proposed the term national park in relation to the Wadden Sea in 1972, two years after the establishment of the Bavarian Forest National Park. In 1973 the ministry of agriculture proposed a bill which was withdrawn the following year because of strong resistance by locals. In 1975, a first scientific conference about the conservation of the Wadden Sea and in 1978, a first trilateral intergovernmental conference with participants form Germany, Netherlands and Denmark took place. In 1982 a joint declaration on the protection of the Wadden Sea was signed in Den Haag by the three states. It was not until 1985 that the Wadden Sea was declared a national park due to political tensions within the local population which are caused by a strong traditional desire for freedom by Frisian people. In 1999, the Wadden Sea National Park was further extended, again accompanied by political protests. The distinction as a National Park led to protesters throwing eggs at the responsible minister and a shrimp boat demonstration in the Kieler Förde.

==== First National Park law ====
The former CDU government founded the Schleswig-Holstein Wadden Sea National Park. It was the third national park in Germany after the Bavarian Forest National Park and the Berchtesgaden National Park. Finally in July 1985, the Landtag of Schleswig-Holstein adopted the national park law. The declared conservation area covered 272,000 ha, divided into three different zones of protection. The National Park begins 150 m from the coastline with a seaward extent from 5 to 10 m water depth. On 1 October 1985, the national park law passed.

In 1986, the Lower Saxony, and in 1990 the Hamburg Wadden Sea National Park were founded. The Wadden Sea areas in the Netherlands and in Denmark are protected by other conservation measures. The Danish Wadden Sea was declared a national park in 2010.

The national park law says:

&quot;„Die Errichtung des Nationalparks dient dem Schutz des schleswig-holsteinischen Wattenmeeres und der Bewahrung seiner besonderen Eigenart, Schönheit und Ursprünglichkeit. Seine artenreiche Pflanzen- und Tierwelt ist zu erhalten und der möglichst ungestörte Ablauf der Naturvorgänge zu sichern. Jegliche Nutzungsinteressen sind mit dem Schutzzweck im Allgemeinen und im Einzelfall gerecht abzuwägen.“&quot;The main point of the law is that the formation of the national park should protect the animals and plants within it, but also the natural processes taking place there. Any utilization of the area is to be weighed against the aim of nature conservation.

Local people who were living near the coast and were affected by the national park law felt overlooked by the government. In their mind the Wadden Sea was formed by their ancestors over centuries which somehow led to an attitude of desiring unconditional freedom and autonomy. The National Park Wadden Sea being governed by the &quot;far away city&quot; Kiel felt like heteronomy by politicians who have no relation to local agriculture, fisheries and had never experienced the danger of storm surges.

On the other hand, the political opposition and local nature conservation organizations were skeptical as well. They thought that the restrictions and conservation measures coming with the national park law were insufficient. They also feared the increasing masses of tourists which the distinctive national park could incur.

==== Ecosystem synthesis report, discussion and protests ====

The basis of the second national park law was the Ecosystem synthesis report, published in 1996. Within 800 pages an interdisciplinary team of scientists summarized suggestions for changes in the existing National Park law based on results of seven years of extensive monitoring in the national park. The synthesis report which was commissioned by the Environment Secretary Berndt Heydemann was discussed in over 200 local assemblies and 15 meetings of national park boards of trustees. In 1998, the cabinet of Schleswig-Holstein began to discuss proposals for the second national park law. In December 1999, it became effective.

The synthesis report provided suggestions for expanding the area classified as national park up to 349,000 ha compared to the original 237,000 ha. It also proposed to declare the &quot;Lister Tief&quot; and the &quot;Wesselburener Loch&quot; a zero use zone. Crafters in the Dithmarscher Wadden Sea during the moult of common shelducks from July to September were prohibited.

The suggestions of the synthesis report caused a great wave of political responses. Especially, North Frisian people led by the head of district administrator Olaf Bastian (CDU) were dedicated enemies of an expanding national park. Not only North Frisian people protested against the synthesis report respectively the second National Park Law but other protest movements developed among the people living at the west coast too. In Büsum 1000 people, including many local shepherds working at the dykes and shrimp fishermen, protested because they felt limited in their freedom and negatively affected in their income. On 26 August 1999, 143 shrimp fishermen travelled with their boats through the Kiel Canal to the city of Kiel to protest against the second national park law during its declaration in front of the Schleswig-Holstein Landtag. During an event in Tönning, locals threw eggs at the Secretary of environment, Rainder Steenblock. In November 1999, one month before the second national park law became effective, 160 fires were lit along the west coast of Schleswig-Holstein as a warning act.

The protests were mainly about the number and size of the zero use zones in which fishing wouldn&#x27;t be allowed, and about the landside border of the park. It should, instead of the 150 m band, now border the outer edge of the dykes which includes a lot of salt marshes and especially swimming places.

==== Second national park law ====

On 17 December 1999, the Landtag of Schleswig-Holstein changed the national park law according to the proposals of the synthesis report. The protective purpose of the National Park was changed from &quot;möglichst ungestörten Ablauf der Naturvorgänge&quot; (that is, an undisturbed ongoing of natural processes) to „conserved as a habitat for the plant and animal species that occur in it naturally as well as for the relationships occurring between such species and their habitats&quot;. Nevertheless, coastal protection still has a higher priority than nature conservation. Additionally, it is written that the restriction of the national park shouldn’t restrain the locals in their interests and habits and that the national park should work to affect the tourism in the North Sea region positively.

The law expanded the national park area only seawards. The coastal border stayed the same, 150 m from the dyke. A zero use zone was created south of the Hindenburgdamm instead of the originally proposed zero use zones &quot;Lister Tief&quot; and &quot;Wesselburener Loch&quot;, which would have been ecologically more valuable. Additionally, a whale sanctuary was established and hunting was prohibited completely, which had much effect on shellfisheries. The law also simplified the conservation zone system. Conservation zone 3 was made obsolete while conservation zone 1 was expanded drastically, especially in areas of tidal inlets. Pleasure crafters and fishermen agreed upon avoiding moulting areas of barnacle geese during moult time. The law also proposed speed limitations for ships and boats in the national park area.

To control non-official criticism and promote cooperation between locals and the National Park Administration the law created countless platforms for task forces and projects.

=== Administration ===
The National Park Administration is the nature conservation authority for the Schleswig-Holstein Wadden Sea National Park functioning as a higher and lower conservation authority. The administration office is located in Tönning. According to the second national park law Article 7 the National Park Administration is responsible for (1.) Informing the public about the national park, conducting educational activities and controlling movements of visitors, as well as for (2.) Carrying out and coordinating ecological monitoring, and providing the necessary relevant scientific basis for planning as well as for (3.) Regulating support provided by nature conservation associations within the meaning of Article 21 d of the state nature conservation act (Landesnaturschutzgesetz) for the national park.

Until 2007 the Wadden Sea National Park was administrated by the National Park State Office (Landesamt) which was directly assigned to the Ministry of Nature, Environment and Regional Development (Ministerium für Natur, Umwelt und Landesentwicklung). Since 1 January 2008 the National Park Administration is integrated in the newly founded Agency of Coastal Defence, National Park and Marine Conservation of Schleswig-Holstein as Department 3: National Park and Marine Conservation. The main reason to unite coastal defence and nature conservation in one agency is to provide a better coordination for overlapping responsibilities of these two departments. Head of Department 3: National Park and Marine Conservation is Dr. Detlef Hansen.

Although the national park only covers the area of Dithmarschen and North Frisia and borders 69 local communities the state administration of Schleswig-Holstein is responsible for the national park. The state administration justifies its responsibility with high efficiency, standardised administration processes and the minimisation of special local interests. Besides that the biggest part of the national park area is classified as unincorporated area. The local communities have no right for administration in these areas. The administrative districts North Frisia and Dithmarschen and the local communities are members of the boards of trustees which are instruments to pool statements and influence on the national park.

 99.9% of the national park area is public property. 99% of that is property of the German Federal Republic the rest belongs to the state of Schleswig-Holstein.

The National Park Administration employs 85 people, to some extent in part-time jobs. It has a budget of seven million euros per year. With integrating the National Park administration in the Agency for Coastal Defence, National Park and Marine Conservation the &quot;Nationalpark Service&quot; got integrated in the National Park administration, so only one administration office is in charge of every area of responsibility concerning the National Park.

The National Park Administration tries to solve conflicts and work more efficient by making agreements with user groups to manage the details of the Park´s utilization. They negotiate treaties with fishermen, the guides for mudflat tours, the operators of excursion boats, but as well with communities like Sankt Peter-Ording, Westerhever or the Hamburger Hallig.

=== Other conservation measures ===
Since 1987 the governments of Denmark, Netherlands and Germany run the Common Wadden Sea Secretariat (CWSS) to provide better coordination of conservation measures. The secretariat is located in Wilhelmshaven. Since 1990 the area of the national park and five Hallig islands additionally own the conservation status of a Biosphere reserve. The waterways in this area are assigned to federal law. The latest act got passed in 1997 and determines the speed limitations and temporal closure of the waterways.

Internationally speaking the Wadden Sea of Schleswig-Holstein is subject to the Ramsar-Convention on Wetlands of International Importance. Since 2002 the area is also listed as a Particularly Sensitive Sea Area (PSSA). Additionally the national park is subject to a trilateral convention for protecting grey seals, harbour seals and Cetaceans called ‘Agreement on the Conservation of Small Cetaceans of the Baltic, North East Atlantic, Irish and North Seas’ as well as to the Agreement on the Conservation of African-Eurasian migratory water birds. The area is designated for the purpose of the Bird directive of the European Union (79/409/EWG) as well as the for the purpose of the Habitats Directive and therefore a part of the European Natura 2000 nature protection network. As a part of the Marine Strategy Framework Directive the ecological status of the Wadden Sea has to be protected and improved. In the purpose of the Waterframework directive the national park is partly assigned to the Flussgebietseinheit (FGE) Eider, a so called &quot;unit of the river basin Eider&quot;, and partly to the FGE Elbe. Harbour seals are protected in the Wadden Sea by the ‘Agreement on the Conservation of Seals in the Wadden Sea’. The 26 July 2009 the Wadden Sea of Schleswig-Holstein received the Status of UNESCO World Heritage together with the Wadden Sea of Lower Saxony and the Netherlands. The adjacent Wadden Sea of Hamburg received the Status in 2011, the National Park Vadehavet in Denmark in 2014.

== Human utilisation of the National Park ==

The national park has 70 neighbouring communities in Schleswig-Holstein with 290.000 people living there. Additionally approximately 15 Million people visit the national park every year. The area of the Wadden Sea National Park is harnessed by tourism, fishery, oil production, coastal defence, grazing, maritime traffic and air traffic, withdrawal of gravel and sand, mussel cultivation and sometimes used for military weapon testing. Most of the utilisation is located directly near or at the coast, so the seaward area is more or less unaffected by human influences. Since the amendment of the second national park law in 1999 mainly voluntary agreements coordinate the limitation in human utilisation of the Wadden Sea. The consideration of traditional usages highly increased the approval of the national park by locals. Since 1987 utilisations, which hardly affect the ecosystem Wadden Sea at all, are allowed again by law. Such utilisations are e.g. collecting small amounts of plants for science or education.

=== Approval of the Wadden Sea National Park by locals and tourists ===
The National Park Administration commissions a monitoring program called &quot;SÖM Watt&quot; (Sozio-ökonomisches Monitoring) regularly. In the SÖM Watt report, data about the regional economy, the demographic developments, opinions and wishes of the local population are gathered and analysed. The results of the monitoring program shows that tourists are at least as well informed about the national park as locals. In a representative survey all over Germany the Wadden Sea National Park was placed second in terms of publicity, right behind the Bavarian Forest National Park, which was the first place. Despite being famous in the public awareness, only a few people distinguish (without help) between Schleswig-Holstein Wadden Sea National Park, Hamburg Wadden Sea National Park and Lower Saxony Wadden Sea National Park.

Besides being highly approved by tourists, the surveys suggest that locals have high rates of consent for the Wadden Sea National Park as well. According to the SÖM report 2017 about 85% of the population of Dithmarschen and North Frisia would vote for a continuation of the national park. Since 2009 the approval rates haven’t gone below 80%. 10% of the samples would vote for a continuation under certain circumstances. Only 2% would vote against a continuation of the Wadden Sea National Park. Locals, who would have voted against the national park, fear further limitations for example in fishery, aquatic sports and accessibility of the conservation area. However most of the samples show comprehension for specific conservation measures. In the survey of the SÖM report 2014 36% of locals said they are proud to have the Wadden Sea National Park. Additionally 52% think the existence of the national park is important. Women and young adults evaluate it more positively than men and elder persons.

It is hard to quantify the effects of the communication and education efforts of the National Park Administration with the locals. The administration has trouble in limiting the agriculture in the national park area, mainly because there hasn&#x27;t been much agriculture in the first place before the Wadden Sea National Park was founded. Also, even 32 years after the creation of the national park, only 14% of the local people actually know that the Wadden Sea area which they are living adjacent to has the conservation status of a national park. The public awareness of the Wadden Sea being a biosphere reserve is &lt; 1%.

=== Coastal defence ===
Coastal defence has a higher priority than nature conservation measurements, even in the national park area. Along the North Sea coast new dikes are being built and old dikes will be amplified according to the sea level rise. In some areas, e.g. at the west coast of Sylt eroded beach material is replaced through beach nourishment. But compared to other marine national parks coastal defence has always been a part of the Wadden Sea. The Wadden Sea wouldn&#x27;t be the same today if not for coastal protection over centuries. For example drainage channels were dug in the Dark Age in salt marsh areas. Even today the channels change the originally amphibious character of the biotope.

In the past land reclamation was the number one priority for the people during the first settlements. Nowadays only small areas of land reclamation are planned (due to nature conservation) mainly for increasing the stability in foreshore areas for better flood protection.

=== Tourism ===

The national park law says that nature conservation in the national park area shall support sustainable development of living and working conditions for locals. The goal is reached by positive backlash on tourism and reputation of the region. The location of the Wadden Sea National Park is a traditionally popular destination for German tourists. The official statistics show that 1.5 million holidaymakers generate 8.4 million overnight stays in the adjacent coastal area, islands and Hallig islands. One can assume that unofficial numbers are much higher because the official statistics don’t include private renting with less than 10 beds to sleep in, long-time camping, and staying overnight in houses / flats of relatives or friends. Another number which is hard to quantify are the daily visitors. To determine a total number of tourists the researchers combine official counting with other representative surveys with topics related to tourism in the North Sea region. Over all 18.7 million overnight stays are recorded as well as 12.8 million daily visitors. Approximately 9.000 people in the North Sea region are working in the tourist sector.

==== North Sea tourism in the Wadden Sea National Park area ====

The surveillance of the national park area is hard to manage for the National Park Administration. The number of tourists is too big; the area of the national park too large and the number of employees responsible for supervising tourists is too low. Additionally tourists do not have a few main entrances as in other German national parks, but the entrances to the Wadden Sea National Park are large in number through the dike areas. The National Park Administration cooperates with local communities and nature conservation organisations to close the surveillance gap.

Most of the time tourists who are visiting the national park stay out of the park itself. Normally the groups of tourists entering the national park are guided walking tours in the mudflat areas. The number of private walking tours is unknown. On the other hand the number of guided walking tours reached a maximum of 5.900 tours with a total of 149.000 participants attending in 2016, a number which has not been reached since 1999. Around 2/3 of the tours are guided and organised by members of the Wadden Sea Conservation Station. The remainder are guided by professional mudflat guides.

==== National Park tourism ====

It is unknown to which degree the status of the national park increased the number of tourists in the North Sea region. Compared to administrative districts which are not located adjacent to the national park region, the increasing rate of tourists in administrative districts adjacent to the Wadden Sea National Park is not significantly higher.

However in 2014 17% of the people making a vacation in the North Sea area decided to go there because of the national park, suggests the SÖM report. These tourists generate a net product of 89 Million euros which is the income equivalent of 4741 people. As a part of the INTERREG IV B-project PROWAD another survey was made asking people to which degree the status of a national park influenced their decision during vacation planning to travel to the North Sea region. About 44% answered that they think the conservation of the Wadden Sea was a &quot;very important&quot; or an &quot;important&quot; factor for choosing their vacation destination.

The National Park Administration is responsible for public relation (PR) topics of the national park. A part of the PR program is their visitor information system. It consists of pavilions, information boards, maps, signs and guides. Meanwhile approximately 750 items are located in 250 places all over the coast of Schleswig-Holstein. Since 1999 the National Park Administration operates a main information centre in the town of Tönning called ‘Multimar Wattforum’. Besides that other bigger information centers are located in Wyk on Föhr Island and Husum (Nationalparkhaus) whereas 30 smaller information centers of the national park can be found all around the coast. The smaller information centers are operated by nature conservation associations or local communities. Other tourist attractions which also provide information about the national park and the World Heritage status are the &quot;Seehundstation Friedrichskoog&quot; and the &quot;Erlebniszentrum Naturgewalten List&quot; (Sylt).
==== National Park partner initiative of the Wadden Sea National Park ====
The National Park Partner Project was founded in 2003 by the National Park Administration. Since then local touristic businesses can apply for a National Park Partnership. The idea behind the project is that tourists who plan a vacation in the North Sea region get a package made of quality service, practised &quot;regionality&quot; and ecological awareness. They also support sustainable touristic development in the National Park region. The project promotes cooperation between local communities, nature conservation associations and the National Park Administration. The central panel of the National Park Partner Project is the &quot;Vergaberat&quot; deciding over which applicant gets accepted and may enter the National Park Partner Network. The &quot;Vergaberat&quot; consists of the representatives from the Island and Hallig Island conference (Insel- und Halligkonferenz), nature conservation associations, National Park Partners, the Nordsee-Tourismus-Service GmbH and the National Park Administration. The head of the &quot;Vergaberat&quot; is Anja Szczesinski (World Wide Fund for Nature), the chief executive is Matthias Kundy (National Park Administration). Companies and businesses who want to apply for a National Park Partnership have to fulfil a catalogue of criteria in the fields of identification with the idea of a national park, ecological awareness and service quality. Currently over 170 partners are part of the network. The partners are categorised for example in apartments, hotels, professional mud flat guides, shipping companies or museum. The National Park Partnership is fee-based.

At the moment there are 27 &quot;Nationale Naturlandschaften&quot; (German national nature reserves) partner initiatives with over 1000 partnerships. They organise themselves in a committee of the Europarc Deutschland e.V. For having a comprehensive quality standard the committee developed a harmonised catalogue of criteria for National Park Partners.

=== Fishery, hunting and agriculture ===

The coexistence of the national park and fishery has conflict potential. While only being a small part of the national product of the west coast (ca. 1%), fishery is highly important for tourism. Tourists expect a maritime flare when having a vacation at the North Sea coast. Shrimp fishery has the biggest economic importance as a part of fishery in the North Sea region because fishing common shrimps (&quot;Crangon crangon&quot;) is not limited by catch quota. On the other hand Atlantic cod, European plaice and common sole are hardly fished at all due to strict catch quota and other protection measures.

Agriculture has a higher economic importance for the North Sea coast. But most of the land used for agriculture is located outside the national park. Only grazing of saltmarshes by sheep happens inside the park and has conflict potential to some extent.

==== Shrimp fishery ====
Shrimpers support the characteristic image of the North Sea region of Schleswig-Holstein as it counts as traditional fishery. Not until 1900 shrimp boats were used for catching shrimps, prior to which a Gliep net was the standard fishing method. The shrimper stock in Schleswig-Holstein declined over the years: in 1999 about 144 shrimp boats were fishing in the North Sea. In 2016 the stock has dropped to half. Small family businesses are affected the most. Against the odds the number of big industrial shrimp boats in the North Sea region is increasing. They can stay outside longer, as well as in bad weather.

From 2010 to 2015 about 6.000 tons of common shrimps a year were caught. In 2016 the number decreased to 2.530 tons, which is unusually small.

==== Mussel fishery ====
Common blue mussels are cultivated in an area with an extension of 1.700 ha in the North Sea area. Seeds (young mussels) for cultivation can be extracted from natural spat falls and &quot;seed collectors&quot;. Catching common blue mussels outside cultivated areas is strictly forbidden. The cultivation of common mussels in the conservation zone 2 of the national park is limited to an area of 13 ha. Since 1997 areas that dry out during low tide are closed for mussel cultivation as well. In total only 8 common mussel cultivation areas in the national park region are allowed by law. On average approximately 10.000 tons of common mussels are harvested. From the beginning of April until mid of June harvesting is generally prohibited.

Catching common cockle and common razor shells is prohibited since 1990. Even before the prohibition, it was economically unimportant due to natural stock decreases in Schleswig-Holstein during hard winter seasons. Pacific oyster (&quot;Magallan gigas&quot;) cultivations are limited to a 30 ha big area near Sylt. These oysters are kept in heated ponds during winter. About 1 million oysters are harvested and sold on Sylt annually; approximately one third is eaten local. The Pacific oyster has widely spread in the Wadden Sea during the last years. The former blue mussel beds evolved into oyssel reefs. Attempts to catch the thick trough shell (&quot;Spisula solida&quot;) were successful in the beginning of the 1990s. During the hard winter in 1995/96 all the shells fell victim to the unusual cold weather. Since the end of 2016 thick trough shell fishery is prohibited in the national park.

==== Aquaculture and hunting ====
An experimental station for marine aquaculture is located in Büsum. The plants water supply with North Sea water comes through a pipeline which begins in the national park. While hunting in the national park area is prohibited since 1999, some hunters are still active on the Hallig Islands which are surrounded by national park conservation zones.

==== Agriculture ====

Besides tourism agriculture is the most important source of income for the west coast of Schleswig-Holstein. Especially southern Dithmarschen has been and still is an important agricultural export area. While most of the agriculture happens outside of the national park area (except for sheep farming), it still has some influence on the national park, for example water travels through Grüppen (drainage channels) from the fields into the North Sea.

Only sheep grazing on salt marshes happens to be a problem with agriculture and the national park. Since the first settlements salt marshes were used for grazing and sheep farming. Since the 1980s intensive grazing got subsidised by the government of Schleswig-Holstein. Nowadays only dikes itself and the dike foreshore areas shall be intensively grazed because of coastal defence manners. Salt marshes which are located more seawards shall be spared out.

From 1991 to 1996, shepherds received compensation for relinquishing the intensive grazing of seaward salt marshes as a part of the &quot;Küstenstreifen-Programm&quot;. In the disused salt marshes water drainage got stopped as well. Because of these measures the salt marshes stock increased up to 13.5% at the coasts of North Frisia and Dithmarschen in the years from 1988 to 2014. With a total area of 12.450 ha (2006), 47% of the salt marshes were not grazed at all, 11% were grazed extensively and 38% were grazed intensively.
=== Transport and infrastructure ===
There are some small and medium-sized harbours (Meldorf, Büsum, Husum, Nordstrand, Pellworm, Dagebüll, Wyk auf Föhr, Amrum, Hörnum and List auf Sylt) located at the coast of Schleswig Holstein. The only possibility to reach them is driving through the national park. Responsible for most of the marine traffic are ferries driving to the North Frisian Islands. The ferry traffic routes go through shipping channels in the national park area.

A special decree on moving through the Wadden Sea by the Federal Government of Germany applies to the maritime area of the national park shipping channels. The decree allows for example temporal closure of conservation zones for the protection of breeding birds and grey seals or bans on driving during low tide. The seaward part of the national park is signed as a PSSA (Particularly Sensitive Sea Area). The marking also provides extra limitations for marine traffic especially for ships with dangerous loads. These ships are forced to take other routes (more seawards) outside of the PSSA. Very important shipping routes, like the Elbe estuary route to Hamburg are an exception.

The area of the Schleswig-Holstein Wadden Sea National Park is located north of a strongly frequented waterway in the southern North Sea. Changing weather conditions, strong storms and limited range of sight are pretty common for the region, so naval accidents are ongoing hazards for the flora and fauna of the national park. But more common than naval accidents are oil-polluted birds due to captains illegally dumping oil into the sea close to the national park. The biggest threat the national park ever experienced happened on 29 October 1998 when the cargo ship MV Pallas, on fire and abandoned, ran aground near the island Amrum. Approximately 244 tons of oil flew into the North Sea.

Because of being completely surrounded by the national park area, the supply chain of the islands and Hallig islands goes through the national park inevitably. Besides the supply transported by ships, other essentials like energy, data or water pipes lead through the national park as well. Also civic air traffic is passing over the national park area.

=== Oil, offshore wind power and sand ===
The only operating offshore oil platform of Germany &quot;Mittelplate A&quot; is located adjacent to Trischen Island in the national park area. It exploits the most considerable oilfield of Germany since 1987 in up to 2000 – 3000 meter water depth. The obtained oil was originally transported by oil tankers to Brunsbüttel but since 2005 the oil is carried away by an underground pipeline. Besides the obvious disturbing factors for the environment, noise level and lighting are considerable disturbances for the breeding birds as well.

The construction of further oil platforms is prohibited by national park law and the Trilateral Wadden Sea Cooperation (TWSC). It is assumed that further oil fields are located in the south of the operated field near the Elbe River and in the salt domes around Büsum and Oldenswort. It is unknown if it&#x27;s possible to exploit the oil fields from stations outside the national park area but it&#x27;s pretty unlikely that they can be tapped by the Mittelplate A. The operating concern of the &quot;Mittelplate A&quot; RWE Dea requested 5 additional exploratory drilling in the national park area. The responsible mining authority gave the permission but according to an inspection by the Landtag of Schleswig-Holstein it is illegitimate. The political discourse still goes on today.

Wind energy in Schleswig-Holstein is only won by onshore wind parks, which are built in the coastal region bordering the national park. First economical important offshore wind farms are planned seawards outside the national park. The sea cable connection from the offshore wind farms to land might cause some disturbances while being built.

While it is generally forbidden to extract resources for commercial use from the national park, an exception is being made for coastal defence purposes. 1.1 Million Cubic meters are extracted every year for example for beach replenishment at the west coast of Sylt, for renewing the Hallig islands or to restore dikes.

=== Military ===
Since the foundation of the Wadden Sea National Park the Bundeswehr gave up its military test area at Sylt. The military testing area in the southern part of Meldorf Bay is still active but it&#x27;s not used for testing bombs and napalm anymore, like in the past. In the 1960s arm manufacturers tested munitions and projectiles while aiming at the Wadden Sea during 130 days a year, heavily disturbing the local fauna. The projectiles had been salvaged with the help of helicopters. Nowadays companies are still allowed to test ammunition in the military testing area near the Wadden Sea during two days a year. Additionally military training flights are located within the national park area regularly. The aircraft aren’t allowed to come below a flying altitude of 900 m.

It is mostly unknown how much ammunition from World War 2 is still located in the Wadden Sea of Schleswig-Holstein. The German marine plunged the remaining munition mostly undocumented in the mudflats. Although most of the munition seems to be dumped in the Lower Saxony part of the Wadden Sea, it is assumed that a total mass of 400.000 – 1.300.000 tons can be found in the Schleswig-Holstein Wadden Sea. The exact locations of the plunged munitions are mostly unknown. Only some places west of Sylt are known to be used as munition graveyards. Due to corrosion heavy pollutants might be set free in the environment. Tourists and fishermen are in great danger when they unluckily come in contact with ammunition remains.

== See also ==
*Wadden Sea National Parks
*Lower Saxony Wadden Sea National Park
*Hamburg Wadden Sea National Park

== Literature ==
* Common Wadden Sea Secretariat (CWSS) (Hrsg.): &quot;Nomination of the Dutch-German Wadden Sea as World Heritage Site&quot;. 2008 als PDF
* Landesamt für den Nationalpark Schleswig-Holsteinisches Wattenmeer (Hrsg.): &quot;Wattenmeermonitoring 2000 – Schriftenreihe des Nationalparks Schleswig-Holsteinisches Wattenmeer&quot;, Sonderheft, Tönning 2001
* Landesamt für den Nationalpark Schleswig-Holsteinisches Wattenmeer (Hrsg.): &quot;SÖM-Bericht 2008&quot; als pdf
* Landesamt für den Nationalpark Schleswig-Holsteinisches Wattenmeer / Landesamt für den Nationalpark Niedersächsisches Wattenmeer / Umweltbundesamt (Hrsg.): &quot;Umweltatlas Wattenmeer. Bd. 1 (Nordfriesisches und Dithmarscher Wattenmeer)&quot;, Verlag Ulmer, Stuttgart, 
* Ministerium für Landwirtschaft, Umweltschutz und Ländliche Räume des Landes Schleswig-Holstein (MLUL) (Hrsg.): &quot;Bericht zur Überprüfung des Biosphärenreservats Schleswig-Holsteinisches Wattenmeer und Halligen durch die UNESCO. Berichtszeitraum 1990 bis 2005&quot;. Juni 2005 als pdf
* Dirk Legler: &quot;Die Organisation deutscher Nationalparkverwaltungen&quot;. Nomos, Baden-Baden 2006, 
* Martin Stock &quot;et al.&quot;: &quot;Salzwiesen an der Westküste von Schleswig-Holstein 1986–2001&quot;. Boyens Buchverlag, Heide 2005, 

== Filmography ==
* &quot;Im Nationalpark Wattenmeer&quot;. Documentary, 45 min., Germany, 1998, by Jens-Uwe Heins and Michael Sutor, Production: Komplett-Media-GmbH, Grünwald (), Brief description by the &quot;ARD&quot;

== External links ==
* Wadden Sea : UNESCO Official Website
* Wadden Sea Conservation Station 

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q706721" start="4" end="47" title="Schleswig-Holstein Wadden Sea National Park" label="Schleswig-Holstein Wadden Sea National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q46169" start="56" end="69" title="national park" label="national park"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194" start="77" end="95" title="Schleswig-Holstein" label="Schleswig-Holstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q26080" start="115" end="125" title="Wadden Sea" label="Wadden Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q449304" start="149" end="181" title="Parliament of Schleswig-Holstein" label="Parliament of Schleswig-Holstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q661217" start="295" end="331" title="Lower Saxon Wadden Sea National Park" label="Lower Saxon Wadden Sea National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q686539" start="337" end="369" title="Hamburg Wadden Sea National Park" label="Hamburg Wadden Sea National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q1644" start="389" end="401" title="Elbe" label="Elbe estuary"/>
<link wikidata="Q26080" start="465" end="475" title="Wadden Sea" label="Wadden Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q27937" start="658" end="687" title="North Frisian Islands" label="geest-based and marsh islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q21161" start="702" end="710" title="Halligen" label="Halligen"/>
<link wikidata="Q28337" start="851" end="859" title="sandbank" label="sandbank"/>
<link wikidata="Q10867" start="971" end="979" title="porpoise" label="porpoise"/>
<link wikidata="Q46316" start="981" end="989" title="shelduck" label="shelduck"/>
<link wikidata="Q157371" start="994" end="1002" title="Zostera" label="eelgrass"/>
<link wikidata="Q29925" start="1238" end="1248" title="salt marsh" label="salt marsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q42762" start="1376" end="1385" title="biosphere" label="biosphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q9259" start="1453" end="1479" title="UNESCO World Heritage Site" label="UNESCO World Heritage Site"/>
<link wikidata="Q1693" start="1672" end="1681" title="North Sea" label="North Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194" start="1691" end="1709" title="Schleswig-Holstein" label="Schleswig-Holstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q35" start="1717" end="1723" title="Denmark" label="Danish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1644" start="1751" end="1763" title="Elbe" label="Elbe estuary"/>
<link wikidata="Q3136" start="1818" end="1823" title="Amrum" label="Amrum"/>
<link wikidata="Q213204" start="1868" end="1897" title="territorial waters" label="twelve mile territorial limit"/>
<link wikidata="Q105190" start="2015" end="2024" title="Levee" label="Sea dykes"/>
<link wikidata="Q27937" start="2269" end="2290" title="North Frisian Islands" label="North Frisian Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q21161" start="2312" end="2320" title="Halligen" label="Halligen"/>
<link wikidata="Q29931" start="2338" end="2347" title="Langeness" label="Langeness"/>
<link wikidata="Q20836" start="2349" end="2354" title="Hooge, Germany" label="Hooge"/>
<link wikidata="Q20754" start="2356" end="2361" title="Gröde" label="Gröde"/>
<link wikidata="Q20687" start="2363" end="2368" title="Oland (Frisian island)" label="Oland"/>
<link wikidata="Q20686" start="2373" end="2391" title="Nordstrandischmoor" label="Nordstrandischmoor"/>
<link wikidata="Q20666" start="2482" end="2490" title="Trischen" label="Trischen"/>
<link wikidata="Q20663" start="2492" end="2499" title="Blauort" label="Blauort"/>
<link wikidata="Q1997974" start="2507" end="2535" title="North Frisian Barrier Island" label="North Frisian Barrier Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q553036" start="2569" end="2595" title="natural regions of Germany" label="natural regions of Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q1861224" start="2716" end="2742" title="List of natural regions in Schleswig-Holstein" label="Schleswig-Holstein Marshes"/>
<link wikidata="Q321837" start="2773" end="2785" title="German Bight" label="German Bight"/>
<link wikidata="Q20741" start="2898" end="2908" title="Eiderstedt" label="Eiderstedt"/>
<link wikidata="Q2937" start="2916" end="2929" title="Kreis Nordfriesland" label="North Frisian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2947" start="2999" end="3011" title="Kreis Dithmarschen" label="Dithmarschen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1693" start="3100" end="3109" title="North Sea" label="North Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q121742" start="3311" end="3326" title="storm tide" label="flood disasters"/>
<link wikidata="Q1398201" start="3557" end="3568" title="tidal range" label="tidal range"/>
<link wikidata="Q20859" start="3655" end="3660" title="geest (topography)" label="geest"/>
<link wikidata="Q49367" start="3682" end="3689" title="ice age" label="ice age"/>
<link wikidata="Q1644" start="3833" end="3837" title="Elbe" label="Elbe"/>
<link wikidata="Q3314" start="3842" end="3847" title="Eider (river)" label="Eider"/>
<link wikidata="Q20666" start="4026" end="4034" title="Trischen" label="Trischen"/>
<link wikidata="Q121742" start="4071" end="4082" title="storm surge" label="storm surge"/>
<link wikidata="Q27769" start="4168" end="4188" title="East Frisian Islands" label="East Frisian Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q47053" start="4351" end="4360" title="estuaries" label="estuaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q31796" start="4767" end="4830" title="Mudflat" label="intertidal estuarine mudflat, mixed sediment mudflat, sand flat"/>
<link wikidata="Q27250" start="4832" end="4844" title="Creek (tidal)" label="tidal creeks"/>
<link wikidata="Q506894" start="4910" end="4921" title="Littoral zone" label="sublittoral"/>
<link wikidata="Q52109" start="5079" end="5095" title="Geomorphology" label="geomorphological"/>
<link wikidata="Q481593" start="5336" end="5350" title="Hindenburgdamm" label="Hindenburgdamm"/>
<link wikidata="Q3107" start="5375" end="5379" title="Sylt" label="Sylt"/>
<link wikidata="Q27027" start="5716" end="5731" title="Harbour porpoise" label="common porpoise"/>
<link wikidata="Q270699" start="6351" end="6355" title="silt" label="silt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1398201" start="6381" end="6392" title="tidal range" label="tidal range"/>
<link wikidata="Q506894" start="6956" end="6967" title="Littoral zone" label="sublittoral"/>
<link wikidata="Q31796" start="6977" end="6984" title="mudflat" label="mudflat"/>
<link wikidata="Q506894" start="7065" end="7075" title="Littoral zone" label="eulittoral"/>
<link wikidata="Q2549340" start="7149" end="7162" title="Supralittoral zone" label="supralittoral"/>
<link wikidata="Q495844" start="7235" end="7249" title="Tidal race" label="tidal currents"/>
<link wikidata="Q971353" start="7475" end="7491" title="Norwegian trench" label="Norwegian Trench"/>
<link wikidata="Q29925" start="7788" end="7798" title="salt marsh" label="salt marsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q28337" start="7827" end="7835" title="Shoal" label="sandbars"/>
<link wikidata="Q215635" start="7930" end="7941" title="Breakwater (structure)" label="breakwaters"/>
<link wikidata="Q20749" start="8226" end="8242" title="Sankt Peter-Ording" label="St. Peter-Ording"/>
<link wikidata="Q123452" start="9038" end="9045" title="Endemism" label="endemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q28067" start="10389" end="10447" title="Puccinellia maritima" label="common salt marsh grass (&amp;quot;Puccinellia maritima&amp;quot;)"/>
<link wikidata="Q160217" start="10449" end="10488" title="Hordeum marinum" label="sea-aster (&amp;quot;Hordeum marinum&amp;quot;)"/>
<link wikidata="Q159453" start="10490" end="10528" title="Suaeda maritima" label="sea-blite (&amp;quot;Sueda maritima&amp;quot;)"/>
<link wikidata="Q888227" start="10533" end="10583" title="Halimione portulacoides" label="sea-purslane (&amp;quot;Halimione portulacoides&amp;quot;)"/>
<link wikidata="Q21126" start="10782" end="10826" title="Plantago maritima" label="see plantain (&amp;quot;Plantago maritima&amp;quot;)"/>
<link wikidata="Q159212" start="10831" end="10872" title="Carex distans" label="distant sedge (&amp;quot;Carex distans&amp;quot;)"/>
<link wikidata="Q161783" start="11071" end="11122" title="Eriophorum angustifolium" label="cotton grass (&amp;quot;Eriophorum angustifolium&amp;quot;)"/>
<link wikidata="Q266" start="11124" end="11131" title="drosera" label="drosera"/>
<link wikidata="Q161548" start="11135" end="11184" title="Gentiana pneumonanthe" label="marsh gentian (&amp;quot;Gentiana pneumonanthe&amp;quot;)"/>
<link wikidata="Q27027" start="11239" end="11255" title="harbour porpoise" label="harbour porpoise"/>
<link wikidata="Q26913" start="11315" end="11328" title="Harbor seal" label="harbour seals"/>
<link wikidata="Q27370" start="11333" end="11342" title="grey seal" label="grey seal"/>
<link wikidata="" start="12510" end="12545" title=":de:Halligflieder-Spitzmaus-Rüsselkäfer" label="Halligflieder-Spitzmaus-Rüsselkäfer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2114623" start="12683" end="12716" title="Bledius spectabilis" label="salt beetle (Bledius spectabilis)"/>
<link wikidata="Q171360" start="13376" end="13394" title="European Spoonbill" label="European spoonbill"/>
<link wikidata="Q25440" start="13396" end="13411" title="Great cormorant" label="Great cormorant"/>
<link wikidata="Q26816" start="13413" end="13433" title="common ringed plover" label="common ringed plover"/>
<link wikidata="Q26680" start="13523" end="13537" title="barnacle goose" label="barnacle goose"/>
<link wikidata="Q18840" start="13539" end="13556" title="common greenshank" label="common greenshank"/>
<link wikidata="Q18854" start="13558" end="13573" title="Eurasian curlew" label="Eurasian curlew"/>
<link wikidata="Q25634" start="13575" end="13592" title="black-headed gull" label="black-headed gull"/>
<link wikidata="Q27160" start="13594" end="13618" title="lesser black-backed gull" label="lesser black-backed gull"/>
<link wikidata="Q25928" start="13620" end="13642" title="Eurasian oystercatcher" label="Eurasian oystercatcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q26147" start="13644" end="13655" title="pied avocet" label="pied avocet"/>
<link wikidata="Q27050" start="13660" end="13684" title="Dark-bellied brent goose" label="dark bellied brent goose"/>
<link wikidata="Q105729329" start="13760" end="13768" title="trawling" label="trawling"/>
<link wikidata="Q106259" start="13999" end="14006" title="polder" label="polders"/>
<link wikidata="Q25438" start="14199" end="14219" title="White-tailed eagle" label="breeding eagle pairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q381084" start="14371" end="14379" title="moulting" label="moulting"/>
<link wikidata="Q20666" start="14464" end="14472" title="Trischen" label="Trischen"/>
<link wikidata="Q690813" start="14621" end="14632" title="Eider" label="eider ducks"/>
<link wikidata="Q3136" start="14772" end="14787" title="Amrum" label="island of Amrum"/>
<link wikidata="Q27050" start="14837" end="14848" title="Brant (goose)" label="brant geese"/>
<link wikidata="Q21124" start="15208" end="15254" title="Common cockle" label="common cockle (&amp;quot;Cerastoderma edule&amp;quot;)"/>
<link wikidata="Q27855" start="15263" end="15303" title="Blue mussel" label="blue mussel (&amp;quot;Mytilus edulis&amp;quot;)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3806139" start="15584" end="15600" title="False angelwing" label="American piddock"/>
<link wikidata="Q378093" start="15669" end="15692" title="Atlantic jackknife clam" label="Atlantic jackknife clam"/>
<link wikidata="Q27779" start="15755" end="15802" title="Carcinus maenas" label="common shore crab (&amp;quot;Carcinus maenas&amp;quot;)"/>
<link wikidata="Q27765" start="15899" end="15911" title="Crangon crangon" label="brown shrimp"/>
<link wikidata="Q220457" start="15916" end="15924" title="barnacle" label="barnacle"/>
<link wikidata="Q3698466" start="15961" end="15968" title="lugworm" label="lugworm"/>
<link wikidata="Q27336" start="16092" end="16131" title="Viviparous eelpout" label="eelpout (&amp;quot;Zoarces viviparus)&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1121059" start="16145" end="16191" title="Sand goby" label="sand goby (&amp;quot;Pomatoschistus minutus&amp;quot;)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1481591" start="16196" end="16245" title="Myoxocephalus scorpius" label="sea scorpion (&amp;quot;Myoxocephalus scorpius&amp;quot;)"/>
<link wikidata="Q59577" start="16358" end="16366" title="Flatfish" label="Flatfish"/>
<link wikidata="Q4242107" start="16372" end="16378" title="plaice" label="plaice"/>
<link wikidata="Q643373" start="16415" end="16450" title="Garfish" label="garfish (&amp;quot;Belone belone&amp;quot;)"/>
<link wikidata="Q759421" start="16804" end="16822" title="Naturschutzgebiet" label="conservation areas"/>
<link wikidata="Q704124" start="17454" end="17483" title="Bavarian Forest National Park" label="Bavarian Forest National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q656855" start="18372" end="18384" title="Kieler Förde" label="Kieler Förde"/>
<link wikidata="Q704124" start="18556" end="18585" title="Bavarian Forest National Park" label="Bavarian Forest National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q702489" start="18594" end="18621" title="Berchtesgaden National Park" label="Berchtesgaden National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q449304" start="18649" end="18678" title="Landtag of Schleswig-Holstein" label="Landtag of Schleswig-Holstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q661217" start="18974" end="18986" title="Lower Saxon Wadden Sea National Park" label="Lower Saxony"/>
<link wikidata="Q686539" start="19004" end="19036" title="Hamburg Wadden Sea National Park" label="Hamburg Wadden Sea National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q3351830" start="19156" end="19173" title="Wadden Sea National Park, Denmark" label="Danish Wadden Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q25761" start="21751" end="21766" title="common shelduck" label="common shelduck"/>
<link wikidata="Q144825" start="22506" end="22516" title="Kiel Canal" label="Kiel Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q449304" start="23281" end="23310" title="Landtag of Schleswig-Holstein" label="Landtag of Schleswig-Holstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q21018" start="25310" end="25317" title="Tönning" label="Tönning"/>
<link wikidata="Q269528" start="27068" end="27087" title="unincorporated area" label="unincorporated area"/>
<link wikidata="Q20749" start="28287" end="28305" title="Sankt Peter-Ording" label="Sankt Peter-Ording"/>
<link wikidata="Q20797" start="28307" end="28318" title="Westerhever" label="Westerhever"/>
<link wikidata="Q20677" start="28326" end="28342" title="Hamburger Hallig" label="Hamburger Hallig"/>
<link wikidata="Q170170" start="28968" end="28985" title="Ramsar Convention" label="Ramsar-Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q370381" start="29239" end="29344" title="ASCOBANS" label="Agreement on the Conservation of Small Cetaceans of the Baltic, North East Atlantic, Irish and North Seas"/>
<link wikidata="Q321961" start="29364" end="29435" title="Agreement on the Conservation of African-Eurasian Migratory Waterbirds" label="Agreement on the Conservation of African-Eurasian migratory water birds"/>
<link wikidata="Q5637838" start="29483" end="29497" title="Birds Directive" label="Bird directive"/>
<link wikidata="Q503021" start="29627" end="29638" title="Natura 2000" label="Natura 2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q1276188" start="29683" end="29718" title="Marine Strategy Framework Directive" label="Marine Strategy Framework Directive"/>
<link wikidata="Q321938" start="30053" end="30110" title="Wadden Sea Agreement" label="‘Agreement on the Conservation of Seals in the Wadden Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q7809" start="30190" end="30196" title="UNESCO" label="UNESCO"/>
<link wikidata="Q9259" start="30197" end="30211" title="World Heritage Site" label="World Heritage"/>
<link wikidata="Q49389" start="30681" end="30688" title="tourism" label="tourism"/>
<link wikidata="Q180538" start="30690" end="30697" title="fishery" label="fishery"/>
<link wikidata="Q1349660" start="30699" end="30713" title="Extraction of petroleum" label="oil production"/>
<link wikidata="Q1316027" start="30715" end="30730" title="Coastal management" label="coastal defence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1316027" start="34014" end="34029" title="Coastal management" label="Coastal defence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1749926" start="34328" end="34345" title="beach nourishment" label="beach nourishment"/>
<link wikidata="Q688443" start="36939" end="36959" title="Mudflat hiking" label="guided walking tours"/>
<link wikidata="Q2252380" start="37287" end="37318" title="Wadden Sea Conservation Station" label="Wadden Sea Conservation Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q20771" start="38937" end="38955" title="Wyk auf Föhr" label="Wyk on Föhr Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q21159" start="38960" end="38965" title="Husum" label="Husum"/>
<link wikidata="Q21160" start="39388" end="39392" title="List auf Sylt" label="List"/>
<link wikidata="Q117892" start="40557" end="40583" title="World Wide Fund for Nature" label="World Wide Fund for Nature"/>
<link wikidata="Q27765" start="41885" end="41929" title="Crangon crangon" label="common shrimps (&amp;quot;Crangon crangon&amp;quot;)"/>
<link wikidata="Q20857" start="44128" end="44171" title="Pacific oyster" label="Pacific oyster (&amp;quot;Magallan gigas&amp;quot;)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1811265" start="44542" end="44589" title="Spisula solida" label="thick trough shell (&amp;quot;Spisula solida&amp;quot;)"/>
<link wikidata="Q188989" start="44882" end="44893" title="aquaculture" label="aquaculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q7368" start="45507" end="45512" title="sheep" label="sheep"/>
<link wikidata="Q105190" start="45957" end="45962" title="Levee" label="dikes"/>
<link wikidata="Q498545" start="46746" end="46753" title="Meldorf" label="Meldorf"/>
<link wikidata="Q20768" start="46755" end="46760" title="Büsum" label="Büsum"/>
<link wikidata="Q21159" start="46762" end="46767" title="Husum" label="Husum"/>
<link wikidata="Q21010" start="46769" end="46779" title="Nordstrand, Germany" label="Nordstrand"/>
<link wikidata="Q3146" start="46781" end="46789" title="Pellworm" label="Pellworm"/>
<link wikidata="Q20744" start="46791" end="46799" title="Dagebüll" label="Dagebüll"/>
<link wikidata="Q20771" start="46801" end="46813" title="Wyk auf Föhr" label="Wyk auf Föhr"/>
<link wikidata="Q3136" start="46815" end="46820" title="Amrum" label="Amrum"/>
<link wikidata="Q28013" start="46822" end="46828" title="Hörnum" label="Hörnum"/>
<link wikidata="Q21160" start="46833" end="46846" title="List auf Sylt" label="List auf Sylt"/>
<link wikidata="Q2048005" start="48391" end="48400" title="MV Pallas" label="MV Pallas"/>
<link wikidata="Q20666" start="49014" end="49029" title="Trischen" label="Trischen Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q1583743" start="49952" end="49965" title="Mittelplate" label="Mittelplate A"/>
<link wikidata="Q204914" start="49972" end="49979" title="DEA AG" label="RWE Dea"/>
<link wikidata="Q61637704" start="50401" end="50420" title="Offshore wind power" label="offshore wind farms"/>
<link wikidata="Q506572" start="50473" end="50482" title="Submarine communications cable" label="sea cable"/>
<link wikidata="Q56010" start="50975" end="50985" title="Bundeswehr" label="Bundeswehr"/>
<link wikidata="Q181822" start="51149" end="51155" title="napalm" label="napalm"/>
<link wikidata="Q34486" start="51389" end="51399" title="helicopter" label="helicopter"/>
<link wikidata="Q185785" start="51724" end="51734" title="ammunition" label="ammunition"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="51740" end="51751" title="World War II" label="World War 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q1965925" start="52433" end="52458" title="Wadden Sea National Parks" label="Wadden Sea National Parks"/>
<link wikidata="Q661217" start="52460" end="52497" title="Lower Saxony Wadden Sea National Park" label="Lower Saxony Wadden Sea National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q686539" start="52499" end="52531" title="Hamburg Wadden Sea National Park" label="Hamburg Wadden Sea National Park"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="247995" wikidata="Q686539" url="?curid=247995" title="Hamburg Wadden Sea National Park">
<text>The Hamburg Wadden Sea National Park () is the smallest of the three German Wadden Sea National Parks which protect the single ecological entity of the Wadden Sea reaching from Den Helder to Esbjerg.

It is an exclave of the city state of Hamburg in North Germany and lies 12.5 km off Cuxhaven in the estuary of the Elbe in the North Sea (German Bight) and includes the islands of Neuwerk, Scharhörn and Nigehörn. It is made up mainly of sand and mixed mudflats with shallow creeks, sand bars (&quot;Plaaten&quot;) and the dune islands. In 2011 the national park was added to the Wadden Sea World Heritage Site, highlighting its intact intertidal ecosystem, importance as a breeding area for many species of birds, and uniquely high biodiversity.

== National park ==
In accordance with a ruling by the Hamburg Parliament on 9 April 1990 the area was reclassified as the Hamburg Wadden Sea National Park. On 5 April 2001 the law was updated and the national park area expanded as a result.

The total area of the national park (Zones 1 and 2) is . The Zone 1 areas are under special protection, limiting mudflat hiking and horse and carriage rides to designated routes.

Within the national park there are about 2,000 animal species, of which about 250 are endemic to the salt marshes of the Wadden Sea. Of particular note are the common seal and the gray seal. Due to the natural influx of sediment, there is a high concentration of food for young fish and seabirds at the mouth of the Elbe. The national park is therefore an important resting and moulting area for seabirds.

For example, shelducks live on the snails that are found in hundreds of thousands on the surface of the mudflats. The approximately 180,000 birds of the north-western shelduck population spends also their moulting period from July to September in the Wadden Sea, which is protected by the three national parks in the states of Lower Saxony, Schleswig-Holstein and Hamburg. About 200,000 eider ducks also spend their moulting season here; about 1,000 pairs of eiders also use the mudflats of the North Sea as a breeding area. Most of them breed on the island of Amrum.

At the same time, the Wadden Sea is a resting place for breeding birds from northern climes that eat up the fat reserves they need for successful breeding. As a result, there are about 10-12 million waders, geese, ducks and gulls in the Wadden Sea as a whole.

The park works closely with the Jordsand Society (&quot;Verein Jordsand&quot;) especially in the area of bird conservation.

== Biosphere reserve ==
Since 1992 the national park has also been designated as a biosphere reserve, something which increases the importance of the park, because since then it has been placed under international protection in accordance with the UNESCO programme, &quot;man and biosphere&quot;. The national park management is responsible for the care of the biosphere reserve and its national aspects.

== Addresses ==
: Nationalpark Hamburgisches Wattenmeer
: Nationalpark-Station Neuwerk, Turmwurt
: D - 27499 Insel Neuwerk
: Tel.: 04721 / 69271
and
:Behörde für Umwelt, Klima, Energie und Agrarwirtschaft
:Nationalpark-Verwaltung Hamburgisches Wattenmeer
:Neuenfelder Straße 19
:D - 21109 Hamburg

== Sources ==

== Filmography ==
*&quot;Im Nationalpark Wattenmeer&quot;. Documentary, 45 min., Deutschland, 1998, by Jens-Uwe Heins and Michael Sutor, Production: Komplett-Media-GmbH, Grünwald (), Short description by &quot;ARD&quot;

== See also ==
*Wadden Sea
*Lower Saxony Wadden Sea National Park
*Schleswig-Holstein Wadden Sea National Park
*Wadden Sea Conservation Station
*Mudflat hiking

== References ==
== External links ==

* Hamburg Wadden Sea National Park 
* National park atlas</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q686539" start="4" end="36" title="Hamburg Wadden Sea National Park" label="Hamburg Wadden Sea National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q1965925" start="76" end="101" title="Wadden Sea National Parks" label="Wadden Sea National Parks"/>
<link wikidata="Q26080" start="152" end="162" title="Wadden Sea" label="Wadden Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q9911" start="177" end="187" title="Den Helder" label="Den Helder"/>
<link wikidata="Q26234" start="191" end="198" title="Esbjerg" label="Esbjerg"/>
<link wikidata="Q15621274" start="210" end="217" title="exclave" label="exclave"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055" start="239" end="246" title="Hamburg" label="Hamburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="256" end="263" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q4197" start="285" end="293" title="Cuxhaven" label="Cuxhaven"/>
<link wikidata="Q1644" start="316" end="320" title="Elbe" label="Elbe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1693" start="328" end="337" title="North Sea" label="North Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q321837" start="339" end="351" title="German Bight" label="German Bight"/>
<link wikidata="Q23442" start="370" end="376" title="island" label="island"/>
<link wikidata="Q1622" start="381" end="388" title="Neuwerk" label="Neuwerk"/>
<link wikidata="Q3073" start="390" end="399" title="Scharhörn" label="Scharhörn"/>
<link wikidata="Q3081" start="404" end="412" title="Nigehörn" label="Nigehörn"/>
<link wikidata="Q26080" start="580" end="590" title="Wadden Sea" label="Wadden Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q9259" start="591" end="610" title="World Heritage Site" label="World Heritage Site"/>
<link wikidata="Q636377" start="803" end="821" title="Hamburg Parliament" label="Hamburg Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q46169" start="949" end="962" title="national park" label="national park"/>
<link wikidata="Q688443" start="1104" end="1118" title="mudflat hiking" label="mudflat hiking"/>
<link wikidata="Q235356" start="1133" end="1141" title="carriage" label="carriage"/>
<link wikidata="Q123452" start="1257" end="1264" title="endemic" label="endemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q29925" start="1272" end="1282" title="salt marsh" label="salt marsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q26913" start="1331" end="1342" title="common seal" label="common seal"/>
<link wikidata="Q27370" start="1351" end="1360" title="gray seal" label="gray seal"/>
<link wikidata="Q46316" start="1591" end="1599" title="shelduck" label="shelduck"/>
<link wikidata="Q381084" start="1783" end="1791" title="moulting" label="moulting"/>
<link wikidata="Q661217" start="1905" end="1917" title="Lower Saxony Wadden Sea National Park" label="Lower Saxony"/>
<link wikidata="Q706721" start="1919" end="1937" title="Schleswig-Holstein Wadden Sea National Park" label="Schleswig-Holstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q690813" start="1965" end="1975" title="eider duck" label="eider duck"/>
<link wikidata="Q3136" start="2139" end="2144" title="Amrum" label="Amrum"/>
<link wikidata="Q26226431" start="2346" end="2352" title="Wader" label="waders"/>
<link wikidata="Q16529344" start="2354" end="2359" title="geese" label="geese"/>
<link wikidata="Q3736439" start="2361" end="2366" title="ducks" label="ducks"/>
<link wikidata="Q2699803" start="2371" end="2375" title="gull" label="gull"/>
<link wikidata="Q2005829" start="2513" end="2530" title="bird conservation" label="bird conservation"/>
<link wikidata="Q179049" start="2616" end="2633" title="biosphere reserve" label="biosphere reserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q7809" start="2781" end="2787" title="United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization" label="UNESCO"/>
<link wikidata="Q26080" start="3489" end="3499" title="Wadden Sea" label="Wadden Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q661217" start="3501" end="3538" title="Lower Saxony Wadden Sea National Park" label="Lower Saxony Wadden Sea National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q706721" start="3540" end="3583" title="Schleswig-Holstein Wadden Sea National Park" label="Schleswig-Holstein Wadden Sea National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q2252380" start="3585" end="3616" title="Wadden Sea Conservation Station" label="Wadden Sea Conservation Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q688443" start="3618" end="3632" title="Mudflat hiking" label="Mudflat hiking"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="247998" wikidata="Q187027" url="?curid=247998" title="Kos">
<text>Kos or Cos (; ) is a Greek island, which is part of the Dodecanese island chain in the southeastern Aegean Sea. Kos is the third largest island of the Dodecanese, after Rhodes and Karpathos; it has a population of 37,089 (2021 census), making it the second most populous of the Dodecanese after Rhodes. The island measures . Administratively, Kos constitutes a municipality within the Kos regional unit, which is part of the South Aegean region. The principal town of the island and seat of the municipality is the town of Kos.

==Name==
The name &quot;Kos&quot; () is first attested in the &quot;Iliad&quot;, and has been in continuous use since. Other ancient names include Meropis, Cea, and Nymphaea.

In many Romance languages, Kos was formerly known as &quot;Stancho&quot;, &quot;Stanchio&quot;, or &quot;Stinco&quot;, and in Ottoman and modern Turkish it is known as , all from the reinterpretation of the Greek expression &#x27;to Kos&#x27;; &quot;cf.&quot; the similar Istanbul and Stimpoli, Crete. Under the rule of the Knights Hospitaller of Rhodes, it was known as &quot;Lango&quot; or &quot;Langò&quot;, presumably because of its length. In &quot;The Travels of Sir John Mandeville&quot;, the author misunderstands this and treats Lango and Kos as distinct islands. In Italian, the island is known as .

A person from Kos is called a &quot;Koan&quot; (or &quot;Coan&quot;) in English. The word is also an adjective, as in &quot;Koan goods&quot;.

==Geography==
Kos is in the Aegean Sea, across from Bodrum, Turkey. Its coastline is long, extending from west to east.

The island has several promontories, some with names known in antiquity: Cape Skandari, anciently &quot;Scandarium&quot; or &quot;Skandarion&quot; in the northeast; Cape &quot;Lacter&quot; or &quot;Lakter&quot; in the south; and Cape &quot;Drecanum&quot; or &quot;Drekanon&quot; in the west.

In addition to the main town and port, also called Kos, the main villages of Kos island are Kardamena, Kefalos, Tingaki, Antimachia, Mastihari, Marmari and Pyli. Smaller ones are Zia, Zipari, Platani, Lagoudi and Asfendiou.

==Climate==
Kos has a hot-summer Mediterranean climate.

==Municipality==

The present municipality of Kos was created in 2011 with the merger of three municipalities, which became municipal units:
*Dikaios
*Irakleides
*Kos

The municipality has an area of 290,313 km2, and has a municipal unit of 67.200 km2.

==Economy==
Tourism is the main industry in Kos, the island&#x27;s beaches being the primary attraction. The main port and population centre on the island, Kos town, is also a tourist and cultural centre, with whitewashed buildings including many hotels, restaurants and a number of nightclubs forming the town&#x27;s &quot;bar street&quot;. The seaside village of Kardamena is a popular resort for young holidaymakers (primarily from the United Kingdom and Scandinavia) and has a large number of bars and nightclubs.

The last decade has seen a significant growth in the number of luxury hotels. While one-star and two-star hotels have decreased, four-star and five-star luxury hotels have sprung up throughout the island. From 2014 to 2023, five-star hotels have practically doubled, both in units (+95.83%) and in total beds (+103.32%). Significant but smaller, is the increase of four-star hotels, both in units (+34.15%) and in total beds (+8.5%).

Farming is the second principal occupation, with the main crops being grapes, almonds, figs, watermelons, olives, and tomatoes, along with wheat and corn. Cos lettuce (romaine lettuce) is named after the island, from where it is said to have originated.

==History==

===Mythological origins===
In Homer&#x27;s &quot;Iliad&quot;, a contingent of Koans fought for the Greeks in the Trojan War.

In classical mythology the founder-king of Kos was Merops, hence &quot;Meropian Kos&quot; is included in the archaic Delian amphictyony listed in the 7th-century Homeric hymn to Delian Apollo; the island was visited by Heracles. Kos was said to be the birthplace of the goddess Leto; the mother of Apollo. Supposedly Leto&#x27;s father Coeus was the first inhabitant of the island.

The island was supposedly colonised by the Carians, but Dorians invaded it in the 11th century BC, establishing a Dorian colony with a large contingent of settlers from Epidaurus, whose Asclepius cult made their new home famous for its &quot;sanatoria&quot;.

===Archaic Era===
Its early history – as part of the religious-political amphictyonic league that included Lindos, Kamiros, Ialysos, Knidos and Halicarnassus, the Doric Hexapolis ( means &#x27;six cities&#x27; in Greek), – is obscure. At the end of the 6th century, Kos fell under Achaemenid domination but rebelled after the Greek victory at the Battle of Mycale in 479. Archaeological finds have shown the existence of a small shrine to Hemera and Helios; gods of the day and the sun respectively.

===Classical Era===
During the Greco-Persian Wars, before it twice expelled the Persians, Kos was ruled by Persian-appointed tyrants, but as a rule it seems to have been under oligarchic government. In the 5th century, it joined the Delian League, and, after the revolt of Rhodes, it served as the chief Athenian station in the south-eastern Aegean (411–407 BC). In 366 BC, a democracy was instituted and the capital was transferred from Astypalaea (at the west end of the island near the modern village of Kefalos) to the newly built town of Cos, laid out in a Hippodamian grid. After helping to weaken Athenian power, in the Social War (357–355 BC), it fell for a few years to king Mausolus of Caria.

Proximity to the east gave the island first access to imported silk thread. Aristotle mentions silk weaving conducted by the women of the island. Silk production of garments was conducted in large factories by female slaves.

==== Coae vestes ====
Older research believed that the island was known in antiquity for the manufacture of transparent light dresses, the . This view goes back to Aristotle, and it has been challenged by modern research. The term &quot;Coae vestes&quot; seems to refer to a type of silk garment and not the site of production (the island of Kos). The origin of the term is ultimately unclear.

===Hellenistic Era===

During the course of the Fourth War of the Diadochi Ptolemy I Soter captured Kos from Antigonus I Monophthalmus, incorporating it into his kingdom. In the Hellenistic period, Kos attained the zenith of its prosperity. Kos was valued by the Ptolemies, who used it as a naval outpost to oversee the Aegean. As a seat of learning, it arose as a provincial branch of the museum of Alexandria, and became a favourite resort for the education of the princes of the Ptolemaic dynasty. During the Hellenistic age, there was a medical school; however, the theory that this school was founded by Hippocrates (see below) during the Classical age is an unwarranted extrapolation. It was the home of the major Hellenistic poet-scholar Philitas.

Despite the incorporation of Kos into the Ptolemaic Kingdom, the island kept its political autonomy (shown in a 3rd-century BC decree found at Kos). The island was ruled autonomously through to its citizens assembly and magistrates (the monarch, the prostates, the exegetes, etc.). The fact that the city could legislate and apply its own laws shows political independence from the Ptolemaic Kingdom. The city-state remained in control of its political institutions and civil rights.

Kos also became a center of production of unrefined silk, oars and amphorae. Kos economic development during the period can further be exemplified by the 3rd- and 2nd-century BC construction of a theatre, a new market with multiple stoas, a temple to Apollo at Alisarna, construction and expansion of the Asclepeion, fortification works at Alisarna and multiple richly decorated houses. In 240 BC, Ziaelas of Bithynia, Seleucus II Callinicus and Ptolemy III Euergetes provided guarantees for the transformation of Kos Asclepeion into an asylum. This decision made Kos a more attractive destination for merchants and pilgrims.

Kos had a strong reputation for justice from the late fourth century BC and was called on more frequently than any other city in the Hellenistic period to provide judges for the arbitration of disputes between and within other cities. Between 310 and 300 BC, Kos arbitrated a dispute between Klazomenai and Teos, provided a temporary law code for the synoecism of Teos and Lebedus, and accepted requests to send judges to resolve internal disputes at Ilium, Samos, and Telos. In the following two centuries, they accepted further requests to send judges to Naxos, Thasos, Erythrae, Mytilene, and four cities whose names are not preserved. The Koan settlement of the dispute at Telos is recorded in an inscription (&quot;IG&quot; XII.4.1 132); one of the most detailed surviving records of foreign judges activities in the Hellenistic period. This judgement, drawing on Koan religious and financial regulations, allowed a group convicted of political crimes to pay off their fines and be reconciled with the wider community by paying for sacrifices and repairs to temples.

Diodorus Siculus (xv. 76) and Strabo (xiv. 657) describe it as a well-fortified port. Its position gave it a high importance in Aegean trade; while the island itself was rich in wines of considerable fame. Under Alexander the Great and the Ptolemies the town developed into one of the great centers in the Aegean; Josephus quotes Strabo to the effect that Mithridates I of the Bosporus was sent to Kos to fetch the gold deposited there by queen Cleopatra of Egypt. Herod is said to have provided an annual stipend for the benefit of prize-winners in the athletic games, and a statue was erected there to his son Herod the Tetrarch (&quot;C. I. G.&quot; 2502 ). Paul briefly visited Kos according to .

===Roman Era===
Except for occasional incursions by corsairs and some severe earthquakes, the island&#x27;s peace was rarely disturbed. Following the lead of its larger neighbour, Rhodes, Kos generally displayed a friendly attitude toward the Romans; in 53 AD it was made a free city. The island of Kos also featured a provincial library during the Roman period. The island first became a center for learning during the Ptolemaic dynasty, and Hippocrates, Apelles, Philitas and possibly Theocritus came from the area. An inscription lists people who made contributions to build the library in the 1st century AD. One of the people responsible for the library&#x27;s construction was the Koan physician Gaius Stertinius Xenophon, who lived in Rome and was the personal physician of the Emperors Tiberius, Claudius, and Nero.

Herod, king of Judaea, ensured the perpetual funding for the gymnasiarch&#x27;s annual office on Kos. An inscription from the assembly of the island, dating around 14 BC, honours Gaius Iulius Herodes, affirming Herod&#x27;s adoption of the Roman &quot;tria nomina&quot;; possibly relating to this financial support or another endowment.

===Byzantine Era===
The bishopric of Kos was a suffragan of the metropolitan see of Rhodes. Its bishop Meliphron attended the First Council of Nicaea in 325. Eddesius was one of the minority Eastern bishops who withdrew from the Council of Sardica in about 344 and set up a rival council at Philippopolis. Iulianus went to the synod held in Constantinople in 448 in preparation for the Council of Chalcedon of 451, in which he participated as a legate of Pope Leo I, and he was a signatory of the joint letter that the bishops of the Roman province of Insulae sent in 458 to Byzantine Emperor Leo I the Thracian with regard to the killing of Proterius of Alexandria. Dorotheus took part in a synod in 518. Georgius was a participant of the Third Council of Constantinople in 680–681. Constantinus went to the Photian Council of Constantinople (879). Under Byzantine rule, apart from the participation of its bishops in councils, the island&#x27;s history remains obscure. It was governed by a &quot;droungarios&quot; in the 8th–9th centuries, and seems to have acquired some importance in the 11th and 12th centuries: Nikephoros Melissenos began his uprising here, and in the middle of the 12th century, it was governed by a scion of the ruling Komnenos dynasty, Nikephoros Komnenos.

Today the ecclesiastical metropolis of Kos remains under the direct authority of the Patriarchate of Constantinople, rather than the Church of Greece, and is also listed by the Catholic Church as a titular see.

===Genoese Era===

Following the 11th century, Kos passed under Genoese control, although it was a Byzantine territory and kept for a while by the Empire of Nicaea. Genoese ruled as protectorate and lasted over four centuries. In the 1320s, Kos nominally formed a part of the realm of Genoese Vignolo de Vignoli. The Knights Hospitaller were hosted over the island paying a rent to Genoese republic. From the 14th century onwards the island experienced raids of Turkish corsairs. During this period two towers were built in the southeast and southwest sections of the castle during the raids of Yıldırım Bayezid between 1391 and 1396. Kos faced its first serious Ottoman attack in 1455. The navy under the command of Hamza Bey attacked the island, besieged and destroyed the Andimacheia Castle. The last Hospitaller governor of the island was Piero de Ponte.

===Ottoman Era===
During the conquest of Rhodes in 1522, it was surrendered to the Ottomans due to the terms of the agreement. When Captain Behram Bey arrived in front of Kos and Bodrum, the castle guards handed over the castle to him and left, and this news reached the camp on 17 Safer 929 (5 January 1523). As soon as the island was taken, a qadi, a castellan and guards were sent to the largest and fortified castle, Nerantzia, which was repaired. The Greek Orthodox people of the island were left in their places and their residence was provided in the suburbs outside the castle.

During the course of the Orlov revolt, a Russian fleet anchored off the Kos castle. On the night of 5 August 1773, the Russians dispatched a landing party intending to capture the castle. They suffered heavy casualties in the ensuing battle. The Russian ships departed Kos two days later, having failed to achieve their objective.

According to the Ottoman General Census of 1881/82–1893, the kaza of had a total population of 12,965, consisting of 10,459 Greeks, 2,439 Muslims and 67 Jews. The island was occupied by the Kingdom of Italy on 20 May 1912.

===Italian Rule===
Kos was transferred to the Kingdom of Italy in 1912 after the Italo-Turkish War. The Italians developed the infrastructures of the island, after the ruinous earthquake of 23 April 1933, which destroyed a great part of the old city and damaged many new buildings. Architect Rodolfo Petracco drew up the new city plan, transforming the old quarters into an archaeological park, and dividing the new city into a residential, an administrative, and a commercial area. In World War II, the island, as Italian possession, was part of the Axis. It was controlled by Italian troops until the Italian surrender in 1943. British and German forces then clashed for control of the island in the Battle of Kos as part of the Dodecanese Campaign, in which the Germans were victorious. Following the battle, 100 Italian officers who had refused to join the Germans were executed in what became known as the Massacre of Kos. German troops occupied the island until 1945, when it became a protectorate of the United Kingdom, which ceded it to Greece in 1947 following the Paris peace treaty.

===Contemporary===
There is a Closed Controlled Access Centre (CCAC), i.e. a refugee camp, with a stated capacity of 2,140. It is one of a number on Greek islands.

==Geology==

The island is part of a chain of mountains from which it became separated after earthquakes and subsidence that occurred in ancient times. The remnants of these mountains include the islands of Kalymnos and Kappari which are separated by an underwater chasm approximately deep, as well as the volcano of Nisyros and the surrounding islands.

There is a wide variety of rocks in Kos which is related to its geographical formation. Prominent among these are the Quaternary layers in which the fossil remains of mammals such as horses, hippopotami and elephants have been found. The fossilised molar of an elephant of gigantic proportions was presented to the Paleontology Museum of the University of Athens.

==Religion==
The people of Kos are predominantly Orthodox Christians; one of the four Orthodox cathedrals in the Dodecanese is located in Kos. In addition, there is a Roman Catholic church on the island and a mosque for the Turkish Muslim community. The synagogue is no longer used for religious ceremonies, as the Jewish community of Kos was targeted and destroyed by occupying German forces in World War II. It has, however, been restored and is maintained with all religious symbols intact, and is now used by the Municipality of Kos for various events, mainly cultural.

In the late 1920s, about 3,700 Turks lived in Kos city; slightly less than 50% of the population, who were mainly in the west part of the city. Today, the population of the Turkish community in Kos has been estimated at 2,000 people. A village with a significant Turkish population is Platani (Kermentes), near the town of Kos.

==Main sights ==
===Ancient sites===
The ancient physician Hippocrates is thought to have been born in Kos, and in the center of the town is the Plane Tree of Hippocrates; a dream temple where the physician is traditionally supposed to have taught. The limbs of the now elderly tree are supported by scaffolding. The small city is also home to the International Hippocratic Foundation of Kos, and the Hippocratic Museum dedicated to him. Near the institute are the ruins of Asklepieion, where Herodicus taught Hippocrates medicine.

The ancient market place of Kos was considered one of the biggest in the ancient world. It was the commercial and commanding centre at the heart of the ancient city. It was organised around a rectangular yard wide and long. It began in the Northern area and ended south on the central road (Decumanus) which went through the city. The northern side connected to the city wall towards the entrance to the harbour. Here there was a monumental entrance. On the eastern side there were shops. In the first half of the 2nd century BC, the building was extended toward the interior yard. The building was destroyed in an earthquake in 469 AD.

In the southern end of the market, there was a round building with a Roman dome and a workshop which produced pigments including Egyptian Blue. Coins, treasures, and copper statues from Roman times were later uncovered by archaeologists. In the western side excavations led to the findings of rooms with mosaic floors which showed beastfights, a theme popular in Kos.

===Castles===

The island has a 14th-century fortress at the entrance to its harbour, erected in 1315 by the Knights Hospitaller, and another from the Byzantine period in Antimachia.

===Synagogue===
The synagogue Kahal Shalom of Kos, on 4, Alexandrou Diakou street in the historic city center, was built in 1935. It was designed by architects Armando Bernabiti and Rodolfo Petracco, and was built by the construction company &#x27;De Martis-Sardelli&#x27;. The synagogue complex includes the synagogue and the adjacent rabbi&#x27;s residence, today housing the offices of the organisation &#x27;Hippocrates&#x27;. The Jewish community of Kos dates from antiquity. An older synagogue was destroyed in the earthquake of 13 April 1933. Following the deportation of nearly 100 members of the Jewish community on Sunday 23 July 1944, the synagogue was abandoned and later purchased by the Municipality in the 1980s. The synagogue has been used as a cultural center by the Municipality of Kos, for lectures and exhibitions. In 2022 the Municipality of Kos and the Central Board of Jewish Communities, commissioned architect Elias V. Messinas to restore the interior of the synagogue, and make possible a dual use of the building for religious services, and cultural activities.

== People==
* Epicharmus of Kos (6th–5th century BC), comic playwright
* Hippocrates (5th century BC), &quot;father of medicine&quot;.
* Philitas of Cos (4th century BC), poet and scholar.
* Ptolemy II Philadelphus (4th century BC) Pharaoh of the Ptolemaic Kingdom
* Berossus, who according to Vitruvius&#x27;s work &quot;de Architectura&quot;, eventually relocated to the island of Kos, off the coast of Asia Minor, where he established a school of astrology under the patronage of the king of Egypt.
* Michael Kefalianos, professional bodybuilder.
* Marika Papagika, early 20th-century singer.
* Ioannis Sarmas, judge and caretaker Prime Minister of Greece in 2023.
* Kostas Skandalidis, former Interior Minister of Greece and close associate of Prime Minister Andreas Papandreou.
* Al Campanis, Major League Baseball player and executive.
* Stergos Marinos, former professional footballer.
* Şükrü Kaya, Turkish politician, who served as Minister of the Interior and Minister of Foreign Affairs of Turkey. He was one of the perpetrators of the Armenian genocide.

== Transport ==

* Kos International Airport

==In popular culture==
*Kos is the setting of the wargaming book &quot;Swords of Kos Fantasy Campaign Setting&quot;, written by Michael O. Varhola with co-authors.
*Kos was the main shooting location and setting for &quot;Signs of Life&quot; (1968 film).

==Gallery==
==See also==
* Coan wine
* List of volcanoes in Greece
* List of islands of Greece#Dodecanes islands
* The disappearance of Ben Needham in 1991.

==References==
==Sources==
*

== External links ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q187027" start="0" end="3" title="Kos" label="Kos"/>
<link wikidata="Q187027" start="7" end="10" title="Kos" label="Cos"/>
<link wikidata="Q41" start="21" end="26" title="Greece" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q131555" start="56" end="66" title="Dodecanese" label="Dodecanese"/>
<link wikidata="Q34575" start="100" end="110" title="Aegean Sea" label="Aegean Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q43048" start="169" end="175" title="Rhodes" label="Rhodes"/>
<link wikidata="Q204757" start="180" end="189" title="Karpathos" label="Karpathos"/>
<link wikidata="Q1242904" start="385" end="402" title="Kos (regional unit)" label="Kos regional unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q173616" start="425" end="437" title="South Aegean" label="South Aegean"/>
<link wikidata="Q207299" start="438" end="444" title="Administrative regions of Greece" label="region"/>
<link wikidata="Q8275" start="597" end="602" title="Iliad" label="Iliad"/>
<link wikidata="Q19814" start="713" end="730" title="Romance languages" label="Romance languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q36730" start="831" end="838" title="Ottoman Turkish" label="Ottoman"/>
<link wikidata="Q256" start="843" end="857" title="Turkish language" label="modern Turkish"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="888" end="904" title="Rebracketing#In Greek" label="reinterpretation"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="977" end="985" title="Names of Istanbul#Stamboul" label="Istanbul"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="990" end="1005" title="Argyroupoli, Rethymno#Name" label="Stimpoli, Crete"/>
<link wikidata="Q187549" start="1029" end="1048" title="Knights Hospitaller" label="Knights Hospitaller"/>
<link wikidata="Q43048" start="1052" end="1058" title="Rhodes" label="Rhodes"/>
<link wikidata="Q24766" start="1159" end="1193" title="John Mandeville" label="The Travels of Sir John Mandeville"/>
<link wikidata="Q652" start="1281" end="1288" title="Italian language" label="Italian"/>
<link wikidata="Q34575" start="1487" end="1497" title="Aegean Sea" label="Aegean Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q172267" start="1511" end="1517" title="Bodrum" label="Bodrum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1245089" start="1603" end="1615" title="Promontory" label="promontories"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1653" end="1666" title="Cape Skandari" label="Cape Skandari"/>
<link wikidata="Q2618787" start="1965" end="1974" title="Kardamaina" label="Kardamena"/>
<link wikidata="Q1890422" start="1976" end="1983" title="Kefalos" label="Kefalos"/>
<link wikidata="Q3930790" start="1985" end="1992" title="Tingaki" label="Tingaki"/>
<link wikidata="Q61995831" start="1994" end="2004" title="Antimachia" label="Antimachia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2006" end="2015" title="Mastihari" label="Mastihari"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2017" end="2024" title="Marmari, Kos" label="Marmari"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2052" end="2055" title="Zia, Kos" label="Zia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2057" end="2063" title="Zipari" label="Zipari"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2065" end="2072" title="Platani, Kos" label="Platani"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2074" end="2081" title="Lagoudi" label="Lagoudi"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2086" end="2095" title="Asfendiou" label="Asfendiou"/>
<link wikidata="Q21693274" start="2297" end="2304" title="Dikaios, Kos" label="Dikaios"/>
<link wikidata="Q2016875" start="2306" end="2316" title="Irakleides" label="Irakleides"/>
<link wikidata="Q49389" start="2421" end="2428" title="Tourism" label="Tourism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2618787" start="2774" end="2783" title="Kardamena" label="Kardamena"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="2848" end="2862" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q21195" start="2867" end="2878" title="Scandinavia" label="Scandinavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2976556" start="3012" end="3020" title="Hotel rating" label="one-star"/>
<link wikidata="Q11451" start="3363" end="3370" title="Agriculture" label="Farming"/>
<link wikidata="Q10978" start="3433" end="3438" title="grape" label="grape"/>
<link wikidata="Q15545507" start="3441" end="3447" title="almond" label="almond"/>
<link wikidata="Q59798" start="3450" end="3454" title="Ficus" label="figs"/>
<link wikidata="Q17507129" start="3456" end="3466" title="watermelon" label="watermelon"/>
<link wikidata="Q37083" start="3469" end="3474" title="olive" label="olive"/>
<link wikidata="Q23501" start="3481" end="3487" title="tomato" label="tomato"/>
<link wikidata="Q15645384" start="3502" end="3507" title="wheat" label="wheat"/>
<link wikidata="Q11575" start="3512" end="3516" title="Maize" label="corn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1762893" start="3518" end="3529" title="Romaine lettuce" label="Cos lettuce"/>
<link wikidata="Q6691" start="3661" end="3666" title="Homer" label="Homer"/>
<link wikidata="Q8275" start="3680" end="3685" title="Iliad" label="Iliad"/>
<link wikidata="Q42937" start="3744" end="3754" title="Trojan War" label="Trojan War"/>
<link wikidata="Q4843933" start="3808" end="3814" title="Merops (mythology)" label="Merops"/>
<link wikidata="Q182875" start="3881" end="3892" title="amphictyony" label="amphictyony"/>
<link wikidata="Q329342" start="3919" end="3948" title="Homeric Hymns" label="Homeric hymn to Delian Apollo"/>
<link wikidata="Q122248" start="3976" end="3984" title="Heracles" label="Heracles"/>
<link wikidata="Q103107" start="4035" end="4039" title="Leto" label="Leto"/>
<link wikidata="Q37340" start="4055" end="4061" title="Apollo" label="Apollo"/>
<link wikidata="Q182837" start="4093" end="4098" title="Coeus" label="Coeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1123411" start="4183" end="4190" title="Carians" label="Carians"/>
<link wikidata="Q203711" start="4196" end="4203" title="Dorians" label="Dorians"/>
<link wikidata="Q233576" start="4309" end="4318" title="Epidaurus" label="Epidaurus"/>
<link wikidata="Q83223" start="4326" end="4335" title="Asclepius" label="Asclepius"/>
<link wikidata="Q182875" start="4473" end="4492" title="amphictyonic league" label="amphictyonic league"/>
<link wikidata="Q738700" start="4507" end="4513" title="Lindos" label="Lindos"/>
<link wikidata="Q1231539" start="4515" end="4522" title="Kamiros" label="Kamiros"/>
<link wikidata="Q1018156" start="4524" end="4531" title="Ialysos" label="Ialysos"/>
<link wikidata="Q690575" start="4533" end="4539" title="Knidos" label="Knidos"/>
<link wikidata="Q5843680" start="4544" end="4557" title="Halicarnassus" label="Halicarnassus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1233764" start="4563" end="4578" title="Doric Hexapolis" label="Doric Hexapolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q389688" start="4681" end="4691" title="Achaemenid" label="Achaemenid"/>
<link wikidata="Q503982" start="4747" end="4763" title="Battle of Mycale" label="Battle of Mycale"/>
<link wikidata="Q192107" start="4839" end="4845" title="Hemera" label="Hemera"/>
<link wikidata="Q134270" start="4850" end="4856" title="Helios" label="Helios"/>
<link wikidata="Q573" start="4870" end="4873" title="day" label="day"/>
<link wikidata="Q525" start="4882" end="4885" title="sun" label="sun"/>
<link wikidata="Q76026" start="4932" end="4950" title="Greco-Persian Wars" label="Greco-Persian Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q389688" start="4981" end="4989" title="Achaemenid Empire" label="Persians"/>
<link wikidata="Q193235" start="5134" end="5147" title="Delian League" label="Delian League"/>
<link wikidata="Q43048" start="5174" end="5180" title="Rhodes" label="Rhodes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064853" start="5205" end="5213" title="History of Athens" label="Athenian"/>
<link wikidata="Q17621883" start="5339" end="5349" title="Astypalaea (Cos)" label="Astypalaea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1890422" start="5408" end="5415" title="Kefalos" label="Kefalos"/>
<link wikidata="Q85754181" start="5444" end="5447" title="Cos (city)" label="Cos"/>
<link wikidata="Q298071" start="5463" end="5474" title="Hippodamian" label="Hippodamian"/>
<link wikidata="Q387020" start="5528" end="5551" title="Social War (357-355 BC)" label="Social War (357–355 BC)"/>
<link wikidata="Q296857" start="5580" end="5593" title="Mausolus" label="king Mausolus"/>
<link wikidata="Q193214" start="5594" end="5602" title="Caria" label="of Caria"/>
<link wikidata="Q868" start="5681" end="5690" title="Aristotle" label="Aristotle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2912306" start="6274" end="6300" title="Wars of the Diadochi" label="Fourth War of the Diadochi"/>
<link wikidata="Q168261" start="6301" end="6316" title="Ptolemy I Soter" label="Ptolemy I Soter"/>
<link wikidata="Q200401" start="6335" end="6360" title="Antigonus I Monophthalmus" label="Antigonus I Monophthalmus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2320005" start="6388" end="6395" title="Ptolemaic Kingdom" label="kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q428995" start="6404" end="6422" title="Hellenistic period" label="Hellenistic period"/>
<link wikidata="Q87" start="6626" end="6636" title="Alexandria" label="Alexandria"/>
<link wikidata="Q494230" start="6767" end="6781" title="medical school" label="medical school"/>
<link wikidata="Q486761" start="6870" end="6883" title="Classical age" label="Classical age"/>
<link wikidata="Q739812" start="6971" end="6979" title="Philitas" label="Philitas"/>
<link wikidata="Q385625" start="7232" end="7241" title="prostates" label="prostates"/>
<link wikidata="Q178401" start="7534" end="7541" title="amphora" label="amphora"/>
<link wikidata="Q327328" start="7699" end="7703" title="stoa" label="stoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q198293" start="7865" end="7884" title="Ziaelas of Bithynia" label="Ziaelas of Bithynia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3373" start="7886" end="7908" title="Seleucus II Callinicus" label="Seleucus II Callinicus"/>
<link wikidata="Q39602" start="7913" end="7934" title="Ptolemy III Euergetes" label="Ptolemy III Euergetes"/>
<link wikidata="Q608502" start="8004" end="8010" title="Asylum (antiquity)" label="asylum"/>
<link wikidata="Q536598" start="8386" end="8396" title="Klazomenai" label="Klazomenai"/>
<link wikidata="Q17586" start="8401" end="8405" title="Teos" label="Teos"/>
<link wikidata="Q977693" start="8445" end="8454" title="synoecism" label="synoecism"/>
<link wikidata="Q302905" start="8467" end="8474" title="Lebedus" label="Lebedus"/>
<link wikidata="Q22647" start="8545" end="8550" title="Troy" label="Ilium"/>
<link wikidata="Q156882" start="8552" end="8557" title="Samos" label="Samos"/>
<link wikidata="Q3243630" start="8563" end="8568" title="Telos" label="Telos"/>
<link wikidata="Q188527" start="8651" end="8656" title="Naxos" label="Naxos"/>
<link wikidata="Q204096" start="8658" end="8664" title="Thasos" label="Thasos"/>
<link wikidata="Q723091" start="8666" end="8674" title="Erythrae" label="Erythrae"/>
<link wikidata="Q189059" start="8676" end="8684" title="Mytilene" label="Mytilene"/>
<link wikidata="Q673341" start="8814" end="8816" title="Inscriptiones Graecae" label="IG"/>
<link wikidata="Q171241" start="9167" end="9183" title="Diodorus Siculus" label="Diodorus Siculus"/>
<link wikidata="Q45936" start="9197" end="9203" title="Strabo" label="Strabo"/>
<link wikidata="Q8409" start="9379" end="9398" title="Alexander the Great" label="Alexander the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q134461" start="9481" end="9489" title="Josephus" label="Josephus"/>
<link wikidata="Q878437" start="9523" end="9552" title="Mithridates I of the Bosporus" label="Mithridates I of the Bosporus"/>
<link wikidata="Q40003" start="9606" end="9621" title="Cleopatra III" label="queen Cleopatra"/>
<link wikidata="Q51672" start="9632" end="9637" title="Herod the Great" label="Herod"/>
<link wikidata="Q192950" start="9779" end="9797" title="Herod the Tetrarch" label="Herod the Tetrarch"/>
<link wikidata="Q9200" start="9828" end="9832" title="Paul of Tarsus" label="Paul"/>
<link wikidata="Q45393" start="9921" end="9929" title="Pirate" label="corsairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q5500203" start="10143" end="10152" title="Free city (antiquity)" label="free city"/>
<link wikidata="Q5264" start="10312" end="10323" title="Hippocrates" label="Hippocrates"/>
<link wikidata="Q216822" start="10325" end="10332" title="Apelles" label="Apelles"/>
<link wikidata="Q739812" start="10334" end="10342" title="Philitas" label="Philitas"/>
<link wikidata="Q219484" start="10356" end="10366" title="Theocritus" label="Theocritus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1346086" start="10571" end="10596" title="Gaius Stertinius Xenophon" label="Gaius Stertinius Xenophon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1407" start="10663" end="10671" title="Tiberius" label="Tiberius"/>
<link wikidata="Q1411" start="10673" end="10681" title="Claudius" label="Claudius"/>
<link wikidata="Q1413" start="10687" end="10691" title="Nero" label="Nero"/>
<link wikidata="Q51672" start="10694" end="10699" title="Herod the Great" label="Herod"/>
<link wikidata="Q16000109" start="10709" end="10715" title="Herodian kingdom" label="Judaea"/>
<link wikidata="Q5624186" start="10755" end="10766" title="gymnasiarch" label="gymnasiarch"/>
<link wikidata="Q272851" start="10946" end="10957" title="tria nomina" label="tria nomina"/>
<link wikidata="Q665487" start="11056" end="11065" title="bishopric" label="bishopric"/>
<link wikidata="Q13426709" start="11079" end="11088" title="suffragan" label="suffragan"/>
<link wikidata="Q8299990" start="11096" end="11122" title="metropolitan see of Rhodes" label="metropolitan see of Rhodes"/>
<link wikidata="Q133331" start="11158" end="11181" title="First Council of Nicaea" label="First Council of Nicaea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1277136" start="11261" end="11279" title="Council of Sardica" label="Council of Sardica"/>
<link wikidata="Q170531" start="11418" end="11438" title="Council of Chalcedon" label="Council of Chalcedon"/>
<link wikidata="Q43954" start="11487" end="11497" title="Pope Leo I" label="Pope Leo I"/>
<link wikidata="Q182547" start="11566" end="11580" title="Roman province" label="Roman province"/>
<link wikidata="Q878481" start="11584" end="11591" title="Aegean Islands" label="Insulae"/>
<link wikidata="Q128866" start="11607" end="11624" title="Byzantine Emperor" label="Byzantine Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q183776" start="11625" end="11643" title="Leo I the Thracian" label="Leo I the Thracian"/>
<link wikidata="Q367341" start="11674" end="11697" title="Proterius of Alexandria" label="Proterius of Alexandria"/>
<link wikidata="Q208037" start="11772" end="11803" title="Third Council of Constantinople" label="Third Council of Constantinople"/>
<link wikidata="Q243187" start="11841" end="11848" title="Photius" label="Photian"/>
<link wikidata="Q862543" start="11849" end="11880" title="Council of Constantinople (879)" label="Council of Constantinople (879)"/>
<link wikidata="Q12544" start="11888" end="11897" title="Byzantine Empire" label="Byzantine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2454522" start="12031" end="12042" title="droungarios" label="droungarios"/>
<link wikidata="Q960351" start="12150" end="12171" title="Nikephoros Melissenos" label="Nikephoros Melissenos"/>
<link wikidata="Q163814" start="12277" end="12285" title="Komnenos" label="Komnenos"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12342" end="12359" title="metropolis of Kos" label="metropolis of Kos"/>
<link wikidata="Q211004" start="12402" end="12432" title="Patriarchate of Constantinople" label="Patriarchate of Constantinople"/>
<link wikidata="Q59778" start="12450" end="12466" title="Church of Greece" label="Church of Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="12494" end="12509" title="Catholic Church" label="Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q15217609" start="12515" end="12526" title="titular see" label="titular see"/>
<link wikidata="Q174306" start="12593" end="12600" title="Republic of Genoa" label="Genoese"/>
<link wikidata="Q12544" start="12628" end="12637" title="Byzantine Empire" label="Byzantine"/>
<link wikidata="Q181254" start="12676" end="12692" title="Empire of Nicaea" label="Empire of Nicaea"/>
<link wikidata="Q187549" start="12846" end="12865" title="Knights Hospitaller" label="Knights Hospitaller"/>
<link wikidata="Q853309" start="12991" end="13007" title="Anatolian beyliks" label="Turkish corsairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q128358" start="13124" end="13140" title="Yıldırım Bayezid" label="Yıldırım Bayezid"/>
<link wikidata="Q3126599" start="13246" end="13255" title="Hamza Bey" label="Hamza Bey"/>
<link wikidata="Q61995831" start="13304" end="13315" title="Antimachia" label="Andimacheia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1379630" start="13372" end="13386" title="Piero de Ponte" label="Piero de Ponte"/>
<link wikidata="Q767935" start="13418" end="13436" title="Siege of Rhodes (1522)" label="conquest of Rhodes"/>
<link wikidata="Q217029" start="13734" end="13738" title="qadi" label="qadi"/>
<link wikidata="Q783310" start="14001" end="14013" title="Orlov revolt" label="Orlov revolt"/>
<link wikidata="Q583941" start="14017" end="14030" title="Russian Imperial Navy" label="Russian fleet"/>
<link wikidata="Q935921" start="14369" end="14373" title="kaza" label="kaza"/>
<link wikidata="Q1467740" start="14432" end="14438" title="Ottoman Greeks" label="Greeks"/>
<link wikidata="Q2368712" start="14461" end="14465" title="History of the Jews in the Ottoman Empire" label="Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q172579" start="14578" end="14594" title="Kingdom of Italy" label="Kingdom of Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q203824" start="14613" end="14630" title="Italo-Turkish War" label="Italo-Turkish War"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="15018" end="15030" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q43056" start="15083" end="15087" title="Axis powers" label="Axis"/>
<link wikidata="Q196502" start="15135" end="15152" title="Italian surrender" label="Italian surrender"/>
<link wikidata="Q1752889" start="15234" end="15247" title="Battle of Kos (1943)" label="Battle of Kos"/>
<link wikidata="Q708173" start="15263" end="15282" title="Dodecanese Campaign" label="Dodecanese Campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q3718427" start="15443" end="15458" title="Massacre of Kos" label="Massacre of Kos"/>
<link wikidata="Q322943" start="15606" end="15624" title="Treaty of Paris (1947)" label="Paris peace treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q104857280" start="15704" end="15716" title="Hotspot camp" label="refugee camp"/>
<link wikidata="Q527809" start="15999" end="16007" title="Kalymnos" label="Kalymnos"/>
<link wikidata="Q644254" start="16012" end="16019" title="Pserimos" label="Kappari"/>
<link wikidata="Q767528" start="16109" end="16116" title="Nisyros" label="Nisyros"/>
<link wikidata="Q26185" start="16265" end="16275" title="Quaternary" label="Quaternary"/>
<link wikidata="Q34505" start="16338" end="16349" title="Hippopotamus" label="hippopotami"/>
<link wikidata="Q189218" start="16396" end="16401" title="Molar (tooth)" label="molar"/>
<link wikidata="Q7378" start="16408" end="16416" title="elephant" label="elephant"/>
<link wikidata="Q7205" start="16462" end="16474" title="Paleontology" label="Paleontology"/>
<link wikidata="Q547867" start="16489" end="16509" title="National and Kapodistrian University of Athens" label="University of Athens"/>
<link wikidata="Q7970362" start="16561" end="16580" title="Greek Orthodox Church" label="Orthodox Christians"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="16679" end="16693" title="Catholic Church" label="Roman Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q32815" start="16721" end="16727" title="mosque" label="mosque"/>
<link wikidata="Q3067719" start="16736" end="16760" title="Turks of the Dodecanese" label="Turkish Muslim community"/>
<link wikidata="Q34627" start="16766" end="16775" title="synagogue" label="synagogue"/>
<link wikidata="Q7325" start="16827" end="16833" title="Jews" label="Jewish"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="16891" end="16897" title="Nazi Germany" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="16908" end="16920" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q5264" start="17475" end="17486" title="Hippocrates" label="Hippocrates"/>
<link wikidata="Q1036717" start="17561" end="17586" title="Tree of Hippocrates" label="Plane Tree of Hippocrates"/>
<link wikidata="Q5768428" start="17817" end="17835" title="Hippocratic Museum" label="Hippocratic Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q731841" start="17890" end="17901" title="Asclepieion" label="Asklepieion"/>
<link wikidata="Q2479107" start="17909" end="17918" title="Herodicus" label="Herodicus"/>
<link wikidata="Q253181" start="18716" end="18729" title="Egyptian blue" label="Egyptian Blue"/>
<link wikidata="Q187549" start="19065" end="19084" title="Knights Hospitaller" label="Knights Hospitaller"/>
<link wikidata="Q12544" start="19107" end="19123" title="Byzantine Empire" label="Byzantine period"/>
<link wikidata="Q61995831" start="19127" end="19137" title="Antimachia" label="Antimachia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6999561" start="19300" end="19317" title="Armando Bernabiti" label="Armando Bernabiti"/>
<link wikidata="Q6999567" start="19322" end="19338" title="Rodolfo Petracco" label="Rodolfo Petracco"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20075" end="20092" title="Elias V. Messinas" label="Elias V. Messinas"/>
<link wikidata="Q312410" start="20244" end="20261" title="Epicharmus of Kos" label="Epicharmus of Kos"/>
<link wikidata="Q5264" start="20303" end="20314" title="Hippocrates" label="Hippocrates"/>
<link wikidata="Q739812" start="20367" end="20382" title="Philitas of Cos" label="Philitas of Cos"/>
<link wikidata="Q39576" start="20421" end="20444" title="Ptolemy II Philadelphus" label="Ptolemy II Philadelphus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2320005" start="20477" end="20494" title="Ptolemaic Kingdom" label="Ptolemaic Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q312425" start="20497" end="20505" title="Berossus" label="Berossus"/>
<link wikidata="Q6831815" start="20734" end="20752" title="Michael Kefalianos" label="Michael Kefalianos"/>
<link wikidata="Q3561019" start="20782" end="20797" title="Marika Papagika" label="Marika Papagika"/>
<link wikidata="Q118402778" start="20828" end="20842" title="Ioannis Sarmas" label="Ioannis Sarmas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2337038" start="20900" end="20918" title="Kostas Skandalidis" label="Kostas Skandalidis"/>
<link wikidata="Q219256" start="20993" end="21011" title="Andreas Papandreou" label="Andreas Papandreou"/>
<link wikidata="Q2829309" start="21015" end="21026" title="Al Campanis" label="Al Campanis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1362952" start="21074" end="21089" title="Stergos Marinos" label="Stergos Marinos"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736" start="21111" end="21121" title="Association football" label="footballer"/>
<link wikidata="Q390718" start="21125" end="21135" title="Şükrü Kaya" label="Şükrü Kaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q84072" start="21137" end="21144" title="Turkish people" label="Turkish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1663916" start="21171" end="21195" title="Ministry of the Interior (Turkey)" label="Minister of the Interior"/>
<link wikidata="Q1829539" start="21200" end="21227" title="List of Ministers of Foreign Affairs (Turkey)" label="Minister of Foreign Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q43" start="21231" end="21237" title="Turkey" label="Turkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q80034" start="21277" end="21294" title="Armenian genocide" label="Armenian genocide"/>
<link wikidata="Q1420601" start="21316" end="21341" title="Kos International Airport" label="Kos International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501543" start="21393" end="21402" title="Wargame" label="wargaming"/>
<link wikidata="Q15499856" start="21471" end="21489" title="Michael O. Varhola" label="Michael O. Varhola"/>
<link wikidata="Q1113073" start="21559" end="21596" title="Signs of Life (1968 film)" label="&amp;quot;Signs of Life&amp;quot; (1968 film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5138048" start="21626" end="21635" title="Coan wine" label="Coan wine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1864701" start="21638" end="21665" title="List of volcanoes in Greece" label="List of volcanoes in Greece"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="21668" end="21711" title="List of islands of Greece#Dodecanes islands" label="List of islands of Greece#Dodecanes islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q15139370" start="21718" end="21746" title="disappearance of Ben Needham" label="disappearance of Ben Needham"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="248001" wikidata="Q826165" url="?curid=248001" title="Web Ontology Language">
<text>The Web Ontology Language (OWL) is a family of knowledge representation languages for authoring ontologies. Ontologies are a formal way to describe taxonomies and classification networks, essentially defining the structure of knowledge for various domains: the nouns representing classes of objects and the verbs representing relations between the objects.

Ontologies resemble class hierarchies in object-oriented programming but there are several critical differences. Class hierarchies are meant to represent structures used in source code that evolve fairly slowly (perhaps with monthly revisions) whereas ontologies are meant to represent information on the Internet and are expected to be evolving almost constantly. Similarly, ontologies are typically far more flexible as they are meant to represent information on the Internet coming from all sorts of heterogeneous data sources. Class hierarchies on the other hand tend to be fairly static and rely on far less diverse and more structured sources of data such as corporate databases.

The OWL languages are characterized by formal semantics. They are built upon the World Wide Web Consortium&#x27;s (W3C) standard for objects called the Resource Description Framework (RDF). OWL and RDF have attracted significant academic, medical and commercial interest.

In October 2007, a new W3C working group was started to extend OWL with several new features as proposed in the OWL 1.1 member submission. W3C announced the new version of OWL on 27 October 2009. This new version, called OWL 2, soon found its way into semantic editors such as Protégé and semantic reasoners such as Pellet, RacerPro, FaCT++ and HermiT.

The OWL family contains many species, serializations, syntaxes and specifications with similar names. OWL and OWL2 are used to refer to the 2004 and 2009 specifications, respectively. Full species names will be used, including specification version (for example, OWL2 EL). When referring more generally, &quot;OWL Family&quot; will be used.

==History==
===Early ontology languages===

There is a long history of ontological development in philosophy and computer science. Since the 1990s, a number of research efforts have explored how the idea of knowledge representation (KR) from artificial intelligence (AI) could be made useful on the World Wide Web. These included languages based on HTML (called SHOE), based on XML (called XOL, later OIL), and various frame-based KR languages and knowledge acquisition approaches.

==Ontology languages for the web==
In 2000 in the United States, DARPA started development of DAML led by James Hendler.
In March 2001, the &quot;Joint EU/US Committee on Agent Markup Languages&quot; decided that DAML should be merged with OIL.
The &quot;EU/US ad hoc Joint Working Group on Agent Markup Languages&quot; was convened to develop DAML+OIL as a web ontology language. This group was jointly funded by the DARPA (under the DAML program) and the European Union&#x27;s Information Society Technologies (IST) funding project. DAML+OIL was intended to be a thin layer above RDFS,
with formal semantics based on a description logic (DL).

DAML+OIL is a particularly major influence on OWL; OWL&#x27;s design was specifically based on DAML+OIL.

===Semantic web standards===

====RDF schema====

In the late 1990s, the World Wide Web Consortium (W3C) &quot;Metadata Activity&quot; started work on RDF Schema (RDFS), a language for RDF vocabulary sharing. The RDF became a W3C Recommendation in February 1999, and RDFS a Candidate Recommendation in March 2000. In February 2001, the &quot;Semantic Web Activity&quot; replaced the Metadata Activity. In 2004 (as part of a wider revision of RDF) RDFS became a W3C Recommendation.
Though RDFS provides some support for ontology specification, the need for a more expressive ontology language had become clear.

====Web-Ontology Working Group====
The World Wide Web Consortium (W3C) created the &quot;Web-Ontology Working Group&quot; as part of their Semantic Web Activity. It began work on November 1, 2001 with co-chairs James Hendler and Guus Schreiber. The first working drafts of the abstract syntax, reference and synopsis were published in July 2002. OWL became a formal W3C recommendation on February 10, 2004 and the working group was disbanded on May 31, 2004.

====OWL Working Group====
In 2005, at the &quot;OWL Experiences And Directions Workshop&quot; a consensus formed that recent advances in description logic would allow a more expressive revision to satisfy user requirements more comprehensively whilst retaining good computational properties.
In December 2006, the OWL1.1 Member Submission was made to the W3C. The W3C chartered the &quot;OWL Working Group&quot; as part of the Semantic Web Activity in September 2007. In April 2008, this group decided to call this new language OWL2, indicating a substantial revision.

OWL 2 became a W3C recommendation in October 2009. OWL 2 introduces profiles to improve scalability in typical applications.

===Acronym===
OWL was chosen as an easily pronounced acronym that would yield good logos, suggest wisdom, and honor William A. Martin&#x27;s &quot;One World Language&quot; knowledge representation project from the 1970s.

===Adoption===
A 2006 survey of ontologies available on the web collected 688 OWL ontologies. Of these, 199 were OWL Lite, 149 were OWL DL and 337 OWL Full (by syntax). They found that 19 ontologies had in excess of 2,000 classes, and that 6 had more than 10,000. The same survey collected 587 RDFS vocabularies.

==Ontologies==

The data described by an ontology in the OWL family is interpreted as a set of &quot;individuals&quot; and a set of &quot;property assertions&quot; which relate these individuals to each other. An ontology consists of a set of axioms which place constraints on sets of individuals (called &quot;classes&quot;) and the types of relationships permitted between them. These axioms provide semantics by allowing systems to infer additional information based on the data explicitly provided. A full introduction to the expressive power of the OWL is provided in the W3C&#x27;s &quot;OWL Guide&quot;.

OWL ontologies can import other ontologies, adding information from the imported ontology to the current ontology.

===Example===
An ontology describing families might include axioms stating that a &quot;hasMother&quot; property is only present between two individuals when &quot;hasParent&quot; is also present, and that individuals of class &quot;HasTypeOBlood&quot; are never related via &quot;hasParent&quot; to members of the &quot;HasTypeABBlood&quot; class. If it is stated that the individual Harriet is related via &quot;hasMother&quot; to the individual Sue, and that Harriet is a member of the &quot;HasTypeOBlood&quot; class, then it can be inferred that Sue is not a member of &quot;HasTypeABBlood&quot;. This is, however, only true if the concepts of &quot;Parent&quot; and &quot;Mother&quot; only mean biological parent or mother and not social parent or mother.

=== Logic ===
To choose a subset of first-order logic that is decidable, propositional logic was used, increasing its power by adding logics represented by convention with acronyms:
==Species==
===OWL dialects===
The W3C-endorsed OWL specification includes the definition of three variants of OWL, with different levels of expressiveness. These are OWL Lite, OWL DL and OWL Full (ordered by increasing expressiveness). Each of these sublanguages is a syntactic extension of its simpler predecessor. The following set of relations hold. Their inverses do not.

* Every legal OWL Lite ontology is a legal OWL DL ontology.
* Every legal OWL DL ontology is a legal OWL Full ontology.
* Every valid OWL Lite conclusion is a valid OWL DL conclusion.
* Every valid OWL DL conclusion is a valid OWL Full conclusion.

====OWL Lite====
OWL Lite was originally intended to support those users primarily needing a classification hierarchy and simple constraints. For example, while it supports cardinality constraints, it only permits cardinality values of 0 or 1. It was hoped that it would be simpler to provide tool support for OWL Lite than its more expressive relatives, allowing quick migration path for systems using thesauri and other taxonomies. In practice, however, most of the expressiveness constraints placed on OWL Lite amount to little more than syntactic inconveniences: most of the constructs available in OWL DL can be built using complex combinations of OWL Lite features, and is equally expressive as the description logic formula_1. Development of OWL Lite tools has thus proven to be almost as difficult as development of tools for OWL DL, and OWL Lite is not widely used.

====OWL DL====
OWL DL is designed to provide the maximum expressiveness possible while retaining computational completeness (either φ or ¬φ holds), decidability (there is an effective procedure to determine whether φ is derivable or not), and the availability of practical reasoning algorithms. OWL DL includes all OWL language constructs, but they can be used only under certain restrictions (for example, number restrictions may not be placed upon properties which are declared to be transitive; and while a class may be a subclass of many classes, a class cannot be an instance of another class). OWL DL is so named due to its correspondence with description logic, a field of research that has studied the logics that form the formal foundation of OWL.

This one can be expressed as formula_2, using the letters logic above.

====OWL Full====
OWL Full is based on a different semantics from OWL Lite or OWL DL, and was designed to preserve some compatibility with RDF Schema. For example, in OWL Full a class can be treated simultaneously as a collection of individuals and as an individual in its own right; this is not permitted in OWL DL. OWL Full allows an ontology to augment the meaning of the pre-defined (RDF or OWL) vocabulary. OWL Full is undecidable, so no reasoning software is able to perform complete reasoning for it.

===OWL2 profiles===
In OWL2 there are three sublanguages (known as &quot;profiles&quot;):
* OWL2 EL is a fragment that has polynomial time reasoning complexity. It is based on the description logic formula_3.
* OWL2 QL is designed to enable easier access and query to data stored in databases. It is based on the DL-Lite family of description logics.
* OWL2 RL is a rule subset of OWL 2 (the acronym &quot;RL&quot; stands for &quot;Rule Language&quot;). It is based on the so-called description logic programs (DLP). Later, a logic called formula_4 corresponding to this profile has been introduced.

==Syntax==
The OWL family of languages supports a variety of syntaxes. It is useful to distinguish &quot;high level&quot; syntaxes aimed at specification from &quot;exchange&quot; syntaxes more suitable for general use.

===High level===
These are close to the ontology structure of languages in the OWL family.

====OWL abstract syntax====
High level syntax is used to specify the OWL ontology structure and semantics.

The OWL abstract syntax presents an ontology as a sequence of &quot;annotations&quot;, &quot;axioms&quot; and &quot;facts&quot;. Annotations carry machine and human oriented meta-data. Information about the classes, properties and individuals that compose the ontology is contained in axioms and facts only.
Each class, property and individual is either &quot;anonymous&quot; or identified by an URI reference. Facts state data either about an individual or about a pair of individual identifiers (that the objects identified are distinct or the same). Axioms specify the characteristics of classes and properties. This style is similar to frame languages, and quite dissimilar to well known syntaxes for DLs and Resource Description Framework (RDF).

Sean Bechhofer, &quot;et al.&quot; argue that though this syntax is hard to parse, it is quite concrete. They conclude that the name &quot;abstract syntax&quot; may be somewhat misleading.

====OWL2 functional syntax====
This syntax closely follows the structure of an OWL2 ontology. It is used by OWL2 to specify semantics, mappings to exchange syntaxes and profiles.

===Exchange syntaxes===
====RDF syntaxes====
Syntactic mappings into RDF are specified
for languages in the OWL family. Several RDF serialization formats have been devised. Each leads to a syntax for languages in the OWL family through this mapping. RDF/XML is normative.

====OWL2 XML syntax====
OWL2 specifies an XML serialization that closely models the structure of an OWL2 ontology.

====Manchester Syntax====
The Manchester Syntax is a compact, human readable syntax with a style close to frame languages.
Variations are available for OWL and OWL2. Not all OWL and OWL2 ontologies can be expressed in this syntax.

===Examples===
* The W3C OWL 2 Web Ontology Language provides syntax examples.

====Tea ontology====
Consider an ontology for tea based on a Tea class. First, an ontology identifier is needed. Every OWL ontology must be identified by a URI (http://www.example.org/tea.owl, say). This example provides a sense of the syntax. To save space below, preambles and prefix definitions have been skipped.

;OWL2 Functional Syntax: 
Ontology(&lt;http://example.org/tea.owl&gt;
 Declaration( Class( :Tea ) )


;OWL2 XML Syntax: 
 &lt;Ontology ontologyIRI=&quot;http://example.org/tea.owl&quot; ...&gt;
 &lt;Prefix name=&quot;owl&quot; IRI=&quot;http://www.w3.org/2002/07/owl#&quot;/&gt;
 &lt;Declaration&gt;
 &lt;Class IRI=&quot;Tea&quot;/&gt;
 &lt;/Declaration&gt;
 &lt;/Ontology&gt;
;Manchester Syntax: 
Ontology: &lt;http://example.org/tea.owl&gt;
Class: Tea
;RDF/XML syntax:
&lt;rdf:RDF ...&gt;
 &lt;owl:Ontology rdf:about=&quot;&quot;/&gt;
 &lt;owl:Class rdf:about=&quot;#Tea&quot;/&gt;
&lt;/rdf:RDF&gt;
;RDF/Turtle: 
 &lt;http://example.org/tea.owl&gt; rdf:type owl:Ontology .
 :Tea rdf:type owl:Class .
==Semantics==
===Relation to description logics===
OWL classes correspond to description logic (DL) &quot;concepts&quot;, OWL properties to DL &quot;roles&quot;, while &quot;individuals&quot; are called the same way in both the OWL and the DL terminology.

Early attempts to build large ontologies were plagued by a lack of clear definitions. Members of the OWL family have model theoretic formal semantics, and so have strong logical foundations.

Description logics are a family of logics that are decidable fragments of first-order logic with attractive and well-understood computational properties. OWL DL and OWL Lite semantics are based on DLs.
They combine a syntax for describing and exchanging ontologies, and formal semantics that gives them meaning. For example, OWL DL corresponds to the formula_5 description logic, while OWL 2 corresponds to the formula_6 logic. Sound, complete, terminating reasoners (i.e. systems which are guaranteed to derive every consequence of the knowledge in an ontology) exist for these DLs.

===Relation to RDFS===
OWL Full is intended to be compatible with RDF Schema (RDFS), and to be capable of augmenting the meanings of existing Resource Description Framework (RDF) vocabulary. A model theory describes the formal semantics for
RDF. This interpretation provides the meaning of RDF and RDFS vocabulary. So, the meaning of OWL Full ontologies are defined by extension of the RDFS meaning, and OWL Full is a semantic extension of RDF.

===Open world assumption===
The languages in the OWL family use the open world assumption. Under the open world assumption, if a statement cannot be proven to be true with current knowledge, we cannot draw the conclusion that the statement is false.

====Contrast to other languages====
A relational database consists of sets of tuples with the same attributes. SQL is a query and management language for relational databases. Prolog is a logical programming language. Both use the closed world assumption.

==Public ontologies==
===Libraries===
====Biomedical====
* OBO Foundry
* NCBO BioPortal
* NCI Enterprise Vocabulary Services

===Standards===
* Suggested Upper Merged Ontology (SUMO)
* TDWG
* PROV-O, the ontology version of the W3C&#x27;s PROV-DM
* Basic Formal Ontology (BFO)
* European Materials Modelling Ontology (EMMO)

===Browsers===
The following tools include public ontology browsers:
* Protégé OWL

===Search===
* Swoogle

==Limitations==
* No direct language support for n-ary relationships. For example, modelers may wish to describe the qualities of a relation, to relate more than 2 individuals or to relate an individual to a list. This cannot be done within OWL. They may need to adopt a pattern instead which encodes the meaning outside the formal semantics.

==See also==

* RDF
* Semantic technology
* Common Logic
* FOAF + 
* Frame language
* Geopolitical ontology
* IDEAS Group
* Meta-Object Facility (MOF), a different standard for the Unified Modeling Language (UML) of the Object Management Group (OMG)
* Metaclass (Semantic Web), a featured allowed by OWL to represent knowledge
* Multimedia Web Ontology Language
* Semantic reasoner
* SKOS
* SSWAP: Simple Semantic Web Architecture and Protocol
* SHACL: Shapes and Constraints Language for RDF
==References==
==Further reading==
* 
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q826165" start="4" end="25" title="Web Ontology Language" label="Web Ontology Language"/>
<link wikidata="Q826165" start="27" end="30" title="Web Ontology Language" label="OWL"/>
<link wikidata="Q3478658" start="47" end="71" title="Knowledge representation and reasoning" label="knowledge representation"/>
<link wikidata="Q324254" start="96" end="106" title="Ontology (information science)" label="ontologies"/>
<link wikidata="Q7211" start="148" end="158" title="Taxonomy" label="taxonomies"/>
<link wikidata="Q2903989" start="378" end="395" title="class hierarchies" label="class hierarchies"/>
<link wikidata="Q79872" start="399" end="426" title="object-oriented programming" label="object-oriented programming"/>
<link wikidata="Q1437428" start="1084" end="1100" title="Semantics (computer science)" label="formal semantics"/>
<link wikidata="Q37033" start="1126" end="1151" title="World Wide Web Consortium" label="World Wide Web Consortium"/>
<link wikidata="Q54872" start="1197" end="1227" title="Resource Description Framework" label="Resource Description Framework"/>
<link wikidata="Q2066865" start="1595" end="1602" title="Protégé (software)" label="Protégé"/>
<link wikidata="Q3929429" start="1607" end="1624" title="semantic reasoner" label="semantic reasoner"/>
<link wikidata="Q324254" start="2085" end="2096" title="ontology (information science)" label="ontological"/>
<link wikidata="Q3478658" start="2221" end="2245" title="knowledge representation" label="knowledge representation"/>
<link wikidata="Q11660" start="2256" end="2279" title="artificial intelligence" label="artificial intelligence"/>
<link wikidata="Q8811" start="2363" end="2367" title="HTML" label="HTML"/>
<link wikidata="Q7520680" start="2376" end="2380" title="Simple HTML Ontology Extensions" label="SHOE"/>
<link wikidata="Q3882789" start="2415" end="2418" title="Ontology Inference Layer" label="OIL"/>
<link wikidata="Q207361" start="2562" end="2567" title="DARPA" label="DARPA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151701" start="2591" end="2595" title="DARPA Agent Markup Language" label="DAML"/>
<link wikidata="Q6135847" start="2603" end="2616" title="James Hendler" label="James Hendler"/>
<link wikidata="Q826165" start="2841" end="2849" title="DAML+OIL" label="DAML+OIL"/>
<link wikidata="Q1438124" start="2976" end="3008" title="Information Society Technologies" label="Information Society Technologies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1751819" start="3079" end="3083" title="RDFS" label="RDFS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1437428" start="3090" end="3106" title="Semantics of programming languages" label="formal semantics"/>
<link wikidata="Q387196" start="3118" end="3135" title="description logic" label="description logic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1751819" start="3400" end="3410" title="RDFS" label="RDF Schema"/>
<link wikidata="Q54872" start="3434" end="3437" title="Resource Description Framework" label="RDF"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153289" start="3479" end="3493" title="web standards" label="Recommendation"/>
<link wikidata="Q333373" start="4137" end="4152" title="abstract syntax" label="abstract syntax"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153289" start="4226" end="4244" title="Web standards" label="W3C recommendation"/>
<link wikidata="Q8003999" start="5132" end="5149" title="William A. Martin" label="William A. Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q17736" start="5795" end="5800" title="axiom" label="axiom"/>
<link wikidata="Q200694" start="7116" end="7135" title="propositional logic" label="propositional logic"/>
<link wikidata="Q17141398" start="7476" end="7487" title="sublanguage" label="sublanguage"/>
<link wikidata="Q4049983" start="8025" end="8036" title="cardinality" label="cardinality"/>
<link wikidata="Q179797" start="8255" end="8263" title="Thesaurus" label="thesauri"/>
<link wikidata="Q7211" start="8274" end="8284" title="Taxonomy (general)" label="taxonomies"/>
<link wikidata="Q3508260" start="8839" end="8851" title="Complete theory" label="completeness"/>
<link wikidata="Q430001" start="8876" end="8888" title="Decidability (logic)" label="decidability"/>
<link wikidata="Q387196" start="9378" end="9395" title="description logic" label="description logic"/>
<link wikidata="Q387196" start="10246" end="10263" title="description logic" label="description logic"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10379" end="10386" title="DL-Lite" label="DL-Lite"/>
<link wikidata="Q61694" start="11484" end="11497" title="URI" label="URI reference"/>
<link wikidata="Q1039416" start="11728" end="11742" title="frame language" label="frame language"/>
<link wikidata="Q387196" start="11793" end="11796" title="description logic" label="DLs"/>
<link wikidata="Q54872" start="11801" end="11831" title="Resource Description Framework" label="Resource Description Framework"/>
<link wikidata="Q54872" start="12279" end="12282" title="Resource Description Framework" label="RDF"/>
<link wikidata="Q1127410" start="12342" end="12362" title="serialization" label="serialization format"/>
<link wikidata="Q2115" start="12525" end="12528" title="XML" label="XML"/>
<link wikidata="Q61694" start="13067" end="13070" title="URI" label="URI"/>
<link wikidata="Q114409" start="13835" end="13841" title="Turtle (syntax)" label="Turtle"/>
<link wikidata="Q387196" start="14008" end="14025" title="description logic" label="description logic"/>
<link wikidata="Q467606" start="14305" end="14320" title="model theory" label="model theoretic"/>
<link wikidata="Q8078" start="14358" end="14363" title="logic" label="logic"/>
<link wikidata="Q4055684" start="14454" end="14471" title="first-order logic" label="first-order logic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3929429" start="14837" end="14845" title="reasoner" label="reasoner"/>
<link wikidata="Q1751819" start="15031" end="15041" title="RDF Schema" label="RDF Schema"/>
<link wikidata="Q54872" start="15107" end="15137" title="Resource Description Framework" label="Resource Description Framework"/>
<link wikidata="Q467606" start="15158" end="15170" title="model theory" label="model theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q859254" start="15383" end="15401" title="extension (model theory)" label="semantic extension"/>
<link wikidata="Q1102454" start="15479" end="15500" title="open world assumption" label="open world assumption"/>
<link wikidata="Q192588" start="15700" end="15719" title="relational database" label="relational database"/>
<link wikidata="Q600590" start="15740" end="15745" title="tuple" label="tuple"/>
<link wikidata="Q2722260" start="15761" end="15770" title="Attribute (computing)" label="attribute"/>
<link wikidata="Q47607" start="15773" end="15776" title="SQL" label="SQL"/>
<link wikidata="Q163468" start="15838" end="15844" title="Prolog" label="Prolog"/>
<link wikidata="Q275603" start="15850" end="15869" title="Logic programming" label="logical programming"/>
<link wikidata="Q1102454" start="15893" end="15916" title="closed world assumption" label="closed world assumption"/>
<link wikidata="Q7072326" start="15978" end="15989" title="Open Biomedical Ontologies" label="OBO Foundry"/>
<link wikidata="Q16335148" start="15992" end="16006" title="National Center for Biomedical Ontology" label="NCBO BioPortal"/>
<link wikidata="Q664846" start="16009" end="16012" title="National Cancer Institute" label="NCI"/>
<link wikidata="Q7635093" start="16063" end="16094" title="Suggested Upper Merged Ontology" label="Suggested Upper Merged Ontology"/>
<link wikidata="Q4914768" start="16104" end="16108" title="TDWG" label="TDWG"/>
<link wikidata="Q37033" start="16147" end="16157" title="World Wide Web Consortium" label="W3C&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q4866972" start="16168" end="16189" title="Basic Formal Ontology" label="Basic Formal Ontology"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16198" end="16235" title="European Materials Modelling Ontology" label="European Materials Modelling Ontology"/>
<link wikidata="Q2066865" start="16315" end="16326" title="Protégé (software)" label="Protégé OWL"/>
<link wikidata="Q752498" start="16343" end="16350" title="Swoogle" label="Swoogle"/>
<link wikidata="Q54872" start="16712" end="16715" title="Resource Description Framework" label="RDF"/>
<link wikidata="Q7449091" start="16718" end="16737" title="Semantic technology" label="Semantic technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q5153563" start="16740" end="16752" title="Common Logic" label="Common Logic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1389366" start="16755" end="16759" title="FOAF (software)" label="FOAF"/>
<link wikidata="Q1039416" start="16765" end="16779" title="Frame language" label="Frame language"/>
<link wikidata="Q3112318" start="16782" end="16803" title="Geopolitical ontology" label="Geopolitical ontology"/>
<link wikidata="Q17092253" start="16806" end="16817" title="IDEAS Group" label="IDEAS Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q866209" start="16820" end="16846" title="Meta-Object Facility" label="Meta-Object Facility (MOF)"/>
<link wikidata="Q169411" start="16877" end="16908" title="Unified Modeling Language" label="Unified Modeling Language (UML)"/>
<link wikidata="Q252733" start="16916" end="16945" title="Object Management Group" label="Object Management Group (OMG)"/>
<link wikidata="Q19478619" start="16948" end="16972" title="Metaclass (Semantic Web)" label="Metaclass (Semantic Web)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6934786" start="17025" end="17057" title="Multimedia Web Ontology Language" label="Multimedia Web Ontology Language"/>
<link wikidata="Q3929429" start="17060" end="17077" title="Semantic reasoner" label="Semantic reasoner"/>
<link wikidata="Q2288360" start="17080" end="17084" title="SKOS" label="SKOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q7393086" start="17087" end="17092" title="SSWAP" label="SSWAP"/>
<link wikidata="Q29377821" start="17142" end="17147" title="SHACL" label="SHACL"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="248003" wikidata="Q1290552" url="?curid=248003" title="Armagh rail disaster">
<text>The Armagh rail disaster happened on 12 June 1889 near Armagh, County Armagh, in Ireland, when a crowded Sunday school excursion train had to negotiate a steep incline; the steam locomotive was unable to complete the climb and the train stalled. The train crew decided to divide the train and take forward the front portion, leaving the rear portion on the running line. The rear portion was inadequately braked and ran back down the gradient, colliding with a following train.

Eighty people were killed and 260 were injured, about a third of them children. It was the worst rail disaster in the United Kingdom in the nineteenth century, and to this day remains the worst railway disaster in Irish history. It is the fourth worst railway accident in the history of the United Kingdom.

At the time, the disaster led directly to various safety measures becoming legal requirements for railways in the United Kingdom. This was important both for the measures introduced and for the move away from voluntarism and towards more direct state intervention in such matters.

==Circumstances of the accident==
===The excursion sets out===
Armagh Methodist Sunday School had organised a day trip to the seaside resort of Warrenpoint, County Down, a distance of about . A special Great Northern Railway of Ireland (GNR(I)) train was arranged for the journey, intended to carry about eight hundred passengers.

The railway route was steeply graded and curved, and the first from Armagh railway station involved a steep continuous climb, up a gradient of 1 in 82 (1.22%) and then 1 in 75 (1.33%). Elsewhere on the line, there were gradients as severe as 1 in 70.2 (1.42%).

Asked to provide rolling stock for a special train to take 800 excursionists, the locomotive department at Dundalk sent fifteen vehicles hauled by a &#x27;four-coupled&#x27; (2-4-0) locomotive; however, the instructions to the engine driver, Thomas McGrath, were that the train was to be of thirteen vehicles. There were more intending passengers than anticipated and, to accommodate the excursion, the Armagh station master decided to use all fifteen vehicles. McGrath, who had never driven the route before (but had been over it with excursion trains when a fireman), objected to these instructions, saying that his instructions were that the train was to be of thirteen vehicles at most. According to the driver:
Two other witnesses said that McGrath had asked for a second engine if more carriages were added and had been refused by the station master, as none was available; McGrath (in supplementary evidence given &quot;through the railway company&#x27;s officers&quot;) denied this. The station master&#x27;s evidence was that the discussion was about adding further carriages to the fifteen with which the locomotive had arrived. The general manager&#x27;s chief clerk was to accompany the excursion; he suggested that the engine of the routine train that would be following twenty minutes behind could assist the excursion up the bank, or that some carriages could be left to come on with the routine train. Following his conversation with the station master, however, McGrath refused the assistance.

The train therefore set off with fifteen carriages, containing about 940 passengers. The carriages were full, and some passengers travelled with the guards. Tickets were checked before setting off and to prevent people without tickets joining the excursion; once each compartment had been checked its doors were locked.

Initially the train made progress up the steep gradient at about but stalled about before the top of the gradient.

===Dividing the excursion train===
To prevent the train rolling back, the brakes were applied. The train did have continuous brakes, (&quot;i.e.&quot;, all carriages had brakes which could be operated by the driver), but they were of the non-automatic vacuum type. They were applied by creation of vacuum in the brake pipes and released by admitting air to the pipe.

This was the opposite of the arrangement preferred by the Board of Trade (&#x27;automatic continuous brakes&#x27;) in which brakes were held off by vacuum (or compressed air) generated by the engine, so that on loss of vacuum (e.g. from a leaky connection or a connection parting) the brakes came on automatically. The two brake vans, however, (one immediately behind the engine tender, the other at the rear of the train) also had hand-operated brakes, each under the control of a guard. These were applied.

The chief clerk directed the train crew to divide the train and proceed with the front portion to Hamilton&#x27;s Bawn station, about away, and leave that portion there, and return for the second portion. Owing to limited siding capacity at Hamilton&#x27;s Bawn, only the front five vehicles could be taken on there; so the rearmost ten vehicles would have to be left standing on the running line. Once this rear portion was uncoupled from the front portion, the continuous brakes on it would be released, and the only brakes holding it against the gradient would be the hand-operated brakes in the rear brake van.

For a goods (freight) train in a similar situation, the wheels would have been &#x27;scotched&#x27; against roll-back, and guard&#x27;s vans on goods trains carried &#x27;sprags&#x27; with which to do this. Those on passenger trains with continuous brakes were not required to carry sprags, and the excursion train did not. The guard in the rear van having applied his handbrake then (on the instructions of the chief clerk) dismounted and scotched the wheels of his van with pieces of ballast. He then also scotched the near rearmost vehicle on its righthand wheels and intended to similarly scotch its lefthand wheels before going back down the track with flags and detonators to protect the train from the scheduled service which was to set off from Armagh 20 minutes after the excursion.

The train was screw-coupled; each carriage was first coupled by a loose chain and hook coupling to the next; the slack on this was then taken up by a turnbuckle screw arrangement, until the buffers of the two carriages were touching. To uncouple, there needed to be some slack in the coupling; as the train had stopped all the couplings were under tension. Once the vacuum brake connection to the rear portion was broken, any attempt to introduce slack into the coupling between the two portions would be defeated by the rear portion settling back to rest its weight upon the rear van brakes. To assist uncoupling the front van guard therefore scotched one of the wheels of the sixth vehicle, that is, the front vehicle of the rear portion being detached. Loosening the turnbuckle thus transferred the weight of the rear portion to the scotch on the sixth vehicle, rather than to the rear van brakes. The couplings to the rear of the sixth vehicle remained under tension, and the slack introduced remained in the coupling between the fifth and sixth vehicles, which could be unhooked.

=== The rear carriages run away ===
The uncoupling accomplished by the front van guard, the driver attempted to start the front portion away. It rolled back slightly, jolting the rear portion; which caused the wheels of the front vehicle of the rear portion to ride up over the stones underneath them. The rear portion had been standing with its couplings tight, but now only the rear two vehicles were in any way restrained, so that the leading eight vehicles of the rear portion fell back on to them.

The momentum of the eight vehicles closing on the rear two was sufficient to push them over the stones, crushing them in turn, so that now only the handbrake on the rear brake van was effective. It was overcome by the weight of ten vehicles, and the rear portion began to move downhill and gathered speed down the steep gradient back towards Armagh Station.

The train crew reversed the front portion and tried to catch the rear portion and re-couple it, but this proved to be impossible.

===Collision===
The line was operated on the time interval system (rather than block working) so that there was no means at Armagh of knowing that the line was not clear. The required 20-minute interval before letting a fast train follow a slow one having elapsed, the following scheduled passenger train had left Armagh. With an engine of similar performance, but a much lighter train (six vehicles), it was managing about up the gradient when, at a distance of about , the driver of the ordinary train saw the approaching runaway train. He braked his train, and had reduced speed to at the moment of collision.
By now, the runaway train had travelled about . The pursuing driver said he did not believe they had reached more than ; the Board of Trade inspector thought a fair estimate of their speed at the collision. 

The engine of the scheduled train overturned, and the connection to its tender was lost. This train was also fitted with &#x27;simple&#x27; (non-automatic) continuous vacuum brakes, and these were lost when the engine became disconnected. The train split into two sections, both running back down the gradient towards Armagh. Application of the handbrakes on the tender and on the brake van brought the front and rear halves of the scheduled train to a stop without further incident, a witness telling the inspector &quot;The tender was slightly damaged, but none of the vehicles, and I heard from the guard that a horse in the box next the tender was not injured&quot;.

The occupants of the rear of the excursion train were not so lucky. The two rearmost vehicles of the excursion train were utterly destroyed, and the third rearmost very badly damaged. The debris tumbled down a embankment.

==Causes of the runaway==

===Inadequate application of brakes ===
As part of his investigations, the Board of Trade inspector carried out calculations which established that a train similar to the excursion train could be hauled over the Armagh bank at about by the excursion train engine, and supported this by a practical trial. However, he did criticise the allocation of an engine with only just enough power for such a duty, especially with a driver who had little knowledge of the route. A further practical trial showed that a single brake van, with the brake correctly working and correctly applied, could (without the aid of scotching) hold 10 carriages on the Armagh bank, against both their own weight and a nudge similar to that which witnesses agreed in describing as having been caused by run-back of the front portion of the divided train. Hence, the problem was not the inadequacy of the brake. The immediate cause was the want of the application of sufficient brake power to hold the rear portion of the excursion train, when this portion, consisting of nine coaches and a brake van; which had been separated from the front of the train by direction of Mr. Elliott, was slightly bumped by the front portion of the train when the driver had to set back previously to starting for Hamilton&#x27;s Bawn.
Two witnesses had seen the brake working properly before the train left Armagh, and the brake apparatus had been found in the wreckage and appeared to be in good working order. Nonetheless, the rear portion had run away, and had done so with the braked wheels revolving freely. Therefore, either the brake had not been applied properly by the guard, or it had been tampered with by passengers in the brake carriage. In the circumstances, the guard should be given the benefit of the doubt.

===Incorrect response to the excursion train stalling===
Responsibility lay primarily with Mr Elliott, the chief clerk. He had directed a course of action which ignored Company rules. These laid down that the main guard should not leave his van until perfectly satisfied that his brake would hold the train (the train should therefore have been allowed to ease back upon the rear brake van); once he had left his brake, no attempt should be made to move the train until he was back at the brake. Meanwhile, the more junior guard should have gone back down the track to protect the train. These precautions had been omitted, to pursue a strategy (dividing the train) which, even had nothing gone wrong, would have had no advantages over awaiting the scheduled train to assist the excursion to Hamilton&#x27;s Bawn.
If Mr. Elliott had therefore only had the prudence to wait where the excursion train stopped near the top of the bank and to send back one of the guards to protect his train, with instructions to ask the driver of the following ordinary train to help the excursion train up the short remaining distance, he would hardly have lost time and would, besides, have avoided the risk inseparable from the delicate operation he unwisely determined to carry out and which should have been resorted to under only most exceptional circumstances and not, as in the present case, where there was so easy a solution of the difficulty.

==Other criticisms==

=== Wrong driver, wrong engine ===
The excursion train (even in the 15-vehicle form in which it set off) should have been able to climb Armagh bank at about . The inspector considered that its failure to do so must have been &quot;due to some want of proper management of the engine&quot; by its insufficiently experienced driver. The locomotive shed foreman at Dundalk was criticised for want of judgment in not sending a more experienced driver and in his choice of engine. The 2-4-0 supplied would have had insufficient margins (even when hauling a 13-vehicle excursion train) to be sure of maintaining a safe speed over the more onerous gradients farther up the line. For a 15-vehicle excursion, assistance should have been given by the engine of the regular train.

=== Failure to provide an assisting engine ===
The report criticised the &quot;over-confidence&quot; of the excursion engine driver as to the capabilities of his engine and regretted that his better judgment must have been overcome by the words of the Armagh station master. The chief clerk came in for further criticism for not having persisted with his instructions for the regular train engine to provide assistance. There was no direct criticism of the station master; either for having increased the size of the train, or for persuading the engine driver to attempt Armagh bank without assistance.

=== The excursion train ===
The organisation of this was criticised on a number of points:
*Passengers should not have been allowed to travel in the brake vans, &quot;a practice that should be sternly prohibited&quot;
*Carriage doors should not have been locked: &quot;a wrong thing&quot;
*Given the weight of the train and the gradients on the line, both brake vans should have been at the rear of the train
*It should not have been so big:

== Findings of the inquest ==
The inquest was completed on Friday 21 June 1889, and made findings of culpable negligence against six of those involved; those at Dundalk responsible for selection of the engine, the driver and both guards on the train, and Mr Elliott who had taken charge. As a result, three of the accused were committed for trial for manslaughter on the following Monday. One guard had been injured in the crash and was presumably still in hospital; the Dundalk personnel were not charged, the &#x27;practical trial&#x27; showing that the engine supplied should not have been defeated by Armagh bank if correctly handled having been carried out on Saturday 22 June. The jury are not reported to have made any findings against more senior management of the Great Northern Railway of Ireland. Elliott was tried in Dublin in August, when the jury reported they were unable to agree; on re-trial in October he was acquitted. The cases against the other defendants were then dropped.

== Recommendation and consequent legislation ==

=== Recommendation triggering legislation===
The key recommendation was in fact couched as a finding:

===Regulatory background===

For many years the Railway Inspectorate of the Board of Trade had been advocating three vital safety measures (among others) to often reluctant railway managements:

;lock: interlocking of points and signals, so that conflicting signal indications are prevented
;block: A space-interval or absolute block system of signalling, where one train is not allowed to enter a physical section until the preceding one had left it
;brake: Continuous brakes, to put at the command of the engine driver adequate braking power; this requirement being increased as the technology made it reasonable to &#x27;automatic&#x27; (in modern parlance &#x27;fail-safe&#x27;) continuous brakes which had to be &#x27;held off&#x27; by vacuum or compressed air and would be applied automatically if that supply was lost (e.g. if a train were divided).

The Board of Trade had got as far and as fast as it could by persuasion, but an inspector commented in 1880 after the Wennington Junction rail crash:

===Questions in Parliament===
In the aftermath of the accident, questions to the President of the Board of Trade Sir Michael Hicks Beach revealed that

* in the whole of Ireland only one engine and six vehicles were equipped with an automatic continuous brake
* in England 18% of the passenger rolling stock had no continuous brake, and a further 22% had non-automatic brakes
* in Scotland 40% of the passenger rolling stock were without continuous brakes

More specifically, for the Great Northern of Ireland:
*in March 1888 there were 208 drivers and firemen employed and 693 occasions on which they worked a 14-hour day or longer, including two in which they worked over 18 hours
* of the 518 miles of railway it worked, only 23 were worked on the block system
* It had no engines or vehicles whose brakes met the requirements of the Board of Trade, furthermore:

===New legislation===
The government was already short of parliamentary time in which to pass legislation it was already committed to, and had promised to introduce no further controversial measures. A bill was drafted and introduced, only to be withdrawn when it became clear that some of its other provisions (most notably requiring specified improvements in couplings, so that those engaged in shunting could safely uncouple wagons without having to step into the gap between them) were sufficiently contentious as to jeopardise passage of the non-controversial portions of the bill. For that reason, some Liberal MPs sympathetic to railwaymen&#x27;s concerns on working hours and the hazards of shunting expressed disappointment that the bill did not go far enough. On the other hand, during the second reading a Liberal MP made the classic argument against detailed and prescriptive regulation:

Nonetheless, within two months of the Armagh disaster Parliament had enacted the Regulation of Railways Act 1889, which authorised the Board of Trade to require the use of continuous automatic brakes on passenger railways, along with the block system of signalling and the interlocking of all points and signals. This is often taken as the beginning of the modern era in UK rail safety.

== Similar accidents ==
* Round Oak rail accident – 1 in 75; 23 August 1858 – Excursion runaway; brake not applied
* Abergele rail disaster – 26 August 1868 – Brake broken by rough shunting
* Stairfoot rail accident – 12 September 1870 – Poorly secured wagons runaway due to rough shunting
* Murulla railway accident (26 killed) – 13 September 1926 – Air brake failure
* Bouhalouane train crash (131 killed) – 27 January 1982 – Passenger carriage roll back after being disconnected from a locomotive on a steep slope.
* 13 die near Kisumu, Kenya, after a passenger train rolls back because of air brake failure – 15 August 2000
* Tenga rail disaster – 25 May 2002
* Igandu train disaster – 24 June 2002

== See also ==

* History of rail transport in Ireland
* Lists of rail accidents
* List of steepest gradients on adhesion railways

==Notes and references==
Notes
References
==Further reading==

==External links==
*Major General Hutchinson&#x27;s report into the circumstances of the disaster, with original witness statements( ) – Railways Archive Website

 </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1290552" start="4" end="24" title="Armagh rail disaster" label="Armagh rail disaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q193452" start="55" end="61" title="Armagh" label="Armagh"/>
<link wikidata="Q192761" start="63" end="76" title="County Armagh" label="County Armagh"/>
<link wikidata="Q661513" start="105" end="118" title="Sunday school" label="Sunday school"/>
<link wikidata="Q5419725" start="119" end="134" title="excursion train" label="excursion train"/>
<link wikidata="Q171043" start="173" end="189" title="steam locomotive" label="steam locomotive"/>
<link wikidata="Q174193" start="597" end="611" title="United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1785227" start="718" end="730" title="List of British rail accidents by death toll" label="fourth worst"/>
<link wikidata="Q193452" start="1132" end="1138" title="Armagh" label="Armagh"/>
<link wikidata="Q3586039" start="1139" end="1148" title="Methodist Church in Ireland" label="Methodist"/>
<link wikidata="Q15850009" start="1179" end="1187" title="day trip" label="day trip"/>
<link wikidata="Q2224481" start="1213" end="1224" title="Warrenpoint" label="Warrenpoint"/>
<link wikidata="Q190684" start="1226" end="1237" title="County Down" label="County Down"/>
<link wikidata="Q5599675" start="1271" end="1304" title="Great Northern Railway of Ireland" label="Great Northern Railway of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1431" end="1437" title="Grade (slope)#Railways" label="graded"/>
<link wikidata="Q4792597" start="1469" end="1491" title="Armagh railway station" label="Armagh railway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414135" start="1680" end="1693" title="rolling stock" label="rolling stock"/>
<link wikidata="Q204956" start="1770" end="1777" title="Dundalk" label="Dundalk"/>
<link wikidata="Q2036617" start="1838" end="1843" title="2-4-0" label="2-4-0"/>
<link wikidata="Q2775569" start="1890" end="1903" title="train driver" label="engine driver"/>
<link wikidata="Q2962020" start="2073" end="2087" title="station master" label="station master"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147709" start="2223" end="2230" title="fireman (steam engine)" label="fireman"/>
<link wikidata="Q208502" start="2455" end="2464" title="railroad car" label="carriages"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3324" end="3330" title="Conductor (transportation)#Train guard (United Kingdom, Australia, and New Zealand)" label="guards"/>
<link wikidata="Q908295" start="3737" end="3743" title="Brake (railway)" label="brakes"/>
<link wikidata="Q3250739" start="4303" end="4312" title="brake van" label="brake van"/>
<link wikidata="Q1249252" start="4588" end="4608" title="Hamilton&amp;#x27;s Bawn" label="Hamilton&amp;#x27;s Bawn"/>
<link wikidata="Q716482" start="5774" end="5784" title="Detonator (railway)" label="detonators"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501648" start="5913" end="5926" title="Railway coupling" label="screw-coupled"/>
<link wikidata="Q204956" start="13326" end="13333" title="Dundalk" label="Dundalk"/>
<link wikidata="Q887543" start="16007" end="16021" title="Board of Trade" label="Board of Trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q630950" start="16133" end="16145" title="interlocking" label="interlocking"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16250" end="16264" title="Railway signalling#Blocks" label="absolute block"/>
<link wikidata="Q862562" start="16275" end="16285" title="railway signal" label="signalling"/>
<link wikidata="Q908295" start="16401" end="16407" title="Brake (railway)" label="brakes"/>
<link wikidata="Q7982919" start="16907" end="16937" title="Wennington Junction rail crash" label="Wennington Junction rail crash"/>
<link wikidata="Q332746" start="17053" end="17076" title="Michael Hicks Beach, 1st Earl St Aldwyn" label="Sir Michael Hicks Beach"/>
<link wikidata="Q5599675" start="17424" end="17449" title="Great Northern Railway (Ireland)" label="Great Northern of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q4097186" start="18622" end="18634" title="Sir John Brunner, 1st Baronet" label="a Liberal MP"/>
<link wikidata="Q11010" start="18762" end="18772" title="Parliament of the United Kingdom" label="Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q7309663" start="18789" end="18820" title="Regulation of Railways Act 1889" label="Regulation of Railways Act 1889"/>
<link wikidata="Q7371109" start="19122" end="19145" title="Round Oak rail accident" label="Round Oak rail accident"/>
<link wikidata="Q1269296" start="19213" end="19235" title="Abergele rail disaster" label="Abergele rail disaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q7597099" start="19288" end="19311" title="Stairfoot rail accident" label="Stairfoot rail accident"/>
<link wikidata="Q6939812" start="19388" end="19412" title="Murulla railway accident" label="Murulla railway accident"/>
<link wikidata="Q4098438" start="19467" end="19490" title="Bouhalouane train crash" label="Bouhalouane train crash"/>
<link wikidata="Q214485" start="19628" end="19634" title="Kisumu" label="Kisumu"/>
<link wikidata="Q114" start="19636" end="19641" title="Kenya" label="Kenya"/>
<link wikidata="Q2691521" start="19726" end="19745" title="Tenga rail disaster" label="Tenga rail disaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q5991464" start="19762" end="19783" title="Igandu train disaster" label="Igandu train disaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q11014758" start="19818" end="19854" title="History of rail transport in Ireland" label="History of rail transport in Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q4434495" start="19857" end="19880" title="Lists of rail accidents" label="Lists of rail accidents"/>
<link wikidata="Q6641474" start="19883" end="19930" title="List of steepest gradients on adhesion railways" label="List of steepest gradients on adhesion railways"/>
</links>
</doc>
