<doc id="252155" wikidata="Q57166" url="?curid=252155" title="Adolf Galland">
<text>Adolf Josef Ferdinand Galland (19 March 1912 – 9 February 1996) was a German Luftwaffe general and flying ace who served throughout the Second World War in Europe. He flew 705 combat missions and fought on the Western Front and in the Defence of the Reich. On four occasions, he survived being shot down, and he was credited with 104 aerial victories, all of them against the Western Allies.

Galland, who was born in Westerholt, Province of Westphalia, Kingdom of Prussia, in the German Empire, became a glider pilot in 1929 before he joined the Luft Hansa. In 1932, he graduated as a pilot at the &quot;Deutsche Verkehrsfliegerschule&quot; (German Commercial Flyers&#x27; School) in Braunschweig before applying to join the Reichswehr of the Weimar Republic later in the year. Galland&#x27;s application was accepted, but he never took up the offer. In February 1934, he was transferred to the Luftwaffe. In 1937, during the Spanish Civil War, he volunteered for the Condor Legion and flew ground attack missions in support of the Nationalists under Francisco Franco. After finishing his tour in 1938 Galland was employed in the Air Ministry writing doctrinal and technical manuals about his experiences as a ground-attack pilot. During this period Galland served as an instructor for ground-attack units. During the German invasion of Poland in September 1939, he again flew ground attack missions. In early 1940, Galland managed to persuade his superiors to allow him to become a fighter pilot.

Galland flew Messerschmitt Bf 109s during the Battle of France and the Battle of Britain. By the end of 1940, his tally of victories had reached 57. In 1941, Galland stayed in France and fought the Royal Air Force (RAF) over the English Channel and Northern France. By November 1941, his tally had increased to 96, by which time he had earned the Knight&#x27;s Cross of the Iron Cross with Oak Leaves and Swords. In November 1941, Werner Mölders, who commanded the German Fighter Force as the &quot;General der Jagdflieger&quot;, was killed while a passenger in a flying accident and Galland succeeded him, staying in the position until January 1945. As &quot;General der Jagdflieger&quot;, Galland was forbidden to fly combat missions.

In late January and early February 1942, Galland first planned and then commanded the Luftwaffe&#x27;s air cover for the &quot;Kriegsmarine&quot; Operation Cerberus, which was a major success. It earned him the Knight&#x27;s Cross of the Iron Cross with Oak Leaves, Swords and Diamonds. Over the ensuing years, Galland&#x27;s disagreements with &quot;Reichsmarschall&quot; Hermann Göring about how best to combat the Allied Air Forces bombing of Germany caused their relationship to deteriorate. The Luftwaffe fighter force was under severe pressure by 1944, and Galland was blamed by Göring for the failure to prevent the Allied strategic bombing of Germany in daylight. The relationship collapsed altogether in early January 1945, when Galland was relieved of his command because of his constant criticism of the Luftwaffe leadership. Galland was then put under house arrest following the so-called Fighter Pilots&#x27; Revolt, in which senior fighter pilots confronted Göring about the conduct of the air war.

In March 1945, Galland returned to operational flying and was permitted to form a jet fighter unit which he called Jagdverband 44. He flew missions over Germany until the end of the war in May. After the war, Galland was employed by Argentina&#x27;s Government and acted as a consultant to the Argentine Air Force. Later, he returned to Germany and managed his own business. Galland also became friends with many former enemies, such as RAF aces Robert Stanford Tuck and Douglas Bader.

==Early life==
Galland was born in Westerholt (now Herten), Westphalia on 19 March 1912 to a family with French Huguenot ancestry. The first Galland in Westerholt arrived from Veynes in 1792, becoming a bailiff to the count von Westerholt, and beginning a family tradition. Adolf Galland (junior) was the second of four sons of Adolf Galland (senior) and his French wife Anna, née Schipper. Galland (senior) worked as the land manager or bailiff to the Count von Westerholt. Galland&#x27;s older brother was Fritz and his two younger brothers were Wilhelm-Ferdinand and Paul. Their father had pet names for all his family members. His wife Anna was called &quot;Anita&quot;. Fritz, his older brother, was &quot;Toby&quot;, Adolf was &quot;Keffer&quot;, Wilhelm-Ferdinand was &quot;Wutz&quot; and Paul was &quot;Paulinchen&quot;, or since they were expecting a girl, occasionally &quot;Paula&quot;.

His two younger brothers also became fighter pilots and aces. Paul claimed 17 victories, before being shot down and killed on 31 October 1942. Wilhelm-Ferdinand, credited with 55 victories, was shot down and killed on 17 August 1943.

In 1927, Galland&#x27;s lifelong interest in flying started when a group of aviation enthusiasts brought a glider club to Borkenberge, a heath east of the Haltern-Münster railway and part of the Westerholt estate. It was here that the &quot;Gelsenkirchen Luftsportverein&quot; (Air Sports Club of Gelsenkirchen) created an interest in flying among young Germans. Galland travelled by foot or horse-drawn wagon to help prepare the gliders for flight until his father bought him a motorcycle. By 19 Galland was a glider pilot. In 1932 he completed pilot training at the &quot;Gelsenkirchen Luftsportverein&quot;. 

Under the Treaty of Versailles, Germany was denied an air force. They were however allowed gliders, which became the way for aspiring pilots to begin their flight training. The sport became so popular that the Reichswehr set up ten schools, at least one in each of the seven military districts of Germany. The military also published a magazine, Flugsport (Flight Sport), to encourage an interest in aviation and began a series of glider competitions around the country. Galland had learned the basic laws of flight and flying technique on paper, but found they did not always work in reality; his inexperience caused a few accidents. One of his tutors, Georg Ismer, taught him various techniques and in 1929 the 17-year-old Galland passed his A certificate. This was one of three certificates he needed for his professional license. When he eventually attained his B and C certificates, his father promised to buy him his own glider if he also passed his matriculations examinations, which he succeeded in doing. Galland became an outstanding glider pilot; he became an instructor before he had passed his &quot;Abitur&quot;.

==Early military career==
In February 1932, Galland graduated from Hindenburg Gymnasium (high school) in Buer and was among 20 personnel who were accepted to the aviation school of Germany&#x27;s national airline, Luft Hansa. During the final years of the Weimar Republic, jobs were scarce, and life was hard for the Galland family economically. Adolf had some experience of flying gliders, so he applied to the &quot;Deutsche Verkehrsfliegerschule&quot; or DVS (German Commercial Flying School) which was heavily subsidised by Luft Hansa. He was one of 100 successful applicants out of 4,000. After ten days of evaluations, he was among just 18 selected for flight training. Adolf was then assessed on performance. Those that did not reach the standard were sent home.

Galland&#x27;s first flight was in an Albatros L 101. Galland had two notable accidents; a heavy landing damaged the undercarriage of his aircraft and a collision. Galland was judged to have employed poor formation tactics in the latter incident. Galland applied to join the German Army in the belief he had failed to pass. In the meantime, he carried on with his flight training. Flights in an Albatros L 75 and the award of a B1 certificate allowed him to fly large aircraft over in weight. He discovered the Army accepted his application, but the flying school refused to release him. By Christmas 1932, he had logged 150 hours flying and had obtained a B2 certificate.

Early in 1933, Galland was sent to the Baltic Sea training base at Warnemünde to train on flying boats. Galland disliked learning what he perceived to be &quot;seamanship&quot; but logged 25 hours in these aircraft. Soon afterward, along with several other pilots, he was ordered to attend an interview at the &quot;Zentrale der Verkehrsflieger Schule&quot; (ZVSCentral Airline Pilot School). The group were interviewed by military personnel in civilian clothing. After being informed of a secret military training program being built that involved piloting high performance aircraft, all the pilots accepted an invitation to join the organisation.

===Into the Luftwaffe===
In May 1933, Galland was ordered to a meeting in Berlin as one of 12 civilian pilots among 70 airmen who came from clandestine programmes, meeting Hermann Göring for the first time. Galland was impressed by Göring and believed him to be a competent leader. In July 1933, Galland travelled to Italy to train with the &quot;Regia Aeronautica&quot; (Italian Air Force).

In September 1933, Galland returned to Germany and flew in some minor competitions as a glider pilot, winning some prizes. Soon afterwards he returned to the ZVS to learn instrument flying and receive training in piloting heavy transport aircraft logging another 50 hours. As a part of his training, beginning in October 1933, Galland flew &quot;Lufthansa&quot; airliners. Flying the Junkers G24 from Stuttgart to Barcelona in Spain, via Geneva and Marseille. In December 1933, Galland was recalled to the ZVS headquarters and offered the chance to join the new Luftwaffe. Galland found the choice hard. He wanted the adventure of a military flying career, but as an airline pilot, Galland had enjoyed the lifestyle of flying and visiting exotic places and was reluctant to give it up. Nevertheless, he decided to officially join the Luftwaffe.

After basic training in the Army, he was discharged from his barracks in Dresden in October 1934. In February 1935 Galland was now part of 900 airmen waiting to be inducted to the new &quot;ReichsLuftwaffe&quot;. In March Galland was ordered to report to &quot;Jagdgeschwader&quot; 2 (Fighter Wing 2), arriving at its headquarters in Jüterbog-Damm on 1 April 1935. Galland&#x27;s performance had not yet been impressive enough for a position as an instructor, so he was evaluated and deemed good enough for an operational posting.

In October 1935, during aerobatic manoeuvre training, he crashed a Focke-Wulf Fw 44 biplane and was in a coma for three days, other injuries were a damaged eye, fractured skull and broken nose. When Galland recovered, he was declared unfit for flying by the doctors. A friend, Major Rheital, kept the doctor&#x27;s report secret to allow Adolf to continue flying. The expansion of the Luftwaffe and his own &quot;Geschwader&quot; (wing) flooded the administration officers and Galland&#x27;s medical report was overlooked. Within a year, Galland showed no signs of injury from his crash. In October 1936 he crashed an Arado Ar 68 and was hospitalised again, aggravating his injured eye. It was at this point his previous medical report came to light again and Galland&#x27;s unfit certificate was discovered. Major Rheital was rumoured to have undergone a court-martial, but the investigators dropped the charges. Galland, however, was grounded. He admitted having fragments of glass in his eye, but convinced the doctors he was fit for flying duty. Galland was ordered to undergo eye tests to validate his claims. Before the testing could begin, one of his brothers managed to acquire the charts. Adolf memorised the charts passing the test and was permitted to fly again.

===Condor Legion===
During the Spanish Civil War, Galland was appointed &quot;Staffelkapitän&quot; of a Condor Legion unit, 3. &quot;Staffel&quot; of &quot;Jagdgruppe&quot; 88 (J/88 – 88th Fighter Group), which was sent to support the Nationalist side under Franco at Ferrol from mid-1937. Galland flew ground attack missions in Heinkel He 51s.
In Spain, Galland first displayed his unique style: flying in swimming trunks with a cigar between his teeth in an aircraft decorated with a Mickey Mouse figure. When asked why he developed this style, he gave a simple answer:
Galland flew his first of 300 combat missions in Spain with the J/88 commander Gotthard Handrick, on 24 July 1937, near Brunete. During his time in Spain, Galland analysed the engagements, evaluated techniques and devised new ground-attack tactics which were passed on to the Luftwaffe. His experiences in pin-point ground assaults were used by Ernst Udet, a proponent of the dive bomber and leading supporter of the Junkers Ju 87 to push for &quot;Stuka&quot; wings. Wolfram von Richthofen, an opponent of Udet&#x27;s, used them to push for the opposite: &quot;Schlachtflieger&quot; dual combination fighter-bombers. After trials with Henschel Hs 123s, Bf 109s and Ju 87s, the Junkers was selected to undergo trials for the dive bomber role.

During his time in Spain, he developed early gasoline and oil bombs, suggested the quartering of personnel on trains to aid in relocation, and following the Nationalist victory was awarded the ‘Spanish Cross in Gold with Swords and Diamonds&#x27; for his contributions. On 24 May 1938 Galland left Spain and was replaced by Werner Mölders. Before leaving he made ten flights in the Bf 109; deeply impressed with the performance of the aircraft, it persuaded him to change from a strike pilot to a fighter pilot. Galland&#x27;s fellow student and friend at the &quot;Kriegsschule&quot; in Dresden, Johannes Janke, later said of him &quot;a very good pilot and excellent shot, but ambitious and he wanted to get noticed. A parvenu. He was crazy about hunting anything, from a sparrow to a man.&quot;

===Staff post in the RLM===
From May to August 1938, Galland took leave and visited Spanish Morocco. On his return to Germany, he was ordered to the headquarters of the &quot;Reichsluftfahrtministerium&quot; (RLM – Ministry of Aviation) where he was tasked with preparing recommendations on the subject of close air support. Galland favoured the virtually simultaneous attack of the air force before the Army advance, leaving their opponents no time to recover. While this reasserted the lessons of World War I, some of the Officer Corps were still pessimistic as to whether that kind of coordination was possible. Galland also adopted the Italian suggestion of heavy armament and criticised the light machine guns in early German fighter aircraft and pointed to the advantages of multi-gun configurations (combining machine guns with cannon). These proved successful in the Bf 109 and Focke-Wulf Fw 190. He also recognised the innovation of drop tanks to extend the range of aircraft as well as the need for specialised tactics for escorting bomber fleets; Galland did not subscribe to the prevailing idea in the Luftwaffe (and RAF) that the bomber &quot;would always get through&quot; (alone). All of Galland&#x27;s suggestions were adopted and proved successful in the early campaigns, 1939–41. During his time in the RLM, he instructed, trained and equipped ground-support wings for Fall Grün (Case Green), the invasion of Czechoslovakia in 1938. However, the invasion did not take place.

Unluckily for Galland, his excellence at evaluation earned him a place at Tutow training facility where he was asked to test fly prototype reconnaissance and strike aircraft. This was not what he wanted, and he hoped to be returned to a fighter unit to fly the Messerschmitt Bf 109. During his time there, he gave positive evaluations on types such as the Focke-Wulf Fw 189 and Henschel Hs 129. During his test piloting career at Tutow, Galland received unwelcome news; he was to become &quot;Gruppenkommandeur&quot; (group commander) of II.(Schlacht)/&quot;Lehrgeschwader&quot; 2 (II.(S)/LG 2 – 2nd battle group of the 2nd Demonstration Wing). It was not a fighter unit, but a special mixed &quot;Geschwader&quot; of ground attack aircraft. On 1 November 1938, I. &quot;Gruppe&quot; (1st group) of &quot;Jagdgeschwader&quot; 433 (JG 433—433rd Fighter Wing) was formed at the Ingolstadt-Manching Airfield, north of Munich. Initially the &quot;Gruppe&quot; was placed under the command of &quot;Hauptmann&quot; Dietrich Graf von Pfeil und Klein-Ellguth and equipped with the Bf 109 D-1 fighter aircraft. That day, Galland was appointed &quot;Staffelkapitän&quot; of the &quot;Gruppe&quot;″s 1. &quot;Staffel&quot; (2nd squadron). On 1 May 1939, the &quot;Gruppe&quot; was renamed and became I. &quot;Gruppe&quot; of &quot;Jagdgeschwader&quot; 52 (JG 52—52nd Fighter Wing). Galland served in this capacity until 31 July 1939 when he was transferred to take command of 5.(S)/LG 2.

==Combat career (1939–1941)==
===Invasion of Poland===
Just before the outbreak of war, Galland was promoted to &quot;Hauptmann&quot;. During the invasion of Poland from 1 September 1939 onward, he flew with 4. &quot;Staffel&quot; of II./&quot;Lehrgeschwader&quot; 2. Equipped with the Henschel Hs 123, nicknamed the &quot;biplane Stuka,&quot; supporting the German Tenth Army. On 1 September, Galland flew alone in a Fieseler Fi 156 &#x27;Storch&#x27; on a reconnaissance mission and was nearly shot down. The next day he flew ground attack missions in support of the 1st &quot;Panzer Division&quot; advancing to the Warta River. Galland&#x27;s &quot;Geschwader&quot; flew intensive sorties in support of the division and XVI Army Corps at Kraków, Radom, Dęblin and L&#x27;vov. The German Army had reached the Vistula river near Warsaw by 7 September. and the Luftwaffe had been executing the kind of close air support operations Galland had been advocating. Galland participated in the maximum effort by the Luftwaffe during the Battle of Bzura. On 11 September, during one of his visits to the front, Adolf Hitler arrived at LG 2 headquarters for lunch with the staff. Such was the state of the Polish Air Force and Polish Army, that by 19 September 1939 some German air units were withdrawn from the campaign. Galland ceased combat operations on this date, having flown 87 missions. After flying nearly 360 missions in two wars and averaging two missions per day, on 13 September 1939, Galland was awarded the Iron Cross Second Class ().

After the end of the campaign, Galland claimed to be suffering from rheumatism and therefore unfit for flying in open-cockpit aircraft, such as the Hs 123. He tactfully suggested a transfer to a single-engine aircraft type with a closed cockpit would improve his condition. His request was accepted on medical grounds. Galland was removed from his post as a direct ground support pilot. Galland never explained whether open cockpits had caused the complaint or some other cause; given his performance with eye specialists, a certain amount of suspicion is reasonable. He was transferred to &quot;&quot;Jagdgeschwader&quot; 27&quot; (JG 27—Fighter Wing 27) on 10 February 1940 as the adjutant, restricting him from flying.

===Western Europe===
After his transfer to JG 27, Galland met Mölders again. Due to his injuries, Galland could never match Mölders&#x27; sharp eyesight; the shards of glass in his eyes denied him that capacity. However, Mölders, by that time a recognised ace shared what experiences he could with Galland; leadership in the air, tactics and organisation. Mölders was &quot;Geschwaderkommodore&quot; of &quot;Jagdgeschwader&quot; 53 at the time of their meeting. For Galland to gain experience on the Bf 109E, which he lacked, Mölders offered him the chance to join his unit. Galland learned Mölders&#x27; tactics, such as using spotter aircraft to indicate the position of enemy formation. Galland learned to allow a &quot;Staffel&quot; to operate freely in order to seize the initiative. Taking his experiences back to JG 27, its commander Max Ibel, agreed to their implementation. Galland gained further experience as a combat leader acting as &quot;Gruppenkommandeur&quot;, when the officer commanding went on leave.

On 10 May 1940, the &quot;Wehrmacht&quot; invaded the Low Countries and France under the codename Fall Gelb. JG 27 supported German forces in the Battle for Belgium. On the third day of the offensive, 12 May 1940, west of Liège, Belgium, at a height of about , flying a Bf 109, Galland, with Gustav Rödel as his wingman, claimed his first aerial victories, over two Royal Air Force (RAF) Hawker Hurricanes. Both aircraft were from No. 87 Squadron. The Hurricanes had been escorting Bristol Blenheim bombers to bomb bridges in the Netherlands. Galland remembered; &quot;My first kill was child&#x27;s play. An excellent weapon and luck had been on my side. To be successful, the best fighter pilot needs both&quot;— Galland pursued one of the &quot;scattering&quot; Hurricanes and shot down another at low level. The pilot, a Canadian, Flying Officer Jack Campbell was killed.

Galland claimed his third Hurricane later that same day over Tienen. He had long believed that his opponents had been Belgian, not knowing that all of the Belgian Air Force&#x27;s Hurricanes had been destroyed on the ground in the first two days, without seeing combat. On 19 May, Galland shot down a French Potez aircraft. During this flight he ran out of fuel short of the runway and landed nearby, at the base of a hill. With the help of soldiers from a German Flak battery, he pushed the Bf 109 up the hill and then half-flew, half-glided down to the Charleville-Mézières airfield in the valley below. He sent back a can of fuel for his wingman, who had also landed short of the runway. He continued flying and the next day, claimed another three more aircraft, making a total of seven. For this he was awarded the Iron Cross First Class () from Erhard Milch on 22 May.

With the effective defeat of Belgium JG 27 was moved into forward airfields to support the invasion of France. During the Battle of Dunkirk, after encountering the Supermarine Spitfire for the first time, Galland was impressed with these aircraft and their pilots. On 29 May, Galland claimed he had shot down a Bristol Blenheim over the sea. Over Dunkirk, the Luftwaffe suffered its first serious rebuff of the war. As
Galland has noted, the nature and style of the air battles over the beaches should have provided a warning as to the inherent weaknesses of the Luftwaffe&#x27;s force structure. On 3 June during Operation Paula, he claimed another French aircraft, a Morane-Saulnier M.S.406 for his 12th victory.

On 6 June 1940, Galland took over the command of III./&quot;Jagdgeschwader&quot; 26 &quot;Schlageter&quot; (III./JG 26–3rd group of the 26th Fighter Wing) with the position of &quot;Gruppenkommandeur&quot;. Under his command were the 7., 8. and 9. &quot;Staffels&quot; with an establishment of 39 Bf 109Es. His &quot;Staffelkapitäns&quot; included Joachim Müncheberg, Wilhelm Balthasar and Gerhard Schöpfel. Balthasar, &quot;Staffelkapitän&quot; of 7. &quot;Staffel&quot; had mistakenly attacked Galland during Fall Rot (Case Red). Being on the same radio frequency, Galland was able to warn Balthasar before he opened fire. The remainder of the campaign passed without incident and on 26 June, Major Gotthard Handrick took over command of JG 26. Galland was pleased, having served under him during his Condor Legion days.

===Battle of Britain===
From June 1940 on, Galland flew as the &quot;Gruppenkommandeur&quot; of III./JG 26 (JG 26), fighting in the Battle of Britain. On 19 July 1940, he was promoted to major and JG 26 moved to the Pas de Calais, where they were to remain for the next 18 months with III./JG 26 based at Caffiers.

On 24 July 1940, almost 40 Bf 109s of III./JG 26 took off for operations over the English Channel—a phase of the battle known as the &quot;Kanalkampf&quot;. They were met by 12 54 Squadron Spitfires. The Spitfires forced the larger number of Bf 109s into a turning battle that ran down the Germans&#x27; fuel. Galland recalled being impressed by the Spitfire&#x27;s ability to outmanoeuvre Bf 109s at low speed and to turn into the Bf 109s within little airspace. Only by executing a &quot;Split S&quot; (a half-roll onto his back, followed by pulling into a long, curving dive) that the Spitfire could not follow without its float carburettor causing a temporary loss of engine power, could his aircraft escape back to France at low altitude. The II. &quot;Gruppe&quot; of JG 52 covered their retreat, losing two Bf 109s to Spitfires from No. 610 Squadron. During the action, two Spitfires were shot down for the loss of four Bf 109s. Galland was shocked by the aggression shown by pilots he initially believed to be relatively inexperienced. Galland later said he realised there would be no quick and easy victory.

As the battles over the Channel continued, Galland shot down Spitfires on 25 and 28 July. On 1 August 1940, Galland was awarded the Knight&#x27;s Cross of the Iron Cross () for his 17 victories. Galland continued to make fighter sweeps over southern England before the main assault opened. On 11 August, Galland&#x27;s unit engaged 74 Squadron. In a brief dogfight, one Spitfire was shot down. During these battles the RAF seemed to know just where and when to send their aircraft. This made Galland suspect a high level of organisation was at work controlling RAF fighters. The cloudy skies of Britain were a dangerous environment to confront an enemy that had an effective ground control system. Galland resolved to fly higher, where he could see most things and where the Bf 109 performed at its best.
By 15 August, in two weeks&#x27; fighting over Britain, Galland had increased his own tally to 21. On this day he claimed three Spitfires. This put him to within three victories of Mölders, who had claimed the highest number of enemy aircraft destroyed and who was wounded and grounded with a damaged knee. One of Galland&#x27;s claims was against 54 Squadron RAF that had surprised him with their aggressive attacks three weeks before. JG 26 claimed nine Spitfires in the air battle—Galland himself filing a claim for a Spitfire at 12:55 off Folkestone. Only two 54 Squadron Spitfires were lost in the late-morning early afternoon battle. Galland&#x27;s claim matches the loss of a Spitfire piloted by Sergeant N. A Lawrence who was rescued with severe shock. In the afternoon of that same day, Galland claimed two more Spitfires from 64 Squadron. JG 26 claimed eight of the unit&#x27;s Spitfires which were all officially &quot;confirmed&quot; by the Germans. However, only two of the RAF fighters were hit and both were destroyed. Pilot Officer C. J. D Andreae was killed in &quot;R6990&quot; and R. Roberts bailed out of &quot;K9964&quot;. Galland and his pilots remained ignorant of the disastrous losses suffered by other German units and the defeat of their attacks by the RAF.

Galland was summoned to &quot;Karinhall&quot; on 18 August 1940, and missed the intense air battle that day, known as The Hardest Day. During the meeting, Göring insisted that, in combat, Bf 109 fighters escort Bf 110s, which could not survive against single-engine fighters. As high-scoring aces, both Galland and Mölders shared their concerns that close escort of Bf 110s and bombers robbed fighter pilots of their freedom to roam and engage the enemy on their own terms. They also pointed to the fact that German bombers flew at medium altitudes and low speed, the best height area and speed for the manoeuvrability of the Spitfire. Galland resented his pilots having to carry out a task unsuited to their equipment but Göring would not move from his position. Galland claimed that fighting spirit was also affected when his pilots were tasked with close-escort missions:
The worst disadvantage of this type of escort was not aerodynamic but lay in its deep contradiction of the basic function of fighter aircraft—to use speed and maneuverability to seek, find, and destroy enemy aircraft, in this case, those of Fighter Command. The [Bf 109s] were bound to the bombers and could not leave until attacked, thus giving their opponent the advantage of surprise, initiative, superior altitude, greater speed, and above all fighting spirit, the aggressive attitude which marks all successful fighter pilots.

===Wing Commander===
Galland returned to action on 22 August 1940, replacing Gotthard Handrick as &quot;Geschwaderkommodore&quot; of JG 26. Major Handrick was an ineffective and indecisive combat commander by some accounts and took a passive role in leading his fighter pilots. Göring grew frustrated with the lack of aggressiveness of several of his fighter-wing commanders, and on 22 August, he replaced Handrick with Adolf Galland.

In the aftermath of Galland&#x27;s appointment, he became aware his pilots were dissatisfied with themselves, the bombers, and particularly the leadership. Galland could not change Göring&#x27;s mind with respect to the escort fighter mission, but he did take immediate actions to improve pilot morale. The first thing Galland did as Kommodore was to replace ineffective group and squadron commanders with younger, more aggressive, and more successful—in terms of aerial engagements—officers in the wing. He also increased the wing staff flight from Handrick&#x27;s two-aircraft formation to a more lethal four-fighter formation. Galland was not content to lead from behind as his predecessor had been. Galland flew as often as possible and led the most difficult missions in order to encourage his men and gain respect.

Galland&#x27;s appointment made no impact on his successes. From 25 August until 14 September, Galland filed claims for victories 23–32. This included three claims on 31 August, for two Spitfires and a Hurricane to take his tally to 27. His 25th victim may have been from 19 Squadron which was claimed south of Cambridge at 09:42. Klaus Mietusch also accounted for one for his 7th victory. Three 19 Squadron Spitfires were shot down in the morning near North Weald. Pilot Officer R. A. C Aeberhardt was killed in a crash-landing in Spitfire &quot;R6912&quot; while Flying Officer T. J. B Coward was wounded in the foot and F.N Brinsden was unhurt. He bailed out of &quot;R6958&quot;. On 6 September, Galland claimed his 30th victory over a 601 Squadron Hurricane. JG 26 claimed two more of them shot down that morning; 601 lost four Hurricanes; Flying Officer W. H. Rhodes-Moorehouse and Flight Lieutenant C. R. Davis were killed while Flying Officer J. Toplnicki and Pilot Officer H. T. Gilbert were wounded.

During the battle, the fighter pilots were criticised by Göring for the growing bomber losses. In a front line general officer briefing on Luftwaffe tactics, Göring asked what his fighter pilots needed to win the battle. Werner Mölders replied that he would like the Bf 109 to be fitted with more powerful engines. Galland replied: &quot;I should like an outfit of Spitfires for my squadron.&quot; which left Göring speechless with rage. Galland still preferred the Bf 109 for offensive sweeps, but he regarded the Spitfire as a better defensive fighter, owing to its manoeuvrability.

During the Battle of Britain, the question of killing enemy pilots while in their parachutes was raised. In another conversation with Göring, Galland recalled: &quot;Göring wanted to know if we had ever thought about this. &quot;Jawohl, Herr Reichsmarschall!&quot; He looked me straight in the eyes and said, &#x27;What would you think of an order to shoot down pilots who were bailing out?&#x27; &#x27;I should regard it as murder, Herr Reichsmarschall&#x27;, I told him, &#x27;I should do everything in my power to disobey such an order&#x27;. &#x27;That is just the reply I had expected from you, Galland.&#x27;&quot; Galland later stated that he thought Göring may have been asking him this question so as to have an answer if the question was ever posed to him, as opposed to the implication that Göring would be in favour of such an action. In practice, this act of mercy was usually not applied. German airmen in parachutes were lost as prisoners of war, but British airmen could live to fight again and were considered combatants. Hugh Dowding, air officer commanding, detested the practice but in his view it conformed to the laws of war at the time.

Galland passed another serious test on 15 September, the date known as Battle of Britain Day. In large-scale clashes Galland claimed his 33rd air victory over a Hurricane while leading JG 26. Over the Thames Estuary, Galland fought an unsuccessful battle with eight Hurricanes which caused a loss of altitude to . Galland spotted two more Hurricanes below and attacked in a classic ambush style from the enemy&#x27;s blind spot. His wingman claimed the other. The two fighters were from the Czechoslovak No. 310 Squadron RAF. Galland&#x27;s victim, Sergeant J. Hubacek reported that he did not see his assailant. The other pilot also survived.

On 23 September, Galland became the third member of the &quot;Wehrmacht&quot; to receive the Knight&#x27;s Cross of the Iron Cross with Oak Leaves for achieving his 39th and 40th aerial victories. On 25 September, he was summoned to Berlin to receive the award from Adolf Hitler. Galland was granted a personal audience with Hitler and during the meeting Galland reported to Hitler that the British had proven tough opponents, and that there were signs of declining morale in the German fighter force in the absence of operational success. Hitler expressed his regret for the war with the &quot;Anglo-Saxons&quot;, who he admired, but resolved to fight until total destruction.

Morale and exhaustion became a problem in September. The Luftwaffe lacked the pilots and aircraft to maintain a constant presence over Britain. To compensate, commanders demanded three to four sorties per day by the most experienced men. Galland recognised the manifest fatigue of his pilots. By the end of September, Galland noticed that &quot;the stamina of the superbly trained and experienced original [cadre of pilots] was down to a point where operational efficiency was being impaired.&quot; Several factors contributed to this situation; Göring&#x27;s interference with tactics without regard for the situation or the capabilities of German aircraft; rapid adaptation to German tactics by the British; the poorer quality replacement pilots to JG 26. This situation led to a conflict between the two significant psychological needs of the fighter pilots: confidence in their aircraft and tactics.

Galland innovated tactically to improve the situation and found a partial solution to Göring&#x27;s irrational order to maintain close escort. He developed a flexible escort system that allowed his pilots constantly to change altitude, airspeed, direction, and distance to the bombers during these close-escort missions. The results were better and acceptable to his pilots. By the end of the Battle of Britain, JG 26 had gained a reputation as one of only two fighter wings that performed escort duties with consistently low losses to the bombers.

The fighter-bomber mission was also a problem Galland had to deal with. Göring was committed to fitting one-third of all fighter wings to use modified Bf 109s to carry bombs. Galland accepted the mission but damaged the morale he had cultivated. Galland&#x27;s response to the situation was to develop tactics that mixed the bomb-laden Bf 109s with the fighter escort in an effort to deceive the enemy and confound their intercept plans. This tactic slowed down the fighter-bomber losses, but the pilots still felt as though they were being wasted. Galland&#x27;s leadership still made several errors; Galland did not capitalise on training opportunities to improve the bombing accuracy of his pilots; he did not discipline those pilots who were prone to jettison their bombs early; he only participated as an escort, violating his own dictum of not asking the men to do something that he would not, while failing to convey to his men these missions were worthy of his attention. Galland&#x27;s decision was even more difficult to understand given his service as a ground attack pilot.

The Battle of Britain continued with large-scale dogfights well past 31 October, considered by some historians as the end of the campaign. A further eight victories—six Spitfires and two Hurricanes—were claimed in October including three on 30 October, which took his tally to 50—the last two victims were claimed at 16:00 CET and were likely from 41 Squadron. Pilot Officer G. G. F. Draper was wounded and Sergeant L. A. Garvey was killed. On 15 November, Galland flew his 150th combat mission and the following day claimed his 53rd and 54th successes against No. 17 Squadron RAF. The accuracy of Galland&#x27;s claims have been assessed, and one source asserts that 44 of his 54 claims can be verified through British records and five definitely could not be reconciled with RAF losses.

In November, a further six victories including four Hurricanes were accounted for – to raise his recorded victories to 51–56, putting him level with the late Helmut Wick, who had been shot down and killed on 28 November. On 5 December, Galland recorded his 57th victory. This made him the most successful fighter pilot of the war at that point, putting him ahead of his colleague, friend and rival Werner Mölders. Analysis conducted by James Corum found that the number of leading fighter pilots were small, but they shared special and indefinable qualities in piloting, particularly marksmanship, hunting skills and situational awareness. Corum found that during the Battle of Britain, Galland accounted for 14% of all JG 26&#x27;s aerial successes, from a unit of around 120 pilots. Four of the wing&#x27;s fighter pilots claimed an astounding 31% of all aircraft shot down.

===Channel Front===
In March 1941, Göring held a major conference for units in the west. After describing in detail the coming air offensive against Britain, he secretly admitted to Adolf Galland and Werner Mölders that &quot;there&#x27;s not a word of truth in it.&quot; The Luftwaffe was to transfer to the Eastern Front. Although only approximately two fighter wings remained in the west for the next year and a half, many of the best fighter crews remained in that theatre. Similarly, the best equipment went to the west; industry supplied the Focke-Wulf Fw 190 to the western theatre first. Small in numbers (no more than 180 aircraft), the western fighter forces were among the best in the Luftwaffe.

Now, promoted to &quot;Oberstleutnant&quot;, he continued to lead JG 26 in 1941 against the RAF fighter sweeps across northern Europe. In early 1941, most of the Luftwaffe″s fighter units were sent to the Eastern Front, or south to the Mediterranean Theater of Operations (MTO), leaving only JG 26 and JG 2 as the sole single-engine fighter &quot;Geschwader&quot; in France. By this time, JG 26 were being re-equipped with the new Bf 109F, normally equipped with a 15 mm (or later a 20 mm) cannon firing through the propeller hub and two cowl-mounted 7.9 mm MG 17. Galland felt the model was grossly under-armed and so tested a series of 109 &quot;specials&quot; – one with a unique armament of an MG 151/20 cannon and two cowl-mounted 13 mm MG 131 machine guns, and another with integral wing-mounted 20 mm MG FF cannons.

On 15 April 1941, Galland took off with lobster and champagne to celebrate General Theo Osterkamp&#x27;s birthday at Le Touquet, France. He made a detour with his wingman towards England, looking for RAF aircraft. Off the cliffs of Dover, he spotted a group of Spitfires. Galland attacked and claimed two confirmed and one unconfirmed shot down. The actual result was the destruction of one Spitfire; the other two were damaged in forced landings with both pilots wounded. During the combat, Galland&#x27;s undercarriage had dropped causing one of the RAF pilots (Flight Lieutenant Paddy Finucane) to claim Galland&#x27;s aircraft as destroyed, but Galland landed without incident at Le Touquet and presented Osterkamp with his gifts. Galland&#x27;s success that day represented his 60th and 61st aerial victory.

Galland received a telephone call from Göring on 10 May 1941, requesting Galland to intercept a Messerschmitt Bf 110 flown by Rudolf Hess heading for Scotland. Galland was unable to launch a full fighter sweep. However, Hess&#x27; flight was far to the north and he reached Scotland crashing his aircraft. Galland sent out fighters to conduct some sweeps so he could honestly claim to have carried out his orders but it was nearly dark and Galland ordered his pilots unused to night flying to stand down.

Galland continued his successes in the summer. On 13 June, he led a small number of Bf 109s on a patrol off the English coast and attacked a pair of No. 258 Squadron RAF Hurricanes claiming both shot down. One can be confirmed through British records as crash landing at RAF Hawkinge. It took his tally to 63. From this point on, the RAF mounted a non-stop offensive with Fighter Command over France. The Germans did not see the point in these operations and soon labeled it the &quot;nonsense offensive.&quot; Galland intended to engage the British and inflict maximum damage while incurring small losses. To do this he only engaged JG 26 in &quot;Staffel&quot; or &quot;Gruppe&quot; strength. The fighters were to scramble quickly, gain height and make use of the sun and cloud to attack the enemy formation that was most vulnerable. Under these tactics many JG 26 pilots began to emerge as aces and effective commanders. On 16 June 1941, for example, JG 26 accounted for 15 enemy aircraft. Josef Priller was among those to score bringing his tally to 22. Priller later rose to command JG 26. Galland claimed a Hurricane this day for victory number 64—though the loss cannot be confirmed in British records. On 17 June, he accounted for two Hurricanes, one from 56 and another from 242 Squadron. The following day he accounted for a No. 145 Squadron Spitfire which inflated his tally to 67—then the highest recorded tally against the Western Allies.

On the morning of 21 June, he accounted for two Bristol Blenheims but was shot down by the Spitfire escorts, crash-landing near Calais. At 16:00 that same afternoon, Galland shot down a No. 611 Squadron Spitfire, but watching his victim for too long, he was himself shot down in &quot;Werknummer&quot; (Factory number) 6713, code &quot;&lt;- + -&quot;, by a 145 Squadron Spitfire flown by Sergeant R.J.C. Grant. Galland bailed out and tugged at what he thought was his parachute ripcord, but was actually pulling at his parachute release harness. With a &quot;sickening&quot; feeling, he composed himself and pulled the ripcord which opened. Theo Osterkamp drove over to the hospital where Galland was being treated for his wounds and informed him his 69 victories had now earned him the Knight&#x27;s Cross of the Iron Cross with Oak Leaves and Swords ().

On 2 July 1941, Galland led JG 26 into combat against a formation of No. 226 Squadron Blenheim bombers. Galland&#x27;s fighter was hit by a 20 mm round from one of the bombers escort fighters. The armour plate fitted to the Bf 109 just days earlier saved Galland&#x27;s life. Wounded in the head he managed to land and was again hospitalised for the second time in a few days. Just earlier that week, when the armour plate was installed, he severely berated his mechanic, Gerhard Meyer, who welded it in, when he hit his head on the canopy upon entering his aircraft. That same mechanic received &quot;a grateful slap on the back&quot;. Galland had been shot up and shot down twice in the space of four days. The Blenheim brought his tally to 70.

On 9 August 1941, RAF ace Douglas Bader bailed out over St Omer, France. Bader was well known to the Luftwaffe and at the time of his capture had been credited with 22 aerial victories. Galland himself claimed two Spitfires on that date. Galland and JG 26 entertained Bader over the next few days. Owing to the significant stature of the prisoner, Galland permitted Bader, under escort, to sit in the cockpit of a Bf 109. Apparently, despite having lost one of his tin legs in the aircraft, Bader, in a semi-serious way, asked if they wouldn&#x27;t mind if he took it on a test flight around the airfield. Galland replied that he feared Douglas would attempt to escape and they would have to give chase and shoot at each other again, and declined the request.

Throughout the summer, Galland claimed another 14 Spitfires in battles against Fighter Command over France. On 23 July 1941, he accounted for three Spitfires (Nos. 71–73)—one in the afternoon and two in the evening. JG 26 claimed 13 enemies for three losses under Galland&#x27;s command this day. Two on 7 August was sufficient to reach 75 aerial victories. On 19 August, he claimed two Spitfires and one Hurricane to surpass the World War I ace Manfred von Richthofen&#x27;s tally of 80. His 80th and 81st victims were from 111 and 71 Squadrons. Galland also flew the Focke-Wulf Fw 190 in the autumn 1941 when the &quot;Geschwader&quot; converted to the type though he retained and flew Bf 109s himself. On 21 October he repeated his successes with a trio of Spitfires to reach 92. Galland&#x27;s opponents were No. 611 Squadron Pilot Officers J F Reeves and N J Smith. Both men were killed, but Fighter Command reported their demise as a collision with each other during the dogfight.

His 96th victim—yet another Spitfire—was claimed on 18 November 1941. It proved to be his last official victory for three years as he was about to be forbidden to fly combat missions. The RAF fighter probably came from 611 Squadron.

==High command (1941–1945)==

In November 1941, he was chosen by Göring to command Germany&#x27;s fighter force as &quot;General der Jagdflieger&quot;, succeeding Werner Mölders who had just been killed in an air crash en route to attend the funeral of Ernst Udet. Galland was not enthusiastic about his promotion, seeing himself as a combat leader and not wanting to be &quot;tied to a desk job&quot;. He was the youngest General in the armed forces.

Soon afterward, on 28 January 1942, Galland was awarded the Knight&#x27;s Cross of the Iron Cross with Oak Leaves, Swords and Diamonds () for his service as &quot;Geschwaderkommodore&quot; of JG 26. Although not keen on a staff position, soon after Galland&#x27;s appointment, he planned and executed the German air superiority plan (Operation Donnerkeil) for the &quot;Kriegsmarine&quot;″s (German navy, or War Marine) Operation Cerberus, from his headquarters at Jever. The German battleships , and heavy cruiser sailed from Brest, France, up the English Channel to Kiel, Germany. The operation caught the British off guard. The RAF attempted to intercept with the forces available, but the German fighter defences were able to shoot down 43 RAF aircraft with 247 British casualties. The Luftwaffe had prevented any damage on the ships by air attack.

A strong proponent of the day fighter force and the defence of Germany, Galland used his position to improve the position of the &quot;Jagdwaffe&quot;. The need was now pressing, as Germany had declared war on the United States on 11 December 1941, and Galland was keen to build up a force that could withstand the resurgence of the Western Allied Air Forces in preparation for what became known as the Defence of the Reich campaign. Galland was outspoken, something that was not often tolerated by Göring. Yet, by earning and cultivating the support of other powerful personalities in the Luftwaffe, like Erhard Milch and Günther Korten, and personalities in the industrial sector such as Albert Speer and even Adolf Hitler, Galland was able to survive in his position for three years.

The Circus offensive of Fighter Command, now magnified by USAAF fighters in large numbers, had combined with Eighth Air Force&#x27;s bomber operations to make Western Europe the critical theatre of air operations by
the late summer, 1943. Neither Göring nor many of his commanders expected this development. In January 1943 Göring suggested increases in the day fighter forces, but not because of concerns over Allied aircraft production, rather the emphasis was on fighters for the fighter-bomber mission. Galland, who was pushing for a major increase in his fighter force, did not appear to recognise the threat in the west at that time either. In January, he wrongly predicted that the main weight of the air war in 1943 would be the Mediterranean. The large fighter forces sent to Africa and Italy received support from Galland. Galland remarked in February 1943, that the fighter force had solved the problem of fighting four-engine bombers by day. Galland&#x27;s confidence was misplaced; his airmen had not yet faced the hundreds of American bombers to fly over Germany in 1943, nor the thousands that joined the fight in 1944. Months later, Galland became one of the strongest advocates for more resources for Defence of the Reich duties.

===Mediterranean===
The first major crisis for Galland&#x27;s command, under his tenure, occurred in 1943. Galland had been supporting operations in the area since April 1943, but the Tunisian defeat caused a reorganisation of Axis air forces in the south. Luftflotte 2 was divided in two, with Luftflotte South East controlling the Balkans and a new Luftflotte 2 controlling Italy, Sardinia, Corsica, and Sicily. A general replacement of commanders also occurred. Wolfram von Richthofen arrived as Luftflotte 2 commander. Galland, went to Sicily to control fighter operations. 

Galland&#x27;s orders were to improve efficiency, morale and the supply of aircraft and pilots. Galland replaced the experienced Osterkamp as &quot;JaFü Sizilien&quot; (Fighter Leader Sicily) on 22 June after he had appointed his close associate Günther Lützow as &quot;Inspekteur der Jadgflieger Süd&quot; (Inspector of Fighter Pilots South) on 17 May. The challenge of a combat command was too tempting and Galland was &quot;not&quot; to prove a capable senior staff officer. Galland&#x27;s failings delighted Richthofen who was content to allow Galland &quot;enough rope to hang himself&quot;, which deflected attention from others.

Upon reaching the island, Galland found the state of German air forces shocking. The combat units were exhausted, short of spares, and under frequent attack—the 130 fighters on the island were the target. It was impossible to completely rebuild the squadrons. The resources available could not prevent the Allied air forces acting with impunity. Göring threatened to have one pilot from each unit stand trial by court martial, and if improvements were not forthcoming, they were to be sent as infantry to the Eastern Front. The commanders on the ground, recognising the true situation, disregarded the threat and the message. Specifically, Göring ordered pilots returning without claims and undamaged aircraft suffer court martial for cowardice. The threat was aimed at JG 77, which at the time was severely stretched. Galland parroted Göring&#x27;s criticism. Under pressure from Göring, he also berated the wing which caused friction with the commanding officer Johannes Steinhoff.

Along with these changes, considerable reinforcements arrived. The number of fighters increased from 190 in mid-May to 450 in early July 1943. Close to 40 percent of all fighter production from 1 May to 15 July 1943 went to the Mediterranean Theatre and two new fighter wings, scheduled for Germany&#x27;s defence, went south. The movement of fighters to redress Allied air superiority achieved only a rise in German losses, which reflected the superiority of Allied production. From 16 May to 9 July Allied forces flew 42,147 sorties and lost 250 aircraft to the Axis&#x27; 325 as the air offensive gradually rendered airfields in Sicily inoperable. The weak German bomber force made only a feeble attempt to support the defence of Sicily.

Losses too were high. In the first nine days of July 1943, Galland&#x27;s command lost approximately 70 fighters. On the fourteenth day he was summoned to Berlin to explain the collapse of air defences on the island. As Galland departed the last dozen operational Axis aircraft departed Sicily on 22 July. Since the Allied invasion of Sicily, Galland had lost 273 German and 115 Italian aircraft and imposed a cost of only around 100 on Allied air forces.

===Conflict with Göring and failed leadership===
Galland&#x27;s position as &quot;General der Jagdflieger&quot; brought him into gradual conflict with Göring as the war continued. Galland was often at odds with Göring and Hitler on how to prosecute the air war. From 1942 to 1944, the German fighter forces on all fronts in the European Theatre of Operations (ETO) came under increasing pressure and Galland&#x27;s relationship with Göring began to turn sour. The first distinct cracks began to appear in the spring of 1943. Galland suggested that the fighter forces defending Germany should limit the number of interceptions flown to allow sufficient time for re-grouping and to conserve air strength. Only by conserving its strength and its precious resources—the fighter pilots—could the Luftwaffe hope to inflict damage on the bombers. Göring found the suggestion unacceptable. He demanded every raid be countered in maximum strength regardless of the size of the Allied fighter escort. According to head of production and procurement Erhard Milch, who was also present at the meeting, &quot;Göring just could not grasp it&quot;.

The combination of declining production and attrition left Galland with a thin resource-base with which to defend Germany. While the pressure eased somewhat in November, Galland and his command faced a formidable threat. The shadow of American escort fighters and the gradual extension of their range covered all of the zones occupied by German fighter units engaged in anti-bomber operations. By early October, German intelligence had reported that American fighters were accompanying bombers as far as Hamburg.

Several American fighter aircraft crashed near Aachen on the cusp of Germany&#x27;s west border. Galland presented these wrecks as proof that the Luftwaffe was facing an enemy that could soon escort its heavy bombers with fighter aircraft to industrial targets inside Germany. Galland submitted his findings to Göring. Göring was livid with Galland and the fighter force. He called the report the &quot;rantings of a worn-out defeatist&quot;, and gave Galland an &quot;order&quot;, that no Allied fighters had crossed into Germany. Göring reasoned the only possible reason could have been that short range fighters ran out of fuel at high altitude and &quot;they were shot down much further west... and glided quite a distance before they crashed.&quot; Galland questioned why an Allied pilot would choose to glide east instead of west. Both men also argued that they must increase fighter production to reach a three or fourfold advantage over the attackers immediately to prepare for this new threat. Göring even at this time, was biased in favour of bombers, to maintain the offensive on all fronts. It was a policy he persisted with until the autumn, 1943.

By October 1943, the fractious relationship came to the surface again. Galland met with Göring at Göring&#x27;s estate, &quot;Schloss Veldenstein&quot;. During the conversation the need for new and improved interceptor aircraft arose. Göring, demanded heavily cannon-armed fighters be used en masse. Göring, prompted by the desires of Hitler, wanted cannons of some in weight. Galland explained that such a weapon could not be used effectively in an aircraft; the cannon would be prone to jamming and the aircraft would be too difficult to manoeuvre. Galland also asserted the use of inappropriate weaponry such as the Messerschmitt Me 410, a favourite of Hitler&#x27;s, had caused heavy losses. Galland argued such measures were deplorable and irresponsible. Göring disregarded Galland&#x27;s arguments and continued his frequent attacks on the fighter force, accusing them of cowardice. Galland, as he always did, defended them, risking his career and, near the end of the war, his life in doing so. Galland stated that he could not agree to follow Göring&#x27;s plans and requested to be dismissed from his post and sent back to his unit. Göring accepted, but two weeks later he apologised to Galland and attributed his behaviour to stress. Galland continued in his post.

Nonetheless, the arguments ultimately continued, mainly over aircraft procurement and armament for the defence of Germany from Allied bombing, and began to give rise to a growing personal rift between Göring and Galland. In November 1943 Galland issued a communique to the fighter forces, announcing the introduction of new weapons, such as heavily armed Fw 190s, to engage of destroy Allied bombers through the use of massed and formation-based attack tactics at close range. He also passed on Göring&#x27;s dissatisfaction with wing and squadron commanders that did not press their attacks in this manner. For the first time, Göring ordered his units, through Galland, to use ramming methods, and risk sacrificing the pilot. It was not the first occasion Galland had ordered this; the General demanded the same from his men during the Channel Dash operation in 1942.

Galland found the appearance of American fighters at this range alarming. German losses were so heavy that Galland held a special meeting with I &quot;Jagdkorps&quot; division commanders on 4 November 1943. Contributing to the day fighter losses was the fact that many German fighters did not possess direction finders to locate their bases in bad weather. It was decided the single-engine fighters must engage in protecting the heavier fighters, such as the Messerschmitt Bf 110, from escorts, so the latter could attack the bombers. The only available unit to protect the heavy fighters was &quot;Jagdgeschwader&quot; 300 (JG 300), with heavily armed but slow variants of the Fw 190. At the end of December, Galland and the staff of &quot;Jagdkorps&quot; I concluded that their new tactics had failed with high losses. The causes were &quot;(a) the weather, (b) the considerable inferiority of German strength, (c) the impossibility of gathering sufficient strength in an area because of time and distance limitations; result : weak and dispersed fighter attack.&quot;

The situation deteriorated in February 1944, with Big Week, as the Combined Bomber Offensive gathered momentum. In mid-March 1944, shortages of skilled pilots caused Galland to send the following message asking for volunteers:

The strained manpower situation in units operating in Defence of the Reich demands urgently the further bringing up of experienced flying personnel from other arms of the service, in particular for the maintenance of fighting power to the air arm, tried pilots of the ground attack and bomber units, especially officers suitable as formation leaders, will now also have to be drawn on.

The plea was desperate. By the end of March, the daylight strategic bombing offensive had put the Luftwaffe under enormous pressure. It retarded, although only for a short period, the expansion of fighter production. Importantly, it had caused devastating attrition. American air forces continued unrelenting pressure for the duration of the war. There was no hope of a recovery for Germany&#x27;s daylight fighter forces under Galland&#x27;s command and the Allied air forces were close to winning air superiority over all of Europe. A conference between Galland and Göring in mid-May 1944 underlined how enemy air operations were devastating the fighter force. Galland reported that Luftflotte Reich had lost 38 percent of its fighter pilots in April 1944, while Luftflotte 3 had lost 24 percent.

Altogether, the Germans had lost 489 pilots (100 officers), Galland reported, while training centres had forwarded only 396 new pilots (including 62 officers). Galland&#x27;s proposals to meet the shortfall and attrition reflected the desperate situation. Galland urged all fighter pilots holding short staff positions be transferred immediately to operational units, that qualified night fighter pilots transfer to the day fighter force, that two fighter groups transfer from the eastern front as soon as possible, and that the ground attack command release all pilots with more than five aerial victories to the defence of the Reich. Finally, Galland reported that flying schools had released 80-plus instructors. Galland took this step even though he was critical of the high command for failing to produce a long-term plan for higher numbers of instructors in schools, particularly after production increased the number of aircraft available.

===Innovations===
On 23 May 1943, Galland flew an early prototype of the Messerschmitt Me 262 jet fighter. After the flight, he described his experience; &quot;It was as though angels were pushing.&quot; Galland became an enthusiastic supporter of the aircraft, realising its potential as a fighter rather than a bomber. Galland hoped that the Me 262 would compensate for the numerical superiority of the Allies. In a wartime report he wrote:
In the last four months [January–April 1944] our day fighters have lost 1,000 pilots...we are numerically inferior and will always remain so...I believe that a great deal can be achieved with a small number of technically and far superior aircraft such as the [Me] 262 and [Me] 163... I would at this moment rather have one Me 262 in action rather than five Bf 109s. I used to say three 109s, but the situation develops and changes.

Galland&#x27;s enthusiasm failed to appreciate the difficulties involved in transferring a design into production, especially under the circumstances. The Me 262 was not Willy Messerschmitt&#x27;s priority. The designer was involved in a battle with Milch from 1942 over the cancellation of the Messerschmitt Me 209 in favour of the jet. There were also problems with the engines and series production was difficult because the company were making design changes at the same time they were working up production lines.

Galland succeeded in temporarily persuading Milch to support cancelling the Me 209 program in favour of producing 100 Me 262s by the end of 1943. However, because of persistent problems with its turbojet engines and later, Hitler&#x27;s determination to use it as a bomber, the Me 262 was not developed as a fighter until late in the war.

By spring 1944, the Me 262 was sufficiently ready for operational service. By this time, Galland faced rivalries amongst the Luftwaffe command over how best to employ the aircraft. Dietrich Peltz, commander of the &quot;IX. Fliegerkorps&quot; (9th Air Corps), wanted to use the aircraft as a weapon against a future Allied landing in France. Peltz saw the aircraft as an ideal fast bomber which could evade the overwhelming numbers of Allied piston-engine fighters and attack the landing grounds. Peltz also wished to use highly trained bomber pilots who he felt could better serve as home defence fighter pilots in place of the overextended and overworked &quot;Jagdwaffe&quot;. Their blind-weather experience and training, and background in multi-engine aircraft made them ideal for these operations in his view.

In the first five months of 1944, Peltz&#x27; conventional bomber force had suffered a significant defeat over England in Operation Steinbock but it did not dull his appetite for offensive action or dent his reputation with Göring. Galland argued against his suggestion. Instead, Galland thought the bomber corps should be disbanded and its pilots converted onto fighters. Göring adopted Peltz&#x27; idea to impress Hitler and regain his waning influence.

Galland did not give up. He made repeated appeals for Me 262 fighter aircraft. Göring refused Galland&#x27;s requests to have equal numbers of Me 262 fighter and bomber variants built. However, Galland&#x27;s close relationship with Albert Speer, the German armaments minister, enabled him to retain a small operational number. Even this was difficult, as Hitler had taken personal control of turbo-jet production and checked where each batch of the aircraft were being deployed.

It was not until September 1944 that Hitler rescinded his directive that the Me 262 be used as a fighter-bomber. Galland had earlier ignored the order and formed &quot;Eprobungskommando 262&quot; to test the Me 262 against high-flying Allied reconnaissance aircraft. He selected the highly decorated pilot Werner Thierfelder as its commander. Hitler heard of the experiment through Milch and ordered Göring to put a stop to it at a meeting on 29 May 1944. Galland persisted with the experiments and ordered operations to be continued. They achieved isolated successes until Thierfelder was shot down and killed by P-51 Mustangs on 18 July 1944. On 20 August, Hitler finally agreed to allow one in every 20 Me 262 to go into service with the &quot;Jagdwaffe&quot; which allowed Galland to build all–jet units.

Galland closely followed Kommando Nowotny, the experimental all-jet fighter unit. The unit struggled into November 1944 without much success and high losses. Galland visited the base near Achmer on 7 November to observe this only jet unit. On 8 November 1944, he was present when ace Walter Nowotny took off with a force of Me 262s in an overcast to engage a USAAF raid. Galland listened over the radio then watched as Nowotny&#x27;s aircraft dived from out of the clouds and crashed into the ground; an apparent victim of American escorting fighters.

Galland remained ambivalent about other types. He was initially sceptical about the design concept in the Heinkel He 162. Göring forced the program along, the hour was desperate and all designs were to be explored. Galland was concerned about dispersing production effort further but apparently changed his mind after viewing a mockup on 7 October 1944 and the seeing the prototype fly in December. He demanded wooden mockups be made for ground instruction while three percent were to serve as trainers.

In the meantime, Galland pursued innovations with existing designs. The Focke-Wulf Fw 190 aircraft was formed into several &quot;Geschwader&quot; with distinctly upgraded firepower. Called the &quot;Sturmbock&quot; (Battering ram), these machines could inflict heavy damage on unescorted bomber formations. Galland supported the conversion of units such as JG 300 to the &quot;Sturmbock&quot; role. The &quot;Sturmbock&quot; were heavily armed and armoured, which meant they were un-manoeuvrable and vulnerable without protection from escorting Bf 109s. Still, the tactics quickly became widespread and were one of the few Luftwaffe success stories in 1944. Galland said after the war, that had it not been for the Allied landing in Normandy which increased the need for lighter fighter variants, each &quot;Geschwader&quot; in the Luftwaffe would have contained a &quot;Gruppe&quot; of &quot;Sturmbock&quot; aircraft by September 1944.

Galland himself flew on unauthorised interception flights to experience the combat pressures of the pilots and witnessed USAAF bombers being escorted by large numbers of P-51 Mustangs. Nevertheless, on occasions the &quot;Sturmbock&quot; tactics worked. For example, on 7 July 1944 Eighth Air Force bombers belonging to the 492nd Bomb Group were intercepted unescorted. The entire squadron of 12 B-24s were shot down. The USAAF 2nd Air Division lost 28 Liberators that day, the majority to a &quot;Sturmbock&quot; attack.

===Dismissal and revolt===

Despite Göring&#x27;s apology after their previous dispute, the relationship between the two men did not improve. Göring&#x27;s influence was in decline by late 1944 and he had fallen out of favour with Hitler. Göring became increasingly hostile to Galland, blaming him and the fighter pilots for the situation. In 1944, the situation worsened. A series of USAAF raids termed Big Week won air superiority for the Allies in February. By the spring of 1944, the Luftwaffe could not effectively challenge the Allies over France or the Low Countries. Operation Overlord, the Allied invasion of German-occupied Europe took place in June 1944. According to a report made by Galland, in the previous four months 1,000 pilots had been killed. Galland reported that the enemy outnumbered his fighters between 6:1 and 8:1 and the standard of Allied fighter pilot training was &quot;astonishingly high&quot;.

To win back some breathing space for his force and German industrial targets, Galland formulated a plan which he called the &quot;Big Blow&quot; (). It called for the mass interception of USAAF bomber formations by approximately 2,000 German fighters. Galland hoped that the German fighters would shoot down some 400–500 bombers. Acceptable losses were to be around 400 fighters and 100–150 pilots. Galland&#x27;s staff could muster 3,700 aircraft of all types by 12 November 1944, with 2,500 retained for this specific operation. The night fighter force was to assist by employing 100 aircraft in southern and northern Germany, to prevent any crippled bombers making it to Switzerland and Sweden. Over the autumn 1944 Galland carefully husbanded his resources and waited for unusually bad weather to improve.

Hitler rejected Galland&#x27;s plan. He hoped to improve Germany&#x27;s position by winning a decisive victory on the Western Front. Hitler distrusted Galland&#x27;s theory and believed him to be afraid and stalling for time. The &quot;Führer&quot; was also skeptical that the Luftwaffe could stop the American air offensive and was not willing to have German resources sit idle on airfields to wait for an improvement in flying conditions. Admittedly Galland&#x27;s efforts had built up a useful reserve, but Hitler was now to use it in support of a land offensive. Göring and Hitler handed over the forces pooled by Galland to Peltz whom they had appointed commander of II. &quot;Jagdkorps&quot;—responsible for virtually all fighter forces in the west. Peltz appointed Gordon Gollob as Special Fighter Staff Officer for the offensive. Gollob ultimately was a vociferous opponent of Galland and eventually engineered his dismissal. Whether the &quot;Big Blow&quot; operation would have worked is a matter of academic debate. Historians remained divided, with some believing it was a lost opportunity while others think it would have had much less impact than Galland estimated.

The operation never took place. Instead, the fighter force was committed to the disastrous Operation Bodenplatte, designed to support German forces during the Battle of the Bulge. Galland&#x27;s influence on matters was now virtually nil. Appalled by the Ardennes losses, he personally confronted Gollob and criticised him severely. Gollob contacted the &quot;Reichsführer-SS&quot; Heinrich Himmler. Himmler&#x27;s reputation as the most powerful man after Hitler at that time may have been a prime motive. Gollob complained about his misuse in the Luftwaffe and Galland&#x27;s leadership. The SS had already spread their influence into other areas of military affairs including the V-2 operations. Himmler, whose relationship with Göring was poor, took the opportunity to exploit the dissent in the Luftwaffe and undermine the &quot;Reichsmarschall&quot; by supporting Gollob. It was also an opportunity for the SS to seize control of the Luftwaffe and for Himmler to oust Göring from power. Göring, for his part offered no support to Galland when Himmler or the SS were mentioned. On 13 January 1945, Galland was finally relieved of his command.

On 17 January, a group of senior pilots took part in a &quot;Fighter Pilots Revolt&quot;. Galland&#x27;s high standing with his fighter pilot peers led to a group of the most decorated Luftwaffe combat leaders loyal to Galland (including Johannes Steinhoff and Günther Lützow) confronting Göring with a list of demands for the survival of their service. Göring initially suspected Galland had instigated the unrest. Heinrich Himmler had wanted to put Galland on trial for treason himself; the SS and Gestapo had already begun investigations into who he associated with. The &quot;Oberkommando der Luftwaffe&quot; (OKL) appointed the more politically acceptable Gollob, a National Socialist supporter, to succeed him as &quot;General der Jagdflieger&quot; on 23 January. Although professional contemporaries, Gollob and Galland had a mutual dislike, and after Galland had removed the Austrian from his personal staff in September 1944, Gollob started to gather evidence to use against Galland, detailing false accusations of his gambling, womanising, and alleged private use of Luftwaffe transport aircraft. The official reason for his being relieved of command was his ill health. Göring suspected Galland of organising the rebellion and wanted all the ringleaders to face court-martial.

For his own safety, Galland went to a retreat in the Harz Mountains. He was to keep the RLM informed of his whereabouts but was effectively under house arrest. Hitler, who liked Galland, learned of the revolt and ordered that &quot;all this nonsense&quot; was to stop immediately. Hitler had been informed by Albert Speer, who in turn had been notified by one of Galland&#x27;s close friends. After Hitler&#x27;s intervention Göring contacted Galland and invited him to Karinhall. In light of his service to the fighter arm, he promised no further action would be taken against him and offered command of a unit of Me 262 jets. Galland accepted on the understanding that Gollob had no jurisdiction over him or his unit.

===Self appraisal===
Galland did not pretend to have been error free. After the war, he was candid about his own mistakes as &quot;General der Jagdflieger&quot;. Production and aircraft procurement were not his responsibility, but Galland identified four major mistakes by the OKL during the war, and accepted partial responsibility for the first three:
* Fighter pilots received no instrument training until very late in the war, after the training course had already been curtailed because of fuel shortages and the need to produce pilots more quickly to replace losses. Galland also did not make sure all-weather flying was incorporated into pilot training, which was of decisive importance in an effective air defence force.
* Attrition by 1942 had created a shortage of experienced combat leaders. No special training was made available for this role. Galland set up a course in late 1943, but it only lasted for a few months. Galland was quoted as saying he thought they could learn the skills while on operations, as he had. This ignored his own talents, and blithely expected other pilots to reach his high standards.
* The Me 262, while not a war winner, might have extended the Defence of the Reich campaign. The problems with the engines, failures of production priorities and Hitler&#x27;s meddling are well known, but the long delay between operational testing, tactical and doctrinal development and training were largely Galland&#x27;s fault.
* The German pilots were increasingly lacking in quantity and quality. Galland recognised this but could not correct it without stepping outside his own authority. Galland noticed that the highly educated engineers and trainees were selected for the bomber arm in the early war years. Most of the brightest youth were pulled by expert campaigners, toward the &quot;Waffen SS&quot; and &quot;Kriegsmarine&quot;. The Luftwaffe did not match this effort.

===Unofficial combat missions===
After his appointment, Galland was strictly confined to operational matters and not allowed to fly tactical or combat missions. As the war continued Galland flew missions in violation of these restrictions against the United States Army Air Forces (USAAF) bombing raids during the Defence of the Reich. Galland was keen to familiarise himself with all types of German fighter aircraft and flew the Fw 190 on these interception missions. He actively engaged American bombers on some raids. On at least one mission, he shot down a USAAF heavy bomber. It is possible that as many as three USAAF heavy bombers were shot down by Galland while he was flying Fw 190s.

==Return to front line service==
Galland was initially assigned to command a &quot;Staffel&quot; of &quot;Jagdgeschwader&quot; 54, at that time stranded behind Soviet lines in the Courland Pocket. Galland never took up this command but was given the task of creating &quot;Jagdverband&quot; 44 (JV 44). On 24 February 1945 the order for its formation read:
The unit was officially formed on 22 February 1945. Galland did everything he could to introduce the Me 262s to the wing as quickly as possible. Göring showed sympathy for Galland&#x27;s efforts, which thus far had only 16 operational jets in February. General Josef Kammhuber was asked to assist Galland. &quot;Kampfgeschwader 51&quot; (KG 51 or Bomber Wing 51), &quot;6&quot; and &quot;27&quot; were behind their training schedules on jets, and they were to hand over their pilots and Me 262s to &quot;Jagdgeschwader&quot; 7 and &quot;Kampfgeschwader&quot; 54. Galland added a suggestion that all experienced fighter pilots flying with Bf 109 or Fw 190 units should be made to join the Me 262 unit. If this could be done Galland believed he could get 150 jets in action against the USAAF fleets. The general chaos and impending collapse prevented his plans from being realised.

On 31 March 1945, Galland flew 12 operational jets to Munich to begin operations. On 5 April, he organised the interception of a USAAF raid. The Me 262s destroyed three B-17s. On 16 April Galland claimed two Martin B-26 Marauder bombers shot down. On 21 April, to his surprise, he was visited by Göring, which turned out to be the final time. Göring officially assigned Günther Lützow to him and confessed to Galland that his assertions about the Me 262 and the use of bomber pilots with experience as jet fighter pilots had been correct. He enquired about the progress of his unit with outspoken civility. As they parted, Göring said, &quot;I envy you Galland, for going into action. I wish I were a few years younger and less bulky. If I were, I would gladly put myself under your command. It would be marvelous to have nothing to worry about but a good fight, like it was in the old days.&quot;

In the space of six days, Galland&#x27;s friend, Steinhoff was badly burned in a crash on 18 April, and then, on 24 April, his friend Lützow was posted missing. On 21 April, Galland was credited with his 100th aerial victory, the 103rd and last Luftwaffe pilot to reach that total.

On 26 April, Galland claimed his 103rd and 104th aerial victories against B-26s which were escorted by the 27th Fighter Group and 50th Fighter Group. Galland again made a mistake; he stopped to make sure his second victory was going to crash and he was hit by a USAAF P-47 Thunderbolt piloted by James Finnegan. Galland nursed his crippled Me 262 to the airfield, only to find it was under attack by more P-47s. Galland landed under fire and abandoned his jet on the runway. The battle was his last operational mission. Soon afterwards, he was sent to hospital for a knee wound that he had sustained during that engagement. The Americans lost four B-26s and another six damaged. Two Me 262s were shot down; the other pilot also survived.

In the 1970s, a San Jose State University graduate student came across Galland&#x27;s memoirs &quot;The First and the Last&quot; while researching USAAF records and matching them to German victory claims. He found that James Finnegan, a P-47 Thunderbolt pilot of the 50th Fighter Group, Ninth Air Force, had made a &quot;probable&quot; claim on 26 April 1945, the day of Galland&#x27;s last mission. The details of the engagement matched. Galland and Finnegan met for the first time at an Air Force Association meeting in San Francisco in 1979.

===Surrender===
By late April, the war was effectively over. On 1 May 1945, Galland attempted to make contact with United States Army forces to negotiate the surrender of his unit. The act itself was dangerous. SS forces roamed the countryside and towns executing anyone who was considering capitulation. The Americans requested that Galland fly his unit and Me 262s to a USAAF controlled airfield. Galland declined citing poor weather and technical problems. In reality, Galland was not going to hand over Me 262 jets to the Americans. Galland had harboured the belief that the Western Alliance would soon be at war with the Soviet Union, and he wanted to join American forces and to use his unit in the coming war to free Germany from Communist occupation. Galland replied, making his whereabouts known to the Americans, and offering his surrender once they arrived at the Tegernsee hospital where he was being treated. Galland then ordered his unit, which had then moved to Salzburg and Innsbruck, to destroy their Me 262s. At the time of his surrender, Galland had filed claims for 104 Allied aircraft shot down. His claims included seven with the Me 262.

On 14 May 1945, Galland was flown to England and interrogated by RAF personnel about the Luftwaffe, its organisation, his role in it, and technical questions. Galland returned to Germany on 24 August and was imprisoned at Hohenpeissenberg. On 7 October, Galland was returned to England for further interrogation. He was eventually released on 28 April 1947.

==Post-war==

===Argentina===
After Galland was released, he travelled to Schleswig-Holstein to join Baroness Gisela von Donner, an earlier acquaintance, on her estate and lived with her three children. During this time, Galland found work as a forestry worker. Galland began to hunt for the family and traded at the local markets to supplement meagre meat rations. Soon Galland rediscovered his love of flying. Kurt Tank, the designer of the Fw 190, requested that he go to his home in Minden to discuss a proposal. Tank had been asked to work for both the British and Russians, and had narrowly avoided being kidnapped by the latter. Tank, through a contact in Denmark, informed Galland about the possibility of the Argentinian Government employing him as a test pilot for Tank&#x27;s new generation of fighters. Galland accepted and flew to Argentina. He settled with Gisela in Ciudad Jardín Lomas del Palomar, Buenos Aires. Galland enjoyed the slow life. His time there, aside from work commitments, was taken up with Gisela and the active Buenos Aires night life. Galland found South America a world away from post-war shortages of Germany. Soon, he took up gliding again.

In a professional capacity, Galland spoke fluent Spanish, which helped in his instruction of new pilots. During his time with the Argentine Air Force (FAA) he flew the British Gloster Meteor. Galland, mindful that it was a contemporary of the Me 262, commented that it was a fine aircraft. He claimed that if he could have fitted the Meteor engines to the Me 262 airframe he would have had the best fighter in the world. Galland continued training, lecturing and consulting for the FAA until 1955. During his later years in Argentina Galland returned to Europe to test fly new aircraft. While there, he teamed up with Eduard Neumann, the former &quot;Geschwaderkommodore&quot; of JG 27 and mentor of Hans-Joachim Marseille, &quot;The Star of Africa&quot;. Neumann had joined Galland&#x27;s staff in April 1943. They flew a Piaggio P.149 in an international air rally across Italy. The weather was appalling and seven aircraft crashed, taking two lives. Galland and Neumann came in second.

===Return to Germany and alleged Nazi sympathies===
For his services to Argentina, Galland was awarded a pilot&#x27;s wings badge and the title of the Honorary Argentine Military Pilot. In 1955 Galland left South America. By that time, he had begun writing his autobiography, &quot;The First and the Last&quot; (&quot;Die Ersten und die Letzten&quot;), that was published in 1954 by Franz Schneekluth. It was a best-seller in 14 languages and sold three million copies. It was well received by the RAF and USAF.

Galland returned to Germany and was approached by Amt Blank, a commissioner for Chancellor Konrad Adenauer for the purpose of joining the new &quot;Bundeswehr&quot; now that West Germany was to join NATO as a military power. In 1955, General Nathan Twining, the chief of staff of the USAF, sent a secret telegram to General William H. Tunner, commander of United States Air Forces in Europe. Claiming Galland&#x27;s alleged &quot;strong neo-Nazi leanings&quot;, association with prominent neo-Nazis such as his former colleague Hans-Ulrich Rudel, and his known service to the Juan Perón government, which was not on good terms with the United States, Twining asked that Tunner communicate to the German government that although the United States made it clear the appointment was entirely the choice of the Germans, they disapproved of Galland for the position of Inspektor (chief of staff) to the German Air Force. According to a Military History Research Office researcher, it is possible that the Americans suspected that Galland&#x27;s rapid promotions were due to his association with Hitler rather than his merits. It is not known how American concerns reached Germany and this was the only reported time that the American government intervened to prevent someone from joining the Bundeswehr. Other sources conflict with this, noting to his close post-war association with RAF aces Douglas Bader and Robert Stanford Tuck, allegedly of Jewish ancestry yet named godfather of Galland&#x27;s son Andreas.

In the summer of 1957, Galland moved to Bonn and rented an office on &quot;Koblenzerstrasse&quot; and began his own aircraft consultancy there. Galland worked hard but continued flying, taking part in national air shows. In 1956, he was appointed honorary chairman of the &quot;Gemeinschaft der Jagdflieger&quot;, the Association of Fighter Pilots. Through this, he came into contact with contemporaries in Britain and America. In 1961, he joined the Gerling Group of Cologne who contracted Galland to help develop their aviation business. With business going well, he bought his own aircraft on his 50th birthday in 1962, a Beechcraft Bonanza which he named &quot;Die Dicke&quot; (Fatty).

In 1969, he served as technical adviser for the film &quot;Battle of Britain&quot;, in which the character Major Falke is based on Galland. Galland was upset about the director&#x27;s decision not to use the real names. While making the film, Galland was joined by his friend Robert Stanford Tuck. Galland also threatened to withdraw at a planned sequence involving him giving a Nazi salute to Göring. Tuck also wrote into the producers, urging them to reconsider; at one point Galland brought his lawyer to Pinewood Studios. In 1973, Galland appeared in the British television documentary series &quot;The World at War&quot;, in episodes four and twelve, &quot;Alone (May 1940 – May 1941)&quot; and &quot;Whirlwind: Bombing Germany (September 1939 – April 1944)&quot;.

Galland took part in many engagements throughout the 1960s and 1970s. In 1974, he was part of the remaining German General Staff that took part in the Operation Sea Lion wargame at Sandhurst in the United Kingdom, replicating the planned German invasion of Britain in 1940 (which the Germans abandoned after their failure in the Battle of Britain). In 1975, he was a guest at the RAF Museum Hendon, during the unveiling of the Battle of Britain Hall, where he was entertained by Prince Charles. In 1980, Galland&#x27;s eyesight became too poor for him to fly and he retired as a pilot. However, he continued to attend numerous aviation events, to include being a periodic guest of the U.S. Air Force for their annual &quot;Gathering of Eagles&quot; program at the Air Command and Staff College at Maxwell AFB, Alabama, USA. On 16 October, he was reunited with two Merkel shotguns stolen by American soldiers after his capture in 1945. Galland had located them before and had tried to buy them back, only to be turned down, as they would be worth more after his death. Towards the end of the 1980s, Galland&#x27;s health began to fail.

==Personal life and death==
Baroness Gisela von Donner had refused to marry Galland as the restrictions imposed upon her by her former husband&#x27;s will would deny her the wealth and freedom she had enjoyed. She left for Germany in 1954. Galland married Sylvinia von Dönhoff on 12 February 1954. However, she was unable to have children and they divorced on 10 September 1963.

On 10 September 1963, Galland married his secretary, Hannelies Ladwein. They had two children: a son, Andreas Hubertus (nicknamed &quot;Andus&quot;) born 7 November 1966; and a daughter, Alexandra-Isabelle born 29 July 1969. The RAF ace Robert Stanford Tuck was the godfather of his son Andreas. Galland remained friends with Tuck until the latter&#x27;s death on 5 May 1987. Galland felt his loss greatly. Galland&#x27;s marriage to Hannelies did not last and on 10 February 1984, he married his third wife, Heidi Horn, who remained with him until his death.

By the 1980s, Galland was regularly attending the funerals of friends like Tuck, and also Douglas Bader, who had died on 5 September 1982 after speaking at a dinner for Arthur Harris. In January 1983, he attended the funeral of Gerhard Barkhorn and his wife Christl, who had died in a traffic accident.

In early February 1996, Galland was taken seriously ill. He had wanted to die at home and so was released from hospital and returned to his own house. With his wife Heidi, son and daughter present, he was given the last rites and died at 1:15 in the morning of Friday, 9 February 1996. His body was buried at the Cementerio in Oberwinter, district of Remagen, on 21 February. A memorial service was held on 31 March at the St. Laurentius Church.

==Summary of military career==
===Aerial victory claims===
According to US historian David T. Zabecki, Galland was credited with 104 aerial victories. Mathews and Foreman, authors of &quot;Luftwaffe Aces – Biographies and Victory Claims&quot;, researched the German Federal Archives and found records for 100 aerial victory claims, plus nine further unconfirmed claims, all of which claimed on the Western Front. This figure of confirmed claims includes two four-engined bombers and six victories with the Me 262 jet fighter.

===Awards===
* Medal for the Campaign of 1936−1939 (&quot;Medalla de la Campaña 1936–1939&quot; or &quot;Medalla de la Campaña&quot;, Spain)
* Military Medal (Spain) with Diamonds
* Spanish Cross in Gold with Swords and Diamonds (6 June 1939)
* Front Flying Clasp of the Luftwaffe in Gold with Pennant &quot;400&quot;
* Wound Badge in Black
* Pilot/Observer Badge in Gold with Diamonds (August 1940)
* Iron Cross (1939)
** 2nd Class (13 September 1939)
** 1st Class (22 May 1940)
* Knight&#x27;s Cross of the Iron Cross with Oak Leaves, Swords and Diamonds
** Knight&#x27;s Cross on 29 July 1940 as &quot;Major&quot; and &quot;Gruppenkommandeur&quot; of the III./&quot;Jagdgeschwader&quot; 26 &quot;Schlageter&quot;
** 3rd Oak Leaves on 24 September 1940 as &quot;Major&quot; and &quot;Geschwaderkommodore&quot; of &quot;Jagdgeschwader&quot; 26 &quot;Schlageter&quot;
** 1st Swords (21 June 1941) as &quot;Oberstleutnant&quot; and &quot;Geschwaderkommodore&quot; of &quot;Jagdgeschwader&quot; 26 &quot;Schlageter&quot;
** 2nd Diamonds (28 January 1942) as &quot;Oberst&quot; and &quot;Geschwaderkommodore&quot; of &quot;Jagdgeschwader&quot; 26 &quot;Schlageter&quot;

===Promotions===
==Notes==
==References==
===Citations===
===Bibliography===
* 
* 
* 
* .
* 
* .
* 
* .
* 
* .
* .
*
* 
* .
* 
* .
* .
* .
* 
* 
* 
* 
*
* .
* 
* 
==Further reading==

==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q57166" start="0" end="29" title="Adolf Galland" label="Adolf Josef Ferdinand Galland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2564009" start="77" end="86" title="Luftwaffe" label="Luftwaffe"/>
<link wikidata="Q222982" start="99" end="109" title="flying ace" label="flying ace"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="136" end="152" title="World War II" label="Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q216184" start="210" end="223" title="Western Front (World War II)" label="Western Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q2704274" start="235" end="255" title="Defence of the Reich" label="Defence of the Reich"/>
<link wikidata="Q329888" start="376" end="390" title="Allies of World War II" label="Western Allies"/>
<link wikidata="Q3985" start="418" end="428" title="Herten" label="Westerholt"/>
<link wikidata="Q829718" start="430" end="452" title="Province of Westphalia" label="Province of Westphalia"/>
<link wikidata="Q27306" start="454" end="472" title="Kingdom of Prussia" label="Kingdom of Prussia"/>
<link wikidata="Q43287" start="481" end="494" title="German Empire" label="German Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q180173" start="505" end="511" title="Glider (sailplane)" label="glider"/>
<link wikidata="Q290162" start="547" end="557" title="Deutsche Luft Hansa" label="Luft Hansa"/>
<link wikidata="Q829062" start="605" end="635" title="Deutsche Verkehrsfliegerschule" label="Deutsche Verkehrsfliegerschule"/>
<link wikidata="Q2773" start="685" end="697" title="Braunschweig" label="Braunschweig"/>
<link wikidata="Q157608" start="726" end="736" title="Reichswehr" label="Reichswehr"/>
<link wikidata="Q41304" start="744" end="759" title="Weimar Republic" label="Weimar Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q10859" start="927" end="944" title="Spanish Civil War" label="Spanish Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q153324" start="969" end="982" title="Condor Legion" label="Condor Legion"/>
<link wikidata="Q208187" start="992" end="1005" title="strike aircraft" label="ground attack"/>
<link wikidata="Q2742116" start="1033" end="1045" title="National faction (Spanish Civil War)" label="Nationalists"/>
<link wikidata="Q29179" start="1052" end="1068" title="Francisco Franco" label="Francisco Franco"/>
<link wikidata="Q117850" start="1152" end="1161" title="doctrine" label="doctrinal"/>
<link wikidata="Q155639" start="1513" end="1533" title="Messerschmitt Bf 109" label="Messerschmitt Bf 109"/>
<link wikidata="Q151340" start="1546" end="1562" title="Battle of France" label="Battle of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q154720" start="1571" end="1588" title="Battle of Britain" label="Battle of Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q165862" start="1698" end="1713" title="Royal Air Force" label="Royal Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q34640" start="1729" end="1744" title="English Channel" label="English Channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q165558" start="1847" end="1911" title="Knight&amp;#x27;s Cross of the Iron Cross with Oak Leaves and Swords" label="Knight&amp;#x27;s Cross of the Iron Cross with Oak Leaves and Swords"/>
<link wikidata="Q58641" start="1931" end="1945" title="Werner Mölders" label="Werner Mölders"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501704" start="1999" end="2022" title="General der Jagdflieger" label="General der Jagdflieger"/>
<link wikidata="Q898788" start="2341" end="2350" title="air superiority" label="air cover"/>
<link wikidata="Q151701" start="2365" end="2377" title="Kriegsmarine" label="Kriegsmarine"/>
<link wikidata="Q859612" start="2384" end="2402" title="Operation Cerberus" label="Operation Cerberus"/>
<link wikidata="Q165558" start="2449" end="2523" title="Knight&amp;#x27;s Cross of the Iron Cross with Oak Leaves, Swords and Diamonds" label="Knight&amp;#x27;s Cross of the Iron Cross with Oak Leaves, Swords and Diamonds"/>
<link wikidata="Q170168" start="2589" end="2604" title="Reichsmarschall" label="Reichsmarschall"/>
<link wikidata="Q47906" start="2611" end="2625" title="Hermann Göring" label="Hermann Göring"/>
<link wikidata="Q841418" start="2868" end="2885" title="strategic bombing" label="strategic bombing"/>
<link wikidata="Q320994" start="3102" end="3114" title="house arrest" label="house arrest"/>
<link wikidata="Q5447844" start="3139" end="3166" title="Fighter Pilots&amp;#x27; Revolt" label="Fighter Pilots&amp;#x27; Revolt"/>
<link wikidata="Q140254" start="3334" end="3345" title="Messerschmitt Me 262" label="jet fighter"/>
<link wikidata="Q539202" start="3367" end="3381" title="Jagdverband 44" label="Jagdverband 44"/>
<link wikidata="Q414" start="3485" end="3494" title="Argentina" label="Argentina"/>
<link wikidata="Q57770" start="3546" end="3565" title="Argentine Air Force" label="Argentine Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q7349995" start="3698" end="3718" title="Robert Stanford Tuck" label="Robert Stanford Tuck"/>
<link wikidata="Q348780" start="3723" end="3736" title="Douglas Bader" label="Douglas Bader"/>
<link wikidata="Q3985" start="3790" end="3796" title="Herten" label="Herten"/>
<link wikidata="Q829718" start="3799" end="3809" title="Province of Westphalia" label="Westphalia"/>
<link wikidata="Q101935" start="3851" end="3859" title="Huguenot" label="Huguenot"/>
<link wikidata="Q470679" start="3915" end="3921" title="Veynes" label="Veynes"/>
<link wikidata="Q4848450" start="3942" end="3949" title="bailiff" label="bailiff"/>
<link wikidata="Q8002064" start="4287" end="4304" title="Wilhelm-Ferdinand Galland" label="Wilhelm-Ferdinand"/>
<link wikidata="Q7150803" start="4309" end="4313" title="Paul Galland" label="Paul"/>
<link wikidata="Q14900" start="5028" end="5035" title="Haltern" label="Haltern"/>
<link wikidata="Q2742" start="5036" end="5043" title="Münster" label="Münster"/>
<link wikidata="Q2765" start="5170" end="5183" title="Gelsenkirchen" label="Gelsenkirchen"/>
<link wikidata="Q8736" start="5496" end="5516" title="Treaty of Versailles" label="Treaty of Versailles"/>
<link wikidata="Q708387" start="6599" end="6605" title="Abitur" label="Abitur"/>
<link wikidata="Q55043" start="6692" end="6701" title="Gymnasium (school)" label="Gymnasium"/>
<link wikidata="Q519650" start="6719" end="6723" title="Buer, Germany" label="Buer"/>
<link wikidata="Q290162" start="6828" end="6838" title="Deutsche Luft Hansa" label="Luft Hansa"/>
<link wikidata="Q41304" start="6870" end="6885" title="Weimar Republic" label="Weimar Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1173715" start="7423" end="7437" title="Albatros Al 101" label="Albatros L 101"/>
<link wikidata="Q157608" start="7660" end="7671" title="Reichswehr" label="German Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q638348" start="7780" end="7793" title="Albatros L 75" label="Albatros L 75"/>
<link wikidata="Q545" start="8098" end="8108" title="Baltic Sea" label="Baltic Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q311849" start="8126" end="8136" title="Warnemünde" label="Warnemünde"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153376" start="8149" end="8160" title="flying boat" label="flying boat"/>
<link wikidata="Q64" start="8783" end="8789" title="Berlin" label="Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q47906" start="8881" end="8895" title="Hermann Göring" label="Hermann Göring"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="9026" end="9031" title="Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1517242" start="9056" end="9073" title="Regia Aeronautica" label="Regia Aeronautica"/>
<link wikidata="Q367809" start="9486" end="9497" title="Junkers G24" label="Junkers G24"/>
<link wikidata="Q1022" start="9503" end="9512" title="Stuttgart" label="Stuttgart"/>
<link wikidata="Q1492" start="9516" end="9525" title="Barcelona" label="Barcelona"/>
<link wikidata="Q29" start="9529" end="9534" title="Spain" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q71" start="9540" end="9546" title="Geneva" label="Geneva"/>
<link wikidata="Q23482" start="9551" end="9560" title="Marseille" label="Marseille"/>
<link wikidata="Q2564009" start="9664" end="9673" title="Luftwaffe" label="Luftwaffe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1731" start="10021" end="10028" title="Dresden" label="Dresden"/>
<link wikidata="Q563383" start="10203" end="10231" title="Jagdgeschwader 2" label="&amp;quot;Jagdgeschwader&amp;quot; 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q486541" start="10282" end="10295" title="Jüterbog" label="Jüterbog-Damm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1435035" start="10547" end="10563" title="Focke-Wulf Fw 44" label="Focke-Wulf Fw 44"/>
<link wikidata="Q1923518" start="10893" end="10903" title="Geschwader" label="Geschwader"/>
<link wikidata="Q31548" start="11098" end="11109" title="Arado Ar 68" label="Arado Ar 68"/>
<link wikidata="Q752080" start="11336" end="11349" title="court-martial" label="court-martial"/>
<link wikidata="Q10859" start="11786" end="11803" title="Spanish Civil War" label="Spanish Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q4386940" start="11833" end="11847" title="Staffelkapitän" label="Staffelkapitän"/>
<link wikidata="Q153324" start="11859" end="11872" title="Condor Legion" label="Condor Legion"/>
<link wikidata="Q822224" start="11905" end="11930" title="Jagdgruppe 88" label="&amp;quot;Jagdgruppe&amp;quot; 88"/>
<link wikidata="Q485329" start="12023" end="12029" title="Ferrol, Spain" label="Ferrol"/>
<link wikidata="Q160355" start="12084" end="12097" title="Heinkel He 51" label="Heinkel He 51"/>
<link wikidata="Q11934" start="12241" end="12253" title="Mickey Mouse" label="Mickey Mouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q69124" start="12406" end="12423" title="Gotthard Handrick" label="Gotthard Handrick"/>
<link wikidata="Q1647090" start="12447" end="12454" title="Brunete" label="Brunete"/>
<link wikidata="Q57179" start="12672" end="12682" title="Ernst Udet" label="Ernst Udet"/>
<link wikidata="Q678321" start="12703" end="12714" title="dive bomber" label="dive bomber"/>
<link wikidata="Q26795" start="12744" end="12757" title="Junkers Ju 87" label="Junkers Ju 87"/>
<link wikidata="Q57177" start="12795" end="12817" title="Wolfram von Richthofen" label="Wolfram von Richthofen"/>
<link wikidata="Q695816" start="12963" end="12978" title="Henschel Hs 123" label="Henschel Hs 123"/>
<link wikidata="Q555104" start="13265" end="13278" title="Spanish Cross" label="Spanish Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q58641" start="13395" end="13409" title="Werner Mölders" label="Werner Mölders"/>
<link wikidata="Q28922" start="13845" end="13852" title="Old World sparrow" label="sparrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q1028" start="13962" end="13969" title="Morocco" label="Morocco"/>
<link wikidata="Q698081" start="14045" end="14071" title="Reichsluftfahrtministerium" label="Reichsluftfahrtministerium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050818" start="14176" end="14193" title="close air support" label="close air support"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="14369" end="14380" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q12800" start="14572" end="14583" title="machine gun" label="machine gun"/>
<link wikidata="Q34775" start="14756" end="14773" title="Focke-Wulf Fw 190" label="Focke-Wulf Fw 190"/>
<link wikidata="Q336368" start="14812" end="14821" title="drop tank" label="drop tank"/>
<link wikidata="Q2268359" start="15257" end="15266" title="Fall Grün (Czechoslovakia)" label="Fall Grün"/>
<link wikidata="Q33946" start="15297" end="15311" title="Czechoslovakia" label="Czechoslovakia"/>
<link wikidata="Q655303" start="15438" end="15443" title="Tutow" label="Tutow"/>
<link wikidata="Q155639" start="15625" end="15645" title="Messerschmitt Bf 109" label="Messerschmitt Bf 109"/>
<link wikidata="Q113838" start="15720" end="15737" title="Focke-Wulf Fw 189" label="Focke-Wulf Fw 189"/>
<link wikidata="Q655135" start="15742" end="15757" title="Henschel Hs 129" label="Henschel Hs 129"/>
<link wikidata="Q5612276" start="15857" end="15874" title="Gruppenkommandeur" label="Gruppenkommandeur"/>
<link wikidata="Q956707" start="15916" end="15944" title="Lehrgeschwader 2" label="&amp;quot;Lehrgeschwader&amp;quot; 2"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16135" end="16141" title="Organization of the Luftwaffe (1933–1945)#Gruppe" label="Gruppe"/>
<link wikidata="Q700734" start="16163" end="16193" title="Jagdgeschwader 433" label="&amp;quot;Jagdgeschwader&amp;quot; 433"/>
<link wikidata="Q472400" start="16240" end="16268" title="Ingolstadt Manching Airport" label="Ingolstadt-Manching Airfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q1726" start="16279" end="16285" title="Munich" label="Munich"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16563" end="16570" title="Organization of the Luftwaffe (1933–1945)#Staffel" label="Staffel"/>
<link wikidata="Q700734" start="16679" end="16708" title="Jagdgeschwader 52" label="&amp;quot;Jagdgeschwader&amp;quot; 52"/>
<link wikidata="Q2366972" start="16961" end="16970" title="Hauptmann" label="Hauptmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q150812" start="16989" end="17007" title="invasion of Poland" label="invasion of Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q163925" start="17202" end="17219" title="10th Army (Wehrmacht)" label="German Tenth Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q156894" start="17261" end="17276" title="Fieseler Fi 156" label="Fieseler Fi 156"/>
<link wikidata="Q163385" start="17412" end="17443" title="1st Panzer Division (Wehrmacht)" label="1st &amp;quot;Panzer Division&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q201823" start="17461" end="17472" title="Warta River" label="Warta River"/>
<link wikidata="Q2808897" start="17566" end="17580" title="XVI Army Corps (Wehrmacht)" label="XVI Army Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q31487" start="17584" end="17590" title="Kraków" label="Kraków"/>
<link wikidata="Q104740" start="17592" end="17597" title="Radom" label="Radom"/>
<link wikidata="Q983732" start="17599" end="17605" title="Dęblin" label="Dęblin"/>
<link wikidata="Q36036" start="17610" end="17620" title="L&amp;#x27;vov" label="L&amp;#x27;vov"/>
<link wikidata="Q548" start="17654" end="17661" title="Vistula" label="Vistula"/>
<link wikidata="Q165549" start="17874" end="17889" title="Battle of Bzura" label="Battle of Bzura"/>
<link wikidata="Q352" start="17947" end="17959" title="Adolf Hitler" label="Adolf Hitler"/>
<link wikidata="Q918504" start="18041" end="18057" title="Polish Air Force" label="Polish Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q248989" start="18062" end="18073" title="Polish Army" label="Polish Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q154554" start="18357" end="18367" title="Iron Cross" label="Iron Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q684924" start="18454" end="18464" title="rheumatism" label="rheumatism"/>
<link wikidata="Q667731" start="18982" end="19011" title="Jagdgeschwader 27" label="&amp;quot;Jagdgeschwader&amp;quot; 27"/>
<link wikidata="Q852661" start="19069" end="19077" title="adjutant" label="adjutant"/>
<link wikidata="Q222982" start="19365" end="19368" title="Fighter ace" label="ace"/>
<link wikidata="Q2435929" start="19483" end="19502" title="Geschwaderkommodore" label="Geschwaderkommodore"/>
<link wikidata="Q577378" start="19512" end="19541" title="Jagdgeschwader 53" label="&amp;quot;Jagdgeschwader&amp;quot; 53"/>
<link wikidata="Q96615" start="19951" end="19959" title="Max Ibel" label="Max Ibel"/>
<link wikidata="Q128781" start="20157" end="20166" title="Wehrmacht" label="Wehrmacht"/>
<link wikidata="Q476033" start="20185" end="20198" title="Low Countries" label="Low Countries"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="20203" end="20209" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q1899063" start="20229" end="20238" title="Fall Gelb" label="Fall Gelb"/>
<link wikidata="Q697625" start="20277" end="20295" title="Battle of Belgium" label="Battle for Belgium"/>
<link wikidata="Q3992" start="20353" end="20358" title="Liège" label="Liège"/>
<link wikidata="Q716970" start="20423" end="20435" title="Gustav Rödel" label="Gustav Rödel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1434883" start="20443" end="20450" title="wingman" label="wingman"/>
<link wikidata="Q165862" start="20497" end="20512" title="Royal Air Force" label="Royal Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q194251" start="20519" end="20535" title="Hawker Hurricane" label="Hawker Hurricane"/>
<link wikidata="Q16056790" start="20562" end="20577" title="No. 87 Squadron RAF" label="No. 87 Squadron"/>
<link wikidata="Q330417" start="20613" end="20629" title="Bristol Blenheim" label="Bristol Blenheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q2649081" start="20641" end="20672" title="Battle of the Netherlands" label="bomb bridges in the Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q13416824" start="20966" end="20980" title="Flying Officer" label="Flying Officer"/>
<link wikidata="Q456550" start="21069" end="21075" title="Tienen" label="Tienen"/>
<link wikidata="Q950693" start="21316" end="21321" title="Potez" label="Potez"/>
<link wikidata="Q86739852" start="21472" end="21476" title="Flak" label="Flak"/>
<link wikidata="Q47383" start="21563" end="21583" title="Charleville-Mézières" label="Charleville-Mézières"/>
<link wikidata="Q57169" start="21858" end="21870" title="Erhard Milch" label="Erhard Milch"/>
<link wikidata="Q151340" start="21974" end="21992" title="Battle of France" label="invasion of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q208529" start="22005" end="22022" title="Battle of Dunkirk" label="Battle of Dunkirk"/>
<link wikidata="Q29190" start="22047" end="22067" title="Supermarine Spitfire" label="Supermarine Spitfire"/>
<link wikidata="Q2078945" start="22497" end="22512" title="Operation Paula" label="Operation Paula"/>
<link wikidata="Q659647" start="22552" end="22575" title="Morane-Saulnier M.S.406" label="Morane-Saulnier M.S.406"/>
<link wikidata="Q2665786" start="22653" end="22682" title="Jagdgeschwader 26" label="&amp;quot;Jagdgeschwader&amp;quot; 26"/>
<link wikidata="Q61834" start="22947" end="22965" title="Joachim Müncheberg" label="Joachim Müncheberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q77790" start="22967" end="22984" title="Wilhelm Balthasar" label="Wilhelm Balthasar"/>
<link wikidata="Q3761029" start="22989" end="23005" title="Gerhard Schöpfel" label="Gerhard Schöpfel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2350870" start="23110" end="23118" title="Fall Rot" label="Fall Rot"/>
<link wikidata="Q154720" start="23555" end="23572" title="Battle of Britain" label="Battle of Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q6738004" start="23610" end="23615" title="Major (Germany)" label="major"/>
<link wikidata="Q159898" start="23639" end="23652" title="Pas de Calais" label="Pas de Calais"/>
<link wikidata="Q867055" start="23728" end="23736" title="Caffiers" label="Caffiers"/>
<link wikidata="Q34640" start="23821" end="23836" title="English Channel" label="English Channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q16821007" start="23878" end="23888" title="Kanalkampf" label="Kanalkampf"/>
<link wikidata="Q1701630" start="23916" end="23927" title="No. 54 Squadron RAF" label="54 Squadron"/>
<link wikidata="Q332164" start="24229" end="24236" title="Split S" label="Split S"/>
<link wikidata="Q7043677" start="24579" end="24595" title="No. 610 Squadron RAF" label="No. 610 Squadron"/>
<link wikidata="Q165558" start="24989" end="25026" title="Knight&amp;#x27;s Cross of the Iron Cross" label="Knight&amp;#x27;s Cross of the Iron Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q2057725" start="25122" end="25145" title="Adlertag (Eagle Day)" label="the main assault opened"/>
<link wikidata="Q1664006" start="25189" end="25200" title="No. 74 Squadron RAF" label="74 Squadron"/>
<link wikidata="Q375314" start="26205" end="26215" title="Folkestone" label="Folkestone"/>
<link wikidata="Q157696" start="26365" end="26373" title="Sergeant" label="Sergeant"/>
<link wikidata="Q11792583" start="26498" end="26509" title="No. 64 Squadron RAF" label="64 Squadron"/>
<link wikidata="Q7194476" start="26696" end="26709" title="Pilot Officer" label="Pilot Officer"/>
<link wikidata="Q482816" start="26773" end="26783" title="Parachute" label="bailed out"/>
<link wikidata="Q222728" start="26978" end="26987" title="Karinhall" label="Karinhall"/>
<link wikidata="Q7738879" start="27066" end="27081" title="The Hardest Day" label="The Hardest Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q2961428" start="29012" end="29026" title="escort fighter" label="escort fighter"/>
<link wikidata="Q7043073" start="29886" end="29897" title="No. 19 Squadron RAF" label="19 Squadron"/>
<link wikidata="Q350" start="29925" end="29934" title="Cambridge" label="Cambridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q6419938" start="29945" end="29959" title="Klaus Mietusch" label="Klaus Mietusch"/>
<link wikidata="Q3242727" start="30067" end="30078" title="North Weald" label="North Weald"/>
<link wikidata="Q17004370" start="31257" end="31303" title="Attacks on parachutists" label="killing enemy pilots while in their parachutes"/>
<link wikidata="Q263128" start="32250" end="32262" title="Hugh Dowding" label="Hugh Dowding"/>
<link wikidata="Q4698125" start="32264" end="32286" title="air officer commanding" label="air officer commanding"/>
<link wikidata="Q4870555" start="32443" end="32464" title="Battle of Britain Day" label="Battle of Britain Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q3059075" start="32573" end="32587" title="Thames Estuary" label="Thames Estuary"/>
<link wikidata="Q224427" start="32876" end="32896" title="No. 310 Squadron RAF" label="No. 310 Squadron RAF"/>
<link wikidata="Q165558" start="33110" end="33163" title="Knight&amp;#x27;s Cross of the Iron Cross with Oak Leaves" label="Knight&amp;#x27;s Cross of the Iron Cross with Oak Leaves"/>
<link wikidata="Q6122513" start="33497" end="33517" title="Jagdwaffe" label="German fighter force"/>
<link wikidata="Q7043492" start="36586" end="36597" title="No. 41 Squadron RAF" label="41 Squadron"/>
<link wikidata="Q7043041" start="36799" end="36818" title="No. 17 Squadron RAF" label="No. 17 Squadron RAF"/>
<link wikidata="Q66687" start="37186" end="37197" title="Helmut Wick" label="Helmut Wick"/>
<link wikidata="Q6131760" start="37464" end="37475" title="James Corum" label="James Corum"/>
<link wikidata="Q189266" start="38215" end="38228" title="Eastern Front (World War II)" label="Eastern Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q9304299" start="38637" end="38651" title="Oberstleutnant" label="Oberstleutnant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1548238" start="38850" end="38885" title="Mediterranean Theater of Operations" label="Mediterranean Theater of Operations"/>
<link wikidata="Q652468" start="39172" end="39177" title="MG 17" label="MG 17"/>
<link wikidata="Q698638" start="39312" end="39318" title="MG 151" label="MG 151"/>
<link wikidata="Q680704" start="39422" end="39434" title="MG FF cannon" label="MG FF cannon"/>
<link wikidata="Q65817" start="39521" end="39535" title="Theo Osterkamp" label="Theo Osterkamp"/>
<link wikidata="Q323164" start="39555" end="39565" title="Le Touquet" label="Le Touquet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1975745" start="39869" end="39883" title="forced landing" label="forced landing"/>
<link wikidata="Q5013228" start="40002" end="40019" title="Flight Lieutenant" label="Flight Lieutenant"/>
<link wikidata="Q2579846" start="40020" end="40034" title="Paddy Finucane" label="Paddy Finucane"/>
<link wikidata="Q155642" start="40348" end="40368" title="Messerschmitt Bf 110" label="Messerschmitt Bf 110"/>
<link wikidata="Q75866" start="40378" end="40389" title="Rudolf Hess" label="Rudolf Hess"/>
<link wikidata="Q7043235" start="40907" end="40927" title="No. 258 Squadron RAF" label="No. 258 Squadron RAF"/>
<link wikidata="Q7275366" start="41029" end="41041" title="RAF Hawkinge" label="RAF Hawkinge"/>
<link wikidata="Q67017" start="41751" end="41764" title="Josef Priller" label="Josef Priller"/>
<link wikidata="Q7043629" start="42022" end="42024" title="No. 56 Squadron RAF" label="56"/>
<link wikidata="Q7043214" start="42042" end="42054" title="No. 242 Squadron RAF" label="242 Squadron"/>
<link wikidata="Q7042971" start="42093" end="42109" title="No. 145 Squadron RAF" label="No. 145 Squadron"/>
<link wikidata="Q7043679" start="42397" end="42413" title="No. 611 Squadron RAF" label="No. 611 Squadron"/>
<link wikidata="Q7335574" start="42690" end="42697" title="Ripcord (skydiving)" label="ripcord"/>
<link wikidata="Q165558" start="42999" end="43063" title="Knight&amp;#x27;s Cross of the Iron Cross with Oak Leaves and Swords" label="Knight&amp;#x27;s Cross of the Iron Cross with Oak Leaves and Swords"/>
<link wikidata="Q7043181" start="43138" end="43154" title="No. 226 Squadron RAF" label="No. 226 Squadron"/>
<link wikidata="Q348780" start="43843" end="43856" title="Douglas Bader" label="Douglas Bader"/>
<link wikidata="Q208793" start="43873" end="43880" title="Saint-Omer" label="St Omer"/>
<link wikidata="Q4701" start="45024" end="45046" title="Manfred von Richthofen" label="Manfred von Richthofen"/>
<link wikidata="Q7042866" start="45103" end="45106" title="No. 111 Squadron RAF" label="111"/>
<link wikidata="Q7043787" start="45111" end="45123" title="No. 71 Squadron RAF" label="71 Squadrons"/>
<link wikidata="Q165558" start="46313" end="46387" title="Knight&amp;#x27;s Cross of the Iron Cross with Oak Leaves, Swords and Diamonds" label="Knight&amp;#x27;s Cross of the Iron Cross with Oak Leaves, Swords and Diamonds"/>
<link wikidata="Q898788" start="46565" end="46580" title="air superiority" label="air superiority"/>
<link wikidata="Q3883953" start="46587" end="46607" title="Operation Donnerkeil" label="Operation Donnerkeil"/>
<link wikidata="Q151701" start="46623" end="46635" title="Kriegsmarine" label="Kriegsmarine"/>
<link wikidata="Q859612" start="46673" end="46691" title="Operation Cerberus" label="Operation Cerberus"/>
<link wikidata="Q12193" start="46780" end="46793" title="Brest, France" label="Brest, France"/>
<link wikidata="Q1707" start="46821" end="46825" title="Kiel" label="Kiel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2704274" start="47510" end="47530" title="Defence of the Reich" label="Defence of the Reich"/>
<link wikidata="Q66121" start="47730" end="47744" title="Günther Korten" label="Günther Korten"/>
<link wikidata="Q60045" start="47797" end="47809" title="Albert Speer" label="Albert Speer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5121850" start="47899" end="47915" title="Circus offensive" label="Circus offensive"/>
<link wikidata="Q270921" start="48004" end="48020" title="Eighth Air Force" label="Eighth Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q27496" start="48054" end="48068" title="Western Europe" label="Western Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q218678" start="49327" end="49342" title="North African Campaign" label="Tunisian defeat"/>
<link wikidata="Q699708" start="49400" end="49412" title="Luftflotte 2" label="Luftflotte 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q1462" start="49526" end="49534" title="Sardinia" label="Sardinia"/>
<link wikidata="Q14112" start="49536" end="49543" title="Corsica" label="Corsica"/>
<link wikidata="Q1460" start="49549" end="49555" title="Sicily" label="Sicily"/>
<link wikidata="Q61913" start="49969" end="49983" title="Günther Lützow" label="Günther Lützow"/>
<link wikidata="Q563398" start="51130" end="51135" title="JG 77" label="JG 77"/>
<link wikidata="Q61466" start="51324" end="51342" title="Johannes Steinhoff" label="Johannes Steinhoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q696817" start="51573" end="51594" title="Mediterranean and Middle East theatre of World War II" label="Mediterranean Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q217981" start="52403" end="52428" title="Allied invasion of Sicily" label="Allied invasion of Sicily"/>
<link wikidata="Q44700" start="52872" end="52902" title="European Theatre of Operations" label="European Theatre of Operations"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055" start="54183" end="54190" title="Hamburg" label="Hamburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1017" start="54240" end="54246" title="Aachen" label="Aachen"/>
<link wikidata="Q3534114" start="54396" end="54408" title="heavy bomber" label="heavy bomber"/>
<link wikidata="Q1175219" start="55974" end="55994" title="Messerschmitt Me 410" label="Messerschmitt Me 410"/>
<link wikidata="Q16335379" start="57309" end="57324" title="Aerial ramming" label="ramming methods"/>
<link wikidata="Q3146472" start="57644" end="57667" title="1st Fighter Corps (Germany)" label="I &amp;quot;Jagdkorps&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1367488" start="57802" end="57819" title="Radio direction finder" label="direction finders"/>
<link wikidata="Q2080051" start="58094" end="58124" title="Jagdgeschwader 300" label="&amp;quot;Jagdgeschwader&amp;quot; 300"/>
<link wikidata="Q317295" start="58623" end="58631" title="Big Week" label="Big Week"/>
<link wikidata="Q1639992" start="58640" end="58665" title="Combined Bomber Offensive" label="Combined Bomber Offensive"/>
<link wikidata="Q574021" start="59873" end="59889" title="Luftflotte Reich" label="Luftflotte Reich"/>
<link wikidata="Q699837" start="59953" end="59965" title="Luftflotte 3" label="Luftflotte 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q180087" start="60371" end="60384" title="night fighter" label="night fighter"/>
<link wikidata="Q155360" start="61657" end="61660" title="Messerschmitt Me 163 Komet" label="163"/>
<link wikidata="Q77096" start="61983" end="62002" title="Willy Messerschmitt" label="Willy Messerschmitt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1755198" start="62108" end="62128" title="Messerschmitt Me 209" label="Messerschmitt Me 209"/>
<link wikidata="Q429382" start="62409" end="62415" title="Messerschmitt Me 209 (1943)" label="Me 209"/>
<link wikidata="Q75123" start="62854" end="62868" title="Dietrich Peltz" label="Dietrich Peltz"/>
<link wikidata="Q255977" start="62893" end="62909" title="9th Air Corps (Germany)" label="IX. Fliegerkorps"/>
<link wikidata="Q532228" start="63611" end="63630" title="Operation Steinbock" label="Operation Steinbock"/>
<link wikidata="Q6576106" start="64733" end="64751" title="Werner Thierfelder" label="Werner Thierfelder"/>
<link wikidata="Q192075" start="65041" end="65053" title="North American P-51 Mustang" label="P-51 Mustang"/>
<link wikidata="Q4229138" start="65262" end="65278" title="Kommando Nowotny" label="Kommando Nowotny"/>
<link wikidata="Q127771" start="65301" end="65312" title="jet fighter" label="jet fighter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1433435" start="65425" end="65431" title="Flugplatz Achmer" label="Achmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q93461" start="65521" end="65535" title="Walter Nowotny" label="Walter Nowotny"/>
<link wikidata="Q156878" start="65896" end="65910" title="Heinkel He 162" label="Heinkel He 162"/>
<link wikidata="Q8641370" start="68331" end="68349" title="Operation Overlord" label="Operation Overlord"/>
<link wikidata="Q1320053" start="68374" end="68396" title="German-occupied Europe" label="German-occupied Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q39" start="69357" end="69368" title="Switzerland" label="Switzerland"/>
<link wikidata="Q34" start="69373" end="69379" title="Sweden" label="Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q216184" start="69612" end="69625" title="Western Front (World War II)" label="Western Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q3146673" start="70166" end="70191" title="2nd Fighter Corps (Germany)" label="II. &amp;quot;Jagdkorps&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q60703" start="70266" end="70279" title="Gordon Gollob" label="Gordon Gollob"/>
<link wikidata="Q835881" start="70766" end="70787" title="Operation Bodenplatte" label="Operation Bodenplatte"/>
<link wikidata="Q151018" start="70834" end="70853" title="Battle of the Bulge" label="Battle of the Bulge"/>
<link wikidata="Q162312" start="71035" end="71050" title="Reichsführer-SS" label="Reichsführer-SS"/>
<link wikidata="Q43067" start="71057" end="71073" title="Heinrich Himmler" label="Heinrich Himmler"/>
<link wikidata="Q174640" start="71358" end="71361" title="V-2" label="V-2"/>
<link wikidata="Q5447844" start="71885" end="71906" title="Fighter Pilots Revolt" label="Fighter Pilots Revolt"/>
<link wikidata="Q44687" start="72317" end="72319" title="SS" label="SS"/>
<link wikidata="Q43250" start="72324" end="72331" title="Gestapo" label="Gestapo"/>
<link wikidata="Q700332" start="72404" end="72430" title="Oberkommando der Luftwaffe" label="Oberkommando der Luftwaffe"/>
<link wikidata="Q7310" start="72495" end="72513" title="National Socialist" label="National Socialist"/>
<link wikidata="Q4186" start="73166" end="73180" title="Harz" label="Harz Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q320994" start="73259" end="73271" title="house arrest" label="house arrest"/>
<link wikidata="Q153626" start="75657" end="75666" title="Waffen SS" label="Waffen SS"/>
<link wikidata="Q741723" start="75996" end="76025" title="United States Army Air Forces" label="United States Army Air Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q683386" start="76540" end="76569" title="Jagdgeschwader 54" label="&amp;quot;Jagdgeschwader&amp;quot; 54"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="76600" end="76606" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet"/>
<link wikidata="Q697172" start="76620" end="76635" title="Courland Pocket" label="Courland Pocket"/>
<link wikidata="Q539202" start="76707" end="76733" title="Jagdverband 44" label="&amp;quot;Jagdverband&amp;quot; 44"/>
<link wikidata="Q83460" start="77050" end="77057" title="General" label="General"/>
<link wikidata="Q65566" start="77058" end="77073" title="Josef Kammhuber" label="Josef Kammhuber"/>
<link wikidata="Q3192516" start="77109" end="77127" title="Kampfgeschwader 51" label="Kampfgeschwader 51"/>
<link wikidata="Q509947" start="77167" end="77168" title="Kampfgeschwader 6" label="6"/>
<link wikidata="Q3052364" start="77185" end="77187" title="Kampfgeschwader 27" label="27"/>
<link wikidata="Q2669514" start="77295" end="77323" title="Jagdgeschwader 7" label="&amp;quot;Jagdgeschwader&amp;quot; 7"/>
<link wikidata="Q443391" start="77328" end="77358" title="Kampfgeschwader 54" label="&amp;quot;Kampfgeschwader&amp;quot; 54"/>
<link wikidata="Q836438" start="77886" end="77906" title="Martin B-26 Marauder" label="Martin B-26 Marauder"/>
<link wikidata="Q4632650" start="78967" end="78985" title="27th Fighter Group" label="27th Fighter Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q4639956" start="78990" end="79008" title="50th Fighter Group" label="50th Fighter Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q207089" start="79128" end="79144" title="P-47 Thunderbolt" label="P-47 Thunderbolt"/>
<link wikidata="Q498526" start="79615" end="79640" title="San Jose State University" label="San Jose State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q16056792" start="79886" end="79901" title="Ninth Air Force" label="Ninth Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q62" start="80121" end="80134" title="San Francisco" label="San Francisco"/>
<link wikidata="Q9212" start="80260" end="80278" title="United States Army" label="United States Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q6186" start="80882" end="80891" title="Communist" label="Communist"/>
<link wikidata="Q260130" start="81020" end="81029" title="Tegernsee" label="Tegernsee"/>
<link wikidata="Q34713" start="81122" end="81130" title="Salzburg" label="Salzburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1735" start="81135" end="81144" title="Innsbruck" label="Innsbruck"/>
<link wikidata="Q533232" start="81528" end="81544" title="Hohenpeissenberg" label="Hohenpeissenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194" start="81739" end="81757" title="Schleswig-Holstein" label="Schleswig-Holstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q61497" start="82077" end="82086" title="Kurt Tank" label="Kurt Tank"/>
<link wikidata="Q3846" start="82152" end="82158" title="Minden" label="Minden"/>
<link wikidata="Q35" start="82328" end="82335" title="Denmark" label="Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q414" start="82509" end="82518" title="Argentina" label="Argentina"/>
<link wikidata="Q5261705" start="82546" end="82577" title="Ciudad Jardín Lomas del Palomar" label="Ciudad Jardín Lomas del Palomar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1486" start="82579" end="82591" title="Buenos Aires" label="Buenos Aires"/>
<link wikidata="Q18" start="82748" end="82761" title="South America" label="South America"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321" start="82893" end="82900" title="Spanish language" label="Spanish"/>
<link wikidata="Q57770" start="82974" end="82993" title="Argentine Air Force" label="Argentine Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q140318" start="83020" end="83034" title="Gloster Meteor" label="Gloster Meteor"/>
<link wikidata="Q87923" start="83462" end="83476" title="Eduard Neumann (fighter pilot)" label="Eduard Neumann"/>
<link wikidata="Q57259" start="83544" end="83566" title="Hans-Joachim Marseille" label="Hans-Joachim Marseille"/>
<link wikidata="Q689357" start="83667" end="83680" title="Piaggio P.149" label="Piaggio P.149"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="84116" end="84138" title="The First and the Last (Galland memoir)" label="The First and the Last"/>
<link wikidata="Q165862" start="84332" end="84335" title="RAF" label="RAF"/>
<link wikidata="Q11223" start="84340" end="84344" title="USAF" label="USAF"/>
<link wikidata="Q493353" start="84397" end="84406" title="Amt Blank" label="Amt Blank"/>
<link wikidata="Q2492" start="84438" end="84453" title="Konrad Adenauer" label="Konrad Adenauer"/>
<link wikidata="Q56010" start="84495" end="84505" title="Bundeswehr" label="Bundeswehr"/>
<link wikidata="Q713750" start="84521" end="84533" title="West Germany" label="West Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q7184" start="84546" end="84550" title="NATO" label="NATO"/>
<link wikidata="Q1251631" start="84589" end="84603" title="Nathan F. Twining" label="Nathan Twining"/>
<link wikidata="Q322891" start="84671" end="84688" title="William H. Tunner" label="William H. Tunner"/>
<link wikidata="Q520693" start="84703" end="84737" title="United States Air Forces in Europe" label="United States Air Forces in Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q151250" start="84784" end="84792" title="neo-Nazi" label="neo-Nazi"/>
<link wikidata="Q57131" start="84875" end="84892" title="Hans-Ulrich Rudel" label="Hans-Ulrich Rudel"/>
<link wikidata="Q93330" start="84923" end="84933" title="Juan Perón" label="Juan Perón"/>
<link wikidata="Q56013" start="85245" end="85261" title="German Air Force" label="German Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q14567502" start="85278" end="85310" title="Military History Research Office (Germany)" label="Military History Research Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q348780" start="85735" end="85748" title="Douglas Bader" label="Douglas Bader"/>
<link wikidata="Q7349995" start="85753" end="85773" title="Robert Stanford Tuck" label="Robert Stanford Tuck"/>
<link wikidata="Q586" start="85896" end="85900" title="Bonn" label="Bonn"/>
<link wikidata="Q673649" start="86481" end="86499" title="Beechcraft Bonanza" label="Beechcraft Bonanza"/>
<link wikidata="Q714989" start="86606" end="86623" title="Battle of Britain (film)" label="Battle of Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q661896" start="87055" end="87071" title="Pinewood Studios" label="Pinewood Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q12766" start="87150" end="87166" title="The World at War" label="The World at War"/>
<link wikidata="Q7097515" start="87465" end="87495" title="Operation Sea Lion (wargame)" label="the Operation Sea Lion wargame"/>
<link wikidata="Q575618" start="87499" end="87508" title="Royal Military Academy Sandhurst" label="Sandhurst"/>
<link wikidata="Q1890450" start="87698" end="87715" title="RAF Museum Hendon" label="RAF Museum Hendon"/>
<link wikidata="Q43274" start="87797" end="87811" title="Prince Charles" label="Prince Charles"/>
<link wikidata="Q11223" start="88003" end="88017" title="U.S. Air Force" label="U.S. Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q4697817" start="88082" end="88111" title="Air Command and Staff College" label="Air Command and Staff College"/>
<link wikidata="Q1785757" start="88115" end="88126" title="Maxwell AFB" label="Maxwell AFB"/>
<link wikidata="Q564010" start="88719" end="88730" title="von Dönhoff" label="von Dönhoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q223973" start="89100" end="89109" title="Godparent" label="godfather"/>
<link wikidata="Q372052" start="89564" end="89577" title="Arthur Harris" label="Arthur Harris"/>
<link wikidata="Q57268" start="89623" end="89639" title="Gerhard Barkhorn" label="Gerhard Barkhorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q9687" start="89680" end="89696" title="Traffic collision" label="traffic accident"/>
<link wikidata="Q486548" start="90050" end="90057" title="Remagen" label="Remagen"/>
<link wikidata="Q20183369" start="90231" end="90247" title="David T. Zabecki" label="David T. Zabecki"/>
<link wikidata="Q685753" start="90405" end="90428" title="German Federal Archives" label="German Federal Archives"/>
<link wikidata="Q919577" start="90688" end="90723" title="Medal for the Campaign of 1936−1939" label="Medal for the Campaign of 1936−1939"/>
<link wikidata="Q625169" start="90816" end="90838" title="Military Medal (Spain)" label="Military Medal (Spain)"/>
<link wikidata="Q555104" start="90855" end="90901" title="Spanish Cross" label="Spanish Cross in Gold with Swords and Diamonds"/>
<link wikidata="Q523186" start="90918" end="90953" title="Front Flying Clasp of the Luftwaffe" label="Front Flying Clasp of the Luftwaffe"/>
<link wikidata="Q680248" start="90993" end="91004" title="Wound Badge" label="Wound Badge"/>
<link wikidata="Q566694" start="91016" end="91036" title="Pilot/Observer Badge" label="Pilot/Observer Badge"/>
<link wikidata="Q154554" start="91075" end="91085" title="Iron Cross" label="Iron Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q165558" start="91155" end="91229" title="Knight&amp;#x27;s Cross of the Iron Cross with Oak Leaves, Swords and Diamonds" label="Knight&amp;#x27;s Cross of the Iron Cross with Oak Leaves, Swords and Diamonds"/>
<link wikidata="Q6738004" start="91278" end="91283" title="Major (Germany)" label="Major"/>
<link wikidata="Q2435929" start="91459" end="91478" title="Geschwaderkommodore" label="Geschwaderkommodore"/>
<link wikidata="Q9304299" start="91579" end="91593" title="Oberstleutnant" label="Oberstleutnant"/>
<link wikidata="Q3756713" start="91735" end="91741" title="Oberst" label="Oberst"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="252162" wikidata="Q3140889" url="?curid=252162" title="Operation Bodyguard">
<text>Operation Bodyguard was the code name for a World War II deception strategy employed by the Allied states before the 1944 invasion of northwest Europe. Bodyguard set out an overall stratagem for misleading the &quot;Oberkommando der Wehrmacht&quot; as to the time and place of the invasion. Planning for Bodyguard was started in 1943 by the London Controlling Section, a department of the war cabinet. They produced a draft strategy, referred to as Plan Jael, which was presented to leaders at the Tehran Conference in late November and, despite skepticism due to the failure of earlier deception strategy, approved on 6 December 1943.

Bodyguard was a strategy under which all deception planners would operate. The overall aim was to lead the Germans to believe that an invasion of northwest Europe would come later than was planned and to expect attacks elsewhere, including the Pas-de-Calais, the Balkans, southern France, Norway and Soviet attacks in Bulgaria and northern Norway. The key part of the strategy was to attempt to hide the amount of troop buildup in Southern England, by developing threats across the European theatre, and to emphasise an Allied focus on major bombing campaigns.

The main stratagem was not an operational approach; instead it set out the overall themes for each subordinate operation to support. Deception planners in England and Cairo developed a number of operational implementations (of which the most significant was Operation Fortitude which developed a threat to Pas-de-Calais).

In June 1944 the Allied forces successfully landed and established a beachhead in Normandy. Later evidence demonstrated that German intelligence had believed significant parts of the deceptions, particularly the order of battle for the armies in Southern England. Following the invasion, Hitler delayed redeploying forces from Calais and other regions to defend Normandy for nearly seven weeks (Bodyguard had been intended to delay this for at least 14 days). Evidence suggests that the threat against Pas-de-Calais, and to a lesser extent Norway and Southern Europe, contributed to the German decision.

==Background==
During World War II, prior to &quot;Bodyguard&quot;, the Allies made extensive use of deception and developed many new techniques and theories. The main protagonists at this time were &#x27;A&#x27; Force, set up in 1940 under Dudley Clarke, and the London Controlling Section, chartered in 1942 under the control of John Bevan. German coastal defences were stretched thin in 1944, as they prepared to defend all of the coast of northwest Europe. The Allies had already employed deception operations against the Germans, aided by the capture of all of the German agents in the United Kingdom and the systematic decryption of German Enigma communications. Once Normandy had been chosen as the site of the invasion, it was decided to attempt to deceive the Germans into thinking it was a diversion and that the true invasion was to be elsewhere.

At that stage of the war, Allied and German intelligence operations were heavily mismatched. Through the signals work at Bletchley Park, many of the German lines of communication were compromised since intercepts, codenamed Ultra, gave the Allies insights into how effectively their deceptions were operating. In Europe, the Allies had good intelligence from resistance movements and aerial reconnaissance. By comparison, most of the German spies sent into Britain had been caught or had handed themselves in and turned into double agents (under the XX System). Some of the compromised agents were so trusted that by 1944, German intelligence had stopped sending new infiltrators. Within the German command structure internal politics, suspicion and mismanagement meant intelligence gathering had only limited effectiveness.

By 1943, Hitler was defending the entire western coast of Europe, with no clear knowledge of where an Allied invasion might land. His tactic was to defend the entire length and to rely on reinforcements to respond to any landings quickly. In France the Germans deployed two Army Groups. One of them, Army Group B, was deployed to protect the coastline; the Fifteenth Army covering the Pas-de-Calais region and the Seventh Army in Normandy. Following a decision to defer the invasion, Operation Overlord, until 1944, the Allies conducted a series of deceptions intended to threaten invasion in Norway and France. Bodyguard was preceded in late 1943 by Operation Cockade, which was intended to confuse the German high command as to Allied intentions and to draw them into air battles across the Channel. In that respect, Cockade was not a success, with German forces barely responding even as a fake invasion force crossed the channel and turned back some distance from its &quot;target&quot;.

==Plan Jael==
Planning for &quot;Bodyguard&quot; began even before Operation Cockade was fully under way, following the decision that Normandy would be the site of the coming invasion. The departments responsible for deception, &#x27;A&#x27; Force, COSSAC&#x27;s Ops (B) and the London Controlling Section, began to address the problem of achieving tactical surprise for &quot;Overlord&quot;. They produced a paper, entitled &quot;First Thoughts&quot;, on 14 July 1943 that outlined many of the concepts that would later form the &quot;Bodyguard&quot; plan. However, since &quot;Cockade&quot; concluded with limited success, most of the Allied high command were sceptical that any new deception would work.

In August, Colonel John Henry Bevan, head of the London Controlling Section, presented a draft plan. Codenamed Jael, a reference to the Old Testament heroine who killed an enemy commander by deception, it would have attempted to deceive the Germans into thinking that the Allies had delayed the invasion for a further year but instead concentrated on the Balkan theatre and on air bombardment of Germany throughout 1944. The plan had a mixed reception in the Allied High command, and in October, a decision on the draft was deferred until after the Tehran Conference, a month later.

Meanwhile, COSSAC had been working on its own deception strategy, &quot;Appendix Y&quot; of Operation Overlord plan. The plan, also known as Torrent, had originated in early September at COSSAC and started life as a feint invasion of the Calais region shortly before D-Day and eventually, after the failure of a similar scheme during &quot;Cockade&quot;, transformed into a plan to divert attention from troops building up in the south-west of England. The early ideas, which later became Operation Bodyguard, recognised that the Germans would expect an invasion. Instead, the core of the plan suggested misleading the Germans as to the exact time and location of the invasion and keeping them on the back foot once it had landed.

In November and December 1943, the Allied leaders met twice, first in Cairo (23–27 November) and then in Tehran (28 November–1 December), to decide on strategy for the following year. Bevan attended the conference and received his final orders on 6 December. Furnished with the final details of &quot;Overlord&quot;, Bevan returned to London to complete the draft. The deception strategy, now codenamed &quot;Bodyguard&quot;, was approved on Christmas Day 1943. The new name had been chosen based on a comment by Winston Churchill to Joseph Stalin at the Tehran Conference: &quot;In wartime, truth is so precious that she should always be attended by a bodyguard of lies&quot;.

==Early 1944 planning==
Operation Bodyguard aimed to deceive the enemy as to the timing, weight and direction of the prospective Allied invasion in France. It had three main goals: to make the Pas-de-Calais appear to be the main invasion target, to mask the actual date and time of the assault and to keep German reinforcements in Pas-de-Calais (and other parts of Europe) for at least 14 days after landing.

&quot;Bodyguard&quot; set out a detailed scenario that the deceivers would attempt to &quot;sell&quot; to the Germans. It included Allied belief in air bombardment as an effective way of winning the war, with the 1944 focus on building bomber fleets. It then specified invasions across the entire European coastline: in Norway, France and the Mediterranean. In January, planners began to fill in the details of &quot;Bodyguard&quot;, producing the various sub-operations to cover each of the invasions and misdirection.

The task fell to two main departments. &#x27;A&#x27; Force, under Dudley Clarke, which had been successful early on, once again took charge of the Mediterranean region. In Europe, however, responsibility shifted away from the LCS, which took on a coordination role. Prior to Dwight Eisenhower&#x27;s appointment as Supreme Commander, all planning for &quot;Overlord&quot; fell to the Chief of Staff to the Supreme Commander Allied Forces (COSSAC), Frederick E. Morgan. Under his regime, the deception department, Ops (B), had received limited resources and left most of the planning so far to the London Controlling section. With Eisenhower&#x27;s arrival, Ops (B) expanded and Dudley Clarke&#x27;s deputy from &#x27;A&#x27; Force, Noel Wild, was placed in control. With the new resources, the department put together the largest single segment of &quot;Bodyguard&quot;, Operation Fortitude.

By early 1944, it became clear that for Operation Bodyguard’s deception strategy to be truly effective, the Soviets needed to play a role. Their cooperation was essential in creating the illusion of large-scale troop movements that would mislead the Germans and prevent them from reinforcing the Western Front. However, persuading the Soviet leadership to participate and ensuring they fully understood the intricacies of the plan, posed a significant diplomatic challenge.

Recognizing the need for a coordinated approach, the United States and Britain agreed to send their top deception experts to Moscow. Col. John Bevan, the chief architect of the operation from the British side, and Col. William H. Baumer, his American counterpart on Eisenhower&#x27;s staff, were chosen to present the plan and negotiate Soviet involvement. The two spent nearly a month in Moscow, carefully navigating Soviet skepticism and logistical hurdles to secure their full commitment. Baumer recorded the details of this mission, along with the broader planning of Operation Bodyguard, in his personal diary and papers.

==Western Front==
&quot;Bodyguard&quot; focused on obfuscating the impending Normandy landings, planned for spring/summer 1944, and so the main effort was focused around the Western front. The planners created Fortitude, building on elements of the earlier Cockade, which encapsulated an entire fictional Allied invasion plan against targets in France and Norway. Its main undertaking was, through the various deception techniques, to overstate the size of the Allied forces in Britain through early 1944, enabling them to threaten multiple targets at once.

===Operation Fortitude===
Under the Fortitude &quot;story&quot;, the Allies intended to invade both Norway and Pas-de-Calais. Using similar techniques to the 1943 Cockade operation (fictional field armies, faked operations, and false &quot;leaked&quot; information) the intention was to increase the apparent size of the Allied forces to make such a large-scale attack seem possible. To allow the plan to stay manageable it was divided into two main sections, each with numerous sub-plans; Fortitude North and South.

Fortitude North was aimed at German forces in Scandinavia and based around the fictional British Fourth Army, based in Edinburgh. The Fourth Army had first been activated the previous year, as part of Cockade to threaten Norway and tie down the enemy divisions stationed there. The Allies created the illusion of the army via fake radio traffic (Operation Skye) and leaks through double agents.

Fortitude South employed similar deception in the south of England, threatening an invasion at Pas-de-Calais by the fictional 1st U.S. Army Group (FUSAG) led by U.S. General George Patton. France was the crux of the &quot;Bodyguard&quot; plan: with Calais as the most logical choice for an invasion, the Allied high command had to mislead the German defences in a very small geographical area. The Pas-de-Calais offered advantages over the chosen invasion site, such as the shortest crossing of the English Channel and the quickest route into Germany. Having a high regard for Patton, German command, particularly Rommel, took steps to heavily fortify that area of coastline. The Allies decided to amplify this belief of a Calais landing.

General Bernard Montgomery, commanding the Allied landing forces, knew that the crucial aspect of any invasion was the ability to grow a beachhead into a full front. He also had only limited divisions at his command, 37 compared to around 60 German formations. Fortitude South&#x27;s main aims were to give the impression of a much larger invasion force (the FUSAG) in the South-East of England, to achieve tactical surprise in the Normandy landings and, once the invasion had occurred, to mislead the Germans into thinking it was a diversionary tactic with Calais the real objective.

===Operation Ironside===

While Fortitude represented the major thrust of &quot;Bodyguard&quot; in support of the Normandy landings, several smaller plans added to the overall picture of confusion. On the Western Front, the largest of them was Operation Ironside. Intercepted communications during January 1944 indicated German high command feared the possibility of landings along the Bay of Biscay, particularly near Bordeaux. The next month, it ordered anti-invasion exercises to be carried out in the region. To play on those fears, the Allies instigated Operation Ironside.

The plot for Ironside was that two divisions sailing from the United Kingdom would land on the Garonne estuary ten days after D-Day. After a beachhead had been established, a further six divisions would arrive directly from the United States. The force would then capture Bordeaux before it linked up with the supposed Operation Vendetta, another deception operation, forces in the south of France.

Ironside was implemented entirely via double agents: &quot;Tate&quot;, &quot;Bronx&quot; and &quot;Garbo&quot;. The Twenty Committee, in charge of anti-espionage and deception operations of British military intelligence, feared the plausibility of the story and so did not promote it too heavily through their agents. Messages sent to their German handlers included elements of uncertainty. That, combined with the fact that Bordeaux was an implausible target (the landing site was far outside the range of fighter cover from the United Kingdom), meant that the Germans took very little notice of the rumours and even went as far as to identify it as a probable deception. However, the Abwehr continued to send questions to their agents related to the landings until early June, and after D-Day, the Germans continued to maintain a state of readiness in the region.

==Political pressure==
One recurring theme for &quot;Bodyguard&quot; was the use of political deception. Bevan had concerns over the impact that physical and wireless deception could have. In early 1944, he proposed a wholly political ploy, Operation Graffham, as a way to bolster elements of &quot;Bodyguard&quot;. Ronald Wingate extended those ideas to create the larger Operation Royal Flush a few months later.

Despite not gaining much traction with the targeted governments, Graffham still influenced the thinking of German commanders and pushed them towards accepting other aspects of &quot;Bodyguard&quot;.

Royal Flush was, however, less successful, with a report by the Abwehr identifying the targeted countries as &quot;outspoken deception centres&quot;. It was the last political overture attempted as part of &quot;Bodyguard&quot;.

===Operation Graffham===

Graffham&#x27;s political target was Sweden, and its main aim was to support the goals of Fortitude North. It was intended to imply that the Allies were building political ties with Sweden in preparation for an upcoming invasion of Norway. The operation involved meetings between several British and Swedish officials as well as the purchase of Norwegian securities and the use of the Double-Cross System to spread false rumours. Sweden maintained a neutral stance during the war, and if its government believed in an imminent Allied invasion of Norway, that would filter through to German intelligence.

Planning for the operation began in February 1944. Bevan was concerned that Fortitude North was not sufficient in creating a threat against Norway and so he proposed Graffham as an additional measure. In contrast to the other aspects of &quot;Bodyguard&quot;, the operation was planned and executed by the British, with no American involvement.

Graffham was envisioned as an extension of existing pressure the Allies were placing on Sweden to end its neutral stance, one example being the requests to end the export of ball bearings, an important component in military hardware, to Germany. By increasing that pressure with additional false requests, Bevan hoped to convince the Germans further that Sweden was preparing to join the Allies.

The impact of Graffham was minimal. The Swedish government agreed to few of the concessions requested during the meetings, and few high-level officials were convinced that the Allies would invade Norway. Overall, the influence of Graffham and Fortitude North on German strategy in Scandinavia is disputed.

===Operation Royal Flush===

&quot;Royal Flush&quot; was proposed and planned by the LCS&#x27;s Ronald Wingate in April 1944. Building on the approach of Graffham, he hoped to support other &quot;Bodyguard&quot; deceptions in the Western and Mediterranean theatres by making political overtures to Sweden, Spain and Turkey. The operation continued Graffham&#x27;s work in Sweden by having ambassadors from the United Kingdom, the United States and the Soviet Union demand for the Germans to be denied access to the country after an Allied invasion of Norway.

==Mediterranean theatre==
Overall control of &quot;Bodyguard&quot; came out of London, local implementation of the Mediterranean portions was left to &#x27;A&#x27; Force. By then, Clarke had split the group into several sections, between Egypt and Italy, with responsibility for strategic or tactical deception. From the outset, &quot;Bodyguard&quot; focused on the Fortitude threat being developed on the Western Front. Deceptions that were planned in the Mediterranean were intended to tie down forces by creating threats to that appeared to have just enough realism.

In late 1943, the Allies had opened a front in Italy, and after the 1944 Normandy landings, focus returned to the Mediterranean as a second front was debated. Eventually, deceptions had to be realigned to the Allies&#x27; new invasion plans since they, at first, threatened the very place that the earlier operations had suggested as a target.

===Operation Zeppelin===

Zeppelin was the Mediterranean equivalent of Fortitude. It was intended to tie down German forces in the area by threatening landings in the Balkans, particularly Crete or Romania. &#x27;A&#x27; Force used similar tactics as before by simulating the existence of the Ninth, Tenth and Twelfth Armies in Egypt via exercises and radio traffic. Although German high command believed that the forces were real, only three under-strength divisions were actually in the area.

===Operation Copperhead===
Copperhead was a small decoy operation within the scope of &quot;Bodyguard&quot; that was suggested by Clarke and planned by &#x27;A&#x27; Force. The deception, undertaken just prior to D-Day, was intended to mislead German intelligence as to the whereabouts of Bernard Montgomery. It was theorised that as a well-known battle commander, if Montgomery were outside England, that would signal to the Germans that an invasion was not imminent.

The actor M.E. Clifton James, who bore a strong resemblance to the general, made public appearances in Gibraltar and North Africa. The Allies hoped it would indicate a forthcoming invasion via the Mediterranean.

The operation is not known to have made a significant impact. According to captured enemy generals, German intelligence believed that it was Montgomery but still guessed that it was a feint.

==Normandy landings==
Elements of the &quot;Bodyguard&quot; plan were in operation on 6 June 1944 in support of Operation Neptune (the amphibious assault of Normandy). Elaborate naval deceptions (Operations Glimmer, Taxable and Big Drum) were undertaken in the English Channel. Small ships and aircraft simulated invasion fleets lying off Pas-de-Calais, Cap d&#x27;Antifer and the western flank of the real invasion force. At the same time Operation Titanic involved the RAF dropping fake paratroopers to the east and west of the Normandy landings.

Juan Pujol García, a Spanish double agent working for British intelligence (code named &quot;Garbo&quot;) in high standing with the Germans, transmitted information about the Allied invasion plan with a further warning that the Normandy invasion was a diversion. This information was transmitted at the behest of the British High Command in order to increase his credibility to the Germans and was done at a time when it was too late to fortify Normandy.

Following the landings, some small tactical deceptions were used to add further confusion. Operation Paradise (I–V) established a number of decoy exits and staging areas around the Normandy beaches to draw German attacks.

==Deception methods==
The &quot;Bodyguard&quot; deceptions were implemented in several ways, including double agents, radio traffic and visual deception. Once planning for each stage had been completed, various operational units were tasked with carrying out the deceptions. In some cases this could be specialist formations, such as R Force, but in other cases it fell to regular units.

===Special means===

A large part of the various &quot;Bodyguard&quot; operations involved the use of double agents. The British &quot;Double Cross&quot; anti-espionage operation had proven very successful from the outset of the war. The LCS was able to use double agents to send back misleading information about Allied invasion plans.

By contrast, Allied intelligence was very good. Ultra, signals intelligence from decrypted German radio transmission, confirmed to planners that the German high command believed in the &quot;Bodyguard&quot; deceptions and gave them the enemy&#x27;s order of battle.

===Visual deception===
The practice of using mock tanks and other military hardware had been developed during the North Africa campaign, especially in Operation Bertram for the attack at El Alamein.

For &quot;Bodyguard&quot;, the Allies put less reliance in those forms of deception since they believed that the German ability to directly reconnoitre England was limited. Some mock hardware was, however, created, particularly dummy landing craft that were stockpiled in the supposed FUSAG staging area.

==Aftermath==
Operation Bodyguard is regarded as a tactical success, delaying the Fifteenth Army in the Pas-de-Calais for seven weeks thus allowing the Allies to build a beachhead and ultimately win the Battle of Normandy. In his memoirs, General Omar Bradley called &quot;Bodyguard&quot; the &quot;single biggest hoax of the war&quot;.

In his 2004 book, &quot;The Deceivers&quot;, Thaddeus Holt attributes the success of &quot;Fortitude&quot; to the trial run of &quot;Cockade&quot; in 1943: &quot;&quot;FORTITUDE&quot; in 1944 could not have run as smoothly as it did if the London Controlling Section and its fellows had not gone through the exercise of &quot;COCKADE&quot; in the year before.&quot;

==References==
===Bibliography===
Books
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
Journals
* 
Websites</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3140889" start="0" end="19" title="Operation Bodyguard" label="Operation Bodyguard"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="44" end="56" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q2832578" start="57" end="66" title="military deception" label="deception"/>
<link wikidata="Q329888" start="92" end="105" title="Allies of World War II" label="Allied states"/>
<link wikidata="Q152412" start="216" end="242" title="Oberkommando der Wehrmacht" label="Oberkommando der Wehrmacht"/>
<link wikidata="Q3258946" start="341" end="367" title="London Controlling Section" label="London Controlling Section"/>
<link wikidata="Q150974" start="498" end="515" title="Tehran Conference" label="Tehran Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q12689" start="881" end="894" title="Pas-de-Calais" label="Pas-de-Calais"/>
<link wikidata="Q23522" start="900" end="907" title="Balkans" label="Balkans"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="918" end="924" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q20" start="926" end="932" title="Norway" label="Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q219" start="955" end="963" title="Bulgaria" label="Bulgaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057207" start="1457" end="1476" title="Operation Fortitude" label="Operation Fortitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q12689" start="1505" end="1518" title="Pas-de-Calais" label="Pas-de-Calais"/>
<link wikidata="Q8641370" start="1539" end="1572" title="Operation Overlord" label="Allied forces successfully landed"/>
<link wikidata="Q19428969" start="2326" end="2345" title="Advanced Headquarters &amp;#x27;A&amp;#x27; Force" label="&amp;#x27;A&amp;#x27; Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q81899" start="2368" end="2381" title="Dudley Clarke" label="Dudley Clarke"/>
<link wikidata="Q6221807" start="2458" end="2468" title="John Bevan (British Army officer)" label="John Bevan"/>
<link wikidata="Q150758" start="2773" end="2779" title="Enigma machine" label="Enigma"/>
<link wikidata="Q155921" start="3107" end="3121" title="Bletchley Park" label="Bletchley Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q825712" start="3210" end="3215" title="Ultra (cryptography)" label="Ultra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058375" start="3511" end="3523" title="double agent" label="double agent"/>
<link wikidata="Q869296" start="3536" end="3545" title="Double-Cross System" label="XX System"/>
<link wikidata="Q208109" start="4086" end="4096" title="Army Group" label="Army Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q157572" start="4112" end="4124" title="Army Group B" label="Army Group B"/>
<link wikidata="Q8641370" start="4296" end="4314" title="Operation Overlord" label="Operation Overlord"/>
<link wikidata="Q3391133" start="4463" end="4480" title="Operation Cockade" label="Operation Cockade"/>
<link wikidata="Q7098699" start="5068" end="5075" title="Ops (B)" label="Ops (B)"/>
<link wikidata="Q954820" start="5624" end="5628" title="Jael" label="Jael"/>
<link wikidata="Q19786" start="5649" end="5662" title="Old Testament" label="Old Testament"/>
<link wikidata="Q150974" start="6062" end="6079" title="Tehran Conference" label="Tehran Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q16470" start="6364" end="6369" title="D-Day" label="D-Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q8016" start="7342" end="7359" title="Winston Churchill" label="Winston Churchill"/>
<link wikidata="Q855" start="7363" end="7376" title="Joseph Stalin" label="Joseph Stalin"/>
<link wikidata="Q9916" start="8714" end="8731" title="Dwight Eisenhower" label="Dwight Eisenhower"/>
<link wikidata="Q1452869" start="8887" end="8906" title="Frederick E. Morgan" label="Frederick E. Morgan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7047264" start="9171" end="9180" title="Noel Wild" label="Noel Wild"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057207" start="9310" end="9329" title="Operation Fortitude" label="Operation Fortitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q216184" start="9628" end="9641" title="Western Front (World War II)" label="Western Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q6221807" start="9945" end="9955" title="John Bevan (British Army officer)" label="John Bevan"/>
<link wikidata="Q132158906" start="10026" end="10043" title="William Henry Baumer Jr." label="William H. Baumer"/>
<link wikidata="Q51977" start="11186" end="11198" title="field army" label="field armies"/>
<link wikidata="Q230071" start="11601" end="11620" title="British Fourth Army" label="British Fourth Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q23436" start="11631" end="11640" title="Edinburgh" label="Edinburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057207" start="11858" end="11872" title="Operation Skye" label="Operation Skye"/>
<link wikidata="Q163651" start="12055" end="12060" title="FUSAG" label="FUSAG"/>
<link wikidata="Q186492" start="12069" end="12095" title="George S. Patton" label="U.S. General George Patton"/>
<link wikidata="Q34640" start="12407" end="12422" title="English Channel" label="English Channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q14060" start="12522" end="12528" title="Rommel" label="Rommel"/>
<link wikidata="Q152025" start="12656" end="12674" title="Bernard Montgomery" label="Bernard Montgomery"/>
<link wikidata="Q41573" start="13620" end="13633" title="Bay of Biscay" label="Bay of Biscay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1479" start="13653" end="13661" title="Bordeaux" label="Bordeaux"/>
<link wikidata="Q5077" start="13909" end="13916" title="Garonne" label="Garonne"/>
<link wikidata="Q8039160" start="14273" end="14277" title="Wulf Schmidt" label="Tate"/>
<link wikidata="Q403394" start="14313" end="14318" title="Joan Pujol Garcia" label="Garbo"/>
<link wikidata="Q869296" start="14330" end="14346" title="Twenty Committee" label="Twenty Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q869296" start="16338" end="16357" title="Double-Cross System" label="Double-Cross System"/>
<link wikidata="Q639425" start="16383" end="16432" title="Sweden during World War II" label="Sweden maintained a neutral stance during the war"/>
<link wikidata="Q11432170" start="17078" end="17090" title="ball bearing" label="ball bearing"/>
<link wikidata="Q14945539" start="17704" end="17718" title="Ronald Wingate" label="Ronald Wingate"/>
<link wikidata="Q714777" start="18768" end="18791" title="Allied invasion of Italy" label="opened a front in Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q34374" start="19273" end="19278" title="Crete" label="Crete"/>
<link wikidata="Q218" start="19282" end="19289" title="Romania" label="Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q152025" start="19869" end="19887" title="Bernard Montgomery" label="Bernard Montgomery"/>
<link wikidata="Q2072694" start="20060" end="20078" title="M.E. Clifton James" label="M.E. Clifton James"/>
<link wikidata="Q1410" start="20153" end="20162" title="Gibraltar" label="Gibraltar"/>
<link wikidata="Q27381" start="20167" end="20179" title="North Africa" label="North Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q16470" start="20567" end="20584" title="Operation Neptune" label="Operation Neptune"/>
<link wikidata="Q4176401" start="20633" end="20649" title="D-Day naval deceptions" label="naval deceptions"/>
<link wikidata="Q3519526" start="20895" end="20912" title="Operation Titanic" label="Operation Titanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q403394" start="21005" end="21022" title="Juan Pujol García" label="Juan Pujol García"/>
<link wikidata="Q126938" start="22018" end="22025" title="R Force" label="R Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q869296" start="22208" end="22220" title="Double-Cross System" label="Double Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q836610" start="22466" end="22486" title="signals intelligence" label="signals intelligence"/>
<link wikidata="Q11167066" start="22660" end="22675" title="order of battle" label="order of battle"/>
<link wikidata="Q7096801" start="22829" end="22846" title="Operation Bertram" label="Operation Bertram"/>
<link wikidata="Q4875869" start="23354" end="23363" title="beachhead" label="beachhead"/>
<link wikidata="Q700674" start="23387" end="23405" title="Operation Cobra" label="Battle of Normandy"/>
<link wikidata="Q207955" start="23431" end="23443" title="Omar Bradley" label="Omar Bradley"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="252163" wikidata="Q2348027" url="?curid=252163" title="Operation Epsom">
<text>Operation Epsom, also known as the First Battle of the Odon, was a British offensive in the Second World War between 26 and 30 June 1944, during the Battle of Normandy. The offensive was intended to outflank and seize the German-occupied city of Caen from the west, an important Allied objective, in the early stages of Operation Overlord, the Allied invasion of north-west Europe.

Preceded by Operation Martlet to secure the right flank of the advance, Operation Epsom began early on 26 June, with units of the 15th (Scottish) Infantry Division advancing behind a rolling artillery barrage. Air cover was sporadic for much of the operation, because poor weather in England forced the last-minute cancellation of bomber support. Accompanied by the 31st Tank Brigade, the 15th (Scottish) Division made steady progress and by the end of the first day had overrun much of the German outpost line, although some difficulties remained in securing the flanks. In mutually-costly fighting over the following two days, a foothold was secured across the River Odon and efforts were made to expand this, by capturing tactically valuable points around the salient and moving up the 43rd (Wessex) Infantry Division. By 30 June, after German counter-attacks, some of the British forces across the river were withdrawn and the captured ground consolidated, bringing the operation to a close.

Many casualties were suffered by both sides but unlike General Bernard Montgomery, the Allied commander in Normandy, &quot;Generalfeldmarschall&quot; Erwin Rommel was unable to withdraw units into reserve after the battle, as they were needed to hold the front line. The British retained the initiative, attacked several more times over the following two weeks and captured Caen in Operation Charnwood in mid-July. Interpretations of the intention and conduct of Operation Epsom differ but there is general agreement concerning its effect on the balance of forces in Normandy. The Germans contained the offensive but only by committing all their strength, including two panzer divisions just arrived in Normandy, which had been intended for an offensive against Allied positions around Bayeux.

==Background==
Operation Overlord called for the British Second Army (Lieutenant-General Miles Dempsey), to secure the Caen and then form a front line from Caumont-l&#x27;Éventé to the south-east of Caen. The intention was to acquire space for airfields and to protect the left flank of the US First Army (Lieutenant General Omar N. Bradley), while it fought the Battle of Cherbourg. 
A section of the full British Army Order No 1 transcript (I Corps Operations Order No. 1, WO 171/258) read, 
Possession of Caen and its surroundings would give the Second Army a suitable staging area for a push south to capture Falaise, which could be used as the pivot for a swing left to advance on Argentan and then towards the Touques River. Hampered by congestion in the beachhead, which delayed the deployment of its armoured support and forced to divert effort to attack strongly held German positions along the route to the town, the 3rd Infantry Division was unable to assault Caen in force on D-Day and was stopped short by the 21st Panzer Division. Follow-up attacks failed as German reinforcements arrived. Abandoning the direct approach, Operation Perch—a pincer attack by I and XXX Corps—was launched on 7 June, to encircle Caen from the east and west.

I Corps, striking south out of the Orne bridgehead, was halted by the 21st Panzer Division and the attack by XXX Corps west of Caen was stopped in front of Tilly-sur-Seulles by the &quot;Panzer-Lehr-Division&quot;. To force &quot;Panzer-Lehr&quot; to withdraw or surrender and to keep operations fluid, part of the 7th Armoured Division pushed through a gap in the German front line near Caumont and captured Villers-Bocage. The Battle of Villers-Bocage led to the vanguard of the 7th Armoured Division being ambushed and withdrawing from the town but by 17 June, &quot;Panzer Lehr&quot; had also been forced back and XXX Corps had taken Tilly-sur-Seulles.

Another attack by the 7th Armoured Division and other offensive operations were abandoned when a severe storm descended on the English Channel on 19 June. The storm lasted for three days and further delayed the Allied build-up. Most of the convoys of landing craft and ships already at sea were driven back to ports in Britain; towed barges and other loads (including of floating roadways for the Mulberry harbours) were lost and 800 craft were left stranded on Normandy beaches until the spring tides in July.

Planning began for a second offensive, Operation Dreadnought, from the Orne bridgehead by the British VIII Corps (Lieutenant-General Richard O&#x27;Connor), outflanking Caen from the east. Dreadnought was cancelled following objections from O&#x27;Connor after studying the ground and an attack towards Évrecy was considered and rejected, either by Montgomery or Dempsey. In a postwar interview with Chester Wilmot, Dempsey claimed that he told Montgomery that he was going to cancel the proposed operation on 18 June. The weather from 19 to 22 June grounded Allied aircraft and the Germans took advantage of the respite from air attacks to improve their defences. Infantry positions were protected with minefields and 88 mm guns were dug into hedgerows and woods covering the approaches to Caen.

==Plan==
On 20 June, Field Marshal Erwin Rommel, the commander of &quot;Heeresgruppe B&quot; (Army Group B), was ordered by Hitler to launch a counter-offensive against the Allies between the towns of Caumont-l&#x27;Éventé (Caumont) and Saint-Lô. The objective was to cut a corridor between the American and British armies, by recapturing the city of Bayeux (taken by the British on 7 June) and the coast beyond. Four SS panzer divisions and one &quot;Heer&quot; panzer division were assigned to the task. Their assault was to be spearheaded by the II SS Panzer Corps, comprising the 9th SS Panzer Division &quot;Hohenstaufen&quot; and 10th SS Panzer Division &quot;Frundsberg&quot;, recently arrived from the Eastern Front. The 1st SS Panzer Division &quot;Leibstandarte SS Adolf Hitler&quot;, 2nd SS Panzer Division &quot;Das Reich&quot; and 2nd Panzer Division would support the attack. Most of the tanks used by these formations were Panzer IVs and Panthers, supplemented by sturmgeschütz (assault guns) and Tigers—the Panthers and Tigers being among the most lethal and well-protected German armoured vehicles of the war.

On 18 June, Montgomery issued a directive to Dempsey to launch a new pincer attack with the aim of capturing Caen. The initial plan called for I and XXX Corps to attack west of Caen for four days, before VIII Corps launched the main attack out of the Orne bridgehead, east of Caen, on 22 June. It was soon realised that VIII Corps would not be able to assemble within the small perimeter of the Orne bridgehead and the following day the plan was revised. A preliminary operation was to take place three days before the main assault. The 51st (Highland) Infantry Division (I Corps) was ordered to strike south from the Orne bridgehead, to prevent units of the 21st Panzer Division from being transferred. Operation Martlet was to commence one day before Epsom with the 49th (West Riding) Infantry Division and the 8th Armoured Brigade (XXX Corps) securing the right flank of VIII Corps, by capturing the high ground to the south-west.

The main role in Operation Epsom was assigned to the newly arrived VIII Corps, consisting of 60,244 men. VIII Corps would launch their offensive from the beachhead gained by the 3rd Canadian Infantry Division. Their operation was to take place in four phases, with its ultimate objective being the high ground near Bretteville-sur-Laize, south of Caen. VIII Corps would be supported by fire from 736 guns, three cruisers and the monitor . The Royal Air Force was to provide a preliminary bombardment by 250 bombers and close air support thereafter.

The 15th (Scottish) Infantry Division would lead the assault. During Phase I, codenamed &quot;Gout&quot;, they were to take the villages of Sainte Manvieu and Cheux. In Phase II (&quot;Hangover&quot;), the division would advance to capture several crossings over the Odon River and the villages of Mouen and Grainville-sur-Odon. Should resistance during the opening phase prove light, the 11th Armoured Division would seize the bridges over the Odon River by &quot;coup de main&quot;. During the first two phases, the 43rd (Wessex) Infantry Division—to be reinforced on 28 June with the infantry brigade of the Guards Armoured Division—was to remain on the start line to provide a &quot;firm base&quot;.
In the third phase, &quot;Impetigo&quot;, the 43rd Division would move forward to relieve all Scottish infantry north of the Odon. The 15th Division would then assemble across the river and expand the bridgehead by capturing several important villages. In the final phase, codenamed &quot;Goitre&quot;, elements of the 43rd Division would cross the river to hold the area taken, while the 15th Division would continue to expand their bridgehead. The 11th Armoured Division would attempt to force a crossing over the River Orne and advance on their final objective of Bretteville-sur-Laize. The 4th Armoured Brigade, although attached to the 11th Armoured Division, was restricted to operations between the Odon and Orne to protect the Corps flank and to be in a position to attack westwards or towards Caen, as necessary.

Depending on the success of VIII Corps attack, I Corps would then launch two supporting operations codenamed &quot;Aberlour&quot; and &quot;Ottawa&quot;. In the former the 3rd Infantry Division, supported by a Canadian infantry brigade, would attack north of Caen; the latter would be a move by the 3rd Canadian Infantry Division and the 2nd Canadian Armoured Brigade to take the village and airfield of Carpiquet. Originally planned for 22 June, Epsom was postponed until 26 June, to make up deficiencies in manpower and materiel. The initial opposition was expected to come from the depleted 12th SS Panzer Division Hitlerjugend (&quot;Hitler Youth&quot;), elements of the 21st Panzer Division, and the Panzer Lehr.

==Operation Martlet==

On 23 June, the 51st (Highland) Infantry Division attacked with the 152nd (Highland) Infantry Brigade. The Highland infantry advanced towards the village of Sainte-Honorine-la-Chardronette before daybreak, without an artillery bombardment, surprising the German garrison. The Highlanders were counter-attacked by Kampfgruppe von Luck of the 21st Panzer Division during the morning but by midday the village was firmly in British hands. German attention and resources were diverted by the success of the Highlanders as VIII Corps prepared for further attacks out of the Orne bridgehead.

At 0415 on 25 June, the 49th (West Riding) Infantry Division supported by the 8th Armoured Brigade and 250 guns, began Operation Martlet against the junction of the Panzer Lehr and 12th SS Panzer divisions. The first objective, Fontenay-le-Pesnel was fought over all day but stubborn German resistance prevented its capture. An infantry battalion supported by tanks, advanced around the village to the west and took Tessel Wood, where they received several German counter-attacks, which were repulsed by British artillery fire and close air support. By nightfall, the 49th Division had failed to reach Rauray leaving the terrain dominating the right flank of VIII Corps in German hands. Martlet forced the I SS Panzer Corps to commit the remaining tanks of the 12th SS Panzer Division against the XXX Corps front, for a counter-attack the following day. During the night, the Germans in Fontenay-le-Pesnel withdrew to straighten the front line and infantry from the 49th Division secured the village before dawn.

==Battle==

===26 June===

Poor weather hampered the start of Operation Epsom on 26 June, where rain over the battlefield had made the ground boggy; over the United Kingdom in the early hours, there was a heavy mist resulting in aircraft being grounded and the bombing being called off. No. 83 Group RAF, based in Normandy, were able to provide air support throughout the operation.

The 49th (West Riding) Infantry Division resumed Operation Martlet at 0650, although much of its artillery support from VIII Corps was diverted to the main operation. The Germans were able to slow the British advance and then launched an armoured riposte. This initially gained ground but was stalled when British armour moved up and the two sides duelled in the confined terrain. Informed during the afternoon that a big British offensive was under way further east, SS-Standartenführer Kurt Meyer of 12th SS Panzer called off the counter-attack and ordered his tank companies to return to their positions south of Rauray. During the rest of the day the 49th Division was able to make progress, eventually halting just north of Rauray.

At 0730 the 44th (Lowland) Infantry Brigade and the 46th (Highland) Infantry Brigade of the 15th (Scottish) Infantry Division, supported by the 31st Tank Brigade moved off their start lines behind a rolling barrage fired from 344 guns. The 46th Brigade initially advanced without armoured support, because in bypassing the mine and booby trap-ridden village of Le Mesnil-Patry, its tanks were forced to negotiate more minefields flanking the village. The 2nd Battalion, Glasgow Highlanders faced only light resistance, while the 9th Battalion The Cameronians, ran into the grenadiers of the 12th SS Panzer Division, who had allowed the barrage to pass over their positions before opening fire. Reuniting with their tanks at around 10:00, by midday the two battalions were fighting for control of their initial objectives; Cheux and Le Haut du Bosq.

The 44th Brigade encountered little opposition until coming under machine gun fire at a small stream, following which German resistance was much more determined. Between 08:30 and 09:30, the 6th Battalion, The Royal Scots Fusiliers and the 8th Battalion, The Royal Scots reached their initial objectives of Sainte Manvieu and La Gaule. After much hand to hand fighting they believed the villages to be captured just after midday, although they later found that some German remnants were holding out. Tanks and infantry from the 12th SS and the 21st Panzer divisions launched two counter-attacks to regain Sainte Manvieu but were repulsed with the aid of massed artillery fire. The main German opposition, in this section of their outpost line, had been from part of the I Battalion, 26th Panzergrenadier Regiment, most of which had been overrun and the divisional pioneer battalion. The Germans in Rauray, which had not been captured the previous day, were able to subject the British brigades to observed artillery and indirect tank fire, causing considerable casualties and destruction, especially in Cheux.
At 12:50 a squadron of the 11th Armoured Division reconnaissance regiment, north of Cheux, was ordered to advance towards the Odon, preparatory to an attempt by the divisional armoured brigade to rush the bridges. Owing to minefields near the village, debris blocking its streets and German holdouts attacking the tanks, it was not until 14:00 that the regiment was able to make progress. By 14:30 the squadron arrived on a ridge south of Cheux where it was engaged by twenty Panzer IVs, sent by the 12th SS Panzer Division from the Rauray area, Tiger tanks from the 3rd Company 101st Heavy SS Panzer Battalion and tanks from the 21st Panzer Division. More tanks from the 11th Armoured Division arrived but determined German resistance halted any further advance and by the end of the day the division had lost twenty-one tanks.

At 18:00 the 227th (Highland) Brigade of the 15th (Scottish) Infantry Division, was committed to the battle. The Highlanders were delayed by fighting in support of the rest of the division and only two companies from the 2nd Battalion Gordon Highlanders made much progress. They entered the northern outskirts of Colleville by 21:00 but soon found themselves cut off by German counter-attacks. After much confused fighting one company was able to break out and rejoin the battalion. To stop the British offensive, that evening Field Marshal Rommel ordered assistance from all available units of the II SS Panzer Corps.

===27 June===

With no attacks during the night, the German command believed that the British offensive had been contained. During the early hours of 27 June, the II SS Panzer Corps was ordered to resume preparations for its counter-offensive towards Bayeux. On the right of the British advance, the I SS Panzer Corps launched a counter-attack with 80 tanks, which was disorganised by artillery-fire, before foundering on the anti-tank guns of the 49th (West Riding) Infantry Division, who then resumed their attempt to secure VIII Corps flank. Rauray was taken by the 49th Division at 16:00 on 27 June, after further determined fighting against the 12th SS Panzer Division. German forces had been diverted from opposing VIII Corps advance and the fall of Rauray denied the Germans an important observation point, although they remained in control of an area of high ground to the south.

Epsom was resumed at 04:45 by the 10th Battalion, Highland Light Infantry of the 227 (Highland) Infantry Brigade. With support from Churchill tanks; the battalion intended to make a bid for the Odon crossing at Gavrus. The Highlanders immediately ran into stiff opposition from elements of the 12th SS Panzer Division and despite artillery support were unable to advance all day, fighting that was costly for both sides. At 07:30 the 2nd Battalion, Argyll and Sutherland Highlanders, also of the 227th Highland Brigade, launched an attack aimed at capturing the Odon crossing at Tourmauville, north-west of the village of Baron-sur-Odon. With the German forces engaged by the Highland Light Infantry, the Argyll and Sutherland Highlanders supported by the 23rd Hussars, were able to advance to Colleville with relative ease. There the small German garrison supported by 88 mm guns, inflicted many casualties upon the British and denied them the village until the afternoon. The battalion seized the bridge at Tourmauville at around 17:00 and set up a bridgehead. By 19:00, two depleted squadrons of the 23rd Hussars and a company of the 8th Battalion, Rifle Brigade (Prince Consort&#x27;s Own) had crossed the Odon into the bridgehead.

The remainder of the 15th (Scottish) Infantry Division around Cheux and Sainte Manvieu, was being relieved by the 43rd (Wessex) Infantry Division. When the 5th Battalion, Duke of Cornwall&#x27;s Light Infantry, of the 214th Infantry Brigade, moved into the outskirts of Cheux, they found that the Scottish infantry had moved on and the vacant position had been reoccupied by grenadiers of 12th SS Panzer Division. After fighting to recapture the position, at 09:30 the battalion was counter-attacked by six Panthers of the 2nd Panzer Division. The attack penetrated Cheux and several British anti-tank guns were destroyed before it was beaten off. Further attacks by the 2nd Panzer Division were halted but the entire front was &quot;a mass of small engagements&quot;. For the rest of the morning and afternoon, the Scottish infantry and the 4th and 29th Armoured brigades expanded the salient north of the Odon and secured the rear of the Argyll and Sutherland Highlanders. During late evening the men of the 159th Infantry Brigade (11th Armoured Division) were transported in trucks through the narrow &quot;Scottish Corridor&quot; to Tourville, where they dismounted and crossed the Odon on foot to reinforce the bridgehead. During the night , a 2,500-strong battle group from the 2nd SS Panzer Division arrived at the front and was placed under the command of the Panzer Lehr Division.

===28 June===
During the early hours of 28 June, a battle group of the 1st SS Panzer Division, &quot;Kampfgruppe Frey&quot;, arrived at the front and was placed under the command of the 12th SS Panzer Division. At 0810, General Friedrich Dollmann, the 7th Army commander, ordered SS-Obergruppenführer Paul Hausser to divert the II SS Panzer Corps, to counter-attack south of Cheux. Hausser replied that no counter-attack could be launched until the following day, as so many of his units had yet to reach the front. The German command was thrown into disarray by Dollmann&#x27;s sudden death, when Rommel and Gerd von Rundstedt (OB West) were en route to a conference with Hitler and out of touch with the situation. It was not until 1500 that Hausser was appointed commander of the 7th Army, with Willi Bittrich replacing him as commander of II SS Panzer Corps. (Hausser was advised to retain control of the Corps until the following morning.) Pending the return of Rommel to Normandy, Hausser was also to be supreme commander in the invasion area. At 1700 the command structure was changed again; the 7th Army under Hausser would be responsible for the invasion front facing the American army, while the Panzer Group West (General Geyr von Schweppenburg) was to be responsible for the invasion front facing the Anglo-Canadian forces.
At 0530 elements of the 15th (Scottish) Infantry Division with tank support, launched a new assault to capture the village of Grainville-sur-Odon. After shelling and close quarter street fighting, the Scots secured the village by 1300 hours; German counter-attacks followed but were repulsed. At 0600 the Germans began two strong flanking attacks, with the intention of pinching out the British salient. &quot;Kampfgruppe Frey&quot; on the eastern flank, launched an attack north of the Odon, supported by Panzer IVs of the 21st Panzer Division. This reached the villages of Mouen and Tourville but the British counter-attacked from the direction of Cheux, resulting in confused heavy fighting throughout the day. Frey&#x27;s battle group managed to gain control of Mouen and British counter-attacks supported by tanks halted any further advance but were unable to retake the village. British patrols found Marcelet partly empty, the German front line having been pulled back towards Carpiquet.

On the western flank, &quot;Kampfgruppe Weidinger&quot; supported by Panthers, tried to recapture Brettevillette, Grainville-sur-Odon and ultimately Mondrainville. The British defenders (Brettevillette and on Point 110: the 1st Battalion Tyneside Scottish, 11th Battalion Durham Light Infantry (49th (West Riding) Infantry Division) and 4th/7th Dragoon Guards (8th Armoured Brigade). In Grainville-sur-Odon and le Valtru: 7th Battalion Seaforth Highlanders, 9th Battalion Cameronians (Scottish Rifles) and 9th Royal Tank Regiment.) held their positions, launching local counter-attacks to retake lost ground and eventually the German offensive was stopped, within of linking up with the lead elements of &quot;Kampfgruppe Frey&quot;.

South of the Odon, at 0900 the Argyll and Sutherland Highlanders advanced out of the bridgehead, to capture a bridge north of the village of Gavrus. Heavy fighting took place into the afternoon before both village and bridge were in Scottish hands. Infantry from the 11th Armoured Division, expanded the bridgehead by taking the village of Baron-sur-Odon and the 23rd Hussars with infantry advanced on Hill 112 (). Having secured its northern slope and dislodged the defenders from its crest, they were unable to advance further, due to the Germans dug in on the reverse slope. Several counter-attacks were launched by 12th SS Panzer and the battered Hussars were relieved at 1500 by the 3rd Royal Tank Regiment but neither side was able to take complete control of the hill. The 11th Armoured Division had lost nearly 40 tanks on its slopes by the end of the day and was surrounded on three sides but troops managed to reach and reinforce the position.

===29 June===
With the weather improving over the United Kingdom and Normandy, Hausser&#x27;s preparations for his counter stroke came under continual harassment from Allied aircraft and artillery fire, delaying the start of the attack to the afternoon. From the number of German reinforcements arriving in the VIII Corps sector and aerial reconnaissance, O&#x27;Connor suspected that the Germans were organising a counter-stroke. XXX Corps was still some way to the north, leaving the VIII Corps right flank vulnerable, O&#x27;Connor postponed attacks by I Corps and ordered VIII Corps onto the defensive. Dempsey, privy to ULTRA decrypts of intercepted German signal traffic, knew the counter-attack was coming and approved O&#x27;Connor&#x27;s precautions. VIII Corps began to reorganise to meet the attack. Supply echelons for Hausser&#x27;s divisions were located in the Évrecy–Noyers-Bocage–Villers-Bocage area and were the focus of RAF fighter-bomber attention throughout the morning and early afternoon; the RAF claimed the destruction of over 200 vehicles.

VIII Corps also launched spoiling attacks, at 0800 1st Battalion Worcestershire Regiment, from the 43rd Division, assaulted Mouen, without tanks behind an artillery barrage. By 1100 the battalion had forced the 1st SS Panzer Division panzergrenadiers back and the 7th Battalion Somerset Light Infantry moved up and dug in on the Caen–Villers-Bocage road. The 129th Brigade of the 43rd Division, swept the woods and orchards around Tourville-sur-Odon, before crossing the river north of Baron-sur-Odon and clearing the south bank. An attempt by the 44th Brigade of the 15th Division to advance towards the Odon and link up with the force holding the Gavrus bridges failed, leaving this position isolated and in the salient the 44th Battalion Royal Tank Regiment failed to capture Hill 113 () north of Évrecy, after clashing with 10th SS Panzer Division and losing six tanks. Elements of the 11th Armoured Division attacked Esquay-Notre-Dame west of Hill 112 but were repulsed and an attack by the 8th Rifle Brigade and the 3rd Royal Tank Regiment on the southern slope of the hill, drove the Germans from the position.
Hausser intended that the 9th SS Panzer Division, with &quot;Kampfgruppe Weidinger&quot; protecting its left flank, to cut across the British salient north of the Odon, while the 10th SS Panzer Division retook Gavrus and Hill 112 south of the river. The 9th SS Panzer attack began at 1400, heavily supported by artillery. The 19th and 20th SS Panzergrenadier Regiments supported by Panthers, Panzer IV&#x27;s and assault guns attacked Grainville, le Haut du Bosq and le Valtru, aiming for Cheux. A British company was overrun and tanks and infantry penetrated le Valtru, where anti-tank guns knocked out four German tanks in the village and artillery fire forced their supporting infantry to withdraw. Confused fighting, at times hand-to-hand, took place outside Grainville and the Panzergrenadiers captured a tactically important wood, before being forced back by a British counter-attack. The Panzergrenadiers claimed they also captured Grainville but no British sources support this and by nightfall British infantry were in control of the village.

At around 1600, the British captured an officer of the 9th SS Panzer Division who was conducting a reconnaissance. He was found to be carrying a map and notebook containing details of new attacks. Around 1830, the Germans attacked the 15th (Scottish) Infantry Division on the right flank. One unit was being relieved and in the confusion, German tanks and infantry slipped through the British defences, with some units advancing before running into heavy resistance. By 2300, the attack by the 9th SS Panzer had been stopped. Supporting attacks against the British eastern flank had been planned but German tank concentrations assembling in the Carpiquet area, had been so severely disrupted by RAF fighter-bombers during the afternoon, that the attacks never materialised.

The 10th SS Panzer Division launched its attack behind schedule at 1430. Following clashes earlier in the day the British were waiting but after five hours of battle, the Scottish infantry defending Gavrus had been pushed back into a pocket around the bridge, north of the village. An artillery bombardment caused the Germans to withdraw but the British did not reoccupy the village. Moving towards Hill 113, the 2nd Grenadier Battalion, Panzergrenadier Regiment 21 and 2nd Battalion, Panzer Regiment 10 of 10th SS Panzer ran into the 44th Battalion The Royal Tank Regiment and 2nd Battalion (The King&#x27;s Royal Rifle Corps) in Évrecy, who thwarted their attempt to occupy the hill. Dealing with this obstacle took the remainder of the day and the attack on Hill 112 was postponed. The Germans claimed the destruction of 28 tanks while the British recorded the loss of 12.

Believing the German attacks on 29 June indicated more counter-attacks for the following day, Dempsey reinforced the Odon bridgehead with a brigade of the 43rd division and pulled in its perimeter. The 159th Infantry Brigade of the 11th Armoured Division was placed under the command of the 15th (Scottish) Infantry Division and acceding to O’Connor’s wishes for additional infantry, Dempsey attached the newly arrived 53rd (Welsh) Infantry Division to VIII Corps; the lead brigade arrived near the Epsom start line during the night. To hold Hill 112, it was necessary hold Évrecy and Hill 113 for which there were insufficient troops and Dempsey ordered the 29th Armoured Brigade to abandon the hill. To hold the area between Rauray and the Odon, Dempsey withdrew the 29th Armoured Brigade north across the river after dark, ready for the expected German offensive.

===30 June===

Bittrich ordered a resumption of the offensive during the night of 29–30 June, hoping to avoid Allied air support. The 19th and 20th Regiments of the 9th SS Panzer Division, renewed their attacks against Grainville-sur-Odon and le Valtru in the dark but little progress was made against the 11th Armoured Division north of the Odon and heavy British artillery bombardments. At 0120, the 10th SS Panzer Division started to move towards Hill 112 and at dawn, covered by a heavy artillery barrage they assaulted the vacated British positions. Unaware that the British had pulled back, Panzergrenadiers and tanks of the 10th SS Panzer advanced on the hill from the south and south-west and infantry from 12th SS Panzer attacked from the east and south-east. Meeting no opposition, by noon the Germans had occupied the hill. A British counter-attack and artillery fire broke up a follow-up attack towards Baron-sur-Odon.

Bittrich called off further offensive action against VIII Corps. In the evening Hausser, commanding the 7th Army, informed Rommel&#x27;s headquarters that his counter-attacks had been temporarily suspended due to &quot;tenacious enemy resistance&quot; and intensive Allied artillery and naval gunfire. Unaware of this and believing that more German attacks would follow, Dempsey closed down Operation Epsom. The front gradually settled down save for skirmishing, although both sides spent the remainder of the day heavily shelling one another. The battleship HMS &quot;Rodney&quot; contributed by bombarding villages suspected of containing German headquarters; one was later found to have housed the headquarters of the I SS Panzer Corps. With no further British offensive moves due, in the afternoon the Gavrus bridges were given up, the Scottish defenders being withdrawn across the Odon. At 2030 the town of Villers-Bocage, a vital traffic centre for the German forces, was destroyed by 250 RAF heavy bombers. It had been intended to catch German troops by the bombing but only French civilians were present.

===1 July===

The II SS Panzer Corps resumed its counter offensive on 1 July, after spending most of the preceding 24 hours regrouping. Unaware that the British had ended their operation and with overcast weather interfering with Allied air support, Bittrich believed he had an opportunity to prevent the 11th Armoured Division continuing its advance across the Orne. Before dawn the 10th SS Panzer Division advanced, supported by heavy mortar and artillery fire. The Germans took the village of Baron-sur-Odon quickly but a counter-attack by the 31st Tank Brigade retook it by noon. Heavy shelling broke up other attacks by 10th SS Panzer from Hill 112 and British patrols later found Panzergrenadiers on the northern slope of the hill.

The 9th SS Panzer Division spent the day attempting to force the British lines between Rauray and the Odon. Supplemented by Panzergrenadiers of the 2nd SS Panzer Division and following a preliminary bombardment, tanks and infantry of 9th SS Panzer advanced behind a smoke screen and broke through the outer British defences. The Germans were stopped by secondary positions in front of Rauray and on high ground to the south-east, although some troops penetrated as far as Haut du Bosq. Further German attacks throughout the day, were met with intense artillery fire and made no progress, in the early evening a British counter-attack with Sherman and flame-throwing Churchill Crocodile tanks restored the original front line. The attacks were costly for both sides, thirty German tanks were claimed destroyed, mostly by the 49th (West Riding) Infantry Division, troops of the 12th SS Panzer Division had been repulsed during the morning and artillery fire halted attacks from other formations.

==Aftermath==

===Analysis===
Having had to commit his last reserves to contain the British offensive, on 29 June Rommel requested permission from Hitler to allow the 7th Army to begin a fighting withdrawal towards the River Seine; a move which would be mirrored by German forces in southern France to form a new front line along the Seine towards the Swiss border. This was partially endorsed by Hausser, who on 30 June proposed a retirement from Caen. Encouraged by the fighting in the valley of the Odon, Hitler stated that &quot;we must not allow mobile warfare to develop&quot;, committing his troops in Normandy to &quot;a policy of aggressive and unyielding defence&quot;. On 2 July, British patrols obtained the first evidence of this, reporting that south of the Odon the Germans were digging in. Aerial photographs taken two days later showed large numbers of new weapon positions and by 8 July, the German forces facing VIII Corps were dug in. Some local adjustments occurred as both sides sought to improve their tactical position and the 12th SS Panzer Division captured Fontaine-Étoupefour on 2 July.
VIII Corps, in battle for the first time, had broken through elaborate German defensive positions and advanced nearly . By throwing in their last reserves, the Germans had been able to achieve a defensive success at the operational level, by containing the British offensive. More than 4,000 casualties were inflicted upon the British but the effort cost the Germans more than 3,000 men. The German commanders had been forced to commit their armoured reserves piecemeal to meet threats as they developed, counter-attacking at a disadvantage. Over tanks were destroyed, the organisation of the remaining forces was disrupted and their offensive power much reduced. With few infantry divisions to relieve them, the panzer divisions were forced to remain in the front line rather than disengaging to recover.

Stephen Hart wrote in 2007 that post-war memoirs by Allied generals led to disputes along national lines during the 1950s and 1960s, with American historians generally critical of Montgomery and the actions of the Anglo-Canadian forces, while &quot;pro-Montgomery&quot; historians set out to refute them. Also published during this period were the national official campaign histories, which were thoroughly researched but avoided detailed critical analysis of the controversies. During the 1980s, revisionist writers concentrated on the perceived deficiencies of the Allies and since the late 1990s, two schools of thought have been revising the revisionists, some expanding on revisionist work by providing a more detailed campaign analysis and those who have tried to show that the techniques employed by the Anglo-Canadian forces were realistic for the circumstances encountered Normandy.

In 1983, Carlo D’Este wrote that the most logical place for a British attack would have been out of the Orne bridgehead, on the extreme eastern flank of the Allied lodgement. An attack from the eastern flank had been rejected by Montgomery, Dempsey and O’Connor as unrealistic. Some writers described the intent of Epsom as an attack to gain ground but in 2004, Andrew Williams wrote that through Ultra decodes, Montgomery knew of Rommel&#x27;s plan to attack towards Bayeux and that Epsom was intended to forestall it. Chester Wilmot wrote in 1952 that the operation was intended to draw the I SS Panzer Corps and the newly arrived II SS Panzer Corps into battle around Caen. Hart wrote that Montgomery wanted to keep the initiative and prevent German armoured forces from moving from to the west against the US First Army or being relieved and forming a reserve. The arrival of the II SS Panzer Corps was a catalyst for Operation Epsom, which retaining the initiative by forcing the German command to use the Corps against VIII Corps. Max Hastings wrote in 1985 that &quot;no sane commander&quot; would mount an attack as big as Epsom without &quot;every hope of breaking through the German defences, or at least of causing the enemy to make substantial withdrawals&quot;. Carlo D’Este wrote that &quot;No amount of pretence can conceal that the real object had been a short pincer movement to outflank Caen&quot;.

Lloyd Clark wrote, &quot;On the battlefield, Epsom ended, rather ignominiously, in a sort of draw&quot; and that judging the effects of Operation Epsom is hampered by disagreement about Montgomery&#x27;s intent. In written orders Montgomery required an advance across the Orne River and the capture of high ground south of Caen, which was prevented by the defenders. Clark wrote that there were implicit objectives with strategic implications, more important than the capture of ground. In 1971, Stephen Ambrose wrote of Epsom veering off-course from the plan and D&#x27;Este that Epsom was &quot;an operation of immense intentions which were not attained&quot;, calling it a &quot;dismal failure&quot;. In 2004, Simon Trew and Stephen Badsey wrote of the British battle that it &quot;... took most of six Panzer Divisions to stop Epsom short of its final objectives...&quot; and Michael Reynolds in 2002 wrote that without the commitment of the six divisions, it was highly likely that the British offensive would have achieved its goals. Ian Daglish in 2007 wrote that while the original concept of Epsom had failed, the offensive was a strategic success. By withdrawing the 11th Armoured Division across the Odon and then into reserve, the Second Army had re-created the threat of an offensive near Caen. By the end of June, all German armoured forces in Normandy were concentrated on the Second Army front.

Milton Shulman had written in 1947 that with the defeat of its second armoured counter-attack in June, the German command had thrown away its most effective troops and Reynolds wrote that while the operation was costly for the British, it caused &quot;grievous losses&quot; to the Germans. In the VIII Corps history published in 1945, G. S. Jackson wrote that Epsom failed in its overt goal but that &quot;when seen as part of Montgomery&#x27;s series of rapid and consecutive blows against the German Army in Normandy, the importance of Epsom becomes more apparent and there is little doubt that it did play a significant part in the Allies&#x27; eventual success in the region&quot;. D&#x27;Este wrote that the losses inflicted on the German army were &quot;purely in terms of men and material&quot;. Terry Copp, in 2003, wrote that too much emphasis had been given to a &quot;win-lose&quot; criterion, whereas a cost-benefit approach provided more insight. Describing the standard German practice of counter-attacking when driven from a position, Copp wrote that the Germans courted losses that could not be readily replaced, &quot;One such counter-attack on 22 July resulted in 10SS regaining control of the Bon Repas–Évrecy road, a clear victory in a win-lose narrative but a typical German defeat in any cost-benefit analysis&quot;.

In 2013, Buckley wrote that by 1 July, there was a stalemate in which the British were established south of the Odon but retired from Hill 112, which may have been premature. The Germans had maintained a continuous front but only by using reserves which made it impossible to begin the counter-offensive planned by , which made the offensive a considerable Allied success, as part of a strategy of attrition based on organised fire power. Looked on as an attempt to break through and force the Germans out of Caen the operation failed but in terms of Montgomery&#x27;s strategy it was a costly victory. The German defence of Normandy never recovered from the damage inflicted during Epsom, the initiative was lost and German counter-attack tactics failed in the face of Allied fire power, with even greater cost than that inflicted on the British; the German command structure and assumptions on which the defence was based were undermined.

===Casualties===
Lloyd Clark wrote that the 15th (Scottish) Infantry Division suffered casualties of and from 27 June to 2 July. John Buckley gave casualties for the division as killed, the casualties incurred from June 1944 to May 1945 and that the other units in the operation had The casualties among the 11th Armoured Division and 43rd (Wessex) Infantry Division, were killed in the 11th Armoured Division. No figures are provided for the 49th (West Riding) Infantry Division, 51st (Highland) Infantry Division or the 8th Armoured Brigade that conducted Operation Martlet and attacks in support of Epsom. From 26 to 30 June, VIII Corps suffered casualties, and On 1 July, a further were killed and wounded and were reported missing. These figures exclude formations in Operation Martlet and attacks in support of Epsom. The Germans suffered more than during Epsom; the 9th SS Panzer Division suffered the 10th SS Panzer Division the 12th SS Panzer Division The Germans lost from 26 June to midnight on 1 July, and among them. In 2015, Stephen Napier published new figures for and tank losses.

===Subsequent operations===
The increasingly costly static defence led to disputes in the German high command. On the evening of 1 July in a conversation with Wilhelm Keitel, Rundstedt said &quot;Make peace, you fools.&quot; Shortly afterwards, Günther von Kluge replaced him as Commander in Chief West. Due to his disagreements with Hitler over how the campaign should be conducted, Schweppenburg was replaced by Heinrich Eberbach as commander of Panzer Group West.

During the lull both sides made changes to their dispositions. The 53rd (Welsh) Infantry Division relieved the 15th (Scottish) Infantry Division in the west of the British salient, while the 43rd (Wessex) Infantry Division relieved the infantry of the 11th Armoured Division who were still holding the Odon bridgehead. The Germans moved up the 277th Infantry Division which began to relieve the 9th SS Panzer Division and the battle group of the 2nd SS Panzer Division.

A few days later the British Second Army launched Operation Charnwood, to take Caen. This incorporated the postponed attack on Carpiquet, originally planned for Epsom as Operation Ottawa but now codenamed Operation Windsor. In a frontal assault the northern half of the city was captured, with the remaining portions being taken during Operations Atlantic and Goodwood in the third week of July. Fighting in the Odon Valley continued and on 10 July Operation Jupiter was launched by VIII Corps to push back the German forces near the village of Baron-sur-Odon, retake Hill 112 and advance to the River Orne. The Second Battle of the Odon began on 15 July to divert German attention from the ground where Operation Goodwood was to take place. The second battle has been called one of the bloodiest encounters of the campaign.

===Battle honours===
The British and Commonwealth system of battle honours recognised participation in Operation Epsom in 1956, 1957 and 1958, by the award to 34 units of the battle honour &quot;Odon&quot;, for service on and around the river from 25 June to 2 July 1944. The award was accompanied by honours for four actions during the operation: &quot;Fontenay le Pesnil&quot; on &quot;Cheux&quot; from &quot;Tourmauville Bridge&quot; on 27 June and &quot;Defence of Rauray&quot; from 

==Notes==
==Footnotes==
==References==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* (Originally published in two volumes as and by Lieutenant Colonel G. S. Jackson)
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 


==Further reading==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
==External links==

* KRRC in Operation Epsom
* Breaking the Panzers, book review</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2348027" start="0" end="15" title="Operation Epsom" label="Operation Epsom"/>
<link wikidata="Q2348027" start="35" end="59" title="Operation Epsom" label="First Battle of the Odon"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="92" end="108" title="Second World War" label="Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q8641370" start="149" end="167" title="Operation Overlord" label="Battle of Normandy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="222" end="228" title="Nazi Germany" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q41185" start="246" end="250" title="Caen" label="Caen"/>
<link wikidata="Q329888" start="279" end="285" title="Allies of World War II" label="Allied"/>
<link wikidata="Q3139030" start="395" end="412" title="Operation Martlet" label="Operation Martlet"/>
<link wikidata="Q104840558" start="513" end="546" title="15th (Scottish) Infantry Division" label="15th (Scottish) Infantry Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q304860" start="574" end="591" title="Barrage (artillery)" label="artillery barrage"/>
<link wikidata="Q170877" start="714" end="720" title="bomber aircraft" label="bomber"/>
<link wikidata="Q2816139" start="749" end="766" title="31st Tank Brigade (United Kingdom)" label="31st Tank Brigade"/>
<link wikidata="Q729029" start="1046" end="1056" title="Odon (river)" label="River Odon"/>
<link wikidata="Q233782" start="1172" end="1203" title="43rd (Wessex) Infantry Division" label="43rd (Wessex) Infantry Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q128781" start="1223" end="1229" title="Wehrmacht" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q2329143" start="1230" end="1245" title="counterattack" label="counter-attacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q5531654" start="1435" end="1442" title="General (United Kingdom)" label="General"/>
<link wikidata="Q152025" start="1443" end="1461" title="Bernard Montgomery" label="Bernard Montgomery"/>
<link wikidata="Q7820253" start="1503" end="1523" title="Generalfeldmarschall" label="Generalfeldmarschall"/>
<link wikidata="Q14060" start="1530" end="1542" title="Erwin Rommel" label="Erwin Rommel"/>
<link wikidata="Q579936" start="1762" end="1781" title="Operation Charnwood" label="Operation Charnwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q183910" start="2166" end="2172" title="Bayeux" label="Bayeux"/>
<link wikidata="Q209514" start="2232" end="2243" title="Second Army (United Kingdom)" label="Second Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q540593" start="2264" end="2277" title="Miles Dempsey" label="Miles Dempsey"/>
<link wikidata="Q309133" start="2331" end="2352" title="Caumont-l&amp;#x27;Éventé" label="Caumont-l&amp;#x27;Éventé"/>
<link wikidata="Q163646" start="2469" end="2479" title="First United States Army" label="First Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q2046665" start="2481" end="2499" title="Lieutenant general (United States)" label="Lieutenant General"/>
<link wikidata="Q207955" start="2500" end="2515" title="Omar Bradley" label="Omar N. Bradley"/>
<link wikidata="Q516202" start="2538" end="2557" title="Battle of Cherbourg" label="Battle of Cherbourg"/>
<link wikidata="Q193306" start="2788" end="2795" title="Falaise, Calvados" label="Falaise"/>
<link wikidata="Q207622" start="2861" end="2869" title="Argentan" label="Argentan"/>
<link wikidata="Q969618" start="2891" end="2904" title="Touques River" label="Touques River"/>
<link wikidata="Q213379" start="3198" end="3218" title="21st Panzer Division (Wehrmacht)" label="21st Panzer Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q2643015" start="3311" end="3326" title="Operation Perch" label="Operation Perch"/>
<link wikidata="Q146889" start="3329" end="3342" title="pincer attack" label="pincer attack"/>
<link wikidata="Q2487699" start="3352" end="3361" title="XXX Corps (United Kingdom)" label="XXX Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q659526" start="3463" end="3467" title="Orne (river)" label="Orne"/>
<link wikidata="Q996524" start="3468" end="3478" title="bridgehead" label="bridgehead"/>
<link wikidata="Q331551" start="3584" end="3601" title="Tilly-sur-Seulles" label="Tilly-sur-Seulles"/>
<link wikidata="Q233763" start="3615" end="3635" title="Panzer-Lehr-Division" label="Panzer-Lehr-Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q260830" start="3743" end="3764" title="7th Armoured Division (United Kingdom)" label="7th Armoured Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q840487" start="3837" end="3851" title="Villers-Bocage, Calvados" label="Villers-Bocage"/>
<link wikidata="Q700710" start="3857" end="3881" title="Battle of Villers-Bocage" label="Battle of Villers-Bocage"/>
<link wikidata="Q34640" start="4213" end="4228" title="English Channel" label="English Channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="4405" end="4412" title="United Kingdom" label="Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q426875" start="4483" end="4499" title="Mulberry harbour" label="Mulberry harbour"/>
<link wikidata="Q2316746" start="4700" end="4710" title="VIII Corps (United Kingdom)" label="VIII Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q352630" start="4731" end="4752" title="Richard O&amp;#x27;Connor" label="Richard O&amp;#x27;Connor"/>
<link wikidata="Q273421" start="4901" end="4907" title="Évrecy" label="Évrecy"/>
<link wikidata="Q154137" start="5317" end="5327" title="88 mm gun" label="88 mm guns"/>
<link wikidata="Q157572" start="5468" end="5482" title="Heeresgruppe B" label="Heeresgruppe B"/>
<link wikidata="Q352" start="5520" end="5526" title="Adolf Hitler" label="Hitler"/>
<link wikidata="Q181704" start="5633" end="5641" title="Saint-Lô" label="Saint-Lô"/>
<link wikidata="Q701923" start="5842" end="5858" title="German Army (Wehrmacht)" label="&amp;quot;Heer&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q701700" start="5945" end="5963" title="II SS Panzer Corps" label="II SS Panzer Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q159267" start="5980" end="6027" title="9th SS Panzer Division Hohenstaufen" label="9th SS Panzer Division &amp;quot;Hohenstaufen&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q164557" start="6032" end="6078" title="10th SS Panzer Division Frundsberg" label="10th SS Panzer Division &amp;quot;Frundsberg&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q189266" start="6106" end="6119" title="Eastern Front (World War II)" label="Eastern Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q156970" start="6125" end="6189" title="1st SS Panzer Division Leibstandarte SS Adolf Hitler" label="1st SS Panzer Division &amp;quot;Leibstandarte SS Adolf Hitler&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q160133" start="6191" end="6235" title="2nd SS Panzer Division Das Reich" label="2nd SS Panzer Division &amp;quot;Das Reich&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q210387" start="6240" end="6259" title="2nd Panzer Division (Wehrmacht)" label="2nd Panzer Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q12186" start="6334" end="6343" title="Panzer IV" label="Panzer IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q151960" start="6349" end="6357" title="Panther tank" label="Panthers"/>
<link wikidata="Q3658811" start="6375" end="6388" title="sturmgeschütz" label="sturmgeschütz"/>
<link wikidata="Q151221" start="6408" end="6414" title="Tiger I" label="Tigers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2438997" start="7061" end="7094" title="51st (Highland) Infantry Division" label="51st (Highland) Infantry Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q927379" start="7292" end="7328" title="49th (West Riding) Infantry Division" label="49th (West Riding) Infantry Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q2818609" start="7337" end="7357" title="8th Armoured Brigade (United Kingdom)" label="8th Armoured Brigade"/>
<link wikidata="Q2816553" start="7637" end="7667" title="3rd Canadian Infantry Division" label="3rd Canadian Infantry Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q309121" start="7774" end="7795" title="Bretteville-sur-Laize" label="Bretteville-sur-Laize"/>
<link wikidata="Q165862" start="7902" end="7917" title="Royal Air Force" label="Royal Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q862757" start="8149" end="8163" title="Saint-Manvieu-Norrey" label="Sainte Manvieu"/>
<link wikidata="Q839861" start="8168" end="8173" title="Cheux" label="Cheux"/>
<link wikidata="Q729029" start="8276" end="8286" title="Odon River" label="Odon River"/>
<link wikidata="Q862453" start="8307" end="8312" title="Mouen" label="Mouen"/>
<link wikidata="Q863482" start="8317" end="8336" title="Grainville-sur-Odon" label="Grainville-sur-Odon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2280081" start="8398" end="8420" title="11th Armoured Division" label="11th Armoured Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q1418066" start="8474" end="8486" title="coup de main" label="coup de main"/>
<link wikidata="Q2350356" start="8620" end="8644" title="Guards Armoured Division" label="Guards Armoured Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q2815836" start="9874" end="9903" title="2nd Canadian Armoured Brigade" label="2nd Canadian Armoured Brigade"/>
<link wikidata="Q839827" start="9940" end="9949" title="Carpiquet" label="Carpiquet"/>
<link wikidata="Q158277" start="10130" end="10166" title="12th SS Panzer Division Hitlerjugend" label="12th SS Panzer Division Hitlerjugend"/>
<link wikidata="Q233763" start="10241" end="10252" title="Panzer Lehr Division" label="Panzer Lehr"/>
<link wikidata="Q2808040" start="10346" end="10379" title="152nd Infantry Brigade (United Kingdom)" label="152nd (Highland) Infantry Brigade"/>
<link wikidata="Q656187" start="10591" end="10602" title="Kampfgruppe" label="Kampfgruppe"/>
<link wikidata="Q64667" start="10603" end="10611" title="Hans von Luck" label="von Luck"/>
<link wikidata="Q538059" start="11093" end="11111" title="Fontenay-le-Pesnel" label="Fontenay-le-Pesnel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7043834" start="12166" end="12182" title="No. 83 Expeditionary Air Group (United Kingdom)" label="No. 83 Group RAF"/>
<link wikidata="Q156395" start="12734" end="12750" title="Standartenführer" label="Standartenführer"/>
<link wikidata="Q57220" start="12751" end="12761" title="Kurt Meyer (Panzermeyer)" label="Kurt Meyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2816840" start="13013" end="13044" title="44th Infantry Brigade (United Kingdom)" label="44th (Lowland) Infantry Brigade"/>
<link wikidata="Q2816878" start="13053" end="13085" title="46th Infantry Brigade (United Kingdom)" label="46th (Highland) Infantry Brigade"/>
<link wikidata="Q875586" start="13362" end="13377" title="Le Mesnil-Patry" label="Le Mesnil-Patry"/>
<link wikidata="Q3108549" start="13471" end="13490" title="Glasgow Highlanders" label="Glasgow Highlanders"/>
<link wikidata="Q2934784" start="13544" end="13559" title="The Cameronians" label="The Cameronians"/>
<link wikidata="Q3091157" start="14057" end="14082" title="The Royal Scots Fusiliers" label="The Royal Scots Fusiliers"/>
<link wikidata="Q3446069" start="14106" end="14121" title="The Royal Scots" label="The Royal Scots"/>
<link wikidata="Q590507" start="14639" end="14654" title="Panzergrenadier" label="Panzergrenadier"/>
<link wikidata="Q2814948" start="15804" end="15828" title="227th Infantry Brigade (United Kingdom)" label="227th (Highland) Brigade"/>
<link wikidata="Q2265327" start="16026" end="16044" title="Gordon Highlanders" label="Gordon Highlanders"/>
<link wikidata="Q5758886" start="17350" end="17373" title="Highland Light Infantry" label="Highland Light Infantry"/>
<link wikidata="Q696182" start="17432" end="17446" title="Churchill tank" label="Churchill tank"/>
<link wikidata="Q872864" start="17511" end="17517" title="Gavrus" label="Gavrus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3135445" start="17749" end="17782" title="Argyll and Sutherland Highlanders" label="Argyll and Sutherland Highlanders"/>
<link wikidata="Q645706" start="17922" end="17936" title="Baron-sur-Odon" label="Baron-sur-Odon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2815173" start="18056" end="18068" title="23rd Hussars" label="23rd Hussars"/>
<link wikidata="Q276994" start="18452" end="18493" title="Rifle Brigade (Prince Consort&amp;#x27;s Own)" label="Rifle Brigade (Prince Consort&amp;#x27;s Own)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2311317" start="18708" end="18746" title="Duke of Cornwall&amp;#x27;s Light Infantry" label="Duke of Cornwall&amp;#x27;s Light Infantry"/>
<link wikidata="Q2814818" start="18755" end="18777" title="214th Infantry Brigade (United Kingdom)" label="214th Infantry Brigade"/>
<link wikidata="Q57457" start="20156" end="20174" title="Friedrich Dollmann" label="Friedrich Dollmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q154633" start="20211" end="20228" title="Obergruppenführer" label="Obergruppenführer"/>
<link wikidata="Q57181" start="20229" end="20241" title="Paul Hausser" label="Paul Hausser"/>
<link wikidata="Q70527" start="20537" end="20555" title="Gerd von Rundstedt" label="Gerd von Rundstedt"/>
<link wikidata="Q655075" start="20557" end="20564" title="OB West" label="OB West"/>
<link wikidata="Q57250" start="20726" end="20740" title="Willi Bittrich" label="Willi Bittrich"/>
<link wikidata="Q240048" start="21134" end="21151" title="5th Panzer Army" label="Panzer Group West"/>
<link wikidata="Q58013" start="21161" end="21183" title="Leo Geyr von Schweppenburg" label="Geyr von Schweppenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q864980" start="21849" end="21858" title="Tourville-en-Auge" label="Tourville"/>
<link wikidata="Q3041566" start="22532" end="22553" title="Durham Light Infantry" label="Durham Light Infantry"/>
<link wikidata="Q4639151" start="22597" end="22619" title="4th/7th Dragoon Guards" label="4th/7th Dragoon Guards"/>
<link wikidata="Q2934784" start="22732" end="22761" title="Cameronians (Scottish Rifles)" label="Cameronians (Scottish Rifles)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2403254" start="22766" end="22789" title="9th Royal Tank Regiment" label="9th Royal Tank Regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q2816636" start="23683" end="23706" title="3rd Royal Tank Regiment" label="3rd Royal Tank Regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q825712" start="24575" end="24580" title="Ultra (cryptography)" label="ULTRA"/>
<link wikidata="Q836610" start="24593" end="24604" title="Signals intelligence" label="intercepted"/>
<link wikidata="Q845389" start="24833" end="24846" title="Noyers-Bocage" label="Noyers-Bocage"/>
<link wikidata="Q3455434" start="25082" end="25105" title="Worcestershire Regiment" label="Worcestershire Regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q3489806" start="25295" end="25318" title="Somerset Light Infantry" label="Somerset Light Infantry"/>
<link wikidata="Q848410" start="25939" end="25956" title="Esquay-Notre-Dame" label="Esquay-Notre-Dame"/>
<link wikidata="Q2816851" start="28498" end="28536" title="44th Royal Tank Regiment" label="44th Battalion The Royal Tank Regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q2997813" start="28556" end="28589" title="The King&amp;#x27;s Royal Rifle Corps" label="The King&amp;#x27;s Royal Rifle Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q2345596" start="29259" end="29289" title="53rd (Welsh) Infantry Division" label="53rd (Welsh) Infantry Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q855635" start="31199" end="31221" title="HMS Rodney (29)" label="HMS &amp;quot;Rodney&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q191643" start="33132" end="33139" title="M4 Sherman" label="Sherman"/>
<link wikidata="Q2950115" start="33159" end="33178" title="Churchill Crocodile" label="Churchill Crocodile"/>
<link wikidata="Q1471" start="33713" end="33718" title="Seine" label="Seine"/>
<link wikidata="Q469120" start="34572" end="34591" title="Fontaine-Étoupefour" label="Fontaine-Étoupefour"/>
<link wikidata="Q874803" start="35908" end="35919" title="Historical revisionism" label="revisionist"/>
<link wikidata="Q825712" start="36701" end="36706" title="Ultra (cryptography)" label="Ultra"/>
<link wikidata="Q125756510" start="38435" end="38445" title="Simon Trew" label="Simon Trew"/>
<link wikidata="Q16019024" start="38762" end="38773" title="Ian Daglish" label="Ian Daglish"/>
<link wikidata="Q76361" start="42673" end="42687" title="Wilhelm Keitel" label="Wilhelm Keitel"/>
<link wikidata="Q57141" start="42759" end="42776" title="Günther von Kluge" label="Günther von Kluge"/>
<link wikidata="Q60885" start="42928" end="42945" title="Heinrich Eberbach" label="Heinrich Eberbach"/>
<link wikidata="Q579936" start="43503" end="43522" title="Operation Charnwood" label="Operation Charnwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q3354892" start="43658" end="43675" title="Operation Windsor" label="Operation Windsor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2165196" start="43800" end="43808" title="Operation Atlantic" label="Atlantic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2427503" start="43813" end="43821" title="Operation Goodwood" label="Goodwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q2998523" start="43902" end="43919" title="Operation Jupiter (1944)" label="Operation Jupiter"/>
<link wikidata="Q7443128" start="44065" end="44090" title="Second Battle of the Odon" label="Second Battle of the Odon"/>
<link wikidata="Q262775" start="44339" end="44353" title="battle honours" label="battle honours"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="252164" wikidata="Q714280" url="?curid=252164" title="Operation Totalize">
<text>Operation Totalize (also spelled Operation Totalise in recent British sources) was an offensive launched by Allied troops in the First Canadian Army during the later stages of Operation Overlord, from 8 to 9 August 1944. The intention was to break through the German defences south of Caen on the eastern flank of the Allied positions in Normandy and exploit success by driving south, to capture the high ground north of the city of Falaise. The goal was to collapse the German front and cut off the retreat of German forces fighting the Allied armies further west. The battle is considered the inaugural operation of the First Canadian Army, which had been activated on 23 July.

In the early hours of 8 August 1944, II Canadian Corps launched the attack using mechanized infantry. They broke through the German front lines and captured vital positions deep in the German defences. It was intended that two fresh armoured divisions would continue the attack but some hesitancy by these two comparatively inexperienced divisions and German armoured counter-attacks halted this offensive. Having advanced , the Allies were halted north of Falaise and forced to prepare a fresh attack.

==Background==
Caen had been an objective of the British forces assaulting Sword Beach on D-Day. The German defences were discovered to be strongest in this sector and most of the German reinforcements sent to Normandy were committed to the defence of the city. Positional warfare ensued for the next six weeks. Several attempts by British and Canadian forces to capture Caen were unsuccessful until 9 July, when all of the city, north of the Orne River, was captured during Operation Charnwood. Between 18 July and 20 July, British forces launched Operation Goodwood to outflank the city to the east and south, while Canadian forces mounted Operation Atlantic to cross the Orne River and clear the remaining portions of the city. Although Operation Goodwood was halted with many tank losses, the two operations secured a bridgehead wide and deep south of the Orne.

The Germans retained their hold on the commanding terrain of the Verrières Ridge south of the city. The British and Canadian attacks launched around Caen (in part to distract the Germans from the western part of the front, where the First United States Army was preparing to break out of the Allied lodgement) had caused the Germans to defend Verrières ridge with some of their strongest and most determined formations, including elements of three SS Panzer divisions of the I SS Panzer Corps.

Within 48 hours of the end of Operation Goodwood, the 2nd Canadian Infantry Division launched an attack against the &quot;formidable&quot; German defences on Verrières Ridge. The Canadians suffered over 1,300 casualties and territorial gains were minimal. From 25 July to 27 July, another attempt was made to take the ridge as part of Operation Spring. Poor execution resulted in around 1,500 Canadian casualties. The Battle of Verrières Ridge had claimed upwards of 2,800 Canadian casualties. While the ridge remained in German hands, the 2nd Canadian Infantry Division gained a foothold on the ridge between the village of Verrières to St.Martin-de-Fontenay, which would allow the troops to assemble free of German observation while they prepared to launch Operation Totalize.

On 25 July, the American First Army began Operation Cobra, which after the first two days, broke through the German defences south of Saint-Lô. By the end of the third day of the operation, American forces had advanced south of the Cobra start line at several points. On 30 July, US forces captured Avranches, at the base of the Cotentin peninsula. The German left flank had collapsed and within 24 hours, units of the US Third Army entered Brittany and advanced south and west through open country, almost without opposition. The 1st SS, 9th SS and 116th Panzer divisions were shifted westward from Verrières Ridge to face this new threat.

General Bernard Montgomery (commanding the ground forces in Normandy), wanted an attack on the eastern flank of the front to capture Falaise, intending that such a move would precipitate a general German collapse. The First Canadian Army (Lieutenant General Harry Crerar), held this part of the Allied front. It consisted of the British I Corps, responsible for the extreme eastern flank of the Allied lines and II Canadian Corps (Lieutenant General Guy Simonds) south of Caen. The II Canadian Corps, which was to launch Operation Totalize consisted of the 2nd Canadian Infantry Division, 3rd Canadian Infantry Division, 49th (West Riding) Infantry Division, 51st (Highland) Infantry Division, 4th Canadian (Armoured) Division, 1st Polish Armoured Division, 2nd Canadian Armoured Brigade and the British 33rd Armoured Brigade.

==Canadian plan==

The German defences on Verrières Ridge remained very strong. The forward infantry positions were well dug-in, with wide fields of fire. The main concentration of one hundred 75 mm and 88 mm anti-tank guns was deployed around the villages of Cramesnil and Saint-Aignan-de-Cramesnil behind the German forward positions, to halt any breakthrough by tanks along the Caen–Falaise road. The front line and defences in depth were held by the 89th Infantry Division, 85th Infantry Division (recently arrived from Rouen) and the remnants of the 272nd Grenadier Infantry Division (severely depleted by the Canadians in Operation Atlantic). The 12th SS Panzer Division &quot;Hitlerjugend&quot; with an attached heavy Tiger tank battalion, with fifty tanks, was in reserve a further back. Some of the infantry were commanded by the German LXXXVI &quot;Korps&quot; but most of the sector (and the 12th SS Panzer Division) was under the command of the I SS Panzer Corps, which had arrived in the area during Operation Goodwood.

Simonds knew that infantry assaults supported by massed artillery had failed to overcome the German forward lines in Operation Atlantic and Operation Spring. During Operation Goodwood, a bombardment by aircraft of RAF Bomber Command had assisted British tanks to break through the German front but they had then suffered many casualties from intact German defences arrayed in depth beyond the bombing. Infantry had been unable to follow up quickly enough to support the leading tanks or to secure ground behind them (follow-up units were also slowed). To solve the tactical problem presented by the terrain and the deep defences, Simonds proposed a radical solution, the first large attack by mechanized infantry.

Some field artillery regiments in Canadian and British infantry divisions had been temporarily equipped with M7 Priest 105 mm self-propelled guns for the landings. When they were replaced by towed QF 25-pounder gun-howitzers, these vehicles were superfluous to operations. Simonds had the Priests converted into &quot;Kangaroo&quot; armoured personnel carriers which would allow infantry to follow the tanks closely on any terrain. Permission was first requested from the Americans, from whom the M7s had been borrowed, to convert them into APCs.

Simonds made air power fundamental to his plan for breaking through the German defence zones. The preliminary aerial bombardment called for RAF bombers to saturate the German defences on both flanks of a -wide corridor along the axis of the Caen–Falaise road, during the night of 7 August. During the early hours of 8 August, two attacking forces of tanks and armoured personnel carriers would advance along the corridor. West of the road under the 2nd Canadian Division were the 4th Canadian Infantry Brigade and 2nd Canadian Armoured Brigade. East of the road, under the 51st (Highland) Division were the 154th (Highland) Brigade and the 33rd Armoured Brigade. These two columns would bypass the front-line defenders and capture the main German anti-tank defences around Cramesnil and Saint-Aignan de Cramesnil at dawn.

The second phase would follow immediately. While the remaining four infantry brigades of the 2nd Canadian Division and 51st (Highland) Division cleared up the isolated German forward defences and the 3rd Canadian Division and 49th (West Riding) Division (I Corps) began subsidiary attacks to widen the base of the salient captured in the first phase, the 4th Canadian Armoured Division and 1st Polish Armoured Division would move up the corridor to Cramesnil and prepare to advance further south. To prepare for their attack, bombers of the US Eighth Air Force would bombard the German reserve positions at Hautmesnil. The ultimate objective was the high ground north of Falaise, beyond the start line.

==First Canadian Army attack==
During the evening of 7 August 1944, the attacking forces formed up in six columns, four vehicles wide, comprising tanks, Kangaroo APCs, half tracks, self-propelled anti-tank guns and Mine flail tanks. At 23:00, Bomber Command commenced the bombardment of German positions along the Caen front. At 23:30, the armoured columns began their advance behind a rolling barrage. Movement was slow at first, many APC drivers became disoriented by the dust caused by the vehicles. Several vehicles became stuck in bomb craters. Simonds had arranged several methods for the columns to maintain direction; some vehicles were fitted with radio direction finders, the artillery fired target-marking shells, Bofors 40 mm guns fired bursts of tracer in the direction of the advance. In spite of all these measures, there was still confusion. Several vehicles collided or were knocked out.

The attack broke through the German defences in several places. By dawn, the attacking columns from the 51st (Highland) Division had reached their intended positions. The infantry dismounted from their Kangaroo APCs within of their objectives at the villages of Cramensnil and Saint-Aignan de Cramesnil, rapidly over-running the defenders. The columns from the 2nd Canadian Division were delayed by fog and unexpected opposition on their right flank but by noon on 8 August, the Allied forces had captured Verrières Ridge. The novel methods used by Simonds ensured that the attackers suffered only a fraction of the loss which would have been incurred in a normal &quot;dismounted&quot; attack. The Allies were poised to move against Cintheaux, south of their furthest penetration but Simonds ordered a halt, to allow field artillery and the 4th Canadian and 1st Polish armoured divisions to move into position for the second phase of the operation.

SS &quot;Brigadeführer&quot; (General) Kurt Meyer, commander of the 12th SS Panzer Division, had already ordered infantry from various formations shattered by the bombers and by the armoured attack, to occupy Cintheaux. He also moved forward two battlegroups from his division, consisting of assault guns, infantry and Tiger tanks, positioning them across the Canadian front. Shortly after midday, he ordered these two battlegroups to counter-attack the leading Allied troops. At this point, the Allied offensive plan called for additional bombardment by the Eighth Air Force, before the 4th Canadian Armoured Division and the 1st Polish Armoured Division pushed south towards Falaise on either side of the Caen–Falaise Road.

The counter-attack by the 12th SS Panzer Division failed but placed Meyer&#x27;s tanks north of the target area that the Eighth Air Force bombarded, ready for the second phase of the Allied attack. Spared the effects of the bombing, the tanks slowed the advance of the 1st Polish Armoured Division, preventing a breakthrough east of the road. West of the road, the German infantry at Cintheaux held up the Canadian armoured formations. Neither division (both on their debut) pressed their attacks as hard as Simonds demanded and laagered (took up defensive positions) while vehicles and troops were supplied and rested when dark fell.

To restore the momentum of the attack, Simonds ordered a column from the 4th Canadian Armoured Division to seize Hill 195, just to the west of the main road, halfway between Cintheaux and Falaise. Worthington Force with B, C and HQ companies of the Algonquin Regiment supporting from the British Columbia Regiment, bumped into the rear of Halfpenny Force fighting the SS in Bretteville-le-Rabet, went round them and lost direction. When dawn broke on 9 August, Worthington Force was to the east of Hill 195 at Hill 140, halfway between Estrees-la-Campagne and Mazieres. Of the fifteen attacking Allied tanks only two were able to escape. By 17.00 hours what remained of Worthington Force had either been captured or forced to withdraw. Because the column was on Hill 140, the wrong objective, other units sent to reinforce went towards the wrong hill. Eventually, another force captured Hill 195 in a model night attack on 10 August; the Germans had been given time to withdraw and reform a defensive line on the Laison River. By 11 August, the Anglo-Canadian offensive had ended.

==Aftermath==
The early phases of the assault had been a great success, despite many casualties in the two Allied armoured divisions in their attempt to push towards Falaise. Formations of four divisions of the First Canadian Army held positions on Hill 195, directly north of Falaise. At the same time, Allied forces managed to inflict upwards of on the Germans. Major General Rod Keller was removed from his command of the 3rd Canadian Infantry Division, after having been badly wounded when his headquarters were hit by American bombs. Keller&#x27;s poor performance in Totalize lost him the confidence of General Crerar and he received no further command positions for the remainder of the war. Simonds and Crerar mounted a follow-up offensive, Operation Tractable, which took place between 14 and 21 August. On 21 August, the Falaise Pocket was closed when Canadian and Polish units made contact with US troops from the south, ending Commonwealth participation in the Battle of Normandy.

==See also==
* Joe Ekins
* Sydney Valpy Radley-Walters
* Michael Wittmann

==Notes==
==Citations==
==Bibliography==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 


==Further reading==
* 
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q714280" start="0" end="18" title="Operation Totalize" label="Operation Totalize"/>
<link wikidata="Q714280" start="33" end="51" title="Operation Totalize" label="Operation Totalise"/>
<link wikidata="Q2703916" start="129" end="148" title="First Canadian Army" label="First Canadian Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q8641370" start="176" end="194" title="Operation Overlord" label="Operation Overlord"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="260" end="266" title="Nazi Germany" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q41185" start="285" end="289" title="Caen" label="Caen"/>
<link wikidata="Q193306" start="433" end="440" title="Falaise, Calvados" label="Falaise"/>
<link wikidata="Q329888" start="538" end="544" title="Allied Powers (World War II)" label="Allied"/>
<link wikidata="Q2715563" start="718" end="735" title="II Canadian Corps" label="II Canadian Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053481" start="762" end="781" title="mechanized infantry" label="mechanized infantry"/>
<link wikidata="Q41185" start="1200" end="1204" title="Caen" label="Caen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138519" start="1260" end="1271" title="Sword Beach" label="Sword Beach"/>
<link wikidata="Q16470" start="1275" end="1280" title="D-Day" label="D-Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q15878" start="1395" end="1403" title="Normandy" label="Normandy"/>
<link wikidata="Q659526" start="1628" end="1638" title="Orne River" label="Orne River"/>
<link wikidata="Q579936" start="1660" end="1679" title="Operation Charnwood" label="Operation Charnwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q2427503" start="1734" end="1752" title="Operation Goodwood" label="Operation Goodwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q2165196" start="1827" end="1845" title="Operation Atlantic" label="Operation Atlantic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2890620" start="2117" end="2132" title="Verrières Ridge" label="Verrières Ridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q163646" start="2285" end="2309" title="First United States Army" label="First United States Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q42916203" start="2500" end="2519" title="SS Panzer Division order of battle" label="SS Panzer divisions"/>
<link wikidata="Q700270" start="2527" end="2544" title="I SS Panzer Corps" label="I SS Panzer Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q2815839" start="2601" end="2631" title="2nd Canadian Division" label="2nd Canadian Infantry Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q2706523" start="2882" end="2898" title="Operation Spring" label="Operation Spring"/>
<link wikidata="Q2890620" start="2965" end="2990" title="Battle of Verrières Ridge" label="Battle of Verrières Ridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q679283" start="3185" end="3206" title="Saint-Martin-de-Fontenay" label="St.Martin-de-Fontenay"/>
<link wikidata="Q700674" start="3369" end="3384" title="Operation Cobra" label="Operation Cobra"/>
<link wikidata="Q181704" start="3461" end="3469" title="Saint-Lô" label="Saint-Lô"/>
<link wikidata="Q204430" start="3626" end="3635" title="Avranches" label="Avranches"/>
<link wikidata="Q463529" start="3656" end="3674" title="Cotentin Peninsula" label="Cotentin peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q223548" start="3749" end="3759" title="United States Army Central" label="Third Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q327" start="3768" end="3776" title="Brittany" label="Brittany"/>
<link wikidata="Q156970" start="3858" end="3864" title="1st SS Panzer Division" label="1st SS"/>
<link wikidata="Q159267" start="3866" end="3872" title="9th SS Panzer Division Hohenstaufen" label="9th SS"/>
<link wikidata="Q170787" start="3877" end="3882" title="116th Panzer Division" label="116th"/>
<link wikidata="Q1779157" start="3883" end="3899" title="Panzer Divisions" label="Panzer divisions"/>
<link wikidata="Q5531654" start="3969" end="3976" title="General (United Kingdom)" label="General"/>
<link wikidata="Q152025" start="3977" end="3995" title="Bernard Montgomery" label="Bernard Montgomery"/>
<link wikidata="Q718465" start="4227" end="4239" title="Harry Crerar" label="Harry Crerar"/>
<link wikidata="Q519313" start="4306" end="4313" title="I Corps (United Kingdom)" label="I Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345095" start="4419" end="4430" title="Guy Simonds" label="Guy Simonds"/>
<link wikidata="Q2816553" start="4558" end="4588" title="3rd Canadian Infantry Division" label="3rd Canadian Infantry Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q927379" start="4590" end="4626" title="49th (West Riding) Infantry Division" label="49th (West Riding) Infantry Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q2438997" start="4628" end="4661" title="51st (Highland) Infantry Division" label="51st (Highland) Infantry Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q3477391" start="4663" end="4695" title="4th Canadian (Armoured) Division" label="4th Canadian (Armoured) Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q163400" start="4697" end="4725" title="1st Polish Armoured Division" label="1st Polish Armoured Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q2815836" start="4727" end="4756" title="2nd Canadian Armoured Brigade" label="2nd Canadian Armoured Brigade"/>
<link wikidata="Q2816219" start="4773" end="4794" title="33rd Armoured Brigade (United Kingdom)" label="33rd Armoured Brigade"/>
<link wikidata="Q259122" start="4990" end="4995" title="7.5 cm PaK 40" label="75 mm"/>
<link wikidata="Q154137" start="5000" end="5005" title="88 mm gun" label="88 mm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370129" start="5006" end="5020" title="Anti-tank gun" label="anti-tank guns"/>
<link wikidata="Q747879" start="5071" end="5096" title="Saint-Aignan-de-Cramesnil" label="Saint-Aignan-de-Cramesnil"/>
<link wikidata="Q2818517" start="5275" end="5297" title="85th Infantry Division (Wehrmacht)" label="85th Infantry Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q30974" start="5321" end="5326" title="Rouen" label="Rouen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2815533" start="5352" end="5385" title="272nd Grenadier Infantry Division" label="272nd Grenadier Infantry Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q158277" start="5450" end="5498" title="12th SS Panzer Division Hitlerjugend" label="12th SS Panzer Division &amp;quot;Hitlerjugend&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q7801544" start="5522" end="5532" title="Tiger tank" label="Tiger tank"/>
<link wikidata="Q2563849" start="5643" end="5667" title="LXXXVI Army Corps (Wehrmacht)" label="LXXXVI &amp;quot;Korps&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1235891" start="6045" end="6063" title="RAF Bomber Command" label="RAF Bomber Command"/>
<link wikidata="Q1402493" start="6551" end="6566" title="field artillery" label="field artillery"/>
<link wikidata="Q696796" start="6655" end="6664" title="M7 Priest" label="M7 Priest"/>
<link wikidata="Q2479591" start="6743" end="6756" title="Ordnance QF 25-pounder" label="QF 25-pounder"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348033" start="6858" end="6878" title="Kangaroo (armoured personnel carrier)" label="&amp;quot;Kangaroo&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q4407246" start="6879" end="6906" title="Armoured personnel carrier" label="armoured personnel carriers"/>
<link wikidata="Q4698988" start="7107" end="7116" title="air power" label="air power"/>
<link wikidata="Q2380335" start="7204" end="7222" title="aerial bombardment" label="aerial bombardment"/>
<link wikidata="Q270921" start="8461" end="8477" title="Eighth Air Force" label="Eighth Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8524" end="8534" title="Hautmesnil" label="Hautmesnil"/>
<link wikidata="Q941081" start="8789" end="8800" title="Half-track" label="half tracks"/>
<link wikidata="Q161161" start="8802" end="8831" title="Self-propelled anti-tank gun" label="self-propelled anti-tank guns"/>
<link wikidata="Q119440032" start="8836" end="8846" title="Mine flail" label="Mine flail"/>
<link wikidata="Q16209265" start="8864" end="8878" title="Bomber Command" label="Bomber Command"/>
<link wikidata="Q304860" start="9007" end="9022" title="Barrage (artillery)" label="rolling barrage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1367488" start="9278" end="9300" title="radio direction finder" label="radio direction finder"/>
<link wikidata="Q115472839" start="9346" end="9358" title="Bofors 40 mm Automatic Gun L/60" label="Bofors 40 mm"/>
<link wikidata="Q518184" start="9380" end="9386" title="Tracer ammunition" label="tracer"/>
<link wikidata="Q839839" start="10261" end="10270" title="Cintheaux" label="Cintheaux"/>
<link wikidata="Q155435" start="10478" end="10506" title="Brigadeführer" label="SS &amp;quot;Brigadeführer&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q57220" start="10517" end="10527" title="Kurt Meyer" label="Kurt Meyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2050638" start="10724" end="10736" title="Battlegroup (army)" label="battlegroups"/>
<link wikidata="Q745798" start="10770" end="10782" title="Assault gun" label="assault guns"/>
<link wikidata="Q7713094" start="12090" end="12108" title="Algonquin Regiment" label="Algonquin Regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q7720174" start="12129" end="12154" title="British Columbia Regiment" label="British Columbia Regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q9172673" start="12351" end="12359" title="Battle for Hill 140" label="Hill 140"/>
<link wikidata="Q226405" start="12377" end="12396" title="Estrées-la-Campagne" label="Estrees-la-Campagne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439590" start="12401" end="12409" title="Mazières" label="Mazieres"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12854" end="12866" title="Laison River" label="Laison River"/>
<link wikidata="Q157148" start="13287" end="13300" title="Major general" label="Major General"/>
<link wikidata="Q1890662" start="13301" end="13311" title="Rod Keller" label="Rod Keller"/>
<link wikidata="Q683912" start="13672" end="13691" title="Operation Tractable" label="Operation Tractable"/>
<link wikidata="Q602744" start="13754" end="13768" title="Falaise Pocket" label="Falaise Pocket"/>
<link wikidata="Q6209686" start="13932" end="13941" title="Joe Ekins" label="Joe Ekins"/>
<link wikidata="Q3814187" start="13944" end="13971" title="Sydney Valpy Radley-Walters" label="Sydney Valpy Radley-Walters"/>
<link wikidata="Q57201" start="13974" end="13990" title="Michael Wittmann" label="Michael Wittmann"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="252167" wikidata="Q221111" url="?curid=252167" title="Operation Dragoon">
<text>Operation Dragoon (initially Operation Anvil) was the code name for the landing operation of the Allied invasion of Provence (Southern France) on 15August 1944. Although initially designed to be executed in conjunction with Operation Overlord, the June 1944 Allied landing in Normandy, the lack of enough resources led to the cancellation of the second landing. By July 1944 the landing was reconsidered, as the clogged-up ports in Normandy did not have the capacity to adequately supply the Allied forces. Concurrently, the high command of the French Liberation Army pushed for a revival of the operation, which would involve large numbers of French troops. As a result, the operation was finally approved in July to be executed in August.

The invasion sought to secure the vital ports on the French Mediterranean coast and increase pressure on the German forces by opening another front. After preliminary commando operations, the US VI Corps landed on the beaches of the Côte d&#x27;Azur under the protection of a large naval task force, followed by several divisions of French Army B. They were opposed by the scattered forces of the German Army Group G, which had been weakened by the relocation of its divisions to other fronts and the replacement of its soldiers with third-rate &quot;Ostlegionen&quot; outfitted with obsolete equipment.

Hindered by Allied air supremacy and a large-scale uprising by the French Resistance, the weak German forces were swiftly defeated. The Germans withdrew to the north through the Rhône valley to establish a stable defense line at Dijon. Allied mobile units were able to overtake the Germans and partially block their route at the town of Montélimar. The ensuing battle led to a stalemate, with neither side able to achieve a decisive breakthrough, until the Germans were finally able to complete their withdrawal and retreat from the town. While the Germans were retreating, the French managed to capture the important ports of Marseille and Toulon, soon putting them into operation.

The Germans were not able to hold Dijon and ordered a complete withdrawal from Southern France. Army GroupG retreated further north, pursued by Allied forces. The fighting ultimately came to a stop at the Vosges mountains, where Army GroupG was finally able to establish a stable defensive line. After meeting with the Allied units from the American Third Army, the Allied forces were in need of reorganizing and, facing stiffened German resistance, the offensive was halted on 14September.

The Americans considered Operation Dragoon a success. It enabled them to liberate most of Southern France in just four weeks while inflicting heavy casualties on the German forces, although a substantial part of the best German units were able to escape. The captured French ports were put into operation, allowing the Allies to solve their supply problems quickly. The British disagreed with the American assessment due to the weak political impact and lack of movement in Italy.

==Background==

===Prelude===
The idea of invading Southern France had come in 1942 from General George Marshall, the US Army Chief of Staff. It was supported by Joseph Stalin at the Tehran Conference in late 1943. In discussions with Franklin D. Roosevelt, Stalin advocated for the operation as an inherent part of the planned invasion of Normandy, preferring to have the Allies in the far west instead of at an alternative landing in the Balkans, which he considered to be in his zone of influence. Marshall insisted that the southern landing be included in the strategic planning, and Roosevelt found cancelling it to be unpalatable.

During planning the operation was known as &quot;Anvil&quot; to complement Operation Sledgehammer which was at the time the code name for the Normandy invasion. Both plans were later renamed: Sledgehammer to Operation Overlord and Anvil to Operation Dragoon. 

Operation Dragoon was controversial from the time it was proposed. The American military leadership and its British counterparts disagreed on the operation. Winston Churchill argued that it would divert military resources from Allied operations in Italy. Instead, he favored an invasion of the oil-producing regions of the Balkans. Churchill reasoned that by attacking the Balkans, the Allies could deny Germany petroleum, forestall the advance of the Red Army, and achieve a superior negotiating position in postwar Europe, all at a stroke.

When first planned, the landings were to take place simultaneouslyOverlord in Normandy and Anvil in the south of France. A dual landing was soon recognized as impossible to conduct with the forces available. The expansion of Overlord from a three- to a five-division front required many additional tank landing ships (LSTs), which would have been needed for Anvil. Another Allied amphibious landing, in Italy, at Anzio, had gone badly. All of these led the Allies to postpone Anvil.

After the landing at Normandy, a revival of Anvil became increasingly attractive to Allied planners. The Normandy ports had insufficient capacity to handle Allied supply needs and French generals under Charles de Gaulle pressed for a direct attack on Southern France with participation of French troops. These factors led to a reconsideration of the plan. Despite Churchill&#x27;s objections, the operation was authorized by the Allied Combined Chiefs of Staff on 14July, then renamed Dragoon on 1August. The landing was scheduled for 15August.

Churchill and his chiefs of staff had opposed Dragoon in favor of reinforcing the campaign in Italy, by capturing Trieste, landing on the Istria peninsula, and moving through the Ljubljana Gap into Austria and Hungary. Then, on 4 August, Churchill proposed that Dragoon (less than two weeks away) should be switched to the coast of Brittany. Eisenhower, supported by Roosevelt, who (with his 1944 election campaign four months away) opposed diverting large forces to the Balkans, stood firm on the agreed plan despite long harangues from Churchill on 5 and 9 August.

===Planning===

The chief objectives of Operation Dragoon were the important French ports of Marseille and Toulon, considered essential to supply the growing Allied forces in France. The Allied planners were cautious, taking heed of lessons learned from the Anzio and Normandy landings. They chose a location with no high ground controlled by the Wehrmacht, conditions that had led to heavy casualties after the initial landings on Omaha Beach at Normandy. The choice for the disembarkation site was an area on the Var coast east of Toulon. A preliminary air campaign was planned to isolate the battlefield and cut the Germans off from reinforcement by destroying several key bridges. A large airborne landing was also planned in the center of the landing zone to quickly seize the high ground overlooking the beaches. Parallel to the invasion, several commando units were to take control of the islands off the coast.

The Allied plan consisted of a three-division landing of US forces led by Major General Lucian Truscott to secure a beachhead on the first day. Their flanks were to be protected by French, American and Canadian commando units. Within 24 hours, 50,000–60,000 troops and 6,500 vehicles were to be disembarked. The airborne landings would concentrate in an area near Draguignan and Le Muy, with the aim of taking these towns to prevent German counterattacks against the beaches. The bulk of the American force then had to advance quickly to the north along the Rhône, to take Lyon and Dijon and make contact with the Allied forces in northern France. After a successful initial landing, units of the French ArmyB were to land, given the task of taking the French ports of Toulon and Marseille.

Although the Germans expected another Allied landing in the Mediterranean, the advancing Red Army and the Allied landings in Normandy placed great strains on German resources, so little was done to improve the condition of Army Group G, occupying southern France. Given the advancing Allied forces in northern France, the Germans deemed a realistic defense in the south impossible. Johannes Blaskowitz&#x27;s Army GroupG headquarters discussed a general withdrawal from southern France in July and August with the German High Command, but the 20 July plot led to an atmosphere in which any withdrawal was out of the question. Blaskowitz was quite aware that his scattered forces would be unable to ward off any serious Allied landing attempt. He planned to withdraw in secret, demolishing the ports, and to proceed in an orderly manner, covered by the 11th Panzer Division. He intended to establish a new defense line at Dijon in central France. German intelligence was aware of the impending Allied landing, and on 13August, Blaskowitz ordered the 11th Panzer Division to move east of the Rhône, where the landing was expected.

===Opposing forces===
The Western Naval Task Force was formed under the command of Vice Admiral Henry Kent Hewitt to carry the U.S. 6th Army Group, also known as the &quot;Southern Group&quot; or &quot;Dragoon Force,&quot; onto the shore. The 6th Army Group was formed in Corsica and activated on 1August, to consolidate the French and American forces slated to invade southern France. Admiral Hewitt&#x27;s naval support for the operation included the American battleships &quot;Nevada&quot;, &quot;Texas&quot;, and &quot;Arkansas&quot;, the British battleship &quot;Ramillies&quot;, and the French battleship , with 20 cruisers for gunfire support and naval aircraft from nine escort carriers assembled as Task Force88.

The main ground force for the operation was the US Seventh Army commanded by Alexander Patch. The US Army&#x27;s VI Corps, commanded by Major General Lucian Truscott, would carry out the initial landing and be followed by the French Army B under command of Général Jean de Lattre de Tassigny. Accompanying the operation was a fully mobilized separate detachment called &quot;Task Force Butler&quot; consisting of the bulk of the Allied tanks, tank destroyers, and mechanized infantry.

The French Resistance played a major role in the fighting. As the Allies advanced into France, the resistance evolved from a guerilla fighting force to a semiorganized army called French Forces of the Interior (FFI). The FFI tied down German troops by sabotaging bridges and communication lines, seizing important traffic hubs and directly attacking isolated German forces. They were aided by Allied special forces from the Office of Strategic Services (OSS), who supplied the Allies with vital intelligence.

The Allied ground and naval forces were supported by a large aerial fleet of 3,470 planes. The majority of them were stationed on Corsica and Sardinia. The tactical bombers and fighters had to support the landings directly, while the strategic element had to bomb German targets deep into France. The strategic bombing started well before the landing, and targeted airports, traffic hubs, railroads, coastal defenses, and communication lines.

Opposing the Allies was the German Army Group G (&quot;HeeresgruppeG&quot;). Although nominally an army group, Army Group G had at the time of the invasion only one army under its command: the 19th Army, led by Friedrich Wiese. As Southern France had never been important to German planning, their forces there had been stripped of nearly all their valuable units and equipment over the course of the war. Due to the Allied threat in Normandy, Army Group G&#x27;s units were continuously sent north until the Dragoon landings. The remaining 11 divisions were understrength and only one panzer division was left, the 11th. In early August, the 11th Panzer Division had sent one of its two panzer battalions to Normandy shortly before the landing.

The troops were positioned thinly along the French coast, with an average of per division. Generally, the troops of the German divisions were only second- and third-rate. This meant that over the course of the war, the divisions were thinned out and soldiers were replaced with wounded old veterans and &quot;Volksdeutsche&quot; from Poland and Czechoslovakia. Numerous units were also replaced by &quot;Ostlegionen&quot; and &quot;Ostbataillone&quot;. These units were volunteers from Eastern Europe, mainly the Soviet Union, and had a generally low fighting morale. The equipment of those troops was in poor shape, consisting of old weapons from various nations, with French, Polish, Soviet, Italian and Czech guns, artillery, and mortars. Four of the German divisions were designated as &quot;static&quot;, which meant that they were stripped of all of their mobile capabilities and unable to move from their positions. The only potent unit inside Army Group G was the 11th Panzer Division, which was commanded by Wend von Wietersheim.

The German chain of command was overly complex, with parallel chains for the occupation forces, the land forces, the Luftwaffe and the Kriegsmarine. The Luftwaffe, with 200 aircraft, and the Kriegsmarine, with 45 small ships, played a negligible role in the operation. The German defense was aided by extensive coastal artillery placements which had been constructed in the years before the landing. After the Fall of France, the Vichy French regime greatly improved the coastal defenses to appease the Germans. Along the coast, about 75 coastal guns of heavy and medium calibers were emplaced. Toulon was protected by a complex of heavy gun artillery batteries in mounted turrets. After their military take-over in November 1942, the Germans improved the coastal defense further by repairing damaged and outdated turrets, as well as moving in additional guns. This included the guns taken from the dismantled French battleship&quot; Provence&quot;.

==Operation==

===Preliminary operations===

To ensure the success of Dragoon and support the initial landings, preliminary commando operations had to be carried out. The first target was the Hyères Islands, specifically Port-Cros and Levant. The guns of the German garrisons on both islands could reach the proposed Allied landing area and the sea lanes that the troops would follow. The First Special Service Force, a joint US-Canadian special forces unit trained in amphibious assault and mountaineering and consisting of three regiments, received the order to take the islands as part of Operation Sitka.

The landings on Port-Cros and Levant started simultaneously on 14August. On Levant, the 2nd and 3rd regiments of the First Special Service Force faced sporadic resistance that became more intense when the German garrison forces came together in the area of the port. The men of the First Special Service Force gained the upper hand and discovered that the &quot;coastal defense battery&quot; the Allied naval forces were worried about was actually several well-camouflaged dummy weapons.

On Port-Cros, the 1st Regiment drove the German garrison to the western side of the island to an old fort. Fighting continued through 16August. When darkness fell, German guns on the French mainland at Cap Benat shelled Port-Cros. HMS &quot;Ramillies&quot; took aim at the fort where the Germans were barricaded. The German garrison surrendered on the morning of 17August. With both islands in Allied hands, the men of the First Special Service Force transferred to the mainland, where they were attached to the First Airborne Task Force.

Meanwhile, at Cap Nègre, to the west of the main invasion, a large group of French commandos destroyed German artillery emplacements as part of Operation Romeo. Their main effort was supported by diversionary flank landings by other commando teams. While the main mission succeeded, 67 French commandos were taken prisoner after they ran into a minefield. In addition to the commando operations, another operation was carried out, named &quot;Operation Span&quot;. This was a deception plan, aimed to confuse the German defenders with fake landings and paratroopers, to disperse them from the actual landing zones.

===Airborne landings===
The first to land in the early hours were the airborne and glider troops. The 1st Airborne Task Force landed in the River Argens valley around the area of Le Muy with the objective of preventing German reinforcements from reaching the landing beaches. The American component being the largest, consisted of the air dropped Mission &quot;Albatross&quot;, followed by the glider-borne Mission &quot;Dove&quot;. Later, the missions &quot;Bluebird&quot; and &quot;Canary&quot; would bring in the reinforcements.

The British landings, codenamed &quot;Operation Rugby,&quot; consisted of the 2nd Parachute Brigade. Fog and low clouds resulted in many paratroopers landing ten or fifteen miles away, while others were closer. The British took the villages of Le Mitan, La Motte, Clastron and Les Serres and then assaulted and captured the bridge over the River Naturby, which carried the road to Le Muy. Soon after they secured the high ground to the east and north of Le Muy, while the Americans did the same in the west and south.

The American 550th Glider Infantry Battalion under the command of Lieutenant Colonel Edward Sachs then attempted to seize the town that evening but were repulsed. Only in the afternoon of the following day after reinforcements arrived did they succeed in capturing Le Muy, along with 700 prisoners. The First Airborne Task Force then waited for the arrival of ground troops while holding off a number of counterattacks. Overall the landings were successful, with 104 dead, 24 of which were caused by glider accidents and 18 by parachute accidents.

===Main invasion force landings===

The preceding bombing missions, together with resistance sabotage acts, hit the Germans heavily, interrupting railroads, damaging bridges, and disrupting the communication network. The landing started on the morning of 15August. Ships of the Western Naval Task Force approached under cover of darkness and were in position at dawn. The first of 1,300 Allied bombers from Italy, Sardinia, and Corsica began aerial bombardment shortly before 06:00. Bombing was nearly continuous until 07:30, when battleships and cruisers launched spotting aircraft and began firing on specific targets detected by aerial surveillance. Naval gunfire ceased as the landing craft headed ashore at 08:00. The relatively steep beach gradients with small tidal range discouraged Axis placement of underwater obstacles, but landing beaches had been defensively mined. LCIs leading the first wave of landing craft fired rockets to explode land mines on the beaches to be used by following troops.

The main landing force consisted of three divisions of the VI Corps. The 3rd Infantry Division landed on the left at Alpha Beach (Cavalaire-sur-Mer), the 45th Infantry Division landed in the center at Delta Beach (Le Muy, Saint-Tropez) and the 36th Infantry Division landed on the right at Camel Beach (Saint-Raphaël).

The landings were overwhelmingly successful. On Delta and Alpha beaches, German resistance was low. The &quot;Osttruppen&quot; surrendered quickly, and the biggest threats to the Allies were the mines. A single German gun and a mortar position were silenced by destroyer fire. The Allied units in this sector were able to secure a beachhead and quickly linked up with the paratroopers, capturing Saint-Tropez and LeMuy. The most serious fighting was on Camel Beach near the town of Saint-Raphaël. This beach was defended by several well-emplaced coastal guns, as well as flak batteries. Through heavy German fire, the Allies attempted to land at the shore. However, at Sector Red of the Camel Beach landing zone, the Allies were not successful. A bombing run of 90Allied B-24 bombers was called in against a German strongpoint there. Even with the assistance of naval fire, the Allies were not able to bring the landing ships close to the shore. They decided to avoid Camel Red and land only at the sectors of Camel Blue and Camel Green, where both landings were successful.

The Allied casualties at the landings were very light, with 95killed and 385 wounded; 40 of those casualties were caused by a rocket-boosted Henschel Hs 293 guided gliding bomb launched from a Do 217 bomber aircraft with a rare appearance of the bomber wing KG 100, which sank the tank landing ship .

===German counterattacks===
French sabotage by the FFI, together with the Allied bombing, severed German communication lines, causing initial confusion among the troops. German field commanders were not able to communicate with Army GroupG&#x27;s headquarters. Despite the hampered communications, German commanders acted independently to put measures in effect to counter the Allied invasion. Directly facing the brunt of the Allied landings was the German LXII Corps at Draguignan, commanded by Ferdinand Neuling. Allied paratroopers interrupted his communication lines and trapped his headquarters in the city. He therefore ordered the nearby 148th Infantry Division to counterattack against the beaches at LeMuy, just before the Allied paratroopers cut him off completely. Wiese, as commander of the 19th Army, was also unable to contact Blaskowitz&#x27;s Army GroupG headquarters, but implemented a plan to push the Allied forces in the LeMuySaint-Raphaël region back into the sea unilaterally. With almost no mobile reserves to react against the beach landings, he ordered the commander of the 189th Infantry Division, Richard von Schwerin, to establish an &quot;ad hoc&quot; battle group (&quot;Kampfgruppe&quot;) from all nearby units to counterattack the Allied beachheads in this area. While vonSchwerin assembled all the men he could find, the 148th Infantry Division near Draguignan encountered heavy resistance from the FFI, which had been reinforced by British paratroopers, upsetting the plan for a swift counterattack toward the beaches.

While the Germans were unable to mount a counterattack against the Allied beachheads on 15August, by the morning of 16August, vonSchwerin had finally assembled a force about the size of four infantry battalions. With this force, he launched a two-pronged assault towards LeMuy and the Allied beachhead, as well as toward Draguignan to relieve the LXIICorps headquarters there. By that time, the Allies had already landed a significant number of troops, vehicles, and tanks. The Allied mobile forces of the 45thDivision went out against the German forces themselves. The division surrounded the town of LesArcs, recently reoccupied by vonSchwerin&#x27;s troops, and attempted to isolate the German forces there. After heavy fighting throughout the day, vonSchwerin ordered his troops to retreat under cover of night. At the same time, heavy fighting occurred at Saint-Raphaël. Mobile units of the 148th Infantry Division finally had arrived there and encountered the U.S. 3rd Division, which was trying to take Saint-Raphaël. This attack, however, was fruitless. By 17August, the German counter-attacks had been largely defeated, Saint-Raphaël was secured together with a large beachhead along the coastline, and mobile forces had linked up with the airborne troops in LeMuy. French troops had been pouring ashore since 16August, passing to the left of the American troops with the objective of Toulon and Marseille.

By the night of 16/17 August, Army Group G headquarters realized that it could not drive the Allies back into the sea. Simultaneously in northern France, the encirclement of the Falaise pocket threatened the loss of large numbers of German forces. Given the precarious situation, Adolf Hitler moved away from his &quot;no step backwards&quot; agenda and agreed to an OKW plan for the complete withdrawal of army groupsG and B. The OKW plan was for all German forces (except the stationary fortress troops) in southern France to move north to link up with Army GroupB to form a new defensive line from Sens through Dijon to the Swiss frontier. Two German divisions (the 148th and 157th) were to retreat into the French-Italian Alps. The Allies were privy to the German plan through Ultra interception.

The German navy&#x27;s response was minimal. The Kriegsmarine had some 25 surface ships (mostly torpedo boats and smaller) though the main anti-invasion force, 10th Torpedo Boat Flotilla based at Genoa, had just four torpedo boats fit for service during &quot;Dragoon&quot; and this force took no action against the invasion fleet. There were two actions against the Allied naval forces taken by other units. On 15 August, off Port-Cros, the US destroyer encountered two German warships and in a short action sank both. On 17 August, off La Ciotat, a force of two German warships encountered a force of PT boats and gunboats staging a diversionary attack. Their destroyer escort engaged both vessels, and after an hour-long gun battle both German vessels were sunk. The Kriegsmarine also had a U-boat force based at Toulon operating in the Western Mediterranean; by the summer of 1944 this had been reduced to eight U-boats, and in air-raids prior to &quot;Dragoon&quot; five were destroyed. On the night of 17 August one boat attempted to sortie, ran aground leaving harbor and was scuttled. The other two U-boats took no action, and were scuttled to avoid capture before the fall of Toulon.

===German withdrawal===
The Germans started the withdrawal, while the motorized Allied forces broke out from their beachheads and pursued the German units from behind. The rapid Allied advance posed a major threat for the Germans, who could not retreat fast enough. The Germans tried to establish a defense line at the Rhône to shield the withdrawal of several valuable units there. The US 45th and 3rd divisions were pressing to the north-west with uncontested speed, undermining Wiese&#x27;s plan for a new defense line. Barjols and Brignoles were taken by the two American divisions on 19August, which also were about to envelop Toulon, as well as Marseille, from the north, cutting off the German units there.

In the northeast, the German problems loomed as large. Taskforce Butlerthe Allied mechanized component of the landingswas pushing north of Draguignan. On 18August Neuling&#x27;s surrounded LXII Corps&#x27; headquarters, attempted an unsuccessful breakout and was finally captured with the rest of the city after some fighting. The German troops in this area were exhausted and demoralized from the fighting against the FFI, so Taskforce Butler was also able to advance at high speed. Digne was liberated on 18August. At Grenoble, the 157th Reserve Infantry Division faced the Allied advance, and its commander decided to retreat on 21August toward the Alps. This decision would prove to be disastrous for the Germans, as it left a large gap in the eastern flank of the retreating Army GroupG. Blaskowitz now decided to sacrifice the 242nd Infantry Division in Toulon, as well as the 244th Infantry Division in Marseille, to buy time for the rest of Army GroupG to retreat through the Rhône Valley, while the 11th Panzer Division and the 198th Infantry Division would shield the retreat in several defense lines.

===Liberation of Marseille and Toulon===


Meanwhile, the disembarked French units started to head for Marseille and Toulon. The initial plan was to capture the ports in succession, but the unexpected Allied advance allowed the French commander de Lattre de Tassigny to attack both ports almost simultaneously. He split his forces into two units, with Joseph de Goislard de Monsabert given the task to take Toulon from the east while Edgard de Larminat drove north to encircle the city at the flanks. The Germans had a significant force stationed in both cities, but they lacked the time to prepare for a determined defense. After heavy fighting around Hyères, which temporarily stopped the advance, French forces approached Toulon on 19August. At the same time, Monsabert swung around the city, enveloped it, and cut off the highway between Toulon and Marseille. On 21August, the French pressed into Toulon, and heavy fighting ensued. The heavy German resistance led to an argument between Larminat and deTassigny, after which deTassigny took over direct command of the operation, dismissing Larminat. By 26August, the remaining German units had surrendered. The battle for Toulon cost the French 2,700 casualties, but they captured all remaining German forces, which lost their entire garrison of 18,000 men.

At the same time, Monsabert&#x27;s attempt to liberate Marseille commenced. At first, a German force at Aubagne was defeated before French troops attacked the city directly. Unlike Toulon, the German commander at Marseille did not evacuate the civilian population, which became increasingly hostile. The resulting fighting with FFI troops further weakened the German units, which were exhausted from partisan fighting. The Wehrmacht was not able to defend on a broad front and soon crumbled into numerous isolated strongpoints. On 27August, most of the city was liberated, with only a few small strongpoints remaining, and on 28August, German troops issued the official surrender. The battle caused 1,825 French casualties, but 11,000 German troops were captured. In both harbors, German engineers had demolished port facilities to deny their use to the Allies.

The French Allied forces that helped liberate Toulon and Marseille consisted of large numbers of men from the Free French Colonial Infantry Division - Algerians, Malians, Mauritanians, and the Senegalese Tirailleurs, under General Charles de Gaulle.

===Battle at Montélimar===
While Marseille and Toulon were liberated, the German retreat continued. The 11th Panzer Division started several feints toward Aix-en-Provence to discourage any further Allied advance. By doing so, LXXXVCorps, as well as IVLuftwaffe Field Corps, were able to successfully retreat from the Allied advance at the Rhône. The Allies were unsure of German intentions, and Truscott decided to try to trap the Germans with a right flank movement while pursuing them with his three divisions from VICorps. However, uncertainty at the Allied headquarters led to indecisiveness, and the Allies missed several opportunities to cut off the retreating LXXXVCorps.

Through the decryption of German radio communications, the Allied headquarters became aware of the German withdrawal plan. They recognized the open German flank to the east of the Rhône at Grenoble due to the retreat of the 157th Infantry Division towards the Alps. To seize this opportunity, Taskforce Butler was ordered to advance in this direction, paralleling the German evacuation effort and ultimately cutting them off further north. While doing so, it fought some scattered German resistance, and finally, after turning left, found itself near Montélimar, a small city on the east bank of the Rhône River. This town lay directly on the German escape route. Following Taskforce Butler was the 36th Infantry Division. Together, they were tasked on 20August with blocking the German force at Montélimar and continuing the northward advance to Grenoble, while VICorps was pursuing the Germans from behind. However, after this speedy advance, the forward Allied forces now suffered from a serious lack of fuel and supplies, which made this task difficult.

On 21 August, Taskforce Butler occupied the hills north of the town of Montélimar, according to revised orders from Truscott, as he considered it too weak to block the entire German force marching north. From this position, Taskforce Butler fired on the evacuating German troops, while waiting for further reinforcements. Troops from the FFI supported the Americans, harassing German troops through the entire battle. The sudden appearance of this new threat shocked Wiese and the German command. As a first countermeasure, Wietersheim&#x27;s 11thPanzer Division was called in. The first of its units to arrive, together with several &quot;ad hoc&quot; Luftwaffe battle groups, were asked to deal with this new threat. This hastily-assembled force mounted an attack against Puy the same day, and the Germans were able to isolate Taskforce Butler from supplies. This success was, however, short-lived, and the Germans were soon pushed back.

The next day, the first units of the 36th Division arrived, reinforcing Taskforce Butler. However, the Allied troops were still short of supplies and lacked enough men to directly attack the German escape route. During the next few days, more Allied men and supplies trickled in. At the same time, the US 45thDivision took over positions at Grenoble, leaving the 36thDivision free to fully commit its forces at Montélimar. Taskforce Butler was officially dissolved on 23August, and John E. Dahlquist, commander of the now fully-arrived 36thInfantry Division, assumed direct control of its units. For the rest of the day, only small skirmishes occurred between German and Allied forces. Meanwhile, the Germans also struggled to bring the 11thPanzer Division through the chaos of the evacuation into position in the town. By 24August, a substantial number of the 11thPanzer Division had finally reached the battle area.

With his newly reorganised units, Dahlquist attempted a direct attack against Montélimar, which failed against the newly-arrived German tank units. The subsequent German counter-attack gained some ground against the hills occupied by the Allies. Its aim was to push the Americans from the hills north of Montélimar and to force the American artillery to move back out of range. After the fighting, the Germans captured a copy of Dahlquist&#x27;s operational plans, giving them a better picture of the Allied forces. As a result, Wiese planned a major attack for 25August by the 11thPanzer Division and the 198th Infantry Division, together with some &quot;ad hoc&quot; Luftwaffe battlegroups. This attack was, however, also a failure. The Allies struck back and retook the hills north of Montélimar, and were able to establish a temporary roadblock on the German escape route. Again, this Allied success also did not last long, as another attack led by Wietersheim reopened the passage at midnight.

After the repeated German counterattacks prevented any lasting roadblock, Truscott finally allowed reinforcements from the 45thDivision to support Dahlquist at Montélimar, as he felt the successful operations further south at the French ports allowed him to refocus to the north. At the same time, the Germans also reinforced their fighting force. Over the next few days, a stalemate emerged, with the Allies unable to block the retreat route and the Germans unable to clear the area of the Allied forces. Both sides became increasingly frustrated during the fighting, with attack, counterattack, and spoiling attacks, which made launching a decisive offensive hard for the 36thDivision. While the 36thDivision had surrounded the 19thArmy, they themselves were almost surrounded, too, during the chaotic fighting, with only a thin supply route to the east open, resulting in their having to fight to the front and the rear. As the 36thDivision was seemingly making no progress, an angry Truscott arrived at Dahlquist&#x27;s headquarters on 26August to relieve him of command. However, on seeing the heavy terrain and shattered forces, he refrained and left the headquarters again. Finally, during 26–28August, the majority of the German forces was able to escape, leaving behind 4,000 burnt-out vehicles and 1,500 dead horses. On 29August, the Allies captured Montélimar, and the final German troops trying to break out surrendered. The Germans suffered 2,100 battle casualties plus 8,000 POWs, while the Americans had 1,575 casualties. Total POW losses of the 19thArmy now amounted to 57,000.

===Final German retreat===
The VI Corps, together with units from the French IICorps at its flank, pursued and tried to cut off the German forces on their way toward the town of Dijon, while the Germans planned to prevent another Montélimar with a defensive shield by the 11thPanzer Division. The Allied 45th and 3rddivisions, as well as the 11thPanzer Division, were racing north to fulfill their objectives. In the meantime, the Germans tried to continue with the evacuation through Lyon. Behind their flight, the Germans destroyed bridges, hoping this would slow down the Allied advance. However, the 45thDivision was able to bypass the German forces, taking the town of Meximieux on 1September. This again posed a threat to the German evacuation. After some initial skirmishes, the 11thPanzer Division launched a heavy attack into the city, causing 215 American casualties and destroying a number of tanks and vehicles.

At the same time, the main German units retreated through Lyon. On 2September, the 36thInfantry Division arrived at Lyon to find the Maquis fighting the Milice with much of the factory areas on fire. The next day, Lyon was liberated and 2,000 Germans were captured, but the rest had already continued their retreat north. Lyon celebrated for two days with the Americans. The Allies made a last-ditch attempt to cut off the Germans with an offensive towards Bourg-en-Bresse by the 45thDivision and the 117thCavalry Squadron from the original Taskforce Butler. However, the 45thDivision was not able to overcome the German defenses near the town. The 117thCavalry Squadron had more success, bypassing Bourg-en-Bresse and taking Montreval and Marboz north of Bourg-en-Bresse, instead. By 3September, Montreval was secure, but the squadron soon found itself trapped by units from the 11thPanzer Division, which surrounded the town. As a result, the squadron was almost annihilated, and the German escape route was again open. The American units then retired to Marboz.

Over the next two weeks, more skirmishes occurred and the Allies were not able to cut off a major portion of the German forces, but the Germans were also not able to maintain any stable defense line as planned. On 10September, forward units of the VI Corps were able to establish contact with units from Patton&#x27;s Third Army. Truscott hoped to be able to push through the Belfort Gap, but on 14September, he received orders from the Allied high command to halt the offensive. Army GroupG was finally able to establish a stable defense line at the Vosges Mountains, thwarting further Allied advances. This, combined with the Allied need to reorganise their command structure as the forces from Northern and Southern France linked up, forced the Allies to stop their pursuit of the Germans, ending the offensive there.

During their fighting retreat up the Rhône, the Germans also withdrew their remaining forces from their garrisons in southwestern France. These divisions raced north along the Atlantic coast and then swung towards the east at the Loire to link up with the rest of Army GroupG at Burgundy. While they did not have to fight the Western Allies as much as the Germans had done at the Rhône, they still had to advance through French partisan-dominated terrain. About 88,000 men moved north, leaving 20,000 in southwestern France behind. During the retreat, about 19,000 men were captured by the Allies and 60,000 men reached Army GroupG&#x27;s line, where they were integrated into the defense of the Vosges Mountains.

==War crimes==
French resistance against the Nazi German occupation and the Vichy French puppet government increased drastically in the weeks leading up to the Dragoon landings. To fight the uprising, German units committed numerous atrocities and war crimes against French fighters, as well as civilians, in retaliatory acts. On 9June, after an attack on the German garrison at Tulle, the 2nd SS Panzer Division Das Reich hanged about 99 civilians while moving towards northern France during the Tulle massacre. The next day, that division murdered 642 civilians in Oradour-sur-Glane during the Oradour-sur-Glane massacre and then proceeded to plunder and raze the town. German units also worked together with French collaborators to subdue partisans, for example against the partisan base at the Vercors massif, but with little lasting result.

Atrocities continued during the German retreat from southern France as German soldiers plundered and burned down towns. French civilians were brought before military courts and sentenced to death because of alleged partisan activities. These atrocities did not help to subdue the French uprising. Instead, the German reprisals had the opposite effect and encouraged the French population to engage in partisan fighting.

==Aftermath==

Operation Dragoon was considered a success by the Allied forces. It enabled them to liberate most of southern France in only four weeks, while inflicting heavy casualties on the German forces. However, the Allies failed to cut off the most valuable units of the retreating Army Group G, which retreated over a distance of in good order, into the Vosges Mountains on the German border, with the capability of continuing the fight. The main reason for the failure to capture or destroy Army GroupG was the Allied shortage of fuel, which began soon after the landing. The Allies had not anticipated the speed of their own advance, so could not adequately provide supplies and logistics to the leading Allied units.

A significant benefit of Operation Dragoon was the use of the port facilities in southern France, especially the large ports at Marseille and Toulon. After Operation Cobra and Operation Dragoon, the Allied advance slowed almost to a halt in September due to a critical lack of supplies. The ports were quickly brought back into service, together with the railroad system in southern France. Thereafter, large quantities of supplies could be moved north to ease the supply situation. In October, 524,894 tons of supplies were unloaded, which was more than one-third of the Allied cargo shipped to the Western Front.

Operation Dragoon also had political implications. Two days after the landing, the Germans proceeded to dismantle the French state. Members of the &quot;Sicherheitsdienst&quot; (SD) stormed French government institutions and moved French officials, including Philippe Pétain, to Belfort, in Eastern France. Later, they were moved to Sigmaringen in Germany, where they acted as a government in exile. With the collapse of the Vichy regime, troops of the Provisional Government of the French Republic re-established control of the French political institutions. Antony Beevor comments, &quot;The landings in the south of France prompted a rapid German withdrawal and thus reduced the damage and suffering done to France.&quot;

Despite these successes, criticism of Dragoon was made by some Allied generals and contemporary commentators such as Bernard Montgomery, Arthur R. Wilson and Chester Wilmot in the aftermath, mostly because of its geostrategic implications. Dragoon was argued to have diverted highly experienced men and much-needed materiel away from the continuing fighting at the Western Front that could have been used, instead, to bolster the Italian Front or to hasten the advance towards the Rhine by the Overlord forces. The resulting loss of momentum gave Stalin on the Eastern Front a free hand to pursue his offensive efforts with more determination, allowing him to win the race towards Berlin and occupy the Balkans. Dragoon, therefore, had consequences reaching into the Cold War.

==See also==
* Battle of La Ciotat
* Battle of Port Cros
* Liberation of France

==Notes==
 A significant number of Canadians also took part, both afloat and in the battles in southern France as members of the binational US-Canadian First Special Service Force.

==References==
==Bibliography==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
==Further reading==
* 

==External links==

* US Army Campaigns of World War II – Southern France () at the United States Army Center of Military History
* www.history.navy.mil: &quot;Operation Dragoon: The Invasion of Southern France &quot;
* Short film &quot;The Unknown Soldier: Operation Dragoon&quot;
* Short film &quot;The Unknown Soldier: The Children of the Resistance&quot;
* Contemporary US documentary &quot;Allied Invasion of Southern France – Operation Dragoon, the Other D-Day&quot;
* Video detailing the recovery and identification of 14 German soldiers killed shortly after Operation Dragoon in 2006
* &quot;Before and after&quot; comparison video showing locations of Operation Dragoon in 1944 and today</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q221111" start="0" end="17" title="Operation Dragoon" label="Operation Dragoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q221111" start="29" end="44" title="Operation Dragoon" label="Operation Anvil"/>
<link wikidata="Q646740" start="72" end="89" title="landing operation" label="landing operation"/>
<link wikidata="Q329888" start="97" end="103" title="Allies of World War II" label="Allied"/>
<link wikidata="Q101081" start="116" end="124" title="Provence" label="Provence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1237299" start="126" end="141" title="Southern France" label="Southern France"/>
<link wikidata="Q8641370" start="224" end="242" title="Operation Overlord" label="Operation Overlord"/>
<link wikidata="Q16470" start="258" end="284" title="Normandy landings" label="Allied landing in Normandy"/>
<link wikidata="Q29879557" start="545" end="567" title="French Liberation Army" label="French Liberation Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q6961214" start="937" end="945" title="VI Corps (United States)" label="VI Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q182822" start="975" end="991" title="Côte d&amp;#x27;Azur" label="Côte d&amp;#x27;Azur"/>
<link wikidata="Q162513" start="1075" end="1088" title="French Army B" label="French Army B"/>
<link wikidata="Q316999" start="1146" end="1158" title="Army Group G" label="Army Group G"/>
<link wikidata="Q695836" start="1293" end="1304" title="Ostlegionen" label="Ostlegionen"/>
<link wikidata="Q898788" start="1366" end="1379" title="air supremacy" label="air supremacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q157146" start="1414" end="1431" title="French Resistance" label="French Resistance"/>
<link wikidata="Q602" start="1525" end="1530" title="Rhône" label="Rhône"/>
<link wikidata="Q7003" start="1576" end="1581" title="Dijon" label="Dijon"/>
<link wikidata="Q234270" start="1684" end="1694" title="Montélimar" label="Montélimar"/>
<link wikidata="Q23482" start="1974" end="1983" title="Marseille" label="Marseille"/>
<link wikidata="Q44160" start="1988" end="1994" title="Toulon" label="Toulon"/>
<link wikidata="Q187843" start="2236" end="2252" title="Vosges mountains" label="Vosges mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q223548" start="2381" end="2391" title="United States Army Central" label="Third Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q2608441" start="3094" end="3101" title="General (United States)" label="General"/>
<link wikidata="Q151414" start="3102" end="3117" title="George Marshall" label="George Marshall"/>
<link wikidata="Q783785" start="3123" end="3145" title="Chief of Staff of the United States Army" label="US Army Chief of Staff"/>
<link wikidata="Q855" start="3167" end="3180" title="Joseph Stalin" label="Joseph Stalin"/>
<link wikidata="Q150974" start="3188" end="3205" title="Tehran Conference" label="Tehran Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q8007" start="3240" end="3261" title="Franklin D. Roosevelt" label="Franklin D. Roosevelt"/>
<link wikidata="Q8641370" start="3333" end="3353" title="invasion of Normandy" label="invasion of Normandy"/>
<link wikidata="Q23522" start="3445" end="3452" title="Balkans" label="Balkans"/>
<link wikidata="Q929991" start="3718" end="3740" title="Operation Sledgehammer" label="Operation Sledgehammer"/>
<link wikidata="Q8641370" start="3851" end="3869" title="Operation Overlord" label="Operation Overlord"/>
<link wikidata="Q8016" start="4061" end="4078" title="Winston Churchill" label="Winston Churchill"/>
<link wikidata="Q162333" start="4138" end="4157" title="Italian Campaign (World War II)" label="operations in Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q251395" start="4356" end="4364" title="Red Army" label="Red Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q11229656" start="4745" end="4762" title="tank landing ship" label="tank landing ship"/>
<link wikidata="Q696844" start="4860" end="4865" title="Operation Shingle" label="Anzio"/>
<link wikidata="Q2042" start="5133" end="5150" title="Charles de Gaulle" label="Charles de Gaulle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1113673" start="5367" end="5391" title="Combined Chiefs of Staff" label="Combined Chiefs of Staff"/>
<link wikidata="Q546" start="5591" end="5598" title="Trieste" label="Trieste"/>
<link wikidata="Q639912" start="5615" end="5621" title="Istria" label="Istria"/>
<link wikidata="Q15242544" start="5656" end="5669" title="Ljubljana Gap" label="Ljubljana Gap"/>
<link wikidata="Q327" start="5809" end="5817" title="Brittany" label="Brittany"/>
<link wikidata="Q128781" start="6392" end="6401" title="Wehrmacht" label="Wehrmacht"/>
<link wikidata="Q464257" start="6477" end="6488" title="Omaha Beach" label="Omaha Beach"/>
<link wikidata="Q12789" start="6560" end="6563" title="Var (department)" label="Var"/>
<link wikidata="Q157148" start="7039" end="7052" title="Major General" label="Major General"/>
<link wikidata="Q2626460" start="7053" end="7068" title="Lucian Truscott" label="Lucian Truscott"/>
<link wikidata="Q194141" start="7329" end="7339" title="Draguignan" label="Draguignan"/>
<link wikidata="Q817832" start="7344" end="7350" title="Le Muy" label="Le Muy"/>
<link wikidata="Q456" start="7538" end="7542" title="Lyon" label="Lyon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7003" start="7547" end="7552" title="Dijon" label="Dijon"/>
<link wikidata="Q162513" start="7662" end="7674" title="First Army (France)" label="French ArmyB"/>
<link wikidata="Q57234" start="8139" end="8158" title="Johannes Blaskowitz" label="Johannes Blaskowitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q152412" start="8271" end="8290" title="OKW" label="German High Command"/>
<link wikidata="Q105570" start="8300" end="8312" title="20 July plot" label="20 July plot"/>
<link wikidata="Q169932" start="8609" end="8629" title="11th Panzer Division (Wehrmacht)" label="11th Panzer Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q2709773" start="8983" end="9000" title="Henry Kent Hewitt" label="Henry Kent Hewitt"/>
<link wikidata="Q2659307" start="9014" end="9033" title="U.S. 6th Army Group" label="U.S. 6th Army Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q14112" start="9159" end="9166" title="Corsica" label="Corsica"/>
<link wikidata="Q1328905" start="9367" end="9373" title="USS Nevada (BB-36)" label="Nevada"/>
<link wikidata="Q1500182" start="9387" end="9392" title="USS Texas (BB-35)" label="Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q523968" start="9410" end="9418" title="USS Arkansas (BB-33)" label="Arkansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1565236" start="9455" end="9464" title="HMS Ramillies (07)" label="Ramillies"/>
<link wikidata="Q104843" start="9508" end="9515" title="cruiser" label="cruiser"/>
<link wikidata="Q6982006" start="9521" end="9536" title="gunfire support" label="gunfire support"/>
<link wikidata="Q253555" start="9566" end="9580" title="escort carrier" label="escort carrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q3515948" start="9595" end="9607" title="Task Force 88 (Operation Dragoon)" label="Task Force88"/>
<link wikidata="Q181197" start="9658" end="9673" title="US Seventh Army" label="US Seventh Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q562665" start="9687" end="9702" title="Alexander Patch" label="Alexander Patch"/>
<link wikidata="Q6961214" start="9723" end="9731" title="U.S. VI Corps" label="VI Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q582170" start="9867" end="9874" title="Général" label="Général"/>
<link wikidata="Q81114" start="9875" end="9901" title="Jean de Lattre de Tassigny" label="Jean de Lattre de Tassigny"/>
<link wikidata="Q692886" start="9942" end="9951" title="Motorized infantry" label="mobilized"/>
<link wikidata="Q157146" start="10100" end="10117" title="French Resistance" label="French Resistance"/>
<link wikidata="Q186595" start="10276" end="10305" title="French Forces of the Interior" label="French Forces of the Interior"/>
<link wikidata="Q658626" start="10520" end="10548" title="Office of Strategic Services" label="Office of Strategic Services"/>
<link wikidata="Q1462" start="10748" end="10756" title="Sardinia" label="Sardinia"/>
<link wikidata="Q204597" start="11243" end="11252" title="19th Army (Wehrmacht)" label="19th Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q3087776" start="11261" end="11276" title="Friedrich Wiese" label="Friedrich Wiese"/>
<link wikidata="Q313323" start="12106" end="12119" title="Volksdeutsche" label="Volksdeutsche"/>
<link wikidata="Q33946" start="12142" end="12156" title="Czechoslovakia" label="Czechoslovakia"/>
<link wikidata="Q695836" start="12201" end="12212" title="Ostlegionen" label="Ostlegionen"/>
<link wikidata="Q63331" start="12814" end="12834" title="Wend von Wietersheim" label="Wend von Wietersheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q2564009" start="12954" end="12963" title="Luftwaffe" label="Luftwaffe"/>
<link wikidata="Q151701" start="12972" end="12984" title="Kriegsmarine" label="Kriegsmarine"/>
<link wikidata="Q151340" start="13247" end="13261" title="Fall of France" label="Fall of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q69808" start="13267" end="13279" title="Vichy France" label="Vichy French"/>
<link wikidata="Q691565" start="13540" end="13566" title="Case Anton" label="take-over in November 1942"/>
<link wikidata="Q2113916" start="13771" end="13779" title="French battleship Provence" label="Provence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1780133" start="13912" end="13920" title="commando" label="commando"/>
<link wikidata="Q292728" start="13980" end="13994" title="Îles d&amp;#x27;Hyères" label="Hyères Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q1658544" start="14009" end="14018" title="Port-Cros" label="Port-Cros"/>
<link wikidata="Q292516" start="14023" end="14029" title="Île du Levant" label="Levant"/>
<link wikidata="Q574835" start="14177" end="14204" title="First Special Service Force" label="First Special Service Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q240313" start="14776" end="14783" title="Artillery battery" label="battery"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15089" end="15098" title="Cap Bénat" label="Cap Benat"/>
<link wikidata="Q4596100" start="15399" end="15424" title="1st Airborne Task Force (Allied)" label="First Airborne Task Force"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15441" end="15450" title="Cap Nègre" label="Cap Nègre"/>
<link wikidata="Q4671604" start="15571" end="15586" title="Operation Romeo" label="Operation Romeo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3354857" start="15870" end="15884" title="Operation Span" label="Operation Span"/>
<link wikidata="Q4596100" start="16145" end="16168" title="1st Airborne Task Force" label="1st Airborne Task Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q644839" start="16183" end="16195" title="River Argens" label="River Argens"/>
<link wikidata="Q817832" start="16222" end="16228" title="Le Muy" label="Le Muy"/>
<link wikidata="Q568731" start="16458" end="16474" title="Mission Dove" label="&amp;quot;Dove&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q16001032" start="16614" end="16629" title="2nd Parachute Brigade in Southern France" label="Operation Rugby"/>
<link wikidata="Q4633853" start="16654" end="16675" title="2nd Parachute Brigade (United Kingdom)" label="2nd Parachute Brigade"/>
<link wikidata="Q338721" start="16830" end="16838" title="La Motte, Var" label="La Motte"/>
<link wikidata="Q637410" start="18523" end="18527" title="Landing Craft Infantry" label="LCIs"/>
<link wikidata="Q178795" start="18593" end="18602" title="land mine" label="land mine"/>
<link wikidata="Q223551" start="18725" end="18746" title="U.S. 3rd Infantry Division" label="3rd Infantry Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q475816" start="18782" end="18799" title="Cavalaire-sur-Mer" label="Cavalaire-sur-Mer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2332510" start="18806" end="18828" title="45th Infantry Division (United States)" label="45th Infantry Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q1813" start="18874" end="18886" title="Saint-Tropez" label="Saint-Tropez"/>
<link wikidata="Q2612933" start="18896" end="18918" title="U.S. 36th Infantry Division" label="36th Infantry Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q234281" start="18955" end="18968" title="Saint-Raphaël, Var" label="Saint-Raphaël"/>
<link wikidata="Q220759" start="19743" end="19755" title="Consolidated B-24 Liberator" label="B-24 bombers"/>
<link wikidata="Q586159" start="20189" end="20204" title="Henschel Hs 293" label="Henschel Hs 293"/>
<link wikidata="Q126966" start="20241" end="20247" title="Dornier Do 217" label="Do 217"/>
<link wikidata="Q821993" start="20306" end="20312" title="KG 100" label="KG 100"/>
<link wikidata="Q2817961" start="20808" end="20818" title="LXII Army Corps" label="LXII Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q3068639" start="20847" end="20864" title="Ferdinand Neuling" label="Ferdinand Neuling"/>
<link wikidata="Q2784084" start="20996" end="21019" title="148th Reserve Division (Germany)" label="148th Infantry Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q2810855" start="21450" end="21473" title="189th Infantry Division (Wehrmacht)" label="189th Infantry Division"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="21475" end="21495" title="Richard von Schwerin" label="Richard von Schwerin"/>
<link wikidata="Q636734" start="22507" end="22514" title="Les Arcs, Var" label="LesArcs"/>
<link wikidata="Q602744" start="23500" end="23514" title="Falaise pocket" label="Falaise pocket"/>
<link wikidata="Q352" start="23602" end="23614" title="Adolf Hitler" label="Adolf Hitler"/>
<link wikidata="Q212420" start="23923" end="23927" title="Sens" label="Sens"/>
<link wikidata="Q270332" start="24001" end="24006" title="157th Reserve Division (Germany)" label="157th"/>
<link wikidata="Q1286" start="24048" end="24052" title="Alps" label="Alps"/>
<link wikidata="Q825712" start="24103" end="24108" title="Ultra (cryptography)" label="Ultra"/>
<link wikidata="Q324233" start="24220" end="24232" title="torpedo boat" label="torpedo boat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1449" start="24320" end="24325" title="Genoa" label="Genoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q604173" start="24615" end="24632" title="battle of Port Cros" label="in a short action"/>
<link wikidata="Q231554" start="24662" end="24671" title="La Ciotat" label="La Ciotat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1888190" start="24727" end="24734" title="PT boat" label="PT boat"/>
<link wikidata="Q4871512" start="24835" end="24858" title="Battle of La Ciotat" label="an hour-long gun battle"/>
<link wikidata="Q428661" start="24918" end="24924" title="U-boat" label="U-boat"/>
<link wikidata="Q44160" start="24940" end="24946" title="Toulon" label="Toulon"/>
<link wikidata="Q15769736" start="25301" end="25315" title="Battle of Toulon (1944)" label="fall of Toulon"/>
<link wikidata="Q658840" start="25841" end="25848" title="Barjols" label="Barjols"/>
<link wikidata="Q207584" start="25853" end="25862" title="Brignoles" label="Brignoles"/>
<link wikidata="Q181306" start="26517" end="26522" title="Digne" label="Digne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1289" start="26553" end="26561" title="Grenoble" label="Grenoble"/>
<link wikidata="Q2815203" start="26866" end="26889" title="242nd Infantry Division (Wehrmacht)" label="242nd Infantry Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q2815207" start="26916" end="26939" title="244th Infantry Division (Wehrmacht)" label="244th Infantry Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q208312" start="27070" end="27093" title="198th Infantry Division (Wehrmacht)" label="198th Infantry Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035422" start="27498" end="27529" title="Joseph de Goislard de Monsabert" label="Joseph de Goislard de Monsabert"/>
<link wikidata="Q1284292" start="27580" end="27598" title="Edgard de Larminat" label="Edgard de Larminat"/>
<link wikidata="Q192574" start="27799" end="27805" title="Hyères" label="Hyères"/>
<link wikidata="Q184047" start="28562" end="28569" title="Aubagne" label="Aubagne"/>
<link wikidata="Q47465" start="29727" end="29742" title="Aix-en-Provence" label="Aix-en-Provence"/>
<link wikidata="Q234270" start="30803" end="30813" title="Montélimar" label="Montélimar"/>
<link wikidata="Q3181399" start="32734" end="32751" title="John E. Dahlquist" label="John E. Dahlquist"/>
<link wikidata="Q2815861" start="35836" end="35850" title="II Corps (France)" label="French IICorps"/>
<link wikidata="Q243579" start="36440" end="36449" title="Meximieux" label="Meximieux"/>
<link wikidata="Q701165" start="36824" end="36830" title="Maquis (World War II)" label="Maquis"/>
<link wikidata="Q579564" start="36844" end="36850" title="Milice" label="Milice"/>
<link wikidata="Q133069" start="37148" end="37163" title="Bourg-en-Bresse" label="Bourg-en-Bresse"/>
<link wikidata="Q252280" start="37205" end="37213" title="Squadron (army)" label="Squadron"/>
<link wikidata="Q244552" start="37417" end="37426" title="Montreval" label="Montreval"/>
<link wikidata="Q274695" start="37431" end="37437" title="Marboz" label="Marboz"/>
<link wikidata="Q186492" start="38061" end="38074" title="George S. Patton" label="Patton&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q223548" start="38075" end="38085" title="United States Army Central" label="Third Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q446148" start="38133" end="38144" title="Belfort Gap" label="Belfort Gap"/>
<link wikidata="Q647033" start="38194" end="38213" title="SHAEF" label="Allied high command"/>
<link wikidata="Q187843" start="38308" end="38324" title="Vosges" label="Vosges Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q1469" start="38809" end="38814" title="Loire" label="Loire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1173" start="38858" end="38866" title="Burgundy" label="Burgundy"/>
<link wikidata="Q157713" start="39673" end="39678" title="Tulle" label="Tulle"/>
<link wikidata="Q160133" start="39684" end="39716" title="2nd SS Panzer Division Das Reich" label="2nd SS Panzer Division Das Reich"/>
<link wikidata="Q2798534" start="39791" end="39805" title="Tulle massacre" label="Tulle massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q190974" start="39861" end="39878" title="Oradour-sur-Glane" label="Oradour-sur-Glane"/>
<link wikidata="Q836897" start="39890" end="39916" title="Oradour-sur-Glane massacre" label="Oradour-sur-Glane massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q3287307" start="40071" end="40106" title="Maquis du Vercors" label="partisan base at the Vercors massif"/>
<link wikidata="Q42377800" start="40451" end="40467" title="Bandenbekämpfung" label="German reprisals"/>
<link wikidata="Q700674" start="41446" end="41461" title="Operation Cobra" label="Operation Cobra"/>
<link wikidata="Q153559" start="42059" end="42076" title="Sicherheitsdienst" label="Sicherheitsdienst"/>
<link wikidata="Q5721" start="42165" end="42180" title="Philippe Pétain" label="Philippe Pétain"/>
<link wikidata="Q171545" start="42185" end="42192" title="Belfort" label="Belfort"/>
<link wikidata="Q82858" start="42239" end="42250" title="Sigmaringen" label="Sigmaringen"/>
<link wikidata="Q783684" start="42359" end="42404" title="Provisional Government of the French Republic" label="Provisional Government of the French Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q380229" start="42466" end="42479" title="Antony Beevor" label="Antony Beevor"/>
<link wikidata="Q152025" start="42749" end="42767" title="Bernard Montgomery" label="Bernard Montgomery"/>
<link wikidata="Q15998912" start="42769" end="42785" title="Arthur R. Wilson" label="Arthur R. Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5093771" start="42790" end="42804" title="Chester Wilmot" label="Chester Wilmot"/>
<link wikidata="Q189266" start="43193" end="43206" title="Eastern Front (World War II)" label="Eastern Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q8683" start="43399" end="43407" title="Cold War" label="Cold War"/>
<link wikidata="Q4871512" start="43425" end="43444" title="Battle of La Ciotat" label="Battle of La Ciotat"/>
<link wikidata="Q604173" start="43447" end="43466" title="Battle of Port Cros" label="Battle of Port Cros"/>
<link wikidata="Q697829" start="43469" end="43489" title="Liberation of France" label="Liberation of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q574835" start="43643" end="43670" title="First Special Service Force" label="First Special Service Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q7889463" start="43831" end="43876" title="United States Army Center of Military History" label="United States Army Center of Military History"/>
<link wikidata="Q3250126" start="43879" end="43899" title="Naval History and Heritage Command" label="www.history.navy.mil"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="252169" wikidata="Q3883961" url="?curid=252169" title="Operation Golden Pheasant">
<text>Operation Golden Pheasant was an emergency deployment of U.S. troops to Honduras in 1988, in response to Nicaraguan attacks on Contra logistics in Honduras.

==History==
In early March 1988, the Nicaraguan Sandinista government launched Operation Danto 88 to overrun Contra rebel supply caches in the San Andrés de Bocay region, crossing into Honduran territory in their drive.
The United States, under President Ronald Reagan, dispatched elements of the 7th Infantry Division (Light) Quick Reaction Force (QRF) on a no-notice deployment. This small force quickly landed at Palmerola Air Base (now known as Soto Cano Air Base) and were moved quickly into position at a Honduran military base to facilitate the guarding of a local general. An international special operations unit led by Orlando Lentini, and the aviation assets of Joint Task Force Bravo (JTF-B) stationed on Pamerola AB, worked along with the 7th Infantry Division and were on the ground several days when the 82nd Airborne elements arrived. The deployment evolved into a live-fire exercise, the light infantry soldiers, paratroopers and special operations unit deployed ready to fight, causing the Sandinistas to rapidly withdraw back across their border.

The 1st and 2nd Battalions of the 504th Parachute Infantry Regiment and Charlie Company, 3rd Battalion of the 505th Parachute Infantry Regiment 82nd Airborne Division, were joined by soldiers from the 2nd Battalion 9th Infantry Regiment, 2d and 3d Battalions of the 27th Infantry Regiment, 7th Infantry Division (Light) QRF from Fort Ord, California.

On 17 March, 1st Battalion landed at Palmerola Air Base. The 2nd Battalion jumped onto the airfield that day, with only one casualty-the Executive Officer broke his leg on landing. Soldiers of the 27th Infantry Regiment (the &quot;Wolfhounds&quot;) rappelled onto the airbase on 17 March 1988 and were moved quickly up to the Nicaraguan border. 2/27th Infantry trained with the Honduran 11th Infantry Battalion at San Lorenzo, 3/27 Infantry trained with the Honduran 9th Infantry Battalion in Jamastran, 2/504 Airborne trained with the Honduran 2nd Infantry Battalion Airborne in Tamara, and 1/504 trained with the Honduran 16th Infantry Battalion in Juticalpa.

Prior to the deployment of combat forces the U.S. had deployed an Engineer Task Force (20th Engineer Brigade, from Fort Bragg, NC) of about 1100 soldiers for Ahuas Tara 88, an annual exercise providing assistance to Honduras. The Engineers were tasked with building roads, bridges, ports and buildings to build confidence with allied forces and to gain real world experience deploying and operating in an austere environment. The Engineer Task Force augmented and supported deploying combat forces with engineering, logistical, and communications troops. When combat forces redeployed the Engineers continued their mission.

The units from the 82nd Airborne, the 504th, began rigorous training exercises with orders to avoid the fighting on the border. Had those orders changed, the paratroopers and infantrymen were prepared to fight, but the invading Sandinista troops had already begun to withdraw. Within days, the Sandinista government negotiated a truce with Contra leaders, and by the end of March the 7th Infantry had returned to Fort Ord, California and the paratroopers of the 82nd had returned to Fort Bragg.

==Participating units==

===United States Army units===
*Elements of Company C, 214th Aviation Regiment, 1st Corps, assigned to JTFB at Palmerola AB
*Elements of 9th Aviation Battalion, 9th Aviation Regiment, 9th Infantry Division, assigned to JTFB at Palmerola AB
*2nd Battalion, 9th Infantry Regiment, 7th Infantry Division (Light)
*Headquarters and Headquarters Company, 9th Infantry Regiment, 7th Infantry Division (Light)
*Battery B, 6/8 Field Artillery, 7th Infantry Division (Light)
*13th Engineer Battalion
*1st Battalion, 504th Parachute Infantry Regiment, 82nd Airborne Division
*2nd Battalion, 504th Parachute Infantry Regiment, 82nd Airborne Division
*Company C, 3rd Battalion, 505th Parachute Infantry Regiment, 82nd Airborne Division
*Company A, 3rd Battalion, 505th Parachute Infantry Regiment, 82nd Airborne Division
*Company HHC 3rd Battalion, 505th Parachute Infantry Regiment, Scout Platoon 
*Company D, 1st Battalion, 325th Airborne Infantry Regiment, 82nd Airborne Division
*General Support (GS) Platoon, 782nd Maintenance Battalion, 82nd Airborne Division
*Company B, 307th Medical Battalion, 82nd Airborne Division
*General Support (GS) Platoon, 82nd Military Police Company, 82d Airborne Division
*Company B, 407th Supply and Transport Battalion, 82d Airborne Division
*Company C, and HQ Elements, 3rd Battalion (Airborne), 73rd Armor, 82nd Airborne Division
*3rd Battalion, 9th Infantry Regiment, 7th Infantry Division (Light)
*2nd Battalion, 27th Infantry Regiment, 7th Infantry Division (Light)
*3rd Battalion, 27th Infantry Regiment, 7th Infantry Division (Light)
*21st Military Police Company (Airborne), 503rd Airborne MP Battalion, 16th MP Brigade (Airborne)
*313th Military Intelligence Battalion, 82nd Airborne Division
*Battery A, 1/14th Field Artillery, 24th Infantry Division
*Battery B, 3rd Battalion, 319th Airborne Field Artillery Regiment, 82nd Airborne Division
*Company A, 1st Battalion, 9th Infantry Regiment, 7th Infantry Division (Light) along with elements of Headquarters and 
*Headquarters Company, 1st Battalion, 9th Infantry Regiment
*Joint Task Force Bravo, 401st Military Police Company
*7th Special Forces Group (Airborne)
*Second Battalion, 9th Aviation Regiment
*864th Engineering Battalion (Combat, Heavy)
*1st Squadron 17th Cavalry Regiment (Airborne, Air Cav)
*988th MP Company, 3rd Platoon
*937th Engineering Group
*Company C, 426th Signal Battalion (retasked from supporting Exercise Ahuas Tara 88)
*HHC 50th Signal Battalion (Airborne, 18th Airborne Corps Electronic Technician)
*Assault Command Post Platoon, A Company, 50th Signal Battalion (Airborne)
*Company A, 307th Engineer Battalion, 82nd Airborne Division
*Battery A, 2nd Battalion, 62nd Regiment Air Defense Artillery, Stinger Teams, 7th Infantry Division (Light)
*Already deployed in country in support of Ahuas Tara
*27th Engineer Battalion (Combat)(Airborne)
*B Co, 11th Engineer Battalion (Combat, Heavy)
*HHC, 20th Engineer Brigade
*C Co, 426th Signal Battalion
*235th Signal Company (Satellite Communication)

===United States Marine Corps units===

*2nd Battalion 7th Marines
*2nd Battalion 5th Marines

===United States Air Force units===
*113th Civil Engineer Squadron (District of Columbia Air National Guard)
*1352nd Aerospace Audiovisual Squadron
*3rd MAPS Pope AFB
*Det 1, 507th Tactical Air Control Wing, Pope AFB
*183rd Airlift Squadron (Mississippi Air National Guard)
437th military airlift wing Charleston AFB
0306th Air Refueling Squadron 
Altus AFB, OK

==References==
==External links==
*Operation Golden Pheasant
*History of the 504th Parachute Infantry Regiment
* A 1988 U.S. Army news archive about 7th Infantry Division (Light) QRF deployment on Operation Golden Pheasant.
*Official welcome document to JTF-Bravo</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3883961" start="0" end="25" title="Operation Golden Pheasant" label="Operation Golden Pheasant"/>
<link wikidata="Q783" start="72" end="80" title="Honduras" label="Honduras"/>
<link wikidata="Q811" start="105" end="114" title="Nicaragua" label="Nicaragua"/>
<link wikidata="Q286810" start="127" end="133" title="Contras" label="Contra"/>
<link wikidata="Q27389" start="206" end="216" title="Sandinista" label="Sandinista"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="237" end="255" title="Operation Danto 88" label="Operation Danto 88"/>
<link wikidata="Q286810" start="267" end="273" title="Contras" label="Contra"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="301" end="320" title="San Andrés de Bocay" label="San Andrés de Bocay"/>
<link wikidata="Q9960" start="413" end="426" title="Ronald Reagan" label="Ronald Reagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q747620" start="574" end="583" title="Palmerola" label="Palmerola"/>
<link wikidata="Q12052523" start="1259" end="1292" title="504th Parachute Infantry Regiment" label="504th Parachute Infantry Regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q2358" start="1369" end="1391" title="82nd Airborne Division" label="82nd Airborne Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q4646583" start="1440" end="1461" title="9th Infantry Regiment (United States)" label="9th Infantry Regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q4632617" start="1491" end="1513" title="27th Infantry Regiment (United States)" label="27th Infantry Regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q261179" start="1515" end="1548" title="7th Infantry Division (United States)" label="7th Infantry Division (Light) QRF"/>
<link wikidata="Q943136" start="1554" end="1562" title="Fort Ord" label="Fort Ord"/>
<link wikidata="Q4632617" start="1774" end="1796" title="27th Infantry Regiment" label="27th Infantry Regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q332231" start="1826" end="1832" title="rappel" label="rappel"/>
<link wikidata="Q27389" start="3093" end="3103" title="Sandinista" label="Sandinista"/>
<link wikidata="Q991369" start="3348" end="3358" title="Fort Bragg, North Carolina" label="Fort Bragg"/>
<link wikidata="Q407622" start="6582" end="6600" title="Air National Guard" label="Air National Guard"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="252171" wikidata="Q2281470" url="?curid=252171" title="Operation Provide Comfort">
<text>Operation Provide Comfort and Provide Comfort II were military operations initiated by the United States and other Coalition nations of the Persian Gulf War, starting in April 1991, to defend Kurdish refugees fleeing their homes in northern Iraq in the aftermath of the Gulf War, and to deliver humanitarian aid to them. The no-fly zone instituted to help bring this about would become one of the main factors allowing the development of the autonomous Kurdistan Region.

==Summary==

Operation Haven (the UK&#x27;s name for the operation) was a UK-headed initiative, made at a time when the US was fundamentally uninterested in any further taking of action in the Persian Gulf region. John Major, the British prime minister at the time, lobbied for other European states to support the mission, which resulted in NATO&#x27;s support and leveraged the necessary US air support. Then, as Saddam Hussein&#x27;s retributive activities intensified, US ground and logistic support was also achieved. This was a distinctly UK-headed operation though, with a proposed force of 6,000 personnel, spearheaded by the 3 Commando Brigade, Royal Marines, with elements from the UK&#x27;s army, the Royal Air Force, and other coalition member states. It was deemed dramatically successful, even though it appeared to be risky given the climate of those times. Operation Haven literally &quot;invaded&quot; Iraq. The Coalition&#x27;s main task was to enter northern Iraq, clear the designated area of any Iraqi threat and establish a safe environment for the Kurdish refugees to return to their homes. The mission was both a military one and humanitarian as once security had been established, the US would provide air support and specialist elements along with other Coalition members, supply and rebuilding of infrastructure would then be initiated. The ground mission within Iraq took 58 days to complete. Operation Provide Comfort (i.e. Haven) officially ended on 24 July 1991, shortly after the enforcement of the &quot;No Fly Zone&quot; continued to ensure Kurdish security in the region.

===US participation and events===
The 1991 uprising in northern Iraq resulted in an Iraqi military response towards the rebels in both northern and southern Iraq. Fearing another genocide like what had happened during the 1988 Anfal campaign, millions of Kurds fled towards the border with Iran and Turkey.

On 3 March, General Norman Schwarzkopf warned the Iraqis that Coalition aircraft would shoot down Iraqi military aircraft flying over the country. On 20 March, a US F-15C Eagle fighter aircraft shot down an Iraqi Air Force Su-22 Fitter fighter-bomber over northern Iraq. On 22 March, another F-15 destroyed a second Su-22 and the pilot of an Iraqi PC-9 trainer bailed out after being approached by US fighter planes.

On 5 April, the United Nations Security Council passed Resolution 688, calling on Iraq to end repression of its civilian population. On 6 April, Operation Provide Comfort began to bring humanitarian relief to the Kurds. A no-fly zone was established by the US, the UK, and France north of the 36th parallel, as part of the Iraqi no-fly zones. This was enforced by US, UK, and French aircraft. Included in this effort was the delivery of humanitarian relief of over an estimated 1 million Kurdish refugees by a 6-nation airlift operation commanded from Incirlik Air Base Turkey involving aircraft from the US, UK, France, Germany, Canada, and Italy. Soviet aircraft participated in logistical aspects of the operation. The airlift was commanded by Colonel Dave Wall, Wing Commander, Aviano Air Base, Italy. Intel and Planning Section Chief was Lt. Colonel Mike DeCapua who coordinated drop zone locations and unique aircraft loads. During the 31-day airlift, more tonnage was delivered and more air miles flown than in the entire Berlin Airlift. C-130s and other transport aircraft flew air drop missions under AWACS control with A-10s and F-16s providing air and ground fire support for the airlift aircraft. On several occasions A-10s neutralized Iraqi radar units in the Zaku area.

Units of the 18th Military Police Brigade, commanded by Colonel Lucious Delk, and a forward Headquarters Command Cell led by Captain Alan Mahan, and Sergeant Major Ed Deane, with units of the 709th Military Police Battalion, the 284th Military Police Company, the 527th Military Police Company and 3rd Platoon of the 202d Military Police Company, provided security of the headquarters, Kurdish refugee camps, and convoy security. The brigade was the last unit to leave the area at the conclusion of operations. Several members of the 202d Military Police Company received the Soldier&#x27;s Medal after calling in and assisting in the medical evacuation of a wounded Iraqi citizen from a minefield near the river not far from the MP headquarters camp.

While Operations Desert Shield and Desert Storm were run by the US Central Command (CENTCOM), Operation Provide Comfort came under the authority of the US European Command (EUCOM), headquartered in Vaihingen, Germany. On-ground humanitarian aid was provided by the 353rd Civil Affairs Command commanded by BG Donald Campbell, and by its subordinate units, 432nd Civil Affairs Battalion, and 431st Civil Affairs Battalion. These units were relocated to Turkey and northern Iraq after completing missions in Kuwait. The 353rd also had liaison officers assigned to HQ EUCOM and to the US Mission to the United Nations, Geneva. The 353rd were soon joined in Iraq by Lieutenant Colonel Ted Sahlin&#x27;s 96th Civil Affairs Battalion (Airborne) from Fort Bragg, North Carolina, which had only returned to the US two weeks before after having been deployed to Saudi Arabia, Iraq and Kuwait for the past 10 months. The base camps that were established for Kurdish refugees were nicknamed Camp Jayhawk and Camp Badger after college mascots. Other camps were established in Silopi, Turkey. The first troops to arrive were the 36th Civil Engineering Squadron from Bitburg Air Base Germany. Smaller &quot;detachment&quot; camps were also built in and around Zakho, Iraq and Sirsenk, Iraq by these same members and were led by Captain Donald Gleason from Ramstein Air Force base and USAF Security Policemen from RAF Bentwaters and RAF Lakenheath. He led a team of fifteen that is now known as the first Air Force unit to enter Iraq. Supplies for these camps were sourced from a variety of areas including units that were returning to the US, Coalition countries, European military stocks, and civilian contractors in the US. Many supplies had to be airdropped due to restrictions by the Turkish government for entering Iraq through their border.

Also deployed to Zakho from their main-body deployment site in Rota, Spain, was Naval Mobile Construction Battalion 133, homeported in Gulfport, Mississippi, commanded by Commander Donald Hutchins. It provided humanitarian aid, water wells, and minor repairs to Sirsink air field. Like its Air Force counterparts, it was the first Naval Mobile Construction Battalion to enter Iraq prior to Operation Iraqi Freedom. Carrier Strike Group 6 commenced its 21st and final operational deployment on 30 May 1991. During this period it provided air power presence and airborne intelligence support (the airwing flew over 900 sorties over Iraq) to the Combined Joint Task Forces of Operation Provide Comfort and Operation Northern Watch enforcing the northern &quot;no-fly zone&quot; in Iraq. It completed this deployment on 23 December 1991.

Lieutenant General John Shalikashvili commanded the overall operation and later became Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff. Task Force Bravo, the in-country multi-national element of the operation was commanded by Major General Jay Garner, US Army, who was later appointed a Special Representative to Iraq under the George W. Bush administration.

The first conventional units to cross into Iraq and enter Zakho were US marines on April 20, 1991, when two companies of infantry were airlifted into Zakho, where around 300 regular Iraqi Army infantry and armored vehicles from the 66th Special Assault Brigade were still present posing as police. The Marines had been preceded by 1st Battalion, 10th Special Forces Group (who were inserted into Iraq on 13 April 1991). The 24th Marine Expeditionary Unit was commanded by Colonel James L. Jones. The MEU consisted of the 24th MEU command element, Battalion Landing team 2/8 (BLT 2/8) under Lt. Colonel Tony Corwin, Composite Helicopter Squadron 264 (HMM-264) Led by Lt. Colonel Joseph Byrtus Jr. and MEU service support group 24 (MSSG-24) led by Lieutenant Colonel Richard Kohl, counting about 2,000 marines. The Marine Expeditionary Unit had been under the command of Commodore Turner, commander, Mediterranean Amphibious Ready Group 1–91, aboard his flagship USS &quot;Guadalcanal&quot;, but were transferred to Combine Task Force (CFT) Provide Comfort on 14 April and was 3 months into a 6-month routine Mediterranean deployment. The 24th MEU would initially serve as the command to a regiment sized force consisting of all MEU elements, 697 Royal Marines from 45 Commando (22 April), commanded by Lieutenant Colonel Jonathan Thompson and 400 marines from the Dutch 1st Amphibious Combat Group (1st ACG) commanded by Lieutenant Colonel Cees Van Egmond (arrived 23 April) for purposes of containing Zakho until the Iraqi forces would withdraw from the area. On 29 April, 3rd Commando Brigade took back command of 45 Commando, 29th Commando Regiment, Royal Artillery and the 1st ACG for expanded operations to the east. On 4 May, BLT 2/8 commenced operations to the south of Zakho along the route to Dohuk. The MEU then began to move back to Silopi, beginning with the BLT on June 15. 24th MEU left northern Iraq on July 15 and embarked on 19 July for the United States, ending its 6-month deployment.

The 24th MEU (SOC) along with Joint Task Force Bravo(Task Force Alpha was responsible for the Kurd camps in the mountains) grew in size in the days following April 20. The MEU was joined by 4th Brigade (Aviation), 3rd Infantry Division, 18th Engineer Brigade, Naval Mobil Construction Battalion 133, 18th Military Police Brigade, 418th Civil Affairs Battalion USAR, 432nd Civil Affairs Battalion USAR, and 431st Civil Affairs Battalion USAR, Canadian 4th Field Ambulance, 3d Battalion, 325th Infantry (Airborne)(reinforced)(arriving on 27 April), 40 Commando, 29 Commando Regiment, Royal Artillery, the French 8th Marine Parachute Infantry (Cougar Force), a Spanish expeditionary force formed from the 1st Airborne Brigade, &quot;Roger De Flor&quot; and the Italian Folgore Parachute Brigade. All together military forces from 10 countries participated deploying 20,000 military personnel. The Kurds were housed in Camp Jahawk and Camp Badger. The mayor of Jayhawk was MAJ Carl Fisher and the mayor of Badger was MAJ John Elliott.

The US contributed to the operation with the United Kingdom who providing the initiative and significant ground and air forces with 3 Commando Brigade and the RAF. Other allies included France, the Netherlands and Australia. The UK deployed 40 and 45 Commando Royal Marines and air transport assets to help protect refugees and to deliver humanitarian aid. The UK used the name Operation Haven. France deployed transport aircraft and special forces, the Netherlands deployed troops from the Korps commando troepen and an Army Medical/Engineering Battalion, and Australia contributed transport aircraft and medical, dental and preventive health teams (under the Australian name, Operation Habitat).

In March 1991 at a refugee camp in Yeşilova Turkish soldiers, instead of cooperating with the Corps of Royal Marines in relief distribution, were charged with stealing blankets, bed linen, flour and food, including sixty boxes of water, intended for the refugees, forcing the Marines to intervene.

==Operation Provide Comfort II==

Operation Provide Comfort II began on 24 July 1991, the same day Provide Comfort ended. This operation was primarily military in nature, and its mission was to prevent Iraqi aggression against the Kurds.

Partly as a result of Western commitment to the Kurds, Iraqi troops were withdrawn from the Kurdish regions in October 1991 and these areas assumed &quot;de facto&quot; independence.

On 5 April 1992, the Islamic Republic of Iran Air Force bombed bases in northern Iraq belonging to the Kurdistan Democratic Party of Iran. Iraqi jets were scrambled to intercept the intruders while Coalition aircraft did not interfere.

On 15 January 1993, Iraqi air defense sites opened fire on two USAF F-111 bombers. On 17 January, Iraqi Su-22s fired on two F-16 jets, and a US F-4 Phantom destroyed an Iraqi radar which had been targeting French reconnaissance aircraft. Around a half-hour later, a US F-16 shot down an Iraqi MiG-23 Flogger which had crossed into the no-fly zone. The next day, US F-16s bombed Bashiqah Airfield and F-4 Phantoms attacked Iraqi air defense sites. Over the next few days and months, more Iraqi sites fired on the American patrols, and several were attacked. That August, the USAF deployed the F-15E Strike Eagle aircraft to Turkey, and on 18 August, these aircraft dropped four laser-guided bombs on an Iraqi SA-3 site near Mosul.

On 14 April 1994, two USAF F-15 Eagle fighters on patrol mistakenly downed two US Army Black Hawk helicopters carrying 26 Coalition citizens, killing all aboard.

On 9 December 1995, F-4 Phantom II aircraft of the Idaho Air National Guard finished their tour of duty with Combined Task Force Provide Comfort at Incirlik Air Base. This was the last operational use of the F-4 Phantom by the USAF.

In August 1996, Iraqi troops intervened in the Kurdish regions of Iraq, and the United States responded with Operation Desert Strike against targets in southern Iraq. As a result, some incidents occurred in northern Iraq, and the United States launched an operation to evacuate certain pro-American Kurds from northern Iraq.

The operation ended officially on 31 December 1996 at the request of the Government of Turkey who wanted to improve relations with Iran and Iraq. It was followed by Operation Northern Watch, which began on 1 January 1997 with the mission of enforcing the northern no-fly zone. France declined to participate in Operation Northern Watch.

== See also ==

* Yeşilova incident

==References==
==Further reading==

==External links==
*Humanitarian Operations in Northern Iraq: With Marines in Operation Provide Comfort
*Operation Haven Northern Iraq 1991</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2281470" start="0" end="25" title="Operation Provide Comfort" label="Operation Provide Comfort"/>
<link wikidata="Q2281470" start="30" end="48" title="Operation Provide Comfort" label="Provide Comfort II"/>
<link wikidata="Q645883" start="54" end="72" title="military operation" label="military operation"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="91" end="104" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q4115894" start="115" end="156" title="Coalition of the Gulf War" label="Coalition nations of the Persian Gulf War"/>
<link wikidata="Q6445765" start="192" end="208" title="Kurdish refugees" label="Kurdish refugees"/>
<link wikidata="Q3108185" start="241" end="245" title="Ba&amp;#x27;athist Iraq" label="Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q37643" start="270" end="278" title="Gulf War" label="Gulf War"/>
<link wikidata="Q822530" start="325" end="336" title="no-fly zone" label="no-fly zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q205047" start="453" end="469" title="Kurdistan Region" label="Kurdistan Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q9559" start="686" end="696" title="John Major" label="John Major"/>
<link wikidata="Q14211" start="702" end="724" title="British prime minister" label="British prime minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q1316" start="887" end="901" title="Saddam Hussein" label="Saddam Hussein"/>
<link wikidata="Q279233" start="1106" end="1124" title="3 Commando Brigade" label="3 Commando Brigade"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046947" start="1126" end="1139" title="Royal Marines" label="Royal Marines"/>
<link wikidata="Q165862" start="1184" end="1199" title="Royal Air Force" label="Royal Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q760002" start="2118" end="2131" title="1991 uprisings in Iraq" label="1991 uprising"/>
<link wikidata="Q3108185" start="2144" end="2148" title="Ba&amp;#x27;athist Iraq" label="Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q529723" start="2307" end="2321" title="Anfal campaign" label="Anfal campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q12223" start="2335" end="2340" title="Kurds" label="Kurds"/>
<link wikidata="Q310188" start="2408" end="2426" title="Norman Schwarzkopf" label="Norman Schwarzkopf"/>
<link wikidata="Q29251" start="2553" end="2564" title="McDonnell Douglas F-15 Eagle" label="F-15C Eagle"/>
<link wikidata="Q127771" start="2565" end="2581" title="fighter aircraft" label="fighter aircraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q183146" start="2611" end="2623" title="Sukhoi Su-17" label="Su-22 Fitter"/>
<link wikidata="Q385642" start="2624" end="2638" title="fighter-bomber" label="fighter-bomber"/>
<link wikidata="Q666994" start="2736" end="2740" title="Pilatus PC-9" label="PC-9"/>
<link wikidata="Q37470" start="2822" end="2853" title="United Nations Security Council" label="United Nations Security Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q1168780" start="2861" end="2875" title="United Nations Security Council Resolution 688" label="Resolution 688"/>
<link wikidata="Q822530" start="3028" end="3039" title="no-fly zone" label="no-fly zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135115" start="3099" end="3112" title="36th parallel north" label="36th parallel"/>
<link wikidata="Q899657" start="3129" end="3147" title="Iraqi no-fly zones" label="Iraqi no-fly zones"/>
<link wikidata="Q4557633" start="4104" end="4132" title="18th Military Police Brigade (United States)" label="18th Military Police Brigade"/>
<link wikidata="Q4643009" start="4283" end="4314" title="709th Military Police Battalion" label="709th Military Police Battalion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1476046" start="4908" end="4926" title="United States Central Command" label="US Central Command"/>
<link wikidata="Q510610" start="4996" end="5015" title="United States European Command" label="US European Command"/>
<link wikidata="Q1022" start="5042" end="5051" title="Stuttgart" label="Vaihingen"/>
<link wikidata="Q817" start="5350" end="5356" title="Kuwait" label="Kuwait"/>
<link wikidata="Q3163297" start="5829" end="5836" title="Kansas Jayhawks" label="Jayhawk"/>
<link wikidata="Q3098117" start="5846" end="5852" title="Wisconsin Badgers" label="Badger"/>
<link wikidata="Q1012881" start="5908" end="5922" title="Silopi" label="Silopi, Turkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q167800" start="6090" end="6101" title="Zakho, Iraq" label="Zakho, Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6106" end="6119" title="Sirsenk, Iraq" label="Sirsenk, Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q1772975" start="6214" end="6237" title="United States Air Force Security Forces" label="USAF Security Policemen"/>
<link wikidata="Q388822" start="6243" end="6257" title="RAF Bentwaters" label="RAF Bentwaters"/>
<link wikidata="Q285198" start="6262" end="6276" title="RAF Lakenheath" label="RAF Lakenheath"/>
<link wikidata="Q6981870" start="6758" end="6797" title="Naval Mobile Construction Battalion 133" label="Naval Mobile Construction Battalion 133"/>
<link wikidata="Q490587" start="6813" end="6834" title="Gulfport, Mississippi" label="Gulfport, Mississippi"/>
<link wikidata="Q545449" start="7068" end="7091" title="Iraq War" label="Operation Iraqi Freedom"/>
<link wikidata="Q5046363" start="7093" end="7115" title="Carrier Strike Group 6" label="Carrier Strike Group 6"/>
<link wikidata="Q471428" start="7532" end="7550" title="John Shalikashvili" label="John Shalikashvili"/>
<link wikidata="Q1763459" start="7600" end="7637" title="Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff" label="Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff"/>
<link wikidata="Q489037" start="7729" end="7753" title="Jay Garner" label="Major General Jay Garner"/>
<link wikidata="Q1719918" start="7831" end="7860" title="Presidency of George W. Bush" label="George W. Bush administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q4631992" start="8287" end="8317" title="24th Marine Expeditionary Unit" label="24th Marine Expeditionary Unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q467451" start="8343" end="8357" title="James L. Jones" label="James L. Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q4748202" start="8775" end="8797" title="amphibious ready group" label="Amphibious Ready Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q5230745" start="8824" end="8851" title="USS Guadalcanal (LPH-7)" label="USS &amp;quot;Guadalcanal&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q279233" start="11031" end="11049" title="3 Commando Brigade" label="3 Commando Brigade"/>
<link wikidata="Q55" start="11097" end="11108" title="Netherlands" label="Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q4637390" start="11140" end="11142" title="40 Commando" label="40"/>
<link wikidata="Q4638181" start="11147" end="11158" title="45 Commando" label="45 Commando"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046947" start="11159" end="11172" title="Royal Marines" label="Royal Marines"/>
<link wikidata="Q3883964" start="11577" end="11594" title="Operation Habitat" label="Operation Habitat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046947" start="11692" end="11714" title="Royal Marines" label="Corps of Royal Marines"/>
<link wikidata="Q378442" start="12341" end="12375" title="Islamic Republic of Iran Air Force" label="Islamic Republic of Iran Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q785078" start="12423" end="12457" title="Kurdistan Democratic Party of Iran" label="Kurdistan Democratic Party of Iran"/>
<link wikidata="Q270990" start="12625" end="12630" title="General Dynamics F-111 Aardvark" label="F-111"/>
<link wikidata="Q183146" start="12661" end="12666" title="Sukhoi Su-17" label="Su-22"/>
<link wikidata="Q155679" start="12850" end="12864" title="Mikoyan-Gurevich MiG-23" label="MiG-23 Flogger"/>
<link wikidata="Q844500" start="13149" end="13167" title="McDonnell Douglas F-15E Strike Eagle" label="F-15E Strike Eagle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1160533" start="13234" end="13251" title="laser-guided bomb" label="laser-guided bomb"/>
<link wikidata="Q312471" start="13265" end="13269" title="SA-3" label="SA-3"/>
<link wikidata="Q83317" start="13280" end="13285" title="Mosul" label="Mosul"/>
<link wikidata="Q2822721" start="13345" end="13362" title="1994 Black Hawk shootdown incident" label="mistakenly downed"/>
<link wikidata="Q12060667" start="13502" end="13526" title="Idaho Air National Guard" label="Idaho Air National Guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1083424" start="13599" end="13616" title="Incirlik Air Base" label="Incirlik Air Base"/>
<link wikidata="Q1781133" start="13794" end="13817" title="Operation Desert Strike" label="Operation Desert Strike"/>
<link wikidata="Q794" start="14142" end="14146" title="Iran" label="Iran"/>
<link wikidata="Q2026233" start="14176" end="14200" title="Operation Northern Watch" label="Operation Northern Watch"/>
<link wikidata="Q8053375" start="14367" end="14384" title="Yeşilova incident" label="Yeşilova incident"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="252173" wikidata="Q932071" url="?curid=252173" title="Industrial relations">
<text>Industrial relations or employment relations is the multidisciplinary academic field that studies the employment relationship; that is, the complex interrelations between employers and employees, labor/trade 
unions, employer organizations, and the state.

The newer name, &quot;Employment Relations&quot; is increasingly taking precedence because &quot;industrial relations&quot; is often seen to have relatively narrow connotations. Nevertheless, industrial relations has frequently been concerned with employment relationships in the broadest sense, including &quot;non-industrial&quot; employment relationships. This is sometimes seen as paralleling a trend in the separate but related discipline of human resource management.

While some scholars regard or treat industrial/employment relations as synonymous with employee relations and labour relations, this is controversial, because of the narrower focus of employee/labour relations, i.e. on employees or labour, from the perspective of employers, managers and/or officials. In addition, employee relations is often perceived as dealing only with non-unionized workers, whereas labour relations is seen as dealing with organized labour, i.e unionized workers. Some academics, universities and other institutions regard human resource management as synonymous with one or more of the above disciplines, although this too is controversial.

== Overview ==
Industrial relations examines various employment situations, not just ones with a unionized workforce. However, according to Bruce E. Kaufman, &quot;To a large degree, most scholars regard trade unionism, collective bargaining and labour–management relations, and the national labour policy and labour law within which they are embedded, as the core subjects of the field.&quot;

Initiated in the United States at end of the 19th century, it took off as a field in conjunction with the New Deal. However, it is generally regarded as a separate field of study only in English-speaking countries, having no direct equivalent in continental Europe. In recent times, industrial relations has been in decline as a field, in correlation with the decline in importance of trade unions and also with the increasing preference of business schools for the human resource management paradigm.

Industrial relations has three faces: science building, problem solving, and ethical. In the science building phase, industrial relations is part of the social sciences, and it seeks to understand the employment relationship and its institutions through high-quality, rigorous research. In this vein, industrial relations scholarship intersects with scholarship in labour economics, industrial sociology, labour and social history, human resource management, political science, law, and other areas.

Industrial relations scholarship assumes that labour markets are not perfectly competitive and thus, in contrast to mainstream economic theory, employers typically have greater bargaining power than employees. Industrial relations scholarship also assumes that there are at least some inherent conflicts of interest between employers and employees (for example, higher wages versus higher profits) and thus, in contrast to scholarship in human resource management and organizational behaviour, conflict is seen as a natural part of the employment relationship. Industrial relations scholars therefore frequently study the diverse institutional arrangements that characterize and shape the employment relationship—from norms and power structures on the shop floor, to employee voice mechanisms in the workplace, to collective bargaining arrangements at company, regional, or national level, to various levels of public policy and labour law regimes, to varieties of capitalism (such as corporatism, social democracy, and neoliberalism).

When labour markets are seen as imperfect, and when the employment relationship includes conflicts of interest, then one cannot rely on markets or managers to always serve workers&#x27; interests, and in extreme cases to prevent worker exploitation. Industrial relations scholars and practitioners, therefore, support institutional interventions to improve the workings of the employment relationship and to protect workers&#x27; rights. The nature of these institutional interventions, however, differ between two camps within industrial relations. The pluralist camp sees the employment relationship as a mixture of shared interests and conflicts of interests that are largely limited to the employment relationship. In the workplace, pluralists, therefore, champion grievance procedures, employee voice mechanisms such as works councils and trade unions, collective bargaining, and labour–management partnerships. In the policy arena, pluralists advocate for minimum wage laws, occupational health and safety standards, international labour standards, and other employment and labour laws and public policies. These institutional interventions are all seen as methods for balancing the employment relationship to generate not only economic efficiency but also employee equity and voice. In contrast, the Marxist-inspired critical camp sees employer–employee conflicts of interest as sharply antagonistic and deeply embedded in the socio-political-economic system. From this perspective, the pursuit of a balanced employment relationship gives too much weight to employers&#x27; interests, and instead deep-seated structural reforms are needed to change the sharply antagonistic employment relationship that is inherent within capitalism. Militant trade unions are thus frequently supported.

== History ==
Industrial relations has its roots in the Industrial Revolution which created the modern employment relationship by spawning free labour markets and large-scale industrial organizations with thousands of wage workers. As society wrestled with these massive economic and social changes, labour problems arose. Low wages, long working hours, monotonous and dangerous work, and abusive supervisory practices led to high employee turnover, violent strikes, and the threat of social instability. Intellectually, industrial relations was formed at the end of the 19th century as a middle ground between classical economics and Marxism, with Sidney Webb and Beatrice Webb&#x27;s &quot;Industrial Democracy&quot; (1897) being a key intellectual work. Industrial relations thus rejected the classical econ.

Institutionally, industrial relations was founded by John R. Commons when he created the first academic industrial relations program at the University of Wisconsin in 1920. Another scholarly pioneer in industrial relations and labour research was Robert F. Hoxie. Early financial support for the field came from John D. Rockefeller Jr. who supported progressive labour–management relations in the aftermath of the bloody strike at a Rockefeller-owned coal mine in Colorado. In Britain, another progressive industrialist, Montague Burton, endowed chairs in industrial relations at the universities of Leeds, Cardiff, and Cambridge in 1929–1930.

Beginning in the early 1930s there was a rapid increase in membership of trade unions in the United States, and with that came frequent and sometimes violent labour–management conflict. During the Second World War these were suppressed by the arbitration powers of the National War Labor Board.

However, as the Second World War drew to a close and in anticipation of a renewal of labour–management conflict after the war, there was a wave of creations of new academic institutes and degree programs that sought to analyse such conflicts and the role of collective bargaining. The most known of these was the Cornell University School of Industrial and Labor Relations, founded in 1945. But counting various forms, there were over seventy-five others. These included the Yale Labor and Management Center, directed by E. Wight Bakke, which began in 1945. An influential industrial relations scholar in the 1940s and 1950s was Neil W. Chamberlain at Yale and Columbia universities.

In the 1950s, industrial relations was formalized as a distinct academic discipline with the emergence in the UK of the so-called &quot;Oxford school&quot;, including Allan Flanders, Hugh Clegg, and Alan Fox, Lord William McCarthy, Sir George Bain (all of whom taught at Nuffield College, Oxford), as well as Otto Kahn-Freund (Brasenose College, Oxford).

Industrial relations was formed with a strong problem-solving orientation that rejected both the classical economists&#x27; &quot;laissez-faire&quot; solutions to labour problems and the Marxist solution of class revolution. It is this approach that underlies the New Deal legislation in the United States, such as the National Labor Relations Act and the Fair Labor Standards Act.

By the early 21st century, the academic field of industrial relations was often described as being in crisis. In academia, its traditional positions are threatened on one side by the dominance of mainstream economics and organizational behaviour, and on the other by postmodernism.

In policy-making circles, the industrial relations emphasis on institutional intervention is trumped by a neoliberal emphasis on the &quot;laissez-faire&quot; promotion of free markets. In practice, trade unions are declining and fewer companies have industrial relations functions. The number of academic programs in industrial relations is therefore shrinking, while fields such as human resource management and organizational behaviour grow. The importance of this work, however, is stronger than ever, and the lessons of industrial relations remain vital. The challenge for industrial relations is to re-establish these connections with the broader academic, policy, and business worlds.

== Theoretical perspectives ==
Industrial relations scholars such as Alan Fox have described three major theoretical perspectives or frameworks, that contrast in their understanding and analysis of workplace relations. The three views are generally known as unitarism, pluralism, and the radical or critical school. Each offers a particular perception of workplace relations and will, therefore, interpret such events as workplace conflict, the role of unions and job regulation differently. The perspective of the critical school is sometimes referred to as the &quot;conflict model&quot;, although this is somewhat ambiguous, as pluralism also tends to see conflict as inherent in workplaces. Radical theories are strongly identified with Marxist theories, although they are not limited to these.

=== Pluralist perspective ===
In pluralism, the organization is perceived as being made up of divergent sub-groups, each with its own legitimate interests and loyalties and with their own set of objectives and leaders. In particular, the two predominant sub-groups in the pluralist perspective are the management and trade unions. The pluralist perspective also supports that conflict is inherent in dealing with industrial relations since different sub-groups have different opinions in the day-to-day operations. Consequently, the role of management would lean less towards enforcing and controlling and more toward persuasion and coordination. Trade unions are deemed legitimate representatives of employees, conflict is resolved through collective bargaining and is viewed not necessarily as a bad thing and, if managed, could, in fact, be channeled towards evolution and positive change.

=== Unitarist perspective ===
In unitarism, the organization is perceived as an integrated and harmonious whole with the idea of &quot;one happy family&quot; in which management and other members of the staff all share a common purpose by emphasizing mutual co-operation. Furthermore, unitarism has a paternalistic approach: it demands loyalty of all employees and is managerial in its emphasis and application. Consequently, trade unions are deemed unnecessary since the loyalty between employees and organizations are considered mutually exclusive, and there cannot be two sides of industry. Conflict is perceived as the result of poor management.

=== Radical or critical perspective ===
This view of industrial relations looks at the nature of the capitalist society, where there is a fundamental division of interest between capital and labour, and sees workplace relations against this background. This perspective sees inequalities of power and economic wealth as having their roots in the nature of the capitalist economic system. Conflict is therefore seen as a natural outcome of capitalism, thus it is inevitable and trade unions are a natural response of workers to their exploitation by capital. Whilst there may be periods of acquiescence, the Marxist view would be that institutions of joint regulation would enhance rather than limit management&#x27;s position as they presume the continuation of capitalism rather than challenge it.

== Labor relations ==
== References ==
=== Bibliography ===
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
== Further reading ==
* 
* 
* Kjellberg, Anders (2022) &quot;The Nordic Model of Industrial Relations&quot;. Lund: Department of Sociology.
* 
* 


==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q932071" start="0" end="20" title="Industrial relations" label="Industrial relations"/>
<link wikidata="Q932071" start="24" end="44" title="Industrial relations" label="employment relations"/>
<link wikidata="Q656365" start="171" end="179" title="employer" label="employer"/>
<link wikidata="Q656365" start="185" end="193" title="employee" label="employee"/>
<link wikidata="Q178790" start="196" end="215" title="labor union" label="labor/trade 
unions"/>
<link wikidata="Q627272" start="217" end="239" title="employer organizations" label="employer organizations"/>
<link wikidata="Q7275" start="245" end="254" title="the state" label="the state"/>
<link wikidata="Q1056396" start="704" end="729" title="human resource management" label="human resource management"/>
<link wikidata="Q932071" start="819" end="837" title="Industrial relations" label="employee relations"/>
<link wikidata="Q608190" start="842" end="858" title="labour relations" label="labour relations"/>
<link wikidata="Q208701" start="1178" end="1194" title="organized labour" label="organized labour"/>
<link wikidata="Q178790" start="1602" end="1613" title="trade union" label="trade union"/>
<link wikidata="Q452421" start="1618" end="1639" title="collective bargaining" label="collective bargaining"/>
<link wikidata="Q2920921" start="1651" end="1661" title="management" label="management"/>
<link wikidata="Q628967" start="1708" end="1718" title="labour law" label="labour law"/>
<link wikidata="Q186356" start="1899" end="1907" title="New Deal" label="New Deal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143635" start="2234" end="2249" title="business school" label="business school"/>
<link wikidata="Q6746685" start="2274" end="2293" title="management paradigm" label="management paradigm"/>
<link wikidata="Q34749" start="2449" end="2463" title="social science" label="social science"/>
<link wikidata="Q656365" start="2497" end="2507" title="employment" label="employment"/>
<link wikidata="Q28161" start="2661" end="2677" title="labour economics" label="labour economics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1302156" start="2679" end="2699" title="industrial sociology" label="industrial sociology"/>
<link wikidata="Q59029" start="2701" end="2707" title="labour history (discipline)" label="labour"/>
<link wikidata="Q908604" start="2712" end="2726" title="social history" label="social history"/>
<link wikidata="Q1056396" start="2728" end="2753" title="human resource management" label="human resource management"/>
<link wikidata="Q36442" start="2755" end="2772" title="political science" label="political science"/>
<link wikidata="Q7748" start="2774" end="2777" title="law" label="law"/>
<link wikidata="Q8134" start="2924" end="2939" title="economic theory" label="economic theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q19483216" start="3265" end="3289" title="organizational behaviour" label="organizational behaviour"/>
<link wikidata="Q452421" start="3611" end="3632" title="collective bargaining" label="collective bargaining"/>
<link wikidata="Q628967" start="3726" end="3736" title="labour law" label="labour law"/>
<link wikidata="Q6206" start="3762" end="3772" title="capitalism" label="capitalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q192886" start="3782" end="3793" title="corporatism" label="corporatism"/>
<link wikidata="Q121254" start="3795" end="3811" title="social democracy" label="social democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q162719" start="3817" end="3830" title="neoliberalism" label="neoliberalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2920921" start="3981" end="3988" title="manager" label="manager"/>
<link wikidata="Q5608720" start="4603" end="4612" title="grievance (labour)" label="grievance"/>
<link wikidata="Q671974" start="4659" end="4672" title="works council" label="works council"/>
<link wikidata="Q178790" start="4678" end="4689" title="trade union" label="trade union"/>
<link wikidata="Q186228" start="4796" end="4808" title="minimum wage" label="minimum wage"/>
<link wikidata="Q629029" start="4815" end="4845" title="occupational health and safety" label="occupational health and safety"/>
<link wikidata="Q6054717" start="4857" end="4887" title="international labour standards" label="international labour standards"/>
<link wikidata="Q7264" start="5141" end="5148" title="Marxism" label="Marxist"/>
<link wikidata="Q2269" start="5685" end="5706" title="Industrial Revolution" label="Industrial Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q49776" start="6087" end="6094" title="strike action" label="strikes"/>
<link wikidata="Q854537" start="6264" end="6271" title="Marxian economics" label="Marxism"/>
<link wikidata="Q332442" start="6278" end="6289" title="Sidney Webb" label="Sidney Webb"/>
<link wikidata="Q242666" start="6294" end="6307" title="Beatrice Webb" label="Beatrice Webb"/>
<link wikidata="Q6027556" start="6321" end="6341" title="Industrial Democracy" label="Industrial Democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1701606" start="6495" end="6510" title="John R. Commons" label="John R. Commons"/>
<link wikidata="Q838330" start="6582" end="6605" title="University of Wisconsin" label="University of Wisconsin"/>
<link wikidata="Q19519876" start="6689" end="6704" title="Robert F. Hoxie" label="Robert F. Hoxie"/>
<link wikidata="Q363984" start="6754" end="6777" title="John D. Rockefeller Jr." label="John D. Rockefeller Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q1018743" start="6856" end="6914" title="Ludlow Massacre" label="bloody strike at a Rockefeller-owned coal mine in Colorado"/>
<link wikidata="Q5620467" start="6963" end="6978" title="Montague Burton" label="Montague Burton"/>
<link wikidata="Q503424" start="7042" end="7047" title="University of Leeds" label="Leeds"/>
<link wikidata="Q1035745" start="7049" end="7056" title="Cardiff University" label="Cardiff"/>
<link wikidata="Q35794" start="7062" end="7071" title="University of Cambridge" label="Cambridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q6467234" start="7160" end="7193" title="labor unions in the United States" label="trade unions in the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="7284" end="7300" title="Second World War" label="Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q3336955" start="7356" end="7380" title="National War Labor Board (1942–1945)" label="National War Labor Board"/>
<link wikidata="Q5171574" start="7696" end="7755" title="Cornell University School of Industrial and Labor Relations" label="Cornell University School of Industrial and Labor Relations"/>
<link wikidata="Q19867379" start="7858" end="7890" title="Yale Labor and Management Center" label="Yale Labor and Management Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q19757762" start="7904" end="7918" title="E. Wight Bakke" label="E. Wight Bakke"/>
<link wikidata="Q19520696" start="8012" end="8031" title="Neil W. Chamberlain" label="Neil W. Chamberlain"/>
<link wikidata="Q49112" start="8035" end="8039" title="Yale University" label="Yale"/>
<link wikidata="Q49088" start="8044" end="8052" title="Columbia University" label="Columbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1552882" start="8235" end="8249" title="Allan Flanders" label="Allan Flanders"/>
<link wikidata="Q16750221" start="8251" end="8261" title="Hugh Clegg (industrial relations)" label="Hugh Clegg"/>
<link wikidata="Q2636685" start="8267" end="8275" title="Alan Fox (sociologist)" label="Alan Fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q2579916" start="8282" end="8298" title="William McCarthy, Baron McCarthy" label="William McCarthy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5536617" start="8304" end="8315" title="George Bain (academic)" label="George Bain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1758457" start="8339" end="8363" title="Nuffield College, Oxford" label="Nuffield College, Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q121832" start="8377" end="8393" title="Otto Kahn-Freund" label="Otto Kahn-Freund"/>
<link wikidata="Q899030" start="8395" end="8420" title="Brasenose College, Oxford" label="Brasenose College, Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q171990" start="8554" end="8567" title="laissez-faire" label="laissez-faire"/>
<link wikidata="Q29502" start="8631" end="8647" title="class revolution" label="class revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q186356" start="8688" end="8696" title="New Deal" label="New Deal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154442" start="8743" end="8771" title="National Labor Relations Act" label="National Labor Relations Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q3064514" start="8780" end="8804" title="Fair Labor Standards Act" label="Fair Labor Standards Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q47783" start="9074" end="9087" title="postmodernism" label="postmodernism"/>
<link wikidata="Q46607" start="9262" end="9273" title="free market" label="free market"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412640" start="10352" end="10360" title="conflict theories" label="conflict"/>
<link wikidata="Q1639471" start="10524" end="10540" title="Marxist theory" label="Marxist theories"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="252174" wikidata="Q257565" url="?curid=252174" title="WDM">
<text>WDM may refer to:

== Science and technology ==

* Warm dark matter in cosmology
* Warm dense matter, a state of matter between solid and plasma
* Wavelength-division multiplexing, a signal transmission method
* &quot;wdm&quot;, the WINGs Display Manager on Unix
* Windows Driver Model, a framework for device drivers in Windows
* Wide Diesel Mixed, a series of Indian locomotives

== Other uses ==

* West Des Moines, Iowa, United States, a city
* Western Development Museum of Saskatchewan
* World Development Movement, a British campaign for social justice
* Waking Down in Mutuality, an American &quot;spiritual awakening&quot; association
* Warith Deen Muhammad (Wallace D. Muhammad), a leader of the Nation of Islam
* WDM (Washington, D.C.), an early 1920s radio station</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q257565" start="0" end="3" title="WDM" label="WDM"/>
<link wikidata="Q2353040" start="51" end="67" title="Warm dark matter" label="Warm dark matter"/>
<link wikidata="Q282699" start="83" end="100" title="Warm dense matter" label="Warm dense matter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1620670" start="147" end="179" title="Wavelength-division multiplexing" label="Wavelength-division multiplexing"/>
<link wikidata="Q181222" start="233" end="254" title="WINGs Display Manager" label="WINGs Display Manager"/>
<link wikidata="Q1329009" start="265" end="285" title="Windows Driver Model" label="Windows Driver Model"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="352" end="380" title="Locomotives of India#Diesel traction" label="series of Indian locomotives"/>
<link wikidata="Q923861" start="402" end="423" title="West Des Moines, Iowa" label="West Des Moines, Iowa"/>
<link wikidata="Q3473794" start="449" end="475" title="Western Development Museum" label="Western Development Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q8035642" start="494" end="520" title="World Development Movement" label="World Development Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q7961152" start="562" end="586" title="Waking Down in Mutuality" label="Waking Down in Mutuality"/>
<link wikidata="Q2030011" start="646" end="666" title="Warith Deen Muhammad" label="Warith Deen Muhammad"/>
<link wikidata="Q85813747" start="724" end="746" title="WDM (Washington, D.C.)" label="WDM (Washington, D.C.)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="252176" wikidata="Q1358538" url="?curid=252176" title="Napier's bones">
<text>Napier&#x27;s bones is a manually operated calculating device created by John Napier of Merchiston, Scotland for the calculation of products and quotients of numbers. The method was based on lattice multiplication, and also called &quot;rabdology&quot;, a word invented by Napier. Napier published his version in 1617. It was printed in Edinburgh and dedicated to his patron Alexander Seton.

Using the multiplication tables embedded in the rods, multiplication can be reduced to addition operations and division to subtractions. Advanced use of the rods can extract square roots. Napier&#x27;s bones are not the same as logarithms, with which Napier&#x27;s name is also associated, but are based on dissected multiplication tables.

The complete device usually includes a base board with a rim; the user places Napier&#x27;s rods and the rim to conduct multiplication or division. The board&#x27;s left edge is divided into nine squares, holding the numbers 1 to 9. In Napier&#x27;s original design, the rods are made of metal, wood or ivory and have a square cross-section. Each rod is engraved with a multiplication table on each of the four faces. In some later designs, the rods are flat and have two tables or only one engraved on them, and made of plastic or heavy cardboard. A set of such bones might be enclosed in a carrying case.

A rod&#x27;s face is marked with nine squares. Each square except the top is divided into two halves by a diagonal line from the bottom left corner to the top right. The squares contain a simple multiplication table. The first holds a single digit, which Napier called the &#x27;single&#x27;. The others hold the multiples of the single, namely twice the single, three times the single and so on up to the ninth square containing nine times the number in the top square. Single-digit numbers are written in the bottom right triangle leaving the other triangle blank, while double-digit numbers are written with a digit on either side of the diagonal.

If the tables are held on single-sided rods, 40 rods are needed in order to multiply 4-digit numbers – since numbers may have repeated digits, four copies of the multiplication table for each of the digits 0 to 9 are needed. If square rods are used, the 40 multiplication tables can be inscribed on 10 rods. Napier gave details of a scheme for arranging the tables so that no rod has two copies of the same table, enabling every possible four-digit number to be represented by 4 of the 10 rods. A set of 20 rods, consisting of two identical copies of Napier&#x27;s 10 rods, allows calculation with numbers of up to eight digits, and a set of 30 rods can be used for 12-digit numbers.

== Multiplication ==

The simplest sort of multiplication, a number with multiple digits by a number with a single digit, is done by placing rods representing the multi-digit number in the frame against the left edge. The answer is read off the row corresponding to the single-digit number which is marked on the left of the frame, with a small amount of addition required, as explained in the examples below.

When multiplying a multi-digit number by another multi-digit number, the larger number is set up on the rods in the frame. An intermediate result is produced by the device for multiplication by each of the digits of the smaller number. These are written down and the final result is calculated by pen and paper.

To demonstrate how to use Napier&#x27;s bones for multiplication, three examples of increasing difficulty are explained below.

===Multiplication by a small single-digit number===

The first example computes .

Napier&#x27;s bones for 4, 2, and 5 are placed into the board, in sequence. These bones show the larger figure which will be multiplied. The numbers lower in each column, or bone, are the digits found by ordinary multiplication tables for the corresponding integer, positioned above and below a diagonal line. (For example, the digits shown in the seventh row of the 4 bone are , representing .) In the example below for , the bones are here depicted as red (4), yellow (2), and blue (5).

The left-most column, preceding the bones shown coloured, may represent the 1 bone. (A blank space or zero to the upper left of each digit, separated by a diagonal line, should be understood, since , , , etc.) A small number is chosen, usually 2 through 9, by which to multiply the large number. In this example the small number by which to multiply the larger is 6. The horizontal row in which this number stands is the only row needed to perform the remaining calculations and may now be viewed in isolation.

For the calculation, the digits separated by vertical lines (i.e. paired between diagonal lines, crossing over from one bone to the next) are added together to form the digits of the product. The final (right-most) number on that row will never require addition, as it is always isolated by the last diagonal line, and will always be the final digit of the product. In this example, there are four digits, since there are four groups of bone values lying between diagonal lines. The product&#x27;s digits will stand in the order as calculated left to right. Apart from the first and the final digit, the product&#x27;s digits will each be the sum of two values taken from two different bones.

Bone values are added together, as described above, to find the digits of the product. In this diagram, the third product digit from the yellow and blue bones have their relevant values coloured green. Each sum is written in the space below. The sequence of the summations from left to right produces the figure of 2550. Therefore, the solution to multiplying 425 by 6 is 2550.

===Multiplication by a larger single-digit number===
When multiplying by larger single digits, it is common that upon adding a diagonal column, the sum of the numbers results in a number that is 10 or greater.

The second example computes . 

Like Example 1, the corresponding bones to the biggest number are placed in the board. For this example, bones 6, 7, 8, and 5 were placed in the proper order as shown below.

In the first column, the number by which the biggest number is multiplied by is located. In this example, the number was 8. Only row 8 will be used for the remaining calculations, so the rest of the board has been cleared for clarity in explaining the remaining steps.

Just as before, each diagonal column is evaluated, starting at the right side. If the sum of a diagonal column equals 10 or greater, the &quot;tens&quot; place of this sum must be carried over and added along with the numbers in the adjacent left column as demonstrated below.

After each diagonal column is evaluated, the calculated numbers are read from left to right to produce a final answer; in this example, 54280 was produced. 

Therefore: The solution to multiplying 6785 by 8 is 54280. 

===Multiplication by a multi-digit number===

The third example computes .

The corresponding bones to the leading number are placed in the board. For this example, the bones 8, 2, and 5 were placed in the proper order as shown below.

To multiply by a multi-digit number, multiple rows are reviewed. For this example, the rows for 9, 1, and 3 have been removed from the board for clarity.

Each row is evaluated individually and each diagonal column is added as explained in the previous examples. The sums are read from left to right, producing the numbers needed for the long hand addition calculations to follow. For this example, row 9, row 1, and row 3 were evaluated separately to produce the results shown below.

Starting with the rightmost digit of the second number, the sums are placed from the rows in sequential order as seen from right to left under each other while utilising a 0 for a place holder. 
 2475
 8250
 742500

The rows and place holders are summed to produce a final answer.
 2475
 8250
 + 742500
 753225

In this example, the final answer produced was 753225. Therefore: The solution to multiplying 825 by 913 is 753225.

== Division ==
Division is performed in a similar fashion. To divide 46785399 by 96431, the bars for the divisor (96431) are placed on the board, as shown in the graphic below. Using the abacus, all the products of the divisor from 1 to 9 are found by reading the displayed numbers. Note that the dividend has eight digits, whereas the partial products (save for the first one) all have six. So the final two digits of 46785399, namely the &#x27;99&#x27;, are temporarily ignored, leaving the number 467853. Then, the greatest partial product that is less than the truncated dividend is found. In this case, 385724. Two things must be marked down, as seen in the diagram: since 385724 is in the &#x27;4&#x27; row of the abacus, a &#x27;4&#x27; is marked down as the left-most digit of the quotient; the partial product, left-aligned, under the original dividend, is also written. The two terms are subtracted, which leaves 8212999. The same steps are repeated: the number is truncated to six digits, the partial product immediately less than the truncated number is chosen, the row number is written as the next digit of the quotient, and the partial product is subtracted from the difference found in the first repetition. The process is shown in the diagram. The cycle is repeated until the result of subtraction is less than the divisor. The number left is the remainder.

So in this example, what remains is a quotient of 485 with a remainder of 16364. The process usually stops here and the answer uses the fractional form .

For more accuracy, the cycle is continued to find as many decimal places required. A decimal point is marked after the last digit of the quotient and a zero is appended to the remainder which leaves 163640. The cycle is continued, each time appending a zero to the
result after the subtraction.

==Extracting square roots==
For extracting the square root, an additional bone is used which is different from the others as it has three columns. The first column has the first nine square numbers, the second has the first nine even numbers, and the last has the numbers 1 to 9.

To find the square root of 46785399, its digits are grouped into twos starting from the right so it looks like this:
: &quot;Note:&quot; A number with an odd number of digits like 85399 would be grouped as 

The leftmost group is chosen first, in this case 46. The largest square on the square root bone less than 46 is picked, which is 36 from the sixth row. The first digit of the solution is 6, since the sixth row was chosen.

Then, the number in the second column from the sixth row on the square root bone, 12, is set on the board.

The value in the first column of the sixth row, 36, is subtracted from 46, which leaves 10.

The next group of digits, 78, is added next to 10; this leaves the remainder 1078.

At this stage, the board and intermediate calculations should look like this:
The numbers in each row are &quot;read&quot;, ignoring the second and third columns from the square root bone; these are recorded. (For example, the sixth row is read as: ).

Like in multiplication shown before, the numbers are read from right to left and add the diagonal numbers from top-right to left-bottom (; ; ).

The largest number less than the current remainder, 1078 (from the eighth row), is found.

Like before, 8 is appended to get the next digit of the square root and the value of the eighth row, 1024, is subtracted from the current remainder, 1078, to get 54. The second column of the eighth row on the square
root bone, 16, is read and the number is set on the board as follows.

The current number on the board is 12. The first digit of
16 is added to 12, and the second digit of 16 is appended to the result. So the board should be set to:
: → append 6 → 136

: &quot;Note:&quot; If the second column of the square root bone has only one digit, this is appended to the current number on the board.

The board and intermediate calculations now look like this.

Once again, the row with the largest value less than the current partial remainder, 5453, is found. This time, it is the third row with 4089.

The next digit of the square root is 3. The same steps as before are repeated and 4089 is subtracted from the current remainder, 5453, to get 1364 as the next remainder. When the board is rearranged, the second column of the square root bone is 6, a single digit. So 6 is appended to the current number on the board, 136, to leave 1366 on the board.
: 136 → append 6 → 1366
The process is repeated again. Now, the largest value on the board smaller than the current remainder, 136499, is 123021 from the ninth row.

The value of every row often doesn&#x27;t need to be found to get the answer. The row that has the answer may be guessed by looking at the number on the first few bones and comparing it with the first few digits of the remainder. But the diagrams show the value of all rows to make it understandable.

9 is appended to the result and 123021 is subtracted from the current remainder.

If all the digits have been used, and a remainder is left, then the integer part is solved, but a fractional bit still needs to be found.

If the integer part is solved, the current result squared () must be the largest perfect square smaller than 46785899. 

This idea is used later on to understand how the technique works, but more digits can be generated.

Similar to finding the fractional portion in long division, two zeros are appended to the remainder to get the new remainder 1347800. The second column of the ninth row of the square root bone is 18 and the current number on the board is 1366. 
: → append 8 → 13678
is computed to set 13678 on the board.

The board and intermediate computations now look like this.

The ninth row with 1231101 is the largest value smaller than the
remainder, so the first digit of the fractional part of the square root is 9.

The value of the ninth row is subtracted from the remainder and a few more zeros are appended to get the new remainder 11669900. The second column on the ninth row is 18 with 13678 on the board, so
: → 13679 → append 8 → 136798
is computed to set 136798 on the board.

The steps can be continued to find as many digits needed and if the precision needed is achieved. If the remainder becomes zero, this means the exact square root was found.

=== Rounding up ===
Having found the desired number of digits, it is easy to determine whether or not it needs rounding up; i.e., changing the last digit. Another digit does not need to be found to see if it is equal to or greater than 5. 25 is appended to the root and it is compared to the remainder; if it is less than or equal to the remainder, then the next digit will be at least five and rounding up is needed. In the example above, 6839925 is less than 11669900, so the root needs to be rounded up to 6840.0.

To find the square root of a number that isn&#x27;t an integer, say 54782.917, everything is the same, except that the digits to the left and right of the decimal point are grouped into twos. 

So 54782.917 would be grouped as

Then the square root can be found using the process previously mentioned.

== Diagonal modification ==
During the 19th century, Napier&#x27;s bones were transformed to make them easier to read. The rods were made with an angle of about 65° so that the triangles that had to be added were aligned. In this case, in each square of the rod the unit is to the right and the ten (or the zero) to the left.

The rods were made such that the vertical and horizontal lines were more visible than the line where the rods touched, making the two components of each digit of the result easier to read. Thus, in the picture it is immediately clear that:

== Genaille–Lucas rulers ==
In 1891, Henri Genaille invented a variant of Napier&#x27;s bones which became known as Genaille–Lucas rulers. By representing the carry graphically, the results of simple multiplication problems can be read directly, with no intermediate mental calculations.

The following example calculates .

==See also==
* Slide calculator
* Genaille–Lucas rulers
* Pascal&#x27;s calculator
* Slide rule

==References==
==External links==
* Wolfram Demonstration implementation of Napier bones in various number systems at cut-the-knot
* Napier and other bones and many calculators</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1358538" start="0" end="19" title="Napier&amp;#x27;s bones" label="Napier&amp;#x27;s bones"/>
<link wikidata="Q159592" start="73" end="84" title="John Napier" label="John Napier"/>
<link wikidata="Q1921454" start="88" end="98" title="Merchiston" label="Merchiston"/>
<link wikidata="Q22" start="100" end="108" title="Scotland" label="Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q622821" start="117" end="128" title="calculation" label="calculation"/>
<link wikidata="Q41118" start="145" end="153" title="quotient" label="quotient"/>
<link wikidata="Q3516846" start="191" end="213" title="lattice multiplication" label="lattice multiplication"/>
<link wikidata="Q3428999" start="237" end="246" title="rabdology" label="rabdology"/>
<link wikidata="Q6798" start="313" end="317" title="1617" label="1617"/>
<link wikidata="Q23436" start="337" end="346" title="Edinburgh" label="Edinburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q4720056" start="375" end="390" title="Alexander Seton, 1st Earl of Dunfermline" label="Alexander Seton"/>
<link wikidata="Q206049" start="403" end="424" title="Multiplication table" label="multiplication tables"/>
<link wikidata="Q40276" start="447" end="461" title="multiplication" label="multiplication"/>
<link wikidata="Q32043" start="480" end="488" title="addition" label="addition"/>
<link wikidata="Q1226939" start="504" end="512" title="division (mathematics)" label="division"/>
<link wikidata="Q40754" start="516" end="528" title="Subtraction" label="subtractions"/>
<link wikidata="Q134237" start="567" end="578" title="square root" label="square root"/>
<link wikidata="Q11197" start="621" end="630" title="logarithm" label="logarithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q82001" start="1037" end="1042" title="ivory" label="ivory"/>
<link wikidata="Q139106" start="1088" end="1096" title="engraved" label="engraved"/>
<link wikidata="Q389782" start="1272" end="1281" title="cardboard" label="cardboard"/>
<link wikidata="Q164" start="1394" end="1400" title="square" label="square"/>
<link wikidata="Q189791" start="1448" end="1456" title="diagonal" label="diagonal"/>
<link wikidata="Q206049" start="1537" end="1557" title="multiplication table" label="multiplication table"/>
<link wikidata="Q82990" start="1584" end="1589" title="Numerical digit" label="digit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055293" start="1655" end="1664" title="Multiple (mathematics)" label="multiples"/>
<link wikidata="Q40276" start="2722" end="2736" title="multiplication" label="multiplication"/>
<link wikidata="Q133250" start="3680" end="3688" title="sequence" label="sequence"/>
<link wikidata="Q218005" start="7843" end="7849" title="summation" label="summed"/>
<link wikidata="Q12806" start="8212" end="8218" title="abacus" label="abacus"/>
<link wikidata="Q134237" start="10420" end="10431" title="square root" label="square root"/>
<link wikidata="Q1854385" start="13456" end="13469" title="long division" label="long division"/>
<link wikidata="Q663208" start="14476" end="14484" title="rounding" label="rounding"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15791" end="15805" title="Henri Genaille" label="Henri Genaille"/>
<link wikidata="Q3455860" start="15870" end="15891" title="Genaille–Lucas rulers" label="Genaille–Lucas rulers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1333956" start="15913" end="15918" title="Carry (arithmetic)" label="carry"/>
<link wikidata="Q140690" start="16094" end="16110" title="Slide calculator" label="Slide calculator"/>
<link wikidata="Q3455860" start="16113" end="16134" title="Genaille–Lucas rulers" label="Genaille–Lucas rulers"/>
<link wikidata="Q873501" start="16137" end="16161" title="Pascal&amp;#x27;s calculator" label="Pascal&amp;#x27;s calculator"/>
<link wikidata="Q190667" start="16164" end="16174" title="Slide rule" label="Slide rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q56811887" start="16294" end="16306" title="cut-the-knot" label="cut-the-knot"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="252177" wikidata="Q244432" url="?curid=252177" title="Black-necked swan">
<text>The black-necked swan (Cygnus melancoryphus) is a species of waterfowl in the tribe Cygnini of the subfamily Anserinae. It is found in Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Uruguay, and the Falkland Islands.

==Taxonomy and systematics==

The black-necked swan has occasionally been placed by itself in the genus &quot;Sthenelides&quot;. Its closest relatives are the black swan (&quot;C. atratus&quot;) and mute swan (&quot;C. olor&quot;). It is monotypic.

==Description==

The black-necked swan is the only member of its genus that breeds in the neotropics and is the largest waterfowl native to South America. Adults are long with a wingspan of . Males weigh and females . The sexes are alike. Adults&#x27; body plumage is white and the neck and head black; the latter usually has a white stripe behind the eye. They have a prominent red knob at the base of their bill. Juveniles are grayish rather than white and lack the knob until their third or fourth year.

==Distribution and habitat==

The black-necked swan is found in the southern tier of South America. It nests from Tierra del Fuego north to central Chile, Uruguay, and Rio Grande do Sul in extreme southern Brazil. It withdraws from the southern half of Argentina in winter and is then found as far north as Brazil&#x27;s São Paulo state. It is a year-round resident of the Falkland Islands. Vagrants have been found on Juan Fernández Island, the South Orkney Islands, the South Shetland Islands, and the Antarctic Peninsula.

The black-necked swan inhabits freshwater marshes and swamps, shallow lakes, brackish lagoons, and sheltered coastal sites. On the mainland of South America, it is often found near human habitation but shuns built-up areas in the Falklands. It is generally found at low elevations but non-breeding flocks can be found as high as in the Andes of southern Argentina.

The wetlands created in Chile by the 1960 Valdivia earthquake, such as Carlos Anwandter Nature Sanctuary on the Cruces River, have become important population centers for the black-necked swan. The population in this sanctuary has fluctuated widely over the years, reaching a low of 214 in January 2008 and a peak of 22,419 in May 2020 before plumbing to 2,782 in May 2022.

==Behavior==
===Feeding===

The black-necked swan&#x27;s diet is almost entirely vegetarian. It feeds on aquatic plants like &quot;Chara&quot;, &quot;Potamogeton&quot;, &quot;Typha&quot;; algae such as &quot;Aphantotece&quot; and &quot;Rhyzoclonium&quot;; and presumably small numbers of aquatic invertebrates. In parts of Chile its principal food is &quot;Egeria densa&quot;. It forages mostly by immersing its head and neck and by surface feeding, but also upends to reach deeper. In times of drought it has been observed grazing in meadows and pastures.

===Breeding===

The black-necked swan&#x27;s breeding season varies geographically. In the far south of its range, it breeds from July to November but ends as early as September in the northern parts. In the Falklands, it breeds between August and November. The exact timing of breeding appears dependent on rainfall. The species is believed to form long-term pair bonds. Its nest is a mound of vegetation constructed by both members of a pair on a small islet or partially floating in a reedbed. The clutch size is four to eight eggs. Males guard females during the 34- to 36-day incubation period. Captive nestlings fledged about 100 days after hatch.

===Vocalization===

The black-necked swan is mostly silent outside the breeding season. During that time, both sexes give a &quot;soft, musical &#x27;Whee-whee-whee&#x27; with the accent on the initial syllable&quot;, repeating it to challenge intruders. The call is also used to maintain contact between members of a pair. Males also give &quot;a musical &#x27;hooee-hoo-hoo&#x27;.&quot;

==Diseases==
Black-necked swans can contract avian influenza. In March 2023 influenza A virus subtype H5N1 was detected in black-necked swan populations in Carlos Anwandter Nature Sanctuary, Chile and Estación Tapia, Uruguay. As on May 30, 2023, three more black-necked swans were found dead due to influenza H5N1 in Lagoa da Mangueira, Taim Ecological Station, Brasil. This raises the total at that station to 63.

==Status and conservation==

The IUCN has assessed the black-necked swan as being of Least Concern. It has a very large range, and though its population size is not known, it is believed to be stable. No immediate threats have been identified. It is widespread and generally common. Large-scale hunting in the 18th and 19th centuries extirpated it from much of Chile but it has recolonized those areas. Some egg collecting and hunting still occur, however. The species occurs in several protected areas in mainland Argentina, in which country the population is estimated at 50,000.

==Gallery==
==References==
==Further reading==
*David, N. &amp; Gosselin, M. (2002). &quot;Gender agreement of avian species names.&quot; &quot;Bull. B. O. C.&quot; 122: 14–49.

==External links==
* (for Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Falkland Islands, Uruguay) with RangeMap
*Black-necked Swan photo gallery VIREO</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q244432" start="4" end="21" title="Black-necked swan" label="black-necked swan"/>
<link wikidata="Q21651" start="61" end="70" title="waterfowl" label="waterfowl"/>
<link wikidata="Q29564928" start="84" end="91" title="Cygnini" label="Cygnini"/>
<link wikidata="Q620938" start="109" end="118" title="Anserinae" label="Anserinae"/>
<link wikidata="Q414" start="135" end="144" title="Argentina" label="Argentina"/>
<link wikidata="Q155" start="146" end="152" title="Brazil" label="Brazil"/>
<link wikidata="Q298" start="154" end="159" title="Chile" label="Chile"/>
<link wikidata="Q77" start="161" end="168" title="Uruguay" label="Uruguay"/>
<link wikidata="Q9648" start="178" end="194" title="Falkland Islands" label="Falkland Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q131044" start="356" end="366" title="black swan" label="black swan"/>
<link wikidata="Q25402" start="396" end="405" title="mute swan" label="mute swan"/>
<link wikidata="Q310890" start="435" end="444" title="monotypic" label="monotypic"/>
<link wikidata="Q217151" start="537" end="546" title="neotropic" label="neotropic"/>
<link wikidata="Q82601" start="1069" end="1085" title="Tierra del Fuego" label="Tierra del Fuego"/>
<link wikidata="Q40030" start="1123" end="1140" title="Rio Grande do Sul" label="Rio Grande do Sul"/>
<link wikidata="Q175" start="1276" end="1285" title="São Paulo (state)" label="São Paulo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1279329" start="1346" end="1354" title="Vagrancy (biology)" label="Vagrants"/>
<link wikidata="Q156325" start="1374" end="1395" title="Juan Fernández Island" label="Juan Fernández Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q207383" start="1401" end="1421" title="South Orkney Islands" label="South Orkney Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q140948" start="1427" end="1449" title="South Shetland Islands" label="South Shetland Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q185605" start="1459" end="1478" title="Antarctic Peninsula" label="Antarctic Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q30198" start="1523" end="1530" title="marshes" label="marshes"/>
<link wikidata="Q187223" start="1567" end="1573" title="lagoon" label="lagoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q212618" start="1884" end="1908" title="1960 Valdivia earthquake" label="1960 Valdivia earthquake"/>
<link wikidata="Q5041779" start="1918" end="1951" title="Carlos Anwandter Nature Sanctuary" label="Carlos Anwandter Nature Sanctuary"/>
<link wikidata="Q3845170" start="1959" end="1971" title="Cruces River" label="Cruces River"/>
<link wikidata="Q860112" start="2353" end="2358" title="Chara (alga)" label="Chara"/>
<link wikidata="Q161728" start="2372" end="2383" title="Potamogeton" label="Potamogeton"/>
<link wikidata="Q145707" start="2397" end="2402" title="Typha" label="Typha"/>
<link wikidata="Q163649" start="2579" end="2591" title="Egeria densa" label="Egeria densa"/>
<link wikidata="Q43987" start="3870" end="3885" title="avian influenza" label="avian influenza"/>
<link wikidata="Q160122" start="3901" end="3931" title="influenza A virus subtype H5N1" label="influenza A virus subtype H5N1"/>
<link wikidata="Q5041779" start="3981" end="4014" title="Carlos Anwandter Nature Sanctuary" label="Carlos Anwandter Nature Sanctuary"/>
<link wikidata="Q121961" start="4026" end="4040" title="Estación Tapia" label="Estación Tapia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4142" end="4160" title="Lagoa da Mangueira" label="Lagoa da Mangueira"/>
<link wikidata="Q956641" start="4162" end="4185" title="Taim Ecological Station" label="Taim Ecological Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q48268" start="4274" end="4278" title="IUCN" label="IUCN"/>
<link wikidata="Q4170994" start="4968" end="4982" title="Bulletin of the British Ornithologists&amp;#x27; Club" label="Bull. B. O. C."/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="252184" wikidata="Q359765" url="?curid=252184" title="Compensation">
<text>Compensation may refer to:
*Financial compensation
*Compensation (chess), various advantages a player has in exchange for a disadvantage
*&quot;Compensation&quot; (essay), by Ralph Waldo Emerson
*&quot;Compensation&quot; (film), a 1999 film
*Compensation (psychology)
*Biological compensation, the characteristic pattern of bending of the plant or mushroom stem after turning from the normal vertical position
*Tuning compensation in brass instruments
*&quot;Compensation&quot;, a specific form of camouflaging in autistic people

==See also==
*&quot;Compensating&quot;, a song by Aminé from his 2020 album &quot;Limbo&quot;</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q359765" start="0" end="12" title="Compensation" label="Compensation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5449697" start="28" end="50" title="Financial compensation" label="Financial compensation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1335668" start="52" end="72" title="Compensation (chess)" label="Compensation (chess)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5156257" start="138" end="170" title="Compensation (essay)" label="&amp;quot;Compensation&amp;quot; (essay)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5156256" start="196" end="227" title="Compensation (film)" label="&amp;quot;Compensation&amp;quot; (film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1338171" start="242" end="267" title="Compensation (psychology)" label="Compensation (psychology)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="269" end="292" title="Gravitropism#Compensation" label="Biological compensation"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="411" end="451" title="Brass instrument#Tuning compensation" label="Tuning compensation in brass instruments"/>
<link wikidata="Q72290770" start="498" end="529" title="Autistic masking" label="camouflaging in autistic people"/>
<link wikidata="Q101126407" start="607" end="624" title="Limbo (Aminé album)" label="&amp;quot;Limbo&amp;quot;"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="252186" wikidata="Q3338917" url="?curid=252186" title="New College, Toronto">
<text>New College is a constituent colleges of the University of Toronto in Canada. One of the larger colleges, with approximately 5,000 students, it stands on Huron Street at the west end of the downtown St. George campus, nestled alongside the Athletic Centre, the Earth Sciences Centre, Sidney Smith Hall and the Ramsey Wright Zoology Laboratory.

== History ==
Founded in 1962, New College was the first college to be created within the University of Toronto since the federation with Victoria, Trinity and St. Michael&#x27;s Colleges. The name of the college was initially to be &quot;New King&#x27;s College&quot;, in homage to University College, which had been known as King&#x27;s College before receiving a new royal charter.

== Namesake cousins ==
New College shares, along with Trinity College, St. Hilda&#x27;s College and University College, the distinction of being Dominion cousins to namesakes in the UK. It is named after New College at the University of Oxford in England, upon which the college system at the University of Toronto is itself modelled.

== Character ==
Designed under the &quot;multi-faculty&quot; concept, the vast majority of its students are from the Faculty of Arts &amp; Science, with the rest drawn from Applied Science &amp; Engineering, Kinesiology &amp; Physical Education, Music, and Pharmacy. In fact, what is now known as Innis College, the second &quot;multi-faculty&quot; college, was originally designed as another wing of New College before it was built separately in 1964.

Housed in an integrated &quot;serpentine&quot; design, New College consists of three halls: Wilson Hall, Wetmore Hall, and a new hall aptly named New Building (built in 2003). Employing an integrated approach to living, residence units are located on the upper floors; the lower floors include the library and reading room, computer labs, staff offices, lecture theatres, dining hall and recreation lounges. The New Building also houses the William Doo Auditorium and a mini-gym.

New College&#x27;s on-campus accommodation is well appointed for students who wish to live near many of the central facilities of University of Toronto, such as Robarts Library, Sidney Smith Hall, the Athletic Centre, and the Lash-Miller chemical laboratories.

== Student life ==
New College has an extremely multicultural student body, with more than three-quarters of its students drawn from the ranks of new Canadians. Both the New College Residence Council (serving students who live at the college) and the New College Student Council (serving residents and commuters) plan activities that feature the college&#x27;s diversity. A highlight of the year, usually held in the winter term, is Mosaic, which is an evening of music, dance and performance featuring multiethnic themes. The Student Council generally uses the William Doo Auditorium for Mosaic, and also for other events such as movie nights and musical concerts.

For students in residence at New College, social life is aided by their floor residence council. The floor residence council organizes restaurant trips, movie nights, field trips (trapeze training, rock climbing, bowling, etc.) and other activities. Each residence floor benefits from a don. New College dons are graduate or upper year students who live with the undergraduates and provide them with advice and support. The New College Residence Council oversees student life specifically for students who live in residence.

Residence student life is also generally anchored around the college&#x27;s cafeteria. The dining area is large, with a number of different dishes available at each mealtime. Vegetarian, Vegan and Halal meals are offered.

In 2008, the College replaced the Dean of Residence position with a new Director of Student Life. This senior administrator is charged not only with running the residence operation but developing student life programming that integrates the 3,000-plus commuting students into the wider New College community. In addition, the college&#x27;s commitment to social justice and equity is now woven through many of its extracurricular programs, a development evidenced by the 2009 appointment of a service-learning coordinator.

== Specialization ==
New College&#x27;s mission around round equity and social justice is reflected in many of its programs, such as African Studies, Caribbean Studies and Equity Studies. The College continues to maintain its connections with the field of engineering and the life sciences. Many of its early officers were from science backgrounds, including Stewart Wilson (Engineering), the first registrar and Donald Ivey (Medicine), the college&#x27;s first principal. Today, like several of the colleges at the University of Toronto, New College coordinates a number of academic degree programmes, Human Biology being a prominent program for aspiring MD&#x27;s.

New College also hosts the annual University of Toronto Youth Summer Program, jointly organised by New College and University of Toronto&#x27;s faculties of Law and Medicine. The Youth Summer Program is a unique enrichment program for high school students that allows early experience of top-tier academic learning in the fields of law and medical sciences.

==References==

* Martin L. Friedland &quot;The University of Toronto: A History&quot; (Toronto: University of Toronto Press © 2002)
* Robin Harris &quot;A History of University of Toronto&quot; (Toronto: University of Toronto Press © 1970)
* Rick Helmes-Hayes &quot;Forty Years, 1963–2003: A History of the Department of Sociology, University of Toronto&quot; (Toronto: Canadian Scholars&#x27; Press, 2003, 215 pp.)
* Professor Brian McKillop, &quot;Matters of Mind: The University in Ontario, 1791–1951&quot; (Ottawa: University of Ottawa Press ©1951)
* Marian Packham &quot;100 Years of Biochemistry at the University of Toronto: An Illustrated History 1908–2008&quot; (Toronto: University of Toronto Press © 2008)

== External links ==
*Stay in the New College Residences this Summer</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3338917" start="0" end="11" title="New College, Toronto" label="New College"/>
<link wikidata="Q180865" start="17" end="37" title="Colleges of the University of Toronto" label="constituent colleges"/>
<link wikidata="Q180865" start="45" end="66" title="University of Toronto" label="University of Toronto"/>
<link wikidata="Q3551503" start="483" end="491" title="Victoria University, Toronto" label="Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q3551685" start="493" end="500" title="Trinity College, Toronto" label="Trinity"/>
<link wikidata="Q3551675" start="505" end="523" title="University of St. Michael&amp;#x27;s College" label="St. Michael&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q3551334" start="628" end="646" title="University College, Toronto" label="University College"/>
<link wikidata="Q3551685" start="785" end="800" title="Trinity College, Toronto" label="Trinity College"/>
<link wikidata="Q7588341" start="802" end="826" title="St. Hilda&amp;#x27;s College, Toronto" label="St. Hilda&amp;#x27;s College"/>
<link wikidata="Q3551334" start="831" end="849" title="University College, Toronto" label="University College"/>
<link wikidata="Q1376987" start="935" end="946" title="New College, Oxford" label="New College"/>
<link wikidata="Q34433" start="954" end="974" title="University of Oxford" label="University of Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q7896481" start="1184" end="1213" title="University of Toronto Faculty of Arts and Science" label="Faculty of Arts &amp;amp; Science"/>
<link wikidata="Q7896479" start="1240" end="1273" title="University of Toronto Faculty of Applied Science and Engineering" label="Applied Science &amp;amp; Engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q6530755" start="1324" end="1332" title="University of Toronto Faculty of Pharmacy" label="Pharmacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3151381" start="1364" end="1377" title="Innis College" label="Innis College"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1613" end="1624" title="Wilson Hall (University of Toronto)" label="Wilson Hall"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1626" end="1638" title="Wetmore Hall (University of Toronto)" label="Wetmore Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q2156146" start="2163" end="2178" title="Robarts Library" label="Robarts Library"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2434" end="2463" title="New College Residence Council" label="New College Residence Council"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2515" end="2542" title="New College Student Council" label="New College Student Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154336" start="3129" end="3142" title="rock climbing" label="rock climbing"/>
<link wikidata="Q3177899" start="3144" end="3151" title="bowling" label="bowling"/>
<link wikidata="Q83364" start="3632" end="3642" title="Vegetarian" label="Vegetarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q181138" start="3644" end="3649" title="Vegan" label="Vegan"/>
<link wikidata="Q177823" start="3654" end="3659" title="Halal" label="Halal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1597965" start="4173" end="4189" title="service-learning" label="service-learning"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="252188" wikidata="Q1781569" url="?curid=252188" title="Congregation of St. Basil">
<text>The Congregation of St. Basil (, abbreviation CSB), also called the Basilians, is a Catholic clerical religious congregation of pontifical right for men, with priests, seminarians and lay associates. It is an apostolic community whose members profess simple vows. The Basilians work in education and evangelization. The congregation was founded in 1822 in the aftermath of the French Revolution. In the early 19th century, the Basilians&#x27; educational and pastoral work brought them to a variety of locations in Canada and the United States. In the 1960s, the priests began to minister in Mexico, and in Colombia in the 1980s.

==History==
===Founding===
Amid the turmoil and persecution of the Catholic Church during the French Revolution and after the Reign of Terror, the Archbishop of Vienne, Charles-François d’Aviau Du Bois-de-Sanzay, encouraged Joseph Lapierre to take over the Catholic education of boys in the isolated hill commune of Saint-Symphorien-de-Mahun, Ardèche department. Despite difficulties, the school grew, and in 1800, when the political climate was more favourable, the archbishop asked Lapierre to also educate candidates for the priesthood. With the addition of Joseph Marie Actorie as director, a minor seminary was founded. Increased growth made it necessary to find a new location, and in 1802 the school moved to Annonay in southern France at the suggestion of Henri Léorat-Picansel, a pastor who had previously been in Saint-Symphorien-de-Mahun.
Ten men, priests and students for the priesthood, formed the staff of the school. In the ensuing years, school enrollment grew to over 300 students, and auxiliary institutions were established nearby. In the years leading up to 1820, changing French educational laws and changing church administration meant falling enrollment. The newly appointed bishop suggested that if they formed an association and bought the property of a nearby school, Maisonseule, that they would have his support. This “coincided with a desire for closer religious life already shown by several of the priests teaching in the college.” Around 1820, Abbot Bernardin Fustier purchased the Chateau de Maisonseule.

On November 21, 1822, the Feast of the Presentation of Our Lady, the congregation&#x27;s first general chapter was held. Joseph Lapierre was unanimously elected superior by the nine other priests. “To these men he was the very symbol of their determination that this work should not fail.” The schools became known for their range of teaching including humanities, rhetoric, philosophy, mathematics, physics and chemistry.

Previously known as the Teaching Priests of the Ardèche, the founders chose St. Basil as their namesake. Their new school, Maisonseule, was in the Parish of St. Basil, but he was also an appropriate choice because he was “a monastic founder, a preacher and an author of a treatise on the study of pagan classics.”

Other patrons of the Basilians are the Blessed Virgin Mary, Saint Joseph, Saint Francis of Assisi, Saint Thomas Aquinas, and Saint John Bosco.

The ten founding priests were:
* Joseph Lapierre (1757–1838) was the first Superior General of the Congregation. He prepared and submitted the first draft Constitutions of the Basilians to Rome. He was a priest who fled persecution during the Revolution and secretly celebrated Mass and provided clandestine Christian education. 
* Pierre Tourvieille (1780–1859) was the second Basilian Superior General elected in 1838. He received covert education during the French Revolution from his older brother, a priest. 
* Jacques Duret (1762–1841) was born in Annonay, the son of a physician. He studied in Paris and was a classmate of the revolutionary enemy of the Catholic Church, Maximilien Robespierre.
* Henri Martinesche (1797–1879) was ordained in 1822 and was a teacher and chaplain. 
* Jean François Pagès (1793–1861) studied philosophy and theology and was ordained in 1818. The following year, he began teaching in Annonay. 
* Augustin Payan (1771–1847) attended the clandestine seminary college at Saint-Symphorien-de-Mahun, becoming a teacher and studying theology.
* Jean-Baptiste Polly (1772–1846) was mayor of Saint-Symphorien-de-Mahun (then called Mahun Libre by the revolutionaries) and hid priests to protect them. He attended the clandestine seminary college where he studied theology, and was secretly ordained. 
* Julien Tracol (1796–1885) was a teacher, librarian, record keeper and first unofficial historian of the Congregation of St. Basil. 
* Jean Antoine Vallon (1775–1840) was ordained around 1800 and was a teacher at Saint-Symphorien-de-Mahun and later at Annonay. 
* André Fayolle, (1791–1867) nephew of Pierre Tourvieille, was a teacher who studied theology before he was ordained. 
===France===
In their early years, the Basilians were not a religious congregation in the canonical sense. They were an association or society of secular priests willing to live in community and pool their resources to support Christian education and preaching. The members did not take formal religious vows of poverty, chastity and obedience until later. In the early years, boundaries were somewhat fluid on membership in the association, based on who lived in the community and taught at the schools at any time.

The early years of the Basilian congregation were full of challenges. The local bishop, who was prepared to suppress the congregation, died the night before signing a decree. However within a couple of generations, the Basilians had grown sufficiently to be formally approved by Pius IX in 1863. 
During the French Third Republic, Catholic schools were again a target, this time of the Socialists who were determined to secularize education. The decrees of 1880 targeted Jesuits but affected all teaching orders including the Basilians, and as a result of the persecution they were forced to close one of their schools in 1881 and one of their houses.

The French government finally suppressed all religious orders in what was known as “La loi de Combes” in 1905. The Basilian confrères were dispersed and their property was sold at auction. The religious life of the Basilian Fathers in France was suspended for twenty years, a blow from which they never recovered.

===Canada===
The Basilians first came to Canada in 1850 at the invitation of Bishop Armand-François-Marie de Charbonnel. As a Basilian student in Annonay from 1811 to 1819, the Bishop of Toronto turned to his former teacher and Irish Basilian, Father Patrick Molony, to assist him in his work with the largely Irish Catholic community in Toronto. Eventually, the Congregation sent four of its members to the New World. In 1852, St. Michael&#x27;s College, Toronto opened its doors, offering a French style of education, a combination of high-school and university education. This effort was a large investment, risk and sacrifice as it represented a significant percentage of the total number of available Basilian priests. In ensuing years, more sacrifices were made in manpower and money to continue the mission foundations in Canada; their work took them to Sandwich in 1856 and Owen Sound in 1863. Three high schools were served by the Basilian order in Toronto including St. Michael&#x27;s College School, Bishop Michael Power High School, and Father Henry Carr Catholic Secondary School. The institute also founded Assumption College School, which became Assumption University in Windsor, Ontario, now federated with the University of Windsor; St. Thomas More College in Saskatoon, Saskatchewan federated with the University of Saskatchewan; and St. Joseph&#x27;s College in Edmonton, Alberta affiliated with the University of Alberta. St. Thomas College (later St. Thomas University (New Brunswick) in Chatham, New Brunswick, was founded by the Basilians in 1910, and in 1923 the college was transferred to the local diocesan clergy. Toronto remains one of the largest centers for the Congregation and is home to the Basilian Curial Offices and the Cardinal Flahiff Basilian Centre.

On April 30, 2020, the Canadian Supreme Court rejected an appeal from the Basilian Fathers of Toronto to deny a $2.6 million settlement to sex abuse victim Rod MacLeod.

===Division and reunion===

Discussion between the congregation in France and North America resulted in the amicable decree of separation in June 1922 creating two separate religious congregations, each with their own constitutions.

The French and North American branches were reunited in 1955, an occasion celebrated in Annonay.

===United States===
The Basilian Fathers have been active in the United States since the last half of the nineteenth century. The first Basilian ministry in the United States was in Louisville, Ohio at St. Louis College in 1867. The Basilians founded and still operate St. Thomas High School and the University of St. Thomas (Texas). In the 1930s the Basilians began an apostolate serving Spanish-speaking populations in Texas in communities such as Galveston, Houston, Sugar Land, Rosenberg, Wharton, New Gulf, Bay City, Angleton, Freeport and Eagle Lake. The work in Texas also served as the platform for Basilian mission work in Mexico and Colombia.

The Basilians also opened Detroit Catholic Central High School in 1928 and Andrean High School in Merrillville, Indiana. They co-sponsor Detroit Cristo Rey High School with the Sisters, Servants of the Immaculate Heart of Mary.

In 1937, the Basilians took over The Aquinas Institute of Rochester in Rochester, New York, and in 1948 established St. John Fisher College in the same city. The Basilians are no longer a sponsor, but maintain strong links to both The Aquinas Institute and St. John Fisher University (renamed in 2022).

===Latin America===
The Basilians started missions to Mexico in 1961 and Colombia in 1987. The Basilian Fathers have served in Mexico City and currently serve in Tehuacán, Puebla, Mexico; and Bogotá, Cali, and Medellín, Colombia. The congregation established parishes and schools in Colombia and Mexico, and is affiliated with St. Basil&#x27;s Medical Centre in Colombia.

==Present==
Today, the Basilians practice their ministry of teaching and preaching within parishes, campus ministry, schools, and colleges located in Canada, United States, Mexico, and Colombia. 
They are currently located at:
* In France, Basilians still serve at Collège Privé Sacré-Coeur and in parishes in and around Annonay.
* In Canada, Basilians serve at St. Michael&#x27;s College School, and St. Basil&#x27;s Catholic Parish, the University of St. Michael&#x27;s College, and the Pontifical Institute of Medieval Studies in Toronto; Assumption College and Assumption Parish in Windsor; and St. Joseph&#x27;s College and St. Alphonsus and St. Clare parishes in Edmonton.
* In the United States, Basilians serve at Catholic Central and Cristo Rey high schools in Detroit; The Aquinas Institute of Rochester and St. John Fisher University in Rochester; St. Thomas High School, the University of St. Thomas, and St. Anne&#x27;s Parish in Houston; and Most Holy Trinity Church in Angleton.
* In Mexico, Basilians serve at Casa San Felipe and Parroquia San Lorenzo in Tehuacán.
* In Colombia, Basilians serve at the parish and school Nuestra Señora de la Asunción in Cali; and Parroquia San Basilio in Medellín.
* As well, there are Basilians engaged in Christian education, pastoral care, and media ministry in Canada and the US.
* The Basilians have novitiate houses in Sugar Land, Texas and Bogotá, Colombia.
* The Basilians have scholasticate (residences for Basilian seminarians) in Houston, Texas; Tlalpan, Mexico; and Medellín, Colombia.
* The Basilians have residences for retired priests in Toronto, Ontario; Las Cruces, New Mexico; Rochester, New York; and Houston, Texas.

==Formation==
The Basilian formation process consists of four basic steps that occur over a period of approximately seven years:
# Associate: This stage gives a candidate the opportunity to get to know the Basilians and allows the Basilians to get to know him. It can occur while a candidate is in high school, college, or working. Generally, most associates spend their last associate year living in a Basilian community, thus indicating a stronger desire to commit to the Basilian way of life.
# Novice: This stage marks another important step of a person&#x27;s journey into religious life. The novitiate lasts for one year and a day, as prescribed by canon law. It is a year away from friends, family, work, and most things familiar to our everyday life so that the novice may build a strong foundation of prayer and spirituality for the rest of his life as a Basilian. At the end of this year, the novice may profess first (temporary) vows.
# Scholastic: At this stage the candidate is living in temporary vows and engaged in three to four years of theological study. Alongside their theological studies, scholastics are engaged in various pastoral ministries during the year and often travel on assignment each summer. These ministries and assignments are tailored to the individual&#x27;s interests and capabilities.
# Supervised Ministry: The Basilians consider the first year of ordination an important stage in the formation process as it is often the most challenging period for new deacons and priests. This serves as an adjustment period to the work of the priesthood in a Basilian apostolate.

==Coat of Arms==
The Basilian coat of arms was developed in the late 19th century. Its main components are the founding date of the congregation (1822); the congregation&#x27;s motto in Latin; and a shield bearing four symbols. The four symbols and their meanings are: a chalice, representing the Blessed Sacrament; an open book, representing knowledge; a fleur-de-lis representing both the Blessed Virgin and the French origins of the Basilians; and a Greek cross, representing Christ and honoring St. Basil, the Greek patron of the congregation. The motto, which is translated as &quot;teach me goodness, discipline, and knowledge&quot;, is often seen on the logos of Basilian schools around the world.

==Superiors general==
# Fr. Joseph B. Lapierre (1822-1838)
# Fr. Pierre Tourvielle (1838-1859)
# Fr. Julien Actorie (1859-1864)
# Fr. Jean-Mathieu Soulerin (1865-1879)
# Fr. Adrien Fayolle (1879-1898)
# Fr. Noel Durand (1898-1910)
# Fr. Victorin Marijon (1910-1914)
# Fr. James Frederick Players (1914-1922)
# Fr. Robert Francis Forster (1922-1929)
# Fr. Henry Carr (1930-1942)
# Fr. Edmund J. McCorkell (1942-1954)
# Cardinal George Bernard Flahiff (1954-1961)
# Fr. Joseph Charles Wey (1961-1973)
# Fr. Thomas James Hanrahan (1973-1981)
# Fr. Ulysse Ernest Pare (1981-1989)
# Fr. Robert Joseph Barringer (1993-1997)
# Bishop Ronald Peter Fabbro (1997-2002)
# Fr. Kenneth John Decker (2002-2010)
# Fr. George Terence Smith (2010-2018)
# Fr. Kevin J. Storey (2018–present)

==Notable Basilians==

* David Bauer, Canadian amateur hockey advocate and Olympic hockey coach
* Henry Carr, made significant contributions to Catholic education in Canada including broadening the curriculum at St. Michael&#x27;s College&#x27;s high school department so its graduates could qualify for admission to university and arranging for St. Michael&#x27;s College to become a federated arts college in the university, a model that was copied by other Catholic institutions in English-speaking Canada. 
* Ronald Peter Fabbro, Bishop of London, Ontario, 2002–present
* George Bernard Flahiff, Archbishop of Winnipeg, 1961–1982
* Eugene Carlisle LeBel, influential administrator of Assumption College, Windsor, and later University of Windsor.
* M. Owen Lee, American classics and music scholar, who was well known for his contributions as an intermission commentator, pianist, and quiz panelist on the Metropolitan Opera radio broadcasts.
* Ulysse Paré, Superior General of the Congregation from 1981 to 1989, under his leadership the Basilians expanded their ministry to Colombia.
* John Michael Miller, Coadjutor Archbishop of Vancouver, 2007–2009 and Archbishop of Vancouver, 2009–Present
* Denis T. O&#x27;Connor, Bishop of London, Ontario, 1890–1899 and Archbishop of Toronto, 1899–1908
* Ricardo Ramírez, Auxiliary Bishop of San Antonio, Texas, 1981–1982 and Bishop of Las Cruces, New Mexico, 1982–2013
* Thomas Rosica, CEO of the Salt + Light Television network
* Jean-Mathieu Soulerin, Superior of the Basilian Order and founder of the University of St. Michael&#x27;s College
* Charles Vincent, early administrator of the University of St. Michael&#x27;s College

==Basilian educational institutions==
===Higher education===
* University of St. Michael&#x27;s College, a federated college of the University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada (1852)
*Assumption University, a federated college of the University of Windsor, Windsor, Ontario, Canada (1870)
*St. Joseph&#x27;s College, a federated college of the University of Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta, Canada (1926)
*St. Thomas More College, a federated college of the University of Saskatchewan, Saskatoon, Saskatchewan, Canada (1936)
*University of St. Thomas, Houston, Texas, United States (1947)
===Secondary education===
*Collège Privé Sacré-Coeur, Annonay, France (1822)
*St. Michael&#x27;s College School, Toronto, Ontario, Canada (1852)
*Assumption College School, Windsor, Ontario, Canada (1870)
*St. Thomas High School, Houston, Texas, United States (1900)
*The Aquinas Institute of Rochester, Rochester, New York, United States (1902)
*Detroit Catholic Central High School, Detroit, Michigan, United States (1928)
*Michael Power-St. Joseph High School, Toronto, Ontario, Canada (1957)
*Andrean High School, Merrillville, Indiana, United States (1959)
*Father Henry Carr Catholic Secondary School, Toronto, Ontario, Canada (1974)
*Father John Redmond Catholic Secondary School and Regional Arts Centre (1986)
*Detroit Cristo Rey High School, Detroit, Michigan, United States (2008)
===Former schools===
*Saint Louis College, Louisville, Ohio, United States (Founded 1866, closed 1873.)
*St. Thomas University, Fredericton, New Brunswick, Canada (Founded in 1910, transferred to the Diocese of Chatham in 1923.)
*St. John Fisher University, Rochester, New York, United States (Founded in 1948, transferred to the Diocese of Rochester in 1968.)

==Notes==
:1.Assumption University was founded by the Society of Jesus in 1852, but has been administered by the Basilians since 1870.
:2.Co-founded with the Sisters, Servants of the Immaculate Heart of Mary.

==References==

* History of St. John Fisher College
* gameo.org

==External links==
* Basilian Fathers Missions
* Basilians in Colombia
* Salt and Light TV website
* Congregation of St. Basil basic information
* Canadian Daily Mass</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1781569" start="4" end="29" title="Congregation of St. Basil" label="Congregation of St. Basil"/>
<link wikidata="Q1781569" start="46" end="49" title="Congregation of St. Basil" label="CSB"/>
<link wikidata="Q1781569" start="68" end="77" title="Congregation of St. Basil" label="Basilians"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="84" end="92" title="Catholic Church" label="Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q6534" start="377" end="394" title="French Revolution" label="French Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q16" start="515" end="521" title="Canada" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q96" start="592" end="598" title="Mexico" label="Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q739" start="607" end="615" title="Colombia" label="Colombia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6534" start="725" end="742" title="French Revolution" label="French Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q193547" start="757" end="772" title="Reign of Terror" label="Reign of Terror"/>
<link wikidata="Q366189" start="778" end="798" title="Archbishop of Vienne" label="Archbishop of Vienne"/>
<link wikidata="Q48772" start="947" end="972" title="Saint-Symphorien-de-Mahun" label="Saint-Symphorien-de-Mahun"/>
<link wikidata="Q238366" start="1347" end="1354" title="Annonay" label="Annonay"/>
<link wikidata="Q103163" start="2107" end="2112" title="Abbot" label="Abbot"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2145" end="2167" title="Chateau de Maisonseule" label="Chateau de Maisonseule"/>
<link wikidata="Q44258" start="2670" end="2679" title="St. Basil" label="St. Basil"/>
<link wikidata="Q345" start="2948" end="2967" title="Blessed Virgin Mary" label="Blessed Virgin Mary"/>
<link wikidata="Q128267" start="2969" end="2981" title="Saint Joseph" label="Saint Joseph"/>
<link wikidata="Q676555" start="2983" end="3006" title="Saint Francis of Assisi" label="Saint Francis of Assisi"/>
<link wikidata="Q9438" start="3008" end="3028" title="Saint Thomas Aquinas" label="Saint Thomas Aquinas"/>
<link wikidata="Q146183" start="3034" end="3050" title="Saint John Bosco" label="Saint John Bosco"/>
<link wikidata="Q44197" start="3731" end="3753" title="Maximilien Robespierre" label="Maximilien Robespierre"/>
<link wikidata="Q30185" start="4165" end="4170" title="mayor" label="mayor"/>
<link wikidata="Q541943" start="5076" end="5107" title="poverty, chastity and obedience" label="poverty, chastity and obedience"/>
<link wikidata="Q43720" start="5561" end="5568" title="Pius IX" label="Pius IX"/>
<link wikidata="Q70802" start="5590" end="5611" title="French Third Republic" label="French Third Republic"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5728" end="5743" title="French Third Republic#Timeline to 1914" label="decrees of 1880"/>
<link wikidata="Q1518944" start="6018" end="6036" title="1905 French law on the Separation of the Churches and the State" label="“La loi de Combes”"/>
<link wikidata="Q2861733" start="6334" end="6369" title="Armand-François-Marie de Charbonnel" label="Armand-François-Marie de Charbonnel"/>
<link wikidata="Q172" start="6437" end="6444" title="Toronto" label="Toronto"/>
<link wikidata="Q3551675" start="6678" end="6713" title="St. Michael&amp;#x27;s College, Toronto" label="St. Michael&amp;#x27;s College, Toronto"/>
<link wikidata="Q7590687" start="7226" end="7259" title="St. Michael&amp;#x27;s College School" label="St. Michael&amp;#x27;s College School"/>
<link wikidata="Q6833599" start="7261" end="7293" title="Michael Power/St. Joseph High School" label="Bishop Michael Power High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q5437607" start="7299" end="7342" title="Father Henry Carr Catholic Secondary School" label="Father Henry Carr Catholic Secondary School"/>
<link wikidata="Q4810347" start="7371" end="7396" title="Assumption College School" label="Assumption College School"/>
<link wikidata="Q4810374" start="7411" end="7432" title="Assumption University (Windsor, Ontario)" label="Assumption University"/>
<link wikidata="Q2065769" start="7477" end="7498" title="University of Windsor" label="University of Windsor"/>
<link wikidata="Q7591976" start="7500" end="7523" title="St. Thomas More College" label="St. Thomas More College"/>
<link wikidata="Q1514848" start="7570" end="7596" title="University of Saskatchewan" label="University of Saskatchewan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7589134" start="7602" end="7627" title="St. Joseph&amp;#x27;s College, Edmonton" label="St. Joseph&amp;#x27;s College"/>
<link wikidata="Q3551491" start="7718" end="7755" title="St. Thomas University (New Brunswick)" label="St. Thomas University (New Brunswick)"/>
<link wikidata="Q196615" start="8064" end="8086" title="Canadian Supreme Court" label="Canadian Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q1397" start="8737" end="8741" title="Ohio" label="Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q7591962" start="8812" end="8834" title="St. Thomas High School (Houston)" label="St. Thomas High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q2495922" start="8843" end="8875" title="University of St. Thomas (Texas)" label="University of St. Thomas (Texas)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439" start="8964" end="8969" title="Texas" label="Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q135744" start="8993" end="9002" title="Galveston, Texas" label="Galveston"/>
<link wikidata="Q93340" start="9013" end="9023" title="Sugar Land, Texas" label="Sugar Land"/>
<link wikidata="Q637444" start="9025" end="9034" title="Rosenberg, Texas" label="Rosenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q970540" start="9036" end="9043" title="Wharton, Texas" label="Wharton"/>
<link wikidata="Q14711144" start="9045" end="9053" title="New Gulf, Texas" label="New Gulf"/>
<link wikidata="Q812071" start="9055" end="9063" title="Bay City, Texas" label="Bay City"/>
<link wikidata="Q162489" start="9065" end="9073" title="Angleton, Texas" label="Angleton"/>
<link wikidata="Q959375" start="9075" end="9083" title="Freeport, Texas" label="Freeport"/>
<link wikidata="Q970566" start="9088" end="9098" title="Eagle Lake, Texas" label="Eagle Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q96" start="9175" end="9181" title="Mexico" label="Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q739" start="9186" end="9194" title="Colombia" label="Colombia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5265872" start="9223" end="9259" title="Detroit Catholic Central High School" label="Detroit Catholic Central High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q4755345" start="9272" end="9291" title="Andrean High School" label="Andrean High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q549140" start="9295" end="9316" title="Merrillville, Indiana" label="Merrillville, Indiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q5265891" start="9334" end="9364" title="Detroit Cristo Rey High School" label="Detroit Cristo Rey High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q2290382" start="9374" end="9423" title="Sisters, Servants of the Immaculate Heart of Mary" label="Sisters, Servants of the Immaculate Heart of Mary"/>
<link wikidata="Q4782994" start="9459" end="9493" title="The Aquinas Institute of Rochester" label="The Aquinas Institute of Rochester"/>
<link wikidata="Q49218" start="9497" end="9516" title="Rochester, New York" label="Rochester, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q7588902" start="9542" end="9565" title="St. John Fisher College" label="St. John Fisher College"/>
<link wikidata="Q1489" start="9857" end="9868" title="Mexico City" label="Mexico City"/>
<link wikidata="Q842261" start="9892" end="9900" title="Tehuacán, Puebla" label="Tehuacán"/>
<link wikidata="Q79923" start="9902" end="9908" title="Puebla" label="Puebla"/>
<link wikidata="Q2841" start="9922" end="9928" title="Bogotá" label="Bogotá"/>
<link wikidata="Q51103" start="9930" end="9934" title="Cali" label="Cali"/>
<link wikidata="Q48278" start="9940" end="9948" title="Medellín" label="Medellín"/>
<link wikidata="Q210723" start="13669" end="13676" title="chalice" label="chalice"/>
<link wikidata="Q211568" start="13754" end="13766" title="fleur-de-lis" label="fleur-de-lis"/>
<link wikidata="Q111699003" start="14238" end="14259" title="Jean-Mathieu Soulerin" label="Jean-Mathieu Soulerin"/>
<link wikidata="Q65048307" start="14459" end="14469" title="Henry Carr (priest)" label="Henry Carr"/>
<link wikidata="Q1507000" start="14531" end="14553" title="George Bernard Flahiff" label="George Bernard Flahiff"/>
<link wikidata="Q2092446" start="14731" end="14750" title="Ronald Peter Fabbro" label="Ronald Peter Fabbro"/>
<link wikidata="Q3018988" start="14903" end="14914" title="David Bauer (ice hockey)" label="David Bauer"/>
<link wikidata="Q65048307" start="14976" end="14986" title="Henry Carr (priest)" label="Henry Carr"/>
<link wikidata="Q2092446" start="15391" end="15410" title="Ronald Peter Fabbro" label="Ronald Peter Fabbro"/>
<link wikidata="Q1507000" start="15454" end="15476" title="George Bernard Flahiff" label="George Bernard Flahiff"/>
<link wikidata="Q5407113" start="15514" end="15535" title="Eugene Carlisle LeBel" label="Eugene Carlisle LeBel"/>
<link wikidata="Q6712943" start="15630" end="15641" title="M. Owen Lee" label="M. Owen Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1701084" start="15969" end="15988" title="John Michael Miller" label="John Michael Miller"/>
<link wikidata="Q5257549" start="16079" end="16101" title="Denis T. O&amp;#x27;Connor" label="Denis T. O&amp;#x27;Connor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2148722" start="16179" end="16194" title="Ricardo Ramírez (bishop)" label="Ricardo Ramírez"/>
<link wikidata="Q7793636" start="16296" end="16309" title="Thomas Rosica" label="Thomas Rosica"/>
<link wikidata="Q3546722" start="16322" end="16345" title="Salt + Light Television" label="Salt + Light Television"/>
<link wikidata="Q111699003" start="16356" end="16377" title="Jean-Mathieu Soulerin" label="Jean-Mathieu Soulerin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3551675" start="16429" end="16469" title="University of St. Michael&amp;#x27;s College" label="University of St. Michael&amp;#x27;s College"/>
<link wikidata="Q111948942" start="16472" end="16487" title="Charles Vincent (priest)" label="Charles Vincent"/>
<link wikidata="Q3551675" start="16516" end="16556" title="University of St. Michael&amp;#x27;s College" label="University of St. Michael&amp;#x27;s College"/>
<link wikidata="Q3551675" start="16621" end="16661" title="University of St. Michael&amp;#x27;s College" label="University of St. Michael&amp;#x27;s College"/>
<link wikidata="Q180865" start="16690" end="16711" title="University of Toronto" label="University of Toronto"/>
<link wikidata="Q4810374" start="16746" end="16767" title="Assumption University (Windsor, Ontario)" label="Assumption University"/>
<link wikidata="Q2065769" start="16796" end="16817" title="University of Windsor" label="University of Windsor"/>
<link wikidata="Q7589134" start="16852" end="16877" title="St. Joseph&amp;#x27;s College (Edmonton)" label="St. Joseph&amp;#x27;s College"/>
<link wikidata="Q640694" start="16906" end="16927" title="University of Alberta" label="University of Alberta"/>
<link wikidata="Q7591976" start="16963" end="16986" title="St. Thomas More College" label="St. Thomas More College"/>
<link wikidata="Q1514848" start="17015" end="17041" title="University of Saskatchewan" label="University of Saskatchewan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2495922" start="17083" end="17107" title="University of St. Thomas (Texas)" label="University of St. Thomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q7590687" start="17224" end="17257" title="St. Michael&amp;#x27;s College School" label="St. Michael&amp;#x27;s College School"/>
<link wikidata="Q4810347" start="17292" end="17317" title="Assumption College School" label="Assumption College School"/>
<link wikidata="Q7591962" start="17352" end="17374" title="St. Thomas High School (Houston)" label="St. Thomas High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q4782994" start="17414" end="17448" title="The Aquinas Institute of Rochester" label="The Aquinas Institute of Rochester"/>
<link wikidata="Q5265872" start="17493" end="17529" title="Detroit Catholic Central High School" label="Detroit Catholic Central High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q6833599" start="17572" end="17608" title="Michael Power-St. Joseph High School" label="Michael Power-St. Joseph High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q4755345" start="17643" end="17662" title="Andrean High School" label="Andrean High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q5437607" start="17709" end="17752" title="Father Henry Carr Catholic Secondary School" label="Father Henry Carr Catholic Secondary School"/>
<link wikidata="Q5437613" start="17787" end="17857" title="Father John Redmond Catholic Secondary School and Regional Arts Centre" label="Father John Redmond Catholic Secondary School and Regional Arts Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q5265891" start="17866" end="17896" title="Detroit Cristo Rey High School" label="Detroit Cristo Rey High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q3551491" start="18043" end="18064" title="St. Thomas University (Canada)" label="St. Thomas University"/>
<link wikidata="Q867043" start="18138" end="18156" title="Roman Catholic Diocese of Bathurst (Canada)" label="Diocese of Chatham"/>
<link wikidata="Q7588902" start="18168" end="18194" title="St. John Fisher University" label="St. John Fisher University"/>
<link wikidata="Q875042" start="18268" end="18288" title="Roman Catholic Diocese of Rochester" label="Diocese of Rochester"/>
<link wikidata="Q36380" start="18354" end="18370" title="Society of Jesus" label="Society of Jesus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2290382" start="18458" end="18507" title="Sisters, Servants of the Immaculate Heart of Mary" label="Sisters, Servants of the Immaculate Heart of Mary"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="252193" wikidata="Q217379" url="?curid=252193" title="Tiryns">
<text>Tiryns ( or ; Ancient Greek: Τίρυνς; Modern Greek: Τίρυνθα) is a Mycenaean archaeological site in Argolis in the Peloponnese, and the location from which the mythical hero Heracles was said to have performed his Twelve Labours. It lies south of Mycenae.

Tiryns was a hill fort with occupation ranging back seven thousand years, from before the beginning of the Bronze Age. It reached its height of importance between 1400 and 1200 BC, when it became one of the most important centers of the Mycenaean world, and in particular in Argolis. Its most notable features were its palace, its Cyclopean tunnels and especially its walls, which gave the city its Homeric epithet of &quot;mighty walled Tiryns&quot;. Tiryns became associated with the myths surrounding Heracles, as the city was the residence of the hero during his labors, and some sources cite it as his birthplace.

The famous megaron of the palace of Tiryns has a large reception hall, the main room of which had a throne placed against the right wall and a central hearth bordered by four Minoan-style wooden columns that served as supports for the roof. Two of the three walls of the megaron were incorporated into an archaic temple of Hera. The site went into decline at the end of the Mycenaean period, and was completely deserted by the time Pausanias visited in the 2nd century AD.

In 1300 BC, the citadel and lower town had a population of 10,000 people covering 20–25 hectares. Despite the destruction of the palace in 1200 BC, the city population continued to increase and by 1150 BC it had a population of 15,000 people.

Along with the nearby ruins of Mycenae, UNESCO designated Tiryns as a World Heritage Site in 1999 because of its outstanding architecture and testimony to the development of Ancient Greek civilization.

==Legend==

Tiryns is first referenced by Homer, who praised its massive walls. Ancient tradition held that the walls were built by the Cyclopes because only giants of superhuman strength could have lifted the enormous stones. After viewing the walls of the ruined citadel in the 2nd century AD, the geographer Pausanias wrote that two mules pulling together could not move even the smaller stones.

Tradition also associates the walls with Proetus, the sibling of Acrisius, king of Argos. According to the legend Proetus, pursued by his brother, fled to Lycia. With the help of the Lycians, he managed to return to Argolis. There, Proetus occupied Tiryns and fortified it with the assistance of the cyclopes. Thus Greek legend links the three Argolic centers with three mythical heroes: Acrisius, founder of the Doric colony of Argos; his brother Proetus, founder of Tiryns; and his grandson Perseus, the founder of Mycenae. But this tradition was born at the beginning of the historical period, when Argos was fighting to become the hegemonic power in the area and needed a glorious past to compete with the other two cities.

==History==
===Neolithic===
The area has been inhabited since prehistory. A small neolithic settlement thrived.

===Early Helladic===
In the middle of the 3rd millennium BC, it was a flourishing early pre-Hellenic settlement located about southeast of Mycenae, on a hill long, wide, and no more than high. From this period, an imposing circular structure survived under the yard of a Mycenaean palace. It was in diameter. It appears to be a fortified area of refuge for the city&#x27;s inhabitants in time of war, and/or a residence of a king. Its base was powerful, and was constructed from two concentric stone walls, among which there were others cross-cutting, so that the thickness reached . The superstructure was clay and the roof was made from fire-baked tiles.

===Middle Helladic===
The first Greek inhabitants—the creators of the Middle Helladic civilization and the Mycenaean civilization after that—settled Tiryns at the beginning of the Middle Helladic period (2000–1600 BC).

===Late Helladic===
In the Late Helladic, the city underwent its greatest growth, also known as the Mycenaean period. The Acropolis was constructed in three phases, the first at the end of the Late Helladic II period (1500–1400 BC), the second in Late Helladic III (1400–1300 BC), and the third at the end of the Late Helladic III B (1300–1200 BC). The surviving ruins of the Mycenaean citadel date to the end of the third period. The city proper surrounded the acropolis on the plain below.

The disaster that struck the Mycenaean centers at the end of the Bronze Age affected Tiryns, but it is certain that the area of the palace was inhabited continuously into the early Archaic period, until the middle of the 8th century BC (a little later a temple was built in the ruins of the palace). In the post-palatial LH IIIC period (), an extensive deposit of precious items, including gold and silver objects and a fifteenth-century BC Minoan signet ring, was made in a cauldron in Tiryns&#x27;s lower town, within the foundations of a Mycenaean house.

===Classical period===

At the beginning of the Classical period Tiryns, like Mycenae, became a relatively insignificant city. When Cleomenes I of Sparta defeated the Argives, their slaves occupied Tiryns for many years, according to Herodotus. Herodotus also mentions that Tiryns took part in the Battle of Plataea in 480 BC with 400 hoplites. Even in decline, Mycenae and Tiryns were disturbing to the Argives, who in their political propaganda wanted to monopolize the glory of legendary (and mythical) ancestors. In 468 BC, Argos completely destroyed both Mycenae and Tiryns, and—according to Pausanias—transferred the residents to Argos, to increase the population of the city. However, Strabo says that many Tirynthians moved to found the city of Halieis, modern Porto Heli.

Despite its importance, little value was given to Tiryns and its mythical rulers and traditions by epics and drama. Pausanias dedicated a short piece (2.25.8) to Tiryns, and newer travelers, traveling to Greece in search of places where the heroes of the ancient texts lived, did not understand the significance of the city.

==Excavations==
The Acropolis was first excavated by Alexandros Rizos Rangavis and the German scholar Friedrich Thiersch in 1831. After trial excavations in August 1876, Heinrich Schliemann considered the palace of Tiryns to be medieval, so he came very close to destroying the remains to excavate deeper for Mycenaean treasures. He returned in 1884 with more archaeological experience and worked for 5 months there. However, the next period of excavation was under Wilhelm Dörpfeld, a director of the German Archaeological Institute; this time, the ruins were estimated properly.

The excavations were repeated later by Dörpfeld with the cooperation of other German archaeologists, who continued his work until 1938. From 1910, the excavations were led by Georg Karo, though the &quot;Tiryns Treasure&quot; was initially excavated in 1915 in Karo&#x27;s absence by the Greek archaeologist , who was stationed in the region as a reserve officer of the Hellenic Army. Karo was removed from his post at the DAI in late 1916, and excavations at Tiryns thereafter ceased until the end of World War I in 1918. After World War II (1939–1945), the work was continued by the Institute and the Greek Archaeological Service. In particular, there were excavations in 1977, 1978/1979, and again in 1982/83.

==Archaeological site==
The walls extend to the entire area of the top of the hill. Their bases survive throughout all of their length, and their height in some places reaching 7 meters, slightly below the original height, which is estimated at 9–10 m. The walls are quite thick, usually 6 meters, and up to 17 m at the points where the tunnels pass through. A strong transverse wall separates the acropolis into two sections -the south includes the palatial buildings, while the northern protects only the top of the hill area. In this second section, which dates to the end of the Mycenaean era, small gates and many tunnels occasionally open, covered with a triangular roof, which served as a refuge for the inhabitants of the lower city in times of danger.

The entrance of the citadel was always on the east side, but had a different position and form in each of the three construction phases. In the second phase, the gate had the form of the Lion Gate of Mycenae. Left there was a tower and to the right was the arm of the wall, so the gate was well protected, since the attackers were forced to cross a very narrow corridor, while the defense could hit them from above and from both sides. In the third phase, the gate was moved further out. The palace of the king, inside the citadel, similar to that of Mycenae (dimensions 11.8 × 9.8 m) consists of three areas: the outer portico with the two columns, the prodomos (anteroom) and the domos (main room) with the cyclical fireplace that was surrounded by four wooden columns. The lateral compartments of the palace seem to have a second floor.

The decoration of the walls of the outer arcade was rich. They had a zone at the bottom of alabaster slabs with relief rosettes and flowers. The rest was decorated with frescos. Three doors lead to prodomos and then another to the domos. In the middle of the eastern wall is visible in the floor the place that corresponded to the royal throne. The floor was richly decorated with different themes in the area around the walls and the space between the columns of the fireplace. Of course, here the walls were decorated with paintings.

In the ruins of the mansion, which burned during the 8th century BC, a Doric temple was built during the Geometric period. Smaller than the mansion, it consisted of two parts, the prodomos and the cella. The width of the temple was just greater than half that of the mansion, while the back wall of the temple reached the height of the rear columns of the fireplace. Three springs fed into the compound, one in the western side of the large courtyard which could be accessed by a secret entrance, and two at the end of north side of the wall, accessed via two tunnels in the wall. These and similar such structures found in other shelters are witnesses to the care which was taken here, as in other Mycenaean acropolises, to the basic problem of water access in a time of siege.

==See also==
*Mycenae
*National Archaeological Museum of Athens

==References==
==Further reading==

==External links==

*Hellenic Ministry of Culture: Tiryns
*The Mycenaean acropolis in Tiryns</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q217379" start="0" end="6" title="Tiryns" label="Tiryns"/>
<link wikidata="Q35497" start="14" end="27" title="Ancient Greek" label="Ancient Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q36510" start="37" end="49" title="Modern Greek" label="Modern Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q181264" start="65" end="74" title="Mycenaean civilization" label="Mycenaean"/>
<link wikidata="Q839954" start="75" end="94" title="archaeological site" label="archaeological site"/>
<link wikidata="Q191897" start="98" end="105" title="Argolis" label="Argolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q78967" start="113" end="124" title="Peloponnese" label="Peloponnese"/>
<link wikidata="Q122248" start="172" end="180" title="Heracles" label="Heracles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1233460" start="212" end="226" title="Labours of Hercules" label="Twelve Labours"/>
<link wikidata="Q132564" start="245" end="252" title="Mycenae" label="Mycenae"/>
<link wikidata="Q744099" start="268" end="277" title="hill fort" label="hill fort"/>
<link wikidata="Q11761" start="362" end="372" title="Bronze Age" label="Bronze Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q181264" start="492" end="501" title="Mycenaean Greece" label="Mycenaean"/>
<link wikidata="Q1228650" start="530" end="537" title="Argolis (ancient region)" label="Argolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q245580" start="586" end="595" title="Cyclopean masonry" label="Cyclopean"/>
<link wikidata="Q6691" start="654" end="659" title="Homer" label="Homer"/>
<link wikidata="Q657117" start="886" end="893" title="megaron" label="megaron"/>
<link wikidata="Q585473" start="1026" end="1032" title="hearth" label="hearth"/>
<link wikidata="Q134178" start="1050" end="1056" title="Minoan civilization" label="Minoan"/>
<link wikidata="Q271834" start="1180" end="1187" title="Archaic period in Greece" label="archaic"/>
<link wikidata="Q38012" start="1198" end="1202" title="Hera" label="Hera"/>
<link wikidata="Q181264" start="1249" end="1265" title="Mycenaean period" label="Mycenaean period"/>
<link wikidata="Q192931" start="1307" end="1316" title="Pausanias (geographer)" label="Pausanias"/>
<link wikidata="Q88291" start="1365" end="1372" title="citadel" label="citadel"/>
<link wikidata="Q132564" start="1624" end="1631" title="Mycenae" label="Mycenae"/>
<link wikidata="Q7809" start="1633" end="1639" title="UNESCO" label="UNESCO"/>
<link wikidata="Q9259" start="1663" end="1682" title="World Heritage Site" label="World Heritage Site"/>
<link wikidata="Q6691" start="1838" end="1843" title="Homer" label="Homer"/>
<link wikidata="Q128430" start="1932" end="1940" title="Cyclopes" label="Cyclopes"/>
<link wikidata="Q192931" start="2107" end="2116" title="Pausanias (geographer)" label="Pausanias"/>
<link wikidata="Q30096846" start="2237" end="2244" title="Proetus" label="Proetus"/>
<link wikidata="Q208017" start="2261" end="2269" title="Acrisius" label="Acrisius"/>
<link wikidata="Q189901" start="2279" end="2284" title="Ancient Argos" label="Argos"/>
<link wikidata="Q208017" start="2584" end="2592" title="Acrisius" label="Acrisius"/>
<link wikidata="Q203711" start="2609" end="2614" title="Dorians" label="Doric"/>
<link wikidata="Q189901" start="2625" end="2630" title="Ancient Argos" label="Argos"/>
<link wikidata="Q30096846" start="2644" end="2651" title="Proetus" label="Proetus"/>
<link wikidata="Q130832" start="2689" end="2696" title="Perseus" label="Perseus"/>
<link wikidata="Q132564" start="2713" end="2720" title="Mycenae" label="Mycenae"/>
<link wikidata="Q182034" start="2831" end="2840" title="hegemonic" label="hegemonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q11756" start="2987" end="2997" title="prehistory" label="prehistory"/>
<link wikidata="Q36422" start="3007" end="3016" title="neolithic" label="neolithic"/>
<link wikidata="Q132564" start="3177" end="3184" title="Mycenae" label="Mycenae"/>
<link wikidata="Q108147624" start="3376" end="3390" title="area of refuge" label="area of refuge"/>
<link wikidata="Q937774" start="3773" end="3781" title="Helladic chronology" label="Helladic"/>
<link wikidata="Q181264" start="3803" end="3825" title="Mycenaean civilization" label="Mycenaean civilization"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059758" start="4413" end="4421" title="Late Bronze Age collapse" label="disaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q11761" start="4474" end="4484" title="Bronze Age" label="Bronze Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q271834" start="4590" end="4604" title="Archaic Greece" label="Archaic period"/>
<link wikidata="Q162919" start="4857" end="4868" title="signet ring" label="signet ring"/>
<link wikidata="Q1317634" start="4884" end="4892" title="cauldron" label="cauldron"/>
<link wikidata="Q843745" start="5016" end="5032" title="Classical Greece" label="Classical period"/>
<link wikidata="Q44005" start="5100" end="5111" title="Cleomenes I" label="Cleomenes I"/>
<link wikidata="Q5690" start="5115" end="5121" title="Sparta" label="Sparta"/>
<link wikidata="Q189901" start="5135" end="5142" title="Argives" label="Argives"/>
<link wikidata="Q26825" start="5202" end="5211" title="Herodotus" label="Herodotus"/>
<link wikidata="Q204636" start="5266" end="5283" title="Battle of Plataea" label="Battle of Plataea"/>
<link wikidata="Q175249" start="5303" end="5311" title="hoplites" label="hoplites"/>
<link wikidata="Q7281" start="5404" end="5414" title="propaganda" label="propaganda"/>
<link wikidata="Q45936" start="5660" end="5666" title="Strabo" label="Strabo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3555526" start="5737" end="5747" title="Porto Heli" label="Porto Heli"/>
<link wikidata="Q37484" start="5849" end="5854" title="epic poetry" label="epics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1389266" start="6129" end="6154" title="Alexandros Rizos Rangavis" label="Alexandros Rizos Rangavis"/>
<link wikidata="Q73076" start="6178" end="6196" title="Friedrich Thiersch" label="Friedrich Thiersch"/>
<link wikidata="Q57106" start="6246" end="6265" title="Heinrich Schliemann" label="Heinrich Schliemann"/>
<link wikidata="Q60239" start="6542" end="6558" title="Wilhelm Dörpfeld" label="Wilhelm Dörpfeld"/>
<link wikidata="Q695302" start="6578" end="6609" title="German Archaeological Institute" label="German Archaeological Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q1281716" start="6833" end="6843" title="Georg Karo" label="Georg Karo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1546449" start="7028" end="7041" title="Hellenic Army" label="Hellenic Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="7160" end="7171" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="7187" end="7199" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q88291" start="8154" end="8161" title="citadel" label="citadel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1450403" start="8321" end="8330" title="Lion Gate" label="Lion Gate"/>
<link wikidata="Q132564" start="8334" end="8341" title="Mycenae" label="Mycenae"/>
<link wikidata="Q134194" start="9144" end="9150" title="fresco" label="fresco"/>
<link wikidata="Q852337" start="9617" end="9633" title="Geometric period" label="Geometric period"/>
<link wikidata="Q132564" start="10306" end="10313" title="Mycenae" label="Mycenae"/>
<link wikidata="Q637187" start="10315" end="10355" title="National Archaeological Museum of Athens" label="National Archaeological Museum of Athens"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="252200" wikidata="Q1059597" url="?curid=252200" title="Rollo May">
<text>Rollo Reece May (April 21, 1909 – October 22, 1994) was an American existential psychologist and author of the influential book &quot;Love and Will&quot; (1969). He is often associated with humanistic psychology and existentialist philosophy, and alongside Viktor Frankl, was a major proponent of existential psychotherapy. The philosopher and theologian Paul Tillich was a close friend who had a significant influence on his work.

May&#x27;s other works include &quot;The Meaning of Anxiety&quot; (1950, revised 1977) and &quot;The Courage to Create&quot; (1975), named after Tillich&#x27;s &quot;The Courage to Be&quot;.

== Early life ==
Reese May, otherwise known as &#x27;Rollo&#x27; May, was born in Ada, Ohio, on April 21,1909 to Matie Boughton and Earl Tittle May, a Men&#x27;s Christian Associations Field Secretary, as the first son and the second eldest of six. 

His name sake, &#x27;Rollo&#x27; or as his Mother called him, &#x27;Little Rollo&#x27; based on the title character from a series of children&#x27;s&#x27; books titled, &#x27;Little Rollo&#x27; written by Jacob Abbott in the 19th century. Rollo was reported to have an intense dislike for this nickname; however, he made his peace with the moniker after learning about Rollo the Conqueror, a tenth century Norman.

Some may describe Rollo&#x27;s childhood as difficult due to the divorce of his parents and to his oldest sister&#x27;s struggle with mental health that resulted in frequent hospitalizations. His mother often left the children alone, and with his sister suffering from schizophrenia, he bore much of the burden. At Michigan State University he majored in English, but was expelled due to his involvement in a radical student magazine. After that, he attended Oberlin College and received a bachelor&#x27;s degree in English. He spent three years teaching in Greece at Anatolia College. During this time, he studied with doctor and psychotherapist Alfred Adler, with whom his later work shares theoretical similarities. He was ordained as a minister shortly after coming back to the United States, but left the ministry after several years to pursue a degree in psychology. He was diagnosed with tuberculosis in 1942 and spent 18 months in a sanatorium. He later attended Union Theological Seminary for a BD during 1938, and Teachers College, Columbia University for a PhD in clinical psychology in 1949. May was a founder and faculty member of Saybrook Graduate School and Research Center in San Francisco.

He spent the final years of his life in Tiburon on San Francisco Bay. May died of congestive heart failure at the age of 85, attended by his wife, Georgia, and friends.

== Writings ==

=== Earlier years (1940s–1950s) ===
When beginning his first books, May&#x27;s topics focused on more practical uses regarding patients and mental health. His first book, &quot;The Art of Counseling&quot; (1939)
talks about his experience of counseling. Some of the topics he looks at are empathy, religion, personality problems and mental health. May also gives his perspective on these and also discusses how to handle those particular types of issues should a counselor encounter them (May 1965). He followed with a more theoretical book, &quot;The Springs of Creative Living: A Study of Human Nature and God&quot; (1940) presenting a personality theory influenced by critiquing the work of others, including Freud and Adler. He claims that personality is deeper than they presented. This is also where May introduces his own meaning for different terms such as libido from Freudian Psychology (May, 1940).

His writings were interrupted in the 1940s due to being diagnosed with tuberculosis and having to work on his PhD.

His later books in the 1950s all focus on mental health. &quot;The Meaning of Anxiety&quot; (1950) explores anxiety and how it can affect mental health. May also discusses how he believes that experiencing anxiety can aid development and how dealing with it appropriately can lead to having a healthy personality. In &quot;Man’s Search for Himself&quot; (1953), May talks about his experience with his patients and the recurring problems they had in common such as loneliness and emptiness. May looks deeper into this and discusses how humans have an innate need for a sense of value and also how life can often present an overwhelming sense of anxiety. May also gives signposts on how to act during these periods. (May, 1953). May&#x27;s final writing in the 1950s &quot;Existence&quot; (1958) is not entirely by May, but he examines the roots of Existential Psychology and why Existential Psychology is important in understanding a gap in human understanding of the nature of existence. He also talks about the Existential Psychotherapy and the contributions it has made. (May, Ernest, Ellenberger &amp; Aronson, 1958)

=== &quot;Psychology and the Human Dilemma&quot; (1967) ===
May uses this book to reflect on a lot of both his ideas so far and those of other thinkers and also mentions some contemporary ideas despite the book&#x27;s publication date. May also expands on some of his previous perspectives such as anxiety and people&#x27;s feelings of insignificance (May, 1967).

=== &quot;Love and Will&quot; (1969) ===
One of May&#x27;s most influential books. He talks about his perspective on love and the Daimonic; how it is part of nature and not the superego. May also discusses how love and sex are in conflict with each other and how they are two different things. May also discusses depression and creativity towards the end. Some of the views in this book are the ones that May is best known for (May, 1969).

=== &quot;Power and Innocence: A Search for the Sources of Violence&quot; (1972) ===
May uses this book to start some new ideas and also define words according to his way of thinking; such as power and physical courage and how power holds the potential for both human goodness and human evil. Another idea May explores is civilisation stemming out of rebellion (May, 1972).

=== &quot;Paulus: Reminiscence of a Friendship&quot; (1973) ===
May identified Paul Tillich as one of his biggest influences and in this book May episodically recalls Tillich&#x27;s life trying to focus just on the key moments over the eight chapters, taking a psychoanalytic approach to the tale (May, 1973)

=== &quot;The Courage to Create&quot; (1975) ===
Listening to our ideas and helping form the structure of our world is what our creative courage can come from; this is the main direction of May in this book. May encourages that people break the pattern in their life and face their fears to reach their full potential (May, 1975).

=== &quot;Freedom and Destiny&quot; (1981) ===
As the title suggests, May focuses on the area of Freedom and Destiny in this book. He examines what freedom might offer and also, comparatively, how destiny is imposing limitations on us, but also how the two have an interdependence. May draws on artists and poets and others to invoke what he is saying (May, 1981).

=== &quot;The Discovery of Being: Writings in Existential Psychology&quot; (1983) ===
May draws on others&#x27; perspectives, including Freud&#x27;s, to go into more detail on existential psychotherapy. Another topic May examines is how Psychoanalyses and Existentialism may have come from similar areas of thinking. There is attention paid to searching for stability with strong feelings of anxiety (May, 1983).

=== &quot;My Quest for Beauty&quot; (1985) ===
Serving as a type of memoir, May discusses his own opinions on the power of beauty. He also states his belief that beauty must be both understood and also valued in the world (May, 1985).

=== &quot;The Cry for Myth&quot; (1991) ===
Argued in this book is May&#x27;s belief that humans can use myths to help them make sense of their lives, based on case studies May uses from his patients. May discusses how this could be particularly useful to those who need direction in a confusing world (May, 1991).

=== &quot;The Psychology of Existence&quot; (1995) ===
Two days before May&#x27;s death, he edited an advanced copy of this book. It was co-authored by Kirk Schneider and was intended to bring some life back into existential psychology. Like some previous books, this talks of existential psychotherapy and targets scholars (May &amp; Schneider, 1995).

== Accomplishments ==
* In 1970, May&#x27;s most popular work, Love and Will (1969), won the Ralph Waldo Emerson Award for humane scholarship and became a best-seller.
* In 1971, May won the American Psychological Association&#x27;s Distinguished Contribution to Science and Profession of Clinical Psychology award.
* In 1972, the New York Society of Clinical Psychologists presented him with the Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr., Award for his book Power and Innocence (1972).
* In 1987, he received the American Psychological Foundation Gold Medal Award for Lifetime Contributions to Professional Psychology.

== Influences and psychological background ==

May was influenced by North American humanism and interested in reconciling existential psychology with other philosophies, especially Freud&#x27;s.

May considered Otto Rank (1884–1939) to be the most important precursor of existential therapy. Shortly before his death, May wrote the foreword to Robert Kramer&#x27;s edited collection of Rank&#x27;s American lectures. &quot;I have long considered Otto Rank to be the great unacknowledged genius in Freud&#x27;s circle&quot;, wrote May.

May is often grouped with humanists, for example Abraham Maslow, who provided a good base for May&#x27;s studies and theories as an existentialist. May delves further into the awareness of the serious dimensions of a human&#x27;s life than Maslow did.

Erich Fromm had many ideas with which May agreed relating to May&#x27;s existential ideals. Fromm studied the ways people avoid anxiety by conforming to societal norms rather than doing what they please. Fromm also focused on self-expression and free will, on all of which May based many of his studies.

May was Irvin D. Yalom&#x27;s therapist. 

== Stages of development ==

Like Freud, May defined certain &quot;stages&quot; of development. These stages are not as strict as Freud&#x27;s psychosexual stages, rather they signify a sequence of major issues in each individual&#x27;s life:
# Innocence – the pre-egoic, pre-self-conscious stage of the infant: An innocent is only doing what he or she must do. However, an innocent does have a degree of will in the sense of a drive to fulfill needs.
# Rebellion – the rebellious person wants freedom, but does not yet have a good understanding of the responsibility that goes with it.
# Ordinary – the normal adult ego learned responsibility, but finds it too demanding, so seeks refuge in conformity and traditional values.
# Creative – the authentic adult, the existential stage, self-actualizing and transcending simple egocentrism

The stages of development that Rollo May set out are not stages in the conventional sense (not in the strict Freudian sense) i.e. both children and adults can present qualities from these stages at different times.

== Aspects of the world ==
May&#x27;s ideas about world aspects influenced his developmental theories. In total, there are three aspects:

# Umwelt
# Mitwelt
# Eigenwelt

The first, Umwelt, describes “the world around us.” This defines the biological or genetic influences of an individual, such influences are not conscious. Therefore, Umwelt teaches us about concepts like fate and destiny. Next, the Mitwelt, describes “the world.” This includes the physical world where meaning is derived from constantly shifting relationships. This aspect of the world starts to influence us as children when we learn to manipulate others and are taught about the role of responsibility. Finally, the Eigenwelt, describes our “own world.” This references the psychological realm where individuals related to themselves. This is where self-exploration, self-knowing, self-reflection, and self-identity are created. This aspect of the world is conscious, and it teaches us self-awareness. Altogether, these aspects work together to shape our individualistic perception of the world and our environment.

== Perspectives ==

===Anxiety===
In May&#x27;s book &quot;The Meaning of Anxiety&quot;, he defined anxiety as &quot;the apprehension cued off by a threat to some value which the individual holds essential to his existence as a self&quot; (1967, p. 72). He quoted Kierkegaard: &quot;Anxiety is the dizziness of freedom&quot;. May&#x27;s interest in anxiety as a result of isolation grew while he was placed in a sanatorium for tuberculosis treatment. There, he saw patients exhibiting fear and anxiety that seemed to be linked to depersonalization and isolation.

From that experience, May concluded that anxiety is essential for individual growth. It is something that we cannot escape, thus we must use anxiety to develop our humanity and freely live a life of dignity.

He believed that the feelings of threat and powerlessness associated with anxiety motivated humans to exercise freedom to act courageously instead of conforming to the comforts of modern life. Ultimately, anxiety created the opportunity for humans to live life to the fullest (Friedman). Additionally, May proposed that internalizing anxiety as fear could reduce overall anxiety because, “anxiety seeks to become fear”. He claimed that shifting anxiety to a fear incentivized avoiding a feared object or removing the fear of the object.

=== Love ===
May&#x27;s thoughts on love are documented in his book &quot;Love and Will&quot;, which addressed love and sex in human behavior. He believed that society separated love and sex into two different ideologies when they should be classified as one. May identified five types of love:

* Libido: Biological function that can be satisfied through sexual intercourse or some other release of sexual tension.
* Eros: Psychological desire that seeks procreation or creation through an enduring union with a loved one.
* Philia: Intimate non-sexual friendship between two people.
* Agape: Esteem for the other, the concern for the other&#x27;s welfare beyond any gain that one can get out of it, disinterested love, typically, the love of God for man.
* Manic: Impulsive, emotionally driven love. Feelings are very hot and cold. The relationship transitions between thriving and perfect, or bitter and ugly.
May investigated and criticized the &quot;Sexual Revolution&quot; in the 1960s, when individuals began to explore their sexuality. The term &quot;Free Sex&quot; replaced the ideology of free love. May postulated that love is intentionally willed by an individual; love reflects human instinct for deliberation and consideration. May then explained that giving in to sexual impulses did not actually make an individual free; freedom came from resisting sexual impulses. Unsurprisingly, May believed that Hippie counterculture as well as commercialization of sex and pornography influenced society to perceive a disconnect between love and sex. Because emotion had separated from reason, it became socially acceptable to seek sexual relationships while avoiding the natural drive to relate to another person and create new life. May believed that sexual freedom caused modern society to neglect important psychological developments such as the importance of caring.

=== Guilt ===
According to May, guilt occurs when people deny their potentialities, fail to perceive the needs of others or are unaware of their dependency on the world. Both anxiety and guilt include issues dealing with one&#x27;s existence in the world. May mentioned they were &quot;ontological&quot;, meaning that they both refer to the nature of being and not to the feelings coming from situations. (Feist &amp; Feist, 2008)

Feist and Feist (2008) outline May&#x27;s three forms of ontological guilt. Each form relates to one of the three modes of being, which are &quot;Umwelt, Mitwelt&quot; and &quot;Eigenwelt&quot;. Umwelt&#x27;s form of guilt comes from a lack of awareness of one&#x27;s existence in the world, which May believed to take place when the world becomes more technologically advanced, and people are less concerned about nature and become removed from nature.

Mitwelt&#x27;s form of guilt comes from failure to see things from other&#x27;s point of view. Because we cannot understand the need of others accurately, we feel inadequate in our relations with them.

Eigenwelt&#x27;s form of guilt is connected with the denial of our own potentialities or failure to fulfil them. This guilt is based in our relationship with the self. This form of guilt is universal because no one can completely fulfil their potentialities.

== Criticism of modern psychotherapy ==

May believed that psychotherapists towards the end of the 20th century had fractured away from the Jungian, Freudian and other influencing psychoanalytic thought and started creating their own &#x27;gimmicks&#x27; causing a crisis within the world of psychotherapy. These gimmicks were said to put too much stock into the self where the real focus needed to be looking at &#x27;man in the world&#x27;. To accomplish this, May pushed for the use of existential therapy over individually created techniques for psychotherapy.

May believed that modern psychotherapy in the late 20th century was branching away from its original founders: Freud, Jung, Rank, and Adler. May believed that modern psychotherapy isolated and ‘cured’ specific patient symptoms, called gimmicks. Typically, gimmicks are minor problems, not deep psychological issues, that emphasize the self. Ultimately, treating gimmicks puts the patient at a disadvantage by giving them a short-lasting fix, while distracting patients from their real problems. May also speculated that therapists become bored after two to three years of treating gimmicks which lead them to create more gimmicks. Dramatically, May believed that gimmicks were designed to destroy modern society. In fact, May postulated that the work of many great philosophers is no longer relevant because they focused on gimmicks.

Thus, May postulated that existential psychotherapy was the future of therapy. Existential psychotherapy aligned with the ideas of Freud, Jung, Rank, and Adler, who sought to bring the unconscious to the conscious. The conscious developed between age one and two, with the unconscious lying at the outer reaches of the conscious. Thus, existential psychotherapy helped patients to hone their mental capacities, allowing them to internalize their experiences; typically, in a more sensitive and intellectual manner. Existential psychotherapy also emphasized natural concepts like death, love, fear which relates to how individuals can fit into the world around them.

== Unconstructive trends in existential psychology ==
In 1961, approximately two years after existential psychology became a recognized domain of psychology, Rollo May voiced his critiques of the ever-growing field. He identified concepts that he believed would hinder the profession as it developed, he called these unconstructive trends. May identified five unconstructive trends:
# The idea the existential psychology could not be specialized to a particular group
# Existential psychology is not a form of therapy
# Existential psychology is not the same as Zen Buddhism
# The anti-scientific tendencies of existential psychiatry
# The widespread “wild eclecticism” would ruin modern therapy

First, May disliked the idea that existential psychology could be specialized to a particular school or group, namely the Ontoanalytic Society. This society analyzed what it meant to be human, or at least they tried to, which May believed would damage existential psychology. Not only was it empirically impossible to quantify, but it was also immoral to attempt. This analysis technique rationalized individual guilt so that the individual could feel relieved from whatever was troubling them; ultimately, May believed this process was removing the humility from the human experience. May&#x27;s second unconstructive trend, which builds on first, emphasized that existential psychology is not a system of therapy. Rather it is an attitude towards human beings. Existential psychology seeks to understand the structure of human beings and their experiences.

Third, May believed the association of existential psychology with Zen Buddhism downplayed the significant differences between these two practices. Existential psychology brings awareness of existential problems like anxiety, tragedy, guilt, and the reality of evil.  Attempting to bypass these problems using Zen Buddhist techniques would cause loss of the sense of self and loss of confidence in capacity for free will. May believed that if we face problems head on, using existential psychology, then we make peace with them and assign them meaning.

Fourth, May detested the anti-scientific tendencies of psychologists practicing existential psychiatry. Such tendencies became popular alongside America&#x27;s anti-intellectualism; a time period when distrust of reason was widespread. May argued against this, stating that science is a part of the universe, therefore, we must accept it.

Finally, May suggested the increase in “wild eclecticism” would ruin therapeutic practice. May believed wild eclecticism overemphasized therapeutic techniques (gimmicks) leading other existentialists to conclude that therapeutic techniques were unimportant to the therapy process. Conversely, May advocated for therapeutic techniques, as long as they held clear presuppositions, and were administered in an undogmatic manner because therapy was meant to be objective.

== Constructive trends in existential psychology ==
May also evaluated constructive trends in existential psychology, which May believed would further the understanding of existential psychology. May identified five constructive trends in existential psychology:

# Science&#x27;s new approach to the study of man
# The central role of decision making in the human experience
# The problem of the ego
# How the senses are recognized as connecting man and the material world
# The concept of normal anxiety and normal guilt

First, May criticized science&#x27;s new approach to the study of man. At that time, science focused heavily on the drives and forces that motivated human beings. Existential psychology, on the other hand, sought to evaluate whole human beings and their experiences. May believed existentialists should focus on the man to whom a drive or force is happening and the subsequent experiences of acting willfully. In this manner, May hoped that existentialists would better understand anxiety, despair and other existential problems which rely on the totality of human experiences.

Second, May appreciated the central role of decision making in human experience. May perceived decision making as an inherent act of the centered self. Decisions cannot be made without consciousness, thus creating the experience freedom of choice. The act of assigning value was a distinct human characteristic.

Third, May evaluated the problem of the ego. Many psychologists assumed that the existential ego was associated with the psychoanalytical ego, which was false. May theorized that the existential ego worked alongside two other aspects, known as the aspects of the existing person. These aspects identify the &quot;self&quot;, the subjective center where personal bias is shaped by experience; the &quot;person&quot;, the social center where we can relate with other people; and the &quot;ego&quot;, our individual perception of how the &quot;self&quot; relates to the &quot;person&quot;.

May&#x27;s final two constructive trends were less developed than his other trends. Simply, May agreed with two shifting paradigms within the psychology world. First, May liked how Dr. Erwin Straus identified the senses as a relationship between man and the world. Up until Dr. Straus&#x27;s work, Pavlovian and Freudian ideologies of the western world insisted that the sense separated man from the natural world. Next, May praised the acceptance of normal anxiety within psychology. May, however, also emphasized the need to accept normal guilt. May believed that normal guilt heavily contributed to feelings of worthlessness. If not treated, neurotic guilt could occur.

== Bibliography ==

== See also ==
* Stephen A. Diamond
* Irvin Yalom
* Abraham Maslow
* Carl Rogers
* Virginia Satir
* Kirk J. Schneider
* &quot;Land of Dreams&quot; (film)

== References ==
== Sources and further reading ==
* 
* 
* 

== External links ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1059597" start="0" end="15" title="Rollo May" label="Rollo Reece May"/>
<link wikidata="Q556014" start="68" end="79" title="Existential therapy" label="existential"/>
<link wikidata="Q212980" start="80" end="92" title="psychologist" label="psychologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q6691706" start="134" end="147" title="Love and Will" label="Love and Will"/>
<link wikidata="Q23364" start="190" end="211" title="humanistic psychology" label="humanistic psychology"/>
<link wikidata="Q38066" start="216" end="241" title="Existentialism" label="existentialist philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q154723" start="257" end="270" title="Viktor Frankl" label="Viktor Frankl"/>
<link wikidata="Q556014" start="297" end="322" title="existential psychotherapy" label="existential psychotherapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q60104" start="355" end="367" title="Paul Tillich" label="Paul Tillich"/>
<link wikidata="Q7750814" start="470" end="492" title="The Meaning of Anxiety" label="The Meaning of Anxiety"/>
<link wikidata="Q1934356" start="707" end="716" title="Ada, Ohio" label="Ada, Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q951122" start="1081" end="1093" title="Jacob Abbott" label="Jacob Abbott"/>
<link wikidata="Q273773" start="1245" end="1264" title="Rollo" label="Rollo the Conqueror"/>
<link wikidata="Q270222" start="1606" end="1631" title="Michigan State University" label="Michigan State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q616591" start="1750" end="1765" title="Oberlin College" label="Oberlin College"/>
<link wikidata="Q163727" start="1781" end="1803" title="bachelor&amp;#x27;s degree" label="bachelor&amp;#x27;s degree"/>
<link wikidata="Q41" start="1849" end="1855" title="Greece" label="Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q4752135" start="1859" end="1875" title="Anatolia College" label="Anatolia College"/>
<link wikidata="Q152393" start="1938" end="1950" title="Alfred Adler" label="Alfred Adler"/>
<link wikidata="Q12204" start="2186" end="2198" title="tuberculosis" label="tuberculosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196251" start="2262" end="2288" title="Union Theological Seminary in the City of New York" label="Union Theological Seminary"/>
<link wikidata="Q2085288" start="2295" end="2297" title="Bachelor of Divinity" label="BD"/>
<link wikidata="Q7691246" start="2315" end="2352" title="Teachers College, Columbia University" label="Teachers College, Columbia University"/>
<link wikidata="Q752297" start="2359" end="2362" title="PhD" label="PhD"/>
<link wikidata="Q199906" start="2366" end="2385" title="clinical psychology" label="clinical psychology"/>
<link wikidata="Q7429134" start="2435" end="2459" title="Saybrook Graduate School" label="Saybrook Graduate School"/>
<link wikidata="Q62" start="2483" end="2496" title="San Francisco" label="San Francisco"/>
<link wikidata="Q984603" start="2539" end="2546" title="Tiburon, California" label="Tiburon"/>
<link wikidata="Q232264" start="2550" end="2567" title="San Francisco Bay" label="San Francisco Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q84172" start="9162" end="9171" title="Otto Rank" label="Otto Rank"/>
<link wikidata="Q2005371" start="9295" end="9308" title="Robert Kramer" label="Robert Kramer"/>
<link wikidata="Q23357" start="9536" end="9550" title="Abraham Maslow" label="Abraham Maslow"/>
<link wikidata="Q57085" start="9740" end="9751" title="Erich Fromm" label="Erich Fromm"/>
<link wikidata="Q362721" start="10053" end="10067" title="Irvin D. Yalom" label="Irvin D. Yalom"/>
<link wikidata="Q6512" start="12497" end="12508" title="Kierkegaard" label="Kierkegaard"/>
<link wikidata="Q6691706" start="13618" end="13631" title="Love and Will" label="Love and Will"/>
<link wikidata="Q3236990" start="17135" end="17139" title="self" label="self"/>
<link wikidata="Q7953" start="19402" end="19414" title="Zen Buddhism" label="Zen Buddhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7608522" start="24475" end="24493" title="Stephen A. Diamond" label="Stephen A. Diamond"/>
<link wikidata="Q362721" start="24496" end="24507" title="Irvin Yalom" label="Irvin Yalom"/>
<link wikidata="Q23357" start="24510" end="24524" title="Abraham Maslow" label="Abraham Maslow"/>
<link wikidata="Q191004" start="24527" end="24538" title="Carl Rogers" label="Carl Rogers"/>
<link wikidata="Q237979" start="24541" end="24555" title="Virginia Satir" label="Virginia Satir"/>
<link wikidata="Q6415463" start="24558" end="24575" title="Kirk J. Schneider" label="Kirk J. Schneider"/>
<link wikidata="Q6484126" start="24578" end="24611" title="Land of Dreams (1988 film)" label="&amp;quot;Land of Dreams&amp;quot; (film)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="252206" wikidata="Q12344159" url="?curid=252206" title="William">
<text>William is a masculine given name of Germanic origin. It became very popular in the English language after the Norman conquest of England in 1066, and remained so throughout the Middle Ages and into the modern era. It is sometimes abbreviated &quot;Wm.&quot; Shortened familiar versions in English include Will, Wills, Willy, Willie, Liam, Bill, Billie, and Billy. A common Irish form is Liam. Scottish diminutives include Wull, Willie or Wullie (as in Oor Wullie or the play &quot;Douglas&quot;). Female forms are Willa, Willemina, Wilma and Wilhelmina.

==Etymology==
William is related to the German given name &quot;Wilhelm&quot;. Both ultimately descend from Proto-Germanic &quot;*Wiljahelmaz&quot;, with a direct cognate also in the Old Norse name &quot;Vilhjalmr&quot; and a West Germanic borrowing into Medieval Latin &quot;Willelmus&quot;. The Proto-Germanic name is a compound of *&quot;wiljô&quot; &quot;will, wish, desire&quot; and *&quot;helmaz&quot; &quot;helm, helmet&quot;.

By regular sound change, Proto-Germanic *&quot;Wiljahelmaz&quot; should have also descended into English as *&quot;Wilhelm&quot;, but this latter form is unattested in written English of any period; the Anglo-Saxon Chronicle refers to William the Conqueror as &quot;Willelm&quot;, a back-formation from the Medieval Latin variant. The form &quot;William&quot; is a back-borrowing from Old Norman &quot;Williame&quot;, a specifically northern Norman reflex of Medieval Latin &quot;Willelmus&quot; (compare the Central French cognate &quot;Guillaume&quot;). The development of the name&#x27;s northern Norman form can be traced in the different versions of the name appearing in Wace&#x27;s &quot;Roman de Rou&quot;.

The first well-known bearer of the name was Charlemagne&#x27;s cousin William of Gellone (755–812). This William is immortalized in the Chanson de Guillaume, and the esteem in which he was held may account for the name&#x27;s subsequent popularity among European nobility.

==English history==

The English &quot;William&quot; is taken from the Anglo-Norman language and was transmitted to England after the Norman conquest in the 11th century, and soon became the most popular name in England, along with other Norman names such as Robert (the English cognate was , which by regular sound changes would have developed into something along the lines of &quot;Reedbart&quot;), Richard, Roger (the English cognate was Hroðgar), Henry (all of Germanic origin and may have been transmitted through the Normans&#x27; use of Old French).

The name Wilkin/Wilkins is also of medieval origin, taken from the shortened version of William (Will) with the suffix &quot;kin&quot; added.

==Variants==

*Wilem, Awilemam (Koromfe)
*Weelum (Scots)
*Willum (Scots)
*Viliamu (Samoan)
*Viliami (Tongan)
*Whiriyamu (Karanga)
*Whiliyamu (Ndebele)
*Wilhelm (German, Polish, Swedish)
*Willem, Wilhelmus, Wim (Dutch, Frisian, Low German)
*Willem, Wilhelm (Afrikaans)
*Wiremu (Maori)
*Willelm (Old English) 
*Williama (Hawaiian)
*Wilhelmus (Indonesian)
*Wëllem (Luxembourgish)
*Walaam (Persian)
*Wiliyom, Wiliyem (Bengali)
*Vĩnh Liêm, Vĩnh Lâm (Vietnamese)
*Billem (Toba Batak)
*Cuglierme, Gugliemo (Neapolitan)
*Golem, Gulielm, Ylli, Ylmer (Albanian)
*Gilen, Guilen (Basque)
*Gulielmus, Vilhelmus, Willelmus, Gullelmus, Gullielmus, Villelmus (Latin)
*Guglielmo (Italian)
*Guillaume (French)
*Guildhelm (Old Dutch)
*Guilhèm, Guilhem, Guilherme, Guilhèume, Guilhaume, Glhaume (Occitan)
*Guillem, Guim (Catalan)
*Guillén (Aragonese)
*Guillermo (Spanish)
*Guilherme (Portuguese)
*Guillerme (Galician)
*Gwilym (Welsh)
*Gwilherm (Breton)
*Gugghiermu (Sicilian)
*Gllâome (Modern Norman)
*Uilliam (Irish)
*Liam (Irish)
*Illiam (Manx Gaelic)
*Uilleam (Scottish Gaelic)
*وِلْيَم – William (Arabic)
*Уилям – Uiliam (Bulgarian)
*װֶעלװֶעל – /ˈvelvel/ (Yiddish)
*Villem, Villu (Estonian)
*Вильгельм, Гильом, Уильям – Vil&#x27;gel&#x27;m, Gil&#x27;yom, Uilyam (Russian)
*Вільгельм, Вільям – Vil&#x27;hel&#x27;m, Vil&#x27;yam (Ukrainian)
*Уільям, Вільям – Uiĺjam, Viĺjam (Belarusian)
*Vilhelm (Danish, Norwegian, Romanian, Swedish)
*Vilhelmo (Esperanto)
*Vilhelms (Latvian)
*Viliam (Slovak)
*Viljem (Slovene)
*ויליאם – /ˈviljam/ (older pronunciation), /ˈwiljam/ (contemporary) (Hebrew)
*Vilim (Croatian)
*Вилијам (Serbian)
*Vilém (Czech)
*Vilmos (Hungarian)
*Viljams, Vilhelms, Vilis (Latvian)
*Vilius, Viliumas, Vilhelmas (Lithuanian)
*Viljami, Ville, Vilho, Viljo (Finnish)
*Vilhjálmur (Icelandic)
*Vilhjálmur, Viljormur (Faroese)
*Vilhjalmr (Old Norse)
*Vilko (Croatian)
*Vilyam, Vilyım (Turkish)
*Vėljams (Samogitian)
*Γουλιέλμος (Gouliélmos) (Greek)
*ܘܠܝܡ (Wil-yam) (Assyrian)
*Գուլիելմոս (Goulielmós) (Armenian)
==People named William==
==See also==
*Williams (surname)
*Bill (disambiguation)
*Billy (disambiguation)
*King William (disambiguation)
*Prince William (disambiguation)
*Saint William (disambiguation)
*Wilhelm (disambiguation)

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q12344159" start="0" end="7" title="William" label="William"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076509" start="13" end="22" title="Masculinity" label="masculine"/>
<link wikidata="Q202444" start="23" end="33" title="given name" label="given name"/>
<link wikidata="Q21200" start="37" end="45" title="Germanic languages" label="Germanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860" start="84" end="100" title="English language" label="English language"/>
<link wikidata="Q200485" start="111" end="137" title="Norman Conquest" label="Norman conquest of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q15729029" start="306" end="310" title="Will (given name)" label="Will"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="312" end="317" title="Wills (given name)" label="Wills"/>
<link wikidata="Q1459646" start="319" end="324" title="Willy" label="Willy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1459646" start="326" end="332" title="Willie" label="Willie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1822658" start="334" end="338" title="Liam" label="Liam"/>
<link wikidata="Q66709548" start="340" end="344" title="Bill (given name)" label="Bill"/>
<link wikidata="Q19831799" start="346" end="352" title="Billie (given name)" label="Billie"/>
<link wikidata="Q19816507" start="358" end="363" title="Billy (name)" label="Billy"/>
<link wikidata="Q170826" start="374" end="379" title="Irish people" label="Irish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1822658" start="388" end="392" title="Liam" label="Liam"/>
<link wikidata="Q181634" start="394" end="402" title="Scottish people" label="Scottish"/>
<link wikidata="Q108709" start="403" end="414" title="diminutives" label="diminutives"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="423" end="427" title="Wull" label="Wull"/>
<link wikidata="Q1459646" start="429" end="435" title="Willie" label="Willie"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="439" end="445" title="Wullie" label="Wullie"/>
<link wikidata="Q7095403" start="453" end="463" title="Oor Wullie" label="Oor Wullie"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="476" end="495" title="Douglas (play)#Theme and response" label="&amp;quot;Douglas&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q4019885" start="515" end="520" title="Willa" label="Willa"/>
<link wikidata="Q21141823" start="522" end="531" title="Willemina" label="Willemina"/>
<link wikidata="Q4964995" start="533" end="538" title="Wilma (given name)" label="Wilma"/>
<link wikidata="Q19816474" start="543" end="553" title="Wilhelmina (given name)" label="Wilhelmina"/>
<link wikidata="Q188" start="596" end="602" title="German language" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q669623" start="664" end="678" title="Proto-Germanic" label="Proto-Germanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q35505" start="739" end="748" title="Old Norse" label="Old Norse"/>
<link wikidata="Q245423" start="878" end="886" title="compound (linguistics)" label="compound"/>
<link wikidata="Q212746" start="1194" end="1215" title="Anglo-Saxon Chronicle" label="Anglo-Saxon Chronicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q37594" start="1226" end="1247" title="William the Conqueror" label="William the Conqueror"/>
<link wikidata="Q33850" start="1376" end="1386" title="Norman language" label="Old Norman"/>
<link wikidata="Q5382" start="1668" end="1672" title="Wace" label="Wace"/>
<link wikidata="Q3440935" start="1686" end="1698" title="Roman de Rou" label="Roman de Rou"/>
<link wikidata="Q3044" start="1751" end="1762" title="Charlemagne" label="Charlemagne"/>
<link wikidata="Q714931" start="1777" end="1795" title="William of Gellone" label="William of Gellone"/>
<link wikidata="Q686546" start="1843" end="1863" title="Chanson de Guillaume" label="Chanson de Guillaume"/>
<link wikidata="Q35214" start="2052" end="2073" title="Anglo-Norman language" label="Anglo-Norman language"/>
<link wikidata="Q4927937" start="2240" end="2246" title="Robert" label="Robert"/>
<link wikidata="Q1249148" start="2383" end="2390" title="Richard" label="Richard"/>
<link wikidata="Q4925304" start="2392" end="2397" title="Roger" label="Roger"/>
<link wikidata="Q1353836" start="2423" end="2430" title="Hroðgar" label="Hroðgar"/>
<link wikidata="Q5716947" start="2433" end="2438" title="Henry (surname)" label="Henry"/>
<link wikidata="Q35222" start="2526" end="2536" title="Old French" label="Old French"/>
<link wikidata="Q357034" start="2549" end="2563" title="Wilkins (disambiguation)" label="Wilkin/Wilkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q35701" start="2715" end="2722" title="Koromfe language" label="Koromfe"/>
<link wikidata="Q14549" start="2733" end="2738" title="Scots language" label="Scots"/>
<link wikidata="Q14549" start="2749" end="2754" title="Scots language" label="Scots"/>
<link wikidata="Q34011" start="2766" end="2772" title="Samoan language" label="Samoan"/>
<link wikidata="Q34094" start="2784" end="2790" title="Tongan language" label="Tongan"/>
<link wikidata="Q33672" start="2804" end="2811" title="Ikalanga language" label="Karanga"/>
<link wikidata="Q35613" start="2825" end="2832" title="Northern Ndebele language" label="Ndebele"/>
<link wikidata="Q188" start="2844" end="2850" title="German language" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q809" start="2852" end="2858" title="Polish language" label="Polish"/>
<link wikidata="Q9027" start="2860" end="2867" title="Swedish language" label="Swedish"/>
<link wikidata="Q7411" start="2894" end="2899" title="Dutch language" label="Dutch"/>
<link wikidata="Q25325" start="2901" end="2908" title="Frisian languages" label="Frisian"/>
<link wikidata="Q25433" start="2910" end="2920" title="Low German" label="Low German"/>
<link wikidata="Q14196" start="2940" end="2949" title="Afrikaans" label="Afrikaans"/>
<link wikidata="Q29026812" start="2952" end="2958" title="Wiremu" label="Wiremu"/>
<link wikidata="Q36451" start="2960" end="2965" title="Māori language" label="Maori"/>
<link wikidata="Q42365" start="2977" end="2988" title="Old English" label="Old English"/>
<link wikidata="Q33569" start="3002" end="3010" title="Hawaiian language" label="Hawaiian"/>
<link wikidata="Q9240" start="3024" end="3034" title="Indonesian language" label="Indonesian"/>
<link wikidata="Q9051" start="3045" end="3058" title="Luxembourgish" label="Luxembourgish"/>
<link wikidata="Q9168" start="3069" end="3076" title="Persian language" label="Persian"/>
<link wikidata="Q9610" start="3097" end="3104" title="Bengali language" label="Bengali"/>
<link wikidata="Q9199" start="3128" end="3138" title="Vietnamese language" label="Vietnamese"/>
<link wikidata="Q33017" start="3149" end="3159" title="Toba Batak language" label="Toba Batak"/>
<link wikidata="Q33845" start="3183" end="3193" title="Neapolitan language" label="Neapolitan"/>
<link wikidata="Q8748" start="3225" end="3233" title="Albanian language" label="Albanian"/>
<link wikidata="Q8752" start="3251" end="3257" title="Basque language" label="Basque"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="3327" end="3332" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q652" start="3346" end="3353" title="Italian language" label="Italian"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="3367" end="3373" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q443089" start="3387" end="3396" title="Old Dutch" label="Old Dutch"/>
<link wikidata="Q14185" start="3459" end="3466" title="Occitan language" label="Occitan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7026" start="3484" end="3491" title="Catalan language" label="Catalan"/>
<link wikidata="Q8765" start="3503" end="3512" title="Aragonese language" label="Aragonese"/>
<link wikidata="Q1553990" start="3515" end="3524" title="Guillermo" label="Guillermo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321" start="3526" end="3533" title="Spanish language" label="Spanish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1310869" start="3536" end="3545" title="Guilherme" label="Guilherme"/>
<link wikidata="Q5146" start="3547" end="3557" title="Portuguese language" label="Portuguese"/>
<link wikidata="Q9307" start="3571" end="3579" title="Galician language" label="Galician"/>
<link wikidata="Q9309" start="3590" end="3595" title="Welsh language" label="Welsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q12107" start="3608" end="3614" title="Breton language" label="Breton"/>
<link wikidata="Q33973" start="3629" end="3637" title="Sicilian language" label="Sicilian"/>
<link wikidata="Q33850" start="3656" end="3662" title="Norman language" label="Norman"/>
<link wikidata="Q9142" start="3674" end="3679" title="Irish language" label="Irish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1822658" start="3682" end="3686" title="Liam" label="Liam"/>
<link wikidata="Q9142" start="3688" end="3693" title="Irish language" label="Irish"/>
<link wikidata="Q12175" start="3704" end="3715" title="Manx language" label="Manx Gaelic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7878076" start="3718" end="3725" title="Uilleam" label="Uilleam"/>
<link wikidata="Q9314" start="3727" end="3742" title="Scottish Gaelic" label="Scottish Gaelic"/>
<link wikidata="Q13955" start="3764" end="3770" title="Arabic" label="Arabic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7918" start="3789" end="3798" title="Bulgarian language" label="Bulgarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q8641" start="3823" end="3830" title="Yiddish" label="Yiddish"/>
<link wikidata="Q9072" start="3848" end="3856" title="Estonian language" label="Estonian"/>
<link wikidata="Q7737" start="3930" end="3937" title="Russian language" label="Russian"/>
<link wikidata="Q8798" start="3995" end="4004" title="Ukrainian language" label="Ukrainian"/>
<link wikidata="Q9091" start="4040" end="4050" title="Belarusian language" label="Belarusian"/>
<link wikidata="Q12805716" start="4053" end="4060" title="Vilhelm" label="Vilhelm"/>
<link wikidata="Q9035" start="4062" end="4068" title="Danish language" label="Danish"/>
<link wikidata="Q9043" start="4070" end="4079" title="Norwegian language" label="Norwegian"/>
<link wikidata="Q7913" start="4081" end="4089" title="Romanian language" label="Romanian"/>
<link wikidata="Q9027" start="4091" end="4098" title="Swedish language" label="Swedish"/>
<link wikidata="Q143" start="4111" end="4120" title="Esperanto" label="Esperanto"/>
<link wikidata="Q48772186" start="4123" end="4131" title="Vilhelms" label="Vilhelms"/>
<link wikidata="Q9078" start="4133" end="4140" title="Latvian language" label="Latvian"/>
<link wikidata="Q9058" start="4151" end="4157" title="Slovak language" label="Slovak"/>
<link wikidata="Q9063" start="4168" end="4175" title="Slovene language" label="Slovene"/>
<link wikidata="Q9288" start="4246" end="4252" title="Hebrew" label="Hebrew"/>
<link wikidata="Q6654" start="4262" end="4270" title="Croatian language" label="Croatian"/>
<link wikidata="Q9299" start="4282" end="4289" title="Serbian language" label="Serbian"/>
<link wikidata="Q9056" start="4299" end="4304" title="Czech language" label="Czech"/>
<link wikidata="Q9067" start="4315" end="4324" title="Hungarian language" label="Hungarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q9078" start="4353" end="4360" title="Latvian language" label="Latvian"/>
<link wikidata="Q9083" start="4392" end="4402" title="Lithuanian language" label="Lithuanian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412" start="4435" end="4442" title="Finnish language" label="Finnish"/>
<link wikidata="Q294" start="4457" end="4466" title="Icelandic language" label="Icelandic"/>
<link wikidata="Q25258" start="4492" end="4499" title="Faroese language" label="Faroese"/>
<link wikidata="Q35505" start="4513" end="4522" title="Old Norse" label="Old Norse"/>
<link wikidata="Q6654" start="4532" end="4540" title="Croatian language" label="Croatian"/>
<link wikidata="Q256" start="4559" end="4566" title="Turkish language" label="Turkish"/>
<link wikidata="Q213434" start="4578" end="4588" title="Samogitian dialect" label="Samogitian"/>
<link wikidata="Q9129" start="4616" end="4621" title="Greek language" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q29440" start="4640" end="4648" title="Assyrian Neo-Aramaic" label="Assyrian"/>
<link wikidata="Q8785" start="4676" end="4684" title="Armenian language" label="Armenian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1688722" start="4725" end="4743" title="Williams (surname)" label="Williams (surname)"/>
<link wikidata="Q257022" start="4745" end="4766" title="Bill (disambiguation)" label="Bill (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q185244" start="4768" end="4790" title="Billy (disambiguation)" label="Billy (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q29394072" start="4792" end="4821" title="King William (disambiguation)" label="King William (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q439924" start="4823" end="4854" title="Prince William (disambiguation)" label="Prince William (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q526238" start="4856" end="4886" title="Saint William (disambiguation)" label="Saint William (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2850854" start="4888" end="4912" title="Wilhelm (disambiguation)" label="Wilhelm (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="252213" wikidata="Q7315635" url="?curid=252213" title="Resistive force">
<text>In physics, resistive force is a force, or the vector sum of numerous forces, whose direction is opposite to the motion of a body, and may refer to:

* Friction, during sliding and/or rolling
* Drag (physics), during movement through a fluid (see fluid dynamics)
* Normal force, exerted reactionally back on the acting body by the compressive, tensile or shear stress within the recipient body
* Intermolecular forces, when separating adhesively bonded surfaces
* Magnetic repulsion, when a magnetic object moves against another magnetic field
* Gravity, during vertical takeoff
* Mechanical load, in a simple machine</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q82580" start="152" end="160" title="Friction" label="Friction"/>
<link wikidata="Q206621" start="194" end="208" title="Drag (physics)" label="Drag (physics)"/>
<link wikidata="Q541008" start="265" end="277" title="Normal force" label="Normal force"/>
<link wikidata="Q245031" start="396" end="416" title="Intermolecular force" label="Intermolecular force"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="491" end="499" title="Magnetism#Magnetic force" label="magnetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q11412" start="546" end="553" title="Gravity" label="Gravity"/>
<link wikidata="Q815284" start="581" end="596" title="Mechanical load" label="Mechanical load"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="252215" wikidata="Q2993809" url="?curid=252215" title="Canada Council">
<text>The Canada Council for the Arts (), commonly called the Canada Council, is a Crown corporation established in 1957 as an arts council of the Government of Canada. It is Canada&#x27;s public arts funder, with a mandate to foster and promote the study and enjoyment of, and the production of works in, the arts.

The Council&#x27;s grants, services, initiatives, prizes and payments contribute to the vibrancy of a creative and diverse arts and literary scene and support its presence across Canada and abroad. The Council&#x27;s investments contribute to fostering greater engagement in the arts among Canadians and international audiences.

In addition, the Canada Council administers the Art Bank, which operates art rental programs and an exhibitions and outreach program. The Canada Council Art Bank holds the largest collection of contemporary Canadian art in the world. The Canada Council is also responsible for the secretariat for the Canadian Commission for UNESCO and the Public Lending Right Commission.

==Organization==
The Canada Council for the Arts is an arms-length organization based in Ottawa, Ontario, that reports to Parliament through the Minister of Canadian Heritage. Its endowment income is supplemented by annual appropriations from Parliament, donations, and bequests. Its main duty is allotting grants and prizes to Canadian artists based on the merits of their applications. The Canada Council also funds and administers many of Canada&#x27;s top arts awards, including the Governor General&#x27;s Literary Awards and the Governor General&#x27;s Awards in Visual and Media Arts.

The Canada Council is called from time to time to appear before parliamentary committees, particularly the Canadian House of Commons Standing Committee on Canadian Heritage. Its accounts are audited by the Auditor General of Canada and included in an Annual Report to Parliament.

=== &quot;Canada Council for the Arts Act&quot; ===
=== History of the Act===
&quot;In 1977, the Canada Council sets up the Payment for Public Use Committee to discuss the creation of a Public Lending Right (PLR) program. The following year, the federal government created the Social Sciences and Humanities Research Council, adopting responsibility for the humanities and social sciences from the Canada Council, which would now only be responsible for the arts.” Starting in 1978, there were attempts to rename the Council to the Killam-Dunn Council, in recognition of contributions to the Council made by Sir Isaac Walton Killam and Sir James Dunn. 

The first version of the &quot;Canada Council for the Arts Act&quot; was titled &quot;An Act for the Establishment of a Canada Council for the Encouragement of the Arts, Humanities and Social Sciences&quot;. It was assented to on March 28, 1957, by the 22nd federal parliament under Liberal Prime Minister Louis St. Laurent. This version of the Act established a council of 21 members who could serve between three and five years, depending on their role in the Council. The Act also granted them the power to co-operate with organizations who had similar aims (such as universities) in funding and facilitating work in the Arts, Humanities, and Social Sciences across Canada, as well as promoting Canadian work in these fields abroad. 

There were several amendments over the years, with most being minor alterations to language or the status of Council members for tax purposes. Two major amendments, passed in the 1970s and later the 1990s, were more significant. In 1976–77, an amendment renamed the Act to simply the Canada Council Act. In conjunction with the establishment of the Social Science and Humanities Research Council, the Act narrowed the Council&#x27;s mandate exclusively to “the study and enjoyment of, and the production of works in, the arts”. While the council&#x27;s powers as a promoting and sponsoring body remained, all references to social sciences and humanities were removed. In 1992, this was reversed, and duties of the Research Council, as well as promotional activities of the Department of External Affairs, were reabsorbed into the Canada Council. This amendment also reduced the number of mandatory Council meetings to two, and shortened the deadline for the Council to submit its financial audits. 

=== The Modern Act === 

The &quot;Canada Council for the Arts Act&quot; was last amended in 2009. This is the current version as of 2022. Between 2002 and 2009 were a number of small revisions to get to the modern &quot;Act&quot; that we have today. The majority of the changes to the &quot;Canada Council for the Arts Act&quot; since 2002 involve updates to language due to evolving definitions. For example, in section 12 of Objects, Powers and Duties of the Council &#x27;public service of Canada&#x27; from 2002 was updated to &#x27;federal public administration&#x27; as of 2005. 

However, one of the most significant changes concerns Part 4 – Members of the Council. In the major 2002 Amendment other members of the council who were not the Chairperson or Vice-Chairperson would be appointed for a period of three years. In 2006 this was updated and changed to a period of four years and has remained fours years since, up to and including the current version. 

Another significant change is the loss of council members. Instead of 21 council members, in the modern &quot;Act&quot; there is the Chairperson and Vice-Chairperson along with 9 other members of the council. That is a reduction of 10 members since the 1977 version of the Act. 

=== Governance ===
The Canada Council for the Arts, as a federal Crown corporation, is accountable to Parliament through the Minister of Canadian Heritage and is governed by an 11-member Board. The Board is composed of a Chair, Vice-Chair, and nine other members from across Canada.

Along with the Director and CEO, Board members are appointed by the Governor-in-Council for fixed terms. The Board meets at least three times per year and is responsible for the oversight of the Canada Council&#x27;s policies, programs, budgets, and grant decisions. The Canada Council&#x27;s Executive Management, on the other hand—which is led by the Director and CEO—is responsible for establishing and implementing the broad directions and vision developed by the Board, as well as managing the Council itself. The Director is appointed by the Governor in Council as well, and also acts as the chief executive officer (CEO).

Chairs of the Canada Council:
*Brooke Claxton, 1957–1960
*Claude Bissell, 1960–1962
*Douglas B. Weldon, 1962–1964
*Jean Martineau, 1964–1969
*John G. Prentice, 1969–1974
*Brian Flemming (&quot;interim&quot;), 1974–1975
*Gertrude M. Laing, 1975–1978
*Mavor Moore, 1979–1983
*Maureen Forrester, 1983–1988
*Allan Gotlieb, 1989–1994
*Donna Scott, 1994–1998
*Jean-Louis Roux, 1998–2004
*Karen Kain, 2004–2008
*Joseph L. Rotman, 2008–2015
*Pierre Lassonde, 2015–2020
*Jesse Wente, 2020–2025
Executive Management:

* For the complete list of members of the Canada Council&#x27;s Executive Management, visit the organization&#x27;s website.

==History==
The Canada Council for the Arts was established and began operations in 1957 as part of a major recommendation of the 1951 report by the Royal Commission on National Development in the Arts, Letters and Sciences, commonly known as the Massey Commission.

The report described an unpromising cultural landscape in Canada: professional theatre was &quot;moribund;&quot; the musical space was meager; professional artistic ventures were lacking and virtually absent outside of the largest urban areas; and English Canada produced only 14 works of fiction in an entire year. Moreover, the report stated:No novelist, poet, short story writer, historian, biographer, or other writer of non-technical books can make even a modestly comfortable living by selling his work in Canada. No composer of music can live at all on what Canada pays him for his compositions. Apart from radio drama, no playwright, and only a few actors and producers, can live by working in the theatre in Canada.&quot; Gifted Canadians &quot;must be content with a precarious and unrewarding life in Canada, or go abroad where their talents are in demand.As such, the report recommended that the Government of Canada establish a Canada Council for the Encouragement of the Arts, Letters, Humanities and Social Sciences. Due to &quot;the dangers inherent in any system of subvention by the central government to the arts and letters and to the culture of the country generally,&quot; the Commission—operating in the aftermath of WWII—proposed that the new council be created with a large amount of independence from government. In introducing the &quot;Canada Council Act&quot; to Parliament, then-Prime Minister Louis St-Laurent said:Our main object in recommending the establishment of the Canada Council is to provide some assistance to universities, to the arts, humanities and social sciences as well as to students in those fields without attempting in any way to control their activities or to tamper with their freedom. Governments should, I feel, support the cultural development of the nation but not attempt to control it.The Canada Council for the Arts was thereafter created as an independent, arm&#x27;s-length body, accountable to Parliament through the Minister of Canadian Heritage with responsibility for establishing its priorities, policies, and funding programs as well as making grant decisions. In its first year, from an initial endowment of CA$50 million, the Council had a budget of $1.5 million for the arts, humanities, and social sciences. By 1964, the Council proposed for a substantial increase to the endowment. Instead, the Council&#x27;s main source of revenue became yearly government appropriations.

In 1977, the Canada Council sets up the Payment for Public Use Committee to discuss the creation of a Public Lending Right (PLR) program. The following year, the federal government created the Social Sciences and Humanities Research Council, adopting responsibility for the humanities and social sciences from the Canada Council, which would now only be responsible for the arts. In March 1986, the Payment for Public Use (PPU) program was established by a Cabinet decision, with an initial budget of $3 million allocated to it by the Treasury Board Secretariat. This would make Canada the 13th country in the world to develop a PLR program. The initial name was promptly changed to Public Lending Right, and catalogue-based system was adopted.

The mid-1990s &quot;program review&quot; process, which the federal government undertook to curb spending and reduce the deficit, affected the Canada Council as it did other federal agencies and departments. During the mid-1990s period, the Council was restructured and its staff numbers reduced. Toward the end of the decade, however, came what the then-chairman of the Council, actor Jean-Louis Roux, called &quot;the beginnings of a new period of growth.&quot; In October 1997, the Canadian Heritage Minister announced another $25 million of funding for 1997–98 and for each of the following 4 years. An additional $10-million increase in the appropriation was announced in the federal budget of February 2000. In May 2001, further $25 million was provided to the Council by the federal government between 2001–02 and 2003–05. In 2006, the Canadian government provided one-time funding of $50 million (divided into $20 million for 2006–07 and $30 million for 2007–08), all of which would go towards grants. In 2007, the government announced an additional $30 million to be added permanently to the Council&#x27;s base budget, bringing the Parliamentary appropriation to around $180 million in 2008–09.

==Divisions and spaces==

=== Âjagemô Exhibition Space ===
Âjagemô is a 3,000-square-foot (278.71 m2) display and performance space at the Canada Council offices that features various exhibitions of contemporary Canadian art, including work from the collection of the Canada Council Art Bank. It takes its name from the Algonquin word for &#x27;crossroads&#x27;.
===Art Bank===

The Canada Council for the Arts oversees the Art Bank (), a division of the Canada Council with the mandate to rent works of art to public and private sector offices. 

The Art Bank&#x27;s collection—the largest collection of contemporary Canadian art in the world—includes some 18,000 artworks by over 3,000 Canadian artists, including those from Indigenous backgrounds. These works include the 6,400 currently being rented to over 200 government and corporate clients. It offers public access to this art through its 3 programs: art rental, loans to museums, and outreach projects.

Established in the 1970s and developed by Canada Council Visual Arts Officer Suzanne Rivard-Lemoyne, the Art Bank buys art from notable Canadian artists through a system of peer-review juries. The Bank is completely self-funded, earning its money from renting out works in its collection, and continues to expand its collection by buying works in accord with its annual purchasing budget. The vast majority of its art is rented by the federal government, with less than 10% being rented to the private sector. Works of art are rented out for two-year periods. The rental rate is generally 20% of the piece&#x27;s market value. Although located in Ottawa, Ontario, the Art Bank services its clients across the country. Its collection has been appraised to be worth over 71 million dollars.

In 2002 the Canada Council Art Bank began to purchase Indigenous art to enhance its collection as part of its 45th anniversary.

=== Canadian Commission for UNESCO ===

Overseeing UNESCO activities in Canada, the Canada Council operates the Canadian Commission for UNESCO (CCUNESCO), which helps governments, organizations, and individual Canadians share information, along with making recommendations to the federal Canadian government on UNESCO programs and budgets.

Established by the Canada Council for the Arts in 1957, the Commission is managed by a 17-member executive committee consisting of representatives of government departments, academics, and other experts in education, culture, and world heritage.

==Grants, Prizes and Initiatives==
===Prizes===
The Canada Council for the Arts promotes public awareness of the arts through its communications, research and arts promotion activities. In particular, every year, the Canada Council awards a broad range of prizes to over 200 Canadian artists and scholars in recognition of their work.

The Canada Council administers various Governor General&#x27;s Awards, including Medals in Architecture, Literary Awards, Performing Arts Awards, and Awards in Visual and Media Arts. Other awards include the Killam Program of scholarly awards, J.B.C Watkins Awards, the John G. Diefenbaker Award, the Musical Instrument Bank, and the Walter Carsen Prize for Excellence in the Performing Arts, among others.

The John G. Diefenbaker Award, with a prize of up to $95,000, allows a distinguished German scholar in the humanities to conduct research in Canada and spend brief periods gaining additional experience at American institutions. The Award was created in 1991, in memory of former Prime Minister John G. Diefenbaker, as the Canadian counterpart to the Konrad Adenauer Award, which was established by the Government of Germany for Canadian scholars in 1988.

The Killam Research Fellowship, granted for two years with a prize of $70,000 per year, provides support to scholars by granting them time to pursue research projects of broad significance and widespread interest within the disciplines of the humanities, social sciences, natural sciences, health sciences, engineering, or studies linking any of these disciplines. This award is one of the most distinguished research fellowships in Canada, and was established by the Killam Trusts through Dorothy J. Killam, in memory of her husband, Izaak Walton Killam.

====Musical Instrument Bank====

The Musical Instrument Bank (MIB; ) is an initiative of Canada Council wherein preeminent Canadian classical musicians, especially young artists, compete for the opportunity to become the steward and performer of a classical instrument from the Musical Instrument Bank on a 3-year loan.

The MIB was established in 1985 with a $100,000 bequest from the Barwick Family along with the fundraising efforts of businessman William Turner and cellist Denis Brott, both of Montréal. Since then, the Bank has received donations and loans of violins, cellos, and bows—created by such luthiers as Stradivari, Gagliano, Guarneri, and Pressenda—as well as generous bequests for the Canada Council to purchase additional instruments.

The Musical Instrument Bank has supported various notable Canadian classical musicians, including Lara St. John, Alexandre Da Costa, Martin Beaver, Judy Kang, and Denise Djokic. among others.

===Grants===
In 2018–19, the Canada Council awarded grants to over 2,800 Canadian artists, almost 450 groups, and over 2,000 arts organizations.

Each year the organization receives some 16,000 grant requests, which are reviewed by peer assessment committees. In 2006–07, the Canada Council awarded some 6,000 grants to artists and arts organizations and made payments to more than 15,400 authors through the Public Lending Right Commission. Grants and payments totaled more than $152 million.

=== Public Lending Right ===
Through its Public Lending Right (PLR) program, the Canada Council financially compensates over 17,000 Canadian authors annually for providing free public access to their books in Canadian public libraries. Authors are compensated through direct payments ranging from CA$50 to $4,500 a year. Eligible work includes original writing, translation, illustration, narration and photography contained in library books across a range.

The Public Lending Right Commission is a permanent advisory board that works with the Canada Council &quot;to define the program&#x27;s criteria and promote the program among eligible authors, illustrators, narrators and translators&quot; from a variety of literary and scholarly genres. The Commission consists of writers, translators, librarians, and publishers, as well as non-voting representatives from the Canada Council, the Department of Canadian Heritage, Library and Archives Canada, and Bibliothèque et Archives nationales du Québec. Author Mélikah Abdelmoumen is the current Commission Chair, with writer Russell Wangersky as Vice-Chair.

The creation of a PLR program was first deliberated in 1977, when the Council sets up the Payment for Public Use Committee to discuss the matter. Also that year, UNEQ (Union des écrivaines et des écrivains québécois) is founded in order to defend the rights of Quebec authors. In 1982, the Applebaum-Hébert Committee recommended that the federal government create a program to pay authors for the use of their books in libraries. Soon after, in March 1986, the Payment for Public Use (PPU) program was established by a Cabinet decision, with an initial budget of $3 million allocated to it by the Treasury Board Secretariat. This would make Canada the 13th country in the world to develop a PLR program. The initial name was promptly changed to Public Lending Right and catalogue-based system was adopted.

The PLR Commission developed and approved its Constitution and Bylaws in 1988, its second year of operation. In 2008, the Commission would unanimously adopt a growth management strategy, including a new four-tier payment scale for PLR payments, which was implemented two years later. The Commission first moved in favour of the possibility of ebooks being eligible in the PLR Program in 2011. However, it would not be until 2016, when the Program opened registration to ebooks. Also in 2016, the Program would begin to consider the future eligibility of audiobook materials, and the Canada Council would pledge to increase direct payments to authors through the PLR Program. In 2012, author Roy MacSkimming published the first of three major research studies related to PLR; subsequent reports would address the arrival of new technologies and compare the Canadian model to other PLR systems operating around the world. The PLR Program would finally open registration to audiobooks in 2019. For the first time, works must have been published during the previous 5 years in order to be eligible for registration.

==See also==
*The Killam Trusts
*Molson Prize
*Virginia Parker Prize

==References==
==Further reading==
*Granatstein, J.L. 1986. &quot;Culture and scholarship: The first ten years of the Canada Council.&quot; &quot;Canada 1957–1967: Years of Uncertainty and Innovation&quot;. Toronto, ON: McClelland &amp; Stewart. Pgs. 139–168.
*Klages, G. 2011. &quot;By Artists, for Artists? Creating the Saskatchewan Arts Board and Canada Council.&quot; &quot;Saskatchewan History&quot; 64/1 (Spring/Summer), pgs. 38–49.
*Mailhot, L., and Melançon, B. 1982. &quot;Le Conseil des arts du Canada, 1957–1982.&quot; Montreal, PQ: Lemeac.
*Ostry, B. 1978. &quot;The Cultural Connection.&quot; Toronto, ON: 1978.
*Woodcock, G. 1985. &quot;Strange Bedfellows: the State and the Arts in Canada.&quot; Toronto, ON: Douglas &amp; McIntyre.

==External links==
*Art Bank official website
*Âjagemô exhibition space
*Governor General&#x27;s Literary Awards official website
*Governor General&#x27;s Awards in Visual and Media Arts official website
*Musical Instrument Bank official website
*Public Lending Right official website
*Canada Council fonds (R834) at Library and Archives Canada</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2993809" start="4" end="31" title="Canada Council" label="Canada Council for the Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q5189488" start="77" end="94" title="Crown corporations of Canada" label="Crown corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q422404" start="141" end="161" title="Government of Canada" label="Government of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q5029892" start="942" end="972" title="Canadian Commission for UNESCO" label="Canadian Commission for UNESCO"/>
<link wikidata="Q449962" start="981" end="1001" title="Public Lending Right" label="Public Lending Right"/>
<link wikidata="Q1930" start="1104" end="1110" title="Ottawa" label="Ottawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1904" start="1112" end="1119" title="Ontario" label="Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q475689" start="1137" end="1147" title="Parliament of Canada" label="Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q3251837" start="1160" end="1189" title="Minister of Canadian Heritage and Status of Women" label="Minister of Canadian Heritage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1591172" start="1238" end="1252" title="Appropriation bill" label="appropriations"/>
<link wikidata="Q211557" start="1285" end="1293" title="Bequest" label="bequests"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1502" end="1541" title="Governor General&amp;#x27;s Awards#Governor General&amp;#x27;s Literary Awards" label="Governor General&amp;#x27;s Literary Awards"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1550" end="1605" title="Governor General&amp;#x27;s Awards#Governor General&amp;#x27;s Awards in Visual and Media Arts" label="Governor General&amp;#x27;s Awards in Visual and Media Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q865588" start="1672" end="1696" title="parliamentary committees" label="parliamentary committees"/>
<link wikidata="Q5030117" start="1715" end="1780" title="Canadian House of Commons Standing Committee on Canadian Heritage" label="Canadian House of Commons Standing Committee on Canadian Heritage"/>
<link wikidata="Q3564227" start="1814" end="1839" title="Auditor General of Canada" label="Auditor General of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q449962" start="2075" end="2095" title="Public Lending Right" label="Public Lending Right"/>
<link wikidata="Q2993802" start="2166" end="2213" title="Social Sciences and Humanities Research Council" label="Social Sciences and Humanities Research Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q5189488" start="5589" end="5614" title="Crown corporations of Canada" label="federal Crown corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3251837" start="5657" end="5686" title="Minister of Canadian Heritage" label="Minister of Canadian Heritage"/>
<link wikidata="Q3271068" start="5884" end="5903" title="Governor-in-Council" label="Governor-in-Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q484876" start="6414" end="6437" title="chief executive officer" label="chief executive officer"/>
<link wikidata="Q401897" start="6477" end="6491" title="Brooke Claxton" label="Brooke Claxton"/>
<link wikidata="Q5128718" start="6504" end="6518" title="Claude Bissell" label="Claude Bissell"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6531" end="6548" title="Douglas B. Weldon" label="Douglas B. Weldon"/>
<link wikidata="Q6171129" start="6561" end="6575" title="Jean Martineau (lawyer)" label="Jean Martineau"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6588" end="6604" title="John G. Prentice" label="John G. Prentice"/>
<link wikidata="Q912176" start="6617" end="6631" title="Brian Flemming" label="Brian Flemming"/>
<link wikidata="Q50975322" start="6666" end="6683" title="Gertrude M. Laing" label="Gertrude M. Laing"/>
<link wikidata="Q2363246" start="6696" end="6707" title="Mavor Moore" label="Mavor Moore"/>
<link wikidata="Q263172" start="6720" end="6737" title="Maureen Forrester" label="Maureen Forrester"/>
<link wikidata="Q4730635" start="6750" end="6763" title="Allan Gotlieb" label="Allan Gotlieb"/>
<link wikidata="Q52707151" start="6776" end="6787" title="Donna Scott" label="Donna Scott"/>
<link wikidata="Q505474" start="6800" end="6815" title="Jean-Louis Roux" label="Jean-Louis Roux"/>
<link wikidata="Q6369754" start="6828" end="6838" title="Karen Kain" label="Karen Kain"/>
<link wikidata="Q14949625" start="6851" end="6867" title="Joseph L. Rotman" label="Joseph L. Rotman"/>
<link wikidata="Q3385801" start="6880" end="6895" title="Pierre Lassonde" label="Pierre Lassonde"/>
<link wikidata="Q47530187" start="6908" end="6919" title="Jesse Wente" label="Jesse Wente"/>
<link wikidata="Q7374024" start="7229" end="7303" title="Royal Commission on National Development in the Arts, Letters and Sciences" label="Royal Commission on National Development in the Arts, Letters and Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q382834" start="7595" end="7609" title="English Canada" label="English Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q106715343" start="8587" end="8591" title="Canada in World War II" label="WWII"/>
<link wikidata="Q128626" start="8771" end="8787" title="Louis St. Laurent" label="Louis St-Laurent"/>
<link wikidata="Q1940786" start="9265" end="9282" title="Arm&amp;#x27;s length body" label="arm&amp;#x27;s-length"/>
<link wikidata="Q3251837" start="9327" end="9356" title="Minister of Canadian Heritage" label="Minister of Canadian Heritage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1104069" start="9524" end="9527" title="CA$" label="CA$"/>
<link wikidata="Q2018526" start="9588" end="9592" title="The arts" label="arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q80083" start="9594" end="9604" title="humanities" label="humanities"/>
<link wikidata="Q34749" start="9610" end="9625" title="Social science" label="social sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q1591172" start="9778" end="9792" title="Appropriation bill" label="appropriations"/>
<link wikidata="Q449962" start="9897" end="9917" title="Public Lending Right" label="Public Lending Right"/>
<link wikidata="Q2993802" start="9988" end="10035" title="Social Sciences and Humanities Research Council" label="Social Sciences and Humanities Research Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q17133814" start="10330" end="10356" title="Treasury Board of Canada Secretariat" label="Treasury Board Secretariat"/>
<link wikidata="Q505474" start="10927" end="10942" title="Jean-Louis Roux" label="Jean-Louis Roux"/>
<link wikidata="Q97356832" start="11222" end="11253" title="2000 Canadian federal budget" label="federal budget of February 2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q4203979" start="11946" end="11971" title="contemporary Canadian art" label="contemporary Canadian art"/>
<link wikidata="Q28092" start="12067" end="12076" title="Algonquin language" label="Algonquin"/>
<link wikidata="Q4203979" start="12352" end="12377" title="contemporary Canadian art" label="contemporary Canadian art"/>
<link wikidata="Q50801193" start="12788" end="12810" title="Suzanne Rivard-Lemoyne" label="Suzanne Rivard-Lemoyne"/>
<link wikidata="Q215028" start="12884" end="12895" title="Peer review" label="peer-review"/>
<link wikidata="Q422404" start="13146" end="13164" title="Government of Canada" label="federal government"/>
<link wikidata="Q1901350" start="13324" end="13336" title="market value" label="market value"/>
<link wikidata="Q1930" start="13358" end="13364" title="Ottawa" label="Ottawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1904" start="13366" end="13373" title="Ontario" label="Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13555" end="13569" title="Visual arts by indigenous peoples of the Americas#North America" label="Indigenous art"/>
<link wikidata="Q7809" start="13681" end="13687" title="UNESCO" label="UNESCO"/>
<link wikidata="Q283256" start="14593" end="14623" title="Governor General&amp;#x27;s Awards" label="Governor General&amp;#x27;s Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q283256" start="14635" end="14657" title="Governor General&amp;#x27;s Medals in Architecture" label="Medals in Architecture"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14659" end="14674" title="Governor General&amp;#x27;s Awards#Governor General.27s Literary Awards" label="Literary Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q3405815" start="14676" end="14698" title="Governor General&amp;#x27;s Performing Arts Awards" label="Performing Arts Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q3405813" start="14704" end="14735" title="Governor General&amp;#x27;s Awards in Visual and Media Arts" label="Awards in Visual and Media Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q128614" start="15256" end="15275" title="John G. Diefenbaker" label="John G. Diefenbaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q313827" start="15364" end="15385" title="Government of Germany" label="Government of Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q1404101" start="15827" end="15847" title="Research fellowship (funding)" label="research fellowships"/>
<link wikidata="Q3071480" start="15886" end="15899" title="The Killam Trusts" label="Killam Trusts"/>
<link wikidata="Q19848443" start="15908" end="15925" title="Dorothy J. Killam" label="Dorothy J. Killam"/>
<link wikidata="Q6101432" start="15953" end="15972" title="Izaak Walton Killam" label="Izaak Walton Killam"/>
<link wikidata="Q123418773" start="16012" end="16035" title="Musical Instrument Bank" label="Musical Instrument Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q9730" start="16107" end="16126" title="classical musicians" label="classical musicians"/>
<link wikidata="Q211557" start="16344" end="16351" title="bequest" label="bequest"/>
<link wikidata="Q3022580" start="16453" end="16464" title="Denis Brott" label="Denis Brott"/>
<link wikidata="Q340" start="16474" end="16482" title="Montreal" label="Montréal"/>
<link wikidata="Q8355" start="16541" end="16548" title="Violin" label="violins"/>
<link wikidata="Q8371" start="16550" end="16556" title="Cello" label="cellos"/>
<link wikidata="Q204948" start="16562" end="16566" title="Bow (music)" label="bows"/>
<link wikidata="Q762707" start="16583" end="16591" title="Luthier" label="luthiers"/>
<link wikidata="Q182011" start="16595" end="16605" title="Antonio Stradivari" label="Stradivari"/>
<link wikidata="Q662879" start="16607" end="16615" title="Gagliano family" label="Gagliano"/>
<link wikidata="Q453267" start="16617" end="16625" title="Giuseppe Guarneri" label="Guarneri"/>
<link wikidata="Q1526123" start="16631" end="16640" title="Giovanni Francesco Pressenda" label="Pressenda"/>
<link wikidata="Q13570129" start="16828" end="16841" title="Lara St. John" label="Lara St. John"/>
<link wikidata="Q4720819" start="16843" end="16861" title="Alexandre Da Costa" label="Alexandre Da Costa"/>
<link wikidata="Q6774978" start="16863" end="16876" title="Martin Beaver" label="Martin Beaver"/>
<link wikidata="Q6304495" start="16878" end="16887" title="Judy Kang" label="Judy Kang"/>
<link wikidata="Q5257650" start="16893" end="16906" title="Denise Djokic" label="Denise Djokic"/>
<link wikidata="Q449962" start="17332" end="17352" title="Public Lending Right" label="Public Lending Right"/>
<link wikidata="Q449962" start="17459" end="17479" title="Public Lending Right" label="Public Lending Right"/>
<link wikidata="Q18345569" start="17627" end="17652" title="Public libraries in Canada" label="Canadian public libraries"/>
<link wikidata="Q1104069" start="17715" end="17718" title="CA$" label="CA$"/>
<link wikidata="Q1056951" start="18309" end="18340" title="Department of Canadian Heritage" label="Department of Canadian Heritage"/>
<link wikidata="Q913250" start="18342" end="18369" title="Library and Archives Canada" label="Library and Archives Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q39628" start="18375" end="18420" title="Bibliothèque et Archives nationales du Québec" label="Bibliothèque et Archives nationales du Québec"/>
<link wikidata="Q7381851" start="18494" end="18511" title="Russell Wangersky" label="Russell Wangersky"/>
<link wikidata="Q3550227" start="18690" end="18694" title="Union des écrivaines et des écrivains québécois" label="UNEQ"/>
<link wikidata="Q17133814" start="19125" end="19151" title="Treasury Board of Canada Secretariat" label="Treasury Board Secretariat"/>
<link wikidata="Q5611761" start="19494" end="19511" title="growth management" label="growth management"/>
<link wikidata="Q128093" start="19678" end="19684" title="E-book" label="ebooks"/>
<link wikidata="Q106833" start="19889" end="19898" title="audiobook" label="audiobook"/>
<link wikidata="Q7373104" start="20026" end="20041" title="Roy MacSkimming" label="Roy MacSkimming"/>
<link wikidata="Q3071480" start="20462" end="20479" title="The Killam Trusts" label="The Killam Trusts"/>
<link wikidata="Q992455" start="20481" end="20493" title="Molson Prize" label="Molson Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q3405376" start="20495" end="20516" title="Virginia Parker Prize" label="Virginia Parker Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q913250" start="21584" end="21611" title="Library and Archives Canada" label="Library and Archives Canada"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="252216" wikidata="Q289093" url="?curid=252216" title="Localization (commutative algebra)">
<text>In commutative algebra and algebraic geometry, localization is a formal way to introduce the &quot;denominators&quot; to a given ring or module. That is, it introduces a new ring/module out of an existing ring/module &quot;R&quot;, so that it consists of fractions formula_1 such that the denominator &quot;s&quot; belongs to a given subset &quot;S&quot; of &quot;R&quot;. If &quot;S&quot; is the set of the non-zero elements of an integral domain, then the localization is the field of fractions: this case generalizes the construction of the field formula_2 of rational numbers from the ring formula_3 of integers.

The technique has become fundamental, particularly in algebraic geometry, as it provides a natural link to sheaf theory. In fact, the term &quot;localization&quot; originated in algebraic geometry: if &quot;R&quot; is a ring of functions defined on some geometric object (algebraic variety) &quot;V&quot;, and one wants to study this variety &quot;locally&quot; near a point &quot;p&quot;, then one considers the set &quot;S&quot; of all functions that are not zero at &quot;p&quot; and localizes &quot;R&quot; with respect to &quot;S&quot;. The resulting ring formula_4 contains information about the behavior of &quot;V&quot; near &quot;p&quot;, and excludes information that is not &quot;local&quot;, such as the zeros of functions that are outside &quot;V&quot; (c.f. the example given at local ring).

== Localization of a ring ==
The localization of a commutative ring by a multiplicatively closed set is a new ring formula_4 whose elements are fractions with numerators in and denominators in .

If the ring is an integral domain the construction generalizes and follows closely that of the field of fractions, and, in particular, that of the rational numbers as the field of fractions of the integers. For rings that have zero divisors, the construction is similar but requires more care.

===Multiplicative set===
Localization is commonly done with respect to a multiplicatively closed set (also called a &quot;multiplicative set&quot; or a &quot;multiplicative system&quot;) of elements of a ring , that is a subset of that is closed under multiplication, and contains .

The requirement that must be a multiplicative set is natural, since it implies that all denominators introduced by the localization belong to . The localization by a set that is not multiplicatively closed can also be defined, by taking as possible denominators all products of elements of . However, the same localization is obtained by using the multiplicatively closed set of all products of elements of . As this often makes reasoning and notation simpler, it is standard practice to consider only localizations by multiplicative sets.

For example, the localization by a single element introduces fractions of the form formula_6 but also products of such fractions, such as formula_7 So, the denominators will belong to the multiplicative set formula_8 of the powers of . Therefore, one generally talks of &quot;the localization by the powers of an element&quot; rather than of &quot;the localization by an element&quot;.

The localization of a ring by a multiplicative set is generally denoted formula_9 but other notations are commonly used in some special cases: if formula_10 consists of the powers of a single element, formula_4 is often denoted formula_12 if formula_13 is the complement of a prime ideal formula_14, then formula_4 is denoted formula_16

&quot;In the remainder of this article, only localizations by a multiplicative set are considered.&quot;

=== Integral domains ===
When the ring is an integral domain and does not contain , the ring formula_4 is a subring of the field of fractions of . As such, the localization of a domain is a domain.

More precisely, it is the subring of the field of fractions of , that consists of the fractions formula_18 such that formula_19 This is a subring since the sum formula_20 and the product formula_21 of two elements of formula_4 are in formula_23 This results from the defining property of a multiplicative set, which implies also that formula_24 In this case, is a subring of formula_23 It is shown below that this is no longer true in general, typically when contains zero divisors.

For example, the decimal fractions are the localization of the ring of integers by the multiplicative set of the powers of ten. In this case, formula_4 consists of the rational numbers that can be written as formula_27 where is an integer, and is a nonnegative integer.

=== General construction ===
In the general case, a problem arises with zero divisors. Let be a multiplicative set in a commutative ring . Suppose that formula_28 and formula_29 is a zero divisor with formula_30 Then formula_31 is the image in formula_4 of formula_33 and one has formula_34 Thus some nonzero elements of must be zero in formula_23 The construction that follows is designed for taking this into account.

Given and as above, one considers the equivalence relation on formula_36 that is defined by formula_37 if there exists a formula_38 such that formula_39

The localization formula_4 is defined as the set of the equivalence classes for this relation. The class of is denoted as formula_41 formula_42 or formula_43 So, one has formula_44 if and only if there is a formula_38 such that formula_39 The reason for the formula_47 is to handle cases such as the above formula_48 where formula_49 is nonzero even though the fractions should be regarded as equal.

The localization formula_4 is a commutative ring with addition 
:formula_51
multiplication
:formula_52
additive identity formula_53 and multiplicative identity formula_54

The function 
:formula_55
defines a ring homomorphism from formula_56 into formula_9 which is injective if and only if does not contain any zero divisors.

If formula_58 then formula_4 is the zero ring that has as unique element.

If is the set of all regular elements of (that is the elements that are not zero divisors), formula_4 is called the total ring of fractions of .

=== Universal property ===
The (above defined) ring homomorphism formula_61 satisfies a universal property that is described below. This characterizes formula_4 up to an isomorphism. So all properties of localizations can be deduced from the universal property, independently from the way they have been constructed. Moreover, many important properties of localization are easily deduced from the general properties of universal properties, while their direct proof may be more technical.

The universal property satisfied by formula_61 is the following: 
:If formula_64 is a ring homomorphism that maps every element of to a unit (invertible element) in , there exists a unique ring homomorphism formula_65 such that formula_66

Using category theory, this can be expressed by saying that localization is a functor that is left adjoint to a forgetful functor. More precisely, let formula_67 and formula_68 be the categories whose objects are pairs of a commutative ring and a submonoid of, respectively, the multiplicative monoid or the group of units of the ring. The morphisms of these categories are the ring homomorphisms that map the submonoid of the first object into the submonoid of the second one. Finally, let formula_69 be the forgetful functor that forgets that the elements of the second element of the pair are invertible.

Then the factorization formula_70 of the universal property defines a bijection
:formula_71

This may seem a rather tricky way of expressing the universal property, but it is useful for showing easily many properties, by using the fact that the composition of two left adjoint functors is a left adjoint functor.

=== Examples ===
*If formula_72 is the ring of integers, and formula_73 then formula_4 is the field formula_2 of the rational numbers.
*If is an integral domain, and formula_76 then formula_4 is the field of fractions of . The preceding example is a special case of this one.
*If is a commutative ring, and if is the subset of its elements that are not zero divisors, then formula_4 is the total ring of fractions of . In this case, is the largest multiplicative set such that the homomorphism formula_79 is injective. The preceding example is a special case of this one.
*If formula_80 is an element of a commutative ring and formula_81 then formula_4 can be identified (is canonically isomorphic to) formula_83 (The proof consists of showing that this ring satisfies the above universal property.) This sort of localization plays a fundamental role in the definition of an affine scheme.
*If formula_14 is a prime ideal of a commutative ring , the set complement formula_13 of formula_14 in is a multiplicative set (by the definition of a prime ideal). The ring formula_4 is a local ring that is generally denoted formula_88 and called &quot;the local ring of at&quot; formula_89 This sort of localization is fundamental in commutative algebra, because many properties of a commutative ring can be read on its local rings. Such a property is often called a local property. For example, a ring is regular if and only if all its local rings are regular.

=== Ring properties ===
Localization is a rich construction that has many useful properties. In this section, only the properties relative to rings and to a single localization are considered. Properties concerning ideals, modules, or several multiplicative sets are considered in other sections.

* formula_90 if and only if contains .
* The ring homomorphism formula_79 is injective if and only if does not contain any zero divisors.
* The ring homomorphism formula_79 is an epimorphism in the category of rings, that is not surjective in general.
* The ring formula_4 is a flat -module (see for details).
* If formula_13 is the complement of a prime ideal formula_14, then formula_96 denoted formula_88 is a local ring; that is, it has only one maximal ideal.

&quot;Properties to be moved in another section&quot;
*Localization commutes with formations of finite sums, products, intersections and radicals; e.g., if formula_98 denote the radical of an ideal &quot;I&quot; in &quot;R&quot;, then
::formula_99
:In particular, &quot;R&quot; is reduced if and only if its total ring of fractions is reduced.
*Let &quot;R&quot; be an integral domain with the field of fractions &quot;K&quot;. Then its localization formula_100 at a prime ideal formula_101 can be viewed as a subring of &quot;K&quot;. Moreover,
::formula_102
:where the first intersection is over all prime ideals and the second over the maximal ideals.
* There is a bijection between the set of prime ideals of &quot;S&quot;−1&quot;R&quot; and the set of prime ideals of &quot;R&quot; that do not intersect &quot;S&quot;. This bijection is induced by the given homomorphism &quot;R&quot; → &quot;S&quot; −1&quot;R&quot;.

=== Saturation of a multiplicative set ===
Let formula_103 be a multiplicative set. The &quot;saturation&quot; formula_104 of formula_105 is the set 
:formula_106
The multiplicative set is &quot;saturated&quot; if it equals its saturation, that is, if formula_107, or equivalently, if formula_108 implies that and are in .

If is not saturated, and formula_109 then formula_110 is a multiplicative inverse of the image of in formula_23 So, the images of the elements of formula_112 are all invertible in formula_9 and the universal property implies that formula_4 and formula_115 are canonically isomorphic, that is, there is a unique isomorphism between them that fixes the images of the elements of .

If and are two multiplicative sets, then formula_4 and formula_117 are isomorphic if and only if they have the same saturation, or, equivalently, if belongs to one of the multiplicative sets, then there exists formula_118 such that belongs to the other.

Saturated multiplicative sets are not widely used explicitly, since, for verifying that a set is saturated, one must know &quot;all&quot; units of the ring.

== Terminology explained by the context ==
The term &quot;localization&quot; originates in the general trend of modern mathematics to study geometrical and topological objects &quot;locally&quot;, that is in terms of their behavior near each point. Examples of this trend are the fundamental concepts of manifolds, germs and sheafs. In algebraic geometry, an affine algebraic set can be identified with a quotient ring of a polynomial ring in such a way that the points of the algebraic set correspond to the maximal ideals of the ring (this is Hilbert&#x27;s Nullstellensatz). This correspondence has been generalized for making the set of the prime ideals of a commutative ring a topological space equipped with the Zariski topology; this topological space is called the spectrum of the ring.

In this context, a &quot;localization&quot; by a multiplicative set may be viewed as the restriction of the spectrum of a ring to the subspace of the prime ideals (viewed as &quot;points&quot;) that do not intersect the multiplicative set.

Two classes of localizations are more commonly considered:
* The multiplicative set is the complement of a prime ideal formula_14 of a ring . In this case, one speaks of the &quot;localization at formula_14&quot;, or &quot;localization at a point&quot;. The resulting ring, denoted formula_121 is a local ring, and is the algebraic analog of a ring of germs.
* The multiplicative set consists of all powers of an element of a ring . The resulting ring is commonly denoted formula_122 and its spectrum is the Zariski open set of the prime ideals that do not contain . Thus the localization is the analog of the restriction of a topological space to a neighborhood of a point (every prime ideal has a neighborhood basis consisting of Zariski open sets of this form).

In number theory and algebraic topology, when working over the ring formula_3 of integers, one refers to a property relative to an integer as a property true &quot;at&quot; or &quot;away&quot; from , depending on the localization that is considered. &quot;Away from &quot; means that the property is considered after localization by the powers of , and, if is a prime number, &quot;at &quot; means that the property is considered after localization at the prime ideal formula_124. This terminology can be explained by the fact that, if is prime, the nonzero prime ideals of the localization of formula_3 are either the singleton set or its complement in the set of prime numbers.

== Localization and saturation of ideals ==
Let be a multiplicative set in a commutative ring , and formula_61 be the canonical ring homomorphism. Given an ideal in , let formula_127 the set of the fractions in formula_4 whose numerator is in . This is an ideal of formula_9 which is generated by , and called the &quot;localization&quot; of by .

The &quot;saturation&quot; of by is formula_130 it is an ideal of , which can also defined as the set of the elements formula_131 such that there exists formula_132 with formula_133

Many properties of ideals are either preserved by saturation and localization, or can be characterized by simpler properties of localization and saturation.
In what follows, is a multiplicative set in a ring , and and are ideals of ; the saturation of an ideal by a multiplicative set is denoted formula_134 or, when the multiplicative set is clear from the context, formula_135 
* formula_136
* formula_137&lt;br&gt;(this is not always true for strict inclusions)
* formula_138
* formula_139
* formula_140
* If formula_14 is a prime ideal such that formula_142 then formula_143 is a prime ideal and formula_144; if the intersection is nonempty, then formula_145 and formula_146

==Localization of a module ==
Let be a commutative ring, be a multiplicative set in , and be an -module. The localization of the module by , denoted , is an -module that is constructed exactly as the localization of , except that the numerators of the fractions belong to . That is, as a set, it consists of equivalence classes, denoted formula_147, of pairs , where formula_148 and formula_28 and two pairs and are equivalent if there is an element in such that
:formula_150
Addition and scalar multiplication are defined as for usual fractions (in the following formula, formula_151 formula_152 and formula_153):
:formula_154
:formula_155
Moreover, is also an -module with scalar multiplication
:formula_156

It is straightforward to check that these operations are well-defined, that is, they give the same result for different choices of representatives of fractions.

The localization of a module can be equivalently defined by using tensor products:
:formula_157
The proof of equivalence (up to a canonical isomorphism) can be done by showing that the two definitions satisfy the same universal property.

===Module properties===
If is a submodule of an -module , and is a multiplicative set in , one has formula_158 This implies that, if formula_159 is an injective module homomorphism, then 
:formula_160
is also an injective homomorphism.

Since the tensor product is a right exact functor, this implies that localization by maps exact sequences of -modules to exact sequences of formula_4-modules. In other words, localization is an exact functor, and formula_4 is a flat -module.

This flatness and the fact that localization solves a universal property make that localization preserves many properties of modules and rings, and is compatible with solutions of other universal properties. For example, the natural map
:formula_163
is an isomorphism. If formula_164 is a finitely presented module, the natural map
:formula_165
is also an isomorphism.

If a module &quot;M&quot; is a finitely generated over &quot;R&quot;, one has
:formula_166
where formula_167 denotes annihilator, that is the ideal of the elements of the ring that map to zero all elements of the module. In particular,
:formula_168 
that is, if formula_169 for some formula_170

==Localization at primes==
The definition of a prime ideal implies immediately that the complement formula_13 of a prime ideal formula_14 in a commutative ring is a multiplicative set. In this case, the localization formula_4 is commonly denoted formula_16 The ring formula_121 is a local ring, that is called &quot;the local ring of &quot; at formula_89 This means that formula_177 is the unique maximal ideal of the ring formula_16 Analogously one can define the localization of a module at a prime ideal formula_14 of . Again, the localization formula_180 is commonly denoted formula_181.

Such localizations are fundamental for commutative algebra and algebraic geometry for several reasons. One is that local rings are often easier to study than general commutative rings, in particular because of Nakayama lemma. However, the main reason is that many properties are true for a ring if and only if they are true for all its local rings. For example, a ring is regular if and only if all its local rings are regular local rings.

Properties of a ring that can be characterized on its local rings are called &quot;local properties&quot;, and are often the algebraic counterpart of geometric local properties of algebraic varieties, which are properties that can be studied by restriction to a small neighborhood of each point of the variety. (There is another concept of local property that refers to localization to Zariski open sets; see , below.)

Many local properties are a consequence of the fact that the module
:formula_182
is a faithfully flat module when the direct sum is taken over all prime ideals (or over all maximal ideals of ). See also Faithfully flat descent.

=== Examples of local properties ===
A property of an -module is a &quot;local property&quot; if the following conditions are equivalent:
* holds for .
* holds for all formula_183 where formula_101 is a prime ideal of .
* holds for all formula_185 where formula_186 is a maximal ideal of .

The following are local properties:
* is zero.
* is torsion-free (in the case where is a commutative domain).
* is a flat module.
* is an invertible module (in the case where is a commutative domain, and is a submodule of the field of fractions of ).
* formula_187 is injective (resp. surjective), where is another -module.

On the other hand, some properties are not local properties. For example, an infinite direct product of fields is not an integral domain nor a Noetherian ring, while all its local rings are fields, and therefore Noetherian integral domains.

== Non-commutative case ==
Localizing non-commutative rings is more difficult. While the localization exists for every set &quot;S&quot; of prospective units, it might take a different form to the one described above. One condition which ensures that the localization is well behaved is the Ore condition.

One case for non-commutative rings where localization has a clear interest is for rings of differential operators. It has the interpretation, for example, of adjoining a formal inverse &quot;D&quot;−1 for a differentiation operator &quot;D&quot;. This is done in many contexts in methods for differential equations. There is now a large mathematical theory about it, named microlocalization, connecting with numerous other branches. The &quot;micro-&quot; tag is to do with connections with Fourier theory, in particular.

== See also ==
* Local analysis
* Localization of a category
* Localization of a topological space

== References ==

*Borel, Armand. Linear Algebraic Groups (2nd ed.). New York: Springer-Verlag. .
* 
*Matsumura. Commutative Algebra. Benjamin-Cummings
* Serge Lang, &quot;Algebraic Number Theory,&quot; Springer, 2000. pages 3–4.
==External links==
* Localization from MathWorld.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q727659" start="3" end="22" title="commutative algebra" label="commutative algebra"/>
<link wikidata="Q180969" start="27" end="45" title="algebraic geometry" label="algebraic geometry"/>
<link wikidata="Q289093" start="47" end="59" title="Localization (commutative algebra)" label="localization"/>
<link wikidata="Q161172" start="129" end="133" title="ring (mathematics)" label="ring"/>
<link wikidata="Q18848" start="137" end="143" title="module (mathematics)" label="module"/>
<link wikidata="Q3080284" start="255" end="264" title="algebraic fraction" label="fractions"/>
<link wikidata="Q66055" start="289" end="300" title="denominator" label="denominator"/>
<link wikidata="Q628792" start="432" end="447" title="integral domain" label="integral domain"/>
<link wikidata="Q774579" start="478" end="496" title="field of fractions" label="field of fractions"/>
<link wikidata="Q1244890" start="563" end="578" title="rational number" label="rational number"/>
<link wikidata="Q12503" start="607" end="614" title="integer" label="integer"/>
<link wikidata="Q180969" start="672" end="690" title="algebraic geometry" label="algebraic geometry"/>
<link wikidata="Q595298" start="725" end="730" title="sheaf (mathematics)" label="sheaf"/>
<link wikidata="Q180969" start="796" end="814" title="algebraic geometry" label="algebraic geometry"/>
<link wikidata="Q11348" start="846" end="854" title="function (mathematics)" label="function"/>
<link wikidata="Q648995" start="890" end="907" title="algebraic variety" label="algebraic variety"/>
<link wikidata="Q214604" start="1334" end="1352" title="zero of a function" label="zeros of functions"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142704" start="1411" end="1421" title="local ring" label="local ring"/>
<link wikidata="Q858656" start="1476" end="1492" title="commutative ring" label="commutative ring"/>
<link wikidata="Q2917823" start="1498" end="1525" title="multiplicatively closed set" label="multiplicatively closed set"/>
<link wikidata="Q628792" start="1639" end="1654" title="integral domain" label="integral domain"/>
<link wikidata="Q774579" start="1716" end="1734" title="field of fractions" label="field of fractions"/>
<link wikidata="Q1244890" start="1768" end="1784" title="rational numbers" label="rational numbers"/>
<link wikidata="Q828111" start="1848" end="1860" title="zero divisor" label="zero divisor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2917823" start="1989" end="2016" title="multiplicatively closed set" label="multiplicatively closed set"/>
<link wikidata="Q4720939" start="2155" end="2161" title="closure (mathematics)" label="closed"/>
<link wikidata="Q242767" start="3388" end="3398" title="complement (set theory)" label="complement"/>
<link wikidata="Q863912" start="3404" end="3415" title="prime ideal" label="prime ideal"/>
<link wikidata="Q628792" start="3617" end="3632" title="integral domain" label="integral domain"/>
<link wikidata="Q774579" start="3695" end="3713" title="field of fractions" label="field of fractions"/>
<link wikidata="Q929536" start="3797" end="3804" title="subring" label="subring"/>
<link wikidata="Q828111" start="4239" end="4251" title="zero divisor" label="zero divisor"/>
<link wikidata="Q81365" start="4272" end="4288" title="decimal fraction" label="decimal fraction"/>
<link wikidata="Q828111" start="4598" end="4610" title="zero divisor" label="zero divisor"/>
<link wikidata="Q130998" start="4985" end="5005" title="equivalence relation" label="equivalence relation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1211071" start="5157" end="5174" title="equivalence class" label="equivalence class"/>
<link wikidata="Q2767837" start="5605" end="5622" title="additive identity" label="additive identity"/>
<link wikidata="Q185813" start="5638" end="5661" title="multiplicative identity" label="multiplicative identity"/>
<link wikidata="Q11348" start="5678" end="5686" title="function (mathematics)" label="function"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194212" start="5710" end="5727" title="ring homomorphism" label="ring homomorphism"/>
<link wikidata="Q182003" start="5768" end="5777" title="injective function" label="injective"/>
<link wikidata="Q1652969" start="5866" end="5875" title="zero ring" label="zero ring"/>
<link wikidata="Q828111" start="5926" end="5942" title="zero divisor" label="regular elements"/>
<link wikidata="Q5695923" start="6021" end="6044" title="total ring of fractions" label="total ring of fractions"/>
<link wikidata="Q1417809" start="6139" end="6157" title="universal property" label="universal property"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194212" start="6221" end="6232" title="ring isomorphism" label="isomorphism"/>
<link wikidata="Q118084" start="6677" end="6681" title="unit (ring theory)" label="unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q217413" start="6787" end="6802" title="category theory" label="category theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q864475" start="6859" end="6866" title="functor" label="functor"/>
<link wikidata="Q357858" start="6875" end="6887" title="left adjoint" label="left adjoint"/>
<link wikidata="Q2646117" start="6893" end="6910" title="forgetful functor" label="forgetful functor"/>
<link wikidata="Q191290" start="6994" end="6999" title="ordered pair" label="pairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q208237" start="7028" end="7037" title="submonoid" label="submonoid"/>
<link wikidata="Q208237" start="7075" end="7081" title="monoid" label="monoid"/>
<link wikidata="Q118084" start="7089" end="7103" title="group of units" label="group of units"/>
<link wikidata="Q1948412" start="7121" end="7129" title="morphism" label="morphism"/>
<link wikidata="Q12503" start="7751" end="7758" title="integer" label="integer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1244890" start="7821" end="7836" title="rational number" label="rational number"/>
<link wikidata="Q628792" start="7849" end="7864" title="integral domain" label="integral domain"/>
<link wikidata="Q774579" start="7903" end="7921" title="field of fractions" label="field of fractions"/>
<link wikidata="Q858656" start="7989" end="8005" title="commutative ring" label="commutative ring"/>
<link wikidata="Q828111" start="8057" end="8069" title="zero divisor" label="zero divisor"/>
<link wikidata="Q5695923" start="8094" end="8117" title="total ring of fractions" label="total ring of fractions"/>
<link wikidata="Q189112" start="8379" end="8401" title="canonical isomorphism" label="canonically isomorphic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154351" start="8579" end="8592" title="affine scheme" label="affine scheme"/>
<link wikidata="Q863912" start="8614" end="8625" title="prime ideal" label="prime ideal"/>
<link wikidata="Q242767" start="8654" end="8668" title="set complement" label="set complement"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142704" start="8783" end="8793" title="local ring" label="local ring"/>
<link wikidata="Q727659" start="8930" end="8949" title="commutative algebra" label="commutative algebra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1868414" start="9063" end="9077" title="local property" label="local property"/>
<link wikidata="Q2138875" start="9102" end="9109" title="regular ring" label="regular"/>
<link wikidata="Q44649" start="9374" end="9380" title="ideal (ring theory)" label="ideals"/>
<link wikidata="Q18848" start="9382" end="9389" title="module (mathematics)" label="modules"/>
<link wikidata="Q949972" start="9470" end="9484" title="if and only if" label="if and only if"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194212" start="9502" end="9519" title="ring homomorphism" label="ring homomorphism"/>
<link wikidata="Q828111" start="9580" end="9592" title="zero divisor" label="zero divisor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1347208" start="9636" end="9647" title="epimorphism" label="epimorphism"/>
<link wikidata="Q5051859" start="9655" end="9672" title="category of rings" label="category of rings"/>
<link wikidata="Q229102" start="9686" end="9696" title="surjective" label="surjective"/>
<link wikidata="Q1426191" start="9735" end="9747" title="flat module" label="flat -module"/>
<link wikidata="Q242767" start="9790" end="9800" title="complement (set theory)" label="complement"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142704" start="9870" end="9880" title="local ring" label="local ring"/>
<link wikidata="Q1203540" start="9907" end="9920" title="maximal ideal" label="maximal ideal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1199022" start="10101" end="10120" title="radical of an ideal" label="radical of an ideal"/>
<link wikidata="Q6423024" start="10204" end="10211" title="reduced ring" label="reduced"/>
<link wikidata="Q180907" start="10591" end="10600" title="bijection" label="bijection"/>
<link wikidata="Q216906" start="11230" end="11252" title="multiplicative inverse" label="multiplicative inverse"/>
<link wikidata="Q189112" start="11431" end="11453" title="canonical isomorphism" label="canonically isomorphic"/>
<link wikidata="Q118084" start="11944" end="11949" title="unit (ring theory)" label="units"/>
<link wikidata="Q8087" start="12104" end="12115" title="geometry" label="geometrical"/>
<link wikidata="Q42989" start="12120" end="12131" title="topology" label="topological"/>
<link wikidata="Q203920" start="12268" end="12276" title="manifold" label="manifold"/>
<link wikidata="Q2520842" start="12279" end="12284" title="germ (mathematics)" label="germs"/>
<link wikidata="Q595298" start="12289" end="12295" title="sheaf (mathematics)" label="sheafs"/>
<link wikidata="Q180969" start="12300" end="12318" title="algebraic geometry" label="algebraic geometry"/>
<link wikidata="Q3554813" start="12323" end="12343" title="affine algebraic set" label="affine algebraic set"/>
<link wikidata="Q619436" start="12369" end="12382" title="quotient ring" label="quotient ring"/>
<link wikidata="Q1455652" start="12388" end="12403" title="polynomial ring" label="polynomial ring"/>
<link wikidata="Q1203540" start="12473" end="12486" title="maximal ideal" label="maximal ideal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068976" start="12509" end="12539" title="Hilbert&amp;#x27;s Nullstellensatz" label="Hilbert&amp;#x27;s Nullstellensatz"/>
<link wikidata="Q863912" start="12609" end="12620" title="prime ideal" label="prime ideal"/>
<link wikidata="Q858656" start="12627" end="12643" title="commutative ring" label="commutative ring"/>
<link wikidata="Q179899" start="12646" end="12663" title="topological space" label="topological space"/>
<link wikidata="Q147978" start="12682" end="12698" title="Zariski topology" label="Zariski topology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154351" start="12737" end="12757" title="spectrum of a ring" label="spectrum of the ring"/>
<link wikidata="Q242767" start="13092" end="13102" title="complement (set theory)" label="complement"/>
<link wikidata="Q863912" start="13108" end="13119" title="prime ideal" label="prime ideal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142704" start="13300" end="13310" title="local ring" label="local ring"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13345" end="13358" title="germ (mathematics)#Ring of germs" label="ring of germs"/>
<link wikidata="Q3275652" start="13700" end="13718" title="neighborhood basis" label="neighborhood basis"/>
<link wikidata="Q12479" start="13770" end="13783" title="number theory" label="number theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q212803" start="13788" end="13806" title="algebraic topology" label="algebraic topology"/>
<link wikidata="Q12503" start="13848" end="13855" title="integer" label="integer"/>
<link wikidata="Q49008" start="14129" end="14141" title="prime number" label="prime number"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165112" start="14386" end="14399" title="singleton set" label="singleton set"/>
<link wikidata="Q44649" start="14604" end="14609" title="ideal (ring theory)" label="ideal"/>
<link wikidata="Q177646" start="15425" end="15442" title="strict subset" label="strict inclusions"/>
<link wikidata="Q863912" start="15507" end="15518" title="prime ideal" label="prime ideal"/>
<link wikidata="Q858656" start="15698" end="15714" title="commutative ring" label="commutative ring"/>
<link wikidata="Q2917823" start="15721" end="15739" title="multiplicative set" label="multiplicative set"/>
<link wikidata="Q18848" start="15756" end="15762" title="module (mathematics)" label="module"/>
<link wikidata="Q1211071" start="15967" end="15984" title="equivalence class" label="equivalence class"/>
<link wikidata="Q3406761" start="16598" end="16613" title="tensor product of modules" label="tensor products"/>
<link wikidata="Q189112" start="16662" end="16683" title="canonical isomorphism" label="canonical isomorphism"/>
<link wikidata="Q18848" start="16803" end="16812" title="submodule" label="submodule"/>
<link wikidata="Q182003" start="16922" end="16931" title="injective" label="injective"/>
<link wikidata="Q1942302" start="16932" end="16951" title="module homomorphism" label="module homomorphism"/>
<link wikidata="Q381725" start="17038" end="17057" title="right exact functor" label="right exact functor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1326955" start="17098" end="17112" title="exact sequence" label="exact sequence"/>
<link wikidata="Q381725" start="17202" end="17215" title="exact functor" label="exact functor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1426191" start="17236" end="17248" title="flat module" label="flat -module"/>
<link wikidata="Q1417809" start="17305" end="17323" title="universal property" label="universal property"/>
<link wikidata="Q1442189" start="17476" end="17487" title="natural transformation" label="natural map"/>
<link wikidata="Q1340572" start="17540" end="17565" title="finitely presented module" label="finitely presented module"/>
<link wikidata="Q1340572" start="17652" end="17670" title="finitely generated module" label="finitely generated"/>
<link wikidata="Q567083" start="17738" end="17749" title="annihilator (ring theory)" label="annihilator"/>
<link wikidata="Q863912" start="17964" end="17975" title="prime ideal" label="prime ideal"/>
<link wikidata="Q242767" start="18005" end="18015" title="set complement" label="complement"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142704" start="18200" end="18210" title="local ring" label="local ring"/>
<link wikidata="Q1203540" start="18314" end="18327" title="maximal ideal" label="maximal ideal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1399751" start="18720" end="18734" title="Nakayama lemma" label="Nakayama lemma"/>
<link wikidata="Q2138875" start="18882" end="18889" title="regular ring" label="regular"/>
<link wikidata="Q2138875" start="18929" end="18947" title="regular local ring" label="regular local ring"/>
<link wikidata="Q1868414" start="19111" end="19127" title="local property" label="local properties"/>
<link wikidata="Q648995" start="19131" end="19150" title="algebraic varieties" label="algebraic varieties"/>
<link wikidata="Q1426191" start="19457" end="19479" title="faithfully flat module" label="faithfully flat module"/>
<link wikidata="Q1203540" start="19544" end="19557" title="maximal ideal" label="maximal ideal"/>
<link wikidata="Q104841007" start="19574" end="19597" title="Faithfully flat descent" label="Faithfully flat descent"/>
<link wikidata="Q628792" start="19980" end="19998" title="commutative domain" label="commutative domain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1426191" start="20008" end="20019" title="flat module" label="flat module"/>
<link wikidata="Q16979425" start="20029" end="20046" title="invertible module" label="invertible module"/>
<link wikidata="Q774579" start="20117" end="20135" title="field of fractions" label="field of fractions"/>
<link wikidata="Q1778193" start="20302" end="20316" title="direct product" label="direct product"/>
<link wikidata="Q190109" start="20320" end="20326" title="field (mathematics)" label="fields"/>
<link wikidata="Q628792" start="20337" end="20352" title="integral domain" label="integral domain"/>
<link wikidata="Q582271" start="20359" end="20374" title="Noetherian ring" label="Noetherian ring"/>
<link wikidata="Q7049224" start="20496" end="20516" title="non-commutative ring" label="non-commutative ring"/>
<link wikidata="Q986499" start="20749" end="20762" title="Ore condition" label="Ore condition"/>
<link wikidata="Q11214" start="21057" end="21078" title="differential equation" label="differential equation"/>
<link wikidata="Q430450" start="21138" end="21155" title="microlocal analysis" label="microlocalization"/>
<link wikidata="Q876215" start="21256" end="21270" title="Fourier theory" label="Fourier theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q865899" start="21305" end="21319" title="Local analysis" label="Local analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q6664610" start="21322" end="21348" title="Localization of a category" label="Localization of a category"/>
<link wikidata="Q6664613" start="21351" end="21386" title="Localization of a topological space" label="Localization of a topological space"/>
<link wikidata="Q123474" start="21407" end="21420" title="Armand Borel" label="Borel, Armand"/>
<link wikidata="Q371948" start="21542" end="21552" title="Serge Lang" label="Serge Lang"/>
<link wikidata="Q719112" start="21657" end="21666" title="MathWorld" label="MathWorld"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="252218" wikidata="Q1188778" url="?curid=252218" title="SAM Coupé">
<text>The SAM Coupé (pronounced /sæm ku:peɪ/ from its original British English branding) is an 8-bit British home computer manufactured by &quot;Miles Gordon Technology&quot; (&quot;MGT&quot;), based in Swansea in the United Kingdom and released in December 1989.

It was based on and designed to have a compatibility mode with the ZX Spectrum 48K with influences from the Loki project and marketed as a logical upgrade from the Spectrum with increased memory, graphical and sound capabilities, native peripheral support (floppy disk, MIDI, joystick, light pen/light gun and a proprietary mouse).

The inclusion of support for higher graphical modes allowed for 80-column text presentation, providing a platform to support productivity and CP/M applications via additional software.

Being based on 8-bit technology at a time when 16-bit home computers were more prevalent, coupled with a lack of commercial software titles, led to it being a commercial failure.

When &quot;MGT&quot; went into receivership in June 1990 two further attempts were made to restart the computer and brand, firstly under &quot;SAM Computers Limited&quot; and then in November 1992 under &quot;West Coast Computers&quot;, a company spun from Format Publications which lasted until liquidation in 2005.

== Naming ==
The capitalised SAM is an acronym for &#x27;Some Amazing Micro&#x27; according to Alan Miles in an interview with ZAT magazine.

The ‘Coupé’ part has two sources: one being an ice cream sundae called the “Ice Cream Coupé” and the other because the machine resembles a fastback car in profile with the feet as the wheels.

== Hardware ==
The SAM Coupé&#x27;s hardware was designed by Bruce Gordon of Miles Gordon Technology. The computer included custom silicon to handle display, memory and IO functionality. This was originally prototyped using wire-wrapped 7400-series logic chips, before being produced as a VLSI VGT-200 gate array ASIC.

=== Processor and logic ===

The machine is based around a Z80B CPU clocked at 6 MHz and a 10,000-gate ASIC. The ASIC performs a similar role in the computer to the ULA in the ZX Spectrum. The Z80B CPU accesses selected parts of the large memory space in its 64 KB address space by slicing it into 16 KB banks and using I/O registers to select the memory pages mapped into each 16 KB bank.

=== Memory and storage ===

The basic SAM Coupé model has 256 KiB of RAM, internally upgradable to 512 KiB via a connector on the main board accessible via a trapdoor underneath, and externally up to an additional 4 MiB, added in 1 MiB packs via the Euroconnector on the back of the system.

The computer has a direct connection for a cassette recorder for data storage but two 3.5 inch floppy disk drives can be installed within the case as well or externally using an interface.

=== Graphics ===

The SAM Coupé was designed primarily for the UK market, and is designed around the PAL television standard, which refreshes at 50 frames per second. Unlike a standard PAL signal which is interleaved, the SAM is designed to emit two identically positioned fields at 50 FPS, giving something closer to a 312 lines progressive signal than the 625-lines interlaced broadcast television signals common in the UK at the time.

The display is surrounded by a large border area to provide a title-safe display zone for the CRT televisions of that era. The colour of this region can be changed in software by using the BORDER port to select a colour from the palette.

==== Display Modes ====
The SAM Coupé has four display modes:

* &quot;Mode 1&quot; — 256 × 192, non-linear framebuffer, 1 bit per pixel with separate colour attributes for each 8×8 block of pixels = 6.75 KB (arranged to match the display of the ZX Spectrum for backwards compatibility)
* &quot;Mode 2&quot; — 256 × 192, linear framebuffer, 1 bit per pixel with separate colour attributes for each 8-wide block of pixels = 12 KB
* &quot;Mode 3&quot; — 512 × 192, linear framebuffer, 2 bits per pixel (4 colours) = 24 KB
* &quot;Mode 4&quot; — 256 × 192, linear framebuffer, 4 bits per pixel (16 colours) = 24 KB
The &#x27;attribute&#x27; modes borrow their design from the ZX Spectrum, where a bitmap is used to select between a paper and ink colour from two groups of eight colours. The group to use is selected by a &#x27;brightness&#x27; flag. The colour block can also be set to &#x27;flash&#x27; - that is, alternate between the two colours used for paper and ink.

==== Hardware palette ====
All modes use palette-based colour look-up tables, selecting from a palette of 128 colours. The palette values consist of 2 bits for each of the red, green and blue components as well as an extra bit which increases the intensity of all three components by a half-step (a &#x27;brightness&#x27; bit).

The ASIC can be configured to generate interrupts when a line on the display is starting to be emitted, allowing video effects to be synchronised with specific display lines with little effort. By default, it will generate an interrupt for every frame. Typically this interrupt is used to double buffer the frame, read the keyboard/mouse state, and output music.

The interrupt state can also be polled directly from the ASIC&#x27;s status register.

The Motorola MC1377P RGB to PAL/NTSC video encoder creates a composite video signal from the machine&#x27;s RGB- and Sync-signals (output by the ASIC) for the RF modulator.

The non-standard SCART display connector includes both composite and RGB output, as well as signals to drive a 16-colour TTL monitor.

Access to internal RAM was shared between the display and the CPU, with CPU accesses incurring a speed penalty (&quot;memory contention&quot;) as it was forced to wait for isochronous ASIC memory-accesses to complete. As a result, the SAM Coupé&#x27;s CPU effectively ran only around 14% faster than the ZX Spectrum CPU, yet was required to do much more work in SAM&#x27;s high-resolution modes to produce a similar movement on the display. A Mode 3 or Mode 4 screen uses four times as much RAM as a ZX Spectrum Mode 1 display, so four times the work had to be done in the same time when updating it.

A small compensation was the straightforward arrangement of colour pixels in this memory, instead of the ZX Spectrum&#x27;s more limited display and attributes memory. Low-level graphics software operations could be much simpler than their Spectrum equivalents and therefore somewhat faster to execute.

The penalty of memory contention delay applied to all memory accesses to RAM, and not just to memory associated with the video circuitry (as in the case of the ZX Spectrum). Hardware sprites and scrolling would have greatly improved the performance of games, unfortunately there was insufficient wafer space on the VLSI ASIC to include such circuitry.

While the main 256 × 192 area of the screen was being drawn, the processor could only access memory in 1 out of every 8 t-states. During the border area this was 1 out of every 4 t-states, which had no effect on the many instructions whose timings were a multiple of 4. In modes 3 and 4 the display could be disabled completely, eliminating these memory contention delays for a full 6 MHz running speed. Code running in ROM or external RAM was unaffected by contention, though any RAM accesses they performed to shared internal RAM would still be affected.

=== Character set ===
The character set includes &quot;block graphics&quot; and international characters. Font size can be altered to make text display in 32, 64, or 85 columns, and double height characters are also possible. Users can freely define their own characters by creating &quot;User Defined Graphics (UDGs).&quot; A large number of character codes (144 to 255) are available for this purpose. Block graphics (code 128 to 143) can be turned off in order free more characters for &quot;UDGs&quot;.

When in BASIC, the cursor is composed of the Blocks off characters (128/129) for lower and upper case respectively regardless of current Blocks setting, so overwriting these positions will also change the cursor. If this is undesirable, then systems variable (SVAR) 1 can be set to a 2-character value for the new lower and upper case cursor characters to be used.

The Utility Tapes and SAMDOS disk operating system media included an international character font loader to allow additional characters to be loaded into the block graphics region starting at 128 (0x80). This meant the cursor characters were overwritten so the accompanying BASIC loader set the cursor to * and + for lower and upper case respectively.

The following table show the predefined character set arrangement:


=== Audio ===

Six channels of 8-octave stereo sound are provided by a Philips SAA1099 sound and noise generator chip. The machine allows for the playback of sound samples under software control as well as supporting four-channel Amiga Tracker modules at 3-bit sample resolution of 10.4KHz and 4-bit at 15.625 Khz. 

To provide backwards compatibility with the ZX Spectrum, the SAM also provides a single-bit &#x27;beeper&#x27; channel which can be used to emit simple tones by toggling the bit on and off as per the original Spectrum.

=== Firmware and DOS ===
The machine shipped with 32 KB of ROM containing code to boot the machine and a BASIC interpreter (SAM BASIC) written by Andrew Wright and heavily influenced by his earlier Beta BASIC for the ZX Spectrum. The ROMs contained only the bootstrap code and the DOS was instead loaded from disk using the codice_1 command, or the key. The majority of disks shipped with SAMDOS, the system&#x27;s first DOS, on them so that they could be directly booted. An improved replacement, MasterDOS, was also developed offering faster disk access, more files and support for the real-time clock accessory to provide file timestamps amongst many other improvements.

The BASIC was very advanced and included code for sprite drawing and basic vector shapes such as lines and circles. The screen co-ordinate system for these was variable and could be arbitrarily scaled and centred. A provision for &quot;recording&quot; sequences of graphics commands so that they could later be repeated without the speed penalty of a BASIC interpreter in between was provided.

The machine is capable of running CP/M 2.2 using the Pro-Dos software with support for both 720 Kilobyte format disks and IDE drives

=== Disk drives ===
The SAM originally used Citizen 3.5 inch slimline drives which slotted in below the keyboard to provide front-facing slots. Like IDE hard disks, these enclosures contained not just the drives but also the drive controllers, a WD1772-02, with the effect that the SAM could use both drives simultaneously.

Due to a flaw in the Coupé&#x27;s design, resetting the machine while a disk was left in a drive would be liable to cause data corruption on that disk, as while the RESET line is held logic low the ASIC (that generates the 8 Mhz clock) is halted thus no clock signal is sent to the drive&#x27;s controllers.

The double density disks used a format of 2 sides, 80 tracks per side and 10 sectors per track, with 512 bytes per sector. This gave a total capacity of 800 KB, though the standard directory occupied 20 KB leaving 780 KB free for user files. Files were stored in the same structure as MGT&#x27;s original +D interface, but with additional codes used for SAM Coupé file types. The disk encoding (NRZ), encoding strategy (linear angular velocity), and track and sector header formats were compatible with those used on the IBM PC and Atari ST, and programs were available to read FAT formatted disks.

=== Expansion ports ===
A large array of expansion ports were provided, including:
* Two internal drive bays.
* Non-standard SCART connector offering composite video and digital and linear RGB as well as power input.
* 64-pin Euroconnector for general purpose hardware expansions.
* Mouse socket (proprietary format, although a converter for Atari ST style mice was later available).
* Light pen / Light gun and Stereo sound output via 5-pin DIN connector.
* MIDI IN/OUT ports (and THROUGH, via a software switch).
* Network using the MIDI port (up to 16 machines could be interconnected).
* Atari-style 9-pin joystick port (dual capability with a splitter cable although due to a flaw the two joysticks would interfere with each other).
* 3.5mm mono Cassette jack (dual use for loading and saving).

Up to four devices could be connected to the Coupé&#x27;s Euroconnector port, through the use of the SAMBUS, which also provided a built-in clock. When using more power-hungry peripherals, the SAMBUS required an additional power supply.

=== Power ===

The SAM&#x27;s Power Supply was a modified Amstrad CPC MP1/MP2 modulator unit, with the RF modulator built in and connected via a joint power/TV socket to the computer. This made signal interference from the AC/DC converter common and it was a popular but entirely unofficial modification to remove the modulator and keep it as a separate unit.

== ZX Spectrum compatibility ==
Emulation of the ZX Spectrum was limited to the 48K and was achieved by either using a supplied utility and a skeleton ROM image (containing no original code) or by loading a complete copy of the ZX Spectrum ROM (obtained from a ZX Spectrum). In order to match the processing speed of the ZX Spectrum (3.5 MHz), the SAM Coupé introduces extra wait states in display Mode 1 (the ZX Spectrum-compatible graphics mode) to slow down the CPU to roughly match the rate of that system.

The 128K model&#x27;s memory map was incompatible with the Coupé&#x27;s memory model and the machine featured an entirely different sound generator. It was possible to convert some games and demos by directly hacking the 128K code or by using a software patcher with the 1 megabyte RAM expansion to provide the address space.

Because the Coupé did not run at exactly the same speed as the Spectrum even in emulation mode, many anti-piracy tape loaders would not work on the Coupé hardware. This led to the development by MGT of a special hardware interface called the &quot;Messenger&quot; which could capture the state of a connected ZX Spectrum to SAM Coupé disk for playback later without the Spectrum connected. The Messenger plugged into the Coupé&#x27;s network port, and the Spectrum&#x27;s expansion slot. Due to unsuitable onboard break (NMI) buttons (needed to activate the Messenger software), a de-bounced break-button card was also provided, which plugged into the Coupé&#x27;s expansion slot.

== See also ==

* List of SAM Coupé games

== References ==

==External links==
*World of SAM
*Quazar
*Simcoupe emulator
*SAM Coupé Pro-DOS [CP/M 2.2] Resource Pages
*Spectrum Advanced Machine
*SAM Coupé for MiSTer
*SAM Coupé for MIST Board</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1188778" start="4" end="13" title="SAM Coupé" label="SAM Coupé"/>
<link wikidata="Q7979" start="57" end="72" title="British English" label="British English"/>
<link wikidata="Q270159" start="89" end="94" title="8-bit" label="8-bit"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="95" end="102" title="United Kingdom" label="British"/>
<link wikidata="Q473708" start="103" end="116" title="home computer" label="home computer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2442127" start="139" end="162" title="Miles Gordon Technology" label="Miles Gordon Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q23051" start="197" end="204" title="Swansea" label="Swansea"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="212" end="226" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q23882" start="326" end="337" title="ZX Spectrum" label="ZX Spectrum"/>
<link wikidata="Q6668674" start="367" end="371" title="Loki (computer)" label="Loki"/>
<link wikidata="Q920419" start="406" end="413" title="upgrade" label="upgrade"/>
<link wikidata="Q5293" start="516" end="527" title="floppy disk" label="floppy disk"/>
<link wikidata="Q80535" start="529" end="533" title="MIDI" label="MIDI"/>
<link wikidata="Q178805" start="535" end="543" title="joystick" label="joystick"/>
<link wikidata="Q20139" start="545" end="554" title="light pen" label="light pen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055974" start="555" end="564" title="light gun" label="light gun"/>
<link wikidata="Q7987" start="583" end="588" title="Computer mouse" label="mouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q5073843" start="656" end="665" title="Characters per line" label="80-column"/>
<link wikidata="Q7247856" start="717" end="729" title="Productivity software" label="productivity"/>
<link wikidata="Q219528" start="734" end="738" title="CP/M" label="CP/M"/>
<link wikidata="Q270159" start="793" end="798" title="8-bit computing" label="8-bit"/>
<link wikidata="Q194368" start="825" end="831" title="16-bit" label="16-bit"/>
<link wikidata="Q5470015" start="1215" end="1234" title="Format Publications" label="Format Publications"/>
<link wikidata="Q2442127" start="1371" end="1381" title="Alan Miles" label="Alan Miles"/>
<link wikidata="Q859553" start="1465" end="1481" title="Sundae" label="ice cream sundae"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145550" start="1557" end="1569" title="Fastback" label="fastback car"/>
<link wikidata="Q2442127" start="1688" end="1711" title="Miles Gordon Technology" label="Miles Gordon Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q605181" start="1835" end="1847" title="wire wrap" label="wire-wrapped"/>
<link wikidata="Q265899" start="1848" end="1859" title="7400-series integrated circuits" label="7400-series"/>
<link wikidata="Q5362061" start="1900" end="1904" title="VLSI Technology" label="VLSI"/>
<link wikidata="Q217302" start="1924" end="1928" title="Application-specific integrated circuit" label="ASIC"/>
<link wikidata="Q203315" start="1990" end="1994" title="Zilog Z80" label="Z80B"/>
<link wikidata="Q5300" start="1995" end="1998" title="Central processing unit" label="CPU"/>
<link wikidata="Q39369" start="2012" end="2015" title="Megahertz" label="MHz"/>
<link wikidata="Q217302" start="2034" end="2038" title="Application-specific integrated circuit" label="ASIC"/>
<link wikidata="Q114901" start="2096" end="2099" title="Uncommitted Logic Array" label="ULA"/>
<link wikidata="Q8799" start="2384" end="2387" title="kibibyte" label="KiB"/>
<link wikidata="Q5295" start="2391" end="2394" title="Random-access memory" label="RAM"/>
<link wikidata="Q8799" start="2538" end="2541" title="mebibyte" label="MiB"/>
<link wikidata="Q831468" start="2572" end="2585" title="SCART" label="Euroconnector"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2709" end="2720" title="Floppy disk#3.5-inch floppy disk" label="floppy disk"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="2867" end="2869" title="United Kingdom" label="UK"/>
<link wikidata="Q105973" start="2905" end="2908" title="PAL" label="PAL"/>
<link wikidata="Q685264" start="3134" end="3145" title="Progressive scan" label="progressive"/>
<link wikidata="Q110498932" start="3162" end="3171" title="625 lines" label="625-lines"/>
<link wikidata="Q184915" start="3172" end="3182" title="Interlaced video" label="interlaced"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163900" start="3590" end="3601" title="framebuffer" label="framebuffer"/>
<link wikidata="Q8805" start="3605" end="3608" title="bit" label="bit"/>
<link wikidata="Q355198" start="3613" end="3618" title="pixel" label="pixel"/>
<link wikidata="Q23882" start="4155" end="4166" title="ZX Spectrum" label="ZX Spectrum"/>
<link wikidata="Q2357944" start="4508" end="4528" title="colour look-up table" label="colour look-up table"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4548" end="4570" title="List of 8-bit computer hardware graphics#SAM Coupé" label="palette of 128 colours"/>
<link wikidata="Q217302" start="4786" end="4790" title="Application-specific integrated circuit" label="ASIC"/>
<link wikidata="Q259011" start="5237" end="5245" title="Motorola" label="Motorola"/>
<link wikidata="Q166194" start="5254" end="5257" title="RGB color model" label="RGB"/>
<link wikidata="Q105973" start="5261" end="5264" title="PAL" label="PAL"/>
<link wikidata="Q185796" start="5265" end="5269" title="NTSC" label="NTSC"/>
<link wikidata="Q25098614" start="5270" end="5283" title="video encoder" label="video encoder"/>
<link wikidata="Q185644" start="5294" end="5309" title="composite video" label="composite video"/>
<link wikidata="Q185644" start="5350" end="5354" title="Composite video" label="Sync"/>
<link wikidata="Q1563565" start="5392" end="5404" title="RF modulator" label="RF modulator"/>
<link wikidata="Q831468" start="5424" end="5429" title="SCART" label="SCART"/>
<link wikidata="Q173451" start="5528" end="5531" title="Transistor–transistor logic" label="TTL"/>
<link wikidata="Q217302" start="5726" end="5730" title="ASIC" label="ASIC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1333015" start="6631" end="6637" title="sprite (computer graphics)" label="sprite"/>
<link wikidata="Q181319" start="6643" end="6652" title="scrolling" label="scrolling"/>
<link wikidata="Q267131" start="6744" end="6749" title="wafer (electronics)" label="wafer"/>
<link wikidata="Q876049" start="6763" end="6767" title="VLSI" label="VLSI"/>
<link wikidata="Q2937822" start="7408" end="7434" title="Semigraphics" label="&amp;quot;block graphics&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q184759" start="7439" end="7463" title="Character encoding" label="international characters"/>
<link wikidata="Q386025" start="8688" end="8694" title="octave" label="octave"/>
<link wikidata="Q34678" start="8695" end="8707" title="stereophonic sound" label="stereo sound"/>
<link wikidata="Q1782951" start="8726" end="8741" title="Philips SAA1099" label="Philips SAA1099"/>
<link wikidata="Q100047" start="8885" end="8890" title="Amiga" label="Amiga"/>
<link wikidata="Q771510" start="8891" end="8898" title="Module file" label="Tracker"/>
<link wikidata="Q23882" start="9016" end="9027" title="ZX Spectrum" label="ZX Spectrum"/>
<link wikidata="Q160710" start="9251" end="9254" title="Read-only memory" label="ROM"/>
<link wikidata="Q42979" start="9297" end="9302" title="BASIC" label="BASIC"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9316" end="9325" title="SAM BASIC" label="SAM BASIC"/>
<link wikidata="Q3507900" start="9390" end="9400" title="Beta BASIC" label="Beta BASIC"/>
<link wikidata="Q600659" start="9473" end="9476" title="disk operating system" label="DOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q862594" start="9780" end="9795" title="real-time clock" label="real-time clock"/>
<link wikidata="Q1333015" start="9917" end="9923" title="Sprite (computer graphics)" label="sprite"/>
<link wikidata="Q170130" start="9942" end="9948" title="Vector graphics" label="vector"/>
<link wikidata="Q219528" start="10296" end="10300" title="CP/M" label="CP/M"/>
<link wikidata="Q79726" start="10358" end="10366" title="Kilobyte" label="Kilobyte"/>
<link wikidata="Q230360" start="10384" end="10387" title="Integrated drive electronics" label="IDE"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368019" start="10440" end="10447" title="Citizen Watch Co." label="Citizen"/>
<link wikidata="Q230360" start="10545" end="10548" title="AT Attachment" label="IDE"/>
<link wikidata="Q7987782" start="10642" end="10651" title="WD1771" label="WD1772-02"/>
<link wikidata="Q3326322" start="10843" end="10858" title="data corruption" label="data corruption"/>
<link wikidata="Q1251401" start="11034" end="11048" title="double density" label="double density"/>
<link wikidata="Q1984473" start="11335" end="11337" title="+D" label="+D"/>
<link wikidata="Q202712" start="11551" end="11557" title="IBM Personal Computer" label="IBM PC"/>
<link wikidata="Q627302" start="11562" end="11570" title="Atari ST" label="Atari ST"/>
<link wikidata="Q190167" start="11608" end="11611" title="File Allocation Table" label="FAT"/>
<link wikidata="Q3715386" start="11728" end="11737" title="drive bay" label="drive bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q831468" start="11755" end="11760" title="SCART" label="SCART"/>
<link wikidata="Q7987" start="11913" end="11918" title="Computer mouse" label="Mouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q20139" start="12016" end="12025" title="Light pen" label="Light pen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055974" start="12028" end="12037" title="Light gun" label="Light gun"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133767" start="12072" end="12085" title="DIN connector" label="DIN connector"/>
<link wikidata="Q80535" start="12089" end="12093" title="MIDI" label="MIDI"/>
<link wikidata="Q1301371" start="12147" end="12154" title="Computer network" label="Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q207922" start="12222" end="12227" title="Atari" label="Atari"/>
<link wikidata="Q178805" start="12240" end="12248" title="joystick" label="joystick"/>
<link wikidata="Q149757" start="12381" end="12389" title="Compact audio cassette" label="Cassette"/>
<link wikidata="Q478829" start="12727" end="12738" title="Amstrad CPC" label="Amstrad CPC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1474513" start="12870" end="12882" title="Electromagnetic interference" label="interference"/>
<link wikidata="Q202871" start="13062" end="13071" title="Emulator" label="Emulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q160710" start="13270" end="13273" title="Read-only memory" label="ROM"/>
<link wikidata="Q23882" start="13546" end="13550" title="ZX Spectrum 128" label="128K"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195806" start="13579" end="13591" title="computer compatibility" label="incompatible"/>
<link wikidata="Q1487" start="13751" end="13758" title="hack (technology slang)" label="hacking"/>
<link wikidata="Q208218" start="13796" end="13803" title="Patch (computing)" label="patcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q79735" start="13815" end="13823" title="megabyte" label="megabyte"/>
<link wikidata="Q178048" start="14090" end="14099" title="computer bus" label="interface"/>
<link wikidata="Q1585234" start="14390" end="14393" title="Non-maskable interrupt" label="NMI"/>
<link wikidata="Q5320" start="14450" end="14460" title="Debounced pushbutton" label="de-bounced"/>
<link wikidata="Q22662566" start="14569" end="14592" title="List of SAM Coupé games" label="List of SAM Coupé games"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="252219" wikidata="Q6839339" url="?curid=252219" title="Microchannel">
<text>Microchannel can refer to
* Basic structure used in microtechnology, see Microchannel (microtechnology).
* Micro Channel architecture in computing</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6839341" start="73" end="103" title="Microchannel (microtechnology)" label="Microchannel (microtechnology)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1455915" start="107" end="133" title="Micro Channel architecture" label="Micro Channel architecture"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="252223" wikidata="Q908458" url="?curid=252223" title="The Runaways">
<text>The Runaways were an American rock band who recorded and performed from 1975 to 1979. Formed in 1975 in Los Angeles, the band released four studio albums and one live album during its run. Among their best-known songs are &quot;Cherry Bomb&quot;, &quot;Hollywood&quot;, &quot;Queens of Noise&quot; and a cover version of the Velvet Underground&#x27;s &quot;Rock &amp; Roll&quot;. Never a major success in the United States, the Runaways became a sensation overseas, especially in Japan, thanks to the single &quot;Cherry Bomb&quot;.

==History==
===Early years===
In early 1975, the rock producer Kim Fowley had an idea for assembling an all-female band at a time when, according to guitarist Joan Jett, &quot;There were no young girls at all playing guitar or any sort of instruments.&quot;

Fowley met lyricist Kari Krome at a party held for Alice Cooper, put her on salary, and had her begin looking for female performers. Krome met Joan Jett and brought her to Fowley. Jett successfully auditioned for Fowley by playing ukulele to a Sweet album, and picked up guitar as her instrument. Soon afterward, in the parking lot of the Rainbow Bar and Grill, Fowley met Sandy West, who agreed to play drums. Fowley had Jett rehearse with West at the latter&#x27;s home in Huntington Beach, and auditioned the pair on the telephone to music journalist Ritchie Yorke. He then turned to two radio stations to advertise for further auditions, which brought lead vocalist/bassist Micki Steele (later of The Bangles).

The Runaways were formed in August 1975. Fowley touted the new group the Runaways as &quot;an all-girl answer to Grand Funk,&quot; and the band signed to Kim Fowley Productions for management in September 1975. The lineup of Jett, West, and Steele made its live debut playing the Whisky a Go Go September 28–29, opening for Fowley&#x27;s previous conceptual band the Hollywood Stars (then billed as &quot;The Stars&quot;).

But on October 30, Steele left due to creative differences. in November, bassist Peggy Foster, as well as Lita Ford had joined to the group as lead guitarist, allowing Jett to focus on rhythm guitar. Trio were previously members of Dangerous.

Fowley and Jett discovered Cherie Currie at the teen nightclub The Sugar Shack and brought her in as lead vocalist for the group.

In two weeks, Foster left the group too and was replaced by Jackie Fox, whom Fowley&#x27;s colleague Rodney Bingenheimer found at the parking lot of the West Hollywood nightclub the Starwood.

=== Fame ===

Phonogram/Mercury Records&#x27; West Coast director of A&amp;R, Denny Rosencrantz, agreed to sign the Runaways on December 12, 1975. The band recorded their debut album &quot;The Runaways&quot; in January 1976 and released in March through Mercury. An album to an initial position of #188 on the &quot;Cash Box&quot; top albums chart, favorable reviews, and numerous radio and album adds, as well as sales of 70,000 units.

The band toured the U.S. in support of headlining groups such as Cheap Trick, Van Halen, Talking Heads, and Tom Petty and the Heartbreakers. For their stage performance, the documentary &quot;&quot; (directed by former Runaway bassist Vicki Blue) revealed each girl patterned herself after their musical idol: Currie on David Bowie, Jett on Suzi Quatro, Ford on a cross between Jeff Beck and Ritchie Blackmore, West on Roger Taylor, and Fox on Gene Simmons.

The Runaways were the subject of a writeup in &quot;People&quot; magazine in September 1976. A week later, Fowley severed his ties with the band and forfeited his rights, titles, claims, and merchandising ownership to Mercury Records. Mercury refused to accept Fowley&#x27;s stakehold in the band and turned it back to him the following week. Fowley and the band reconciled in November and returned to the studio to record their followup album &quot;Queens of Noise&quot;. The album was released on January 7, 1977.

The Runaways performed a world tour in support of &quot;Queens of Noise.&quot; The band quickly became lumped in with the growing punk rock movement. The band (already fixtures on the West Coast punk scene) formed alliances with mostly male punk bands such as the Ramones and the Dead Boys (via New York City&#x27;s CBGB) as well as the British punk scene by hanging out with the likes of the Damned, Generation X and the Sex Pistols.

In the summer of 1977, booking agent David Libert secured dates in Japan, where they played a string of sold-out shows. They were unprepared for the onslaught of fans that greeted them at the airport. Jett later described the mass hysteria as &quot;just like Beatlemania&quot;. While in Japan, the Runaways had a TV special, made numerous television appearances, and released the album &quot;Live in Japan&quot;, which went gold. Jackie Fox left mid-tour and was replaced by bassist Vicki Blue when the group returned to America.

Cherie Currie left the band on August 9, 1977. Fowley recorded the Runaways&#x27; third LP, &quot;Waitin&#x27; for the Night,&quot; at Larrabee Studios the same month, with the band as a four-piece and with Joan Jett on vocals. The album was released on October 17, 1977, and was the final album that Fowley would record with the group.

=== Dissolution ===
Due to disagreements over money and the management of the band, the Runaways and Kim Fowley parted ways in 1977. The group quickly hired Toby Mamis, who worked for Blondie and Suzi Quatro. When the group split from Fowley, they also parted with their record label Mercury/PolyGram, to which their deal was tied. In the &quot;Edgeplay&quot; documentary, members of the group (especially Fox and Currie) as well as the parents of Currie and West, have accused Fowley and others assigned to look after the band of broken promises as to schooling and other care, using divide and conquer tactics to keep control of the band, along with the verbal taunting of band members. The band reportedly spent much time enjoying the excesses of the rock &#x27;n&#x27; roll lifestyle during this time. They partnered with Thin Lizzy producer John Alcock, after Jett&#x27;s future partner Kenny Laguna turned down the job, to record their last album &quot;And Now... The Runaways&quot;.

Blue left the group due to medical problems and was briefly replaced by Laurie McAllister in November 1978. McAllister was referred to the band by her neighbor, Duane Hitchings, who played keyboards on &quot;And Now... The Runaways&quot;. Before joining the Runaways, McAllister played with Baby Roulette and the Rave Ons, who had one song released on a Kim Fowley compilation LP called &quot;Vampires From Outer Space&quot;. McAllister appeared onstage with the Runaways at their final shows in California in December 1978 and quit in January 1979.

Disagreement among band members included the musical style; Jett wanted the band to make a musical change, shifting towards punk rock/glam rock while Ford and West wanted to continue playing hard rock/heavy metal music. Neither would accept the other&#x27;s point of view. The band played their last concert on New Year&#x27;s Eve 1978 at the Cow Palace and officially broke up in April 1979.

=== Potential reunion ===
In 2010, Jett and Currie reunited to re-record the song &quot;Cherry Bomb&quot; for the video game &quot;Guitar Hero: Warriors of Rock&quot;.

In a 2015 interview with WHMH-FM, Ford said that she decided against a possible reunion in the early 1990s because &quot;Nirvana was just kicking in, and it was really bad timing; it wouldn&#x27;t have worked. People would have just turned their nose up at it.&quot;

In December 2018, Ford said that a Runaways reunion would never happen and blamed Jett&#x27;s manager Kenny Laguna as the reason, saying, &quot;Joan Jett is very much in &#x27;Joan Jett land,&#x27; I guess you could say. Will she ever come out of Joan Jett land? I don&#x27;t think so. I think her manager controls that, and it&#x27;s really up to him and her. It seems to me like Joan Jett&#x27;s manager just runs her life in every way, shape, or form. He&#x27;s very controlling and he has a real problem with me. He has a real issue with me. He sees me as a threat, which is ridiculous because she&#x27;s like my sister, and I love Joan. It&#x27;s ridiculous, it&#x27;s uncalled for, and it&#x27;s caused a little bit of rivalry between her and I, which is totally uncalled for. It&#x27;s his fault. The hard part is just trying to communicate with Joan without her manager involved. We had dinner a couple of years ago, what was supposed to be a girl&#x27;s night out, and she brought her manager with her. So it&#x27;s like, dude, answer the question. I&#x27;m trying to ask you a question. Are you interested in putting The Runaways back together? She never answered the question.&quot;

On May 12, 2021, Currie was asked about a reunion, to which she responded, &quot;I&#x27;ve played with all the girls individually; I&#x27;ve played with all of them — with Lita, with Joan, and, of course, with Sandy; I never did a show without her before she passed away. So I&#x27;m the only one that&#x27;s actually played with all the members. Lita and Joan have a little bit of an issue, and that just seems to be the problem. Lita doesn&#x27;t like Kenny. I wish they would get over it, honestly, but I don&#x27;t think so. Kenny was my manager during the early stages of making &quot;Blvds Of Splendor&quot;. We were very good friends for 20 years. But then, unfortunately, with the record, with them holding up &quot;Blvds Of Splendor&quot; for 10 years, that kind of eroded my friendship with him a bit.&quot;

==After the breakup==
===Joan Jett===

Jett went on to work with producer Kenny Laguna and after being rejected by 23 record labels, formed their own label, Blackheart Records, in 1980. In doing so, Jett became one of the first female recording artists to found her own record label. The label continues to release albums by the Blackhearts and other bands. Jett went on to have massive success with a cover of the Arrows&#x27; song &quot;I Love Rock &#x27;n&#x27; Roll&quot;, as well as &quot;Crimson and Clover&quot;, &quot;Bad Reputation&quot;, and &quot;I Hate Myself for Loving You&quot;. She also co-starred in the 1987 film &quot;Light of Day&quot; with Michael J. Fox, and appeared in the 2000 Broadway revival of &quot;The Rocky Horror Show&quot; as Columbia. Jett is on &quot;Rolling Stone&quot; magazine&#x27;s list of &quot;The 100 Greatest Guitarists of All Time&quot;. In 2015, she and her band the Blackhearts were inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame.

===Sandy West===

West continued her association with John Alcock once the group disbanded. She formed the Sandy West Band and toured California throughout the 1980s and 1990s. She also did session work with John Entwistle of the Who and became a drum teacher.

West died from lung cancer in October 2006, having been diagnosed the previous year. A memorial tribute concert was later held in Los Angeles, featuring the Sandy West Band, Cherie Currie, the Bangles, the Donnas, and Carmine and Vinny Appice, among several others.

===Micki Steele===

Steele (as Michael Steele) joined the band the Bangles and went on to success with songs such as &quot;Manic Monday&quot;, &quot;Walk Like an Egyptian&quot; and &quot;Eternal Flame&quot;.

===Cherie Currie===

Upon leaving the Runaways, Currie released a 1978 solo album titled &quot;Beauty&#x27;s Only Skin Deep&quot; and a 1980 duet album with her twin sister Marie Currie, &quot;Messin&#x27; with the Boys&quot;, in which the duo was backed by members of Toto. The Curries&#x27; cover of Russ Ballard&#x27;s &quot;Since You Been Gone&quot; reached Number 95 on the U.S. chart. Currie also appeared in a number of films, most notably &quot;Foxes&quot; with Jodie Foster. Throughout the 1990s, Currie worked as a drug counselor for addicted teens and as a personal fitness trainer. She married actor Robert Hays and they had a son together, Jake Hays. The couple divorced in 1997.

Currie still performs and records, remaining under contract with Blackheart Records, but her current passion is chainsaw carving which she displays at an art gallery in Chatsworth, California. In 2013, Cherie recorded two songs with Alexx Michael for the Munich-based hard rock-glam metal group Shameless, which were released on the album &quot;Beautiful Disaster&quot; on October 2, 2013. Currie&#x27;s most recent solo album, &quot;Blvds of Splendor&quot;, was released in 2020.

===Lita Ford===

Ford returned to PolyGram as a solo artist in the 1980s, where she released several albums before pairing with manager Sharon Osbourne. She had success with songs like &quot;Kiss Me Deadly&quot; and &quot;Close My Eyes Forever&quot; (the second a duet with her manager&#x27;s husband Ozzy Osbourne). She was married to Chris Holmes of W.A.S.P., and to former Nitro singer Jim Gillette, with whom she has two sons. After a long hiatus, Ford staged a comeback, performing at Rock The Bayou and other hard rock festivals during the summer of 2008. She released &quot;Wicked Wonderland&quot;, her first studio album in 14 years, on October 6, 2009. During that year Ford toured as a special guest of progressive metal band Queensrÿche and performed songs from &quot;Wicked Wonderland&quot; and reprised her duet &quot;Close My Eyes Forever&quot; with Queensrÿche lead singer Geoff Tate.

===Vicki Blue===

Vicki Blue is now known as Victory Tischler-Blue. After leaving the Runaways, she shifted her focus to film and television production eventually becoming a producer/director for several reality- and magazine-based television shows including &quot;Entertainment Tonight&quot;, &quot;Access Hollywood&quot;, and &quot;Real Stories of the Highway Patrol&quot;. She went on to form Sacred Dogs Entertainment Group a motion picture production company and released a documentary on the Runaways called &quot;&quot;. In 2005, Tischler-Blue directed &quot;Naked Under Leather&quot;, a documentary about fellow female rocker Suzi Quatro, which was selected for the Santa Cruz Film Festival in May 2004 but never released. Focusing on music driven productions, she was tapped to executive produce a network special: &quot;The Bee Gees &quot;Unbroken Fever&quot;—The 30th Anniversary of Saturday Night Fever&quot;. Additionally, Tischler-Blue and Ford teamed up to record music for &quot;El Guitarrista&quot;, an animated series that Sacred Dogs Entertainment Group is producing.

===Jackie Fox===

Fox returned to using her birth name of Fuchs and graduated from UCLA &quot;summa cum laude&quot;, with a Bachelor of Arts in Linguistics and Italian. She later received a Juris Doctor from Harvard Law School and practices entertainment law. She co-wrote &quot;Delilah&#x27;s Scissors&quot; with Tischler-Blue and executive-produced and appeared in &quot;Edgeplay&quot;, Tischler-Blue&#x27;s 2005 documentary about the Runaways. She also writes an L.A. cat care column for Examiner.com and is an occasional contributor to Listverse.com. She is the author of &quot;The Well&quot;, an unpublished work of young adult historical fiction, and is currently working on her second novel. In December 2018 she won four games on the game show &quot;Jeopardy!&quot;

In July 2015, after Fowley&#x27;s death, Fuchs revealed publicly that Fowley raped her on New Year&#x27;s Eve 1975 at a party after a Runaways performance at a club in Orange County. Sixteen years old at the time, she was reportedly given Quaaludes by a man who she thought was a roadie and raped while she was incapacitated. Currie said she spoke up against Fowley&#x27;s actions, then stormed out of the room when he refused to stop. &quot;Look Away&quot;, a documentary about sexual abuse in the rock music industry features Fuchs&#x27; story.

===Laurie McAllister===
McAllister joined another of Fowley&#x27;s all-female bands, the Orchids, who released their only album in 1980. McAllister retired from the music industry and worked as a veterinarian technician in Eugene, Oregon. She died of complications from an asthma attack on August 25, 2011 at the age of 54.

==Members==
===Session musicians===
===Lineups===
===Timeline===
==Discography==
=== Studio albums ===
=== Live albums ===
=== Compilation albums ===
* &quot;Flaming Schoolgirls&quot; (1980, Cherry Red)
* &quot;The Best of the Runaways&quot; (1982, Mercury)
* &quot;I Love Playin&#x27; with Fire&quot; (1982, Cherry Red)
* &quot;Born to be Bad&quot; (1991, Marilyn)
* &quot;Neon Angels&quot; (1992, Mercury)
* &quot;The Runaways featuring Joan Jett and Lita Ford&quot; (1997, PolyGram)
* &quot;20th Century Masters - The Millennium Collection: The Best of the Runaways&quot; (2005, Universal)
* &quot;The Mercury Albums Anthology&quot; (2010, Hip-O)
* &quot;Cherokee Studios Demos&quot; (2024)

=== Charted singles ===
==Influence==
The Runaways&#x27; success paved the way for many successful female artists and female bands over the past 30 years, including the Bangles, the Go-Go&#x27;s, Sahara Hotnights, L7, the Donnas, and Vixen to enter the male-dominated arena of rock music. They are named as influences by several artists, including the Germs, Courtney Love, the Adolescents, Taylor Momsen, White Flag, and Rhino Bucket who acknowledged the Runaways&#x27; influence on their music during their performance at the December 2006 tribute concert honoring Sandy West.

==Film==

A biographical film about the band, inspired by Currie&#x27;s memoir, was released in 2010. Jett was one of the executive producers of the film. Actresses Kristen Stewart and Dakota Fanning starred as Jett and Currie, respectively. Michael Shannon played Fowley. None of the band&#x27;s former bass players were featured in the film; Fox did not want to be involved in any part of the film, and requested that her name be changed in the story. The fictional replacement is named Robin Robbins. The film was written and directed by Floria Sigismondi, and was released to limited theaters on March 19, 2010.

&quot;The Runaways&quot; received generally positive reviews from critics. On review aggregator Rotten Tomatoes, the film has a 70% rating based on 187 reviews, and an average rating of 6.19/10.

==New Runaways (1987)==
In the early 1980s, Gayle Welch, an ambitious 13-year-old girl from Kaitaia, New Zealand, wrote a song, &quot;Day of Age&quot;, and recorded it in Mandrell Recording Studios in Auckland, New Zealand. The resulting tape found its way to Fowley&#x27;s desk. He played the Welch tape for colleague and Los Angeles deejay Rodney Bingenheimer, who played the song on his show on radio KROQ and included it on his annual compilation of his most-liked music for the year. Also on that compilation was a song that featured Chicago-native guitarist Bill Millay.

It did not take long before Fowley, who still owned the Runaways trademark, was putting together a new Runaways band built around Welch. Missy Bonilla was recruited from the typing pool of CBS Records, Denise Pryor came from Compton and Kathrine Dombrowski (&quot;Kathy DiAmber&quot;) was also added. Welch was present only on tape and only on the first song on the CD, &quot;I Want to Run With the Bad Boys&quot;. Millay played guitar, David Carr played keyboards and a drum machine rounded out the team. Glenn Holland, also from New Zealand, a friend of both Bingenheimer and Fowley, facilitated. The album, &quot;Young and Fast&quot;, was released in 1987, and was a minor hit.

==References==
==External links==
* Joan Jett official site
* Lita Ford official site
* Victory Tischler-Blue official site
* Sacred Dogs Entertainment Group official site
* Jackie Fox&#x27;s Runaways essays
* 
* The Runaways on Metaladies.com</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q908458" start="0" end="12" title="The Runaways" label="The Runaways"/>
<link wikidata="Q5092300" start="228" end="239" title="Cherry Bomb (The Runaways song)" label="Cherry Bomb"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="253" end="262" title="Queens of Noise#&amp;quot;Hollywood&amp;quot;" label="Hollywood"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="276" end="291" title="Queens of Noise#&amp;quot;Queens of Noise&amp;quot;" label="Queens of Noise"/>
<link wikidata="Q103550" start="321" end="343" title="the Velvet Underground" label="the Velvet Underground"/>
<link wikidata="Q3063537" start="357" end="372" title="Rock &amp;amp; Roll (The Velvet Underground song)" label="Rock &amp;amp; Roll"/>
<link wikidata="Q1378199" start="597" end="607" title="Kim Fowley" label="Kim Fowley"/>
<link wikidata="Q7623897" start="638" end="653" title="all-female band" label="all-female band"/>
<link wikidata="Q231106" start="693" end="702" title="Joan Jett" label="Joan Jett"/>
<link wikidata="Q332032" start="844" end="856" title="Alice Cooper" label="Alice Cooper"/>
<link wikidata="Q61285" start="1024" end="1031" title="ukulele" label="ukulele"/>
<link wikidata="Q487919" start="1037" end="1042" title="The Sweet" label="Sweet"/>
<link wikidata="Q7284581" start="1132" end="1153" title="Rainbow Bar and Grill" label="Rainbow Bar and Grill"/>
<link wikidata="Q265202" start="1166" end="1176" title="Sandy West" label="Sandy West"/>
<link wikidata="Q5917" start="1268" end="1284" title="Huntington Beach" label="Huntington Beach"/>
<link wikidata="Q7336693" start="1347" end="1360" title="Ritchie Yorke" label="Ritchie Yorke"/>
<link wikidata="Q443813" start="1471" end="1483" title="Michael Steele (musician)" label="Micki Steele"/>
<link wikidata="Q214418" start="1494" end="1505" title="The Bangles" label="The Bangles"/>
<link wikidata="Q622815" start="1622" end="1632" title="Grand Funk Railroad" label="Grand Funk"/>
<link wikidata="Q123858131" start="1876" end="1891" title="Hollywood Stars (band)" label="Hollywood Stars"/>
<link wikidata="Q163211" start="2039" end="2048" title="Lita Ford" label="Lita Ford"/>
<link wikidata="Q237497" start="2204" end="2217" title="Cherie Currie" label="Cherie Currie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1045845" start="2278" end="2291" title="lead vocalist" label="lead vocalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q2880397" start="2368" end="2378" title="Jackie Fox" label="Jackie Fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q7356857" start="2409" end="2428" title="Rodney Bingenheimer" label="Rodney Bingenheimer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3989459" start="2490" end="2498" title="Starwood (nightclub)" label="Starwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q1421587" start="2690" end="2702" title="The Runaways (album)" label="The Runaways"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068713" start="3004" end="3015" title="Cheap Trick" label="Cheap Trick"/>
<link wikidata="Q190155" start="3017" end="3026" title="Van Halen" label="Van Halen"/>
<link wikidata="Q205001" start="3028" end="3041" title="Talking Heads" label="Talking Heads"/>
<link wikidata="Q2117272" start="3047" end="3078" title="Tom Petty and the Heartbreakers" label="Tom Petty and the Heartbreakers"/>
<link wikidata="Q7927561" start="3174" end="3184" title="Victory Tischler-Blue" label="Vicki Blue"/>
<link wikidata="Q5383" start="3259" end="3270" title="David Bowie" label="David Bowie"/>
<link wikidata="Q234750" start="3280" end="3291" title="Suzi Quatro" label="Suzi Quatro"/>
<link wikidata="Q192474" start="3317" end="3326" title="Jeff Beck" label="Jeff Beck"/>
<link wikidata="Q192183" start="3331" end="3348" title="Ritchie Blackmore" label="Ritchie Blackmore"/>
<link wikidata="Q15880" start="3358" end="3370" title="Roger Meddows-Taylor" label="Roger Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q207197" start="3383" end="3395" title="Gene Simmons" label="Gene Simmons"/>
<link wikidata="Q33659" start="3450" end="3456" title="People (magazine)" label="People"/>
<link wikidata="Q3281620" start="3848" end="3863" title="Queens of Noise" label="Queens of Noise"/>
<link wikidata="Q483407" start="4179" end="4186" title="Ramones" label="Ramones"/>
<link wikidata="Q1180791" start="4191" end="4204" title="the Dead Boys" label="the Dead Boys"/>
<link wikidata="Q1022965" start="4231" end="4235" title="CBGB" label="CBGB"/>
<link wikidata="Q940536" start="4304" end="4314" title="The Damned (band)" label="the Damned"/>
<link wikidata="Q1157004" start="4316" end="4328" title="Generation X (band)" label="Generation X"/>
<link wikidata="Q82545" start="4337" end="4348" title="Sex Pistols" label="Sex Pistols"/>
<link wikidata="Q5236582" start="4388" end="4400" title="David Libert" label="David Libert"/>
<link wikidata="Q549544" start="4610" end="4621" title="Beatlemania" label="Beatlemania"/>
<link wikidata="Q1648076" start="4743" end="4756" title="Live in Japan (The Runaways album)" label="Live in Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1421802" start="4980" end="5006" title="Waitin&amp;#x27; for the Night" label="Waitin&amp;#x27; for the Night"/>
<link wikidata="Q39049611" start="5017" end="5033" title="Larrabee Sound Studios" label="Larrabee Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q202741" start="5404" end="5411" title="Blondie (band)" label="Blondie"/>
<link wikidata="Q234750" start="5416" end="5427" title="Suzi Quatro" label="Suzi Quatro"/>
<link wikidata="Q700359" start="5512" end="5520" title="PolyGram" label="PolyGram"/>
<link wikidata="Q202314" start="6046" end="6056" title="Thin Lizzy" label="Thin Lizzy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6391121" start="6112" end="6124" title="Kenny Laguna" label="Kenny Laguna"/>
<link wikidata="Q3281467" start="6179" end="6202" title="And Now... The Runaways" label="And Now... The Runaways"/>
<link wikidata="Q3071" start="6886" end="6895" title="punk rock" label="punk rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q76092" start="6896" end="6905" title="glam rock" label="glam rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q83270" start="6953" end="6962" title="hard rock" label="hard rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q38848" start="6963" end="6980" title="heavy metal music" label="heavy metal music"/>
<link wikidata="Q604015" start="7105" end="7115" title="Cow Palace" label="Cow Palace"/>
<link wikidata="" start="7287" end="7316" title="Guitar Hero: Warriors of Rock" label="Guitar Hero: Warriors of Rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q7950296" start="7350" end="7357" title="WHMH-FM" label="WHMH-FM"/>
<link wikidata="Q11649" start="7446" end="7453" title="Nirvana (band)" label="Nirvana"/>
<link wikidata="Q6391121" start="7695" end="7707" title="Kenny Laguna" label="Kenny Laguna"/>
<link wikidata="Q2905559" start="9764" end="9782" title="Blackheart Records" label="Blackheart Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q702998" start="10022" end="10028" title="Arrows (British band)" label="Arrows"/>
<link wikidata="Q719454" start="10046" end="10076" title="I Love Rock &amp;#x27;n&amp;#x27; Roll" label="I Love Rock &amp;#x27;n&amp;#x27; Roll"/>
<link wikidata="Q5185718" start="10101" end="10119" title="Crimson and Clover" label="Crimson and Clover"/>
<link wikidata="Q2878546" start="10133" end="10147" title="Bad Reputation (Joan Jett song)" label="Bad Reputation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3147100" start="10165" end="10193" title="I Hate Myself for Loving You" label="I Hate Myself for Loving You"/>
<link wikidata="Q3822873" start="10244" end="10256" title="Light of Day" label="Light of Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q395274" start="10268" end="10282" title="Michael J. Fox" label="Michael J. Fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q583612" start="10335" end="10356" title="The Rocky Horror Show" label="The Rocky Horror Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q33511" start="10393" end="10406" title="Rolling Stone" label="Rolling Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q179191" start="10555" end="10581" title="Rock and Roll Hall of Fame" label="Rock and Roll Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q215835" start="10792" end="10806" title="John Entwistle" label="John Entwistle"/>
<link wikidata="Q93346" start="10810" end="10817" title="the Who" label="the Who"/>
<link wikidata="Q214418" start="11035" end="11046" title="the Bangles" label="the Bangles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1056412" start="11048" end="11058" title="the Donnas" label="the Donnas"/>
<link wikidata="Q361167" start="11064" end="11071" title="Carmine Appice" label="Carmine"/>
<link wikidata="Q360498" start="11076" end="11088" title="Vinny Appice" label="Vinny Appice"/>
<link wikidata="Q214418" start="11176" end="11187" title="the Bangles" label="the Bangles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1759710" start="11236" end="11248" title="Manic Monday" label="Manic Monday"/>
<link wikidata="Q1885339" start="11262" end="11283" title="Walk Like an Egyptian" label="Walk Like an Egyptian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371048" start="11300" end="11313" title="Eternal Flame (song)" label="Eternal Flame"/>
<link wikidata="Q18685582" start="11495" end="11507" title="Marie Currie" label="Marie Currie"/>
<link wikidata="Q6822010" start="11515" end="11541" title="Messin&amp;#x27; with the Boys" label="Messin&amp;#x27; with the Boys"/>
<link wikidata="Q207472" start="11591" end="11595" title="Toto (band)" label="Toto"/>
<link wikidata="Q1355924" start="11624" end="11636" title="Russ Ballard" label="Russ Ballard"/>
<link wikidata="Q4353106" start="11650" end="11669" title="Since You Been Gone" label="Since You Been Gone"/>
<link wikidata="Q82413" start="11775" end="11780" title="Foxes (film)" label="Foxes"/>
<link wikidata="Q41351" start="11792" end="11804" title="Jodie Foster" label="Jodie Foster"/>
<link wikidata="Q1970920" start="11934" end="11945" title="Robert Hays" label="Robert Hays"/>
<link wikidata="Q2905559" start="12081" end="12099" title="Blackheart Records" label="Blackheart Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q3476537" start="12128" end="12144" title="chainsaw carving" label="chainsaw carving"/>
<link wikidata="Q1020942" start="12185" end="12207" title="Chatsworth, Los Angeles" label="Chatsworth, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q1726" start="12271" end="12277" title="Munich" label="Munich"/>
<link wikidata="Q83270" start="12284" end="12293" title="hard rock" label="hard rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q188539" start="12294" end="12304" title="glam metal" label="glam metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1806985" start="12634" end="12649" title="Sharon Osbourne" label="Sharon Osbourne"/>
<link wikidata="Q2979634" start="12720" end="12741" title="Close My Eyes Forever" label="Close My Eyes Forever"/>
<link wikidata="Q133151" start="12799" end="12812" title="Ozzy Osbourne" label="Ozzy Osbourne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1077347" start="12834" end="12846" title="Chris Holmes (musician)" label="Chris Holmes"/>
<link wikidata="Q467673" start="12850" end="12858" title="W.A.S.P. (band)" label="W.A.S.P."/>
<link wikidata="Q772684" start="12874" end="12879" title="Nitro (band)" label="Nitro"/>
<link wikidata="Q1382099" start="12887" end="12899" title="Jim Gillette" label="Jim Gillette"/>
<link wikidata="Q3023586" start="13079" end="13096" title="Wicked Wonderland (album)" label="Wicked Wonderland"/>
<link wikidata="Q462380" start="13234" end="13245" title="Queensrÿche" label="Queensrÿche"/>
<link wikidata="Q551619" start="13386" end="13396" title="Geoff Tate" label="Geoff Tate"/>
<link wikidata="Q234750" start="14033" end="14044" title="Suzi Quatro" label="Suzi Quatro"/>
<link wikidata="Q174710" start="14570" end="14574" title="UCLA" label="UCLA"/>
<link wikidata="Q6581478" start="14581" end="14596" title="summa cum laude" label="summa cum laude"/>
<link wikidata="Q1765120" start="14611" end="14627" title="Bachelor of Arts" label="Bachelor of Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1540185" start="14677" end="14689" title="Juris Doctor" label="Juris Doctor"/>
<link wikidata="Q49122" start="14695" end="14713" title="Harvard Law School" label="Harvard Law School"/>
<link wikidata="Q499767" start="15245" end="15254" title="Jeopardy!" label="Jeopardy!"/>
<link wikidata="Q5925" start="15430" end="15443" title="Orange County, California" label="Orange County"/>
<link wikidata="Q423912" start="15501" end="15510" title="Quaaludes" label="Quaaludes"/>
<link wikidata="Q115809683" start="15698" end="15719" title="Look Away (2021 film)" label="&amp;quot;Look Away&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q7623897" start="15877" end="15892" title="all-female band" label="all-female band"/>
<link wikidata="Q171224" start="16033" end="16047" title="Eugene, Oregon" label="Eugene, Oregon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3284410" start="16293" end="16312" title="Flaming Schoolgirls" label="Flaming Schoolgirls"/>
<link wikidata="Q700359" start="16611" end="16619" title="PolyGram" label="PolyGram"/>
<link wikidata="Q38903" start="16717" end="16726" title="Universal Music Group" label="Universal"/>
<link wikidata="Q5767810" start="16778" end="16783" title="Hip-O Records" label="Hip-O"/>
<link wikidata="Q214418" start="16995" end="17006" title="the Bangles" label="the Bangles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1533339" start="17008" end="17024" title="the Go-Go&amp;#x27;s" label="the Go-Go&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q1756258" start="17026" end="17042" title="Sahara Hotnights" label="Sahara Hotnights"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138185" start="17044" end="17046" title="L7 (band)" label="L7"/>
<link wikidata="Q1056412" start="17048" end="17058" title="the Donnas" label="the Donnas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1865430" start="17064" end="17069" title="Vixen (band)" label="Vixen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1850698" start="17182" end="17187" title="Germs (band)" label="Germs"/>
<link wikidata="Q222071" start="17189" end="17202" title="Courtney Love" label="Courtney Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q131774" start="17208" end="17219" title="Adolescents" label="Adolescents"/>
<link wikidata="Q193509" start="17221" end="17234" title="Taylor Momsen" label="Taylor Momsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q7994690" start="17236" end="17246" title="White Flag (band)" label="White Flag"/>
<link wikidata="Q1779944" start="17252" end="17264" title="Rhino Bucket" label="Rhino Bucket"/>
<link wikidata="Q126599" start="17575" end="17590" title="Kristen Stewart" label="Kristen Stewart"/>
<link wikidata="Q115541" start="17595" end="17609" title="Dakota Fanning" label="Dakota Fanning"/>
<link wikidata="Q41449" start="17652" end="17667" title="Michael Shannon" label="Michael Shannon"/>
<link wikidata="Q263309" start="17951" end="17968" title="Floria Sigismondi" label="Floria Sigismondi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3491832" start="18105" end="18122" title="review aggregator" label="review aggregator"/>
<link wikidata="Q105584" start="18123" end="18138" title="Rotten Tomatoes" label="Rotten Tomatoes"/>
<link wikidata="Q257417" start="18315" end="18322" title="Kaitaia" label="Kaitaia"/>
<link wikidata="Q664" start="18324" end="18335" title="New Zealand" label="New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q37100" start="18424" end="18432" title="Auckland" label="Auckland"/>
<link wikidata="Q7356857" start="18565" end="18584" title="Rodney Bingenheimer" label="Rodney Bingenheimer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1297" start="18762" end="18769" title="Chicago" label="Chicago"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="252228" wikidata="Q1530855" url="?curid=252228" title="Operation Quicksilver">
<text>Operation Quicksilver may refer to:

*Operation Quicksilver (deception plan), a World War II plan by the Allied nations threatening an invasion at Pas de Calais
*Operation Quicksilver (1978), an American nuclear test series of eighteen blasts conducted at the Nevada Test Site in 1978 and 1979
*Operation Quicksilver (1990s), a plan to reduce the size of the United States Army in the early 1990s as a result of the end of the Cold War</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1057207" start="38" end="76" title="Operation Quicksilver (deception plan)" label="Operation Quicksilver (deception plan)"/>
<link wikidata="Q936085" start="162" end="190" title="Operation Quicksilver (1978)" label="Operation Quicksilver (1978)"/>
<link wikidata="Q9212" start="295" end="324" title="Operation Quicksilver (1990s)" label="Operation Quicksilver (1990s)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="252235" wikidata="Q840023" url="?curid=252235" title="Nilpotent">
<text>In mathematics, an element formula_1 of a ring formula_2 is called nilpotent if there exists some positive integer formula_3, called the index (or sometimes the degree), such that formula_4.

The term, along with its sister idempotent, was introduced by Benjamin Peirce in the context of his work on the classification of algebras.

== Examples ==

*This definition can be applied in particular to square matrices. The matrix
:: formula_5
:is nilpotent because formula_6. See nilpotent matrix for more.

* In the factor ring formula_7, the equivalence class of 3 is nilpotent because 32 is congruent to 0 modulo 9.
* Assume that two elements formula_8 and formula_9 in a ring formula_2 satisfy formula_11. Then the element formula_12 is nilpotent as formula_13 An example with matrices (for &quot;a&quot;, &quot;b&quot;):formula_14 Here formula_15 and formula_16.

*By definition, any element of a nilsemigroup is nilpotent.

== Properties ==
No nilpotent element can be a unit (except in the trivial ring, which has only a single element ). All nilpotent elements are zero divisors.

An formula_17 matrix formula_18 with entries from a field is nilpotent if and only if its characteristic polynomial is formula_19.

If formula_1 is nilpotent, then formula_21 is a unit, because formula_4 entails formula_23

More generally, the sum of a unit element and a nilpotent element is a unit when they commute.

== Commutative rings ==
The nilpotent elements from a commutative ring formula_2 form an ideal formula_25; this is a consequence of the binomial theorem. This ideal is the nilradical of the ring. Every nilpotent element formula_1 in a commutative ring is contained in every prime ideal formula_27 of that ring, since formula_28. So formula_25 is contained in the intersection of all prime ideals.

If formula_1 is not nilpotent, we are able to localize with respect to the powers of formula_1: formula_32 to get a non-zero ring formula_33. The prime ideals of the localized ring correspond exactly to those prime ideals formula_27 of formula_2 with formula_36. As every non-zero commutative ring has a maximal ideal, which is prime, every non-nilpotent formula_1 is not contained in some prime ideal. Thus formula_25 is exactly the intersection of all prime ideals.

A characteristic similar to that of Jacobson radical and annihilation of simple modules is available for nilradical: nilpotent elements of a ring formula_2 are precisely those that annihilate all integral domains internal to the ring formula_2 (that is, of the form formula_41 for prime ideals formula_42). This follows from the fact that nilradical is the intersection of all prime ideals.

== Nilpotent elements in Lie algebra ==
Let formula_43 be a Lie algebra. Then an element formula_44 is called nilpotent if it is in formula_45 and formula_46 is a nilpotent transformation. See also: Jordan decomposition in a Lie algebra.

==Nilpotency in physics==

Any ladder operator in a finite dimensional space is nilpotent. They represent creation and annihilation operators, which transform from one state to another, for example the raising and lowering Pauli matrices formula_47. 

An operand formula_48 that satisfies formula_49 is nilpotent. Grassmann numbers which allow a path integral representation for Fermionic fields are nilpotents since their squares vanish. The BRST charge is an important example in physics.

As linear operators form an associative algebra and thus a ring, this is a special case of the initial definition. More generally, in view of the above definitions, an operator formula_48 is nilpotent if there is formula_51 such that formula_52 (the zero function). Thus, a linear map is nilpotent iff it has a nilpotent matrix in some basis. Another example for this is the exterior derivative (again with formula_53). Both are linked, also through supersymmetry and Morse theory, as shown by Edward Witten in a celebrated article.

The electromagnetic field of a plane wave without sources is nilpotent when it is expressed in terms of the algebra of physical space. More generally, the technique of microadditivity (which can used to derive theorems in physics) makes use of nilpotent or nilsquare infinitesimals and is part smooth infinitesimal analysis.

==Algebraic nilpotents==
The two-dimensional dual numbers contain a nilpotent space. Other algebras and numbers that contain nilpotent spaces include split-quaternions (coquaternions), split-octonions,
biquaternions formula_54, and complex octonions formula_55. If a nilpotent infinitesimal is a variable tending to zero, it can be shown that any sum of terms for which it is the subject is an indefinitely small proportion of the first order term.

==See also==
*Idempotent element (ring theory)
*Unipotent
*Reduced ring
*Nil ideal
*Nilpotent matrix

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q395" start="3" end="14" title="mathematics" label="mathematics"/>
<link wikidata="Q161172" start="42" end="46" title="ring (mathematics)" label="ring"/>
<link wikidata="Q840023" start="67" end="76" title="Nilpotent" label="nilpotent"/>
<link wikidata="Q12503" start="107" end="114" title="integer" label="integer"/>
<link wikidata="Q840023" start="137" end="142" title="Nilpotent" label="index"/>
<link wikidata="Q840023" start="161" end="167" title="Nilpotent" label="degree"/>
<link wikidata="Q2243424" start="224" end="234" title="Idempotent (ring theory)" label="idempotent"/>
<link wikidata="Q467611" start="254" end="269" title="Benjamin Peirce" label="Benjamin Peirce"/>
<link wikidata="Q2739329" start="398" end="413" title="square matrix" label="square matrices"/>
<link wikidata="Q650670" start="476" end="492" title="nilpotent matrix" label="nilpotent matrix"/>
<link wikidata="Q619436" start="513" end="524" title="factor ring" label="factor ring"/>
<link wikidata="Q1211071" start="540" end="557" title="equivalence class" label="equivalence class"/>
<link wikidata="Q8349849" start="590" end="599" title="Congruence relation" label="congruent"/>
<link wikidata="Q319400" start="605" end="611" title="Modular arithmetic" label="modulo"/>
<link wikidata="Q55648448" start="898" end="910" title="nilsemigroup" label="nilsemigroup"/>
<link wikidata="Q118084" start="973" end="977" title="unit (ring theory)" label="unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1652969" start="993" end="1005" title="trivial ring" label="trivial ring"/>
<link wikidata="Q828111" start="1069" end="1081" title="zero divisor" label="zero divisor"/>
<link wikidata="Q190109" start="1137" end="1142" title="field (mathematics)" label="field"/>
<link wikidata="Q849705" start="1175" end="1200" title="characteristic polynomial" label="characteristic polynomial"/>
<link wikidata="Q118084" start="1265" end="1269" title="Unit (ring theory)" label="unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q858656" start="1459" end="1475" title="commutative ring" label="commutative ring"/>
<link wikidata="Q44649" start="1494" end="1499" title="ring ideal" label="ideal"/>
<link wikidata="Q26708" start="1541" end="1557" title="binomial theorem" label="binomial theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q3341881" start="1577" end="1587" title="Nilradical of a ring" label="nilradical"/>
<link wikidata="Q863912" start="1679" end="1690" title="prime ideal" label="prime ideal"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1849" end="1857" title="localization of a ring#Construction and properties for commutative rings" label="localize"/>
<link wikidata="Q1677769" start="2308" end="2324" title="Jacobson radical" label="Jacobson radical"/>
<link wikidata="Q664495" start="2724" end="2735" title="Lie algebra" label="Lie algebra"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2863" end="2900" title="Jordan–Chevalley decomposition#Relations to the theory of algebras" label="Jordan decomposition in a Lie algebra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186765" start="2934" end="2949" title="ladder operator" label="ladder operator"/>
<link wikidata="Q902336" start="3009" end="3044" title="creation and annihilation operators" label="creation and annihilation operators"/>
<link wikidata="Q336233" start="3126" end="3140" title="Pauli matrices" label="Pauli matrices"/>
<link wikidata="Q719375" start="3158" end="3165" title="operand" label="operand"/>
<link wikidata="Q60301" start="3217" end="3233" title="Grassmann number" label="Grassmann number"/>
<link wikidata="Q898323" start="3249" end="3262" title="Path integral formulation" label="path integral"/>
<link wikidata="Q2752849" start="3346" end="3357" title="BRST charge" label="BRST charge"/>
<link wikidata="Q413" start="3385" end="3392" title="physics" label="physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q204" start="3645" end="3658" title="zero function" label="zero function"/>
<link wikidata="Q207643" start="3669" end="3679" title="linear map" label="linear map"/>
<link wikidata="Q949972" start="3693" end="3696" title="iff" label="iff"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754547" start="3770" end="3789" title="exterior derivative" label="exterior derivative"/>
<link wikidata="Q193442" start="3845" end="3858" title="supersymmetry" label="supersymmetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q2296951" start="3863" end="3875" title="Morse theory" label="Morse theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q201513" start="3889" end="3902" title="Edward Witten" label="Edward Witten"/>
<link wikidata="Q177625" start="3933" end="3954" title="electromagnetic field" label="electromagnetic field"/>
<link wikidata="Q2893020" start="4037" end="4062" title="algebra of physical space" label="algebra of physical space"/>
<link wikidata="Q4139289" start="4223" end="4252" title="smooth infinitesimal analysis" label="smooth infinitesimal analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q751048" start="4300" end="4311" title="dual number" label="dual number"/>
<link wikidata="Q2996919" start="4405" end="4421" title="split-quaternion" label="split-quaternion"/>
<link wikidata="Q3348988" start="4440" end="4454" title="split-octonion" label="split-octonion"/>
<link wikidata="Q2590607" start="4457" end="4469" title="biquaternion" label="biquaternion"/>
<link wikidata="Q743418" start="4495" end="4504" title="octonions" label="octonions"/>
<link wikidata="Q2243424" start="4719" end="4751" title="Idempotent element (ring theory)" label="Idempotent element (ring theory)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2494915" start="4753" end="4762" title="Unipotent" label="Unipotent"/>
<link wikidata="Q6423024" start="4764" end="4776" title="Reduced ring" label="Reduced ring"/>
<link wikidata="Q453275" start="4778" end="4787" title="Nil ideal" label="Nil ideal"/>
<link wikidata="Q650670" start="4789" end="4805" title="Nilpotent matrix" label="Nilpotent matrix"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="252236" wikidata="Q7735365" url="?curid=252236" title="The Frontier">
<text>The Frontier can refer to:

* &quot;The Frontier&quot; (1991 film), a 1991 Chilean film directed by Ricardo P. Larrain
* &quot;The Frontier&quot; (2014 film), an American drama film by Matt Rabinowitz
* &quot;The Frontier&quot; (2015 film), an American crime film
* The Frontier (Hong Kong), a defunct political group in Hong Kong
* The Frontier (Hong Kong, 2010), a political group in Hong Kong
* &quot;The Frontier&quot; (website), an investigative news website in Oklahoma, U.S.
* The Frontier (North American history), the American frontier during the period of western expansion
* , a mod for Fallout: New Vegas.
* The Frontier, previous name for the New Frontier Hotel and Casino

==See also==
* Frontier (disambiguation)
* La Frontera, Chile, the limit between the Spanish/Chilean state and Mapuche territory</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7735365" start="0" end="12" title="The Frontier" label="The Frontier"/>
<link wikidata="Q7250197" start="30" end="66" title="The Frontier (1991 film)" label="&amp;quot;The Frontier&amp;quot; (1991 film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q20720820" start="121" end="157" title="The Frontier (2014 film)" label="&amp;quot;The Frontier&amp;quot; (2014 film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q27957886" start="203" end="239" title="The Frontier (2015 film)" label="&amp;quot;The Frontier&amp;quot; (2015 film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q10898980" start="266" end="290" title="The Frontier (Hong Kong)" label="The Frontier (Hong Kong)"/>
<link wikidata="Q835384" start="333" end="363" title="The Frontier (Hong Kong, 2010)" label="The Frontier (Hong Kong, 2010)"/>
<link wikidata="Q48966531" start="398" end="432" title="The Frontier (website)" label="&amp;quot;The Frontier&amp;quot; (website)"/>
<link wikidata="Q14947899" start="484" end="521" title="The Frontier (North American history)" label="The Frontier (North American history)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1150966" start="656" end="685" title="New Frontier Hotel and Casino" label="New Frontier Hotel and Casino"/>
<link wikidata="Q351502" start="702" end="727" title="Frontier (disambiguation)" label="Frontier (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6462660" start="730" end="748" title="La Frontera, Chile" label="La Frontera, Chile"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="252247" wikidata="Q191707" url="?curid=252247" title="Leo II (emperor)">
<text>Leo II (, ; – 474), called the Younger, briefly reigned as a child emperor of the Eastern Roman Empire from 473 to 474. He was the son of Zeno, the Isaurian general and future emperor, and Ariadne, a daughter of the emperor Leo I (). Leo II was made co-emperor with his grandfather Leo I on 17 November 473, and became sole emperor on 18 January 474 after Leo I died of dysentery. His father Zeno was made co-emperor by the Byzantine Senate on 29 January, and they co-ruled for a short time before Leo II died in late 474.

==History==
Leo II, called &quot;the Younger&quot;, was born in 467, the son of Zeno, an Isaurian general, and Ariadne, the daughter of then-emperor Leo I. He was the maternal grandson of Emperor Leo I and Empress Verina. As the grandson of Leo I, Leo II had a strong claim to succeed his throne. Leo I, who was becoming increasingly ill, felt obligated to declare a successor to the imperial throne, but passed over his son-in-law on account of his unpopularity. Accordingly, Leo II was made &#x27; (heir to the throne) by Leo I around October 472, and was later promoted to &#x27; (also by Leo I) in November 473, making him co-emperor alongside his grandfather. He was crowned at the Hippodrome of Constantinople, and the ceremony was presided over by the Ecumenical Patriarch Acacius. The 10th-century &#x27; gives a detailed account of his coronation as &#x27;, which is dated to 17 November 473. He was also appointed as the sole consul for 474 around this time.

When Leo I died of dysentery on 18 January 474, Leo II acceded to the throne as sole &#x27;. The historian Warren Treadgold wrote that during the reign of Leo II, his father Zeno was the true power behind the throne. On 29 January 474, the Byzantine Senate, with the approval of Empress Verina, made his father Zeno co-&#x27; under Leo II, as Leo was too young to sign official documents. Leo II died in Constantinople shortly after 10 October 474. The 6th-century writer John Malalas states that he reigned &quot;1 year and 23 days&quot;, which, reckoning from his coronation as &quot;&quot;, would give a death date of 8/9 December. However, he also states that Leo died on &quot;November of the 13th indiction... as was written by the most learned Nestorianos, whose chronicle ended with Leo&quot;. Theodorus Lector, another 6th-century historian, states that Leo II died after a rule of 10 months, that is, from January to November 474. This is also corroborated by the 9th-century writer Theophanes the Confessor. The 20th-century Byzantinist George Ostrogorsky simply wrote that Leo II died sometime in the autumn of 474. He died aged 7, which is corroborated by the 6th-century writers John Malalas and John of Ephesus. The death of Leo II left Zeno as sole emperor.

His death having occurred so soon after he became emperor has led to speculation among some modern scholars that he was poisoned by either his mother or father so that Zeno could become sole emperor. However, no contemporary sources raised this suggestion even though Zeno was unpopular; thus it is considered likely that Leo II&#x27;s death was natural, especially taking into account the high child mortality rate of the time. Victor of Tunnuna, a 6th-century chronicler, says that Leo II did not actually die, but was rather taken by Ariadne and hidden at a monastery. This is likely a confusion with Basiliscus, the son of the Byzantine commander Armatus. Basiliscus was crowned &quot;&quot; in 476 and was almost executed in 477 after his father was murdered by Zeno, but was saved by Ariadne. The confusion likely stems from the fact that Basiliscus was renamed Leo in order to avoid association with the usurper who rose against Zeno.

Zeno was vastly unpopular due to a lack of dynastic prestige, with his only familial ties to the imperial throne being his marriage to Ariadne, the daughter of Leo I, and through his now-dead son Leo II. Additionally, because he was an Isaurian, he was seen as a foreigner by the Byzantine elite, and the treasury was empty on his ascension. Zeno&#x27;s sole rule was opposed by general Basiliscus, brother of Verina, the widow of Leo I, who proclaimed him as emperor in January 475. Zeno fled, and Basiliscus ruled for 20 months before Zeno returned and retook the throne. Zeno&#x27;s rule was marked by constant revolts, and it was only through cunning, bribery and luck that he managed to rule for 17 years until his death on 9 April 491.

==References==

=== Notes ===
===Citations===
===Primary sources===

*&quot;Anonymus Valesianus II&quot; (Anonymous, 6th century).
*&quot;Chronicon Paschale&quot; (Anonymous, 7th century).
*&quot;Makhtbhanuth Zabhne&quot; (Bar Hebraeus, 13th century).
*Chronicle of Domninos (6th century).
*&quot;Ecclesiastical History&quot; of Evagrius Scholasticus (6th century).
*Book XIV of the &quot;Chronographia&quot; of John Malalas (6th century).
*&quot;Romana&quot; (Jordanes, 6th century).
*&quot;Chronicle&quot; of Michael the Syrian (12th century).
*Chronicle of Nestorianos (6th century).
*Chronicle of Theophanes the Confessor (8th century).
*Chronicle of Victor of Tunnuna (6th century).
*&quot;Extracts of History&quot; (Joannes Zonaras, 12th century).
===Bibliography===
*
*
*
* 
*
*
*McEvoy, M. A. (2019). &#x27;Leo II, Zeno, and the transfer of power from a son to his father in AD 474&#x27;, in J.-W. Drijvers and N. Lenski (eds). &quot;The Fifth Century: Age of Transformation&quot;. Edipuglia.
* 
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q191707" start="0" end="6" title="Leo II (emperor)" label="Leo II"/>
<link wikidata="Q191707" start="27" end="38" title="Leo II (emperor)" label="the Younger"/>
<link wikidata="Q6869257" start="61" end="74" title="child emperor" label="child emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q12544" start="82" end="102" title="Eastern Roman Empire" label="Eastern Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q183452" start="138" end="142" title="Zeno (emperor)" label="Zeno"/>
<link wikidata="Q914218" start="148" end="155" title="Isauria" label="Isauria"/>
<link wikidata="Q291756" start="189" end="196" title="Ariadne (empress)" label="Ariadne"/>
<link wikidata="Q183776" start="224" end="229" title="Leo I (emperor)" label="Leo I"/>
<link wikidata="Q129279" start="370" end="379" title="dysentery" label="dysentery"/>
<link wikidata="Q598719" start="424" end="440" title="Byzantine Senate" label="Byzantine Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q183452" start="604" end="608" title="Zeno (emperor)" label="Zeno"/>
<link wikidata="Q914218" start="613" end="620" title="Isauria" label="Isauria"/>
<link wikidata="Q291756" start="635" end="642" title="Ariadne (empress)" label="Ariadne"/>
<link wikidata="Q183776" start="720" end="725" title="Leo I (emperor)" label="Leo I"/>
<link wikidata="Q258150" start="738" end="744" title="Verina" label="Verina"/>
<link wikidata="Q105742802" start="1196" end="1203" title="Coronation of the Byzantine emperor" label="crowned"/>
<link wikidata="Q387548" start="1211" end="1239" title="Hippodrome of Constantinople" label="Hippodrome of Constantinople"/>
<link wikidata="Q60719" start="1283" end="1303" title="Ecumenical Patriarch" label="Ecumenical Patriarch"/>
<link wikidata="Q415483" start="1304" end="1311" title="Acacius of Constantinople" label="Acacius"/>
<link wikidata="Q4489757" start="1460" end="1466" title="consul" label="consul"/>
<link wikidata="Q129279" start="1513" end="1522" title="dysentery" label="dysentery"/>
<link wikidata="Q201788" start="1591" end="1600" title="historian" label="historian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1995678" start="1601" end="1617" title="Warren Treadgold" label="Warren Treadgold"/>
<link wikidata="Q598719" start="1734" end="1750" title="Byzantine Senate" label="Byzantine Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q16869" start="1898" end="1912" title="Constantinople" label="Constantinople"/>
<link wikidata="Q312491" start="1966" end="1978" title="John Malalas" label="John Malalas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1339127" start="2197" end="2206" title="indiction" label="indiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q120405425" start="2245" end="2256" title="Nestorianos" label="Nestorianos"/>
<link wikidata="Q920986" start="2296" end="2312" title="Theodorus Lector" label="Theodorus Lector"/>
<link wikidata="Q297584" start="2487" end="2511" title="Theophanes the Confessor" label="Theophanes the Confessor"/>
<link wikidata="Q648154" start="2530" end="2541" title="Byzantinist" label="Byzantinist"/>
<link wikidata="Q311461" start="2542" end="2560" title="George Ostrogorsky" label="George Ostrogorsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q718607" start="2704" end="2719" title="John of Ephesus" label="John of Ephesus"/>
<link wikidata="Q601846" start="3198" end="3215" title="Victor of Tunnuna" label="Victor of Tunnuna"/>
<link wikidata="Q4867453" start="3373" end="3383" title="Basiliscus (Caesar)" label="Basiliscus"/>
<link wikidata="Q288416" start="3420" end="3427" title="Armatus" label="Armatus"/>
<link wikidata="Q193056" start="4099" end="4109" title="Basiliscus" label="Basiliscus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1087874" start="4593" end="4611" title="Chronicon Paschale" label="Chronicon Paschale"/>
<link wikidata="Q380295" start="4678" end="4690" title="Bar Hebraeus" label="Bar Hebraeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q365678" start="4746" end="4780" title="Ecclesiastical History (Evagrius Scholasticus)" label="&amp;quot;Ecclesiastical History&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q365678" start="4784" end="4805" title="Evagrius Scholasticus" label="Evagrius Scholasticus"/>
<link wikidata="Q312491" start="4838" end="4863" title="Chronographia (Malalas)" label="&amp;quot;Chronographia&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q312491" start="4867" end="4879" title="John Malalas" label="John Malalas"/>
<link wikidata="Q7362358" start="4896" end="4914" title="Romana (Jordanes)" label="&amp;quot;Romana&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q131548" start="4916" end="4924" title="Jordanes" label="Jordanes"/>
<link wikidata="Q129020" start="4941" end="4962" title="Chronicle of Michael the Syrian" label="&amp;quot;Chronicle&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q129020" start="4966" end="4984" title="Michael the Syrian" label="Michael the Syrian"/>
<link wikidata="Q32052" start="5177" end="5192" title="Joannes Zonaras" label="Joannes Zonaras"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="252250" wikidata="Q3884964" url="?curid=252250" title="Orbit (dynamics)">
<text>In mathematics, specifically in the study of dynamical systems, an orbit is a collection of points related by the evolution function of the dynamical system. It can be understood as the subset of phase space covered by the trajectory of the dynamical system under a particular set of initial conditions, as the system evolves. As a phase space trajectory is uniquely determined for any given set of phase space coordinates, it is not possible for different orbits to intersect in phase space, therefore the set of all orbits of a dynamical system is a partition of the phase space. Understanding the properties of orbits by using topological methods is one of the objectives of the modern theory of dynamical systems. 

For discrete-time dynamical systems, the orbits are sequences; for real dynamical systems, the orbits are curves; and for holomorphic dynamical systems, the orbits are Riemann surfaces.

== Definition ==
Given a dynamical system (&quot;T&quot;, &quot;M&quot;, Φ) with &quot;T&quot; a group, &quot;M&quot; a set and Φ the evolution function

:formula_1 where formula_2 with formula_3

we define

:formula_4

then the set

:formula_5

is called the orbit through &quot;x&quot;. An orbit which consists of a single point is called constant orbit. A non-constant orbit is called closed or periodic if there exists a formula_6 in formula_7 such that 
:formula_8.

=== Real dynamical system ===

Given a real dynamical system (&quot;R&quot;, &quot;M&quot;, Φ), &quot;I&quot;(&quot;x&quot;) is an open interval in the real numbers, that is formula_9. For any &quot;x&quot; in &quot;M&quot;
:formula_10
is called positive semi-orbit through &quot;x&quot; and
:formula_11
is called negative semi-orbit through &quot;x&quot;.

=== Discrete time dynamical system ===
For a discrete time dynamical system with a time-invariant evolution function formula_12:

The forward orbit of x is the set : 
:formula_13

If the function is invertible, the backward orbit of x is the set :

:formula_14

and orbit of x is the set :

:formula_15

where :
* formula_16 is the evolution function formula_17
* set formula_18 is the dynamical space,
*formula_19 is number of iteration, which is natural number and formula_20
*formula_21 is initial state of system and formula_22

=== General dynamical system ===
For a general dynamical system, especially in homogeneous dynamics, when one has a &quot;nice&quot; group formula_23 acting on a probability space formula_18 in a measure-preserving way, an orbit formula_25 will be called periodic (or equivalently, closed) if the stabilizer formula_26 is a lattice inside formula_23.

In addition, a related term is a bounded orbit, when the set formula_28 is pre-compact inside formula_18.

The classification of orbits can lead to interesting questions with relations to other mathematical areas, for example the Oppenheim conjecture (proved by Margulis) and the Littlewood conjecture (partially proved by Lindenstrauss) are dealing with the question whether every bounded orbit of some natural action on the homogeneous space formula_30 is indeed periodic one, this observation is due to Raghunathan and in different language due to Cassels and Swinnerton-Dyer . Such questions are intimately related to deep measure-classification theorems.

=== Notes ===

It is often the case that the evolution function can be understood to compose the elements of a group, in which case the group-theoretic orbits of the group action are the same thing as the dynamical orbits.

== Examples ==

* The orbit of an equilibrium point is a constant orbit.

== Stability of orbits ==

A basic classification of orbits is
* constant orbits or fixed points
* periodic orbits
* non-constant and non-periodic orbits

An orbit can fail to be closed in two ways. 
It could be an asymptotically periodic orbit if it converges to a periodic orbit. Such orbits are not closed because they never truly repeat, but they become arbitrarily close to a repeating orbit.
An orbit can also be chaotic. These orbits come arbitrarily close to the initial point, but fail to ever converge to a periodic orbit. They exhibit sensitive dependence on initial conditions, meaning that small differences in the initial value will cause large differences in future points of the orbit.

There are other properties of orbits that allow for different classifications. An orbit can be hyperbolic if nearby points approach or diverge from the orbit exponentially fast.

==See also==
* Wandering set
* Phase space method
* Phase space
* Cobweb plot or Verhulst diagram
* Periodic points of complex quadratic mappings and multiplier of orbit
* Orbit portrait

==References==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q395" start="3" end="14" title="mathematics" label="mathematics"/>
<link wikidata="Q638328" start="45" end="61" title="dynamical system" label="dynamical system"/>
<link wikidata="Q3884964" start="67" end="72" title="Orbit (dynamics)" label="orbit"/>
<link wikidata="Q638328" start="114" end="132" title="evolution function" label="evolution function"/>
<link wikidata="Q62542" start="196" end="207" title="Phase space (dynamical system)" label="phase space"/>
<link wikidata="Q18351510" start="284" end="301" title="initial condition" label="initial condition"/>
<link wikidata="Q381060" start="552" end="561" title="partition (set theory)" label="partition"/>
<link wikidata="Q7825032" start="630" end="649" title="Topological dynamics" label="topological methods"/>
<link wikidata="Q638328" start="724" end="754" title="discrete-time dynamical system" label="discrete-time dynamical system"/>
<link wikidata="Q133250" start="772" end="780" title="sequence" label="sequence"/>
<link wikidata="Q638328" start="787" end="808" title="real dynamical system" label="real dynamical system"/>
<link wikidata="Q161973" start="826" end="831" title="curve" label="curve"/>
<link wikidata="Q207476" start="842" end="853" title="holomorphic function" label="holomorphic"/>
<link wikidata="Q753035" start="888" end="903" title="Riemann surface" label="Riemann surface"/>
<link wikidata="Q83478" start="1004" end="1009" title="group (mathematics)" label="group"/>
<link wikidata="Q36161" start="1027" end="1030" title="set (mathematics)" label="set"/>
<link wikidata="Q12916" start="1531" end="1542" title="real number" label="real number"/>
<link wikidata="Q21199" start="2185" end="2199" title="natural number" label="natural number"/>
<link wikidata="Q83478" start="3394" end="3399" title="group (mathematics)" label="group"/>
<link wikidata="Q288465" start="3419" end="3441" title="orbit (group theory)" label="group-theoretic orbits"/>
<link wikidata="Q288465" start="3449" end="3461" title="Group action (mathematics)" label="group action"/>
<link wikidata="Q1530271" start="3541" end="3558" title="equilibrium point" label="equilibrium point"/>
<link wikidata="Q177239" start="3832" end="3841" title="limit (mathematics)" label="converges"/>
<link wikidata="Q166314" start="4000" end="4007" title="chaos theory" label="chaotic"/>
<link wikidata="Q187536" start="4127" end="4169" title="sensitive dependence on initial conditions" label="sensitive dependence on initial conditions"/>
<link wikidata="Q3925833" start="4379" end="4389" title="Hyperbolic equilibrium point" label="hyperbolic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2506703" start="4478" end="4491" title="Wandering set" label="Wandering set"/>
<link wikidata="Q7180967" start="4494" end="4512" title="Phase space method" label="Phase space method"/>
<link wikidata="Q62542" start="4515" end="4526" title="Phase space" label="Phase space"/>
<link wikidata="Q5139042" start="4529" end="4540" title="Cobweb plot" label="Cobweb plot"/>
<link wikidata="Q7168642" start="4563" end="4608" title="Periodic points of complex quadratic mappings" label="Periodic points of complex quadratic mappings"/>
<link wikidata="Q7100051" start="4635" end="4649" title="Orbit portrait" label="Orbit portrait"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="252251" wikidata="Q2682005" url="?curid=252251" title="Automatic writing">
<text>Automatic writing, also called psychography, is a claimed psychic ability allowing a person to produce written words without consciously writing. Practitioners engage in automatic writing by holding a writing instrument and allowing alleged spirits to manipulate the practitioner&#x27;s hand. The instrument may be a standard writing instrument, or it may be one specially designed for automatic writing, such as a planchette or a ouija board. 

Religious and spiritual traditions have incorporated automatic writing, including Fuji in Chinese folk religion and the Enochian language associated with Enochian magic. In the modern era, it is associated with Spiritualism and the occult, with notable practitioners including W. B. Yeats and Arthur Conan Doyle. There is no evidence supporting the existence of automatic writing, and claims associated with it are unfalsifiable. Documented examples are considered to be the result of the ideomotor phenomenon.

==History==
===Early history===
Spirit writing, later called &quot;Fuji&quot; (扶乩/扶箕), has a long tradition in China, where messages from various deities and spirits were received by mediums since the Song dynasty. In the 19th century, messages received through spirit writing led to the foundation of several Chinese salvationist religions. The spread of Chinese cultural techniques, such as printing and painting, introduced the influence of &quot;spirit writing&quot;, practised by Japanese Zen Ōbaku monks, who were said to communicate with an ancient Taoist sage credited with creating the kung fu system.

In the West, an early example of the practice is the 16th-century Enochian language, allegedly dictated to John Dee and Edward Kelley by Enochian angels and integral to the practice of Enochian magic. The language is said to be extremely detailed and complex in its grammar and rules. Dee also claimed that the Enochian instruction included information regarding the elixir of life in the ruins of Glastonbury Abbey.

===Approach===
Parapsychologist William Fletcher Barrett wrote that &quot;automatic messages may take place either by the writer passively holding a pencil on a sheet of paper, or by the planchette, or by an &#x27;ouija board&#x27;.&quot; In Spiritualism, spirits are claimed to take control of the hand of a medium to write messages, letters, and even entire books. Automatic writing can happen in a trance or waking state. Some psychical researchers such as Thomson Jay Hudson have claimed no spirits are involved in automatic writing and the subconscious mind is the explanation.

===Hoaxes===

Paranormal investigator Harry Price exposed the supposed automatic writing in the Borley Rectory as the wall-scrawling of a housewife attempting to hide an extramarital affair.

A prominent alleged example of automatic writing is the Brattleboro hoax. When Charles Dickens died in 1870, he left &quot;The Mystery of Edwin Drood&quot; unfinished. According to the itinerant printer T. P. James, this angered Dickens&#x27; spirit so much that he channelled the rest of the novel through James&#x27;s hand. This is supposed to have begun on Christmas Eve 1872 and continued in tri-weekly sessions until completion.

==Practitioners==

Automatic writing as a spiritual practice was reported by Hyppolyte Taine in the preface to the third edition of his &quot;De l&#x27;intelligence&quot;, published in 1878. Besides &quot;ethereal visions&quot; or &quot;magnetic auras&quot;, Fernando Pessoa claimed to have experienced automatic writing. He said he felt &quot;owned by something else&quot;, sometimes feeling a sensation in the right arm he claimed was lifted into the air without his will. Georgie Hyde-Lees, the wife of William Butler Yeats, also claimed she could write automatically. Sri Aurobindo and his follower, The Mother (Mirra Alfassa), regularly practiced Automatic writing.

Shortly after his 1917 marriage to Georgie Hyde-Lees, the poet W. B. Yeats came to be heavily influenced by her delving into what they referred to as &quot;the automatic script&quot;.

In his 1918 book &quot;The New Revelation&quot;, Arthur Conan Doyle wrote that automatic writing occurs either by the writer&#x27;s subconscious or by external spirits operating through the writer. Doyle and his wife led an automatic writing séance with Harry Houdini wherein Lady Doyle wrote 15 pages of purported messages from Houdini&#x27;s mother, although this information was immediately discounted as fraudulent by Houdini.

The essay &quot;The Automatic Message&quot; (1933), first published in the magazine &quot;Minotaure&quot;, No. 3-4, (Paris), was one of André Breton&#x27;s significant theoretical works about automatism. In 1919, Breton and Philippe Soupault had used what later became the Surrealist automatism method to compose &quot;Les Champs Magnétiques&quot; (The Magnetic Fields). In 1997, &quot;The Magnetic Fields&quot; was also the title of a compilation of surrealist writing of André Breton, Paul Éluard, Philippe Soupault, and others. It included the authorized translation of Breton&#x27;s The Automatic Message in English by the poet David Gascoyne, whose &quot;Man&#x27;s Life is This Meat&quot; (1936) (a collection of his own surrealist writings and translations of the French surrealists) and &quot;Hölderlin&#x27;s Madness&quot; (1938) established Gascoyne&#x27;s reputation as one of a small group of English surrealists. Gascoyne&#x27;s 1935 &quot;A Short Survey of Surrealism&quot; for the 1936 London International Surrealist Exhibition also expanded the movement to the English-speaking world. The Surrealist poet Robert Desnos claimed he was among the most gifted in automatic writing. Surrealist automatists, most notably André Masson, adapted these methods to art-making in which the artist suppresses conscious control over the making process, allowing the unconscious mind to have great sway. Prior to the Surrealists, Dadaists, such as Hans Arp, made some use of this method through chance operations.

The medium Pierre L. O. A. Keeler had an alleged spirit writing communication from Abraham Lincoln currently exhibited at the Lily Dale Museum. Despite Lincoln being well-known for his skepticism and Keeler having been known to employ magician&#x27;s tricks, this is used as one of the many examples of skeptics purportedly endorsing Spiritualism posthumously. Skeptical investigator Joe Nickell who conducted a detailed examination of the &quot;spirit&quot; writing, concluded it had no resemblance to Lincoln&#x27;s handwriting and described the message as &quot;bogus&quot;.

There was an apocalyptic cult led by a lapsed Scientologist named Dorothy Martin. She and her followers were waiting for an alien ship to take them to the nonexistent planet Clarion and save them from a worldwide flood that was to commence at midnight on December 20, 1954. When that did not occur, Martin allegedly got an automatic writing message from God calling the whole thing off.

===Since 1975===

In 1975, Wendy Hart of Maidenhead claimed she wrote automatically about Nicholas Moore, a sea captain who died in 1642. Also in 1975, the CIA attempted to employ remote viewing through the Stargate Project. In the spring of 1989, Angela Dellafiora, a member of Stargate Project&#x27;s remote viewing unit, claimed to be guided by spirits moving her hand in writing responses about the location of a fugitive DEA agent named Charlie Jordan. In reviewing the matter, Joe Nickell states, &quot;[T]he Charlie Jordan case, touted as one of the most successful examples... in the U.S. government&#x27;s psychic-spying project is not convincing evidence of anything — save perhaps folly. ...[I]t also illustrates the limitations of anecdotal evidence: conflicting versions, selective reporting, and lack of documentation, together with additional manifestations of faulty memory, bias, and other human foibles.&quot;

Conspiracy theorist David Icke said he first became aware of being &quot;Son of the Godhead&quot; via automatic writing. Vassula Ryden claims to receive and transcribe messages from her guardian angel Daniel, Jesus, Yahweh. She has provoked both skepticism and credulity from Catholic laity and clergy, as well as the skeptical community at large. Alleged cases of automatic writing have included Joseph Smith, Patience Worth, Aleister Crowley, Jane Roberts, Helen Schucman and author Neale Donald Walsch. Crowley, for instance, compiled the &quot;Collected Works&quot; over time, which included &quot;The Book of the Law&quot; as well as transcripts of his visions of the first two Enochian Aethyrs (planes).

==Scientific analysis and skepticism==

Scientists and skeptics consider automatic writing to be the result of the ideomotor effect.

According to skeptical investigator Joe Nickell, &quot;automatic writing is produced while one is in a dissociated state. It is a form of motor automatism, or unconscious muscular activity.&quot; Neurologist Terence Hines has written &quot;automatic writing is an example of a milder form of dissociative state&quot;. In 1900, Swiss psychologist Theodore Flournoy studied the case of the French medium Helene Smith, particularly her handwriting during seances. He concluded that the automatic writing phenomenon was an effect of autosuggestion produced by autohypnotization, leading to the emergence of a secondary self.

Paranormal researcher Ben Radford writes in his 2017 book &quot;Investigating Ghosts&quot; that there is no real way to know if the writing is coming from &quot;outside their bodies,&quot; you &quot;must take their word for it. Because the source of the information is at issue and the medium cannot be validated, we must turn to the content of the material.&quot; Various psychic mediums have claimed to channel famous dead people. For example, Susan Lander claimed that Betsy Ross contacted her to say, &quot;I am gay and I fly the flag of pride and liberty for all of us.&quot; According to Radford, historians say that there is &quot;no credible historical evidence that Ross ... either made or had a hand in designing the American flag.&quot; Without some kind of validation, &quot;anyone can claim to communicate with the spirit of anyone.&quot; Radford argues that &quot;Automatic writing should logically hinder, not help spirit communication,&quot; given that spelling and grammar are more difficult than direct speech. 

===Scientific studies===

In an 1890 paper on hypnotism, Morton Prince claims, &quot;automatic writing is not a purely unconscious reflex act, but, the product of conscious individuality,&quot; and further claims that the hand that is writing is under the control of a separate hypnotic personality during trances. Physician Charles Arthur Mercier, in the &quot;British Medical Journal&quot; (1894), criticized the spiritualist interpretation of automatic writing, concluding, &quot;there is no need nor room for the agency of spirits, and the invocation of such agency is the sign of a mind not merely unscientific, but uninformed.&quot;

Psychology professor Théodore Flournoy investigated the claim by nineteenth-century medium Hélène Smith (Catherine Müller) that she did automatic writing to convey messages from Mars in Martian language. Flournoy concluded that her &quot;Martian&quot; language had a strong resemblance to Ms. Smith&#x27;s native language of French and that her automatic writing was &quot;romances of the subliminal imagination, derived largely from forgotten sources (for example, books read as a child).&quot; He invented the term cryptomnesia to describe this phenomenon.

In 1927, psychiatrist Harold Dearden wrote that automatic writing is a psychological method of &quot;tapping&quot; the unconscious mind and that there is nothing mysterious about it.

In 1986, A.B. Joseph investigated two female patients who were found to exhibit ictal hypergraphia.

Automatic writing behavior was discovered by Dilek Evyapan and Emre Kumral in three patients with right hemispheric damage.

A 2012 study of ten psychographers using single photon emission computed tomography showed differences in brain activity and writing complexity during alleged trance states vs. normal state writing.

==Pop culture and media==

Automatic writing is touted by medium Bonnie Page in a &quot;Sentinel and Enterprise&quot; article as a method of accessing claircognizance abilities.

Automatic writing is featured prominently in a 1961 episode of &quot;Perry Mason&quot;, &quot;The Case of the Meddling Medium&quot;, and is also depicted in the 1980 film &quot;The Changeling&quot; and the 1999 film &quot;The Sixth Sense&quot;.

Portions of Van Morrison&#x27;s album &quot;Astral Weeks&quot; supposedly are inspired by dreams, reveries, and automatic writing.

Czech director Jan Švankmajer claims he concocted the screenplay for his hybrid film &quot;Insect (Hmyz)&quot; in a fit of automatic writing.

William S. Burroughs has described his book &quot;Naked Lunch&quot; as &quot;automatic writing gone horribly wrong&quot; and believed he found his subconscious taken over by a hostile entity.

In an interview in &quot;GQ&quot;, David Byrne indicated an interest in automatic writing due to the influence of Brian Eno.

==Gallery==
==See also==
* Automatic drawing
* Artistic inspiration
* Asemic writing
* Automatic speech
* &quot;Memoirs of a Suicide&quot;
* Chico Xavier
* Joseph Sieber Benner
* Divided consciousness
* Dowsing
* Dual consciousness
* Graphology
* Left brain interpreter
* List of topics characterized as pseudoscience
* &quot;Oahspe: A New Bible&quot; – claimed to be written via automatic writing
* Spiritism
* &quot;Spiritism&quot;
* Spiritualist art
* Speaking in tongues
* Surrealist automatism
* Table-turning
* Xenoglossy
==References==
==Further reading==
* (The document is in English but the linked website is in German.)
* 
* 
* 

== External links ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2682005" start="0" end="17" title="Automatic writing" label="Automatic writing"/>
<link wikidata="Q2682005" start="31" end="43" title="Automatic writing" label="psychography"/>
<link wikidata="Q6635546" start="58" end="73" title="List of psychic abilities" label="psychic ability"/>
<link wikidata="Q2098091" start="415" end="425" title="planchette" label="planchette"/>
<link wikidata="Q672107" start="431" end="436" title="ouija" label="ouija"/>
<link wikidata="Q871710" start="528" end="532" title="Fuji (planchette writing)" label="Fuji"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074275" start="536" end="557" title="Chinese folk religion" label="Chinese folk religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q35325" start="566" end="574" title="Enochian" label="Enochian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1115585" start="600" end="614" title="Enochian magic" label="Enochian magic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7578143" start="657" end="669" title="Spiritualism (beliefs)" label="Spiritualism"/>
<link wikidata="Q178934" start="678" end="684" title="occult" label="occult"/>
<link wikidata="Q40213" start="723" end="734" title="W. B. Yeats" label="W. B. Yeats"/>
<link wikidata="Q35610" start="739" end="757" title="Arthur Conan Doyle" label="Arthur Conan Doyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q220888" start="861" end="874" title="Unfalsifiability" label="unfalsifiable"/>
<link wikidata="Q787393" start="935" end="955" title="ideomotor phenomenon" label="ideomotor phenomenon"/>
<link wikidata="Q871710" start="1025" end="1029" title="Fuji (planchette writing)" label="Fuji"/>
<link wikidata="Q7462" start="1159" end="1171" title="Song dynasty" label="Song dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q10874708" start="1268" end="1298" title="Chinese salvationist religions" label="Chinese salvationist religions"/>
<link wikidata="Q384728" start="1456" end="1461" title="Ōbaku" label="Ōbaku"/>
<link wikidata="Q9598" start="1514" end="1520" title="Taoist" label="Taoist"/>
<link wikidata="Q3705105" start="1553" end="1560" title="kung fu" label="kung fu"/>
<link wikidata="Q35325" start="1636" end="1644" title="Enochian" label="Enochian"/>
<link wikidata="Q201484" start="1677" end="1685" title="John Dee" label="John Dee"/>
<link wikidata="Q127080" start="1690" end="1703" title="Edward Kelley" label="Edward Kelley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1115585" start="1755" end="1769" title="Enochian magic" label="Enochian magic"/>
<link wikidata="Q912502" start="1937" end="1951" title="elixir of life" label="elixir of life"/>
<link wikidata="Q544113" start="1968" end="1985" title="Glastonbury Abbey" label="Glastonbury Abbey"/>
<link wikidata="Q369067" start="2020" end="2044" title="William Fletcher Barrett" label="William Fletcher Barrett"/>
<link wikidata="Q2098091" start="2175" end="2185" title="planchette" label="planchette"/>
<link wikidata="Q829348" start="2230" end="2242" title="Spiritualism (movement)" label="Spiritualism"/>
<link wikidata="Q583271" start="2297" end="2303" title="mediumship" label="medium"/>
<link wikidata="Q179098" start="2418" end="2439" title="psychical researchers" label="psychical researchers"/>
<link wikidata="Q7795879" start="2448" end="2466" title="Thomson Jay Hudson" label="Thomson Jay Hudson"/>
<link wikidata="Q848369" start="2533" end="2550" title="subconscious mind" label="subconscious mind"/>
<link wikidata="Q476676" start="2610" end="2621" title="Harry Price" label="Harry Price"/>
<link wikidata="Q893894" start="2668" end="2682" title="Borley Rectory" label="Borley Rectory"/>
<link wikidata="Q5686" start="2843" end="2858" title="Charles Dickens" label="Charles Dickens"/>
<link wikidata="Q1168105" start="2887" end="2913" title="The Mystery of Edwin Drood" label="The Mystery of Edwin Drood"/>
<link wikidata="Q44178991" start="2967" end="2978" title="T. P. James" label="T. P. James"/>
<link wikidata="Q297726" start="3276" end="3291" title="Hyppolyte Taine" label="Hyppolyte Taine"/>
<link wikidata="Q173481" start="3458" end="3473" title="Fernando Pessoa" label="Fernando Pessoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q40213" start="3705" end="3725" title="William Butler Yeats" label="William Butler Yeats"/>
<link wikidata="Q192207" start="3771" end="3784" title="Sri Aurobindo" label="Sri Aurobindo"/>
<link wikidata="Q464879" start="3815" end="3828" title="Mirra Alfassa" label="Mirra Alfassa"/>
<link wikidata="Q5548182" start="3906" end="3923" title="Georgie Hyde-Lees" label="Georgie Hyde-Lees"/>
<link wikidata="Q40213" start="3934" end="3945" title="W. B. Yeats" label="W. B. Yeats"/>
<link wikidata="Q35610" start="4105" end="4123" title="Arthur Conan Doyle" label="Arthur Conan Doyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q131545" start="4310" end="4323" title="Harry Houdini" label="Harry Houdini"/>
<link wikidata="Q7714975" start="4504" end="4525" title="The Automatic Message" label="The Automatic Message"/>
<link wikidata="Q1518390" start="4578" end="4587" title="Minotaure" label="Minotaure"/>
<link wikidata="Q161955" start="4624" end="4636" title="André Breton" label="André Breton"/>
<link wikidata="Q186251" start="4680" end="4690" title="Surrealist automatism" label="automatism"/>
<link wikidata="Q336467" start="4712" end="4729" title="Philippe Soupault" label="Philippe Soupault"/>
<link wikidata="Q186251" start="4761" end="4782" title="Surrealist automatism" label="Surrealist automatism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2745130" start="4807" end="4829" title="Les Champs Magnétiques" label="Les Champs Magnétiques"/>
<link wikidata="Q7714975" start="5075" end="5096" title="The Automatic Message" label="The Automatic Message"/>
<link wikidata="Q176372" start="5120" end="5134" title="David Gascoyne" label="David Gascoyne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1666958" start="5489" end="5531" title="London International Surrealist Exhibition" label="London International Surrealist Exhibition"/>
<link wikidata="Q39427" start="5594" end="5604" title="Surrealist" label="Surrealist"/>
<link wikidata="Q170095" start="5610" end="5623" title="Robert Desnos" label="Robert Desnos"/>
<link wikidata="Q312529" start="5720" end="5732" title="André Masson" label="André Masson"/>
<link wikidata="Q6034" start="5920" end="5924" title="Dada" label="Dada"/>
<link wikidata="Q153739" start="5938" end="5946" title="Hans Arp" label="Hans Arp"/>
<link wikidata="Q583271" start="6009" end="6015" title="Mediumship" label="medium"/>
<link wikidata="Q23620049" start="6016" end="6038" title="Pierre L. O. A. Keeler" label="Pierre L. O. A. Keeler"/>
<link wikidata="Q91" start="6088" end="6103" title="Abraham Lincoln" label="Abraham Lincoln"/>
<link wikidata="Q1389124" start="6389" end="6400" title="Joe Nickell" label="Joe Nickell"/>
<link wikidata="Q131036" start="6630" end="6643" title="Scientologist" label="Scientologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q238803" start="7013" end="7023" title="Maidenhead" label="Maidenhead"/>
<link wikidata="Q37230" start="7128" end="7131" title="CIA" label="CIA"/>
<link wikidata="Q844197" start="7152" end="7166" title="remote viewing" label="remote viewing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132233" start="7179" end="7195" title="Stargate Project (U.S. Army unit)" label="Stargate Project"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132233" start="7251" end="7267" title="Stargate Project (U.S. Army unit)" label="Stargate Project"/>
<link wikidata="Q333118" start="7921" end="7931" title="David Icke" label="David Icke"/>
<link wikidata="Q263261" start="8022" end="8035" title="Vassula Ryden" label="Vassula Ryden"/>
<link wikidata="Q47102" start="8298" end="8310" title="Joseph Smith" label="Joseph Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q3368744" start="8312" end="8326" title="Patience Worth" label="Patience Worth"/>
<link wikidata="Q172684" start="8328" end="8344" title="Aleister Crowley" label="Aleister Crowley"/>
<link wikidata="Q465348" start="8346" end="8358" title="Jane Roberts" label="Jane Roberts"/>
<link wikidata="Q273262" start="8360" end="8374" title="Helen Schucman" label="Helen Schucman"/>
<link wikidata="Q318860" start="8386" end="8405" title="Neale Donald Walsch" label="Neale Donald Walsch"/>
<link wikidata="Q787393" start="8727" end="8743" title="Ideomotor phenomenon" label="ideomotor effect"/>
<link wikidata="Q1389124" start="8782" end="8793" title="Joe Nickell" label="Joe Nickell"/>
<link wikidata="Q7701917" start="8954" end="8967" title="Terence Hines" label="Terence Hines"/>
<link wikidata="Q18663" start="9038" end="9056" title="Dissociation (psychology)" label="dissociative state"/>
<link wikidata="Q667117" start="9092" end="9109" title="Théodore Flournoy" label="Theodore Flournoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1915357" start="9148" end="9160" title="Hélène Smith" label="Helene Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q2896201" start="9390" end="9401" title="Ben Radford" label="Ben Radford"/>
<link wikidata="Q234952" start="9840" end="9850" title="Betsy Ross" label="Betsy Ross"/>
<link wikidata="Q3324608" start="10456" end="10469" title="Morton Prince" label="Morton Prince"/>
<link wikidata="Q15431205" start="10724" end="10746" title="Charles Arthur Mercier" label="Charles Arthur Mercier"/>
<link wikidata="Q546003" start="10761" end="10784" title="British Medical Journal" label="British Medical Journal"/>
<link wikidata="Q667117" start="11060" end="11077" title="Théodore Flournoy" label="Théodore Flournoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1915357" start="11130" end="11142" title="Hélène Smith" label="Hélène Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q111" start="11217" end="11221" title="Mars" label="Mars"/>
<link wikidata="Q1790393" start="11556" end="11568" title="cryptomnesia" label="cryptomnesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q21466126" start="11621" end="11635" title="Harold Dearden" label="Harold Dearden"/>
<link wikidata="Q16564780" start="11863" end="11868" title="ictal" label="ictal"/>
<link wikidata="Q962154" start="11869" end="11881" title="hypergraphia" label="hypergraphia"/>
<link wikidata="Q551808" start="11982" end="11999" title="Cerebral hemisphere" label="right hemispheric"/>
<link wikidata="Q7256350" start="12029" end="12040" title="psychograph" label="psychograph"/>
<link wikidata="Q849737" start="12050" end="12092" title="single photon emission computed tomography" label="single photon emission computed tomography"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12274" end="12285" title="Bonnie Page" label="Bonnie Page"/>
<link wikidata="Q2975244" start="12360" end="12375" title="claircognizance" label="claircognizance"/>
<link wikidata="Q165356" start="12457" end="12468" title="Perry Mason (1957 TV series)" label="Perry Mason"/>
<link wikidata="Q1168623" start="12565" end="12579" title="The Changeling (film)" label="The Changeling"/>
<link wikidata="Q183063" start="12610" end="12625" title="The Sixth Sense" label="The Sixth Sense"/>
<link wikidata="Q272203" start="12646" end="12658" title="Van Morrison" label="Van Morrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q750452" start="12678" end="12690" title="Astral Weeks" label="Astral Weeks"/>
<link wikidata="Q316165" start="12781" end="12795" title="Jan Švankmajer" label="Jan Švankmajer"/>
<link wikidata="Q188176" start="12909" end="12929" title="William S. Burroughs" label="William S. Burroughs"/>
<link wikidata="Q379286" start="12959" end="12970" title="Naked Lunch" label="Naked Lunch"/>
<link wikidata="Q336640" start="13137" end="13148" title="David Byrne" label="David Byrne"/>
<link wikidata="Q569003" start="13216" end="13225" title="Brian Eno" label="Brian Eno"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13255" end="13272" title="Spiritualist art#Automatic drawing" label="Automatic drawing"/>
<link wikidata="Q196668" start="13275" end="13295" title="Artistic inspiration" label="Artistic inspiration"/>
<link wikidata="Q15073717" start="13298" end="13312" title="Asemic writing" label="Asemic writing"/>
<link wikidata="Q11073520" start="13315" end="13331" title="Automatic speech" label="Automatic speech"/>
<link wikidata="Q10328604" start="13340" end="13360" title="Memoirs of a Suicide" label="Memoirs of a Suicide"/>
<link wikidata="Q561598" start="13369" end="13381" title="Chico Xavier" label="Chico Xavier"/>
<link wikidata="Q3525510" start="13384" end="13404" title="Joseph Sieber Benner" label="Joseph Sieber Benner"/>
<link wikidata="Q984598" start="13407" end="13428" title="Divided consciousness" label="Divided consciousness"/>
<link wikidata="Q64434026" start="13431" end="13438" title="Dowsing" label="Dowsing"/>
<link wikidata="Q5310190" start="13441" end="13459" title="Dual consciousness" label="Dual consciousness"/>
<link wikidata="Q185133" start="13462" end="13472" title="Graphology" label="Graphology"/>
<link wikidata="Q6516942" start="13475" end="13497" title="Left brain interpreter" label="Left brain interpreter"/>
<link wikidata="Q4437154" start="13500" end="13545" title="List of topics characterized as pseudoscience" label="List of topics characterized as pseudoscience"/>
<link wikidata="Q2351381" start="13548" end="13579" title="Oahspe" label="&amp;quot;Oahspe: A New Bible&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q214255" start="13628" end="13637" title="Kardecist spiritism" label="Spiritism"/>
<link wikidata="Q55461670" start="13646" end="13655" title="Spiritism (book)" label="Spiritism"/>
<link wikidata="Q10355291" start="13664" end="13680" title="Spiritualist art" label="Spiritualist art"/>
<link wikidata="Q61070" start="13683" end="13702" title="Speaking in tongues" label="Speaking in tongues"/>
<link wikidata="Q186251" start="13705" end="13726" title="Surrealist automatism" label="Surrealist automatism"/>
<link wikidata="Q3513424" start="13729" end="13742" title="Table-turning" label="Table-turning"/>
<link wikidata="Q785104" start="13745" end="13755" title="Xenoglossy" label="Xenoglossy"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="252252" wikidata="Q182043" url="?curid=252252" title="Matti Vanhanen">
<text>Matti Taneli Vanhanen (; born 4 November 1955) is a Finnish politician who served as Prime Minister of Finland from 2003 to 2010. He was also Chairman of the Centre Party in 2006. In his earlier career, he was a journalist. Vanhanen is the son of professor Tatu Vanhanen and Anni Tiihonen.

==Career==
Vanhanen studied political science at the University of Helsinki, graduating as a Master of Social Sciences in 1989. He was chairman of the Centre Party Youth League from 1980 to 1983. He also served as a member of the Espoo City Council from 1981 to 1984. Vanhanen used to work as a journalist. He was an editor (1985–1988) and editor-in-chief (1988–1991) at the local newspaper &quot;Kehäsanomat&quot;. In a column in &quot;Suomenmaa&quot; (the Centre Party&#x27;s organ), he strongly condemned the &quot;Baltic Star&quot; pro-Estonian independence demonstration held in Helsinki in July 1985, calling the demonstration &quot;provocative&quot;.
Vanhanen was elected to the Finnish Parliament (Eduskunta) in 1991. As a member of Parliament he was interested in ecological issues. For instance, Vanhanen spoke against the building of a fifth nuclear power plant in 1992, at the same time as serving on the board of electricity corporation Fortum. He served on the Parliamentary Environment Committee 1991–1995, and was chair of the Parliamentary Grand Committee 2000–2001. He was vice-chair of the Centre Party Parliamentary group 1994–2001, and Deputy Chairman of the Centre Party 2000–2003.

Another important topic for Vanhanen was Finland&#x27;s foreign and security policy. As a specialist on the European Union he was a member of the European Union Constitutional Convention. There he criticised the president of the convention, former French president Valéry Giscard d&#x27;Estaing, as authoritarian. Vanhanen has said that he is unenthusiastic about European co-operation, and that he is an &quot;EU pragmatist&quot;, so he may be considered a eurosceptic, especially when compared to his EU-enthusiast predecessor Paavo Lipponen.

Vanhanen served as Chairman of the Youth Foundation from 1998 to 2003 and deputy chairman from 1981 to 1997. The prosecution claims the Youth Foundation donated under the direction of Centre Party MP Antti Kaikkonen funding of over 90,000 euros for his own campaign and that of other Centre Party MPs including Matti Vanhanen. Prosecutors say this contravened the Foundation&#x27;s own rules and laws governing such institutions.

===Vanhanen&#x27;s first cabinet===
Vanhanen resigned from the Constitutional Convention in 2003 when he became Minister of Defense in the cabinet of Prime Minister Anneli Jäätteenmäki. After Jäätteenmäki&#x27;s resignation, Vanhanen was elected Prime Minister and his first cabinet was formed.

As a politician, Vanhanen is considered to be part of the liberal wing of the old agrarian Central Party, along with the two other Party ministers from Uusimaa region. His government cut the top state income tax rate from 35.5% to 33.5% in 2005 and 32.5% in 2006 (resulting in approximately 55% total tax rate after local government and social security taxes). The corporate tax rate was also lowered to 26% and capital gains to 28% (both formerly 29%), though at the same time dividends were partially made taxable.

===Presidential candidate===

As the Centre Party candidate, Vanhanen challenged President Tarja Halonen in the 2006 Finnish presidential election. He received 18.6% of the vote, coming third to the National Coalition Party&#x27;s Sauli Niinistö (24.1%) and Social Democrat and incumbent Tarja Halonen (46.3%), and thus did not qualify for the runoff. Vanhanen expressed his support for Niinistö in the runoff election against his coalition partner&#x27;s candidate Halonen.

The presidential election, and co-operation between Centre Party and National Coalition Party, proved to be a major strain on the government coalition between the Centre Party and Social Democrats. The flashpoint came in March, when the Centre Party demanded national agricultural subsidies to cover farmers&#x27; losses when the Finnish exception in the European Union&#x27;s Common Agricultural Policy was about to expire. At the end of the crisis Vanhanen told his parliamentary group that taxpayers would cover ninety percent or about 100 million euros in losses.

Matti Vanhanen received 25,000 euros for his presidential election campaign in 2006 from Ahti Vilppula via his company Helsingin Mekaanikkotalo. Mekaanikkotalo is owned by Procomex in Luxembourg and further by Kilbrin Investments Limited in the Virgin Islands. In 2009 it was found out that this finance was not included in the finance announcement.

===Vanhanen&#x27;s second cabinet===

After the March 2007 election the Centre Party narrowly remained the largest party after losing four seats. However, their coalition partner, the SDP, lost eight seats and the centre-right National Coalition Party gained ten. Vanhanen&#x27;s second cabinet was formed on a centre-right basis, with minor partners the Green League and the Swedish People&#x27;s Party.

A scandal involving Vanhanen&#x27;s second cabinet began rolling in May 2008, after the leader of the Centre Party&#x27;s parliamentary group Timo Kalli said publicly that he would not reveal information about his campaign finances, because such disclosure was not required. After a media backlash, Kalli gave up his secrecy and listed a group of businessmen known as &quot;Kehittyvien maakuntien Suomi&quot; (KMS; in English, &quot;The Finland of Developing Regions&quot;), who had financed the Centre Party. Centre Party links with KMS were suspected, as one address of the organisation belonged to a party official. It was later revealed that the organisation had been formed in the Centre Party&#x27;s general secretary&#x27;s office.

After the Russian response to the Georgian invasion of South Ossetia, Vanhanen said that Finland would rethink its security.

Vanhanen&#x27;s cabinet proposed raising the retirement age from 63 to 65 years. His proposal was fiercely opposed by the Central Organisation of Finnish Trade Unions (Finnish acronym SAK), which is affiliated with the SDP.

In December 2009, Vanhanen announced that he would step down as chair of the Centre Party at its June 2010 convention. Mari Kiviniemi was chosen to the position and she also inherited the position as Prime Minister. In September 2010 Vanhanen started as the head of the Family Business Network Finland and left the parliament.

In 2010, the Finnish police investigated whether Vanhanen had been wrong not to disqualify himself in certain cabinet decisions on financial contributions to an organisation affiliated with the Centre Party, which had previously financed Vanhanen&#x27;s presidential campaign. Because the charges concerned Vanhanen&#x27;s actions while in office, the decision whether he should be prosecuted fell to the Constitutional Law Committee of the Finnish Parliament. The Committee decided not to prosecute Vanhanen.

===Return to politics===
In November 2014, Vanhanen announced that he would leave the Family Business Network. He was elected to the parliament in the 2015 elections with 11,304 personal votes. In June 2015, Vanhanen was chosen as the chairman of the Centre Party parliamentary group.

In March 2016, Vanhanen announced that he is seeking Centre Party&#x27;s candidacy in 2018 presidential election. As no challengers appeared within the party, Vanhanen was the sole candidate in June&#x27;s party conference and was confirmed as the Centre Party&#x27;s candidate in the presidential election. Vanhanen said that his candidacy is motivated by the support he felt he had around the country during his last campaign and the will to improve the security situation in the areas surrounding Finland. Following the nomination, Vanhanen left his duties as the chairman of the parliamentary group in order to focus on global affairs. On 23 June 2016, Vanhanen was chosen as the chairman of the Foreign Affairs Committee in the Parliament. In the first round of the presidential election, Vanhanen placed fifth with 4.1 percent of the votes, while the incumbent president Sauli Niinistö went on to secure his second term with a majority of votes.

After getting re-elected in 2019 parliamentary election, Vanhanen was elected as the Speaker of the Parliament.

In June 2020, after Katri Kulmuni&#x27;s resignation, Vanhanen was appointed Minister of Finance. Though he initially didn&#x27;t want to accept the offer, he changed his mind and accepted out of a sense of duty. In May 2021 Vanhanen announced his resignation from the post to hand it over to party chair Annika Saarikko.

In 2016, Vanhanen said that Finland&#x27;s membership in NATO was a true option. In 2022, Vanhanen supported Finland&#x27;s membership in NATO. In 2023, as the Speaker of the Parliament of Finland he signed the parliament&#x27;s approval to join the military alliance.

==Personality==

Vanhanen has been characterised as uncharismatic and even boring, which he has attempted to turn to his advantage in tense political situations. Vanhanen is known for being a teetotaler, saying that he does not like the taste of alcohol.

Matti Vanhanen was against the independence movement in the Baltic States during the 1980s. In his column in Suomenmaa in 1985, Vanhanen condemned the Baltic independence movement both for &quot;wishing to change the Soviet system&quot; and for &quot;indifference towards the post Second World War reality.&quot; Vanhanen claimed that the difference between capitalism and socialism was not significant; and that instead of being concerned about the Soviet system, it would be better to concentrate, for example, on the research of Finno-Ugric languages.

In 2009, he visited China and credited the government for being systematic, as well as being able to place clear priorities and to mobilise the required resources to accomplish them. In his opinion, the Western world ought to note the example of China, where policies are implemented rapidly and effectively. He said he was impressed of the progress the country has made in dealing with difficult issues.

Vanhanen married Merja Vanhanen in 1985. They have two children: Annastiina (born 1991) and Juhana (born 1994). Matti Vanhanen and Merja Vanhanen unexpectedly announced their divorce on 6 April 2005.

After his divorce, he dated Susan Kuronen (she later changed her last name to Ruusunen). In February 2007, Kuronen released a tell-all book &quot;The Prime Minister&#x27;s Bride&quot;, which actually boosted the prime minister&#x27;s popularity with the public. Tens of thousands of Finns signed an online petition against the book and some bookstores refused to put it on the shelf. Vanhanen sued the book&#x27;s publisher (but not Kuronen) for invasion of privacy in March 2007, following the March elections. In 2010 the Supreme Court of Finland upheld the privacy violation conviction against Susan Ruusunen and her publisher.

After ending his dating relationship with Kuronen (Ruusunen), Vanhanen got engaged to Sirkka Mertala in 2009. This relationship ended in 2010.

In a 2006 book commissioned for the presidential elections, &quot;Se on ihan Matti&quot;, Vanhanen compared the Finnish tabloid press to the KGB and Stasi, former Soviet Union and East German secret police agencies.

Vanhanen has two homes; he lives permanently in Lepsämä, a rural village in the Nurmijärvi municipality, but on weekends in the town of Rauma.

Vanhanen is about . He is left-handed.

==Cabinets==
* Vanhanen I Cabinet
* Vanhanen II Cabinet

== Honours ==

* Order of the Lion of Finland (1999)
* , Grand Cross, Order of the White Rose of Finland (2004)
* , 1st Class, Order of the Cross of Terra Mariana (2007)
* , Knight Grand Cross with Collar, Order of Merit of the Italian Republic (2008)
* , Commander Grand Cross, Order of the Polar Star
* , Grand Cross, Order of the Phoenix (Greece)

==See also==
* Keskusta

==References==
==External links==

* Official site



|-


|-</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q182043" start="0" end="21" title="Matti Vanhanen" label="Matti Taneli Vanhanen"/>
<link wikidata="Q738695" start="85" end="110" title="Prime Minister of Finland" label="Prime Minister of Finland"/>
<link wikidata="Q506591" start="158" end="170" title="Centre Party (Finland)" label="Centre Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q978240" start="257" end="270" title="Tatu Vanhanen" label="Tatu Vanhanen"/>
<link wikidata="Q36442" start="319" end="336" title="political science" label="political science"/>
<link wikidata="Q28695" start="344" end="366" title="University of Helsinki" label="University of Helsinki"/>
<link wikidata="Q34749" start="394" end="408" title="Social Science" label="Social Science"/>
<link wikidata="Q47034" start="521" end="526" title="Espoo" label="Espoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3080776" start="728" end="737" title="Suomenmaa" label="Suomenmaa"/>
<link wikidata="Q643412" start="977" end="1007" title="Parliament of Finland" label="Finnish Parliament (Eduskunta)"/>
<link wikidata="Q134447" start="1144" end="1163" title="nuclear power plant" label="nuclear power plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439075" start="1241" end="1247" title="Fortum" label="Fortum"/>
<link wikidata="Q4782149" start="1537" end="1579" title="Foreign relations of Finland" label="Finland&amp;#x27;s foreign and security policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="1604" end="1618" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q845296" start="1642" end="1682" title="Convention on the Future of Europe" label="European Union Constitutional Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q2124" start="1761" end="1790" title="Valéry Giscard d&amp;#x27;Estaing" label="Valéry Giscard d&amp;#x27;Estaing"/>
<link wikidata="Q6229" start="1795" end="1808" title="authoritarian" label="authoritarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q223200" start="1954" end="1965" title="Euroscepticism" label="eurosceptic"/>
<link wikidata="Q29110" start="2025" end="2039" title="Paavo Lipponen" label="Paavo Lipponen"/>
<link wikidata="Q11852109" start="2242" end="2257" title="Antti Kaikkonen" label="Antti Kaikkonen"/>
<link wikidata="Q229517" start="2638" end="2657" title="Anneli Jäätteenmäki" label="Anneli Jäätteenmäki"/>
<link wikidata="Q81988" start="2707" end="2733" title="Matti Vanhanen&amp;#x27;s first cabinet" label="was elected Prime Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q81988" start="2738" end="2755" title="Matti Vanhanen&amp;#x27;s first cabinet" label="his first cabinet"/>
<link wikidata="Q5711" start="2921" end="2935" title="Uusimaa" label="Uusimaa region"/>
<link wikidata="Q506591" start="3324" end="3336" title="Centre Party (Finland)" label="Centre Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q29558" start="3368" end="3377" title="president of Finland" label="President"/>
<link wikidata="Q29213" start="3378" end="3391" title="Tarja Halonen" label="Tarja Halonen"/>
<link wikidata="Q221057" start="3399" end="3433" title="2006 Finnish presidential election" label="2006 Finnish presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q304191" start="3486" end="3510" title="National Coalition Party (Finland)" label="National Coalition Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q29207" start="3518" end="3532" title="Sauli Niinistö" label="Sauli Niinistö"/>
<link wikidata="Q499029" start="3545" end="3560" title="Social Democratic Party of Finland" label="Social Democrat"/>
<link wikidata="Q29213" start="3575" end="3588" title="Tarja Halonen" label="Tarja Halonen"/>
<link wikidata="Q396268" start="4031" end="4053" title="Agricultural subsidy" label="agricultural subsidies"/>
<link wikidata="Q220687" start="4140" end="4166" title="Common Agricultural Policy" label="Common Agricultural Policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4696385" start="4421" end="4434" title="Ahti Vilppula" label="Ahti Vilppula"/>
<link wikidata="Q32" start="4516" end="4526" title="Luxembourg" label="Luxembourg"/>
<link wikidata="Q26262" start="4577" end="4591" title="Virgin Islands" label="Virgin Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q1386722" start="4731" end="4750" title="2007 Finnish parliamentary election" label="March 2007 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q499029" start="4867" end="4870" title="Social Democratic Party of Finland" label="SDP"/>
<link wikidata="Q304191" start="4910" end="4934" title="National Coalition Party (Finland)" label="National Coalition Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q74172" start="4947" end="4977" title="Matti Vanhanen&amp;#x27;s second cabinet" label="Vanhanen&amp;#x27;s second cabinet"/>
<link wikidata="Q196695" start="5038" end="5050" title="Green League" label="Green League"/>
<link wikidata="Q845537" start="5059" end="5086" title="Swedish People&amp;#x27;s Party (Finland)" label="Swedish People&amp;#x27;s Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q6304985" start="5231" end="5241" title="Timo Kalli" label="Timo Kalli"/>
<link wikidata="Q1352232" start="5303" end="5319" title="campaign finance" label="campaign finance"/>
<link wikidata="Q578398" start="6077" end="6121" title="Central Organisation of Finnish Trade Unions" label="Central Organisation of Finnish Trade Unions"/>
<link wikidata="Q105068" start="6299" end="6313" title="Mari Kiviniemi" label="Mari Kiviniemi"/>
<link wikidata="Q643412" start="6949" end="6967" title="Finnish Parliament" label="Finnish Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q1658720" start="7396" end="7417" title="2018 Finnish presidential election" label="presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q29207" start="8182" end="8196" title="Sauli Niinistö" label="Sauli Niinistö"/>
<link wikidata="Q20036875" start="8286" end="8313" title="2019 Finnish parliamentary election" label="2019 parliamentary election"/>
<link wikidata="Q20253947" start="8391" end="8404" title="Katri Kulmuni" label="Katri Kulmuni"/>
<link wikidata="Q7045446" start="8676" end="8691" title="Annika Saarikko" label="Annika Saarikko"/>
<link wikidata="Q7184" start="8751" end="8755" title="NATO" label="NATO"/>
<link wikidata="Q118157" start="9016" end="9029" title="charisma" label="uncharismatic"/>
<link wikidata="Q15131448" start="9156" end="9166" title="teetotalism" label="teetotaler"/>
<link wikidata="Q39731" start="9280" end="9293" title="Baltic States" label="Baltic States"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="9437" end="9443" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="9501" end="9517" title="Second World War" label="Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="9670" end="9676" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet"/>
<link wikidata="Q79890" start="9752" end="9773" title="Finno-Ugric languages" label="Finno-Ugric languages"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9840" end="9850" title=":wikt:systematic" label="systematic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7648343" start="10411" end="10424" title="Susan Kuronen" label="Susan Kuronen"/>
<link wikidata="Q262843" start="10682" end="10697" title="online petition" label="online petition"/>
<link wikidata="Q500459" start="10907" end="10931" title="Supreme Court of Finland" label="Supreme Court of Finland"/>
<link wikidata="Q895089" start="11279" end="11292" title="tabloid press" label="tabloid press"/>
<link wikidata="Q80919" start="11300" end="11303" title="KGB" label="KGB"/>
<link wikidata="Q153846" start="11308" end="11313" title="Stasi" label="Stasi"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="11322" end="11334" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q16957" start="11339" end="11350" title="East Germany" label="East German"/>
<link wikidata="Q6527853" start="11424" end="11431" title="Lepsämä" label="Lepsämä"/>
<link wikidata="Q597156" start="11456" end="11466" title="Nurmijärvi" label="Nurmijärvi"/>
<link wikidata="Q37013" start="11512" end="11517" title="Rauma, Finland" label="Rauma"/>
<link wikidata="Q2421902" start="11546" end="11557" title="left-handed" label="left-handed"/>
<link wikidata="Q81988" start="11575" end="11593" title="Vanhanen I Cabinet" label="Vanhanen I Cabinet"/>
<link wikidata="Q74172" start="11596" end="11615" title="Vanhanen II Cabinet" label="Vanhanen II Cabinet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1890947" start="11634" end="11662" title="Order of the Lion of Finland" label="Order of the Lion of Finland"/>
<link wikidata="Q94437" start="11687" end="11721" title="Order of the White Rose of Finland" label="Order of the White Rose of Finland"/>
<link wikidata="Q60476" start="11744" end="11779" title="Order of the Cross of Terra Mariana" label="Order of the Cross of Terra Mariana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059569" start="11823" end="11861" title="Order of Merit of the Italian Republic" label="Order of Merit of the Italian Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q961142" start="11896" end="11919" title="Order of the Polar Star" label="Order of the Polar Star"/>
<link wikidata="Q1536485" start="11937" end="11966" title="Order of the Phoenix (Greece)" label="Order of the Phoenix (Greece)"/>
<link wikidata="Q506591" start="11983" end="11991" title="Keskusta" label="Keskusta"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="252268" wikidata="Q3227602" url="?curid=252268" title="Liverpool, New South Wales">
<text>Liverpool is a suburb of South Western Sydney, in the state of New South Wales, Australia, south-west of the Sydney CBD. It is the administrative seat of the City of Liverpool and is in the Cumberland Plain.

==History==
Liverpool is one of the oldest urban settlements in Australia, founded on 7 November 1810 as an agricultural centre by Governor Lachlan Macquarie. He named it after Robert Banks Jenkinson, Earl of Liverpool, who was then the Secretary of State for the Colonies and the English city of Liverpool, upon which some of the area&#x27;s architecture is based.

The Post Office opened at Liverpool on 1 March 1825 - one of the first Post Offices to be opened in New South Wales. Liverpool was one of the six stations on the first line of Telegraphs to be constructed in this Colony. On 26 January 1858, a Telegraph Office was opened at the Railway Station. Later, on 12 July 1878, these two offices were amalgamated and plans proposed to construct a joint office. Finally a Foundation Stone was laid prior to construction starting. Mrs. N. G. Bull of Cabramatta had the honour of laying the Stone - such a responsibility given to a woman bringing great indignation by the Mayor and several of the leading men. An Indignation Meeting held soon after confirmed unanimously that Mrs Bull was &quot;a fit and proper person&quot; to have laid the stone.

Urban sprawl of Sydney across the Cumberland Plain soon reached Liverpool, and it became an outer suburb of metropolitan Sydney with a strong working-class presence and manufacturing facilities. The Liverpool area also became renowned for its vast Housing Commission estates housing thousands of low-income families after the slum clearance and urban renewal programs in inner-city Sydney in the 1960s.

== Heritage listings ==
Liverpool has a number of heritage-listed sites, including:
* 251 Bigge Street: Liverpool Courthouse
* Birkdale Crescent: Collingwood
* College Street: Old Liverpool Hospital
* Elizabeth Drive: St Luke&#x27;s Anglican Church
* Georges River, Heathcote Road near Newbridge Road: Liverpool Weir
* Great Southern railway: Liverpool railway station
* 17 Speed Street: Rosebank

==Commercial area==

Liverpool is currently the major city centre in South Western Sydney. The city centre has a Hoddle Grid layout with many little laneways and arcades, similar to that of Melbourne. The central retail strip is Macquarie Street which contains numerous small cafes. In recent times the extension of the Westfield shopping centre has seen many new fashion stores come in. The Central Business District is being touted as Sydney&#x27;s Third CBD centred around the Western Sydney Airport and aerotropolis. The CBD was rezoned for mixed use in 2018 to allow for more homes, offices and shops.

The main shopping area is centred on Macquarie Street, with Westfield Liverpool, a major shopping centre at the northern end. Liverpool Plaza is a shopping mall located between Macquarie Mall &amp; Northumberland Street. The northern end of the city has been zoned for high density residential apartments. The southern end of the city is zoned for high density commercial developments. Liverpool has a large teaching hospital, two technical colleges and many shopping centres and office buildings. The private hospital operator Healthscope owns the Sydney Southwest Private Hospital in Liverpool.

==Transport==

Liverpool is well served by roads such as the Hume Highway (also known as Liverpool Road), the M5 Motorway, and the Westlink M7 Motorway.

Liverpool railway station is on the Main Southern railway line. Liverpool has services to the Sydney CBD, Leppington, Parramatta and Schofields. The Liverpool to Parramatta transitway provides a bus-only route for buses.

For details of long distance and local bus services see Liverpool station.
==Schools==
There are three public primary schools within the suburb of Liverpool: Liverpool Public School, Liverpool West and Marsden Road. Liverpool Boys and Liverpool Girls are the two public secondary schools. The Mainsbridge School caters to children with intellectual disabilities and Liverpool Hospital School for children hospitalized for lengthy periods.

Private schools include All Saints Primary School, All Saints Catholic College and Al Amanah College.

Post secondary education is catered to with the South Western College of TAFE, Macarthur Community College, Liverpool U3A: School for Seniors, University of Western Sydney English Language Centre, School of Arts in Macquarie Street, and the University Of Wollongong.

== Places of worship ==
St Luke&#x27;s Anglican Church, located in the city centre across the road from Westfield Liverpool, is the oldest existing Anglican church in Australia. All Saints Catholic Church in George St is located with the All Saints schools. St Raphael, Nickolas and Irene Greek Orthodox Church is in Forbes Street and the Serbian Orthodox Church of the Apostle Luke is on Flowerdale Rd.

Ganzibra Dakhil Mandi is a Mandaean temple located in the city centre of Liverpool, and is the largest of its kind in Australia. It is led by Rishama (head priest) Salah Choheili.

==Sport and recreation==
===Parks===

There are many open spaces within the city centre, including botanical parks and sporting facilities. Bigge Park on the east side of the city features a War Memorial while Pioneer Memorial Park to the north has a historical cemetery. Woodward Park to the west is the main sporting precinct containing a number of outdoor playing fields and the Whitlam Leisure Centre, hosting a swimming pool and a 3000-seat indoor sports stadium. Other notable sports facilities within the suburb of Liverpool include Collimore Park (netball) and Paciullo Park (soccer and touch football).

===Sporting teams===
Prominent local teams include Fairfield-Liverpool Cricket Club which plays in the Sydney Grade Cricket competition, Liverpool City Netball, which has participated successfully in many State and representative competitions, Hinchinbrook Hornets Junior Rugby League and FC Bossy Liverpool which plays in the New South Wales Super League and Liverpool Rangers FC which is located at Ireland Park, Memorial Avenue. The West Sydney Razorbacks basketball team used to play out of the Gough Whitlam Centre while they were in the NBL. Liverpool is also home to Australian Ice Hockey League team the Sydney Ice Dogs who play out of the Liverpool Catholic Club Ice Rink and Liverpool little athletics.

==Media==

Liverpool has an arts and creation centre which provides music lessons with instruments such as:guitar, drums and banjo etc.

Liverpool is currently served by a full-time radio station 89.3FM 2GLF which broadcasts local information, music and ethnic programming. It is one of the first FM radio stations setup in the early &#x27;80s.

Liverpool has had several newspapers since the late 1800s. The first newspaper appeared in Liverpool in 1886 was &quot;The Liverpool Times&quot; which was soon superseded by &quot;The Liverpool Mercury&quot;. Both of these newspapers were then incorporated with &quot;The Liverpool Herald&quot;. There was also the free newspaper &quot;The Liverpool News&quot; that ran from 1904 to about 1973.
Liverpool now has two newspapers, &quot;The Liverpool Leader&quot; and &quot;The Liverpool Champion&quot; published every Wednesday.

==Demographics==
According to the 2021 census conducted by the Australian Bureau of Statistics, Liverpool had a population of 31,078. These came from a wide variety of ethnic backgrounds; approximately one-third (33.9%) of residents were born in Australia. The next most common countries of birth were Iraq (11.3%), India (4.9%), Vietnam (3.1%), Fiji (2.7%), and Philippines (2.2%). The most popular ethnic responses were Australian (9.4%), Iraqi (8.3%), English (8.3%), Serbian (6.9%), and Indian (6.8%).

24.6% of people only spoke English at home. Other languages spoken at home included Arabic 19.2%, Serbian 6.5%, Vietnamese 4.4%, Hindi 3.2%, and Urdu 2.4%.

Liverpool is remarkable for the high proportion of people who reported following some religion in the Census; only 12.1% stated that they had no religion, much lower than the national average of 38.4%. This Census question is optional and 10.9% of residents did not respond to it, which introduces some uncertainty into all the religious figures. The most common responses for religion were Islam 16.4%, Catholic 16.2%, and &quot;Miscellaneous Religions&quot; 9.2%.

==Notable people==

* Mark Bosnich, former footballer
* Leslie Camilleri, convicted criminal with 3x life imprisonment charges
* Michael Clarke, cricketer
* Sir Jenkin Coles, auctioneer and politician
* Walter Hampson Cooper, journalist, playwright, politician and barrister
* Isaac De Gois, rugby league player
* Mitchell Duke, soccer player
* Michael Dwyer, Irish Rebellion Leader (1798–1803) and Chief of Police Liverpool (1813–1820)
* Nathan Foley, former member of Hi-5, entertainer
* Frederick Augustus Forbes, store-keeper, grazier and politician
* Scott Gardiner, first golfer of Aboriginal descent to play on the PGA Tour
* Liam Hatcher, cricketer
* Vic Hey, rugby league player
* Brett Hodgson, rugby league player
* Harry Kewell, soccer player
* Craig Knowles, politician
* Terry Lamb, rugby league player
* Anthony Minichiello, rugby league player
* Mark Minichiello, rugby league player
* Brad Morrin, rugby league player
* Pat Richards, rugby league player
* Richard Sadleir (1794–1889), first mayor of Liverpool (in 1872)
* Lenny Zappavigna, boxer

==Politics==

The suburb of Liverpool is split in its representation at all three levels of government with Hoxton Park Road the divider in each case. At the local level, Liverpool is part of the City of Liverpool, which is divided into two wards, the North Ward on the north side of Hoxton Park Road and the South Ward on the other side. Each ward elects five councillors and the council currently consists of four Labor councillors, four Liberals, two members of the Liverpool Community Independents Team (LCIT). There is also a directly elected mayor, Ned Mannoun.

For New South Wales state elections, the north side of Liverpool is located in the Electoral district of Liverpool, held by Charishma Kaliyanda, while the south side is in the electoral district of Holsworthy, held by Tina Ayyad. Charishmas Kaliyanda is a member of the Labor Party while Tina Ahmad is a member of the Liberal Party. Federally, the north side of Liverpool is located in the Division of Hughes held by Jenny Ware of the Liberal Party. The south side is part of the Division of Werriwa, held by Labor&#x27;s Anne Stanley.

The table above illustrates recent election results in the Liverpool area by combining results from each of the booths located in the suburb of Liverpool. The table regards only the first-preference votes. The winner(s) of each election is highlighted in yellow.

== Geography ==

The Cooks River/Castlereagh Ironbark ecological community and Cumberland Plain Woodland are the indigenous flora community of the area, which are found in remnants within the suburb. 
=== Climate ===

Liverpool has a humid subtropical climate (Köppen climate classification: &quot;Cfa&quot;) and is a few degrees warmer than the Sydney CBD at daytime, although nights are slightly cooler than Sydney&#x27;s. If the maximum temperature is 27 °C in the city, in Liverpool it could typically reach as high as 33 °C, while in winter the temperature can be close to 0 °C while it is above 7 °C in central Sydney. 

The hottest day recorded in Liverpool was on 1 February 1977 when it reached 45.8 °C. At the time this was the second highest temperature recorded in Sydney&#x27;s metropolitan area, being 2 °C behind Richmond&#x27;s record set in 1939. 

Rainfall is somewhat spread throughout the months, although the first half tends to be wetter. July to September tend to be drier, due to foehn winds originating from the Great Dividing Range. Frost can occur in the winter; the lowest recorded temperature was -5 °C, on 25 July 1994.

==Notes==
==References==
==External links==
* Liverpool City Council website

* Spokey Blokeys - Liverpool - Episode 25</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3227602" start="0" end="9" title="Liverpool, New South Wales" label="Liverpool"/>
<link wikidata="Q7632426" start="15" end="21" title="Suburbs and localities (Australia)" label="suburb"/>
<link wikidata="Q7565311" start="25" end="45" title="South Western Sydney" label="South Western Sydney"/>
<link wikidata="Q3224" start="63" end="78" title="New South Wales" label="New South Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="80" end="89" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1852577" start="109" end="119" title="Sydney CBD" label="Sydney CBD"/>
<link wikidata="Q1309863" start="158" end="175" title="City of Liverpool (New South Wales)" label="City of Liverpool"/>
<link wikidata="Q3041725" start="190" end="206" title="Cumberland Plain" label="Cumberland Plain"/>
<link wikidata="Q467694" start="349" end="366" title="Lachlan Macquarie" label="Lachlan Macquarie"/>
<link wikidata="Q312569" start="386" end="408" title="Robert Jenkinson, 2nd Earl of Liverpool" label="Robert Banks Jenkinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q24074790" start="410" end="427" title="Earl of Liverpool" label="Earl of Liverpool"/>
<link wikidata="Q24826" start="506" end="515" title="Liverpool" label="Liverpool"/>
<link wikidata="Q192042" start="1364" end="1376" title="Urban sprawl" label="Urban sprawl"/>
<link wikidata="Q3041725" start="1398" end="1414" title="Cumberland Plain" label="Cumberland Plain"/>
<link wikidata="Q5916133" start="1612" end="1630" title="Housing NSW" label="Housing Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q26213921" start="1690" end="1704" title="slum clearance" label="slum clearance"/>
<link wikidata="Q920600" start="1709" end="1722" title="urban renewal" label="urban renewal"/>
<link wikidata="Q116457764" start="1872" end="1892" title="Liverpool Courthouse" label="Liverpool Courthouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q58202041" start="1914" end="1925" title="Collingwood, Liverpool" label="Collingwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q58202037" start="1944" end="1966" title="Old Liverpool Hospital" label="Old Liverpool Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q58201914" start="1986" end="2016" title="St Luke&amp;#x27;s Anglican Church, Liverpool" label="St Luke&amp;#x27;s Anglican Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q58202028" start="2070" end="2084" title="Liverpool Weir" label="Liverpool Weir"/>
<link wikidata="Q12061337" start="2111" end="2136" title="Liverpool railway station, Sydney" label="Liverpool railway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q58201919" start="2156" end="2164" title="Rosebank, Liverpool" label="Rosebank"/>
<link wikidata="Q2556223" start="2279" end="2290" title="Hoddle Grid" label="Hoddle Grid"/>
<link wikidata="Q7988705" start="2834" end="2853" title="Westfield Liverpool" label="Westfield Liverpool"/>
<link wikidata="Q31374404" start="2863" end="2878" title="shopping mall" label="shopping centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q188507" start="3068" end="3078" title="apartments" label="apartments"/>
<link wikidata="Q6658472" start="3182" end="3199" title="Liverpool Hospital" label="teaching hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q4284971" start="3276" end="3292" title="private hospital" label="private hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q5691366" start="3302" end="3313" title="Healthscope" label="Healthscope"/>
<link wikidata="Q1372588" start="3433" end="3445" title="Hume Highway" label="Hume Highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q929825" start="3482" end="3493" title="Metroad 5" label="M5 Motorway"/>
<link wikidata="Q2485091" start="3503" end="3514" title="Westlink M7" label="Westlink M7"/>
<link wikidata="Q12061337" start="3526" end="3551" title="Liverpool railway station, Sydney" label="Liverpool railway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q6736056" start="3562" end="3588" title="Main Southern railway line" label="Main Southern railway line"/>
<link wikidata="Q6527803" start="3632" end="3642" title="Leppington" label="Leppington"/>
<link wikidata="Q21319" start="3644" end="3654" title="Parramatta" label="Parramatta"/>
<link wikidata="Q7432005" start="3659" end="3669" title="Schofields, New South Wales" label="Schofields"/>
<link wikidata="Q6658678" start="3675" end="3709" title="Liverpool–Parramatta T-way" label="Liverpool to Parramatta transitway"/>
<link wikidata="Q12061337" start="3804" end="3821" title="Liverpool railway station, Sydney" label="Liverpool station"/>
<link wikidata="Q4729409" start="4239" end="4266" title="All Saints Catholic Boys College" label="All Saints Catholic College"/>
<link wikidata="Q4703472" start="4271" end="4288" title="Al Amanah College" label="Al Amanah College"/>
<link wikidata="Q3274997" start="4364" end="4368" title="TAFE" label="TAFE"/>
<link wikidata="Q1350021" start="4532" end="4556" title="University Of Wollongong" label="University Of Wollongong"/>
<link wikidata="Q58201914" start="4583" end="4613" title="St Luke&amp;#x27;s Anglican Church, Liverpool" label="St Luke&amp;#x27;s Anglican Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q7988705" start="4663" end="4682" title="Westfield Liverpool" label="Westfield Liverpool"/>
<link wikidata="Q188814" start="4898" end="4921" title="Serbian Orthodox Church" label="Serbian Orthodox Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q121952987" start="4964" end="4985" title="Ganzibra Dakhil Mandi" label="Ganzibra Dakhil Mandi"/>
<link wikidata="Q102444912" start="4991" end="5006" title="Mandaean temple" label="Mandaean temple"/>
<link wikidata="Q109967731" start="5128" end="5142" title="Salah Choheili" label="Salah Choheili"/>
<link wikidata="Q7659948" start="5861" end="5881" title="Sydney Grade Cricket" label="Sydney Grade Cricket"/>
<link wikidata="Q5424851" start="6047" end="6065" title="FC Bossy Liverpool" label="FC Bossy Liverpool"/>
<link wikidata="Q12494831" start="6085" end="6113" title="New South Wales Super League" label="New South Wales Super League"/>
<link wikidata="Q3567448" start="6194" end="6216" title="West Sydney Razorbacks" label="West Sydney Razorbacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q427823" start="6301" end="6304" title="National Basketball League (Australasia)" label="NBL"/>
<link wikidata="Q781457" start="6332" end="6360" title="Australian Ice Hockey League" label="Australian Ice Hockey League"/>
<link wikidata="Q1544685" start="6370" end="6385" title="Sydney Ice Dogs" label="Sydney Ice Dogs"/>
<link wikidata="Q16249506" start="6406" end="6438" title="Liverpool Catholic Club Ice Rink" label="Liverpool Catholic Club Ice Rink"/>
<link wikidata="Q7747804" start="7086" end="7106" title="The Liverpool Herald" label="The Liverpool Herald"/>
<link wikidata="Q7747802" start="7154" end="7172" title="The Liverpool News" label="The Liverpool News"/>
<link wikidata="Q60745365" start="7381" end="7392" title="2021 Australian census" label="2021 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q123347" start="7410" end="7441" title="Australian Bureau of Statistics" label="Australian Bureau of Statistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q796" start="7649" end="7653" title="Iraq" label="Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="7663" end="7668" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q881" start="7677" end="7684" title="Vietnam" label="Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q712" start="7693" end="7697" title="Fiji" label="Fiji"/>
<link wikidata="Q928" start="7710" end="7721" title="Philippines" label="Philippines"/>
<link wikidata="Q350628" start="8500" end="8512" title="Mark Bosnich" label="Mark Bosnich"/>
<link wikidata="Q814272" start="8534" end="8550" title="Leslie Camilleri" label="Leslie Camilleri"/>
<link wikidata="Q1428440" start="8607" end="8621" title="Michael Clarke (cricketer)" label="Michael Clarke"/>
<link wikidata="Q6177544" start="8639" end="8651" title="Jenkin Coles" label="Jenkin Coles"/>
<link wikidata="Q20810692" start="8681" end="8702" title="Walter Cooper (New South Wales politician)" label="Walter Hampson Cooper"/>
<link wikidata="Q6076235" start="8755" end="8768" title="Isaac De Gois" label="Isaac De Gois"/>
<link wikidata="Q5393901" start="8792" end="8805" title="Mitchell Duke" label="Mitchell Duke"/>
<link wikidata="Q3308168" start="8823" end="8836" title="Michael Dwyer" label="Michael Dwyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q6969053" start="8917" end="8929" title="Nathan Foley (singer)" label="Nathan Foley"/>
<link wikidata="Q5750135" start="8948" end="8952" title="Hi-5 (Australian group)" label="Hi-5"/>
<link wikidata="Q5497291" start="8968" end="8993" title="Frederick Augustus Forbes" label="Frederick Augustus Forbes"/>
<link wikidata="Q7436383" start="9034" end="9048" title="Scott Gardiner" label="Scott Gardiner"/>
<link wikidata="Q12060728" start="9066" end="9076" title="Aboriginal Australians" label="Aboriginal"/>
<link wikidata="Q910409" start="9100" end="9108" title="PGA Tour" label="PGA Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q21621447" start="9111" end="9123" title="Liam Hatcher" label="Liam Hatcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q7924823" start="9137" end="9144" title="Vic Hey" label="Vic Hey"/>
<link wikidata="Q2924606" start="9168" end="9181" title="Brett Hodgson" label="Brett Hodgson"/>
<link wikidata="Q204429" start="9205" end="9217" title="Harry Kewell" label="Harry Kewell"/>
<link wikidata="Q5181125" start="9235" end="9248" title="Craig Knowles" label="Craig Knowles"/>
<link wikidata="Q7704650" start="9263" end="9273" title="Terry Lamb" label="Terry Lamb"/>
<link wikidata="Q2852902" start="9297" end="9316" title="Anthony Minichiello" label="Anthony Minichiello"/>
<link wikidata="Q6768900" start="9340" end="9356" title="Mark Minichiello" label="Mark Minichiello"/>
<link wikidata="Q4954136" start="9380" end="9391" title="Brad Morrin" label="Brad Morrin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3368585" start="9415" end="9427" title="Pat Richards" label="Pat Richards"/>
<link wikidata="Q20741538" start="9451" end="9466" title="Richard Sadleir" label="Richard Sadleir"/>
<link wikidata="Q6526111" start="9517" end="9533" title="Lenny Zappavigna" label="Lenny Zappavigna"/>
<link wikidata="Q1309863" start="9738" end="9755" title="City of Liverpool (New South Wales)" label="City of Liverpool"/>
<link wikidata="Q3224" start="10115" end="10130" title="New South Wales" label="New South Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q5355602" start="10194" end="10225" title="Electoral district of Liverpool" label="Electoral district of Liverpool"/>
<link wikidata="Q117193480" start="10235" end="10254" title="Charishma Kaliyanda" label="Charishma Kaliyanda"/>
<link wikidata="Q16892020" start="10287" end="10319" title="electoral district of Holsworthy" label="electoral district of Holsworthy"/>
<link wikidata="Q117357100" start="10329" end="10339" title="Tina Ayyad" label="Tina Ayyad"/>
<link wikidata="Q2973656" start="10501" end="10519" title="Division of Hughes" label="Division of Hughes"/>
<link wikidata="Q112127622" start="10528" end="10538" title="Jenny Ware" label="Jenny Ware"/>
<link wikidata="Q2973901" start="10591" end="10610" title="Division of Werriwa" label="Division of Werriwa"/>
<link wikidata="Q25768264" start="10633" end="10645" title="Anne Stanley (politician)" label="Anne Stanley"/>
<link wikidata="Q28183787" start="10933" end="10986" title="Cooks River/Castlereagh Ironbark ecological community" label="Cooks River/Castlereagh Ironbark ecological community"/>
<link wikidata="Q55608674" start="10991" end="11016" title="Cumberland Plain Woodland" label="Cumberland Plain Woodland"/>
<link wikidata="Q864320" start="11146" end="11171" title="humid subtropical climate" label="humid subtropical climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q124095" start="11173" end="11202" title="Köppen climate classification" label="Köppen climate classification"/>
<link wikidata="Q1852577" start="11258" end="11268" title="Sydney CBD" label="Sydney CBD"/>
<link wikidata="Q108919970" start="11916" end="11927" title="Southeast Australian foehn" label="foehn winds"/>
<link wikidata="Q192583" start="11949" end="11969" title="Great Dividing Range" label="Great Dividing Range"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="252269" wikidata="Q792732" url="?curid=252269" title="Bendis">
<text>Bendis () was a Thracian goddess associated with hunting and the moon. Worship of the goddess seems to have been introduced into Attica around 430 BC. In Athens, Bendis was identified with the goddess Artemis, but she had a separate temple at Piraeus, near the temple of Artemis, and was a distinct goddess. She was a huntress, like Artemis, but was often accompanied by dancing satyrs and maenads, as represented on a fifth-century red-figure stemless cup at Verona.

The Greeks wrote of Bendis as one of the seven daughters of Zeus who were turned into swans who would later reappear in human forms driving a golden carriage and teaching crowds.

== Etymology ==
The deity&#x27;s name, &quot;Bendis&quot;, is thought to derive from a Proto-Indo-European stem &quot;*bʰendʰ-&quot;, meaning &#x27;to bind, unite, combine&#x27;.

==Worship==
By a decree of the Oracle of Dodona, which required the Athenians to grant land for a shrine or temple, her cult was introduced into Attica by immigrant Thracian residents, and, though Thracian and Athenian processions remained separate, both cult and festival became so popular that in Plato&#x27;s time () its festivities were naturalized as an official ceremonial of the city-state, called the &quot;Bendideia&quot; (Βενδίδεια). Among the events were night-time torch-races on horseback, mentioned in Plato&#x27;s &quot;Republic&quot;, 328:

&quot;You haven&#x27;t heard that there is to be a torchlight race this evening on horseback in honour of the Goddess?&quot; &quot;On horseback?&quot; said I. &quot;That is a new idea. Will they carry torches and pass them along to one another as they race with the horses, or how do you mean?&quot; &quot;That&#x27;s the way of it,&quot; said Polemarchus, &quot;and, besides, there is to be a night festival which will be worth seeing.&quot;

In Piraeus there was a temple of the goddess which was called the Bendidia / Bendideion (Βενδίδειον).

A red-figure skyphos, now at Tübingen University, of c. 440–430, seems to commemorate the arrival of the newly authorized cult: it shows Themis (representing traditional Athenian customs) and a booted and cloaked Bendis, who wears a Thracian fox-skin cap.

A small marble votive stele of Bendis, –375 BC, found at Piraeus, (pictured left) shows the goddess and her worshippers in bas-relief. The image shows that the Thracian goddess has been strongly influenced by Athenian conceptions of Artemis: Bendis wears a short chiton like Artemis, but with an Asiatic snug-sleeved undergarment. She is wrapped in an animal skin like Artemis and has a spear, but has a hooded Thracian mantle, fastened with a brooch. She wears high boots. In the fourth century BC terracotta figurine (pictured right) she is similarly attired and once carried a (wooden?) spear. 
Elsewhere in Greece, the cult of Bendis did not catch on.

Just as in all other respects the Athenians continue to be hospitable to things foreign, so also in their worship of the gods; for they welcomed so many of the foreign rites that they were ridiculed for it by comic writers; and among these were the Thracian and Phrygian rites. (Strabo, &quot;Geography&quot; (1st century AD), 10.3.18)

The &quot;Phrygian rites&quot; Strabo mentioned referred to the cult of Cybele that was also welcomed to Athens in the 5th century.

==Related deities==
The Athenians may have blended the cult of Bendis with the equally Dionysiac Thracian revels of Kotys, mentioned by Aeschylus and other ancient writers. Archaic female cult figures unearthed in Thrace (modern-day Bulgaria) have also been identified with Bendis.

Bendida Peak on Trinity Peninsula in Antarctica is named after the goddess.

==References==
== Sources ==

* &quot;Bendis&quot;, William Smith (ed.) &quot;Dictionary of Greek and Roman Biography and Mythology.&quot; 1. Boston: Little, Brown &amp; Co., 1867.
* &quot;Bendis (Thracian goddess)&quot;, The Editors. &quot;Encyclopedia Britannica&quot;, 20 Jul. 1998. Accessed 24 January 2022.

==Further reading==

* Auffarth, Christoph (Tübingen). “Bendis”. In: &quot;Brill’s New Pauly&quot;. Antiquity volumes edited by: Hubert Cancik and Helmuth Schneider, English Edition by: Christine F. Salazar, Classical Tradition volumes edited by: Manfred Landfester, English Edition by: Francis G. Gentry. Consulted online on 2 July 2022 &lt;http://dx.doi.org/10.1163/1574-9347_bnp_e215260&gt;. First published online: 2006; First print edition: 9789004122598, 20110510
* Beschi, Luigi. &quot;Bendis, the Great Goddess of the Thracians, in Athens&quot;. In: &quot;ORPHEUS - Journal of Indo-European and Thracian Studies&quot;. Институт за балканистика с Център по тракология - Българска академия на науките, 1990. pp. 29–36.
* Cerkezov, Valentin. &quot;Iconography of the Thracian Goddess Bendis in the Tombstones with a &quot;Funeral Feast&quot; from Southern Thrace&quot;. In: &quot;Eirene: studia graeca et latina&quot; Nº 33, 1997, pp. 53–66. . https://www.degruyter.com/database/HBOL/entry/hb.10712435/html
* Janouchová, Petra. &quot;The cult of Bendis in Athens and Thrace&quot;. In &quot;Graeco-Latina Brunensia&quot;. 2013, vol. 18, iss. 1, pp. 95–106. .
* Planeaux, Christopher. “The Date of Bendis’ Entry into Attica”. In: &quot;The Classical Journal&quot; 96, no. 2 (2000): 165–92. http://www.jstor.org/stable/3298122.
==External links==
* &quot;BENDIS - Thracian Goddess of the Moon &amp; Hunting&quot;, &quot;Theoi Project&quot;, 2017. Accessed 24 January 2022.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q792732" start="0" end="6" title="Bendis" label="Bendis"/>
<link wikidata="Q41741" start="16" end="24" title="Thrace" label="Thracian"/>
<link wikidata="Q122443" start="129" end="135" title="Attica" label="Attica"/>
<link wikidata="Q163709" start="379" end="385" title="satyrs" label="satyrs"/>
<link wikidata="Q209599" start="390" end="396" title="maenad" label="maenad"/>
<link wikidata="Q37178" start="736" end="755" title="Proto-Indo-European" label="Proto-Indo-European"/>
<link wikidata="Q382317" start="860" end="876" title="Dodona" label="Oracle of Dodona"/>
<link wikidata="Q122443" start="974" end="980" title="Attica, Greece" label="Attica"/>
<link wikidata="Q123397" start="1364" end="1372" title="The Republic (Plato)" label="Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q58976" start="1833" end="1840" title="Piraeus" label="Piraeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q4887071" start="1896" end="1904" title="Bendidia" label="Bendidia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136095" start="1946" end="1953" title="skyphos" label="skyphos"/>
<link wikidata="Q39503" start="2423" end="2430" title="Artemis" label="Artemis"/>
<link wikidata="Q45936" start="3126" end="3132" title="Strabo" label="Strabo"/>
<link wikidata="Q188236" start="3256" end="3262" title="Cybele" label="Cybele"/>
<link wikidata="Q2709208" start="3433" end="3438" title="Kotys (deity)" label="Kotys"/>
<link wikidata="Q40939" start="3453" end="3462" title="Aeschylus" label="Aeschylus"/>
<link wikidata="Q7179369" start="3600" end="3612" title="Bendida Peak" label="Bendida Peak"/>
<link wikidata="Q2038835" start="3616" end="3633" title="Trinity Peninsula" label="Trinity Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q51" start="3637" end="3647" title="Antarctica" label="Antarctica"/>
<link wikidata="Q1210336" start="3755" end="3808" title="Dictionary of Greek and Roman Biography and Mythology" label="Dictionary of Greek and Roman Biography and Mythology"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="252272" wikidata="Q1372588" url="?curid=252272" title="Hume Highway">
<text>The Hume Highway, including the sections now known as the Hume Freeway and the Hume Motorway, is one of Australia&#x27;s major inter-city national highways, running for between Melbourne in the southwest and Sydney in the northeast. Upgrading of the route from Sydney&#x27;s outskirts to Melbourne&#x27;s outskirts to dual carriageway was completed on 7 August 2013.

From north to south, the road is called the Hume Highway in metropolitan Sydney, the Hume Motorway between the Cutler Interchange and Berrima, the Hume Highway elsewhere in New South Wales and the Hume Freeway in Victoria. It is part of the Auslink National Network and is a vital link for road freight to transport goods to and from the two cities as well as serving Albury–Wodonga and Canberra. It is therefore considered to be Australia&#x27;s longest highway in terms of its dual-carriageway standard retaining the M, or motorway, alphanumeric.

==Route==
At its Sydney end, Hume Highway begins at Parramatta Road, in Ashfield. This route is numbered as A22. The first of the highway was known as Liverpool Road until August 1928, when it was renamed as part of Hume Highway, as part of the creation of the NSW highway system. Sections of the highway through Sydney&#x27;s suburbs continue to be also known by its former names of Liverpool Road, Sydney Road and Copeland Street (the latter two bypassing Liverpool&#x27;s CBD).

The main Hume Highway/Motorway effectively commences at the junction of the M5 South-West Motorway and the Westlink M7 at . Heading eastbound, the M5 provides access to Sydney Airport and the CBD; while the M7 provides access to Newcastle and Brisbane bypassing the Sydney CBD. Both of these routes are tolled. The section of Hume Motorway between Prestons and Narellan Road was previously known as South Western Freeway (not to be confused with the M5 South-West Motorway) and was allocated route number F5. While this section later officially became known as Hume Highway, it continued to be referred to as the F5 Freeway until the early 2010s due to its renaming to M31 Hume Motorway in 2013.

Other than sections within the urban areas of Sydney and Melbourne, Hume Highway is generally dual-carriageway (with at-grade intersections and restricted entry from adjoining land), with considerable lengths which are of full freeway standard. Most of these sections are bypasses of the larger towns on the route, where the need to deviate the route to construct the bypass made it practical to deny access from adjoining land and thus provide full freeway conditions. In addition to these bypasses the sections between Casula (in southwestern Sydney) and Berrima (built 1973–92), and Broadford to Wallan (1976), which were both constructed as major deviations, are also of full freeway standard. The entire section in Victoria is categorised as a freeway by government roads authority VicRoads, although a few intersections along the route are not yet grade-separated. The speed limit on the full length of the highway is .

As Hume Freeway approaches Melbourne at the suburb of Craigieburn, north of the Melbourne central business district, the Craigieburn Bypass now diverts Hume Freeway (and the M31 designation) to the east of the former route, to terminate at the Western and Metropolitan Ring Roads. This bypass was opened in two stages, in December 2004 and December 2005.

At its Melbourne end, the original alignment of the Melbourne–Sydney route followed Royal Parade northward from where it begins at its intersection with Elizabeth Street and Flemington Road. Royal Parade becomes Sydney Road at Brunswick Road and then became the Hume Highway itself at Campbellfield. This ceased to be the designated route of Hume Highway in 1992, with the completion of Stage 1 of the Western Ring Road, at which point the designation of the southbound highway was truncated. The former highway south from the Western Ring Road to Elizabeth Street is route is now numbered as Metropolitan Route 55 and is now officially called Sydney Road.

===Landscapes===
Heading north from Melbourne, the road passes through the hills of the Great Dividing Range, some of which is covered with box eucalypt forest but of which much is cleared for farmland, before levelling out near Seymour to cross flat, mostly cleared farming country to Wodonga and the Victoria–New South Wales border. Victoria&#x27;s landscape differs from that of the typical &#x27;true Australian Outback&#x27;, but a dry summer can leave the ground parched. Mount Buffalo can be seen in the distance to the east as the highway comes down off the Warby Range near Glenrowan, and a museum commemorating Ned Kelly is located nearby. At Wangaratta the highway passes close to the Rutherglen and Milawa wine-producing areas.

Continuing north, the Murray River, the south bank of which is the Victoria–New South Wales border, is crossed on the bypass of Albury-Wodonga. From Albury, the highway skirts Lake Hume and continues across undulating country generally north-east towards Holbrook and then Tarcutta. Just north of Tarcutta the highway encounters the first of several ranges which form outliers of the Great Dividing Range, and which are crossed as the highway climbs the slopes to the tablelands west of Yass. From here the highway runs eastward, to Goulburn where it again turns northeast. Most of the New South Wales countryside from Albury to Marulan has been developed for wool production, with Yass and Goulburn in particular noted for their fine wool.

==History==
The coast of New South Wales, from the Queensland to the Victorian borders, is separated from the inland by an escarpment, forming the eastern edge of the Great Dividing Range, with few easy routes up this escarpment. To climb from the coast to the tablelands, Hume Highway uses the Bargo Ramp, a geological feature which provides one of the few easy crossings of the escarpment.

In the first twenty years of European settlement at Sydney (established 1788), exploration southwest of Sydney was slow. This area was heavily wooded at the time, especially the &quot;Bargo brush&quot;, which was regarded as almost impenetrable. In 1798 explorers (Wilson, Price, Hacking, and Collins) reached the Moss Vale and Marulan districts, but this was not followed up. Any settlement would have to await the construction of an adequate access track, which would have been beyond the colony&#x27;s resources at the time, and would have served little purpose as a source of supplies for Sydney, due to the time taken to reach Sydney. In 1804, Charles Throsby penetrated through the Bargo brush to the country on the tablelands near Moss Vale and Sutton Forest. On another expedition in 1818, he reached Lake Bathurst and the &quot;Goulburn Plains&quot;. Many of the early explorers would most likely have used aboriginal guides, but they do not appear to have given them credit.

After Charles Throsby&#x27;s 1818 journey towards present day Goulburn, followed by Hamilton Hume and William Hovell&#x27;s overland journey from Appin (near Campbelltown) to Port Phillip and return in 1824, development of the Southern Tablelands for agriculture was rapid. The present route of Hume Highway is much the same as that used by the pioneers.

The route taken by Hume Highway to climb from the coast to the Southern Tablelands and across the Great Divide is situated between the parallel river gorge systems of the Wollondilly and Shoalhaven rivers. This country consists generally of a gently sloping plateau which is deeply dissected by the Nepean River and its tributaries. The route of the Highway, by using four high-level bridges to cross these gorges, avoids the Razorback Range, and has minimal earthworks. The climb from the western side of the Nepean River at Menangle up to Mittagong is fairly sustained, a fact that is hard to appreciate at high speed on the modern freeway. The highway climbs non-stop over a distance of from the Pheasants Nest bridge over the Nepean River to Yerrinbool, before dropping slightly before the final climb to reach the tablelands at Aylmerton, a climb of over in .

===Early road construction===
Governor Lachlan Macquarie ordered the construction of a road, which became known as the Great South Road (the basis of the northern end of Hume Highway) in 1819 from Picton to the Goulburn Plains and he travelled to Goulburn in 1820, but it is unlikely that even a primitive road was finished at that time.
The Great South Road was rebuilt and completely re-routed between Yanderra and Goulburn by Surveyor-General Thomas Mitchell in 1833. The &quot;Main Roads Management Act&quot; of June 1858 declared the Great South Road, from near Sydney through Goulburn and Gundagai to Albury, as one of the three main roads in the colony. However, its southern reaches were described as only a &quot;scarcely formed bullock track&quot; as late as 1858. The road was improved in the mid-1860s with some sections near Gundagai &quot;metalled&quot; and all creeks bridged between Adelong Creek (approximately 10 kilometres south of Gundagai and now known as the village of Tumblong) and Albury.

Mitchell&#x27;s route in New South Wales, except for the current-day bypasses at Mittagong, Berrima and Marulan (dual carriageways were completed in 1986), is still largely followed by today&#x27;s highway. Mitchell intended to straighten the route north of Yanderra, but was not granted funding, although his proposed route through Pheasants Nest has similarities to the freeway route opened in 1980. Mitchell&#x27;s work on the Great South Road is best preserved at Towrang Creek (10 kilometres north of Goulburn), where his stone arch culvert still stands, although it was superseded in 1965 by a concrete box culvert which in turn was superseded by the current route of the highway when it was duplicated in 1972.

By contrast, in Victoria there was an early and major change to Mitchell&#x27;s route. Mitchell&#x27;s original route between Albury and Melbourne went through Mitchellstown on the Goulburn River and took a long detour to the west of Mount Macedon.

In March 1837 Charles Bonney blazed a new trail from Mitchellstown through Kilmore to Melbourne, a route that took a day and a half off the previous journey. The bulk of Bonney&#x27;s track formed the Sydney Road for the next 139 years. and was especially surveyed in 1840.

===Road classification===
In 1914, both the Victorian and NSW sections of the highway were declared main roads by their respective state road authorities.

Within Victoria, the passing of the &quot;Country Roads Act of 1912&quot; through the Parliament of Victoria provided for the establishment of the Country Roads Board (later VicRoads) and their ability to declare Main Roads, taking responsibility for the management, construction and care of the state&#x27;s major roads from local municipalities. (Main) Sydney Road was declared a Main Road over a period of months, from 7 September 1914 (Baddaginnie through Benalla to Glenrowan), 5 October 1914 (Springhurst through Chiltern to Barnawartha), 16 November 1914 (through Craigieburn, Broadford and Euroa), to 30 November 1914 (from Craigieburn through Wallan and Kimore to Broadford, from Broadford through Seymour to Euroa, Euroa through Violet Town to Baddaginne, Glenrowan through Wangaratta to Springhurst, and finally Barnawartha through Wodonga to the state border with New South Wales). The passing of the &quot;Highways and Vehicles Act of 1924&quot; provided for the declaration of State Highways, roads two-thirds financed by the State government through the Country Roads Board. North-Eastern Highway was declared a State Highway on 1 July 1925, cobbled from a collection of roads from Melbourne through Seymour, Benalla, Wangaratta and Wodonga to the Murray River (for a total of 161 miles), subsuming the original declaration of Main Sydney Road as a Main Road.

Within New South Wales, the passing of the &quot;Main Roads Act of 1924&quot; through the Parliament of New South Wales provided for the declaration of Main Roads, roads partially funded by the State government through the Main Roads Board (later Transport for NSW). Main Road No. 2 was declared along Great South Road on 8 August 1928, heading southwest from the intersection with Great Western Highway at Ashfield, through Bankstown, Liverpool, Crossroads, Narellan, Picton, Mittagong, Goulburn, Yass, and Gundagai to Albury. With the passing of the &quot;Main Roads (Amendment) Act of 1929&quot; to provide for additional declarations of State Highways and Trunk Roads, this was amended to State Highway 2 on 8 April 1929.

The Great South Road through New South Wales, and North-Eastern Highway through Victoria, were renamed Hume Highway in 1928, after Hamilton Hume, the first European (with William Hovell) to traverse an overland route between Sydney and the Port Phillip District, in what later became the Colony of Victoria. The highway was fully sealed by 1940.

In New South Wales, the passing of the &quot;Roads Act of 1993&quot; through the Parliament of New South Wales updated road classifications and the way they could be declared within New South Wales. Under this act, Hume Highway today retains its declaration as Highway 2, from the intersection with Parramatta Road in Ashfield in Sydney, to the state border with Victoria.

In Victoria, the passing of the &quot;Road Management Act 2004&quot; through the Parliament of Victoria granted the responsibility of overall management and development of Victoria&#x27;s major arterial roads to VicRoads: VicRoads re-declared the road in 2013 as Hume Freeway (Freeway #1550), beginning at the state border with New South Wales to the intersection with Western and Metropolitan Ring Roads at Thomastown.

The route was allocated National Route 31 across its entire length in 1954. The Whitlam government introduced the federal &quot;National Roads Act 1974&quot;, where roads declared as a National Highway were still the responsibility of the states for road construction and maintenance, but were fully compensated by the Federal government for money spent on approved projects. As an important interstate link between the capitals of New South Wales and Victoria, Hume Highway was declared a National Highway in 1974, and was consequently re-allocated National Highway 31. At the Sydney end, as the South-Western Freeway was extended during the 1990s, National Highway 31 was replaced with Metroad 5 from Prestons to Liverpool in the early 1990s, then by Metroad 7 through Liverpool, and State Route 31 from Liverpool to its terminus at Ashfield. At the Melbourne end, route M31 was diverted onto the Craigieburn bypass in 2005; the former alignment (now known as Sydney Road) was replaced with State Route 55. With both states&#x27; conversion to the newer alphanumeric system between the late 1990s and the early 2010s, its route number was updated to route M31 for the highway within Victoria in 1997, and eventually within New South Wales in 2013 (with the route between Berrima and Prestons also renamed Hume Motorway), with route A28 between Prestons and Liverpool, and route A22 from Liverpool to its terminus at Ashfield.

===Upgrades===
====New South Wales====

Between February 2009 and March 2012, both carriageways were widened between Brooks Road and Narellan Road. This work was undertaken in 3 stages. The first stage, widening to 4 lanes each way between Brooks Road and St Andrews Road St Andrews was completed in 2010. The second stage, widening to 4 lanes each way between St Andrews Road and Raby Road commenced in 2009 and was completed in mid-2011. The final stage, widening to 3 lanes each way between Raby Road and Narellan Road, commenced in September 2010 and was completed in March 2012. Construction of a pedestrian bridge over the highway to link Claymore and Woodbine was also completed. This section of the highway, opened as part of the two stages opened in October 1973 and December 1974, was originally designed for widening of the carriageways to three lanes.

Work commenced in 2010 on a bypass of Holbrook. The bypass was opened to traffic on 7 August 2013 after being postponed due to wet weather. The opening of the bypass resulted in dual carriageway (much to freeway standard) over the full length of the highway for the first time.

====Victoria====
In 2008, VicRoads undertook a planning study for the upgrading of Hume Freeway by removal of direct access from adjoining properties and grade-separation of the intersections between Kalkallo and Beveridge. These intersections had the highest accident rate of the Hume Freeway in Victoria. The study, completed in March 2009, ensured council planning schemes were amended so as to reserve space for the upgrade, but no timetable had been set for the project.

In addition a 4-level interchange between Hume Freeway and the proposed Outer Metropolitan Ring Road is slated to start construction in the 2030s.

====Timeline of duplication and bypass works====
Duplication works on the highway began in the 1960s and concluded in 2013. The entire route between Sydney and Melbourne is now a dual carriageway, limited access highway.

*1962 – Chiltern to Barnawartha opened January, 1962. This is referred to as the &#x27;Hume By-pass Road&#x27;. Although initially opened as a single carriageway, two lane bypass, it was the first rural bypass of Victorian towns – Chiltern and Barnawartha – on Hume Highway and was designed to allow for the future construction of a second carriageway.
*1962 – Craigieburn &#x27;Hume By-pass Road&#x27;, a dual-carriageway bypass over the Sydney to Melbourne railway and Craigieburn Road, opened January 1962 at a cost of £388,000, superseded by Craigieburn bypass in 2005.
*1965/66 – Broadford to Tallarook, duplication of 4 miles completed during the financial year.
*1966 – 1.6 km of dual carriageway opened over Bendooley Hill between Mittagong and Berrima, superseded by Berrima bypass in 1989.
*1966/67 – Craigieburn to Kalkallo, 4.4 miles of dual carriageways completed during the financial year.
*1966/67 – Tallarook, 1.4 miles completed south of Tallarook and 1.3 miles completed north of Tallarook during the financial year.
*1967/68 – Kalkallo to Beveridge, 4.1 miles of dual carriageways completed during the financial year.
*1969/70 – Beveridge, Completion of 11 miles of dual carriageway during the financial year, including a deviation at Beveridge and continuation south to connect with existing dual carriageways north of Craigieburn.
*1970/71 – Tallarook bypass, 4.5 mile bypass of Tallarook opened during the financial year.
*1973 – Camden bypass stage 1, Macarthur Bridge across the Nepean River floodplain, opened.
*1973 – South Western Expressway first section (9.8 km) (later subsumed into Hume Highway), opened from Hume Highway in Cross Roads to Campbelltown Road in Raby, on 26 October.
*1974 – Camden bypass stage 2, new dual carriageway route from Narellan Road in Macarthur to Macarthur Bridge, opened.
*1974 – South Western Expressway second section (5.8 km) (also later subsumed into Hume Highway), opened from Campbelltown Road in Raby to Narellan Road in Macarthur, on 16 December.
*1976 – Kilmore bypass, new dual carriageway route from Wallan to Broadford, opened 3 May 1976, by Premier of Victoria, the Hon R J Hamer, ED, MP. At that time it was the longest section of freeway ever opened at one time in Victoria (34 km) and was the &#x27;single biggest construction project carried out by the CRB since its inception in 1913&#x27;.
*1977 – new route of Hume Highway, built to freeway standard, opened from Yanderra to Aylmerton (13.5 km) on 24 May.
*1979 – Violet Town to Baddaginnie, 10 km of dual carriageways opened early 1979, at a cost of $5.1mil.
*1979 – Avenel to Tubbs Hill (near Longwood), 14.5 km duplication opened 19 December 1979, by Minister for Transport, the Hon Robert Maclellan MLA, at a cost of $6.5mil.
*1980 – Violet Town bypass, 12 km from Wibrahams Road to the existing freeway at One Mile Creek, opened 21 March 1980, by Minister for Transport, the Hon Robert Maclellan MLA, at a cost of $11mil.
*1980 – 35 km deviation of Hume Highway bypassing the Razorback Range opened on 15 December from Narellan Road in Macarthur to Yanderra, connecting sections opened December 1974 and May 1977.
*1981 – Avenel bypass, 16 km north-east from Goulburn Valley Highway interchange, opened 1 December 1981, by Minister for Transport, the Hon Robert Maclellan MLA, at a cost of $25mil.
*1982 – Seymour bypass, 9 km section, opened 14 December 1982, by Minister for Transport, the Hon. Steve Crabb MP, at a cost of $26mil. At this stage, although largely opened to traffic, a one kilometre section of south bound carriageway south of Seymour was still under construction.
*1984 – Longwood section, 10 km from Oxenburys Road to Creighton Road, opened by Assistant Minister of Transport, the Hon. Jack Simpson MP, on 18 May 1984, at a cost of $10mil. The opening marked the halfway point for the duplication of the highway within Victoria, with the total length of dual carriageways at that point measuring 151 km.
*1985 – Barnawartha to Wodonga duplication, from Hanson Road to Parkers Road. An initial 4 km of the 12.6 km duplicate carriageway was completed in 1985.
*1986 – Marulan bypass, 7.3 km section opened 27 November 1986.
*1987 – Benalla bypass, 36.5 km section, opened March 1987, at a cost of $70mil. The bypass was at this time the longest stretch of highway duplication opened at once in Victoria, and extended from south of Baddaginnie to Chivers Road, south of Glenrowan.
*1987 – A new grade-separated interchange with the Illawarra Highway.
*1987/88 – Barnawartha to Wodonga, from Hanson Road to Parkers Road. The remaining 8.6 km of the 12.6 km duplicate carriageway was expected to be open to traffic in &#x27;the second half of 1987&#x27;.
*1987/88 – Chiltern to Barnawartha. 21 km duplication from Gilmours Road to Hanson Road was expected to be &#x27;opened to traffic in stages from July 1987 until late 1989&#x27;, at a cost of $31mil.
*1988/89 – Glenrowan bypass, 12.5 km section, completed during the financial year, at a cost of $31.5mil.
*1989 – Berrima bypass, 15.5 km-long section, completed 22 March 1989, at a cost of $80ilm.
*1990 – Springhurst to Chiltern, 5.2 km duplication, opened to traffic in March 1990, at a cost of $8.5mil.
*1990 – Euroa to Balmattum, 8 km duplication, opened to traffic in June 1990, at a cost of $16mil.
*1990 – Barnawartha bypass, 3.3 km section, completed in June 1990, at a cost of $11mil.
*1991 – 3.3 km duplication north of Springhurst completed in November 1991.
*1991 – 10 km duplication from Coppabella Road to Reedy Creek completed 17 December 1991.
*1992 – Euroa bypass, completed 3 April 1992, at a cost of $43mil ($2mil under budget).
*1992 – Mittagong bypass, 8.2 km section, completed 17 August 1992, at a cost of $83mil (originally part of the 1970s/1980s F5 project).
*1992 – Goulburn bypass, 13 km section, completed 5 December 1992, at a cost of $84mil.
*1993 – Cullerin Range deviation, 34 km section, completed 5 April 1993, at a cost of $132mil.
*1994 – Springhurst bypass, 5 km section, completed March 1994, at a cost of $7.7mil.
*1994 – Wangaratta bypass, 20 km section, completed April 1994, at a cost of $80mil (eight months ahead of schedule and $30m under budget); this was the final section of Hume Highway within Victoria to be duplicated.
*1994 – Yass bypass, 18 km section, completed 25 July 1994, at a total cost of $106mil.
*1995 – Cullerin to Yass duplication, first 11 km section completed 14 September 1994, second 6 km section completed 3 May 1995, at a total cost of $59.1mil.
*1995 – Jugiong bypass, 13 km section, completed 11 October 1995, at a total cost of $85.5mil.
*1996 – Tarcutta Range deviation, 9.4 km section upgrade south of Tumblong completed 3 May 1996, at a cost of $52.6mil.
*2004 – Craigieburn bypass first section, between the Metropolitan Ring Road and Cooper Street, completed December 2004.
*2005 – Craigieburn bypass second section, between Cooper Street and Craigieburn, completed December 2005, completing the 17 km bypass, at a total cost of $305mil.
*2007 – Albury–Wodonga bypass, 14.6 km section, completed 6 March 2007; the NSW section comprised from Ettamogah to the Murray River through the city of Albury. The Australian Government fully funded the $374 million NSW section of the project. The $150m Victorian section was largely funded by the federal government, with the $5.8m Bandiana Link funded by the State Government of Victoria.
*2009 – Southern Hume Highway duplication, Work began in October 2007 and the 65 km section (2 km shorter than the previous highway route) was progressively opened to traffic from mid 2009 and completed in December 2009. Completion of this section left only 21 km of the Hume Highway as single carriageway, through the towns of Tarcutta, Holbrook and Woomargama.

*2009 – Coolac bypass, 12 km section, completed August 2009, funded by the Australian Government at a cost of $171mil.
*2009 – Sheahan Bridge duplication, Gundagai: traffic was switched to the new bridge in May 2009 to enable essential maintenance on existing bridge, both bridges available to traffic as dual carriageways in December 2009, funded by the Australian Government at a cost of $70.6mil.
*2011 – Woomargama bypass, 9 km section, completed 7 November 2011, funded by the Australian Government at a cost of $265mil.
*2011 – Tarcutta bypass, 7 km section, completed 15 November 2011, funded by the Australian Government at a cost of $290mil.
*2013 – Holbrook bypass. In June 2013, the NSW department of Roads and Maritime celebrated the imminent completion of the duplication of the Hume Highway with a community day at the Holbrook Bypass.

===Fixed speed camera locations===
In April 2007, &#x27;point-to-point&#x27; fixed speed-camera sites were installed, in the median strip along the Craigieburn Bypass section and northward to Broadford, in Victoria, at roughly 15–20 km intervals. These measure both instantaneous (flash photography) speed and its speciality in the point-to-point versions (between two or more sites and then the average speed is measured to the fixed speed limit, comparing how long it takes a vehicle to reach one point from another). There are five sites, with two cameras (radar version) at each, totalling ten altogether.
In Sydney: next to Ashfield Primary School, near Culdees Road Burwood, Willee St Enfield, Stacey St Bankstown, Brennan St Yagoona, and Knight St Lansvale.
===Exit numbering trial===
Between Prestons and Campbelltown, an exit numbering system was trialled from May 2016.

===Former route allocations===
Hume Highway has many former route allocations including former National Route 31. Where and when the former route numbers were implemented are stated below.

&quot;Ashfield – Chullora:&quot;
* National Route 31 
* Metroad 5 
* State Route 31 
* A22 
&quot;Chullora – Warwick Farm:&quot;
* National Route 31 
* State Route 31 
* A22 
&quot;Warwick Farm – Casula:&quot;
* National Route 31 
* National Highway 31 
* Metroad 7 
*unallocated: 
* A28 
&quot;Casula – Prestons:&quot;
* National Route 31 
* National Highway 31 
* Metroad 5 
* Metroad 7 
*unallocated: 
* A28 
&quot;Prestons – Campbelltown:&quot;
* National Route 31 
* National Highway 31 
* Metroad 5 
* M31 
&quot;Campbelltown – Ettamogah:&quot; 
* National Route 31 
* National Highway 31 
* M31 
&quot;Ettamogah – NSW/VIC border:&quot; 
* National Route 31 
* National Highway 31 
* A31 (de facto) 
* M31 
&quot;NSW/VIC border – Campbellfield:&quot;
* National Route 31 
* National Highway 31 
* National Highway M31 
* M31 

==Exits and major interchanges==

Hume Highway exits and major intersections are spread across in the Australian states of New South Wales and Victoria. The highway&#x27;s national route is divided into four sections comprising, from north to south, urban stretches of the highway in Sydney, a motorway from the outskirts of Sydney to the Southern Highlands, a grade-separated highway in regional New South Wales and across the state border, and a freeway throughout regional Victoria and into the outer suburbs of northern Melbourne.

In Sydney, Hume Highway stretches southwest from in the inner west to via and . From Sydney&#x27;s southwestern outskirts; Hume Motorway stretches south by southwest, from Prestons to outside bypassing and . From outside Berrima, Hume Highway stretches southwest by west, bypassing , , and before crossing the Murray River and entering Victoria. From this point Hume Freeway continues southwest by south, bypassing , and terminating at .

From northeast to southwest, termini, major exits and interchanges occur with the Great Western Highway / Parramatta Road (A22), A3 (A3), A6 (A6), Henry Lawson Drive, Cumberland Highway (A28), M5 Motorway (M5), Westlink M7 (M7), Camden Valley Way (A28), A9 (A9), Remembrance Drive, Old Hume Highway (B73), Illawarra Highway (A48), Federal Highway (M23), Yass Valley Way, Barton Highway (A25), Lachlan Valley Way (B81), Burley Griffin Way (B94), Snowy Mountains Highway (B72), Sturt Highway (A20), Olympic Highway (A41), Riverina Highway (B58), Murray Valley Highway (B400), Great Alpine Road (B500), Midland Highway (A300/B300), Goulburn Valley Freeway (M39), Goulburn Valley Highway (B340), Northern Highway (B75), Sydney Road (SR55), and Western and Metropolitan Ring Roads (M80).

Major river crossings, from northeast to southwest, are the Nepean (three times), Wingecarribee, Paddys, Murrumbidgee, Murray, Ovens, King and Goulburn rivers. The Hume also crosses the Prospect, Jugiong, and Tarcutta creeks.

==Towns==
In New South Wales all towns on the highway have been bypassed. From Sydney, southwards to the Victorian border, the bypassed towns include Campbelltown, Camden, Picton, Mittagong, Berrima, Marulan, Goulburn, Gunning, Yass, Bowning, Bookham, Jugiong, Coolac, Gundagai, Tarcutta, Holbrook, Woomargama, Albury and Young.

In Victoria all towns have been bypassed. They are, in order from the NSW border, Wodonga, Chiltern, Wangaratta, Benalla, Violet Town, Euroa, Seymour, Broadford and Craigieburn.

===Camden===
Camden dates from 1840 and lies south west of Sydney on the Nepean River. It retains a rural character and has many historic buildings. There is an aviation museum at nearby Narellan. Urban sprawl has made Camden part of the Sydney metropolitan area.

Before the early 1970s, the Hume Highway ran west from the Cross Roads in Casula, 6 km south of Liverpool to western Edmondson Park, near the Forest Lawn Memorial Park, where it turned and followed the route of what is now Camden Valley Way. It ran through Narellan town centre before crossing the Nepean River on the Cowpasture Bridge. It ran through Camden town centre on Argyle Street before turning onto Murray Street, which then becomes Broughton Street. It then ran over the Razorback Range and through Picton, Tahmoor, Bargo, and Yanderra, where the modern Hume Highway reunites. 

In 1973, the first stage of the South Western Freeway opened between the Hume Highway in Cross Roads and Campbelltown Road in Raby; in the same year, the first stage of the Camden Bypass opened from MacArthur Road in Elderslie to the Old Hume Highway/Broughton Street in South Camden, which included a bridge over the Nepean River floodplain. In 1974, the South Western Freeway was extended to Narellan Road in Campbelltown; in the same year, Stage 2 of the Camden Bypass opened, linking MacArthur Road and Narellan Road in Narellan, just east of its junction with Camden Valley Way (the original Hume Highway). This routed Hume Highway traffic, from Cross Roads on the South Western Freeway to Narellan Road, then along Narellan Road to the Camden Bypass, then over the Camden Bypass to rejoin the Hume Highway in South Camden to continue its journey to Yanderra. The Camden Bypass was superseded in 1980 with the extension of the South Western Freeway from Campbelltown to Yanderra to connect with the Yanderra-Aylmerton freeway section opened in 1977. This extension bypassed Camden, the Razorback Range, Picton, Tahmoor, and Bargo.
An alternative route to the highway runs from Aylmerton through Mittagong and Bowral to join Illawarra Highway at Moss Vale and then follows Illawarra Highway through Sutton Forest to rejoin Hume Highway at Hoddles Crossroads (named after Surveyor Robert Hoddle who also laid out the Melbourne CBD).

===Mittagong===

Mittagong lies south-west of Sydney, just off Hume Highway at the edge of the Southern Tablelands. Mittagong is also a part of the Southern Highlands region. It is notable for being the location of Australia&#x27;s first ironworks. Mittagong&#x27;s streets are lined with various species of deciduous trees and it has a busy town centre.

Until August 1992 when the Mittagong bypass was opened, the town was dominated by trucks and in winter it was also busy with skiers&#x27; traffic on the way to the Australian Alps. Today, Hume Highway bypasses Mittagong and all the towns of the Southern Tablelands. In the late 1990s, engineers detected subsidence under part of the bypass where it runs along a steep slope near the Nattai River. This was caused by features of the local geology, and mining activity at the adjacent Mount Alexandra coalmine from the 1950s to the 1970s. The problem was remedied by closing one carriageway at a time and building a pair of &#x27;land bridges&#x27; across the unstable section of the slope.

===Moss Vale===

Moss Vale has several beautiful old and attractive buildings and Leighton Gardens, in the centre of the main street, is a pleasant park. It is best during spring when its flowers are in blossom or in autumn when the leaves of its exotic deciduous trees are changing colour. Sutton Forest is surrounded by farms, vineyards and is home to elegant country homes and estates. It has a church, an inn, a couple of restaurants and one or two specialty shops.

===Berrima===
Berrima has flourished since it was bypassed in March 1989, with tourists finding it an easy day trip from either Sydney or Canberra to enjoy the town square and the Georgian architecture of this historic town. Berrima is the last Southern Highlands town that the Hume Highway passes.

===Marulan===

The Marulan bypass was opened in 1986. The southern part of Governor Lachlan Macquarie&#x27;s road of 1819 ran from Sutton Forest roughly along existing minor roads through what is now Penrose State Forest to Canyonleigh, Brayton, Carrick and Towrang, where it joined the current route to Goulburn. Branching from this route (now part of the Illawarra Highway) just west of Sutton Forest, a road, now known as Old Argyle Road, developed in the 1820s. It ran to Bungonia, via Wingello, Tallong, and the southern outskirts of Marulan. Marulan lies on the 150th meridian east.

When Thomas Mitchell rerouted the Great South Road in the 1830s, he decided to bring these two roads together to meet at old Marulan, with roads proceeding west to Goulburn and south to Bungonia. When the railway reached Marulan in 1868, the town migrated 3 km north to the railway station. Nevertheless, the old cemetery remains at the Bungonia Road intersection. A quarry is about to be developed near the intersection, so an interchange has been built. It is at this point that the highway climbs the Marulan Ramp, which is part of the divide between the Shoalhaven and Wollondilly River systems.

===Towrang Stockade===
Towrang Creek was the site of a major stockade for chain-bound convicts and others involved in the construction of the Great South Road. The stockade was located on the western side of the highway and was used from around 1836 to 1842. The stockade became the principal penal establishment in the southern district and was noted for its harsh discipline. There were usually at least 250 convicts stationed there. They slept on bare boards with a blanket apiece, 10 men to a box or cell. One of the two official floggers was later found murdered. The stockade used to be accessible by a stile, but this has been taken down to discourage use of the once daunting intersection of the Highway with Towrang Road. There are the remains of the powder magazine next to the Wollondilly River, three graves on the north bank of Towrang Creek, and the remains of a weir on Towrang Creek built for the stockade. Aboriginal stone tools have also been found on the banks of Towrang Creek, indicating that this was a route well-travelled long before Hamilton Hume came this way in 1824.

There is also a rest area on the eastern side of the highway, where a well-preserved bridge dating from 1839 (possibly designed by David Lennox) and a 1960s concrete box culvert can be viewed.

===Goulburn===

After the cities of Liverpool and Campbelltown, Goulburn is the first major rural city along Hume Highway from Sydney. It is the centre of a rich agricultural area specialising in fine wool production. From this area comes some of the world&#x27;s finest wool. Therefore, the city has a monument called The Big Merino near the service station. Goulburn was bypassed on 5 December 1992 and the main street (Auburn Street) is quieter, but still busy during Saturday morning shopping. Picturesque Belmore Park is located midway along Auburn Street. A number of architecturally and historically significant buildings are located near Belmore Park, including the courthouse, the post office and the railway station. Also in central Goulburn are two cathedrals, both of architectural note. A number of old houses and hotels are located near the railway station on Sloane Street.

===Gunning===
Gunning&#x27;s 19th century main street was built very wide, for the time of horse and bullock-drawn wagons. This served the town well when the main highway between Sydney and Melbourne carried cars and trucks through the town. This ceased when the bypass was completed on 5 April 1993. The town is now much quieter, and it has been able to resume a more rural pace of life. It has developed something of an industry in providing bed and breakfast accommodation. The recently built Gunning Wind Farm is located beside the highway, with its wind turbines providing a distinctive landmark.

The former route of the highway which passed over the Cullerin Ranges is still in use between Bredalbane and Gunning, now known as Cullerin Road.

===Yass===

Yass has an historic main street, with well-preserved 19th century verandah-post pubs (mostly converted to other uses). It is popular with tourists, some from Canberra and others taking a break from the highway. Hamilton Hume&#x27;s farm &quot;Cooma Cottage&quot; is located east of Yass, close to the intersection of the former routes of the Hume and Barton Highways. He lived there until his death in 1873. The Yass Bypass opened on 25 July 1994.
===Bookham===

Bookham is situated west of Yass. The highway once passed through the village, but now bypasses it. This bypass was completed in two stages, the south stage opened on 18 February 1998 and the north stage opened on 11 July 2001. As a result of the bypass the Bookham Rest Area was established, which is a popular stop for travellers using facilities and picnicking. It is also used as an overnight camping spot.

For many years Bookham became a quiet hamlet of two historic churches, a cricket ground, a successful worm farm and two thriving old and new machinery yards. In 2009 a cafe was open called Barney&#x27;s of Bookham (now Barney&#x27;s Cafe, Bookham). Barney&#x27;s offers freshly prepared food in a relaxed pet friendly setting. Its recent success has led to the opening of new accommodation in the Old Bookham Church, formerly St Columba&#x27;s Catholic Church. The church, now deconsecrated, combines comfort and style and can house up to six to eight guests. Both the cafe and church can claim to be amongst the closest such businesses to the highway.

===Coolac===
The section at Coolac was the last two lane section of highway between Sydney and Gundagai until it was bypassed with a dual carriageway on 14 August 2009, after a delay due to indigenous heritage issues, the construction contract was awarded to Abigroup in February 2007.

===Gundagai===

At Snake Gully, adjacent to the highway north of Gundagai is the &quot;Dog on the Tuckerbox&quot;. A statue (with a souvenir shop next door) was erected five miles (eight kilometres) from Gundagai. Snake Gully serves as a way station for many highway travellers.

Gundagai was bypassed on 25 March 1977 with the completion of the first Sheahan Bridge over the Murrumbidgee River. This bridge, named after Bill Sheahan, was the second longest road bridge in New South Wales (after the Sydney Harbour Bridge), until its duplication on 17 May 2009, This is now the fourth-longest road bridge in New South Wales – longer than the Sydney Harbour Bridge. The original Sheahan Bridge was only one lane in each direction.

The Prince Alfred Bridge, on the old route of the highway across the Murrumbidgee floodplain, is of major engineering interest, as it is one of Australia&#x27;s longest timber trestle bridges, as is the adjacent 1903 railway bridge. Gundagai was originally located on the river flats directly beside the Murrumbidgee River, but a disastrous flood in 1852 destroyed the town and drowned 89 people. The town was then relocated to its present position. A grade-separated interchange was completed at the intersection of the Highway and West Street in December 2006.

===Tumblong===

The route of the highway between Tumblong and Tarcutta is the third route of the highway in this location. The original route led west from Tumblong along the Murrumbidgee River, before turning south over difficult country, crossing what is now the Sturt Highway and rejoining the current route of the highway as Lower Tarcutta Road. This was replaced in December 1938 by the first Tumblong deviation, to the east of the current route. The main features of this section of the highway were a deep, narrow cutting and the reinforced concrete bowstring arch bridge over Hillas Creek. This bridge has been preserved as it is one of only two bridges in New South Wales built to this design, and is visible on the western side of the highway close to the interchange with the Snowy Mountains Highway. The second and current deviation opened to traffic on 21 November 1983.

Approximately southwest of Gundagai is the interchange with Sturt Highway, which leads to Wagga Wagga, Mildura and Adelaide.

===Tarcutta===
Tarcutta is located almost exactly halfway between Sydney and Melbourne and has been a popular stopover and change-over point for truck drivers making their way between the two cities. There is a memorial to truck drivers who have died on the local stretch of Hume Highway. It was near Tarcutta that the final section of Hume Highway was sealed in 1940. Construction began on a bypass of Tarcutta in 2010. The bypass, which passes west of the town, was opened to traffic on 15 November 2011. As improvements to the Hume Highway have reduced travelling time between Sydney and Melbourne to about nine hours driving time in good conditions, the town&#x27;s importance to the average motorist has diminished.

===Holbrook===

Holbrook was called Germanton until anti-German sentiment during World War I led to the town and the shire being renamed in honour of the wartime submarine captain, Lt Holbrook who was awarded the Victoria Cross. From 1995, a feature of the town has been a partial reconstruction of HMAS &quot;Otway&quot;, an Oberon class submarine. This landmark was in recognition of the town&#x27;s namesake&#x27;s connections with submarines. Holbrook had the only set of traffic signals (for pedestrians) that remained on the Hume Highway between the Sydney Orbital and Melbourne&#x27;s Western Ring Road. A bypass, that was officially opened by Prime Minister, Julia Gillard and Minister for Infrastructure and Transport, Anthony Albanese on 23 June 2013, did not open for traffic until August 2013.

===Woomargama===

Woomargama, is a village between Holbrook and Albury which acts as a local service centre for a rich wool-growing area. The bypass of Woomargama was opened on 7 November 2011.

===Bowna and Table Top===

Table Top is a small town located approximately north of Albury, and Bowna is a locality about to the east of Table Top. In the 1950s, the road was diverted a much longer route to the northwest, intersecting with Olympic Highway south of Gerogery, to allow the construction of the Hume Dam. This in turn was superseded by the dual carriage way which straightened the route.

Remnants of the old original road still exist as Old Sydney Road to the north east of Thurgoona and Plunketts Road in Bowna. The route is visible on aerial imagery (when water levels are low), following a line from the intersection with Table Top Road, pointing directly to Bowna and Mullengandra. Remnants of the old single lane highway used from the 1950s can be seen and used for vehicular traffic. This section was renamed as Bowna Road.

===Albury–Wodonga===


Albury&#x27;s history is linked with the two famous Australian explorers, Hamilton Hume and William Hovell, as the city&#x27;s location sprung from their crossing of the Murray River. Albury, commonly associated with its Victorian twin, Wodonga, is one of the few rural Australian cities to experience a boom, mainly from industrialisation in recent times.

The Albury bypass was first proposed in 1964 but only opened on 6 March 2007. Following a series of announcements and changes of plans through the 1990s, when Albury residents failed to agree on whether an &#x27;internal&#x27; or &#x27;external&#x27; bypass route was more appropriate, the &#x27;internal bypass&#x27; option was chosen. Approval was granted in 2004 and construction, by Abigroup, began in January 2005. The route is parallel to and on the eastern side of the Sydney–Melbourne railway, beginning at the railway overpass north of Albury. After crossing the Murray River, the bypass crosses the railway to rejoin the previous highway at the southern end of the Lincoln Causeway, connecting to the Wodonga bypass. The Albury bypass includes a freeway standard connection to Murray Valley Highway at Bandiana, east of Wodonga.

===Wangaratta===

Wangaratta is, after Wodonga, the largest centre in northeast Victoria, with a population of approximately 17,000 at the . Wangaratta is at the junction of the Great Alpine Road. Hume and Hovell passed through this area on their 1824 expedition and the town was founded in 1837 when the surrounding area was opened for farming. The town was bypassed in 1994.

Attractions include Merriwa Park, a sunken garden adjacent to the King River, Airworld at Wangaratta Airport, and old goldfield areas of nearby Beechworth and Chiltern.

===Benalla===

Benalla is a large town located just off Hume Freeway between Melbourne and Wangaratta. Founded in 1848, growth was slow until a goldrush in the 1850s. It had many associations with the Kelly gang and the courthouse was the venue for a number of their trials. It also has a memorial to the Australian war hero Sir Edward &#x27;Weary&#x27; Dunlop, an Australian doctor who acted as a leader to allied troops on the Thailand-Burma Railway in World War II.

===Euroa===

Euroa is famous for a Ned Kelly bank robbery. The town is located on the Seven Creeks and has pretty gardens and a number of attractive 19th century buildings.

===Seymour===

The bypass of Seymour opened in December 1982. Seymour remains on the Goulburn Valley Highway. The town is in the rich Goulburn Valley which supports the local vineyards. The large Puckapunyal military base is located west of Seymour. Once the centre of the bushranging area of Victoria, it has a museum which displays many period relics of that era. It was until the 1970s a major railway maintenance centre, and part of the railway workshops now houses a railway museum. The museum&#x27;s collection of rolling stock, including State carriages used by governors and monarchs, is extensive.

===Kalkallo===

Construction of the Donnybrook Road interchange, immediately to the north of the Craigieburn Bypass, replaced the dangerous at-grade intersection with (C723) at Kalkallo an overpass and entry/exit ramps in both directions, at a cost of $32 million. Works commenced in December 2007 and completion occurred in March 2009, three months ahead of schedule.

===Craigieburn===
Prior to the opening of the Craigieburn Bypass in 2005, the Hume Highway skirted Craigieburn (the town centre was bypassed in the 1950s). The section of the highway from Craigieburn to Campbellfield (on Melbourne&#x27;s outskirts) was a significant bottleneck, with 12 sets of traffic signals in section of road. The Craigieburn Bypass now links directly to the Western and Metropolitan Ring Roads. By 2013, the Old Hume Highway (Sydney Road) section from Fawkner to Campbellfield was again becoming a bottleneck due to poor traffic signal coordination. There was some opposition for the bypass by several local governments in the northern suburbs of Melbourne, including the City of Darebin and the City of Merri-bek, as well as local environmental groups. Their alternative proposal was rejected by the state government. A pedestrian and cyclist cement path – the Galada Tamboore Pathway – runs the length of the bypass and connects with the Metropolitan Ring Road path, from where it is possible to connect to the Merri Creek Trail, Western Ring Road Trail, the City of Whittlesea Public Gardens and Edgars Road. The Craigieburn Bypass is shown in the 1969 Melbourne Transportation Plan as part of the F2 Freeway corridor, which extended south along Merri Creek, Hoddle St, Barkly St in St Kilda, south through Elwood and Brighton, then east along South Road, connecting to the Dingley Freeway corridor.

==Alternative Routes==
The main alternative route between Sydney and Melbourne is the Princes Highway/Princes Freeway/Princes Motorway route (A1/M1) which follows the coast for most of its length. Other inland alternate routes include the Olympic Highway route (A41) between Albury and Sydney via Wagga Wagga, Cowra and Bathurst, and also the Federal Highway / Monaro Highway route (M23/A23/B23) via Canberra which links with Hume Highway near Goulburn and Princes Highway in East Gippsland.

==Incidents==
In 1989, the professional golfer Jerry Stolhand died in a car accident on the highway at Breadalbane, New South Wales. The Hume Highway was also where notorious serial killer Ivan Milat picked up several of his victims.

==See also==

* Old Hume Highway
* Highways in Australia
* Highways in New South Wales
* Highways in Victoria
* Freeways in Australia
* Freeways in New South Wales
* Freeways in Victoria

==References==
== Bibliography ==
* 
* 

==External links==
*Driving the Hume Hwy – 900km in 6 minutes – Youtube video
*Hume Highway to receive $785m upgrade: Vaile
*Libs to finish Hume duplication by 2012
*QBR (Queensland Business review) Coalition to complete duplication of Hume Highway by 2012
*ALP to fix NSW rural transport corridors
*Vaile exhorts colleagues to keep up the fight to win 

===Construction news===
* Coolac Bypass, RTA
* Coolac bypass better projects, RTA
* Hume Highway, Abigroup
* Coolac bypass, Abigroup
* Hume Highway duplication package, RTA
* Southern Alliance
* Northern Alliance
* Hume Highway to receive $785m upgrade: Vaile
* Liberals to finish Hume duplication by 2012
* QBR (Queensland Business review) Coalition to complete duplication of Hume Highway by 2012
* ALP to fix NSW rural transport corridors
* Media release – Warren Truss, Minister for Transport and Regional Services</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1372588" start="4" end="16" title="Hume Highway" label="Hume Highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1372588" start="58" end="70" title="Hume Highway" label="Hume Freeway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1372588" start="79" end="92" title="Hume Highway" label="Hume Motorway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1967298" start="138" end="154" title="National Highway (Australia)" label="national highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q3141" start="177" end="186" title="Melbourne" label="Melbourne"/>
<link wikidata="Q3130" start="208" end="214" title="Sydney" label="Sydney"/>
<link wikidata="Q1302778" start="318" end="334" title="dual carriageway" label="dual carriageway"/>
<link wikidata="Q14934999" start="479" end="497" title="Sir Roden Cutler VC Memorial Interchange" label="Cutler Interchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q2805096" start="502" end="509" title="Berrima, New South Wales" label="Berrima"/>
<link wikidata="Q3224" start="541" end="556" title="New South Wales" label="New South Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q36687" start="581" end="589" title="Victoria, Australia" label="Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1967298" start="609" end="633" title="National Highway (Australia)" label="Auslink National Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q4712855" start="736" end="750" title="Albury–Wodonga" label="Albury–Wodonga"/>
<link wikidata="Q3114" start="755" end="763" title="Canberra" label="Canberra"/>
<link wikidata="Q14934970" start="970" end="985" title="Parramatta Road" label="Parramatta Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q2157505" start="990" end="998" title="Ashfield, New South Wales" label="Ashfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q929825" start="1476" end="1498" title="M5 Motorway (Sydney)" label="M5 South-West Motorway"/>
<link wikidata="Q2485091" start="1507" end="1518" title="Westlink M7" label="Westlink M7"/>
<link wikidata="Q17581" start="1569" end="1583" title="Sydney Airport" label="Sydney Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q57278" start="1629" end="1638" title="Newcastle, New South Wales" label="Newcastle"/>
<link wikidata="Q34932" start="1643" end="1651" title="Brisbane" label="Brisbane"/>
<link wikidata="Q2739432" start="1703" end="1709" title="road pricing" label="tolled"/>
<link wikidata="Q2413114" start="1761" end="1774" title="A9 (Sydney)" label="Narellan Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q1320887" start="2884" end="2892" title="VicRoads" label="VicRoads"/>
<link wikidata="Q5181698" start="3078" end="3089" title="Craigieburn, Victoria" label="Craigieburn"/>
<link wikidata="Q6811747" start="3104" end="3139" title="Melbourne central business district" label="Melbourne central business district"/>
<link wikidata="Q2153517" start="3268" end="3303" title="M80 Ring Road" label="Western and Metropolitan Ring Roads"/>
<link wikidata="Q56683" start="4024" end="4035" title="Sydney Road" label="Sydney Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q192583" start="4126" end="4146" title="Great Dividing Range" label="Great Dividing Range"/>
<link wikidata="Q5405491" start="4182" end="4190" title="eucalypt" label="eucalypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q569073" start="4454" end="4461" title="Outback" label="Outback"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165967" start="4516" end="4529" title="Mount Buffalo National Park" label="Mount Buffalo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2358411" start="4621" end="4630" title="Glenrowan, Vic" label="Glenrowan"/>
<link wikidata="Q301816" start="4659" end="4668" title="Ned Kelly" label="Ned Kelly"/>
<link wikidata="Q183078" start="4801" end="4813" title="Murray River" label="Murray River"/>
<link wikidata="Q42329" start="5439" end="5443" title="wool" label="wool"/>
<link wikidata="Q1174791" start="5644" end="5654" title="escarpment" label="escarpment"/>
<link wikidata="Q192583" start="5688" end="5708" title="Great Dividing Range" label="Great Dividing Range"/>
<link wikidata="Q2884477" start="5816" end="5826" title="Bargo, New South Wales" label="Bargo Ramp"/>
<link wikidata="Q2884477" start="6098" end="6109" title="Bargo, New South Wales" label="Bargo brush"/>
<link wikidata="Q3324945" start="6228" end="6237" title="Moss Vale, New South Wales" label="Moss Vale"/>
<link wikidata="Q6777932" start="6242" end="6249" title="Marulan, New South Wales" label="Marulan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5082943" start="6563" end="6578" title="Charles Throsby" label="Charles Throsby"/>
<link wikidata="Q7650261" start="6666" end="6679" title="Sutton Forest, New South Wales" label="Sutton Forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q7348476" start="6723" end="6736" title="Lake Bathurst (New South Wales)" label="Lake Bathurst"/>
<link wikidata="Q605235" start="6751" end="6766" title="Goulburn" label="Goulburn Plains"/>
<link wikidata="Q277864" start="7024" end="7040" title="Hume and Hovell expedition" label="overland journey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1164736" start="7427" end="7438" title="Wollondilly River" label="Wollondilly"/>
<link wikidata="Q823277" start="7443" end="7453" title="Shoalhaven River" label="Shoalhaven"/>
<link wikidata="Q646893" start="7555" end="7567" title="Nepean River" label="Nepean River"/>
<link wikidata="Q11880367" start="7715" end="7725" title="Earthworks (engineering)" label="earthworks"/>
<link wikidata="Q6816446" start="7782" end="7790" title="Menangle, New South Wales" label="Menangle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1939928" start="7797" end="7806" title="Mittagong" label="Mittagong"/>
<link wikidata="Q7181150" start="7955" end="7969" title="Pheasants Nest, New South Wales" label="Pheasants Nest"/>
<link wikidata="Q8052662" start="8002" end="8012" title="Yerrinbool, New South Wales" label="Yerrinbool"/>
<link wikidata="Q4831435" start="8089" end="8098" title="Aylmerton, New South Wales" label="Aylmerton"/>
<link wikidata="Q467694" start="8161" end="8178" title="Lachlan Macquarie" label="Lachlan Macquarie"/>
<link wikidata="Q8048322" start="8526" end="8534" title="Yanderra, New South Wales" label="Yanderra"/>
<link wikidata="Q2142133" start="8568" end="8583" title="Thomas Mitchell (explorer)" label="Thomas Mitchell"/>
<link wikidata="Q2733575" start="8717" end="8725" title="Gundagai" label="Gundagai"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8975" end="8983" title="Road surface#Gravel surface" label="metalled"/>
<link wikidata="Q6777932" start="9241" end="9248" title="Marulan, New South Wales" label="Marulan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7181150" start="9470" end="9484" title="Pheasants Nest, New South Wales" label="Pheasants Nest"/>
<link wikidata="Q7830306" start="9605" end="9612" title="Towrang, New South Wales" label="Towrang"/>
<link wikidata="Q38261565" start="10016" end="10029" title="Mitchellstown" label="Mitchellstown"/>
<link wikidata="Q609096" start="10037" end="10051" title="Goulburn River" label="Goulburn River"/>
<link wikidata="Q5025945" start="10090" end="10103" title="Mount Macedon" label="Mount Macedon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5075671" start="10120" end="10134" title="Charles Bonney" label="Charles Bonney"/>
<link wikidata="Q38261565" start="10159" end="10172" title="Mitchellstown" label="Mitchellstown"/>
<link wikidata="Q2778994" start="10181" end="10188" title="Kilmore, Victoria" label="Kilmore"/>
<link wikidata="Q1848835" start="10623" end="10645" title="Parliament of Victoria" label="Parliament of Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q5177406" start="10684" end="10703" title="Country Roads Board" label="Country Roads Board"/>
<link wikidata="Q1320887" start="10711" end="10719" title="VicRoads" label="VicRoads"/>
<link wikidata="Q774681" start="10977" end="10988" title="Baddaginnie, Victoria" label="Baddaginnie"/>
<link wikidata="Q816673" start="10997" end="11004" title="Benalla, Victoria" label="Benalla"/>
<link wikidata="Q2358411" start="11008" end="11017" title="Glenrowan, Victoria" label="Glenrowan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7581140" start="11036" end="11047" title="Springhurst, Victoria" label="Springhurst"/>
<link wikidata="Q2963640" start="11056" end="11064" title="Chiltern, Victoria" label="Chiltern"/>
<link wikidata="Q2716031" start="11068" end="11079" title="Barnawartha, Victoria" label="Barnawartha"/>
<link wikidata="Q5181698" start="11108" end="11119" title="Craigieburn, Victoria" label="Craigieburn"/>
<link wikidata="Q2925842" start="11121" end="11130" title="Broadford, Victoria" label="Broadford"/>
<link wikidata="Q5411679" start="11135" end="11140" title="Euroa, Victoria" label="Euroa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2400081" start="11189" end="11195" title="Wallan, Victoria" label="Wallan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2778994" start="11200" end="11206" title="Kilmore, Victoria" label="Kimore"/>
<link wikidata="Q985689" start="11244" end="11251" title="Seymour, Victoria" label="Seymour"/>
<link wikidata="Q2340517" start="11276" end="11287" title="Violet Town, Victoria" label="Violet Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q1024728" start="11321" end="11331" title="Wangaratta" label="Wangaratta"/>
<link wikidata="Q606307" start="11380" end="11387" title="Wodonga, Victoria" label="Wodonga"/>
<link wikidata="Q3365521" start="12003" end="12032" title="Parliament of New South Wales" label="Parliament of New South Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q129820913" start="12136" end="12152" title="Main Roads Board" label="Main Roads Board"/>
<link wikidata="Q7834923" start="12160" end="12177" title="Transport for NSW" label="Transport for NSW"/>
<link wikidata="Q1544396" start="12295" end="12316" title="Great Western Highway" label="Great Western Highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1523969" start="12771" end="12784" title="Hamilton Hume" label="Hamilton Hume"/>
<link wikidata="Q974540" start="12811" end="12825" title="William Hovell" label="William Hovell"/>
<link wikidata="Q7230856" start="12880" end="12901" title="Port Phillip District" label="Port Phillip District"/>
<link wikidata="Q56850459" start="12928" end="12946" title="Colony of Victoria" label="Colony of Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q3365521" start="13068" end="13097" title="Parliament of New South Wales" label="Parliament of New South Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q1848835" start="13442" end="13464" title="Parliament of Victoria" label="Parliament of Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1320887" start="13573" end="13581" title="VicRoads" label="VicRoads"/>
<link wikidata="Q2153517" start="13730" end="13765" title="M80 Ring Road" label="Western and Metropolitan Ring Roads"/>
<link wikidata="Q7996534" start="13862" end="13880" title="Whitlam government" label="Whitlam government"/>
<link wikidata="Q7592428" start="15483" end="15493" title="St Andrews, New South Wales" label="St Andrews"/>
<link wikidata="Q5130111" start="15856" end="15864" title="Claymore, New South Wales" label="Claymore"/>
<link wikidata="Q8032360" start="15869" end="15877" title="Woodbine, New South Wales" label="Woodbine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1320887" start="16381" end="16389" title="VicRoads" label="VicRoads"/>
<link wikidata="Q6353350" start="16555" end="16563" title="Kalkallo, Victoria" label="Kalkallo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2143313" start="16568" end="16577" title="Beveridge, Victoria" label="Beveridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q7111990" start="16904" end="16932" title="Outer Metropolitan Ring Road" label="Outer Metropolitan Ring Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q14875255" start="17177" end="17199" title="limited access highway" label="limited access highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q2963640" start="17210" end="17218" title="Chiltern, Victoria" label="Chiltern"/>
<link wikidata="Q2716031" start="17222" end="17233" title="Barnawartha, Victoria" label="Barnawartha"/>
<link wikidata="Q36687" start="17415" end="17424" title="Victoria (Australia)" label="Victorian"/>
<link wikidata="Q5181698" start="17563" end="17574" title="Craigieburn, Victoria" label="Craigieburn"/>
<link wikidata="Q7660247" start="17641" end="17668" title="Sydney–Melbourne rail corridor" label="Sydney to Melbourne railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q2925842" start="17787" end="17796" title="Broadford, Victoria" label="Broadford"/>
<link wikidata="Q7680077" start="17800" end="17809" title="Tallarook" label="Tallarook"/>
<link wikidata="Q6353350" start="18028" end="18036" title="Kalkallo, Victoria" label="Kalkallo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2143313" start="18260" end="18269" title="Beveridge, Victoria" label="Beveridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q2400081" start="19273" end="19279" title="Wallan, Victoria" label="Wallan"/>
<link wikidata="Q13527909" start="19316" end="19335" title="Premier of Victoria" label="Premier of Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q3453276" start="19345" end="19354" title="R J Hamer" label="R J Hamer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5177406" start="19532" end="19535" title="Country Roads Board" label="CRB"/>
<link wikidata="Q2340517" start="19696" end="19707" title="Violet Town" label="Violet Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q774681" start="19711" end="19722" title="Baddaginnie, Victoria" label="Baddaginnie"/>
<link wikidata="Q2873433" start="19800" end="19806" title="Avenel, Victoria" label="Avenel"/>
<link wikidata="Q6674500" start="19827" end="19835" title="Longwood, Victoria" label="Longwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q7340334" start="19918" end="19934" title="Rob Maclellan" label="Robert Maclellan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1540146" start="20396" end="20419" title="Goulburn Valley Highway" label="Goulburn Valley Highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q985689" start="20543" end="20550" title="Seymour, Victoria" label="Seymour"/>
<link wikidata="Q17386653" start="20634" end="20645" title="Steve Crabb" label="Steve Crabb"/>
<link wikidata="Q6674500" start="20828" end="20836" title="Longwood, Victoria" label="Longwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q18377856" start="20943" end="20955" title="Jack Simpson (politician)" label="Jack Simpson"/>
<link wikidata="Q606307" start="21184" end="21191" title="Wodonga" label="Wodonga"/>
<link wikidata="Q816673" start="21387" end="21394" title="Benalla" label="Benalla"/>
<link wikidata="Q774681" start="21586" end="21597" title="Baddaginnie, Victoria" label="Baddaginnie"/>
<link wikidata="Q2358411" start="21624" end="21633" title="Glenrowan, Victoria" label="Glenrowan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7581140" start="22313" end="22324" title="Springhurst, Victoria" label="Springhurst"/>
<link wikidata="Q5411679" start="22421" end="22426" title="Euroa" label="Euroa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1024728" start="23269" end="23279" title="Wangaratta" label="Wangaratta"/>
<link wikidata="Q2153517" start="23993" end="24015" title="M80 Ring Road" label="Metropolitan Ring Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q4712855" start="24232" end="24246" title="Albury–Wodonga" label="Albury–Wodonga"/>
<link wikidata="Q3224" start="24300" end="24303" title="New South Wales" label="NSW"/>
<link wikidata="Q3512773" start="24327" end="24336" title="Table Top, New South Wales" label="Ettamogah"/>
<link wikidata="Q183078" start="24344" end="24356" title="Murray River" label="Murray River"/>
<link wikidata="Q2991162" start="24389" end="24410" title="Government of Australia" label="Australian Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q4470034" start="24988" end="24994" title="Coolac" label="Coolac"/>
<link wikidata="Q8034002" start="25388" end="25398" title="Woomargama" label="Woomargama"/>
<link wikidata="Q2500821" start="25514" end="25522" title="Tarcutta" label="Tarcutta"/>
<link wikidata="Q14218357" start="25639" end="25647" title="Holbrook, New South Wales" label="Holbrook"/>
<link wikidata="Q540967" start="25692" end="25710" title="Roads and Maritime Services" label="Roads and Maritime"/>
<link wikidata="Q2925842" start="26023" end="26032" title="Broadford, Victoria" label="Broadford"/>
<link wikidata="Q1967298" start="27907" end="27921" title="National Highway (Australia)" label="national route"/>
<link wikidata="Q46622" start="28029" end="28037" title="motorway" label="motorway"/>
<link wikidata="Q3128623" start="28074" end="28092" title="Southern Highlands (New South Wales)" label="Southern Highlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q1643599" start="28096" end="28111" title="grade separation" label="grade-separated"/>
<link wikidata="Q46622" start="28183" end="28190" title="freeway" label="freeway"/>
<link wikidata="Q12486609" start="28327" end="28337" title="Inner West (Sydney)" label="inner west"/>
<link wikidata="Q1779930" start="28463" end="28469" title="Bypass (road)" label="bypass"/>
<link wikidata="Q1544396" start="28792" end="28813" title="Great Western Highway" label="Great Western Highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q14934970" start="28816" end="28831" title="Parramatta Road" label="Parramatta Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q1249539" start="28839" end="28841" title="A3 (Sydney)" label="A3"/>
<link wikidata="Q2021580" start="28848" end="28850" title="A6 (Sydney)" label="A6"/>
<link wikidata="Q5724731" start="28857" end="28875" title="Henry Lawson Drive" label="Henry Lawson Drive"/>
<link wikidata="Q6824798" start="28877" end="28895" title="Cumberland Highway" label="Cumberland Highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q929825" start="28903" end="28914" title="M5 Motorway (Sydney)" label="M5 Motorway"/>
<link wikidata="Q2485091" start="28921" end="28932" title="Westlink M7" label="Westlink M7"/>
<link wikidata="Q1028432" start="28939" end="28956" title="Camden Valley Way" label="Camden Valley Way"/>
<link wikidata="Q2413114" start="28964" end="28966" title="A9 (Sydney)" label="A9"/>
<link wikidata="Q2142942" start="28973" end="28990" title="Remembrance Drive" label="Remembrance Drive"/>
<link wikidata="Q2018391" start="28992" end="29008" title="Old Hume Highway" label="Old Hume Highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1262066" start="29016" end="29033" title="Illawarra Highway" label="Illawarra Highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q977654" start="29041" end="29056" title="Federal Highway (Australia)" label="Federal Highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146003" start="29064" end="29079" title="Yass Valley Way" label="Yass Valley Way"/>
<link wikidata="Q495004" start="29081" end="29095" title="Barton Highway" label="Barton Highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1799709" start="29103" end="29121" title="Lachlan Valley Way" label="Lachlan Valley Way"/>
<link wikidata="Q1016613" start="29129" end="29147" title="Burley Griffin Way" label="Burley Griffin Way"/>
<link wikidata="Q2296110" start="29155" end="29178" title="Snowy Mountains Highway" label="Snowy Mountains Highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q916940" start="29186" end="29199" title="Sturt Highway" label="Sturt Highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q2021555" start="29207" end="29222" title="Olympic Highway" label="Olympic Highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q2155597" start="29230" end="29246" title="Riverina Highway" label="Riverina Highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q916411" start="29254" end="29275" title="Murray Valley Highway" label="Murray Valley Highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1544202" start="29284" end="29301" title="Great Alpine Road" label="Great Alpine Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q1712496" start="29310" end="29325" title="Midland Highway (Victoria)" label="Midland Highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1540146" start="29339" end="29362" title="Goulburn Valley Freeway" label="Goulburn Valley Freeway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1540146" start="29370" end="29393" title="Goulburn Valley Highway" label="Goulburn Valley Highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q739599" start="29402" end="29418" title="Northern Highway, Victoria" label="Northern Highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q56683" start="29426" end="29437" title="Sydney Road, Melbourne" label="Sydney Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q2153517" start="29450" end="29485" title="M80 Ring Road, Melbourne" label="Western and Metropolitan Ring Roads"/>
<link wikidata="Q646893" start="29554" end="29560" title="Nepean River" label="Nepean"/>
<link wikidata="Q2584373" start="29576" end="29589" title="Wingecarribee River" label="Wingecarribee"/>
<link wikidata="Q7123666" start="29591" end="29597" title="Paddys River (Southern Highlands, New South Wales)" label="Paddys"/>
<link wikidata="Q475597" start="29599" end="29611" title="Murrumbidgee River" label="Murrumbidgee"/>
<link wikidata="Q183078" start="29613" end="29619" title="Murray River" label="Murray"/>
<link wikidata="Q1861761" start="29621" end="29626" title="Ovens River" label="Ovens"/>
<link wikidata="Q1742080" start="29628" end="29632" title="King River (Victoria)" label="King"/>
<link wikidata="Q609096" start="29637" end="29645" title="Goulburn River" label="Goulburn"/>
<link wikidata="Q4381024" start="29680" end="29688" title="Prospect Creek (New South Wales)" label="Prospect"/>
<link wikidata="Q19874821" start="29690" end="29697" title="Jugiong Creek" label="Jugiong"/>
<link wikidata="Q7685696" start="29703" end="29711" title="Tarcutta Creek" label="Tarcutta"/>
<link wikidata="Q954186" start="29871" end="29883" title="Campbelltown, New South Wales" label="Campbelltown"/>
<link wikidata="Q1028408" start="29885" end="29891" title="Camden, New South Wales" label="Camden"/>
<link wikidata="Q516010" start="29893" end="29899" title="Picton, New South Wales" label="Picton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1939928" start="29901" end="29910" title="Mittagong" label="Mittagong"/>
<link wikidata="Q2805096" start="29912" end="29919" title="Berrima, New South Wales" label="Berrima"/>
<link wikidata="Q6777932" start="29921" end="29928" title="Marulan, New South Wales" label="Marulan"/>
<link wikidata="Q605235" start="29930" end="29938" title="Goulburn" label="Goulburn"/>
<link wikidata="Q3120886" start="29940" end="29947" title="Gunning, New South Wales" label="Gunning"/>
<link wikidata="Q1380121" start="29949" end="29953" title="Yass, New South Wales" label="Yass"/>
<link wikidata="Q594981" start="29955" end="29962" title="Bowning, New South Wales" label="Bowning"/>
<link wikidata="Q4943223" start="29964" end="29971" title="Bookham, New South Wales" label="Bookham"/>
<link wikidata="Q6304885" start="29973" end="29980" title="Jugiong, New South Wales" label="Jugiong"/>
<link wikidata="Q4470034" start="29982" end="29988" title="Coolac, New South Wales" label="Coolac"/>
<link wikidata="Q2733575" start="29990" end="29998" title="Gundagai" label="Gundagai"/>
<link wikidata="Q2500821" start="30000" end="30008" title="Tarcutta, New South Wales" label="Tarcutta"/>
<link wikidata="Q14218357" start="30010" end="30018" title="Holbrook, New South Wales" label="Holbrook"/>
<link wikidata="Q8034002" start="30020" end="30030" title="Woomargama, New South Wales" label="Woomargama"/>
<link wikidata="Q331764" start="30032" end="30038" title="Albury" label="Albury"/>
<link wikidata="Q3305212" start="30043" end="30048" title="Young, New South Wales" label="Young"/>
<link wikidata="Q606307" start="30133" end="30140" title="Wodonga" label="Wodonga"/>
<link wikidata="Q2963640" start="30142" end="30150" title="Chiltern, Victoria" label="Chiltern"/>
<link wikidata="Q1024728" start="30152" end="30162" title="Wangaratta" label="Wangaratta"/>
<link wikidata="Q816673" start="30164" end="30171" title="Benalla" label="Benalla"/>
<link wikidata="Q2340517" start="30173" end="30184" title="Violet Town, Victoria" label="Violet Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q5411679" start="30186" end="30191" title="Euroa, Victoria" label="Euroa"/>
<link wikidata="Q985689" start="30193" end="30200" title="Seymour, Victoria" label="Seymour"/>
<link wikidata="Q2925842" start="30202" end="30211" title="Broadford, Victoria" label="Broadford"/>
<link wikidata="Q5181698" start="30216" end="30227" title="Craigieburn, Victoria" label="Craigieburn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1028408" start="30243" end="30249" title="Camden, New South Wales" label="Camden"/>
<link wikidata="Q6965754" start="30417" end="30425" title="Narellan, New South Wales" label="Narellan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5050941" start="30569" end="30575" title="Casula, New South Wales" label="Casula"/>
<link wikidata="Q5338966" start="30612" end="30626" title="Edmondson Park, New South Wales" label="Edmondson Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q6965754" start="30752" end="30760" title="Narellan,_New_South_Wales" label="Narellan"/>
<link wikidata="Q646893" start="30793" end="30805" title="Nepean River" label="Nepean River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1028408" start="30847" end="30853" title="Camden,_New_South_Wales" label="Camden"/>
<link wikidata="Q516010" start="31004" end="31010" title="Picton,_New_South_Wales" label="Picton"/>
<link wikidata="Q3513927" start="31012" end="31019" title="Tahmoor,_New_South_Wales" label="Tahmoor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2884477" start="31021" end="31026" title="Bargo,_New_South_Wales" label="Bargo"/>
<link wikidata="Q8048322" start="31032" end="31040" title="Yanderra" label="Yanderra"/>
<link wikidata="Q7278830" start="31210" end="31214" title="Raby,_New_South_Wales" label="Raby"/>
<link wikidata="Q5353990" start="31301" end="31310" title="Elderslie,_New_South_Wales" label="Elderslie"/>
<link wikidata="Q954186" start="31495" end="31507" title="Campbelltown,_New_South_Wales" label="Campbelltown"/>
<link wikidata="Q4831435" start="32097" end="32106" title="Aylmerton,_New_South_Wales" label="Aylmerton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1939928" start="32538" end="32547" title="Mittagong" label="Mittagong"/>
<link wikidata="Q3128623" start="32669" end="32687" title="Southern Highlands (New South Wales)" label="Southern Highlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q3324945" start="33584" end="33593" title="Moss Vale, New South Wales" label="Moss Vale"/>
<link wikidata="Q7650261" start="33858" end="33871" title="Sutton Forest, New South Wales" label="Sutton Forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q2805096" start="34052" end="34059" title="Berrima, New South Wales" label="Berrima"/>
<link wikidata="Q3114" start="34176" end="34184" title="Canberra" label="Canberra"/>
<link wikidata="Q6777932" start="34357" end="34364" title="Marulan, New South Wales" label="Marulan"/>
<link wikidata="Q467694" start="34422" end="34439" title="Lachlan Macquarie" label="Lachlan Macquarie"/>
<link wikidata="Q7650261" start="34469" end="34482" title="Sutton Forest, New South Wales" label="Sutton Forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q1262066" start="34695" end="34712" title="Illawarra Highway" label="Illawarra Highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q21927780" start="34814" end="34822" title="Bungonia, New South Wales" label="Bungonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q8025184" start="34828" end="34836" title="Wingello, New South Wales" label="Wingello"/>
<link wikidata="Q1912943" start="34838" end="34845" title="Tallong, New South Wales" label="Tallong"/>
<link wikidata="Q2584076" start="34906" end="34925" title="150th meridian east" label="150th meridian east"/>
<link wikidata="Q2142133" start="34933" end="34948" title="Thomas Mitchell (explorer)" label="Thomas Mitchell"/>
<link wikidata="Q7830306" start="35552" end="35559" title="Towrang" label="Towrang"/>
<link wikidata="Q7830306" start="36246" end="36253" title="Towrang" label="Towrang"/>
<link wikidata="Q1164736" start="36317" end="36334" title="Wollondilly River" label="Wollondilly River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1523969" start="36587" end="36600" title="Hamilton Hume" label="Hamilton Hume"/>
<link wikidata="Q5236489" start="36756" end="36768" title="David Lennox" label="David Lennox"/>
<link wikidata="Q605235" start="36883" end="36891" title="Goulburn" label="Goulburn"/>
<link wikidata="Q42329" start="37090" end="37094" title="wool" label="wool"/>
<link wikidata="Q4906010" start="37138" end="37152" title="Big Merino" label="The Big Merino"/>
<link wikidata="Q3120886" start="37723" end="37737" title="Gunning, New South Wales" label="Gunning&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q5619261" start="38205" end="38222" title="Gunning Wind Farm" label="Gunning Wind Farm"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="38366" end="38381" title="Cullerin Ranges" label="Cullerin Ranges"/>
<link wikidata="Q1380121" start="38471" end="38475" title="Yass, New South Wales" label="Yass"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146003" start="38492" end="38503" title="Yass Valley Way" label="main street"/>
<link wikidata="Q3114" start="38630" end="38638" title="Canberra" label="Canberra"/>
<link wikidata="Q4943223" start="38935" end="38942" title="Bookham, New South Wales" label="Bookham"/>
<link wikidata="Q4470034" start="40029" end="40035" title="Coolac, New South Wales" label="Coolac"/>
<link wikidata="Q87915635" start="40260" end="40268" title="Abigroup" label="Abigroup"/>
<link wikidata="Q5288277" start="40375" end="40395" title="Dog on the Tuckerbox" label="Dog on the Tuckerbox"/>
<link wikidata="Q106920435" start="40640" end="40654" title="Sheahan Bridge" label="Sheahan Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q475597" start="40664" end="40682" title="Murrumbidgee River" label="Murrumbidgee River"/>
<link wikidata="Q4910841" start="40709" end="40721" title="Bill Sheahan (politician)" label="Bill Sheahan"/>
<link wikidata="Q54495" start="40788" end="40809" title="Sydney Harbour Bridge" label="Sydney Harbour Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q7243804" start="41023" end="41043" title="Prince Alfred Bridge" label="Prince Alfred Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q916940" start="41848" end="41861" title="Sturt Highway" label="Sturt Highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q2296110" start="42370" end="42393" title="Snowy Mountains Highway" label="Snowy Mountains Highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q916940" start="42528" end="42541" title="Sturt Highway" label="Sturt Highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q459600" start="42558" end="42569" title="Wagga Wagga" label="Wagga Wagga"/>
<link wikidata="Q705829" start="42571" end="42578" title="Mildura" label="Mildura"/>
<link wikidata="Q5112" start="42583" end="42591" title="Adelaide" label="Adelaide"/>
<link wikidata="Q2500821" start="42609" end="42617" title="Tarcutta, New South Wales" label="Tarcutta"/>
<link wikidata="Q14218357" start="43332" end="43340" title="Holbrook, New South Wales" label="Holbrook"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="43397" end="43408" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q7052165" start="43497" end="43508" title="Norman Douglas Holbrook" label="Lt Holbrook"/>
<link wikidata="Q5630505" start="43615" end="43637" title="HMAS Otway (S 59)" label="HMAS &amp;quot;Otway&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q8004" start="43792" end="43806" title="traffic signal" label="traffic signal"/>
<link wikidata="Q221488" start="43813" end="43824" title="pedestrians" label="pedestrians"/>
<link wikidata="Q7660073" start="43872" end="43886" title="Sydney Orbital" label="Sydney Orbital"/>
<link wikidata="Q3141" start="43891" end="43900" title="Melbourne" label="Melbourne"/>
<link wikidata="Q2153517" start="43908" end="43925" title="Western Ring Road" label="Western Ring Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q319145" start="43967" end="43981" title="Prime Minister of Australia" label="Prime Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q41563" start="43983" end="43996" title="Julia Gillard" label="Julia Gillard"/>
<link wikidata="Q6865888" start="44001" end="44042" title="Minister for Infrastructure and Transport (Australia)" label="Minister for Infrastructure and Transport"/>
<link wikidata="Q335697" start="44044" end="44060" title="Anthony Albanese" label="Anthony Albanese"/>
<link wikidata="Q8034002" start="44141" end="44151" title="Woomargama, New South Wales" label="Woomargama"/>
<link wikidata="Q3512773" start="44345" end="44354" title="Table Top, New South Wales" label="Table Top"/>
<link wikidata="Q4951363" start="44414" end="44419" title="Bowna" label="Bowna"/>
<link wikidata="Q2021555" start="44558" end="44573" title="Olympic Highway" label="Olympic Highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q21946958" start="44626" end="44634" title="Hume Dam" label="Hume Dam"/>
<link wikidata="Q331764" start="45186" end="45192" title="Albury" label="Albury"/>
<link wikidata="Q1523969" start="45260" end="45273" title="Hamilton Hume" label="Hamilton Hume"/>
<link wikidata="Q974540" start="45278" end="45292" title="William Hovell" label="William Hovell"/>
<link wikidata="Q183078" start="45356" end="45368" title="Murray River" label="Murray River"/>
<link wikidata="Q606307" start="45423" end="45430" title="Wodonga" label="Wodonga"/>
<link wikidata="Q87915635" start="45931" end="45939" title="Abigroup" label="Abigroup"/>
<link wikidata="Q916411" start="46331" end="46352" title="Murray Valley Highway" label="Murray Valley Highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1024728" start="46402" end="46412" title="Wangaratta" label="Wangaratta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1544202" start="46562" end="46579" title="Great Alpine Road" label="Great Alpine Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q2750312" start="46906" end="46916" title="Beechworth, Victoria" label="Beechworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q2963640" start="46921" end="46929" title="Chiltern, Victoria" label="Chiltern"/>
<link wikidata="Q816673" start="46947" end="46954" title="Benalla, Victoria" label="Benalla"/>
<link wikidata="Q3048501" start="47257" end="47292" title="Weary Dunlop" label="Sir Edward &amp;#x27;Weary&amp;#x27; Dunlop"/>
<link wikidata="Q11718" start="47361" end="47383" title="Burma Railway" label="Thailand-Burma Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="47387" end="47399" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q5411679" start="47415" end="47420" title="Euroa, Victoria" label="Euroa"/>
<link wikidata="Q301816" start="47437" end="47446" title="Ned Kelly" label="Ned Kelly"/>
<link wikidata="Q985689" start="47605" end="47612" title="Seymour, Victoria" label="Seymour"/>
<link wikidata="Q1540146" start="47661" end="47684" title="Goulburn Valley Highway" label="Goulburn Valley Highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q7258247" start="47772" end="47783" title="Puckapunyal" label="Puckapunyal"/>
<link wikidata="Q5296762" start="48220" end="48230" title="Donnybrook, Victoria" label="Donnybrook"/>
<link wikidata="Q6353350" start="48361" end="48369" title="Kalkallo, Victoria" label="Kalkallo"/>
<link wikidata="Q5181698" start="48600" end="48611" title="Craigieburn, Victoria" label="Craigieburn"/>
<link wikidata="Q8004" start="48849" end="48864" title="traffic signals" label="traffic signals"/>
<link wikidata="Q2153517" start="48934" end="48969" title="M80 Ring Road, Melbourne" label="Western and Metropolitan Ring Roads"/>
<link wikidata="Q2018391" start="48984" end="49014" title="Old Hume Highway" label="Old Hume Highway (Sydney Road)"/>
<link wikidata="Q541032" start="49248" end="49263" title="City of Darebin" label="City of Darebin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1947531" start="49272" end="49289" title="City of Merri-bek" label="City of Merri-bek"/>
<link wikidata="Q53121" start="49412" end="49419" title="cyclist" label="cyclist"/>
<link wikidata="Q5181700" start="49438" end="49461" title="Craigieburn Bypass Trail" label="Galada Tamboore Pathway"/>
<link wikidata="Q6820034" start="49589" end="49606" title="Merri Creek Trail" label="Merri Creek Trail"/>
<link wikidata="Q7988246" start="49608" end="49631" title="Western Ring Road Trail" label="Western Ring Road Trail"/>
<link wikidata="Q4573578" start="49727" end="49761" title="1969 Melbourne Transportation Plan" label="1969 Melbourne Transportation Plan"/>
<link wikidata="Q823531" start="49862" end="49870" title="St Kilda, Victoria" label="St Kilda"/>
<link wikidata="Q1478712" start="50066" end="50081" title="Princes Highway" label="Princes Highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q204705" start="50082" end="50097" title="Princes Freeway" label="Princes Freeway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1474738" start="50098" end="50114" title="Southern Freeway" label="Princes Motorway"/>
<link wikidata="Q2021555" start="50219" end="50234" title="Olympic Highway" label="Olympic Highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q331764" start="50255" end="50261" title="Albury" label="Albury"/>
<link wikidata="Q459600" start="50277" end="50288" title="Wagga Wagga" label="Wagga Wagga"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138239" start="50290" end="50295" title="Cowra" label="Cowra"/>
<link wikidata="Q704978" start="50300" end="50308" title="Bathurst, New South Wales" label="Bathurst"/>
<link wikidata="Q977654" start="50323" end="50338" title="Federal Highway (Australia)" label="Federal Highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1944053" start="50341" end="50355" title="Monaro Highway" label="Monaro Highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q605235" start="50424" end="50432" title="Goulburn" label="Goulburn"/>
<link wikidata="Q107582642" start="50520" end="50534" title="Jerry Stolhand" label="Jerry Stolhand"/>
<link wikidata="Q4959195" start="50576" end="50604" title="Breadalbane, New South Wales" label="Breadalbane, New South Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q723700" start="50662" end="50672" title="Ivan Milat" label="Ivan Milat"/>
<link wikidata="Q2018391" start="50724" end="50740" title="Old Hume Highway" label="Old Hume Highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1327255" start="50743" end="50764" title="Highways in Australia" label="Highways in Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q669923" start="50767" end="50794" title="List of highways in New South Wales" label="Highways in New South Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q1840892" start="50797" end="50817" title="Highways in Victoria" label="Highways in Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q5501257" start="50820" end="50841" title="Freeways in Australia" label="Freeways in Australia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="50844" end="50871" title="Freeways in Australia#Rural region" label="Freeways in New South Wales"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="50874" end="50894" title="Freeways in Australia#Rural region 2" label="Freeways in Victoria"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="252274" wikidata="Q194187" url="?curid=252274" title="Sade (singer)">
<text>Helen Folasade Adu ( ; born 16 January 1959), known professionally as Sade Adu or simply Sade ( or ), is a Nigerian-British singer, known as the lead vocalist of her band Sade. One of the most successful British female artists in history, she is often recognised as an influence on contemporary music. Her success in the music industry was recognised with the honour Officer of the Order of the British Empire in 2002, and she was made Commander in the 2017 Birthday Honours.

Sade was born in Ibadan, British Nigeria, and was brought up in England from the age of four. She studied at Saint Martin&#x27;s School of Art in London and gained modest recognition as a fashion designer and part-time model before joining the band Pride in the early 1980s. After gaining attention as a performer, she formed the band Sade, and secured a recording contract with Epic Records in 1983.

A year later, the band released the album &quot;Diamond Life&quot;, which became one of the era&#x27;s best-selling albums and the best-selling debut by a British female vocalist. In July 1985, Sade was among the performers at the Live Aid charity concert at Wembley Stadium, and the next year, she appeared in the film &quot;Absolute Beginners&quot;. The band released their third album (&quot;Stronger Than Pride&quot;) in 1988, and a fourth album (&quot;Love Deluxe&quot;) in 1992. The band went on hiatus in 1996 after the birth of Sade&#x27;s child.

The band reunited in 1999 and the following year, released &quot;Lovers Rock&quot;, their first album in eight years. &quot;Lovers Rock&quot; was a departure from the band&#x27;s earlier jazz-inspired sounds. In 2010, the band released &quot;Soldier of Love&quot;, their sixth studio album, and toured arenas worldwide. 

Since that tour ended in 2011, the band has released two songs, &quot;Flower of the Universe&quot; for the soundtrack of Disney&#x27;s &quot;A Wrinkle in Time&quot;, and &quot;The Big Unknown&quot;, part of the soundtrack of Steve McQueen&#x27;s film &quot;Widows&quot;.

==Early life==
Helen Folasade Adu was born on 16 January 1959 in Ibadan, Oyo State, Nigeria. Her middle name, Folasade, means &quot;crowned with wealth&quot; in Yoruba. Her parents are Adebisi Adu, a Nigerian lecturer in economics of Yoruba background, from Ikere-Ekiti and Anne Hayes, an English district nurse; they met in London, married in 1955, and moved to Nigeria. Sade was four years old when her parents separated. Hayes returned to England with Sade and her elder brother, Banji, to live with their maternal grandparents near Colchester, Essex. At age 11, Sade moved to Holland-on-Sea, Essex with her mother and brother. After completing her education at Clacton County High School and Colchester Institute at the age of 18, she moved to London and studied fashion design at Saint Martin&#x27;s School of Art.

==Career==
===1980–1984: Beginnings and &quot;Diamond Life&quot;===
After completing a three-year course in fashion design, and later modelling briefly, Sade began backup singing with British band Pride. During this time, she formed a songwriting partnership with Pride&#x27;s guitarist/saxophonist Stuart Matthewman; together, backed by Pride&#x27;s rhythm section, they began doing their own sets at Pride gigs. Her solo performances of the song &quot;Smooth Operator&quot;, co-written with Ray St. John, attracted record companies&#x27; attention, and in 1983 Sade and Matthewman split from Pride, along with keyboardist Andrew Hale, bassist Paul Denman, and drummer Paul Cook, to form the band Sade. By the time she performed her first show at London&#x27;s Heaven nightclub, she had become so popular that 1,000 people were turned away at the door. In May 1983, Sade performed her first US show at New York City&#x27;s Danceteria nightclub. On 18 October 1983, Sade Adu signed with Epic Records. The rest of the band signed in 1984.

Following the record deal, the group began recording their debut album, &quot;Diamond Life,&quot; which took six weeks to record and was recorded entirely at The Power Plant in London. &quot;Diamond Life&quot; was released on 16 July 1984, reached number two in the UK Album Chart, sold over 1.2 million copies in the UK, and won the Brit Award for Best British Album in 1985. The album was also a hit internationally, reaching number one in several countries and the top ten in the US, where it sold in excess of four million copies. &quot;Diamond Life&quot; had international sales of over six million copies, becoming one of the top-selling debut recordings of the &#x27;80s, and the best-selling debut ever by a British female vocalist.

&quot;Your Love Is King&quot; was released as the album&#x27;s lead single on 25 February 1984 and was a success in European territories, charting at number seven in Ireland and number six on the UK Singles Chart. The song was less successful in the US, where it peaked at number 54 on the US &quot;Billboard&quot; Hot 100. The third single, &quot;Smooth Operator&quot;, was released on 15 September 1984 and became the most successful song in the US from the album &quot;Diamond Life&quot;. The track peaked at number five on the US &quot;Billboard&quot; Hot 100 and the US &quot;Billboard&quot; Hot Black Singles, as well as peaking at number one on the US &quot;Billboard&quot; Adult Contemporary chart. In Europe the song fared well, peaking at number 19 in the UK, and reaching the top 20 in Austria, Switzerland, France, and Germany.

===1985–2000: Continued success and first hiatus===

In late 1985, the band released their second album, &quot;Promise&quot;, which peaked at number one in both the UK and the US and became the band&#x27;s first album to reach number one on the US &quot;Billboard&quot; 200. The album topped the chart in 1986 and spent two weeks at the peak position. Eventually, the album went on to sell four million copies in the region and was certified four times platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America (RIAA). The album spawned two singles &quot;Never as Good as the First Time&quot; and &quot;The Sweetest Taboo,&quot; the latter of which was released as the album&#x27;s lead single and stayed on the US Hot 100 for six months. &quot;The Sweetest Taboo&quot; peaked at number five on the US &quot;Billboard&quot; Hot 100, number one on the US adult Contemporary chart, and number three on the US Hot R&amp;B/Hip-Hop Singles &amp; Tracks. Sade was so popular that some radio stations reinstated the &#x27;70s practice of playing album tracks, adding &quot;Is It a Crime&quot; and &quot;Tar Baby&quot; to their playlists. The following year, 1986, the band won a Grammy Award for Best New Artist.

In 1986, Sade made her acting debut in &quot;Absolute Beginners&quot;, a film adapted from the Colin MacInnes book of the same name about life in late-1950s London. Sade played the role of Athene Duncannon and lent her vocals to the film&#x27;s accompanying soundtrack. The film was screened out of competition at the 1986 Cannes Film Festival and grossed £1.8 million in the UK.
Sade&#x27;s third album, &quot;Stronger Than Pride&quot;, was released on 3 May 1988, and like Sade&#x27;s previous album became a commercial success and certified three times platinum in the US. The album was popularized by four singles, most notably the album&#x27;s second single &quot;Paradise&quot;, which peaked at number 16 on the US &quot;Billboard&quot; Hot 100 and peaked at number one on the US &quot;Billboard&quot; Hot R&amp;B/Hip-Hop Songs, becoming the band&#x27;s first single to do so.

&quot;Love Deluxe&quot; was released as the band&#x27;s fourth studio album on 26 October 1992. The album peaked at number three on the US &quot;Billboard&quot; 200 and has sold 3.4 million copies in the United States. The album was later certified four times platinum by the RIAA for shipments of four million copies. The album was also commercially successful elsewhere, reaching number one in France, and reaching the top ten in New Zealand, Sweden, Switzerland, and the UK. The album went on to be certified gold in the United Kingdom. In November 1994, the group released their first compilation album, &quot;The Best of Sade&quot;. The album was another top ten hit in both the United Kingdom and the United States, certified platinum and four times platinum, respectively.
The compilation album included material from Sade&#x27;s previous albums, as well as a cover version of &quot;Please Send Me Someone to Love&quot; (1950), originally by Percy Mayfield.

===2000–2010: &quot;Lovers Rock&quot; and second hiatus===

Following an eight-year hiatus, the band released their fifth studio album, &quot;Lovers Rock&quot;, on 13 November 2000 and received positive reviews from music critics.
The album reached number 18 on the UK Albums Chart, number three on the US &quot;Billboard&quot; 200, and has since been certified triple platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America (RIAA), having sold 3.9 million copies in the United States by February 2010. On 27 February 2002, the album earned Sade the Grammy Award for Best Pop Vocal Album, and the lead single &quot;By Your Side&quot; was nominated for the 2002 Grammy Award for Best Female Pop Vocal Performance. Although the single lost out to Nelly Furtado&#x27;s &quot;I&#x27;m Like a Bird&quot;, it has been listed as the 48th greatest love song of all time by VH1.

To promote the album, Sade and the band embarked on their fifth concert tour entitled Lovers Rock Tour. The tour was announced via the band&#x27;s website in April 2001. The announcement stated the tour would begin in the summer of 2001 with 30 shows. Initial dates were rescheduled due to extended rehearsal time. The shows sold well, with many stops adding additional shows. In August 2001, the tour was extended by eight weeks due to ticket demand. Deemed by many critics as a comeback tour, it marked the band&#x27;s first performances since 1994 and took place in 2001. Although many believed the trek would expand to other countries, this did not occur. With over 40 shows, it became the 13th biggest tour in North America, earning over $26 million.

Following the tour, the band released their first live album, &quot;Lovers Live&quot; on 5 February 2002 by Epic Records. &quot;Lovers Live&quot; reached number ten on the US &quot;Billboard&quot; 200 and number 51 on the UK Albums Chart, the band&#x27;s first album to miss the top twenty in the UK. The album was certified gold by the RIAA on 7 March 2002, having reached US sales of 562,000 copies, while the DVD was certified platinum on 30 January 2003 for shipping 100,000 copies.

Following the release of &quot;Lovers Rock&quot;, Sade took a ten-year hiatus, during which she raised her child and moved to the Caribbean. During this time, she made a rare public appearance for an award ceremony that took place in 2002 to accept an Order of the British Empire (OBE) at Buckingham Palace for services to music. In 2002, she appeared on the Red Hot Organization album, &quot;Red Hot + Riot&quot;, a compilation CD in tribute to the music of fellow Nigerian musician, Fela Kuti. She recorded a remix of her hit single &quot;By Your Side&quot; for the album and was billed as a co-producer.

===2010–2017: &quot; Soldier of Love&quot; and third hiatus===

The band&#x27;s sixth studio album, &quot;Soldier of Love&quot;, was released worldwide on 8 February 2010, and was their first album in ten years to contain new material. Upon release, the album received positive reviews and became a success. The album debuted atop the &quot;Billboard&quot; 200 in the United States with first-week sales of 502,000 copies. &quot;Soldier of Love&quot; became the band&#x27;s first album to debut at number one and the band&#x27;s second album to peak at number one on the chart. The album also had the best sales week by a group since Australian band AC/DC released their album &quot;Black Ice&quot; and entered the &quot;Billboard&quot; 200 at number one in November 2008. Consequently, the band became the act with the longest time between number-one albums, as the band&#x27;s &quot;Promise&quot; (1985) and &quot;Soldier of Love&quot; were separated by 24 years, 10 months and 2 weeks.

The first single and title track, &quot;Soldier of Love&quot;, premiered on US radio on 8 December 2009 and was released digitally on 11 January 2010. Subsequent singles, &quot;Babyfather&quot; and &quot;The Moon and the Sky&quot;, were played by US urban adult contemporary radio on 13 April and 24 August 2010, respectively. At the 53rd Annual Grammy Awards in 2011, the title track won Best R&amp;B Performance by a Duo or Group with Vocals, while the song, &quot;Babyfather&quot;, was nominated for Best Pop Performance by a Duo or Group with Vocals.

In April 2011, the band began their Sade Live tour (also known as the &quot;Once in a Lifetime Tour&quot; or the &quot;Soldier of Love Tour&quot;). The band toured Europe, the Americas, Australia and Asia to promote the band&#x27;s sixth studio album and their second compilation album, &quot;The Ultimate Collection&quot; (2011). This trek marked the band&#x27;s first tour in nearly a decade and ranked 27th in &quot;Pollstar&#x27;s&quot; &quot;Top 50 Worldwide Tour (Mid-Year)&quot;, earning over 20 million dollars. At the conclusion of 2011, the tour placed tenth on &quot;Billboard&#x27;s&quot; annual &quot;Top 25 Tours&quot;, earning over $50 million with 59 shows. The tour was chronicled with &quot;Bring Me Home - Live 2011&quot;, released in May 2012.

===2018–present: Return===
In March 2018, she (and the reunited Sade band) released the acoustic ballad &quot;Flower of the Universe&quot; for the soundtrack to the Disney film &quot;A Wrinkle in Time&quot;. About asking Sade to contribute to the album, director Ava DuVernay wrote &quot;I never thought she&#x27;d say yes, but asked anyway.&quot; Later that year, Sade released &quot;The Big Unknown&quot; for the soundtrack to the 20th Century Fox film &quot;Widows&quot;. The film&#x27;s director, Steve McQueen, stated that Sade agreed to write the song for the film, because &quot;the original series of &quot;Widows&quot; had deeply resonated with her.&quot; For a couple of weeks in 2022, the band visited Miraval Studios in France for the first time since recording some of their albums &quot;Promise&quot; and &quot;Stronger Than Pride&quot;. The successor to &quot;Soldier of Love&quot; is rumoured to be in progress.

==Legacy and influence==
&quot;The New Yorker&quot; described Sade&#x27;s voice as a &quot;grainy contralto full of air that betrays a slight ache but no agony, and values even imperfect dignity over a show of pain&quot;, a &quot;deeply English&quot; quality that makes categorising the artist&#x27;s voice difficult. Her voice was described by the BBC as &quot;husky and restrained&quot; and compared to singer Billie Holiday. BBC called her songwriting &quot;sufficiently soulful and jazzy yet poppy, funky yet easy listening, to appeal to fans of all those genres.&quot; Sade has been called a &quot;pop star&quot;. With the musicians in her band, Sade, &quot;The New Yorker&quot; wrote, &quot;created one of the most profitable catalogues in pop&quot;; the band&#x27;s &quot;easy&quot; sound backing songs &quot;exploring the heavier lifting inside love: commitment, consistency, friendship.&quot; Her success has been attributed to a combination of her unique beauty, seemingly indefinable origins, and mysterious persona. In 2023, Rolling Stone ranked Sade at No. 51 on their list of the 200 Greatest Singers of All Time.

Sade&#x27;s work has influenced and been recognised by many singers and hip hop artists. Rapper Rakim of Eric B. &amp; Rakim stated he grew up listening to Sade&#x27;s music and was influenced by her voice and style. Rakim has also referred to Sade&#x27;s song &quot;Smooth Operator&quot; in the song &quot;Microphone Fiend&quot; (1988). Talib Kweli stated he learned about precision from Sade due to her performance of &quot;Love Deluxe&quot; in its entirety at Madison Square Garden. Rapper Missy Elliott cited Sade&#x27;s performance of &quot;Smooth Operator&quot; as one of her favourites. Hip hop group Souls of Mischief stated they grew up listening to Sade&#x27;s music. Hip hop group Tanya Morgan also described Sade as one of their favourite artists. Other rappers to recognise Sade include the former rap duo of Clipse – Malice and Pusha. In reaction to the newly released album &quot;Soldier of Love&quot;, rapper Kanye West wrote, &quot;This is why i still have a blog. To be a part of moments like this ... new Sade ... How much better this ... than everything else?&quot;. Rapper Rick Ross stated in an interview that &quot;People may know my infatuation with Sade. There&#x27;s never been a bad Sade track. I love all different sides.&quot;

The late singer Aaliyah said that she admired Sade because &quot;she stays true to her style no matter what ... she&#x27;s an amazing artist, an amazing performer ... and I absolutely love her.&quot; American R&amp;B singer Brandy has cited Sade as one of her major vocal influences. Heavy metal singers Greg Puciato and Chino Moreno have also named her as an inspiration.

==Personal life==
Sade squatted in Tottenham in the 1980s, with her then-boyfriend Robert Elms. In 1989, she married Spanish film director Carlos Pliego. Their marriage ended in 1995. Sade moved briefly to the Caribbean to live with Jamaican music producer Bob Morgan in the late 1990s and gave birth on 21 July 1996 to her first child, who later sang on Sade&#x27;s song &quot;Babyfather&quot; in 2010. Sade and Morgan separated, and she has been in a relationship with Ian Watts, a former Royal Marine, since 2007; from this relationship, she has a stepson. 

In 2016, on National Coming Out Day, Sade&#x27;s child, Izaak Theo Adu, came out as a transgender man. In September 2019, Izaak posted a message online, thanking his mother for her support through his transition. In the fall of 2024, Sade and the Red Hot Organization&#x27;s TRANSA project released &quot;Young Lion&quot;, a song dedicated to her son.

In 2005, Sade moved out to the British countryside, where she bought a run-down cottage to renovate. Sade rarely grants interviews.

==Honours, awards and nominations==

Sade was appointed an Officer of the Order of the British Empire (OBE) in 2002 for services to music, and stated her award was &quot;a great gesture to me and all black women in England&quot;. She was promoted to Commander of the same Order (CBE) in the 2017 Birthday Honours, also for services to music. In 1986, she became the first Nigerian-born artist to win a Grammy Award when she was named Best New Artist. In 2023, Sade was invited to be inducted into the Songwriters Hall of Fame. Sade became a 2024 nominee for induction into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame.

==Discography==
===Studio albums===
*&quot;Diamond Life&quot; (1984)
*&quot;Promise&quot; (1985)
*&quot;Stronger Than Pride&quot; (1988)
*&quot;Love Deluxe&quot; (1992)
*&quot;Lovers Rock&quot; (2000)
*&quot;Soldier of Love&quot; (2010)

==Tours==
* 1984: Diamond Life Tour
* 1985-1986: Promise Tour
* 1988: Stronger Than Pride Tour
* 1993: Love Deluxe World Tour
* 2001: Lovers Rock Tour
* 2011: Sade Live

==References==
==Further reading==

Books
*
*

Magazines
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*

Newspapers
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*

Websites
*
*
==External links==
Main
* – official site
*

Articles
*Shapersofthe80s.com – Provides images and stories of Sade Adu&#x27;s life while a men&#x27;s clothing designer and part-time model.
**</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q194187" start="0" end="18" title="Sade (singer)" label="Helen Folasade Adu"/>
<link wikidata="Q194187" start="70" end="78" title="Sade (singer)" label="Sade Adu"/>
<link wikidata="Q194187" start="89" end="93" title="Sade (singer)" label="Sade"/>
<link wikidata="Q658182" start="171" end="175" title="Sade (band)" label="Sade"/>
<link wikidata="Q14420" start="367" end="409" title="Officer of the Order of the British Empire" label="Officer of the Order of the British Empire"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="436" end="445" title="Order of the British Empire#Precedence and privileges" label="Commander"/>
<link wikidata="Q30681904" start="453" end="474" title="2017 Birthday Honours" label="2017 Birthday Honours"/>
<link wikidata="Q183298" start="494" end="500" title="Ibadan" label="Ibadan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2046345" start="502" end="517" title="Colonial Nigeria" label="British Nigeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q15274445" start="586" end="619" title="Saint Martin&amp;#x27;s School of Art" label="Saint Martin&amp;#x27;s School of Art"/>
<link wikidata="Q216364" start="856" end="868" title="Epic Records" label="Epic Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q904971" start="927" end="939" title="Diamond Life" label="Diamond Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q193740" start="1110" end="1118" title="Live Aid" label="Live Aid"/>
<link wikidata="Q43279" start="1138" end="1153" title="Wembley Stadium (1923)" label="Wembley Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q332394" start="1205" end="1223" title="Absolute Beginners (film)" label="Absolute Beginners"/>
<link wikidata="Q1346719" start="1274" end="1293" title="Stronger Than Pride" label="Stronger Than Pride"/>
<link wikidata="Q1185154" start="1336" end="1347" title="Love Deluxe" label="Love Deluxe"/>
<link wikidata="Q2713327" start="1500" end="1511" title="Lovers Rock (Sade album)" label="Lovers Rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q2713327" start="1559" end="1570" title="Lovers Rock (Sade album)" label="Lovers Rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q1930152" start="1677" end="1692" title="Soldier of Love (album)" label="Soldier of Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q50549252" start="1827" end="1849" title="Flower of the Universe" label="Flower of the Universe"/>
<link wikidata="Q191224" start="1878" end="1884" title="Walt Disney Pictures" label="Disney"/>
<link wikidata="Q24301388" start="1898" end="1915" title="A Wrinkle in Time (2018 film)" label="A Wrinkle in Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q65050015" start="1933" end="1948" title="The Big Unknown" label="The Big Unknown"/>
<link wikidata="Q706475" start="1982" end="1995" title="Steve McQueen (director)" label="Steve McQueen"/>
<link wikidata="Q29163736" start="2014" end="2020" title="Widows (2018 film)" label="Widows"/>
<link wikidata="Q183298" start="2094" end="2100" title="Ibadan" label="Ibadan"/>
<link wikidata="Q503905" start="2102" end="2111" title="Oyo State" label="Oyo State"/>
<link wikidata="Q3510682" start="2126" end="2137" title="Yoruba name" label="middle name"/>
<link wikidata="Q34311" start="2190" end="2196" title="Yoruba language" label="Yoruba"/>
<link wikidata="Q16155102" start="2229" end="2237" title="Nigerian" label="Nigerian"/>
<link wikidata="Q190168" start="2263" end="2269" title="Yoruba people" label="Yoruba"/>
<link wikidata="Q42406" start="2318" end="2325" title="English people" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q184163" start="2565" end="2575" title="Colchester" label="Colchester"/>
<link wikidata="Q5880857" start="2609" end="2623" title="Holland-on-Sea" label="Holland-on-Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q5124906" start="2694" end="2720" title="Clacton County High School" label="Clacton County High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q5142094" start="2725" end="2745" title="Colchester Institute" label="Colchester Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q15274445" start="2814" end="2847" title="Saint Martin&amp;#x27;s School of Art" label="Saint Martin&amp;#x27;s School of Art"/>
<link wikidata="Q4309945" start="3149" end="3166" title="Stuart Matthewman" label="Stuart Matthewman"/>
<link wikidata="Q4049660" start="3304" end="3319" title="Smooth Operator" label="Smooth Operator"/>
<link wikidata="Q7298137" start="3343" end="3355" title="Ray St. John" label="Ray St. John"/>
<link wikidata="Q21005593" start="3495" end="3506" title="Paul Denman" label="Paul Denman"/>
<link wikidata="Q5694616" start="3612" end="3618" title="Heaven (nightclub)" label="Heaven"/>
<link wikidata="Q5215426" start="3774" end="3784" title="Danceteria" label="Danceteria"/>
<link wikidata="Q904971" start="3967" end="3979" title="Diamond Life" label="Diamond Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q719415" start="4155" end="4169" title="UK Album Chart" label="UK Album Chart"/>
<link wikidata="Q223313" start="4223" end="4233" title="Brit Award" label="Brit Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q3632219" start="4257" end="4264" title="Brit Awards 1985" label="in 1985"/>
<link wikidata="Q4053479" start="4637" end="4654" title="Your Love Is King" label="Your Love Is King"/>
<link wikidata="Q193259" start="4827" end="4843" title="UK Singles Chart" label="UK Singles Chart"/>
<link wikidata="Q180072" start="4924" end="4953" title="Billboard Hot 100" label="&amp;quot;Billboard&amp;quot; Hot 100"/>
<link wikidata="Q4049660" start="4979" end="4994" title="Smooth Operator" label="Smooth Operator"/>
<link wikidata="Q180072" start="5165" end="5194" title="Billboard Hot 100" label="&amp;quot;Billboard&amp;quot; Hot 100"/>
<link wikidata="Q1639748" start="5228" end="5245" title="Hot R&amp;amp;B/Hip-Hop Songs" label="Hot Black Singles"/>
<link wikidata="Q2273744" start="5312" end="5336" title="Hot Adult Contemporary Tracks" label="Adult Contemporary chart"/>
<link wikidata="Q293628" start="5428" end="5435" title="Ö3 Austria Top 40" label="Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q776921" start="5583" end="5590" title="Promise (Sade album)" label="Promise"/>
<link wikidata="Q188819" start="5720" end="5745" title="Billboard 200" label="&amp;quot;Billboard&amp;quot; 200"/>
<link wikidata="Q200863" start="5941" end="5982" title="Recording Industry Association of America" label="Recording Industry Association of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q22043850" start="6027" end="6058" title="Never as Good as the First Time" label="Never as Good as the First Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q4051313" start="6075" end="6093" title="The Sweetest Taboo" label="The Sweetest Taboo"/>
<link wikidata="Q41254" start="6644" end="6656" title="Grammy Award" label="Grammy Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q1453643" start="6661" end="6676" title="Best New Artist" label="Best New Artist"/>
<link wikidata="Q332394" start="6724" end="6742" title="Absolute Beginners (film)" label="Absolute Beginners"/>
<link wikidata="Q1563964" start="6774" end="6788" title="Colin MacInnes" label="Colin MacInnes"/>
<link wikidata="Q4669763" start="6801" end="6810" title="Absolute Beginners (novel)" label="same name"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="6836" end="6842" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q897830" start="6997" end="7022" title="1986 Cannes Film Festival" label="1986 Cannes Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q1346719" start="7090" end="7109" title="Stronger Than Pride" label="Stronger Than Pride"/>
<link wikidata="Q7134224" start="7348" end="7356" title="Paradise (Sade song)" label="Paradise"/>
<link wikidata="Q180072" start="7400" end="7429" title="Billboard Hot 100" label="&amp;quot;Billboard&amp;quot; Hot 100"/>
<link wikidata="Q1639748" start="7487" end="7512" title="Hot R&amp;amp;B/Hip-Hop Songs" label="Hot R&amp;amp;B/Hip-Hop Songs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1185154" start="7569" end="7580" title="Love Deluxe" label="Love Deluxe"/>
<link wikidata="Q188819" start="7702" end="7727" title="Billboard 200" label="&amp;quot;Billboard&amp;quot; 200"/>
<link wikidata="Q732456" start="8177" end="8193" title="The Best of Sade" label="The Best of Sade"/>
<link wikidata="Q155171" start="8430" end="8443" title="cover version" label="cover version"/>
<link wikidata="Q7204242" start="8453" end="8483" title="Please Send Me Someone to Love" label="Please Send Me Someone to Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q322600" start="8512" end="8526" title="Percy Mayfield" label="Percy Mayfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q2713327" start="8671" end="8682" title="Lovers Rock (Sade album)" label="Lovers Rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q719415" start="8795" end="8810" title="UK Albums Chart" label="UK Albums Chart"/>
<link wikidata="Q188819" start="8835" end="8860" title="Billboard 200" label="&amp;quot;Billboard&amp;quot; 200"/>
<link wikidata="Q200863" start="8914" end="8955" title="Recording Industry Association of America" label="Recording Industry Association of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q1027891" start="9081" end="9118" title="Grammy Award for Best Pop Vocal Album" label="Grammy Award for Best Pop Vocal Album"/>
<link wikidata="Q583971" start="9146" end="9158" title="By Your Side (Sade song)" label="By Your Side"/>
<link wikidata="Q637650" start="9187" end="9204" title="44th Grammy Awards" label="2002 Grammy Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q935283" start="9209" end="9242" title="Grammy Award for Best Female Pop Vocal Performance" label="Best Female Pop Vocal Performance"/>
<link wikidata="Q80424" start="9276" end="9289" title="Nelly Furtado" label="Nelly Furtado"/>
<link wikidata="Q1996003" start="9303" end="9323" title="I&amp;#x27;m Like a Bird" label="I&amp;#x27;m Like a Bird"/>
<link wikidata="Q203078" start="9396" end="9399" title="VH1" label="VH1"/>
<link wikidata="Q6692451" start="9488" end="9504" title="Lovers Rock Tour" label="Lovers Rock Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q482994" start="10209" end="10219" title="live album" label="live album"/>
<link wikidata="Q649492" start="10227" end="10238" title="Lovers Live" label="Lovers Live"/>
<link wikidata="Q216364" start="10267" end="10279" title="Epic Records" label="Epic Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q188819" start="10334" end="10359" title="Billboard 200" label="&amp;quot;Billboard&amp;quot; 200"/>
<link wikidata="Q719415" start="10381" end="10396" title="UK Albums Chart" label="UK Albums Chart"/>
<link wikidata="Q14420" start="10899" end="10926" title="Order of the British Empire" label="Order of the British Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q42182" start="10936" end="10953" title="Buckingham Palace" label="Buckingham Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q748704" start="11006" end="11026" title="Red Hot Organization" label="Red Hot Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q7304339" start="11040" end="11054" title="Red Hot + Riot" label="Red Hot + Riot"/>
<link wikidata="Q313868" start="11132" end="11141" title="Fela Kuti" label="Fela Kuti"/>
<link wikidata="Q1930152" start="11361" end="11376" title="Soldier of Love (album)" label="Soldier of Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q188819" start="11590" end="11615" title="Billboard 200" label="&amp;quot;Billboard&amp;quot; 200"/>
<link wikidata="Q27593" start="11905" end="11910" title="AC/DC" label="AC/DC"/>
<link wikidata="Q157534" start="11938" end="11947" title="Black Ice (album)" label="Black Ice"/>
<link wikidata="Q3064448" start="12285" end="12300" title="Soldier of Love (Sade song)" label="Soldier of Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q4838477" start="12422" end="12432" title="Babyfather (song)" label="Babyfather"/>
<link wikidata="Q29832177" start="12449" end="12469" title="The Moon and the Sky" label="The Moon and the Sky"/>
<link wikidata="Q7900083" start="12495" end="12519" title="urban adult contemporary" label="urban adult contemporary"/>
<link wikidata="Q1334315" start="12579" end="12604" title="53rd Annual Grammy Awards" label="53rd Annual Grammy Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q3113378" start="12634" end="12688" title="Grammy Award for Best R&amp;amp;B Performance by a Duo or Group with Vocals" label="Best R&amp;amp;B Performance by a Duo or Group with Vocals"/>
<link wikidata="Q747902" start="12748" end="12798" title="Grammy Award for Best Pop Performance by a Duo or Group with Vocals" label="Best Pop Performance by a Duo or Group with Vocals"/>
<link wikidata="Q7397783" start="12837" end="12846" title="Sade Live" label="Sade Live"/>
<link wikidata="Q222910" start="13069" end="13086" title="compilation album" label="compilation album"/>
<link wikidata="Q3989760" start="13094" end="13117" title="The Ultimate Collection (Sade album)" label="The Ultimate Collection"/>
<link wikidata="Q774443" start="13220" end="13235" title="Pollstar" label="Pollstar&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q4968294" start="13510" end="13535" title="Bring Me Home - Live 2011" label="Bring Me Home - Live 2011"/>
<link wikidata="Q658182" start="13630" end="13634" title="Sade (band)" label="Sade"/>
<link wikidata="Q50549252" start="13676" end="13698" title="Flower of the Universe" label="Flower of the Universe"/>
<link wikidata="Q7414" start="13731" end="13737" title="The Walt Disney Company" label="Disney"/>
<link wikidata="Q24301388" start="13749" end="13766" title="A Wrinkle in Time (2018 film)" label="A Wrinkle in Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q4827381" start="13829" end="13841" title="Ava DuVernay" label="Ava DuVernay"/>
<link wikidata="Q434841" start="13999" end="14015" title="20th Century Fox" label="20th Century Fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q29163736" start="14027" end="14033" title="Widows (2018 film)" label="Widows"/>
<link wikidata="Q706475" start="14067" end="14080" title="Steve McQueen (director)" label="Steve McQueen"/>
<link wikidata="Q3501001" start="14279" end="14294" title="Miraval Studios" label="Miraval Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q1930152" start="14441" end="14456" title="Soldier of Love (album)" label="Soldier of Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q217305" start="14526" end="14540" title="The New Yorker" label="The New Yorker"/>
<link wikidata="Q37137" start="14593" end="14602" title="contralto" label="contralto"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="14844" end="14847" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q104358" start="14907" end="14921" title="Billie Holiday" label="Billie Holiday"/>
<link wikidata="Q364214" start="15720" end="15725" title="Rakim" label="Rakim"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351122" start="15729" end="15748" title="Eric B. &amp;amp; Rakim" label="Eric B. &amp;amp; Rakim"/>
<link wikidata="Q6839880" start="15931" end="15947" title="Microphone Fiend" label="Microphone Fiend"/>
<link wikidata="Q318755" start="15962" end="15973" title="Talib Kweli" label="Talib Kweli"/>
<link wikidata="Q186125" start="16087" end="16108" title="Madison Square Garden" label="Madison Square Garden"/>
<link wikidata="Q155079" start="16117" end="16130" title="Missy Elliott" label="Missy Elliott"/>
<link wikidata="Q1516678" start="16232" end="16249" title="Souls of Mischief" label="Souls of Mischief"/>
<link wikidata="Q7684029" start="16316" end="16328" title="Tanya Morgan" label="Tanya Morgan"/>
<link wikidata="Q744772" start="16446" end="16452" title="Clipse" label="Clipse"/>
<link wikidata="Q16214109" start="16455" end="16461" title="No Malice" label="Malice"/>
<link wikidata="Q2329709" start="16466" end="16471" title="Pusha T" label="Pusha"/>
<link wikidata="Q15935" start="16549" end="16559" title="Kanye West" label="Kanye West"/>
<link wikidata="Q297831" start="16718" end="16727" title="Rick Ross" label="Rick Ross"/>
<link wikidata="Q11617" start="16897" end="16904" title="Aaliyah" label="Aaliyah"/>
<link wikidata="Q690974" start="17105" end="17111" title="Brandy Norwood" label="Brandy"/>
<link wikidata="Q746768" start="17185" end="17197" title="Greg Puciato" label="Greg Puciato"/>
<link wikidata="Q507734" start="17202" end="17214" title="Chino Moreno" label="Chino Moreno"/>
<link wikidata="Q44854" start="17278" end="17286" title="Squatting" label="squatted"/>
<link wikidata="Q503375" start="17290" end="17299" title="Tottenham" label="Tottenham"/>
<link wikidata="Q3435048" start="17338" end="17349" title="Robert Elms" label="Robert Elms"/>
<link wikidata="Q664609" start="17465" end="17474" title="Caribbean" label="Caribbean"/>
<link wikidata="Q766" start="17488" end="17495" title="Jamaica" label="Jamaica"/>
<link wikidata="Q4838477" start="17633" end="17643" title="Babyfather (song)" label="Babyfather"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046947" start="17746" end="17758" title="Royal Marines" label="Royal Marine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1114667" start="17829" end="17852" title="National Coming Out Day" label="National Coming Out Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q189125" start="17903" end="17914" title="transgender" label="transgender"/>
<link wikidata="Q748704" start="18064" end="18084" title="Red Hot Organization" label="Red Hot Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q5783996" start="18250" end="18257" title="cottage" label="cottage"/>
<link wikidata="Q14420" start="18362" end="18404" title="Officer of the Order of the British Empire" label="Officer of the Order of the British Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q14420" start="18553" end="18580" title="Commander of the Order of the British Empire" label="Commander of the same Order"/>
<link wikidata="Q30681904" start="18594" end="18615" title="2017 Birthday Honours" label="2017 Birthday Honours"/>
<link wikidata="Q1453643" start="18737" end="18752" title="Grammy Award for Best New Artist" label="Best New Artist"/>
<link wikidata="Q861660" start="18804" end="18828" title="Songwriters Hall of Fame" label="Songwriters Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q179191" start="18880" end="18906" title="Rock and Roll Hall of Fame" label="Rock and Roll Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q904971" start="18952" end="18964" title="Diamond Life" label="Diamond Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q776921" start="18985" end="18992" title="Promise (Sade album)" label="Promise"/>
<link wikidata="Q1346719" start="19013" end="19032" title="Stronger Than Pride" label="Stronger Than Pride"/>
<link wikidata="Q1185154" start="19053" end="19064" title="Love Deluxe" label="Love Deluxe"/>
<link wikidata="Q2713327" start="19085" end="19096" title="Lovers Rock (Sade album)" label="Lovers Rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q1930152" start="19117" end="19132" title="Soldier of Love (album)" label="Soldier of Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q24078226" start="19196" end="19208" title="Promise Tour" label="Promise Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q658182" start="19250" end="19272" title="Love Deluxe World Tour" label="Love Deluxe World Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q6692451" start="19281" end="19297" title="Lovers Rock Tour" label="Lovers Rock Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q7397783" start="19306" end="19315" title="Sade Live" label="Sade Live"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="252277" wikidata="Q145387" url="?curid=252277" title="Polyether ether ketone">
<text>Polyether ether ketone (PEEK) is a colourless organic thermoplastic polymer in the polyaryletherketone (PAEK) family, used in engineering applications. It was invented in November 1978 and brought to market in the early 1980s by part of Imperial Chemical Industries (ICI), the PEEK division was acquired through a management buyout, giving rise to Victrex PLC.

==Synthesis==
PEEK polymers are obtained by step-growth polymerization by the dialkylation of bisphenolate salts. Typical is the reaction of 4,4&#x27;-difluorobenzophenone with the disodium salt of hydroquinone, which is generated in situ by deprotonation with sodium carbonate. The reaction is conducted around 300 °C in polar aprotic solvents - such as diphenyl sulfone.

==Properties==
PEEK is a semicrystalline thermoplastic with excellent mechanical and chemical resistance properties that are retained to high temperatures. The processing conditions used to mould PEEK can influence the crystallinity and hence the mechanical properties. Its Young&#x27;s modulus is 3.6 GPa and its tensile strength is 90 to 100 MPa. PEEK has a glass transition temperature of around 143 °C (289 °F) and melts around 343 °C (662 °F). Some grades have a useful operating temperature of up to 250 °C (482 °F). The thermal conductivity increases nearly linearly with temperature between room temperature and solidus temperature. It is highly resistant to thermal degradation, as well as to attack by both organic and aqueous environments. It is attacked by halogens and strong Brønsted and Lewis acids, as well as some halogenated compounds and aliphatic hydrocarbons at high temperatures. It is soluble in concentrated sulfuric acid at room temperature, although dissolution can take a very long time unless the polymer is in a form with a high surface-area-to-volume ratio, such as a fine powder or thin film. It has high resistance to biodegradation.

==Applications==
PEEK is used to fabricate items for demanding applications, including bearings, piston parts, pumps, high-performance liquid chromatography columns, compressor plate valves, and electrical cable insulation. It is one of the few plastics compatible with ultra-high vacuum applications, which makes it suitable for aerospace, automotive, and chemical industries. PEEK is used in medical implants, for example in creating a partial replacement skull in neurosurgical applications.

PEEK is used in spinal fusion devices and reinforcing rods. It is radiolucent, but it is hydrophobic causing it to not fully fuse with bone. PEEK seals and manifolds are commonly used in fluid applications. PEEK also performs well in high temperature applications (up to 260 °C/500 °F). Because of this and its low thermal conductivity, it is also used in fused filament fabrication (FFF) printing to thermally separate the hot end from the cold end.

==Processing options==
PEEK melts at a relatively high temperature (343 °C / 649.4 °F) compared to most other thermoplastics. In the range of its melting temperature it can be processed using injection moulding or extrusion methods. It is technically feasible to process granular PEEK into filament form and 3D printing parts from the filament material using fused deposition modeling – FDM (or fused filament fabrication – FFF) technology. PEEK filaments have been demonstrated for producing medical devices up to class IIa. With this new filament, it is possible to use the FFF method for different medical applications like dentures.

In its solid state PEEK is readily machinable, for example, by CNC milling machines and is commonly used to produce high-quality plastic parts that are thermostable and both electrically and thermally insulating. Filled grades of PEEK can also be CNC machined, but special care must be taken to properly manage stresses in the material.

PEEK is a high-performance polymer, but its high price, due to its complex production process, restricts its use to only the most demanding applications.

==Shape-memory PEEK in biomechanical applications==
PEEK is not traditionally a shape-memory polymer; however, recent advances in processing have allowed shape-memory behaviour in PEEK with mechanical activation. This technology has expanded to applications in orthopaedic surgery.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q145387" start="0" end="22" title="Polyether ether ketone" label="Polyether ether ketone"/>
<link wikidata="Q145387" start="24" end="28" title="Polyether ether ketone" label="PEEK"/>
<link wikidata="Q174211" start="46" end="53" title="organic compound" label="organic"/>
<link wikidata="Q380677" start="54" end="67" title="thermoplastic" label="thermoplastic"/>
<link wikidata="Q81163" start="68" end="75" title="polymer" label="polymer"/>
<link wikidata="Q20898103" start="83" end="102" title="polyaryletherketone" label="polyaryletherketone"/>
<link wikidata="Q899151" start="237" end="271" title="Imperial Chemical Industries" label="Imperial Chemical Industries (ICI)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7927590" start="348" end="359" title="Victrex" label="Victrex PLC"/>
<link wikidata="Q901428" start="406" end="432" title="step-growth polymerization" label="step-growth polymerization"/>
<link wikidata="Q177604" start="442" end="452" title="alkylation" label="alkylation"/>
<link wikidata="Q9258922" start="459" end="468" title="phenolate" label="phenolate"/>
<link wikidata="Q4637051" start="503" end="533" title="4,4&amp;#x27;-difluorobenzophenone" label="4,4&amp;#x27;-difluorobenzophenone"/>
<link wikidata="Q419164" start="560" end="572" title="hydroquinone" label="hydroquinone"/>
<link wikidata="Q2686738" start="604" end="617" title="deprotonation" label="deprotonation"/>
<link wikidata="Q190227" start="623" end="639" title="sodium carbonate" label="sodium carbonate"/>
<link wikidata="Q27949284" start="690" end="697" title="aprotic" label="aprotic"/>
<link wikidata="Q5279737" start="717" end="733" title="diphenyl sulfone" label="diphenyl sulfone"/>
<link wikidata="Q380677" start="777" end="790" title="thermoplastic" label="thermoplastic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2091584" start="1010" end="1030" title="Young&amp;#x27;s modulus" label="Young&amp;#x27;s modulus"/>
<link wikidata="Q825643" start="1096" end="1124" title="glass transition temperature" label="glass transition temperature"/>
<link wikidata="Q122663030" start="1356" end="1363" title="Solidus (chemistry)" label="solidus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2611095" start="1403" end="1422" title="thermal degradation" label="thermal degradation"/>
<link wikidata="Q556036" start="1525" end="1533" title="Brønsted acid" label="Brønsted"/>
<link wikidata="Q900337" start="1538" end="1548" title="Lewis acid" label="Lewis acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q190100" start="1990" end="1998" title="Bearing (mechanical)" label="bearings"/>
<link wikidata="Q45227" start="2000" end="2006" title="piston" label="piston"/>
<link wikidata="Q134574" start="2014" end="2019" title="pumps" label="pumps"/>
<link wikidata="Q381233" start="2021" end="2059" title="high-performance liquid chromatography" label="high-performance liquid chromatography"/>
<link wikidata="Q208443" start="2086" end="2092" title="valves" label="valves"/>
<link wikidata="Q188447" start="2098" end="2114" title="electrical cable" label="electrical cable"/>
<link wikidata="Q178150" start="2115" end="2125" title="Electrical insulation" label="insulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7880334" start="2173" end="2190" title="ultra-high vacuum" label="ultra-high vacuum"/>
<link wikidata="Q486975" start="2297" end="2312" title="medical implant" label="medical implant"/>
<link wikidata="Q770609" start="2415" end="2428" title="spinal fusion" label="spinal fusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q2401305" start="2465" end="2476" title="Radiodensity" label="radiolucent"/>
<link wikidata="Q18349149" start="2755" end="2781" title="fused filament fabrication" label="fused filament fabrication"/>
<link wikidata="Q260606" start="3043" end="3061" title="injection moulding" label="injection moulding"/>
<link wikidata="Q139143" start="3065" end="3074" title="extrusion" label="extrusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q18349149" start="3210" end="3235" title="fused deposition modeling" label="fused deposition modeling"/>
<link wikidata="Q6554101" start="3372" end="3375" title="medical devices" label="IIa"/>
<link wikidata="Q143567" start="3478" end="3486" title="dentures" label="dentures"/>
<link wikidata="Q190247" start="3552" end="3555" title="CNC" label="CNC"/>
<link wikidata="Q656950" start="3556" end="3572" title="milling machines" label="milling machines"/>
<link wikidata="Q15740972" start="3837" end="3861" title="high-performance plastics" label="high-performance polymer"/>
<link wikidata="Q906777" start="4062" end="4082" title="shape-memory polymer" label="shape-memory polymer"/>
<link wikidata="Q216685" start="4243" end="4262" title="orthopaedic surgery" label="orthopaedic surgery"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="252279" wikidata="Q382691" url="?curid=252279" title="PEEK and POKE">
<text>In computing, PEEK and POKE are commands used in some high-level programming languages for accessing the contents of a specific memory cell referenced by its memory address. PEEK gets the byte located at the specified memory address.
POKE sets the memory byte at the specified address. These commands originated with machine code monitors such as the DECsystem-10 monitor; 
these commands are particularly associated with the BASIC programming language, though some other languages such as Pascal and COMAL also have these commands. These commands are comparable in their roles to pointers in the C language and some other programming languages.

One of the earliest references to these commands in BASIC, if not the earliest, is in Altair BASIC. The PEEK and POKE commands were conceived in early personal computing systems to serve a variety of purposes, especially for modifying special memory-mapped hardware registers to control particular functions of the computer such as the input/output peripherals. Alternatively programmers might use these commands to copy software or even to circumvent the intent of a particular piece of software (e.g. manipulate a game program to allow the user to cheat). Today it is unusual to control computer memory at such a low level using a high-level language like BASIC. As such the notions of &quot;PEEK&quot; and &quot;POKE&quot; commands are generally seen as antiquated.

The terms &quot;peek&quot; and &quot;poke&quot; are sometimes used colloquially in computer programming to refer to memory access in general.

==Statement syntax==

The PEEK function and POKE commands are usually invoked as follows, either in direct mode (entered and executed at the BASIC prompt) or in indirect mode (as part of a program):

integer_variable = PEEK(address)

POKE address, value

The &quot;address&quot; and &quot;value&quot; parameters may contain expressions, as long as the evaluated expressions correspond to valid memory addresses or values, respectively. A valid &quot;address&quot; in this context is an address within the computer&#x27;s address space, while a valid &quot;value&quot; is (typically) an unsigned value between zero and the maximum unsigned number that the minimum addressable unit (memory cell) may hold.

==Memory cells and hardware registers==

The address locations that are POKEd or PEEKed at may refer either to ordinary memory cells or to memory-mapped hardware registers of I/O units or support chips such as sound chips and video graphics chips, or even to memory-mapped registers of the CPU itself (which makes software implementations of powerful machine code monitors and debugging/simulation tools possible). As an example of a POKE-driven support chip control scheme, the following POKE command is directed at a specific register of the Commodore 64&#x27;s built-in VIC-II graphics chip, which will make the screen border turn black:
POKE 53280, 0

A similar example from the Atari 8-bit computers tells the ANTIC display driver to turn all text upside-down:
POKE 755, 4

The difference between machines, and the importance and utility of the hard-wired memory locations, meant that &quot;memory maps&quot; of various machines were important documents. An example is &quot;Mapping the Atari&quot;, which starts at location zero and mapped out the entire 64 kB memory of the Atari 8-bit systems location by location.

==PEEK and POKE in other BASICs==
North Star Computers, a vendor from the early 1980s, offered their own dialect of BASIC with their NSDOS operating system. Concerned about possible legal issues, they renamed the commands codice_1 and codice_2. There were also BASIC dialects that used the reserved words codice_3 and codice_4 instead.

BBC BASIC, used on the BBC Micro and other Acorn Computers machines, did not feature the keywords &quot;PEEK&quot; and &quot;POKE&quot; but used the question mark symbol (?), known as &quot;query&quot; in BBC BASIC, for both operations, as a function and command. For example:
&gt; DIM W% 4 : REM reserve 4 bytes of memory, pointed to by integer variable W%
&gt; ?W% = 42 : REM store constant 42; equivalent of &#x27;POKE W%, 42&#x27;
&gt; PRINT ?W% : REM print the byte pointed to by W%; equivalent of &#x27;PRINT PEEK(W%)&#x27;
 42
32-bit values could be POKEd and PEEKed using the exclamation mark symbol (!), known as &quot;pling&quot;, with the least significant byte first (little-endian). In addition, the address could be offset by specifying either query or pling &quot;after&quot; the address and following it with the offset:
&gt; !W% = &amp;12345678 : REM ampersand (&amp;) specifies hexadecimal
&gt; PRINT ~?W%, ~W%?3 : REM tilde (~) prints in hexadecimal
 78 12
Strings of text could be PEEKed and POKEd in a similar way using the Dollar sign ($). The end of the string is marked with the Carriage return character (&amp;0D in ASCII); when read back, this terminating character is not returned. Offsets cannot be used with the dollar sign.
&gt; DIM S% 20 : REM reserve 20 bytes of memory pointed to by S%
&gt; $S% = &quot;MINCE PIES&quot; : REM store string &#x27;MINCE PIES&#x27;, terminated by &amp;0D
&gt; PRINT $(S% + 6) : REM retrieve string, excluding &amp;0D terminator, and starting at S% + 6 bytes
PIES
==16 and 32-bit versions==
As most early home computers used 8-bit processors, PEEK or POKE values are between 0 and 255. Setting or reading a 16-bit value on such machines requires two commands, such as to read a 16-bit integer at address A, and followed by to store a 16-bit integer V at address A.

Some BASICs, even on 8-bit machines, have commands for reading and writing 16-bit values from memory. BASIC XL for the Atari 8-bit computers uses a &quot;D&quot; (for &quot;double&quot;) prefix: codice_5 and codice_6. The East-German &quot;Kleincomputer&quot; KC85/1 and KC87 calls them codice_7 and codice_8.

The Sinclair QL has codice_9 and codice_10 for 16-bit values and codice_11 and codice_12 for 32-bit values. ST BASIC for the Atari ST uses the traditional names but allows defining 8/16/32 bit memory segments and addresses that determine the size.

A Linux command line codice_13 utility has been developed mainly for ARM based single board computers. codice_13 is a Linux command line tool to read from and write to system memory. Its main use is to talk to hardware peripherals from userland: to read or manipulate state, and to dump registers.

==POKEs as cheats==
In the context of games for many 8-bit computers, users could load games into memory and, before launching them, modify specific memory addresses in order to cheat, getting an unlimited number of lives, immunity, invisibility, etc. Such modifications were performed using POKE statements. The Commodore 64, ZX Spectrum and Amstrad CPC also allowed players with one of the relevant cartridges (such as Action Replay or Multiface) to freeze the running program, enter POKEs, and resume.

For example, in &quot;Knight Lore&quot; for the ZX Spectrum, immunity can be achieved with the following command:
POKE 47196,201
In this case, the value 201 corresponds to a RET instruction, so that the game returns from a subroutine early before triggering collision detection.

Magazines such as &quot;Your Sinclair&quot; published lists of such POKEs for games. Such codes were generally identified by reverse-engineering the machine code to locate the memory address containing the desired value that related to, for example, the number of lives, detection of collisions, etc.

Using a &#x27;POKE&#x27; cheat is more difficult in modern games, as many include anti-cheat or copy-protection measures that inhibit modification of the game&#x27;s memory space. Modern operating systems enforce virtual memory protection schemes to deny external program access to non-shared memory (for example, separate page tables for each application, hence inaccessible memory spaces).

==Generic usage of POKE==
&quot;POKE&quot; is sometimes used to refer to any direct manipulation of the contents of memory, rather than just via BASIC, particularly among people who learned computing on the 8-bit microcomputers of the late 1970s and early 1980s. BASIC was often the only language available on those machines (on home computers, usually present in ROM), and therefore the obvious, and simplest, way to program in machine language was to use BASIC to POKE the opcode values into memory. Doing much low-level coding like this usually came from lack of access to an assembler.
An example of the generic usage of POKE and PEEK is in Visual Basic for Windows, where DDE can be achieved with the LinkPoke keyword.

==See also==
* Killer poke
* Type-in program
* Self-modifying code
* Pointer (computer programming)

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q179310" start="3" end="12" title="computing" label="computing"/>
<link wikidata="Q382691" start="14" end="27" title="PEEK and POKE" label="PEEK and POKE"/>
<link wikidata="Q211496" start="54" end="85" title="high-level programming language" label="high-level programming language"/>
<link wikidata="Q18343761" start="128" end="139" title="Memory cell (computing)" label="memory cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q835713" start="158" end="172" title="memory address" label="memory address"/>
<link wikidata="Q1780522" start="317" end="337" title="machine code monitor" label="machine code monitor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1568240" start="351" end="363" title="PDP-10" label="DECsystem-10"/>
<link wikidata="Q42979" start="426" end="431" title="BASIC" label="BASIC"/>
<link wikidata="Q81571" start="490" end="496" title="Pascal (programming language)" label="Pascal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1023991" start="501" end="506" title="COMAL (programming language)" label="COMAL"/>
<link wikidata="Q118155" start="581" end="589" title="Pointer (computer programming)" label="pointers"/>
<link wikidata="Q15777" start="597" end="607" title="C (programming language)" label="C language"/>
<link wikidata="Q286196" start="733" end="745" title="Altair BASIC" label="Altair BASIC"/>
<link wikidata="Q891094" start="890" end="903" title="memory-mapped I/O" label="memory-mapped"/>
<link wikidata="Q5351510" start="904" end="921" title="hardware register" label="hardware register"/>
<link wikidata="Q5280369" start="1660" end="1671" title="direct mode" label="direct mode"/>
<link wikidata="Q189053" start="1707" end="1713" title="command line interpreter" label="prompt"/>
<link wikidata="Q40056" start="1749" end="1756" title="computer program" label="program"/>
<link wikidata="Q778379" start="1884" end="1894" title="expression (programming)" label="expression"/>
<link wikidata="Q367204" start="2081" end="2094" title="address space" label="address space"/>
<link wikidata="Q891094" start="2404" end="2417" title="memory-mapped I/O" label="memory-mapped"/>
<link wikidata="Q5351510" start="2418" end="2435" title="hardware register" label="hardware register"/>
<link wikidata="Q219320" start="2440" end="2443" title="input/output" label="I/O"/>
<link wikidata="Q1418253" start="2475" end="2485" title="sound chip" label="sound chip"/>
<link wikidata="Q187466" start="2538" end="2546" title="processor register" label="register"/>
<link wikidata="Q1780522" start="2616" end="2636" title="machine code monitor" label="machine code monitor"/>
<link wikidata="Q845566" start="2642" end="2651" title="debugging" label="debugging"/>
<link wikidata="Q99775" start="2809" end="2821" title="Commodore 64" label="Commodore 64"/>
<link wikidata="Q1639225" start="2838" end="2844" title="MOS Technology VIC-II" label="VIC-II"/>
<link wikidata="Q249075" start="2948" end="2969" title="Atari 8-bit computers" label="Atari 8-bit computers"/>
<link wikidata="Q295795" start="2980" end="2985" title="ANTIC" label="ANTIC"/>
<link wikidata="Q6754184" start="3245" end="3262" title="Mapping the Atari" label="Mapping the Atari"/>
<link wikidata="Q3308417" start="3423" end="3443" title="North Star Computers" label="North Star Computers"/>
<link wikidata="Q9135" start="3528" end="3544" title="operating system" label="operating system"/>
<link wikidata="Q429801" start="3726" end="3735" title="BBC BASIC" label="BBC BASIC"/>
<link wikidata="Q749976" start="3749" end="3758" title="BBC Micro" label="BBC Micro"/>
<link wikidata="Q342149" start="3769" end="3784" title="Acorn Computers" label="Acorn Computers"/>
<link wikidata="Q11169" start="3875" end="3888" title="question mark" label="question mark"/>
<link wikidata="Q166764" start="4310" end="4326" title="exclamation mark" label="exclamation mark"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4406" end="4419" title="Endianness#Little-endian" label="little-endian"/>
<link wikidata="Q11110" start="4771" end="4782" title="Dollar sign" label="Dollar sign"/>
<link wikidata="Q283976" start="4829" end="4844" title="Carriage return" label="Carriage return"/>
<link wikidata="Q8815" start="4867" end="4872" title="ASCII" label="ASCII"/>
<link wikidata="Q473708" start="5293" end="5306" title="home computer" label="home computer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2027332" start="5656" end="5664" title="BASIC XL" label="BASIC XL"/>
<link wikidata="Q249075" start="5673" end="5694" title="Atari 8-bit computers" label="Atari 8-bit computers"/>
<link wikidata="Q602253" start="5869" end="5880" title="Sinclair QL" label="Sinclair QL"/>
<link wikidata="Q3627876" start="5973" end="5981" title="ST BASIC" label="ST BASIC"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6591" end="6596" title="Cheating in video games#Memory editing" label="cheat"/>
<link wikidata="Q99775" start="6726" end="6738" title="Commodore 64" label="Commodore 64"/>
<link wikidata="Q23882" start="6740" end="6751" title="ZX Spectrum" label="ZX Spectrum"/>
<link wikidata="Q478829" start="6756" end="6767" title="Amstrad CPC" label="Amstrad CPC"/>
<link wikidata="Q164653" start="6834" end="6847" title="Action Replay" label="Action Replay"/>
<link wikidata="Q3815729" start="6851" end="6860" title="Multiface" label="Multiface"/>
<link wikidata="Q2422991" start="6941" end="6952" title="Knight Lore" label="Knight Lore"/>
<link wikidata="Q23882" start="6967" end="6978" title="ZX Spectrum" label="ZX Spectrum"/>
<link wikidata="Q3242416" start="7093" end="7108" title="Return statement" label="RET instruction"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7177" end="7196" title="Collision_detection#Video_games" label="collision detection"/>
<link wikidata="Q2464944" start="7223" end="7236" title="Your Sinclair" label="Your Sinclair"/>
<link wikidata="Q189401" start="7714" end="7728" title="virtual memory" label="virtual memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195972" start="7824" end="7834" title="page table" label="page table"/>
<link wikidata="Q270159" start="8101" end="8106" title="8-bit" label="8-bit"/>
<link wikidata="Q32738" start="8107" end="8120" title="microcomputer" label="microcomputer"/>
<link wikidata="Q473708" start="8223" end="8237" title="home computers" label="home computers"/>
<link wikidata="Q160710" start="8258" end="8261" title="read-only memory" label="ROM"/>
<link wikidata="Q55813" start="8323" end="8339" title="machine language" label="machine language"/>
<link wikidata="Q766483" start="8369" end="8375" title="opcode" label="opcode"/>
<link wikidata="Q165436" start="8473" end="8482" title="assembly language" label="assembler"/>
<link wikidata="Q2378" start="8539" end="8563" title="Visual Basic for Windows" label="Visual Basic for Windows"/>
<link wikidata="Q1268873" start="8571" end="8574" title="Dynamic Data Exchange" label="DDE"/>
<link wikidata="Q6407569" start="8634" end="8645" title="Killer poke" label="Killer poke"/>
<link wikidata="Q7860618" start="8648" end="8663" title="Type-in program" label="Type-in program"/>
<link wikidata="Q2165944" start="8666" end="8685" title="Self-modifying code" label="Self-modifying code"/>
<link wikidata="Q118155" start="8688" end="8718" title="Pointer (computer programming)" label="Pointer (computer programming)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="252282" wikidata="Q153432" url="?curid=252282" title="Maurice André">
<text>Maurice André (21 May 1933 – 25 February 2012) was a French trumpeter, active in the classical music field.

He was professor of trumpet at the Conservatoire National Supérieur de Musique in Paris where he introduced the teaching of the piccolo trumpet including the Baroque repertoire on trumpet. André has inspired many innovations on his instrument and he contributed to the popularization of the trumpet.

==Biography==
André was born in Alès in the Cévennes, into a mining family. He himself worked in the mine from the age of 14 to the age of 18. His father was an amateur musician; André studied trumpet with a friend of his father, who suggested that André be sent to the conservatory. In order to gain free admission to the conservatory, he joined a military band. After only six months at the conservatory, he won his first prize.

At the conservatory, André&#x27;s professor, Raymond Sabarich, reprimanded him for not having worked hard enough and told him to return when he could excel in his playing. A few weeks later, he returned to play all fourteen etudes found in the back of Arban&#x27;s book to a very high standard. Sabarich later said that &quot;it was then that Maurice Andre became Maurice Andre.&quot; Maurice André won the Geneva International Music Competition in 1955, together with Theo Mertens, and the ARD International Music Competition in Munich in 1963. He was made an honorary member of the Delta chapter of Phi Mu Alpha Sinfonia at Ithaca College in New York in 1970.

André rose to international prominence in the 1960s and 1970s with a series of recordings of baroque works on piccolo trumpet for Erato and other labels. He also performed many transcriptions of works for oboe, flute, and even voice and string instruments. André had over 300 audio recordings to his name, from the mid-1950s to his death.

André had three children: Lionel (1959–1988), trumpeter and music teacher; Nicolas, who plays the trumpet; and Béatrice, who plays the oboe. All three performed with their father in concert. He also made several recordings with his brother Raymond (b. 1941).

One of André&#x27;s students, Guy Touvron, wrote a biography entitled &quot;Maurice André: Une trompette pour la renommée&quot; (Maurice André: A Trumpet for Fame), which was published in 2003.

André spent the last few years of his life in retirement in southern France. He died at the age of 78 in a hospital in Bayonne on 25 February 2012. He is buried in the cemetery of the village of Saint-André-Capcèze (in the Lozère).

==References==
==External links==
*Webpage with rich information about Maurice André
*Maurice André and Prague . Documents and reminiscences on the recording of the Brandenburg Concerto No. 2 in F major in 1965 (Maurice André, Milan Munclinger, Ars Rediviva)
*AllMusic Guide to Maurice Andre Discography</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q153432" start="0" end="13" title="Maurice André" label="Maurice André"/>
<link wikidata="Q8338" start="60" end="69" title="trumpeter" label="trumpeter"/>
<link wikidata="Q9730" start="85" end="100" title="European classical music" label="classical music"/>
<link wikidata="Q1569742" start="237" end="252" title="piccolo trumpet" label="piccolo trumpet"/>
<link wikidata="Q8361" start="267" end="285" title="Baroque music" label="Baroque repertoire"/>
<link wikidata="Q193183" start="442" end="446" title="Alès" label="Alès"/>
<link wikidata="Q626655" start="454" end="462" title="Cévennes" label="Cévennes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1021290" start="680" end="692" title="music school" label="conservatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1078286" start="759" end="772" title="military band" label="military band"/>
<link wikidata="Q3421132" start="887" end="903" title="Raymond Sabarich" label="Raymond Sabarich"/>
<link wikidata="Q207841" start="1066" end="1072" title="Étude" label="etudes"/>
<link wikidata="Q542616" start="1094" end="1099" title="Jean-Baptiste Arban" label="Arban"/>
<link wikidata="Q4784612" start="1107" end="1111" title="Arban method" label="book"/>
<link wikidata="Q668053" start="1249" end="1287" title="Geneva International Music Competition" label="Geneva International Music Competition"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1311" end="1323" title="Theo Mertens" label="Theo Mertens"/>
<link wikidata="Q320240" start="1333" end="1368" title="ARD International Music Competition" label="ARD International Music Competition"/>
<link wikidata="Q1726" start="1372" end="1378" title="Munich" label="Munich"/>
<link wikidata="Q7181548" start="1443" end="1464" title="Phi Mu Alpha Sinfonia" label="Phi Mu Alpha Sinfonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q8361" start="1598" end="1605" title="Baroque music" label="baroque"/>
<link wikidata="Q1569742" start="1615" end="1630" title="piccolo trumpet" label="piccolo trumpet"/>
<link wikidata="Q3055995" start="1635" end="1640" title="Erato Records" label="Erato"/>
<link wikidata="Q1458203" start="1682" end="1696" title="transcription (music)" label="transcriptions"/>
<link wikidata="Q20077126" start="1781" end="1786" title="Sound recording" label="audio"/>
<link wikidata="Q2270036" start="2135" end="2146" title="Guy Touvron" label="Guy Touvron"/>
<link wikidata="Q134674" start="2419" end="2426" title="Bayonne" label="Bayonne"/>
<link wikidata="Q379522" start="2495" end="2514" title="Saint-André-Capcèze" label="Saint-André-Capcèze"/>
<link wikidata="Q12580" start="2523" end="2529" title="Lozère" label="Lozère"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="252289" wikidata="Q1280569" url="?curid=252289" title="Severn Tunnel">
<text>The Severn Tunnel () is a railway tunnel in the United Kingdom, linking South Gloucestershire in the west of England to Monmouthshire in south Wales under the estuary of the River Severn. It was constructed by the Great Western Railway (GWR) between 1873 and 1886 for the purpose of dramatically shortening the journey times of their trains, passenger and goods alike, between South Wales and Western England. It has often been regarded as the crowning achievement of GWR&#x27;s chief engineer Sir John Hawkshaw.

Prior to the tunnel&#x27;s construction, lengthy detours were necessary for all traffic between South Wales and Western England, which either used ship or a lengthy diversion upriver via . Recognising the value of such a tunnel, the GWR sought its development, tasking Hawkshaw with its design and later contracting the civil engineer Thomas A. Walker to undertake its construction, which commenced in March 1873. Work proceeded smoothly until October 1879, at which point significant flooding of the tunnel occurred from what is now known as &quot;The Great Spring&quot;. Through strenuous and innovative efforts, the flooding was contained and work was able to continue, albeit with a great emphasis on drainage. Structurally completed during 1885, the first passenger train was run through the tunnel on 1 December 1886, nearly 14 years after the commencement of work.

Following its opening, the tunnel quickly formed a key element of the main trunk railway line between southern England and South Wales. Amongst other services, the GWR operated a car shuttle train service through the tunnel for many decades. However, the tunnel has also presented especially difficult conditions, both operationally and in terms of infrastructure and structural maintenance. On average, around 50 million litres of water per day infiltrates the tunnel, necessitating the permanent operation of several large pumping engines. Originally, during much of the steam era, a large number of pilot and banking locomotives were required to assist heavy trains traverse the challenging gradients of the tunnel, which were deployed from nearby marshalling yards.

The tunnel is long, although only of its length are under the river. It was the longest underwater tunnel in the world until 1987—when Japan&#x27;s Seikan Tunnel linking the islands of Honshu and Hokkaido took the title—and, for more than 100 years, it was the longest mainline railway tunnel within the UK. It was finally exceeded in this capacity during 2007 with the opening of the two major tunnels of High Speed 1, forming a part of the Channel Tunnel Rail Link. In 2016, overhead line equipment (OHLE) was installed in the tunnel to allow the passage of electric traction; this work was undertaken as one element of the wider 21st-century modernisation of the Great Western main line.

==General==

The Severn Tunnel forms a critical part of the trunk railway line between southern England and South Wales, and carries an intensive passenger train service as well as significant levels of goods traffic. As of 2012, an average of 200 trains per day use the tunnel. The whole length of the tunnel is controlled as a single signal section, which has the consequence of limiting the headway of successive trains.

There is a continuous drainage culvert between the tracks to lead ground water away to the lowest point of the tunnel, under Sudbrook Pumping Station, where it is pumped to the surface. The hazard of ignited petroleum running into the culvert in the event of derailment of a tank wagon means special arrangements have to be made to prevent occupation of the tunnel by passenger trains while hazardous liquid loads are being worked through. Evacuation arrangements are in place to enable the escape of passengers and staff in the event of serious accident in the tunnel.

There is restricted personnel access to the tunnel at Sudbrook Pumping Station, where an iron ladder descends in the shaft of the water pumping main; the ventilation air is pumped in at this point also. The GWR original ventilation arrangement was to extract air at Sudbrook, but the exhaust gases from steam train operation led to premature corrosion of the fan mechanism. When the Cornish pumping engines were replaced in the 1960s, the draughting was reversed so that atmospheric air is pumped into the tunnel exhausting at the tunnel mouths.

On average, it has been determined that around per day of fresh (spring) water are typically being pumped from the tunnel; this is normally released directly into the adjacent River Severn. Attempts have also been made to try to determine the sources of the water which feeds the &quot;Great Spring&quot;.

The especially difficult conditions for infrastructure maintenance in the tunnel, as well as the physical condition of the tunnel structure, require a higher than normal degree of maintenance attention. Access and personal safety difficulties mean that significant work tasks can only be performed during temporary line closure, during which trains are normally diverted via . It is claimed that the tunnel would be full of water within 26 minutes if the pumps were switched off and backup measures failed, while Network Rail has also observed that the corrosive atmosphere of the tunnel, produced from a combination of moisture and diesel fumes from passing trains, results in so much corrosion that the steel rails need to be replaced every six years.

==History==
===Construction===

Prior to the building of the tunnel, the railway journey between the Bristol area and South Wales involved a ferry journey between and or a long detour via . Officials within the Great Western Railway (GWR) Company soon realised that the rail journey time between the two locations could be significantly shortened by construction of a tunnel directly underneath the River Severn. As such, during the early 1870s, GWR&#x27;s chief engineer, Sir John Hawkshaw, developed his design for this tunnel. On 27 June 1872, the company obtained an Act of Parliament which authorised the construction of the envisioned railway tunnel as a replacement for the ferry between Portskewett, Monmouthshire and New Passage, Gloucestershire.

On 18 March 1873, construction activity commenced using labourers employed directly by the GWR; this initial work was focused on the sinking of a shaft, possessing a diameter of at Sudbrook and a smaller drainage heading near the Pennant Measures. The rate of early work on the tunnel was slow and gradual, but without major incident. By August 1877, only the shaft and a heading had been completed; accordingly, that same year, new contracts were issued for the digging of additional shafts at both sides of the Severn as well as new headings along the tunnel&#x27;s intended route.

As the civil engineer Thomas A. Walker, who was appointed as the contractor for the tunnel&#x27;s construction, notes in his book, the GWR had expected the critical part of the work to be the tunnelling under the deep-water channel of the Shoots. However, the most substantial difficulties of the venture were encountered during October 1879, when, with only 130 yards (119 m) separating the main tunnel heading being driven from the Monmouthshire side and the shorter Gloucestershire heading, the workings were inundated. The incoming water was fresh, not from the Severn but from the Welsh side, and the source became known as &quot;The Great Spring&quot;.

Walker was entrusted by Hawkshaw to proceed with efforts to rescue and then complete the tunnel following the 1879 flooding. To achieve this required holding the Great Spring in check, which in turn was accomplished via the installation of greatly-increased pumping facilities, while a diver also had to be sent down a shaft and along the tunnel heading to close a watertight door in the workings, sealing off the waters. During November 1880, this troublesome task was finally achieved by the lead diver, Alexander Lambert, who was equipped with Henry Fleuss&#x27; newly developed self-contained rebreather apparatus, avoiding the need for the trailing hose of standard diving dress. However, work in the area of the Great Spring was unable to continue until January 1881, at which point the Great Spring was temporarily sealed off.
On 26 September 1881, the two headings met, marking a key milestone in the tunnel&#x27;s construction, efforts transferred to addressing the tunnel&#x27;s final structure along with the long deep cuttings at either end. During October 1883, work was again disrupted by further flooding originating from the Great Spring, which was further compounded by the appearance of a spring tide only a week later; again, Lambert and other divers managed to save the day and seal the works. It was recognised that water ingress problems were to continue, thus a heading was driven at a gradient of 1 in 500 from the original Sudbrook shaft, continuing until it reached the fissure through which the Great Spring flowed. By diverting the water into the new heading, the walled-in section of the tunnel could be more easily drained and finished.

There were additional mishaps which afflicted the construction site; at one point, there was an unintentional breakthrough of the bed of a pool, known as the &quot;Salmon Pool&quot;, on the English side of the tunnel. It had been originally assumed that the continuous brickwork lining of the tunnel would withstand the groundwater pressure, thus the drainage sluice valve on the side heading was closed and all but one of the pumps were taken from the site. However, on 20 December 1885, the pressure rose so high (up to 395 kN per sq m) that a number of bricks were discovered to have been pushed out of the lining. To address this, the sluice valve was opened gradually, allowing the pressure to subside but necessitating the long-term operation of additional pumping engines. In the intervening period, the Severn Railway Bridge, a competing means for railway traffic to traverse the Severn, spanning between Sharpness and Lydney, was also being built, eventually being opened to traffic during 1879.

On 22 October 1884, work commenced on the laying of the double tracks throughout the tunnel. On 18 April 1885, the final brick was placed in the tunnel&#x27;s lining. It possessed a horseshoe-shaped cross-section, complete with a concave floor, having a height of 6.1 metres above the rails along with a maximum width of . An enclosed drainage channel, in the form of an upturned semi-circular tunnel, is built onto the tunnel invert, below the rails and having a height of . According to Railway Industry publication Rail Engineer, it is believed that around 76.4 million bricks were used in the tunnel&#x27;s construction. The brickwork is between and thick. Around the deepest part of the tunnel, the roof is only a maximum of beneath the river bed.

During mid-1885, the Severn Tunnel was completed from a structural standing. To mark this accomplishment, on 5 September 1885, a special passenger train carrying numerous company officials and VIPs, including Sir Daniel Gooch, the then-chairman of the GWR Company, travelled through the tunnel. The first goods train passed through it on 9 January 1886. However, regular services would have to wait until the permanent pumping systems were complete. On 17 November 1886, the tunnel works were inspected by Colonel F. H. Rich, the Government Inspector, a necessary step in advance of its opening to any passenger traffic. Colonel Rich approved the works; thus, the tunnel was opened to regular goods trains during September 1886; the first passenger train followed on 1 December 1886, by which point nearly 14 years had passed since work on the tunnel had started.

===Operations===
At the newly built station, the GWR built a major marshalling yard, which: distributed east and north, sending coal from the South Wales Valleys towards London and the Midlands; created mainline and localised mixed-traffic freight from goods shipped in from the Midlands, the Southwest and along the Thames Valley, both westwards into Wales and vice versa.
Due to the access gradients, throughout the steam era, assistance was required for the passage of all heavy trains through the Severn Tunnel, which entailed (eastwards, from ): of 1-in-90 down to the middle of the tunnel; a further at 1-in-100 up to ; a short level then more at 1-in-100 to . This meant that the associated locomotive shed at Severn Tunnel Junction (86E), had a large number of pilot and banking locomotives to assist heavy trains through the tunnel. Under typical operations, pilot locomotives usually worked eastwards and were detached at Pilning, and would then work westwards piloting a second train back to the marshalling yard. During the latter days of steam under British Rail, these locomotives were mainly a group of latter-built GWR 5101 Class 2-6-2T locomotives, the bulk of which now form the core preserved stock of that class today.

A number of fixed Cornish engines, powered by Lancashire boilers, were used to permanently pump out the Great Spring and other sources of water from the tunnel. These were still in regular use until the 1960s, at which point they were replaced by electrically powered pumps. These pumps and their control systems have since been replaced during the 1990s by privately owned railway infrastructure company Railtrack. During the 1930s, the availability of the reliable fresh water supply from the Great Spring was a significant contributing factor in favour of the selection of an adjacent site to be established as the Royal Navy Propellant Factory, Caerwent. Water was also supplied for paper manufacture to a mill at Sudbrook; this facility has since been closed.

On 7 December 1991, the Severn Tunnel rail accident occurred, involving an InterCity 125 that was struck from behind by a Class 155. The subsequent accident investigation, while unable to reach a firm conclusion on the cause, indicated that the axle counters used for detecting train movements in the tunnel may have been accidentally reset.

The Second Severn Crossing, which was built during the 1990s, crosses over the tunnel via a &quot;ground level bridge&quot; on the English side, near the Salmon Pool. This bridge is supported in such a way that no load is imposed on the tunnel. During that bridge&#x27;s construction, the opportunity was taken to renew the concrete cap above the tunnel in the Salmon Pool.

In 2002, two Class 121s were overhauled by LNWR, Crewe for use as a Network Rail emergency train that was stabled near Severn Tunnel Junction station. They were removed in 2008 having never been used.

====Car transport====

Before 1909 a few vehicles were transported through the tunnel on an informal basis. On 7 April 1909 the Great Western Railway started a formal service for the conveyance of motor cars through the tunnel. The vehicles were drained of petrol before being loaded, and refuelled at the destination. In the first year more than 300 cars were carried. The service was suspended for a time during the First World War but restarted in 1921. The charge in 1921 was £1 8&quot;s&quot; () on an open truck, or £2 8&quot;s&quot; () in a closed truck.

The car shuttle train service would transport cars on rail trucks through the tunnel between Pilning and Severn Tunnel Junction. The service functioned as a rail-based alternative to the Aust Ferry, which was operated under an erratic timetable determined by the tides, or lengthy road journeys via Gloucester.

The rail shuttle service was continued after the end of World War II, but was ultimately made redundant by the opening of the Severn Bridge in 1966, leading to its discontinuation shortly thereafter.

==Electrification==

As part of the 21st-century modernisation of the Great Western Main Line, the tunnel was prepared for electrification. While the structure provided good clearances and was therefore relatively easy to electrify, there was also a detracting factor in the form of the continuous seepage of water through the tunnel roof in some areas, which provided a key engineering challenge. The options of using either conventional tunnel electrification equipment or a covered solid beam technology were considered; supported by studies, it was decided to use the solid beam approach. Accordingly, along the length of the tunnel&#x27;s roof, an aluminium conductor rail was installed to hold an un-tensioned copper contact cable; this rail is held in place using roughly 7000 high-grade stainless steel fixtures, which should be resistant to the hostile tunnel environment. Reportedly, the rigid rail is more robust, requires less maintenance, and is more compact than traditional overhead wires, and has been used in several other tunnels along the GWML.

In order to install the overhead electrification equipment, a six-week closure of the Severn Tunnel was necessary, which commenced on 12 September 2016. During that time, alternative means of travel were either a longer train journey via Gloucester, or a bus service between Severn Tunnel Junction and Bristol Parkway stations. Also during that time, and until late 2017, there were direct flights between Cardiff and London City Airport. Following the completion of this work, which involved the installation of of copper contact wires using 1,700 vertical drop tubes and 857 anchoring points at a rough cost of £10 million to perform, the tunnel was reopened to regular traffic on 22 October 2016. However, less than two years later, another three-week closure of the tunnel was enacted after it was discovered that some of the recently installed overhead electrification equipment had already started to rust. To combat corrosion, aluminium wire was used, the first of its type in the United Kingdom. Electric trains began operating through the tunnel in June 2020.

==See also==
* Severn tunnel (1810)
* Crossings of the River Severn

==References==
===Citations===
===Bibliography===

* &quot;The Severn Tunnel: Its Construction and Difficulties (1872–1887)&quot; by Thomas A. Walker (1st edition 1888) reprinted edition 2004, Nonsuch Publishing Ltd, Stroud, England . Reissued in 2013 (from fresh photographs of the 1890 second edition) by Cambridge University Press, . (Walker was the contractor entrusted by the chief GWR engineer Sir John Hawkshaw with rescuing and completing the tunnel after the 1879 flooding)
* &quot;Railway Tales of the Unexpected&quot; by K Westcott-Jones , 1992, Atlantic Transport Publishers.
==Further reading==

==External links==

* History of the tunnel from the Great Western Archive
* Building the Severn Tunnel, how divers tried to seal the Great Spring</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1280569" start="4" end="17" title="Severn Tunnel" label="Severn Tunnel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1369280" start="72" end="93" title="South Gloucestershire" label="South Gloucestershire"/>
<link wikidata="Q207176" start="120" end="133" title="Monmouthshire" label="Monmouthshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q47053" start="159" end="166" title="estuary" label="estuary"/>
<link wikidata="Q19682" start="174" end="186" title="River Severn" label="River Severn"/>
<link wikidata="Q843251" start="214" end="235" title="Great Western Railway" label="Great Western Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q6238306" start="498" end="511" title="John Hawkshaw" label="John Hawkshaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q7786917" start="849" end="865" title="Thomas A. Walker" label="Thomas A. Walker"/>
<link wikidata="Q789344" start="1566" end="1583" title="car shuttle train" label="car shuttle train"/>
<link wikidata="Q4127666" start="1999" end="2018" title="Bank engine" label="banking locomotives"/>
<link wikidata="Q519608" start="2138" end="2155" title="Classification yard" label="marshalling yards"/>
<link wikidata="Q99250" start="2306" end="2319" title="Seikan Tunnel" label="Seikan Tunnel"/>
<link wikidata="Q277604" start="2564" end="2576" title="High Speed 1" label="High Speed 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q277604" start="2600" end="2624" title="High Speed 1" label="Channel Tunnel Rail Link"/>
<link wikidata="Q110701" start="2635" end="2658" title="Overhead line" label="overhead line equipment"/>
<link wikidata="Q4631021" start="2790" end="2847" title="21st-century modernisation of the Great Western main line" label="21st-century modernisation of the Great Western main line"/>
<link wikidata="Q10967145" start="3400" end="3408" title="Sudbrook, Monmouthshire" label="Sudbrook"/>
<link wikidata="Q5171849" start="4229" end="4252" title="Cornish engine" label="Cornish pumping engines"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501071" start="5213" end="5225" title="Network Rail" label="Network Rail"/>
<link wikidata="Q23154" start="5556" end="5563" title="Bristol" label="Bristol"/>
<link wikidata="Q843251" start="5666" end="5687" title="Great Western Railway" label="Great Western Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q19682" start="5854" end="5866" title="River Severn" label="River Severn"/>
<link wikidata="Q6238306" start="5932" end="5945" title="John Hawkshaw" label="John Hawkshaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q4677783" start="6026" end="6043" title="Acts of Parliament in the United Kingdom" label="Act of Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q25653" start="6136" end="6141" title="ferry" label="ferry"/>
<link wikidata="Q7232419" start="6150" end="6161" title="Portskewett" label="Portskewett"/>
<link wikidata="Q686838" start="6181" end="6192" title="New Passage" label="New Passage"/>
<link wikidata="Q10967145" start="6393" end="6401" title="Sudbrook, Monmouthshire" label="Sudbrook"/>
<link wikidata="Q17017524" start="6442" end="6458" title="Pennant Measures" label="Pennant Measures"/>
<link wikidata="Q7786917" start="6819" end="6835" title="Thomas A. Walker" label="Thomas A. Walker"/>
<link wikidata="Q4491238" start="8004" end="8016" title="Henry Fleuss" label="Henry Fleuss"/>
<link wikidata="Q1428339" start="8054" end="8064" title="rebreather" label="rebreather"/>
<link wikidata="Q3590981" start="8119" end="8140" title="standard diving dress" label="standard diving dress"/>
<link wikidata="Q12068773" start="9936" end="9957" title="Severn Railway Bridge" label="Severn Railway Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1241160" start="10038" end="10047" title="Sharpness, Gloucestershire" label="Sharpness"/>
<link wikidata="Q540012" start="10052" end="10058" title="Lydney" label="Lydney"/>
<link wikidata="Q956495" start="11078" end="11081" title="VIP" label="VIP"/>
<link wikidata="Q333815" start="11098" end="11110" title="Daniel Gooch" label="Daniel Gooch"/>
<link wikidata="Q19975122" start="11399" end="11409" title="Frederick Henry Rich" label="F. H. Rich"/>
<link wikidata="Q519608" start="11817" end="11833" title="Classification yard" label="marshalling yard"/>
<link wikidata="Q605169" start="12813" end="12825" title="British Rail" label="British Rail"/>
<link wikidata="Q4039205" start="12881" end="12895" title="GWR 5101 Class" label="GWR 5101 Class"/>
<link wikidata="Q5171849" start="13008" end="13022" title="Cornish engine" label="Cornish engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q8564070" start="13036" end="13053" title="Lancashire boiler" label="Lancashire boiler"/>
<link wikidata="Q489224" start="13395" end="13404" title="Railtrack" label="Railtrack"/>
<link wikidata="Q7374554" start="13608" end="13647" title="Royal Navy Propellant Factory, Caerwent" label="Royal Navy Propellant Factory, Caerwent"/>
<link wikidata="Q975813" start="13780" end="13807" title="Severn Tunnel rail accident" label="Severn Tunnel rail accident"/>
<link wikidata="Q948845" start="13831" end="13844" title="InterCity 125" label="InterCity 125"/>
<link wikidata="Q3303707" start="13878" end="13887" title="British Rail Class 155" label="Class 155"/>
<link wikidata="Q340774" start="14001" end="14013" title="axle counter" label="axle counter"/>
<link wikidata="Q51969210" start="14103" end="14125" title="Prince of Wales Bridge (United Kingdom)" label="Second Severn Crossing"/>
<link wikidata="Q3307596" start="14487" end="14496" title="British Rail Class 121" label="Class 121"/>
<link wikidata="Q18161567" start="14517" end="14521" title="Arriva TrainCare" label="LNWR"/>
<link wikidata="Q648810" start="14523" end="14528" title="Crewe" label="Crewe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501071" start="14542" end="14554" title="Network Rail" label="Network Rail"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="15094" end="15109" title="First World War" label="First World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q789344" start="15243" end="15260" title="car shuttle train" label="car shuttle train"/>
<link wikidata="Q7194244" start="15332" end="15339" title="Pilning railway station" label="Pilning"/>
<link wikidata="Q2496470" start="15344" end="15366" title="Severn Tunnel Junction railway station" label="Severn Tunnel Junction"/>
<link wikidata="Q4822840" start="15426" end="15436" title="Aust Ferry" label="Aust Ferry"/>
<link wikidata="Q23384" start="15502" end="15506" title="tide" label="tide"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="15607" end="15619" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1850537" start="15677" end="15690" title="Severn Bridge" label="Severn Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q4631021" start="15788" end="15845" title="21st-century modernisation of the Great Western Main Line" label="21st-century modernisation of the Great Western Main Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q172587" start="16547" end="16562" title="stainless steel" label="stainless steel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2496470" start="17092" end="17114" title="Severn Tunnel Junction railway station" label="Severn Tunnel Junction"/>
<link wikidata="Q800574" start="17119" end="17134" title="Bristol Parkway railway station" label="Bristol Parkway"/>
<link wikidata="Q8982" start="17235" end="17254" title="London City Airport" label="London City Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q184197" start="17724" end="17728" title="rust" label="rust"/>
<link wikidata="Q663" start="17751" end="17760" title="aluminium" label="aluminium"/>
<link wikidata="Q7457962" start="17902" end="17922" title="Severn tunnel (1810)" label="Severn tunnel (1810)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6614780" start="17925" end="17954" title="List of crossings of the River Severn" label="Crossings of the River Severn"/>
<link wikidata="" start="18015" end="18079" title=":wikisource:The Severn Tunnel" label="The Severn Tunnel: Its Construction and Difficulties (1872–1887)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6238306" start="18360" end="18373" title="John Hawkshaw" label="John Hawkshaw"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="252290" wikidata="Q367079" url="?curid=252290" title="List of governors of New Mexico">
<text>The governor of New Mexico is the head of government of New Mexico and the commander-in-chief of the state&#x27;s military forces. The governor has a duty to enforce state laws, the power to either approve or veto bills passed by the New Mexico Legislature, to convene the legislature at any time, and to grant pardons.

Twenty-eight individuals have held the office of governor of New Mexico since the state&#x27;s admission to the Union in 1912, two of whom—Edwin L. Mechem and Bruce King—served three non-consecutive terms. King holds the record as New Mexico&#x27;s longest-serving governor, with 12 years of service. William C. McDonald, the first governor, took office on January 15, 1912. The first woman to serve as Governor was Republican Susana Martinez, who served from 2011-2019. The current officeholder is Michelle Lujan Grisham, who took office on January 1, 2019, as the first elected female Democratic governor of the state.

==List of governors==

On August 18, 1846, American forces led by Stephen W. Kearny captured Santa Fe, capital of the Mexican territory of Santa Fe de Nuevo México. A code of laws known as the Kearny Code was established on September 22, 1846. The region remained under military control until formally annexed by the United States on July 4, 1848. Following Kearny&#x27;s departure for California on September 26, the chief military officer in the territory was Col. Sterling Price until October 11, 1848; Lt. Col. John M. Washington until October 23, 1849; and Col. John Munroe until the territory was organized. 

Kearny appointed Charles Bent as governor before he left for California; Bent would be assassinated during the Taos Revolt on January 19, 1847. Col. Price appointed Donaciano Vigil as acting governor. A statehood convention chose Henry Connelly as governor on June 20, 1850, but this was never recognized by the federal government.

===Territory of New Mexico===
New Mexico Territory was organized on December 13, 1850. It would remain a territory for 62 years.

===State of New Mexico===
The state of New Mexico was admitted to the Union on January 6, 1912. 

The state constitution of 1912 called for the election of a governor and lieutenant governor every four years. The term was changed to two years by a 1914 amendment, and lengthened back to four years in 1970. Governors originally could not succeed themselves; this was changed in 1914 to allow governors to succeed themselves once before having to take a term off. With the lengthening of the term to four years in 1970, this was changed back to prohibiting them from succeeding themselves, but in 1986 it was lengthened back to two terms. A 1962 amendment made it so that the governor and lieutenant governor are elected on a ticket (election). In the event of a vacancy in the office of governor, the lieutenant governor becomes governor.


==See also==
* List of New Mexico state legislatures

==Notes==
==References==
;General
* 
* 
* 
; Specific
==External links==

*Office of the Governor of New Mexico
*New Mexico History Museum website</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q367079" start="4" end="26" title="List of governors of New Mexico" label="governor of New Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q2285706" start="34" end="52" title="head of government" label="head of government"/>
<link wikidata="Q1522" start="56" end="66" title="New Mexico" label="New Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q35657" start="101" end="113" title="U.S. state" label="state&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q7010221" start="114" end="129" title="New Mexico National Guard" label="military forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q7010195" start="234" end="256" title="New Mexico Legislature" label="New Mexico Legislature"/>
<link wikidata="Q537151" start="311" end="317" title="pardon" label="pardon"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="433" end="438" title="United States" label="Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q375358" start="460" end="475" title="Edwin L. Mechem" label="Edwin L. Mechem"/>
<link wikidata="Q887337" start="480" end="490" title="Bruce King" label="Bruce King"/>
<link wikidata="Q888372" start="622" end="641" title="William C. McDonald (governor)" label="William C. McDonald"/>
<link wikidata="Q29468" start="737" end="747" title="Republican Party (United States)" label="Republican"/>
<link wikidata="Q256334" start="748" end="763" title="Susana Martinez" label="Susana Martinez"/>
<link wikidata="Q3917203" start="820" end="842" title="Michelle Lujan Grisham" label="Michelle Lujan Grisham"/>
<link wikidata="Q518351" start="1009" end="1026" title="Stephen W. Kearny" label="Stephen W. Kearny"/>
<link wikidata="Q5037059" start="1027" end="1035" title="Capture of Santa Fe" label="captured"/>
<link wikidata="Q38555" start="1036" end="1044" title="Santa Fe, New Mexico" label="Santa Fe"/>
<link wikidata="Q96" start="1061" end="1068" title="Mexico" label="Mexican"/>
<link wikidata="Q921283" start="1082" end="1106" title="Santa Fe de Nuevo México" label="Santa Fe de Nuevo México"/>
<link wikidata="Q6382221" start="1136" end="1147" title="Kearny Code" label="Kearny Code"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186695" start="1236" end="1252" title="Mexican Cession" label="formally annexed"/>
<link wikidata="Q532248" start="1410" end="1424" title="Sterling Price" label="Sterling Price"/>
<link wikidata="Q1700944" start="1458" end="1476" title="John M. Washington" label="John M. Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q1701171" start="1510" end="1521" title="John Munroe" label="John Munroe"/>
<link wikidata="Q375010" start="1576" end="1588" title="Charles Bent" label="Charles Bent"/>
<link wikidata="Q7684314" start="1670" end="1681" title="Taos Revolt" label="Taos Revolt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1239615" start="1724" end="1739" title="Donaciano Vigil" label="Donaciano Vigil"/>
<link wikidata="Q1606622" start="1789" end="1803" title="Henry Connelly" label="Henry Connelly"/>
<link wikidata="Q597711" start="1922" end="1942" title="New Mexico Territory" label="New Mexico Territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q18350273" start="2076" end="2097" title="Admission to the Union" label="admitted to the Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q5164216" start="2124" end="2142" title="Constitution of New Mexico" label="state constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q15145017" start="2747" end="2764" title="ticket (election)" label="ticket (election)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7010195" start="2878" end="2915" title="List of New Mexico state legislatures" label="List of New Mexico state legislatures"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="252293" wikidata="Q878264" url="?curid=252293" title="List of governors of Washington">
<text>The governor of Washington is the head of government of Washington and commander-in-chief of the state&#x27;s military forces. The officeholder has a duty to enforce state laws, the power to either approve or veto bills passed by the Washington Legislature and line-item veto power to cancel specific provisions in spending bills. The Washington governor may also convene the legislature on &quot;extraordinary occasions&quot;.

Washington Territory had 14 territorial governors from its organization in 1853 until the formation of the state of Washington in 1889. Territorial governors were appointed by the president of the United States. Elisha P. Ferry had the longest term of eight years and went on to become the state&#x27;s first governor. William H. Wallace was appointed governor but never took office due to being elected as the territory&#x27;s congressional delegate. George Edward Cole was appointed governor and took office, but his appointment was never ratified by the U.S. Senate and he was replaced as governor after four months.

Twenty-two individuals have held the office of Governor of Washington since the state&#x27;s admission to the Union, with Arthur B. Langlie serving non-consecutive terms. Populist Party candidate John Rankin Rogers is the only non-Democratic or Republican nominee to win office. The most recent governor to be from Eastern Washington was Clarence D. Martin, elected in 1932. The current governor is Democrat Bob Ferguson, who took office on January 15, 2025. 

==List of governors==
===Territory of Washington===
Washington Territory was organized on March 2, 1853, from the northern half of Oregon Territory. 

===State of Washington===
Washington was admitted to the Union on November 11, 1889. The term for governor is four years, commencing on the second Monday in the January following the election. If the office of governor is vacant or the governor is unable to discharge their duties, the lieutenant governor assumes the duties of governor, though still officially retains the office of lieutenant governor. If both the offices of governor and lieutenant governor are unable to fulfill their duties, the secretary of state is next in line, and then the treasurer. There is no limit to the number of terms a governor may serve. The office of lieutenant governor is not elected on the same ticket as the governor.


==See also==
*List of Washington state legislatures
*Gubernatorial lines of succession in the United States#Washington

==Notes==
==References==
;General
*
* 
* 
*
* 
;Specific
==External links==

*Office of the Governor of Washington</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q878264" start="4" end="26" title="List of governors of Washington" label="governor of Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q2285706" start="34" end="52" title="head of government" label="head of government"/>
<link wikidata="Q1223" start="56" end="66" title="Washington (state)" label="Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q7972070" start="97" end="125" title="Washington National Guard" label="state&amp;#x27;s military forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q7972258" start="234" end="256" title="Washington Legislature" label="Washington Legislature"/>
<link wikidata="Q6553022" start="261" end="275" title="line-item veto" label="line-item veto"/>
<link wikidata="Q176562" start="641" end="656" title="Elisha P. Ferry" label="Elisha P. Ferry"/>
<link wikidata="Q889378" start="748" end="766" title="William H. Wallace" label="William H. Wallace"/>
<link wikidata="Q125387" start="881" end="899" title="George Edward Cole" label="George Edward Cole"/>
<link wikidata="Q371494" start="1172" end="1189" title="Arthur B. Langlie" label="Arthur B. Langlie"/>
<link wikidata="Q337794" start="1221" end="1235" title="Populist Party (United States)" label="Populist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q371184" start="1246" end="1264" title="John Rankin Rogers" label="John Rankin Rogers"/>
<link wikidata="Q7972236" start="1281" end="1291" title="Washington State Democratic Party" label="Democratic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7972273" start="1295" end="1305" title="Washington State Republican Party" label="Republican"/>
<link wikidata="Q3046581" start="1365" end="1383" title="Eastern Washington" label="Eastern Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q166537" start="1388" end="1406" title="Clarence D. Martin" label="Clarence D. Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q4932411" start="1458" end="1470" title="Bob Ferguson (politician)" label="Bob Ferguson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1710656" start="1563" end="1583" title="Washington Territory" label="Washington Territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1420228" start="1642" end="1658" title="Oregon Territory" label="Oregon Territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1853559" start="2300" end="2319" title="Lieutenant Governor of Washington" label="lieutenant governor"/>
<link wikidata="Q15145017" start="2347" end="2353" title="ticket (election)" label="ticket"/>
<link wikidata="Q65085462" start="2387" end="2424" title="List of Washington state legislatures" label="List of Washington state legislatures"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2426" end="2491" title="Gubernatorial lines of succession in the United States#Washington" label="Gubernatorial lines of succession in the United States#Washington"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="252294" wikidata="Q1362781" url="?curid=252294" title="TwixT">
<text>TwixT is a two-player strategy board game, an early entrant in the 1960s 3M bookshelf game series. It became one of the most popular and enduring games in the series. It is a connection game where players alternate turns placing pegs and links on a pegboard in an attempt to link their opposite sides. While TwixT itself is simple, the game also requires strategy, so young children can play it, but it also appeals to adults. The game has been discontinued except in Germany and Japan.

== History ==

TwixT was invented as a paper and pencil game in 1957 by Alex Randolph, a game designer. When Alex was commissioned along with Sid Sackson by 3M in 1961 to start a games division, the game was issued as a boardgame, one of the first 3M bookshelf games. Avalon Hill took over publication in 1976 when 3M sold its game division. Avalon&#x27;s parent company was acquired by Hasbro in 1998, and the game was discontinued. The game is no longer produced in the United States, but a succession of German companies has produced the game since the 1970s under license from Avalon. TwixT was short-listed for the first Spiel des Jahres in 1979, and was inducted into the Academy of Adventure Gaming Arts &amp; Design&#x27;s Hall of Fame, along with Randolph, in 2011.

== Rules ==
Twixt is played on a board comprising a 24×24 square grid of holes (minus 4 corner holes). The game has two types of playing pieces, pegs, which fit into the holes, and links, which fit into the top of the peg pieces and are used to connect to peg pieces. In the 3M edition, players are Red and Black; different sets may use different colors. The topmost and bottommost rows of holes belong to the lighter color; the leftmost and rightmost rows to the darker color.

*The players take turns placing pegs of their respective colors on the board, one peg per turn.
*The player with the lighter color makes the first move.
*A player may &quot;not&quot; place a peg on their opponent&#x27;s border rows.
*To counteract first-move advantage, the pie rule is suggested. After the first peg is placed, the second player has the option to swap sides. This is typically indicated by turning the pieces box end for end, or swapping boxes if they are separate. If the second player chooses not to swap immediately after the first peg is placed, then sides may not be swapped later in that game. (This &quot;one-move equalization&quot; was added by Randolph after 3M published his game. It is present in the Schmidt Spiele edition and all later editions.)
*After placing a peg, a player may &quot;link&quot; one or more pairs of pegs on the board of their colour. The links can only connect two pegs a knight&#x27;s move away from each other, and cannot cross another link; they block other links, most importantly those of the opponent. As part of the player&#x27;s move, they may remove their own links (but not those of the opponent) in order to rearrange the sequence of links on the board. A variant for pencil and paper play allows a connection to cross the player&#x27;s links but not those of the opponent.
*The object is to make a continuous chain of linked pegs connecting the player&#x27;s border rows. If neither player can achieve this, the game is a draw.

== Computational complexity for general rectangular boards ==
TwixT has been proven to be PSPACE-complete for determining the game value, via a reduction from Hex. TwixT has also been shown to be NP-complete regarding whether a single set of vertices can support a connecting path, via a reduction from 3-satisfiability.
These proofs are indicative of a complex strategy: the game has not been solved, no winning strategy has been discovered, nor is the outcome of the game with perfect play known.
==Related games==
On the 24×24 grid, tactical considerations tend to predominate. The opening phase is over quickly, and the rest of the game is spent attempting to tactically execute the plan. Hex, which has a very similar game object, may have more predictable tactics, but strategical considerations are much more important. In this sense, Hex is more like Go than TwixT, since a single move is generally less committal, and consequences may take longer to play out.

== Variants ==
One variant is Twixt PP (Paper and Pencil). The rules are almost identical to standard TwixT, except links are never removed and a player&#x27;s &quot;own&quot; links are allowed to cross each other. A winning path might loop across itself but crossed links are not connected to each other at the intersection. The paper and pencil rules may reduce the number of draws (which are already rare). Whether it reduces the complexity of the game or not is highly debatable.

This rules difference has no effect in terms of game outcome most of the time. For those rare situations where it does, most of those cases are where a draw under standard rules is a decisive game under PP rules. The image shows a contrived position where black is to move. Black wins under PP rules but loses under standard rules.

Row handicapping can be used to equalize the game for players of different strengths. The simplest handicap is to allow the weaker player to move first (i.e. eliminate the pie rule). Beyond that, one dimension of the grid is reduced so the weaker player has a shorter distance to span.

The game may be played on different size grids. The 12×12 board shown here leads to a very short game. On the standard board, tactics dominate; larger boards introduce deeper strategic considerations. Since most commercial sets use boards which are made from four &quot;quadrants&quot; which either clip together or are hinged, a 36×36 grid could be assembled from three standard sets of the same size. In Europe, there briefly appeared a TwixT knock-off called &quot;Imuri&quot; which used a 30×30 grid. The board had no holes, and lines were drawn to indicate where the links could be placed. This edition was removed from shelves for copyright infringement.

Mark Thompson&#x27;s variant Diagonal TwixT has the same rules as standard TwixT, but the border lines run at a 45-degree angle to the grid. David Bush&#x27;s version has the border lines running parallel to link paths. These variants result in different tactical patterns.

== Competition ==
The official world championships were held as part of the Mind Sports Olympiad in 1997, 1998 and 1999. Since 2000 TwixT has had a major international tournament as part of the MSO but there has been no official World Championships. Between 2011 and 2022, the TwixT event at the MSO has again become the World Championships. The list of winners is given below.

List of MSO champions


==Reception==
&quot;Games&quot; magazine included &quot;TwixT&quot; in their &quot;Top 100 Games of 1980&quot;, describing it as &quot;much more subtle and interesting than the old Bridg-It, with which it should not be confused&quot;.

&quot;Games&quot; magazine included &quot;TwixT&quot; in their &quot;Top 100 Games of 1981&quot;, noting that &quot;The best offense, oddly enough, is a good defense.&quot;

&quot;Games&quot; magazine included &quot;TwixT&quot; in their &quot;Top 100 Games of 1982&quot;, noting that &quot;Subtlety and finesse will win every time against straightforward aggression in this game of great depth and varied tactics.&quot;

==Reviews==
*&quot;Jeux &amp; Stratégie&quot; #6
*&quot;Games &amp; Puzzles&quot; #18
*&quot;The Playboy Winner&#x27;s Guide to Board Games&quot;
*&quot;Family Games: The 100 Best&quot;
*&quot;The Guide to simulations/games for education and training&quot;

==See also==
*List of connection games
*Gale, also called Bridg-It

==References==
==External links==
*Introduction to TwixT on the International Computer Games Association website. Introduction, rules, computer-TwixT related links
*Sensei&#x27;s Library: Twixt More info about TwixT
*Current Twixt-playing programs
*Connection Games Part VI: Twixt from Dr. Eric Silverman&#x27;s blog on abstract games</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1362781" start="0" end="5" title="TwixT" label="TwixT"/>
<link wikidata="Q573573" start="22" end="30" title="Abstract strategy game" label="strategy"/>
<link wikidata="Q131436" start="31" end="41" title="board game" label="board game"/>
<link wikidata="Q642391" start="73" end="97" title="3M bookshelf game series" label="3M bookshelf game series"/>
<link wikidata="Q5161688" start="175" end="190" title="connection game" label="connection game"/>
<link wikidata="Q563679" start="560" end="573" title="Alex Randolph" label="Alex Randolph"/>
<link wikidata="Q790101" start="756" end="767" title="Avalon Hill" label="Avalon Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q501476" start="875" end="881" title="Hasbro" label="Hasbro"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128609" start="1114" end="1130" title="Spiel des Jahres" label="Spiel des Jahres"/>
<link wikidata="Q1206771" start="1166" end="1231" title="Origins Award" label="Academy of Adventure Gaming Arts &amp;amp; Design&amp;#x27;s Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q3932109" start="2017" end="2025" title="pie rule" label="pie rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q136" start="2666" end="2684" title="Knight (chess)" label="knight&amp;#x27;s move"/>
<link wikidata="Q2347716" start="2973" end="2989" title="Pencil and paper game" label="pencil and paper"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3325" end="3340" title="PSPACE-complete#Puzzles and games" label="PSPACE-complete"/>
<link wikidata="Q844874" start="3394" end="3397" title="Hex (board game)" label="Hex"/>
<link wikidata="Q215206" start="3431" end="3442" title="NP-complete" label="NP-complete"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3538" end="3554" title="Boolean satisfiability problem#3-satisfiability" label="3-satisfiability"/>
<link wikidata="Q573520" start="3629" end="3635" title="Solved game" label="solved"/>
<link wikidata="Q573520" start="3714" end="3726" title="perfect play" label="perfect play"/>
<link wikidata="Q14489467" start="6323" end="6343" title="Mind Sports Olympiad" label="Mind Sports Olympiad"/>
<link wikidata="Q5520103" start="6670" end="6675" title="Games (magazine)" label="Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q5520103" start="6892" end="6897" title="Games (magazine)" label="Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q5520103" start="7066" end="7071" title="Games (magazine)" label="Games"/>
<link wikidata="" start="7326" end="7346" title=":fr:Jeux et Stratégie" label="Jeux &amp;amp; Stratégie"/>
<link wikidata="Q5520074" start="7363" end="7382" title="Games &amp;amp; Puzzles" label="Games &amp;amp; Puzzles"/>
<link wikidata="Q55642325" start="7400" end="7446" title="The Playboy Winner&amp;#x27;s Guide to Board Games" label="The Playboy Winner&amp;#x27;s Guide to Board Games"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7579" end="7603" title="Connection game#List of connection games" label="List of connection games"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7605" end="7609" title="Shannon switching game#Gale" label="Gale"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="252295" wikidata="Q806704" url="?curid=252295" title="Bank and Monument stations">
<text>Bank and Monument are two interlinked stations in the City of London that form a public transport complex served by five lines of the London Underground as well as the Docklands Light Railway (DLR).

Bank station, named after the Bank of England, opened in 1900 at Bank Junction and is served by the Central, Northern and Waterloo &amp; City lines, and the DLR. Monument station, named after the Monument to the Great Fire of London, opened in 1884 and is served by the Circle and District lines. The stations have been linked as an interchange since 1933.

The station complex is one of the busiest on the London Underground network. The station complex was previously rated the Underground&#x27;s worst station in passenger surveys, and a substantial upgrade and expansion was completed in 2023 after seven years of construction. The station has 27 escalators, the most of any station on the Underground. The stations are in fare zone 1.

==History==
The Bank–Monument station complex was created by building links between several nearby stations constructed by different companies. The first station was opened by the Metropolitan Inner Circle Completion Railway.

===Metropolitan Inner Circle Completion Railway, 1884===

The Metropolitan Railway (MR) and District Railway (DR) had, by 1876, built most of the Inner Circle (now the Circle line), reaching and respectively. The companies were in dispute over the completion of the route, for the DR was struggling financially and the MR was concerned that completion would affect its revenues through increased competition from the DR in the City area. City financiers who were keen to see the line completed established the Metropolitan Inner Circle Completion Railway in 1874 to link Mansion House to Aldgate. Forced into action, the MR bought out the company and with the DR began construction of the final section of the Inner Circle in 1879. The new section of railway included two new stations: Tower of London and another located close to the Monument.

The station at Monument opened with the name &quot;Eastcheap&quot; on 6 October 1884, after the nearby street, and was renamed &quot;The Monument&quot; on 1 November 1884. Initially, trains from both companies served the station on the Inner Circle service, but other operational patterns have been used. In 1909, a new entrance was completed to a design by architect George Campbell Sherrin, which included a new entrance incorporating commercial space where the booking hall had previously been located. The Inner Circle service achieved a separate identity as the Circle line in 1949, although its trains were still provided by the District or Metropolitan lines.

=== Waterloo &amp; City Railway, 1898 ===
The Waterloo &amp; City Railway was built by the London and South Western Railway (L&amp;SWR) to link its terminus at Waterloo to the City. The station, with platforms under Queen Victoria Street and close to Mansion House, opened on 8 August 1898 as &quot;City&quot;.

The Waterloo &amp; City line platforms were renamed &quot;Bank&quot; on 28 October 1940. In September 1960, the steeply sloping passages to the platforms were supplemented with the &quot;Travolator&quot;, one of the few sets of moving walkways on the whole underground system. Advertising at the Waterloo &amp; City line station often takes the form of large painted murals on the walls and ceilings of the sloped exits, forming one of the largest advertisements on the Underground.

As the W&amp;CR was owned by the L&amp;SWR, a mainline railway, it became part of British Rail; it was only transferred to Underground operation in 1994.

=== City &amp; South London Railway, 1900 ===

The first station to be known as Bank opened on 25 February 1900, when the City &amp; South London Railway (C&amp;SLR, now part of the Northern line) opened its extension from to . The earlier terminus of the line, , on a different tunnel alignment, was closed at the same time.

The C&amp;SLR had obtained permission to demolish the 18th-century church of St Mary Woolnoth on the corner of Lombard Street and build a station (originally proposed to be named &quot;Lombard Street&quot;) on the site. After public protest, the company changed its plans to build only a sub-surface ticket hall and lift entrance in the crypt of the church. This necessitated moving the bodies elsewhere, strengthening the crypt with a steel framework and underpinning the church&#x27;s foundations. Unusually for stations later converted to escalators, the original lift access from the ticket hall is still in use.

=== Central London Railway, 1900 ===

The opening of the eastern terminus of the Central London Railway (CLR, now the Central line) at Bank followed on 30 July 1900.

As with the C&amp;SLR, the high cost of property in the City, coupled with the presence of the Royal Exchange, the Bank of England, and Mansion House, meant that the station had to be built entirely underground. Permission was granted by the City of London Corporation for the station to be sited beneath the busy junction of roads meeting at this point on condition that public subways were provided to act as pedestrian road crossings. To avoid undermining the road above, the station&#x27;s lifts were installed in separate lift shafts rather than paired two-per-shaft as usual.

To avoid wayleave payments to property owners and to lessen possible claims for damage during construction and operation, the CLR tunnels were directly under public streets. This caused the platforms under Threadneedle Street and Poultry to be so curved that one end of the platform cannot be seen from the other. East of Bank station the Central line tunnels have sharp curves to avoid the vaults of the Bank of England itself. Due to the close proximity of the CLR, W&amp;CR and C&amp;SLR stations, and the non-competing directions of their services, their ticket halls were soon connected, but connection between the CLR and C&amp;SLR platforms were made only when escalators were installed in 1924. The CLR station itself was reconstructed during the major rebuilding of the Bank of England in 1925. The booking hall underneath Bank Junction was redecorated and a new subway entrance built into the corner of the Bank of England itself.

===Monument link, 1933===

The southern end of the C&amp;SLR (which by then was part of the Edgware–Highgate–Morden line) platforms was close to those of Monument station and, on 18 September 1933, a connecting escalator link was opened, connecting the two stations directly for the first time.

===Second World War===
During the Blitz, the station was used as a bomb shelter. On 11 January 1941, the Central line ticket hall of Bank station suffered a direct hit from a German bomb. The roadway collapsed into the subways and station concourse, killing 56 people.

===Docklands Light Railway and station refurbishment, 1990s===
In 1991, the Docklands Light Railway was extended to Bank station, following criticism of the original, poorly connected terminus at Tower Gateway. The new platforms were built parallel to but deeper than those of the Northern line, with connections at one end to the Central line and Monument Station at the other. As part of the construction of the extension, a new link between the Waterloo &amp; City and the Central line was excavated – uncovering part of one of the Greathead tunnelling shields used for the Waterloo &amp; City line. This shield forms part of the new passageway, and passengers pass through when transferring between the two lines. As with all other DLR stations, the DLR platforms were made accessible to those in wheelchairs, however the route was indirect with the use of three different passenger lifts required to reach the DLR.
In January 1994, a statue of James Henry Greathead was erected outside the station, next to the Royal Exchange. It was unveiled by the Lord Mayor of London and is positioned on a plinth which hides a ventilation shaft for the Underground.

The rest of the station was comprehensively refurbished, with decorative tiling panels based on the City&#x27;s coat of arms, new lighting and replacement of escalators. This work was completed in 1997, partially funded by the City of London Corporation.

===New Bloomberg entrance, 2010s===
In the late 2010s, a new entrance was constructed at Bloomberg&#x27;s new London headquarters on Walbrook, near station, providing direct access to the Waterloo &amp; City line via four new escalators and two lifts – providing step-free access to that line for the first time. First announced in 2008, construction began in November 2015 following delays due to the financial crisis. The new entrance was opened on 30 November 2018, and was officially opened by Mayor of London Sadiq Khan and former Mayor of New York Michael Bloomberg in December 2018.

The new entrance incorporates etched glass panels by artist John Hutton, depicting 66 figures based on the ancient Roman history of the area, including the Roman Temple of Mithras. The artwork was originally completed in 1962 on Bucklersbury House, the post war office building previously located on the site.

== Station upgrade and expansion ==

Between 2003 and 2014, demand at the Bank–Monument station complex rose by over 50% to 337,000 customers per day. The station complex was also rated the Underground&#x27;s worst station in passenger surveys.

According to Transport for London (TfL), &quot;areas of the station [were] close to &#x27;saturation&#x27; point, where day to day demand overwhelms capacity&quot;. Unlike other congested stations such as Oxford Circus, passengers could not be held back at station entrances during peak times to avoid overwhelming the station, as around half of passengers are interchanging between lines. The high demand on the station was exacerbated by the narrow passageways, pinch points, spiral staircases and indirect routes between lines. Some parts of the station operated &quot;one way&quot;, with staff directing passengers on longer routes to increase the capacity of the station.

Given these issues, the station complex was substantially upgraded between 2016 and 2023, increasing capacity by 40%, at a cost of around £700million. The overall project – incorporating twelve new escalators, two new lifts and two moving walkways – included:

* A new southbound platform for the Northern line and conversion of the existing southbound platform to passenger circulation space.
* New direct passenger tunnel with moving walkways connecting the Northern line and Central line.
* New escalators between the Northern line and the DLR
* A new station entrance and ticket hall on Cannon Street, just east of St Mary Abchurch, with new escalators and step-free access to the Northern line and DLR.
* Modernising the station to comply with contemporary fire and evacuation standards.
Owing to the severe curvature of the Central line platforms, there is a substantial gap between the train and the platform. Because of this, no step-free access was currently proposed for the Central line, as the cost would be prohibitive and it would be difficult for passengers to use.

TfL described the construction of the project as &quot;intricate and complicated&quot;, with over 30 listed buildings in the historic City of London located above the tunnels. The new southbound Northern line tunnel was dug from a worksite on King William Street, using the underground spaces left over from the closed King William Street tube station. Former running tunnels have previously been used as circulation space at Angel and London Bridge stations.

As part of the development of the scheme, TfL worked with potential bidders to improve the design of the station from TfL&#x27;s original design. The design proposed in the winning bid by Dragados was 9.7% cheaper than the original design (saving TfL £60million), took ten months less time to construct than the original design (the proposed closure of the Northern line was also five weeks shorter), and the layout of the station was more efficient. This improved the benefit–cost ratio by 45%, from 2.4:1 to 3.5:1.

=== Progress ===
Following consultations in the early 2010s, and a Transport and Works Act Order in 2015, construction of the new Northern line tunnel began in April 2016, and was estimated to take six years. By July 2019, the project had reached the halfway stage. By October 2020, the majority of tunnelling work, around , had been completed, with around 200,000 tonnes of material excavated from beneath the City. By July 2021, installation of escalators was underway, as well as preparation work to connect to the new Northern line tunnels in 2022. From January until mid May 2022, the Northern line through Bank was closed – this was required to allow the existing line to be connected to the new running tunnels, convert the previous southbound platform to a new passenger concourse, as well as final fit-out and integration works throughout the expanded station complex.On 15 May 2022, the new Northern line southbound platform and concourse was opened, the first part of the station expansion open to the public. On 13 October 2022, new escalators connecting the DLR and the Northern line opened. On 28 October 2022, a moving walkway between the Central and Northern lines was opened. These new connections cut the time taken to interchange between lines, as well as expanding the capacity of the station. On 27 February 2023, the project was completed with the opening of the new Cannon Street entrance, as well as lifts providing step-free access to the Northern line and improving the step-free access to the DLR. The station has 27 escalators, the most of any station on the Underground. In September 2024, the upgrade project won an industry award, with judges describing it as &quot;an extremely successful major project, in an extremely challenging circumstances at an extremely challenging location”.

== Ticket halls and entrances ==
Following the opening of the Cannon Street entrance in 2023, the station complex has sixteen entrances and five ticket halls, the most of any station on the Underground.

* Bullring (Central line) ticket hall, located underneath Bank Junction.
* Lombard Street (Northern line) ticket hall, located under Lombard Street.
* Monument ticket hall, located under Monument Street adjacent to the Monument to the Great Fire of London, serving the District &amp; Circle lines.
* Walbrook ticket hall, at Bloomberg London, serving the Waterloo &amp; City line.
* Cannon Street ticket hall, on Cannon Street located just east of St Mary Abchurch.

== Notable events ==
On 11 January 1941, during the Blitz, 56 people were killed and 69 were seriously injured when a German bomb hit the booking hall, with the blast travelling down the stairs and escalators to the platforms. The crater, measuring , was covered with a Bailey bridge for the traffic to pass over. The station itself was closed for two months.

On 7 September 2003, Bank station was used for a disaster training exercise, &quot;Exercise Osiris&quot;, billed as &quot;the most realistic live disaster exercise of its kind&quot;. The event, lasting several hours and involving about 500 police, fire brigade, ambulance and London Underground personnel, was intended to prepare the emergency services for mass decontamination in the event of a chemical, biological, radiological or nuclear attack.

==Connections==
A large number of London Buses routes serve the station complex day and night.

==References==
==External links==
* 
* London Transport Museum Photographic Archive
** 
** 
** </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q806704" start="0" end="4" title="Bank and Monument stations" label="Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q806704" start="9" end="17" title="Bank and Monument stations" label="Monument"/>
<link wikidata="Q23311" start="54" end="68" title="City of London" label="City of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q20075" start="134" end="152" title="London Underground" label="London Underground"/>
<link wikidata="Q216360" start="168" end="197" title="Docklands Light Railway" label="Docklands Light Railway (DLR)"/>
<link wikidata="Q183231" start="230" end="245" title="Bank of England" label="Bank of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q4856012" start="265" end="278" title="Bank Junction" label="Bank Junction"/>
<link wikidata="Q205355" start="300" end="307" title="Central line (London Underground)" label="Central"/>
<link wikidata="Q214793" start="309" end="317" title="Northern line" label="Northern"/>
<link wikidata="Q207699" start="322" end="341" title="Waterloo &amp;amp; City line" label="Waterloo &amp;amp; City"/>
<link wikidata="Q607700" start="396" end="432" title="Monument to the Great Fire of London" label="Monument to the Great Fire of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q210321" start="470" end="476" title="Circle line (London Underground)" label="Circle"/>
<link wikidata="Q211265" start="481" end="489" title="District line" label="District"/>
<link wikidata="Q130390596" start="581" end="633" title="List of busiest London Underground stations" label="one of the busiest on the London Underground network"/>
<link wikidata="Q41171881" start="927" end="938" title="London fare zone 1" label="fare zone 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q935025" start="1230" end="1250" title="Metropolitan Railway" label="Metropolitan Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q5283358" start="1260" end="1276" title="District Railway" label="District Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1770524" start="1954" end="1969" title="Tower of London tube station" label="Tower of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q1790942" start="2106" end="2123" title="Eastcheap" label="the nearby street"/>
<link wikidata="Q1508250" start="2382" end="2405" title="George Campbell Sherrin" label="George Campbell Sherrin"/>
<link wikidata="Q207699" start="2728" end="2755" title="Waterloo &amp;amp; City Railway" label="Waterloo &amp;amp; City Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130022" start="2773" end="2805" title="London and South Western Railway" label="London and South Western Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q795691" start="2842" end="2850" title="London Waterloo station" label="Waterloo"/>
<link wikidata="Q4581969" start="2898" end="2919" title="Queen Victoria Street, London" label="Queen Victoria Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q1786933" start="2933" end="2946" title="Mansion House, London" label="Mansion House"/>
<link wikidata="Q847580" start="3222" end="3236" title="moving walkway" label="moving walkway"/>
<link wikidata="Q605169" start="3560" end="3572" title="British Rail" label="British Rail"/>
<link wikidata="Q1094056" start="3755" end="3786" title="City &amp;amp; South London Railway" label="City &amp;amp; South London Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q7594608" start="4037" end="4053" title="St Mary Woolnoth" label="St Mary Woolnoth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1432321" start="4071" end="4085" title="Lombard Street, London" label="Lombard Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q192619" start="4297" end="4302" title="crypt" label="crypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q7883752" start="4416" end="4428" title="underpinning" label="underpinning"/>
<link wikidata="Q15003" start="4502" end="4511" title="escalator" label="escalator"/>
<link wikidata="Q132911" start="4527" end="4531" title="Elevator" label="lift"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053892" start="4659" end="4681" title="Central London Railway" label="Central London Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1241240" start="4840" end="4854" title="Royal Exchange (London)" label="Royal Exchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q1094147" start="4987" end="5013" title="City of London Corporation" label="City of London Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1188673" start="5124" end="5131" title="Subway (underpass)" label="subways"/>
<link wikidata="Q272893" start="5337" end="5345" title="Easement" label="wayleave"/>
<link wikidata="Q2732007" start="5534" end="5553" title="Threadneedle Street" label="Threadneedle Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q7235592" start="5558" end="5565" title="Poultry, London" label="Poultry"/>
<link wikidata="Q183231" start="6107" end="6122" title="Bank of England" label="Bank of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q4856012" start="6160" end="6173" title="Bank Junction" label="Bank Junction"/>
<link wikidata="Q216360" start="6912" end="6935" title="Docklands Light Railway" label="Docklands Light Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1702680" start="7032" end="7045" title="Tower Gateway DLR station" label="Tower Gateway"/>
<link wikidata="Q741170" start="7371" end="7380" title="James Henry Greathead" label="Greathead"/>
<link wikidata="Q2016868" start="7381" end="7398" title="tunnelling shield" label="tunnelling shield"/>
<link wikidata="Q741170" start="7785" end="7806" title="James Henry Greathead" label="James Henry Greathead"/>
<link wikidata="Q73341" start="7891" end="7911" title="Lord Mayor of London" label="Lord Mayor of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q1750543" start="8108" end="8120" title="Coat of arms of the City of London" label="coat of arms"/>
<link wikidata="Q1094147" start="8223" end="8249" title="City of London Corporation" label="City of London Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q13977" start="8341" end="8357" title="Bloomberg L.P." label="Bloomberg&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q46996829" start="8362" end="8381" title="Bloomberg London" label="London headquarters"/>
<link wikidata="Q207699" start="8440" end="8464" title="Waterloo &amp;amp; City line" label="Waterloo &amp;amp; City line"/>
<link wikidata="Q334155" start="8766" end="8776" title="Sadiq Khan" label="Sadiq Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q607" start="8806" end="8823" title="Michael Bloomberg" label="Michael Bloomberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q6240548" start="8903" end="8914" title="John Hutton (artist)" label="John Hutton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1408799" start="8999" end="9023" title="London Mithraeum" label="Roman Temple of Mithras."/>
<link wikidata="Q682520" start="9413" end="9433" title="Transport for London" label="Transport for London"/>
<link wikidata="Q678791" start="9605" end="9618" title="Oxford Circus tube station" label="Oxford Circus"/>
<link wikidata="Q214793" start="10375" end="10388" title="Northern line" label="Northern line"/>
<link wikidata="Q847580" start="10507" end="10521" title="moving walkway" label="moving walkway"/>
<link wikidata="Q205355" start="10556" end="10568" title="Central line (London Underground)" label="Central line"/>
<link wikidata="Q2936432" start="10669" end="10682" title="Cannon Street" label="Cannon Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q7594555" start="10697" end="10713" title="St Mary Abchurch" label="St Mary Abchurch"/>
<link wikidata="Q570600" start="11261" end="11276" title="listed building" label="listed building"/>
<link wikidata="Q3197044" start="11403" end="11422" title="King William Street, London" label="King William Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q1684782" start="11479" end="11511" title="King William Street tube station" label="King William Street tube station"/>
<link wikidata="Q531444" start="11586" end="11591" title="Angel tube station" label="Angel"/>
<link wikidata="Q801125" start="11596" end="11609" title="London Bridge station" label="London Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1550888" start="11809" end="11817" title="Dragados" label="Dragados"/>
<link wikidata="Q4887470" start="12090" end="12108" title="benefit–cost ratio" label="benefit–cost ratio"/>
<link wikidata="Q7834907" start="12206" end="12235" title="Transport and Works Act 1992" label="Transport and Works Act Order"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12729" end="12742" title="Northern line#Bank branch" label="Northern line"/>
<link wikidata="Q847580" start="13266" end="13280" title="moving walkway" label="moving walkway"/>
<link wikidata="Q4856012" start="14219" end="14232" title="Bank junction" label="Bank Junction"/>
<link wikidata="Q1432321" start="14294" end="14309" title="Lombard Street, London" label="Lombard Street."/>
<link wikidata="Q607700" start="14380" end="14416" title="Monument to the Great Fire of London" label="Monument to the Great Fire of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q211265" start="14430" end="14438" title="District line" label="District"/>
<link wikidata="Q210321" start="14445" end="14451" title="Circle line (London Underground)" label="Circle"/>
<link wikidata="Q46996829" start="14486" end="14502" title="Bloomberg London" label="Bloomberg London"/>
<link wikidata="Q207699" start="14516" end="14540" title="Waterloo &amp;amp; City line" label="Waterloo &amp;amp; City line"/>
<link wikidata="Q2936432" start="14574" end="14587" title="Cannon Street" label="Cannon Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q7594555" start="14609" end="14625" title="St Mary Abchurch" label="St Mary Abchurch"/>
<link wikidata="Q6900329" start="14676" end="14685" title="the Blitz" label="the Blitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q803818" start="14898" end="14911" title="Bailey bridge" label="Bailey bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q6784023" start="15346" end="15366" title="mass decontamination" label="mass decontamination"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192411" start="15474" end="15486" title="London Buses" label="London Buses"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="252299" wikidata="Q685812" url="?curid=252299" title="Plymouth Brethren">
<text>The Plymouth Brethren or Assemblies of Brethren are a low church and Nonconformist Christian movement whose history can be traced back to Dublin, Ireland, in the mid to late 1820s, where it originated from Anglicanism. The group emphasizes &quot;sola scriptura&quot;, the belief that the Bible is the only authority for church doctrine and practice. Plymouth Brethren generally see themselves as a network of like-minded free churches, not as a Christian denomination.

==History==
===Origins in Ireland===
The Brethren movement began in Dublin, Ireland, where several groups of Christians met informally to celebrate the Eucharist together, the first meeting being in 1825. The central figures were Anthony Norris Groves, a dentist studying theology at Trinity College; Edward Cronin, studying medicine, John Nelson Darby, a curate in County Wicklow; and John Gifford Bellett, a lawyer who brought them together. They did not have any liturgy, order of service, or even any ministers; in their view, since their guide was &quot;the Bible alone&quot; they sought to do it according to their own interpretation of the biblical text.

===Early theology===
An important early stimulus was the study of prophecy, which was the subject of a number of annual meetings at Powerscourt House in County Wicklow starting in 1831. Lady Powerscourt had attended Henry Drummond&#x27;s prophecy conferences at Albury Park, and Darby was espousing the same pre-tribulational view in 1831 as Edward Irving. Many people came to these meetings who became important in the English movement, including Benjamin Wills Newton and George Müller.

The two main but conflicting aspirations of the movement were to create a holy and pure fellowship on the one hand, and to allow all Christians into fellowship on the other. Believers in the movement felt that the established Church of England had abandoned or distorted many of the ancient traditions of Christendom, following decades of dissent and the expansion of Methodism and political revolutions in the United States and France. People in the movement wanted simply to meet together in the name of the Lord Jesus Christ without reference to denominational differences.

===Establishment in Great Britain===
The first meeting on the British mainland was held in December 1831 in Plymouth, England. It was organised primarily by George Wigram, Benjamin Wills Newton, and John Nelson Darby. The movement soon spread throughout the United Kingdom, and the assembly in Plymouth had more than 1,000 people in fellowship in 1845.

They became known as &quot;the brethren from Plymouth&quot; and were soon simply called &quot;Plymouth Brethren&quot;. The term &quot;Darbyites&quot; is also used, especially when describing the Exclusive branch which has a more pronounced influence from Darby. Many within the movement refuse to accept any name other than &quot;Christian&quot;.

===Schism===

In 1845, Darby returned from an extended visit to Switzerland where he had achieved considerable success establishing churches. He returned to Plymouth where Newton was in control, and he disagreed with some details in a book that Newton had published concerning the tribulation that was coming. He also objected to Newton&#x27;s place as an elder in the Plymouth meeting. But several attempts to settle the quarrel in the presence of other brethren failed to produce any clear result. Two years later, Darby attacked Newton over a lecture that Newton had given on the 6th Psalm, and an exchange of tracts followed. Newton retracted some of his statements, but he eventually left Plymouth and established another chapel in London.

Darby had instituted a second meeting at Plymouth, and in 1848 he complained of the Bristol Bethesda assembly, in which George Müller was prominent; he was concerned because they had accepted a member from Ebrington Street, Newton&#x27;s original chapel. Bethesda investigated the individual but defended their decision, and Darby was not satisfied. He issued a circular on 26 August 1848, cutting off Bethesda and all assemblies who received anyone who went there. This defined the essential characteristic of &quot;exclusivism&quot; which he pursued for the rest of his life.

===Two movements: Exclusive Brethren and Open Brethren===
From 1848, the Brethren continued as two separate main movements: the Exclusive Brethren led by Darby, and the Open Brethren led by Müller and others. Darby visited Exclusive assemblies in America seven times between 1862 and 1877. Itinerant preachers from Scotland and Ireland established most of the early Open Brethren assemblies in America in the second half of the 19th century.

The Exclusive Brethren experienced many subsequent splits, scatterings, and recombinations. The Open Brethren also suffered a split concerning the autonomy of assemblies, which occurred at different times in different parts of the world. Nevertheless, both continued to expand their congregations. In the United States between 1916 and 1919, Exclusive Brethren membership increased 33% to 3,896, while Open Brethren membership increased 25% to 5,928. The census also recorded three smaller movements with sizeable congregations.

==Open Brethren==

The best-known and oldest distinction between Open assemblies is in the nature of relationships among their local churches. Open Brethren assemblies function as networks of like-minded independent local churches. Brethren generally feel an obligation to recognize and adhere to the disciplinary actions of other associated assemblies. Conversely, Open assemblies aware of that disciplining would not automatically feel a binding obligation to support it, treating each case on its own merit. Reasons for being put under discipline by both the Open and Exclusive Brethren include disseminating gross Scriptural or doctrinal error or being involved in unscriptural behavior. Being accused of illegal financial dealings may also result in being put under discipline.

Another less clear difference between assemblies lies in their approaches to collaborating with other Christians. Many Open Brethren will hold gospel meetings, youth events, or other activities in partnership with non-Brethren Evangelical Christian churches. More conservative Brethren tend to not support activities outside their own meetings.

===IBCM===
International Brethren Conferences on Mission (IBCM) were founded in 1993 in Singapore by unions of churches from various countries. According to an IBCM Network census released in 2020, they claimed 40,000 churches and 2,700,000 members in 155 countries.

==Exclusive Brethren==

Exclusive Brethren have remained attached to Darby&#x27;s doctrine. They are more interdependent, more conservative with a propensity for a dress code, very attached to the spontaneity of worship and preaching. They form several more or less compartmentalized circles of communion, from the most moderate to the narrowest. The movement has a Protestant theology and recognizes infant baptism. Around 40,000 worldwide in 2012, &quot;close&quot; brothers are often referred to as Darbyists, but rarely refer to themselves as such.

===Plymouth Brethren Christian Church===
The term &quot;Exclusive Brethren&quot; is most commonly used in the media to describe one separatist group known as Taylor-Hales Brethren, who now call themselves the Plymouth Brethren Christian Church (PBCC), which claims 50,000 members worldwide in 2023, known for a particularly isolationist interpretation of separation from evil and definition of what constitutes fellowship. In their view, fellowship includes dining out, business and professional partnerships, membership of clubs, etc., rather than just the act of Communion (Lord&#x27;s Supper), so these activities are done only with other members. There are several unquantified but sizable branches unaffiliated with the Raven-Taylor-Hales group (since initial divisions in the 1880&#x27;s, and more recent secessions in the 1960&#x27;s-1970&#x27;s) that prefer being referred to as Closed or Careful rather than Exclusive brethren to avoid any connection with the more strident group.

==Brethren labels and distinctions==

Terminology which sometimes confuses Brethren and non-Brethren alike is the distinction between the Open assemblies, usually called &quot;Chapels&quot;, and the Closed assemblies (non-Exclusive), called &quot;Gospel Halls.&quot; Contrary to common misconceptions, those traditionally known as the &quot;Closed Brethren&quot; are not a part of the Exclusive Brethren, but are rather a very conservative subset of the Open Brethren. The Gospel Halls regard reception to the assembly as a serious matter. One is not received to the Lord&#x27;s Supper but to the fellowship of the assembly. This is important because the Lord&#x27;s Supper is for believers, not unbelievers.

Some chapels, on the other hand, will allow practically anyone to participate who walks in and says that they are a Christian, based on the newcomer&#x27;s profession of faith. Such assemblies are said to have an &quot;open table&quot; approach to strangers. Gospel Hall Brethren, on the other hand, generally believe that only those formally recognised as part of that or an equivalent assembly should break bread. Most Closed and some Open Brethren hold that association with evil defiles and that sharing the Communion meal can bring that association.

Their support text is from 1 Corinthians 15:33, &quot;Do not be deceived: evil communications corrupt good manners.&quot; Among other distinctions, the Gospel Halls would generally not use musical instruments in their services, whereas many Chapels use them and may have singing groups, choirs, &quot;worship teams&quot; of musicians, etc. The Gospel Halls tend to be more conservative in dress; women do not wear trousers often, although they can and there is no scriptural objection in doing so, but most do not wear them in meetings and always have their heads covered, while in most Chapels women may wear whatever they wish, though modesty in dress serves as a guideline, and many continue the tradition of wearing a head covering taught in 1 Corinthians 11:2-13. Open Brethren churches are all independent, self-governing, local congregations with no central headquarters, although there are a number of seminaries, missions agencies, and publications that are widely supported by Brethren churches and which help to maintain a high degree of communication among them.

Henry K. Carroll performed an analysis of United States census data in 1912 to assign Roman numerals to various Brethren groups. For example, Brethren III is also known as the Lowe Brethren and the Elberfeld Brethren. Carroll&#x27;s initial findings listed four sub-groups, identified as Brethren I-IV, but he expanded the number to six and then to eight; Arthur Carl Piepkorn expanded the number to ten. Those who have attempted to trace the realignments of the Plymouth Brethren include Ian McDowell and Massimo Introvigne. The complexity of the Brethren&#x27;s history is evident in charts by McDowell and Ian McKay.

==Definition==

Both Open and Exclusive Brethren have historically been known as &quot;Plymouth Brethren.&quot; That is still largely the case in some areas, such as North America. In some other parts of the world such as Australia and New Zealand, most Open Brethren shun the &quot;Plymouth&quot; label. This is mostly because of widespread negative media coverage of the Plymouth Brethren Christian Church, the most hardline branch of the Exclusive Brethren (and the only numerically significant Exclusive group in either country), which most Open Brethren consider to be a cult with which they do not wish to be misidentified.

==Leadership==
One of the most defining elements of the Brethren is the rejection of the concept of clergy. Their view is that all Christians are ordained by God to serve and therefore all are ministers, in keeping with the doctrine of the priesthood of all believers. The Brethren embrace the most extensive form of that idea, in that there is no ordained or unordained person or group employed to function as minister(s) or pastors. Brethren assemblies are led by the local church elders within any fellowship.

Historically, there is no office of pastor in most Brethren churches, because they believe that the term &quot;pastor&quot; (, in Greek) as it is used in Ephesians 4:11 describes one of the gifts given to the church, rather than a specific office. In the words of Darby, these gifts in Ephesians 4:11 are &quot;ministrations for gathering together and for edification established by Christ as Head of the body by means of gifts with which He endows persons as His choice.&quot; Therefore, there is no formal ordination process for those who preach, teach, or lead within their meetings. Men who become elders, or those who become deacons and overseers within the fellowship, have been recognized by others within the individual assemblies and have been given the blessing of performing leadership tasks by the elders.

An elder should be able and ready to &quot;teach&quot; when his assembly sees the &quot;call of God&quot; on his life to assume the office of elder (). Brethren elders conduct many other duties that would typically be performed by the clergy in other Christian groups, including counselling those who have decided to be baptized, performing baptisms, visiting the sick, and giving spiritual counsel in general. Normally, sermons are given either by the elders or by men who regularly attend the Sunday meetings—but, again, only men whom the elders recognize as having the &quot;call of God&quot; on their lives for that particular ministry. Visiting speakers, however, are usually paid their travel costs and provided for with Sunday meals following the meetings.

Open and Exclusive Brethren differ in how they interpret the concept of no clergy. The Open Brethren believe in a plurality of elders (; ,; ; Philippians 1:1), men meeting the Biblical qualifications found in and . This position is also taken in some Baptist churches, especially Reformed Baptists, and by the Churches of Christ. It is understood that elders are appointed by the Holy Spirit (Acts 20:28) and are recognised as meeting the qualifications by the assembly and by previously existing elders. Generally, the elders themselves will look out for men who meet the biblical qualifications, and invite them to join them as elders. In some Open assemblies, elders are elected democratically, but this is a fairly recent development and is still relatively uncommon.

Officially naming and recognizing eldership is common to Open Brethren (cf. ), whereas many Exclusive Brethren assemblies believe that recognizing a man as an elder is too close to having clergy, and therefore a group of leading brothers, none of whom has an official title of any kind, attempts to present issues to the entire group for it to decide upon, believing that the whole group must decide, not merely a body of elders. Traditionally, only men are allowed to speak (and, in some cases, attend) these decision-making meetings, although not all assemblies follow that rule today.

The term &quot;elder&quot; is based on the same Scriptures that are used to identify bishops and overseers in other Christian circles, and some Exclusive Brethren claim that the system of recognition of elders by the assembly means that the Open Brethren cannot claim full adherence to the doctrine of the priesthood of all believers. Open Brethren consider, however, that this reveals a mistaken understanding of the priesthood of all believers which, in the Assemblies, has to do with the ability to directly offer worship to God and His Christ at the Lord&#x27;s Supper, whether silently or audibly, without any human mediator being necessary—which is in accordance with , where it is stated that Christ Jesus Himself is the sole Mediator between God and men (&quot;men&quot; being used here generically of mankind, and not referring simply and solely to males).

The Plymouth Brethren Christian Church, the most hardline of all the Exclusive Brethren groups, has developed into a de facto hierarchical body which operates under the headship of an &quot;Elect Vessel&quot;, currently Bruce Hales of Australia.

In place of an ordained ministry, an itinerant preacher often receives a &quot;commendation&quot; to the work of preaching and teaching that demonstrates the blessing and support of the assembly of origin. In most English-speaking countries, such preachers have traditionally been called &quot;full-time workers&quot;, &quot;labouring brothers&quot;, or &quot;on the Lord&#x27;s work&quot;; in India, they are usually called Evangelists and very often are identified with &quot;Evg.&quot; in front of their name.

A given assembly may have any number of full-time workers, or none at all. In the last twenty years, many Open Assemblies in Australia, America, and New Zealand, and some elsewhere, have begun calling their full-time workers pastors, but this is not seen as ordaining clergy and does not connote a transfer of any special spiritual authority. In such assemblies, the pastor is simply one of several elders, and differs from his fellow-elders only in being salaried to serve full-time. Depending on the assembly, he may or may not take a larger share of the responsibility for preaching than his fellow elders.

== UK government COVID-19 contracts ==

Dozens of companies with connections to the Exclusive Brethren, now known as the Plymouth Brethren Christian Church, were awarded £2.2 billion in UK government COVID-19 contracts from the Department of Health and Social Care. This included providing personal protective equipment (PPE). Several former members of the church have connections with the Conservative Party, and Members of Parliament previously lobbied for the church to be given UK charitable status by the Charity Commission.

== Missionary work ==
The Plymouth Brethren have been active in foreign missionary work, principally in Central Africa, India and Latin America. Brethren are found throughout the English-speaking world and in most European countries. The movement spread to the US in the 1860s.

==Notable Brethren==
This list consists of mostly nineteenth-century figures who were associated with the Brethren movement before the 1848 schism. They are the leading historical figures common to both the Open and Exclusive Brethren. Two exceptions are H.A. Ironside and Watchman Nee, twentieth-century preachers who spent time associated with both the Open and Exclusive Brethren. See the respective articles for other more recent figures who have functioned primarily or entirely in either the Open Brethren or Exclusive Brethren:
* Robert Anderson – senior officer of Scotland Yard and Christian author; was a member of the Plymouth Brethren, first with Darby then with the Open Brethren party, before returning to his Presbyterian roots
* John Gifford Bellet – research fellow in classics at Trinity College, Cambridge.
* André Bergeron – French trade union leader
* George Beurling – Canadian WWII fighter pilot
* Robert Mackenzie Beverley – one of the most influential figures to abandon the Quakers and join the Brethren during the Beaconite controversy
* John Bodkin Adams – British general practitioner, convicted fraudster, and suspected serial killer.
* Lancelot Brenton – translator of the Greek-English edition of the Septuagint
* F. F. Bruce – British biblical scholar, author of 40 books and commentaries. (Open Brethren)
* Robert Chapman – prominent among the Plymouth Brethren in the 19th century
* William Coltman - Victoria Cross recipient, most decorated stretcher bearer of World War I.
* Henry Craik – worked with George Müller in Bristol at Gideon and Bethesda Chapels from 1832
* Edward Cronin – pioneer of homeopathy and one of the original Dublin brethren
* Anthony Crosland – British Labour Party MP and Foreign Secretary from 1976 to 1977; grandson of F. E. Raven (Raven Exclusive Brethren).
* Aleister Crowley – British occultist, was raised in the movement until his father&#x27;s death.
* John Nelson Darby – international preacher, writer, translator, hymn writer, and &quot;father of dispensationalism&quot;
* James George Deck – evangelist and missionary to New Zealand; officially associated with the Exclusives but refused to cut his ties to the Open Brethren.
* Jim Elliot – one of five missionaries killed while participating in Operation Auca
* Garrison Keillor - author and radio personality, left PB assemblies of his childhood
* Ken Follett – British novelist
* Emily Bowes Gosse – painter, illustrator, and author of religious tracts
* Philip Henry Gosse – naturalist and marine biologist
** Edmund Gosse – the son of Phillip and Emily Gosse who wrote &quot;Father and Son&quot;, about his relationship with his father and the religion.
* Anthony Norris Groves – missionary to Baghdad and India
* Stuart Wesley Keene Hine – missionary and hymn-writer, translator and author of How Great Thou Art
* John Eliot Howard – chemist and quinologist
* Luke Howard – chemist and meteorologist, the &quot;namer of clouds&quot;
* Harry Ironside – Bible teacher, preacher, and author; pastor of the Moody Church in Chicago (1930–1948); associated at different times with both the Open and Exclusive Brethren
* William Kelly – prominent leader of the Exclusive Brethren in the late 19th century
* Charles Henry Mackintosh – 19th-century author of Christian books who published as C.H.M.
* George Müller – founder of the Bristol Orphanage and a stated teacher in Bethesda Chapel, Bristol
* Watchman Nee – leader in the &quot;Little Flock&quot; movement in China after being &quot;put out&quot; by Exclusive Brethren for &quot;breaking bread with sectarians&quot;
* Thomas Newberry – translator of the &quot;Newberry Reference Bible&quot;, which uses a system of symbols to explain verb tenses
* Francis William Newman – younger brother of Cardinal John Henry Newman; excommunicated for denying the Divinity of Christ
* Benjamin Wills Newton – early leader of the assembly in Plymouth; branded as a heretic by John Darby and his followers
* John Parnell, 2nd Baron Congleton – missionary to Mesopotamia
* G. H. Pember – English theologian who lived in the 19th century; wrote the book &quot;Earth&#x27;s Earliest Ages&quot;
* Joseph M. Scriven – writer of the words to the hymn &quot;What A Friend We Have In Jesus&quot;
* Hudson Taylor – founder of the China Inland Mission
* Samuel Prideaux Tregelles – English biblical scholar and theologian
* William Edwy Vine – author of &quot;Vine&#x27;s Expository Dictionary of Old and New Testament Words&quot; and numerous commentaries
* George Wigram – wrote a Greek and English Concordance to the New Testament and &quot;The Englishman&#x27;s Hebrew and Chaldee Concordance of the Old Testament&quot;
* Orde Wingate – British commando

==See also==

*Assemblies Jehovah Shammah
*Exclusive Brethren
*Gospel Hall Brethren or Gospel Hall Assemblies
*Indian Brethren
*Kerala Brethren Assembly
*The Local Church (affiliation)
*Needed Truth Brethren
*Open Brethren
*Plymouth Brethren Christian Church

==Notes and references==
==Bibliography==
* Adams, Norman (1972) &quot;Goodbye, Beloved Brethren&quot;. Impulse Publications Inc. 
* Carroll, H. K. (1912) &quot;Religious Forces in the United States&quot;. New York
* Coad, F. Roy (2001) &quot;A History of the Brethren Movement: Its Origins, Its Worldwide Development and Its Significance for the Present Day&quot;. Regent College Publishing 
* Dorman, W. H. (1866) &quot;The Close of Twenty-eight Years of Association with J. N. Darby&quot;. London: Houlston &amp; Wright. 
* Ph.D. Thesis
* 
* 
* Ironside, H. A. (1985) &quot;Historical Sketch of the Brethren Movement&quot; Loizeaux Brothers , 1st edition 1942.
* Kelly, William (1883) &quot;Response by William Kelly to J. S. Teulon&#x27;s Plymouth Brethren&quot; Free download site
* Lindsay, Thomas Martin (1885). , &quot;Encyclopædia Britannica&quot;, Ninth Edition. New York: Charles Scribner&#x27;s Sons.
* Lindsay, Thomas Martin &amp; Grieve, Alexander James (1911). , &quot;Encyclopædia Britannica&quot;, Eleventh Edition. New York: Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
* 
* Pickering, Henry (1918) &quot;Chief Men Among the Brethren&quot;. London: Pickering &amp; Inglis, 1918; Loizeaux Brothers, Inc. Neptune, NJ, 1996, 
* Smith, Natan Dylan (1996) &quot;Roots, Renewal and the Brethren&quot;. Hope Publishing House 
* Strauch, Alexander (1995) &quot;Biblical Eldership: an Urgent Call to Restore Biblical Church Leadership&quot;. Lewis &amp; Roth Publishers 
* Stott, Rebecca (2017) &quot;In the Days of Rain: A Daughter, A Father, A Cult&quot;. Winner of the 2017 Costa Biography Prize. London: Fourth Estate. 
* Stunt, Timothy C. F. (2000) &quot;From Awakening to Secession: radical evangelicals in Switzerland and Britain, 1815–35&quot;. Edinburgh: T. &amp; T. Clark 
* Taylor (1866) &quot;Biography of Henry Craik&quot;. London
* Teulon, J. S. (1883) &quot;The History and Teaching of The Plymouth Brethren&quot;. London Free download site 

==External links==
*Brethren Online
*Plymouth Brethren (online library of Brethren authors)
*The Brethren Writers Hall of Fame
*BrethrenPedia
*Brethren Archive (online archive of historical reference material related to all strands of &#x27;Plymouth Brethren&#x27;)
*Brethren Archivists and Historians Network
*Christian Brethren Archive (largest and most significant collection of Brethren archives, books, tracts and periodicals in the world) 
*The Plymouth Brethren Movement History of, and Selected Ministry from, the &#x27;Raven/Taylor&#x27; segment of the so-called Plymouth Brethren movement)
*Bible. Darby Translation</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q685812" start="4" end="21" title="Plymouth Brethren" label="Plymouth Brethren"/>
<link wikidata="Q685812" start="25" end="47" title="Plymouth Brethren" label="Assemblies of Brethren"/>
<link wikidata="Q1323511" start="54" end="64" title="low church" label="low church"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144064" start="69" end="82" title="Nonconformist (Protestantism)" label="Nonconformist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1761" start="138" end="144" title="Dublin" label="Dublin"/>
<link wikidata="Q6423963" start="206" end="217" title="Anglicanism" label="Anglicanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q310430" start="246" end="260" title="sola scriptura" label="sola scriptura"/>
<link wikidata="Q1761" start="538" end="544" title="Dublin" label="Dublin"/>
<link wikidata="Q66086" start="622" end="631" title="Eucharist" label="Eucharist"/>
<link wikidata="Q447554" start="700" end="721" title="Anthony Norris Groves" label="Anthony Norris Groves"/>
<link wikidata="Q988135" start="771" end="784" title="Edward Cronin (homeopath)" label="Edward Cronin"/>
<link wikidata="Q436010" start="805" end="822" title="John Nelson Darby" label="John Nelson Darby"/>
<link wikidata="Q1031181" start="856" end="876" title="John Gifford Bellett" label="John Gifford Bellett"/>
<link wikidata="Q172331" start="936" end="943" title="liturgy" label="liturgy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1845" start="1033" end="1038" title="Bible" label="Bible"/>
<link wikidata="Q25840" start="1265" end="1282" title="Powerscourt Estate" label="Powerscourt House"/>
<link wikidata="Q258151" start="1349" end="1363" title="Henry Drummond (1786–1860)" label="Henry Drummond"/>
<link wikidata="Q4712857" start="1395" end="1406" title="Albury Park" label="Albury Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q870109" start="1441" end="1458" title="pre-tribulational" label="pre-tribulational"/>
<link wikidata="Q1292605" start="1475" end="1488" title="Edward Irving" label="Edward Irving"/>
<link wikidata="Q817740" start="1581" end="1602" title="Benjamin Wills Newton" label="Benjamin Wills Newton"/>
<link wikidata="Q62655" start="1607" end="1620" title="George Müller" label="George Müller"/>
<link wikidata="Q33203" start="1991" end="2000" title="Methodism" label="Methodism"/>
<link wikidata="Q43382" start="2309" end="2317" title="Plymouth" label="Plymouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q21" start="2319" end="2326" title="England" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q5546258" start="2358" end="2371" title="George Wigram" label="George Wigram"/>
<link wikidata="Q817740" start="2373" end="2394" title="Benjamin Wills Newton" label="Benjamin Wills Newton"/>
<link wikidata="Q436010" start="2400" end="2417" title="John Nelson Darby" label="John Nelson Darby"/>
<link wikidata="Q1429373" start="2689" end="2698" title="Darbyites" label="Darbyites"/>
<link wikidata="Q1429373" start="4356" end="4374" title="Exclusive Brethren" label="Exclusive Brethren"/>
<link wikidata="Q839054" start="4397" end="4410" title="Open Brethren" label="Open Brethren"/>
<link wikidata="Q334" start="6419" end="6428" title="Singapore" label="Singapore"/>
<link wikidata="Q1741926" start="7000" end="7014" title="Pedobaptism" label="infant baptism"/>
<link wikidata="Q66086" start="8711" end="8729" title="Eucharist" label="Lord&amp;#x27;s Supper"/>
<link wikidata="Q1885639" start="10132" end="10145" title="Christian head covering" label="head covering"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="11329" end="11338" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q664" start="11343" end="11354" title="New Zealand" label="New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q11038979" start="11683" end="11687" title="cult" label="cult"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156551" start="11978" end="12005" title="priesthood of all believers" label="priesthood of all believers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1423891" start="12149" end="12157" title="Minister (Christianity)" label="minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q152002" start="12164" end="12170" title="pastor" label="pastor"/>
<link wikidata="" start="12406" end="12420" title="Ephesians 4:11" label="Ephesians 4:11"/>
<link wikidata="Q2526886" start="13950" end="13969" title="Plurality (church governance)" label="plurality of elders"/>
<link wikidata="" start="13978" end="13993" title="Philippians 1:1" label="Philippians 1:1"/>
<link wikidata="Q93191" start="14087" end="14094" title="Baptist" label="Baptist"/>
<link wikidata="Q2122370" start="14116" end="14132" title="Reformed Baptist" label="Reformed Baptist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1272775" start="14146" end="14164" title="Churches of Christ" label="Churches of Christ"/>
<link wikidata="" start="14229" end="14239" title="Acts 20:28" label="Acts 20:28"/>
<link wikidata="Q29182" start="15283" end="15289" title="bishop" label="bishop"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16285" end="16296" title="Bruce Hales" label="Bruce Hales"/>
<link wikidata="Q373069" start="16737" end="16747" title="Evangelism" label="Evangelist"/>
<link wikidata="Q84263196" start="17637" end="17645" title="COVID-19" label="COVID-19"/>
<link wikidata="Q3044742" start="17665" end="17701" title="Department of Health and Social Care" label="Department of Health and Social Care"/>
<link wikidata="Q1333024" start="17727" end="17756" title="personal protective equipment" label="personal protective equipment"/>
<link wikidata="Q9626" start="17827" end="17845" title="Conservative Party (UK)" label="Conservative Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q5074501" start="17947" end="17965" title="Charity Commission for England and Wales" label="Charity Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q379806" start="18520" end="18532" title="Watchman Nee" label="Watchman Nee"/>
<link wikidata="Q321122" start="18784" end="18799" title="Robert Anderson (Scotland Yard official)" label="Robert Anderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q184619" start="18820" end="18833" title="Scotland Yard" label="Scotland Yard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1031181" start="18992" end="19011" title="John Gifford Bellet" label="John Gifford Bellet"/>
<link wikidata="Q332342" start="19045" end="19071" title="Trinity College, Cambridge" label="Trinity College, Cambridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q2847265" start="19075" end="19089" title="André Bergeron" label="André Bergeron"/>
<link wikidata="Q2559186" start="19120" end="19135" title="George Beurling" label="George Beurling"/>
<link wikidata="Q16065744" start="19168" end="19193" title="Robert Mackenzie Beverley" label="Robert Mackenzie Beverley"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19288" end="19309" title="Quakers#Beaconite controversy" label="Beaconite controversy"/>
<link wikidata="Q131004" start="19312" end="19329" title="John Bodkin Adams" label="John Bodkin Adams"/>
<link wikidata="Q6483608" start="19414" end="19430" title="Lancelot Charles Lee Brenton" label="Lancelot Brenton"/>
<link wikidata="Q29334" start="19480" end="19490" title="Septuagint" label="Septuagint"/>
<link wikidata="Q181778" start="19493" end="19504" title="F. F. Bruce" label="F. F. Bruce"/>
<link wikidata="Q7342863" start="19588" end="19602" title="Robert Chapman (Plymouth Brethren)" label="Robert Chapman"/>
<link wikidata="Q4228959" start="19665" end="19680" title="William Coltman" label="William Coltman"/>
<link wikidata="Q219578" start="19683" end="19697" title="Victoria Cross" label="Victoria Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q1168239" start="19759" end="19770" title="Henry Craik (evangelist)" label="Henry Craik"/>
<link wikidata="Q62655" start="19785" end="19798" title="George Müller" label="George Müller"/>
<link wikidata="Q988135" start="19853" end="19866" title="Edward Cronin (homeopath)" label="Edward Cronin"/>
<link wikidata="Q81058" start="19880" end="19890" title="homeopathy" label="homeopathy"/>
<link wikidata="Q301252" start="19933" end="19949" title="Anthony Crosland" label="Anthony Crosland"/>
<link wikidata="Q9630" start="19960" end="19972" title="Labour Party (UK)" label="Labour Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371091" start="19980" end="19997" title="Foreign Secretary (United Kingdom)" label="Foreign Secretary"/>
<link wikidata="Q172684" start="20071" end="20087" title="Aleister Crowley" label="Aleister Crowley"/>
<link wikidata="Q436010" start="20169" end="20186" title="John Nelson Darby" label="John Nelson Darby"/>
<link wikidata="Q3757991" start="20292" end="20309" title="James George Deck" label="James George Deck"/>
<link wikidata="Q220458" start="20448" end="20458" title="Jim Elliot" label="Jim Elliot"/>
<link wikidata="Q2683146" start="20516" end="20530" title="Operation Auca" label="Operation Auca"/>
<link wikidata="Q183031" start="20533" end="20549" title="Garrison Keillor" label="Garrison Keillor"/>
<link wikidata="Q210669" start="20620" end="20631" title="Ken Follett" label="Ken Follett"/>
<link wikidata="Q3052360" start="20653" end="20670" title="Emily Bowes Gosse" label="Emily Bowes Gosse"/>
<link wikidata="Q443062" start="20728" end="20746" title="Philip Henry Gosse" label="Philip Henry Gosse"/>
<link wikidata="Q484591" start="20749" end="20759" title="naturalist" label="naturalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q742371" start="20784" end="20796" title="Edmund Gosse" label="Edmund Gosse"/>
<link wikidata="Q5437669" start="20844" end="20870" title="Father and Son (Gosse book)" label="&amp;quot;Father and Son&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q447554" start="20931" end="20952" title="Anthony Norris Groves" label="Anthony Norris Groves"/>
<link wikidata="Q1530" start="20969" end="20976" title="Baghdad" label="Baghdad"/>
<link wikidata="Q531646" start="21069" end="21087" title="How Great Thou Art" label="How Great Thou Art"/>
<link wikidata="Q3181423" start="21090" end="21107" title="John Eliot Howard" label="John Eliot Howard"/>
<link wikidata="Q189522" start="21122" end="21133" title="quinologist" label="quinologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q440061" start="21136" end="21147" title="Luke Howard" label="Luke Howard"/>
<link wikidata="Q2310145" start="21162" end="21175" title="meteorologist" label="meteorologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q15492818" start="21211" end="21225" title="Harry Ironside" label="Harry Ironside"/>
<link wikidata="Q13650483" start="21279" end="21291" title="Moody Church" label="Moody Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q1297" start="21295" end="21302" title="Chicago" label="Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q8013898" start="21390" end="21403" title="William Kelly (Guernsey and Blackheath)" label="William Kelly"/>
<link wikidata="Q860216" start="21476" end="21500" title="Charles Henry Mackintosh" label="Charles Henry Mackintosh"/>
<link wikidata="Q62655" start="21568" end="21581" title="George Müller" label="George Müller"/>
<link wikidata="Q379806" start="21668" end="21680" title="Watchman Nee" label="Watchman Nee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1318624" start="21703" end="21715" title="Local churches (affiliation)" label="Little Flock"/>
<link wikidata="Q7792719" start="21843" end="21858" title="Thomas Newberry" label="Thomas Newberry"/>
<link wikidata="Q7553" start="21861" end="21871" title="translator" label="translator"/>
<link wikidata="Q780899" start="21973" end="21995" title="Francis William Newman" label="Francis William Newman"/>
<link wikidata="Q45722" start="22017" end="22025" title="Cardinal (Catholicism)" label="Cardinal"/>
<link wikidata="Q44490" start="22026" end="22043" title="John Henry Newman" label="John Henry Newman"/>
<link wikidata="Q817740" start="22097" end="22118" title="Benjamin Wills Newton" label="Benjamin Wills Newton"/>
<link wikidata="Q6251959" start="22218" end="22251" title="John Parnell, 2nd Baron Congleton" label="John Parnell, 2nd Baron Congleton"/>
<link wikidata="Q11767" start="22268" end="22279" title="Mesopotamia" label="Mesopotamia"/>
<link wikidata="Q839109" start="22282" end="22294" title="G. H. Pember" label="G. H. Pember"/>
<link wikidata="Q705227" start="22403" end="22420" title="Joseph M. Scriven" label="Joseph M. Scriven"/>
<link wikidata="Q3364742" start="22461" end="22491" title="What A Friend We Have In Jesus" label="What A Friend We Have In Jesus"/>
<link wikidata="Q470718" start="22500" end="22513" title="Hudson Taylor" label="Hudson Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q546298" start="22554" end="22579" title="Samuel Prideaux Tregelles" label="Samuel Prideaux Tregelles"/>
<link wikidata="Q4102477" start="22624" end="22641" title="William Edwy Vine" label="William Edwy Vine"/>
<link wikidata="Q7932368" start="22660" end="22724" title="Vine&amp;#x27;s Expository Dictionary" label="Vine&amp;#x27;s Expository Dictionary of Old and New Testament Words"/>
<link wikidata="Q5546258" start="22759" end="22772" title="George Wigram" label="George Wigram"/>
<link wikidata="Q839018" start="22801" end="22812" title="Concordance (publishing)" label="Concordance"/>
<link wikidata="Q451466" start="22926" end="22938" title="Orde Wingate" label="Orde Wingate"/>
<link wikidata="Q20711417" start="22974" end="23000" title="Assemblies Jehovah Shammah" label="Assemblies Jehovah Shammah"/>
<link wikidata="Q1429373" start="23002" end="23020" title="Exclusive Brethren" label="Exclusive Brethren"/>
<link wikidata="Q5587388" start="23022" end="23042" title="Gospel Hall Brethren" label="Gospel Hall Brethren"/>
<link wikidata="Q5587388" start="23046" end="23068" title="Gospel Hall Assemblies" label="Gospel Hall Assemblies"/>
<link wikidata="Q6019940" start="23070" end="23085" title="Indian Brethren" label="Indian Brethren"/>
<link wikidata="Q6393306" start="23087" end="23102" title="Kerala Brethren" label="Kerala Brethren"/>
<link wikidata="Q1318624" start="23113" end="23143" title="The Local Church (affiliation)" label="The Local Church (affiliation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6986528" start="23145" end="23166" title="Needed Truth Brethren" label="Needed Truth Brethren"/>
<link wikidata="Q839054" start="23168" end="23181" title="Open Brethren" label="Open Brethren"/>
<link wikidata="Q16258191" start="23183" end="23217" title="Plymouth Brethren Christian Church" label="Plymouth Brethren Christian Church"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="252300" wikidata="Q878260" url="?curid=252300" title="List of governors of Idaho">
<text>The governor of Idaho is the head of government of Idaho and commander-in-chief of the state&#x27;s military forces. The officeholder has the duty to see state laws are executed, power to either approve or veto bills passed by the Idaho Legislature. The current governor of Idaho is Brad Little, a Republican, who took office on January 7, 2019.

Thirty-one individuals have held the office of governor of Idaho since the state&#x27;s admission to the Union in 1890, two of whom served non-consecutive terms. The state&#x27;s first governor, George L. Shoup, had the shortest term, of three months; Cecil Andrus had the longest, of 14 years.

==List of governors==
===Territory of Idaho===
Idaho Territory was created from Dakota Territory, Nebraska Territory, and Washington Territory on March 4, 1863.

There were sixteen territorial governors appointed by the president of the United States from the territory&#x27;s organization in 1863 until the formation of the state of Idaho in 1890. Due to the long distance from Washington, D.C. to Boise, there was often a lengthy gap between a governor being appointed and his arrival in the territory; four resigned before even arriving.

===State of Idaho===

Idaho was admitted to the Union on July 3, 1890. The terms for governor and lieutenant governor are 4 years, commencing on the first Monday in the January following the election. Prior to 1946, the offices were elected to terms of two years. If the office of governor is vacant or the governor is out of state or unable to discharge his duties, the lieutenant governor acts as governor until such time as the disability is removed. If both the offices of governor and lieutenant governor are vacant or both those officers are unable to fulfill their duties, the President &quot;pro tempore&quot; of the Idaho Senate is next in line, and then the Speaker of the Idaho House of Representatives. After the change to four-year terms, self-succession (re-election) was not initially allowed; newly elected Governor Robert E. Smylie, formerly the state&#x27;s attorney general, successfully lobbied the 1955 legislature to propose an amendment to the state constitution to allow gubernatorial re-election, which was approved by voters in the 1956 general election. There is no limit to the number of terms a governor may serve. The governor and the lieutenant governor are elected at the same time but not on the same ticket.


==See also==

*List of lieutenant governors of Idaho
*Gubernatorial lines of succession in the United States#Idaho
*List of Idaho state legislatures
*Elections in Idaho

==Notes==
==References==

;General
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 


;Constitution


;Specific
==External links==

*Office of the Governor of Idaho</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q878260" start="4" end="21" title="List of governors of Idaho" label="governor of Idaho"/>
<link wikidata="Q2285706" start="29" end="47" title="head of government" label="head of government"/>
<link wikidata="Q1221" start="51" end="56" title="Idaho" label="Idaho"/>
<link wikidata="Q380782" start="61" end="79" title="commander-in-chief" label="commander-in-chief"/>
<link wikidata="Q35657" start="87" end="92" title="U.S. state" label="state"/>
<link wikidata="Q5987386" start="100" end="115" title="Idaho Military Department" label="military forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q4256974" start="231" end="248" title="Idaho Legislature" label="Idaho Legislature"/>
<link wikidata="Q4954097" start="283" end="294" title="Brad Little" label="Brad Little"/>
<link wikidata="Q5987412" start="298" end="308" title="Idaho Republican Party" label="Republican"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="452" end="457" title="United States" label="Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q880826" start="542" end="557" title="George L. Shoup" label="George L. Shoup"/>
<link wikidata="Q372022" start="599" end="611" title="Cecil Andrus" label="Cecil Andrus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1656599" start="690" end="705" title="Idaho Territory" label="Idaho Territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1117425" start="723" end="739" title="Dakota Territory" label="Dakota Territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q751536" start="741" end="759" title="Nebraska Territory" label="Nebraska Territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1710656" start="765" end="785" title="Washington Territory" label="Washington Territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q11696" start="863" end="893" title="president of the United States" label="president of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q1221" start="977" end="982" title="Idaho" label="Idaho"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="1022" end="1038" title="Washington, D.C." label="Washington, D.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q35775" start="1042" end="1047" title="Boise, Idaho" label="Boise"/>
<link wikidata="Q1221" start="1207" end="1212" title="Idaho" label="Idaho"/>
<link wikidata="Q18350273" start="1217" end="1238" title="Admission to the Union" label="admitted to the Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q1494863" start="1810" end="1822" title="Idaho Senate" label="Idaho Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1494870" start="1868" end="1898" title="Idaho House of Representatives" label="Idaho House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q442471" start="2017" end="2033" title="Robert E. Smylie" label="Robert E. Smylie"/>
<link wikidata="Q929060" start="2444" end="2481" title="List of lieutenant governors of Idaho" label="List of lieutenant governors of Idaho"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2483" end="2543" title="Gubernatorial lines of succession in the United States#Idaho" label="Gubernatorial lines of succession in the United States#Idaho"/>
<link wikidata="Q65083497" start="2545" end="2577" title="List of Idaho state legislatures" label="List of Idaho state legislatures"/>
<link wikidata="Q5354708" start="2579" end="2597" title="Elections in Idaho" label="Elections in Idaho"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="252305" wikidata="Q887205" url="?curid=252305" title="List of governors of Wyoming">
<text>The governor of Wyoming is the head of government of Wyoming, and the commander-in-chief of the Wyoming&#x27;s military department (National Guard).

The gubernatorial term has been set at four years since statehood. Originally, a governor could be elected any number of times. Since a 1992 referendum, governors have been limited to eight years in office during any 16-year period—effectively limiting them to two consecutive terms.

== List of governors ==
===Territory of Wyoming===

=== State of Wyoming ===

== See also ==
* List of Wyoming state legislatures

==Notes==
==References==

===Bibliography===
* 
* 


==External links==
*Office of the Governor of Wyoming</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q887205" start="4" end="23" title="List of governors of Wyoming" label="governor of Wyoming"/>
<link wikidata="Q2285706" start="31" end="49" title="head of government" label="head of government"/>
<link wikidata="Q1214" start="53" end="60" title="Wyoming" label="Wyoming"/>
<link wikidata="Q380782" start="70" end="88" title="commander-in-chief" label="commander-in-chief"/>
<link wikidata="Q8040362" start="96" end="147" title="Wyoming Military Department" label="Wyoming&amp;#x27;s military department (National Guard)"/>
<link wikidata="Q128303482" start="530" end="564" title="List of Wyoming state legislatures" label="List of Wyoming state legislatures"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="252306" wikidata="Q8233" url="?curid=252306" title="Zollernalbkreis">
<text>The Zollernalbkreis is a &quot;Landkreis&quot; (district) in the middle of Baden-Württemberg, Germany. The district is located in the Swabian Alb, and contains the second highest elevation of this range, the high &quot;Oberhohenberg&quot;. In the south-east the district nearly reaches to the river Danube.

The district was created on January 1, 1973, when the two previous districts Balingen and Hechingen were merged.

Neighboring districts are (from north clockwise) Tübingen, Reutlingen, Sigmaringen, Tuttlingen, Rottweil and Freudenstadt.

== Coat of arms ==
The coat of arms shows the black-and-white checkered symbol of Hohenzollern in the left half, and the triple black deer antler on the yellow ground as the symbol of Württemberg. Almost all of the district&#x27;s area belonged to these two states historically. 
== Towns (&quot;Städte&quot;) and municipalities (&quot;Gemeinden&quot;) ==



== Language ==
In the area of Zollernalbkreis, Swabian German is spoken. In former times, Yiddish, Pleißne and Romani was also spoken.
The &quot;Pleißne&quot; was spoken by hawkers selling items such as baskets, brushes, and whips, and belongs to Rotwelsch. It was used as a code.

==Smuggler==
Within the Heuberg Training Area there is the legendary &quot;Dreibannmarke&quot;, also called the &quot;Bahn&quot;, a 17th-century border, which today marks the border between three different municipalities, formerly in the three states of Württemberg, Baden, and Hohenzollern. The meadow at the Dreibannmarke served as a stopping place for traveling merchants, wagons and craftsmen. With care it is possible to identify traces of the border. After the inauguration of the firing ranges, a meadow in Meßstetten was allocated as a camping site at the edge of the restricted area. Until 1835 merchandise was smuggled over the customs borders guarded by local hunters. Hans Ungnad von Weißenwolff, Freiherr von Sonneck, Hans III.(1493–1564) Bible printer and smuggler in Bad Urach Coffee smuggler Haux had was killed on 21 July 1831 in Pfaffental.

==&quot;Ébénistes&quot;==
&quot;Ébénistes&quot; make case furniture, either veneered or painted. Frommern was the world capital of furniture in the time of Wirtschaftswunder. In Frommern a line of high polished industrial production take up the ideas of the royal &quot;Hofebenist&quot;. In the &quot;Haus der Volkskunst&quot;of the Schwäbischer Albverein the traditional &quot;Himmelbett&quot; is use as a hotel bed.

==Mining==

Sandstone, limestone, black coal and sand have been the primary products mined. The Goldhöhle mine was in Erlaheim near Mildersbach, Schwefelkies, in Geislingen. It later collapsed.
In former times iron ore was mined on the Heuberg. Fidel Eppler was the name of the mine inspector. The buttress wood was bought in Truchtelfingen and used by Lautlingen miners at the Hörnle area.
In Oberdigisheim Geppert in 1738 SHW-Ludwigsthal produced iron ore.
From an old 3.5 km mine in an ooidal iron ore seam (Doggererzflöz) in Weilheim is wood in the Tuttlinger Fruchtkasten.
Steel was produced in Tuttlingen by the Schwäbische Hüttenwerke in Ludwigstal, which produces now iron brakes. 
In Meßstetten-Michelfeld sand was found in an old arm of Danube. Christian Kiesinger (1876–1969) father of Kurt Georg Kiesinger had a factory. Ooidal iron ore (Bohnerz aus Eisenroggenstein) was found. After the Franco-Prussian War the mining was stopped. In Germany coal mining stopped 2018.

black stone was mined for Operation Desert (German fuel project).
Black coal is mined from the Posidonia Shale.
Jet work (to make black jewellery which was very fashionable), was called Beinschnitzen.

== References ==
== External links ==
*https://www.br.de/br-fernsehen/sendungen/traumpfade/wegdesbuches-104.html </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q8233" start="4" end="19" title="Zollernalbkreis" label="Zollernalbkreis"/>
<link wikidata="Q106658" start="25" end="57" title="Districts of Germany" label="&amp;quot;Landkreis&amp;quot; (district)"/>
<link wikidata="Q985" start="75" end="92" title="Baden-Württemberg" label="Baden-Württemberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="94" end="101" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q159589" start="134" end="145" title="Swabian Alb" label="Swabian Alb"/>
<link wikidata="Q2009870" start="219" end="232" title="Oberhohenberg" label="Oberhohenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1653" start="299" end="305" title="Danube" label="Danube"/>
<link wikidata="Q8214" start="471" end="479" title="Tübingen (district)" label="Tübingen"/>
<link wikidata="Q8217" start="481" end="491" title="Reutlingen (district)" label="Reutlingen"/>
<link wikidata="Q8230" start="493" end="504" title="Sigmaringen (district)" label="Sigmaringen"/>
<link wikidata="Q8208" start="506" end="516" title="Tuttlingen (district)" label="Tuttlingen"/>
<link wikidata="Q8211" start="518" end="526" title="Rottweil (district)" label="Rottweil"/>
<link wikidata="Q8189" start="531" end="543" title="Freudenstadt (district)" label="Freudenstadt"/>
<link wikidata="Q83969" start="628" end="640" title="Hohenzollern" label="Hohenzollern"/>
<link wikidata="Q159626" start="730" end="741" title="Württemberg" label="Württemberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q327274" start="952" end="966" title="Swabian German" label="Swabian German"/>
<link wikidata="Q8641" start="995" end="1002" title="Yiddish" label="Yiddish"/>
<link wikidata="Q503998" start="1004" end="1011" title="Rotwelsch" label="Pleißne"/>
<link wikidata="Q13201" start="1016" end="1022" title="Romani language" label="Romani"/>
<link wikidata="Q3555589" start="1078" end="1085" title="Hawker (trade)" label="hawkers"/>
<link wikidata="Q503998" start="1152" end="1161" title="Rotwelsch" label="Rotwelsch"/>
<link wikidata="Q2456571" start="1211" end="1232" title="Heuberg Training Area" label="Heuberg Training Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q1101161" start="1867" end="1927" title="Hans von Ungnad" label="Hans Ungnad von Weißenwolff, Freiherr von Sonneck, Hans III."/>
<link wikidata="Q83032" start="1969" end="1978" title="Bad Urach" label="Bad Urach"/>
<link wikidata="Q559597" start="2055" end="2064" title="Ébéniste" label="Ébénistes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2741056" start="2100" end="2114" title="case furniture" label="case furniture"/>
<link wikidata="Q477683" start="2123" end="2129" title="Wood veneer" label="veneer"/>
<link wikidata="Q312390" start="2203" end="2220" title="Wirtschaftswunder" label="Wirtschaftswunder"/>
<link wikidata="Q16015" start="2225" end="2233" title="Balingen" label="Frommern"/>
<link wikidata="Q2258037" start="2380" end="2402" title="Schwäbischer Albverein" label="Schwäbischer Albverein"/>
<link wikidata="Q3256519" start="2425" end="2435" title="Canopy bed" label="Himmelbett"/>
<link wikidata="Q50769" start="2562" end="2571" title="Pyrite" label="Goldhöhle"/>
<link wikidata="Q50769" start="2611" end="2623" title="Pyrite" label="Schwefelkies"/>
<link wikidata="Q642735" start="2955" end="2959" title="ooid" label="ooid"/>
<link wikidata="Q677" start="2962" end="2966" title="iron" label="iron"/>
<link wikidata="Q102798" start="2967" end="2970" title="ore" label="ore"/>
<link wikidata="Q552134" start="2995" end="3003" title="Rietheim-Weilheim" label="Weilheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q15987" start="3066" end="3076" title="Tuttlingen" label="Tuttlingen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1653" start="3213" end="3219" title="Danube" label="Danube"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3221" end="3240" title="Christian Kiesinger" label="Christian Kiesinger"/>
<link wikidata="Q2512" start="3263" end="3283" title="Kurt Georg Kiesinger" label="Kurt Georg Kiesinger"/>
<link wikidata="Q642735" start="3299" end="3303" title="Ooid" label="Ooid"/>
<link wikidata="Q677" start="3306" end="3310" title="iron" label="iron"/>
<link wikidata="Q102798" start="3311" end="3314" title="ore" label="ore"/>
<link wikidata="Q46083" start="3367" end="3386" title="Franco-Prussian War" label="Franco-Prussian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2105647" start="3449" end="3460" title="Posidonia Shale" label="black stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1303344" start="3475" end="3513" title="Operation Desert (German fuel project)" label="Operation Desert (German fuel project)"/>
</links>
</doc>
