<doc id="252507" wikidata="Q14947899" url="?curid=252507" title="American frontier">
<text>The American frontier, also known as the Old West, and popularly known as the Wild West, encompasses the geography, history, folklore, and culture associated with the forward wave of American expansion in mainland North America that began with European colonization in the early 17th century and ended with the admission of the last few contiguous western territories as states in 1912. 

This era of massive migration and settlement was particularly encouraged by United States President Thomas Jefferson following the 1803 Louisiana Purchase, giving rise to the expansionist attitude known as the American concept of &quot;manifest destiny&quot; and historian Frederick Jackson Turner’s&#x27; &quot;Frontier Thesis&quot; argument on it. 

The legends, historical events and folklore of the American frontier, known as the frontier myth, have embedded themselves into United States culture so much so that the Old West, and the Western genre of media specifically, has become one of the defining features of American national identity.

==Periodization==
Historians have debated at length as to when the frontier era began, when it ended, and which were its key sub-periods. For example, the Old West subperiod is sometimes used by historians regarding the time from the end of the American Civil War in 1865 to when the Superintendent of the Census, William Rush Merriam, stated the U.S. Census Bureau would stop recording western frontier settlement as part of its census categories after the 1890 U.S. Census. His successors however continued the practice until the 1920 Census. 

Others, including the Library of Congress and University of Oxford, often cite differing points reaching into the early 1900s; typically within the first two decades before American entry into World War I. A period known as &quot;The Western Civil War of Incorporation&quot; lasted from the 1850s to 1919. This period includes historical events synonymous with the archetypical Old West or &quot;Wild West&quot; such as violent conflict arising from encroaching settlement into frontier land, the removal and assimilation of natives, consolidation of property to large corporations and government, vigilantism, and the attempted enforcement of laws upon outlaws.

In 1890, the Superintendent of the Census, William Rush Merriam stated: &quot;Up to and including 1880 the country had a frontier of settlement, but at present the unsettled area has been so broken into by isolated bodies of settlement that there can hardly be said to be a frontier line. In the discussion of its extent, its westward movement, etc., it can not, therefore, any longer have a place in the census reports.&quot; Despite this, the later continued to show the westward frontier line, and his successors continued the practice. By the 1910 U.S. census however, the frontier had shrunk into divided areas without a singular westward line of settlement. An influx of agricultural homesteaders in the first two decades of the 20th century, taking up more acreage than homestead grants in the entirety of the 19th century, is cited to have significantly reduced open land.

A &quot;frontier&quot; is a zone of contact at the edge of a line of settlement. Theorist Frederick Jackson Turner went deeper, arguing that the frontier was the scene of a defining process of American civilization: &quot;The frontier,&quot; he asserted, &quot;promoted the formation of a composite nationality for the American people.&quot; He theorized it was a process of development: &quot;This perennial rebirth, this fluidity of American life, this expansion westward...furnish[es] the forces dominating American character.&quot; Turner&#x27;s ideas since 1893 have inspired generations of historians (and critics) to explore multiple individual American frontiers, but the popular folk frontier concentrates on the conquest and settlement of Native American lands west of the Mississippi River, in what is now the Midwest, Texas, the Great Plains, the Rocky Mountains, the Southwest, and the West Coast.

Enormous popular attention was focused on the Western United States (especially the Southwest) in the second half of the 19th century and the early 20th century, from the 1850s to the 1910s. Such media typically exaggerated the romance, anarchy, and chaotic violence of the period for greater dramatic effect. This inspired the Western genre of film, along with television shows, novels, comic books, video games, children&#x27;s toys, and costumes.

As defined by Hine and Faragher, &quot;frontier history tells the story of the creation and defense of communities, the use of the land, the development of crops and hotels, and the formation of states.&quot; They explain, &quot;It is a tale of conquest, but also one of survival, persistence, and the merging of peoples and cultures that gave birth and continuing life to America.&quot; Turner himself repeatedly emphasized how the availability of &quot;free land&quot; to start new farms attracted pioneering Americans: &quot;The existence of an area of free land, its continuous recession, and the advance of American settlement westward, explain American development.&quot; 

Through treaties with foreign nations and native tribes, political compromise, military conquest, the establishment of law and order, the building of farms, ranches, and towns, the marking of trails and digging of mines, combined with successive waves of immigrants moving into the region, the United States expanded from coast to coast, fulfilling the ideology of Manifest Destiny. In his &quot;Frontier Thesis&quot; (1893), Turner theorized that the frontier was a process that transformed Europeans into a new people, the Americans, whose values focused on equality, democracy, and optimism, as well as individualism, self-reliance, and even violence.

===Terms &quot;West&quot; and &quot;frontier&quot;===
The frontier is the margin of undeveloped territory that would comprise the United States beyond the established frontier line. The U.S. Census Bureau designated frontier territory as generally unoccupied land with a population density of fewer than 2 people per square mile (0.77 people per square kilometer). The frontier line was the outer boundary of European-American settlement into this land. Beginning with the first permanent European settlements on the East Coast, it has moved steadily westward from the 1600s to the 1900s (decades) with occasional movements north into Maine and New Hampshire, south into Florida, and east from California into Nevada. 

Pockets of settlements would also appear far past the established frontier line, particularly on the West Coast and the deep interior, with settlements such as Los Angeles and Salt Lake City respectively. The &quot;West&quot; was the recently settled area near that boundary. Thus, parts of the Midwest and American South, though no longer considered &quot;western&quot;, have a frontier heritage along with the modern western states. Richard W. Slatta, in his view of the frontier, writes that &quot;historians sometimes define the American West as lands west of the &quot;98th meridian&quot; or 98° west longitude,&quot; and that other definitions of the region &quot;include all lands west of the Mississippi or Missouri rivers.&quot;

==Maps of United States territories==

Key:              

==History==

===Colonial frontier===

In the colonial era, before 1776, the west was of high priority for settlers and politicians. The American frontier began when Jamestown, Virginia, was settled by the English in 1607. In the earliest days of European settlement on the Atlantic coast, until about 1680, the frontier was essentially any part of the interior of the continent beyond the fringe of existing settlements along the Atlantic coast. 

English, French, Spanish, and Dutch patterns of expansion and settlement were quite different. Only a few thousand French migrated to Canada; these habitants settled in villages along the St. Lawrence River, building communities that remained stable for long stretches. Although French fur traders ranged widely through the Great Lakes and midwest region, they seldom settled down. French settlement was limited to a few very small villages such as Kaskaskia, Illinois as well as a larger settlement around New Orleans. In what is now New York state the Dutch set up fur trading posts in the Hudson River valley, followed by large grants of land to rich landowning patroons who brought in tenant farmers who created compact, permanent villages. They created a dense rural settlement in upstate New York, but they did not push westward.

Areas in the north that were in the frontier stage by 1700 generally had poor transportation facilities, so the opportunity for commercial agriculture was low. These areas remained primarily in subsistence agriculture, and as a result, by the 1760s these societies were highly egalitarian, as explained by historian Jackson Turner Main:

In the South, frontier areas that lacked transportation, such as the Appalachian Mountains region, remained based on subsistence farming and resembled the egalitarianism of their northern counterparts, although they had a larger upper-class of slaveowners. North Carolina was representative. However, frontier areas of 1700 that had good river connections were increasingly transformed into plantation agriculture. Rich men came in, bought up the good land, and worked it with slaves. The area was no longer &quot;frontier&quot;. It had a stratified society comprising a powerful upper-class white landowning gentry, a small middle-class, a fairly large group of landless or tenant white farmers, and a growing slave population at the bottom of the social pyramid. Unlike the North, where small towns and even cities were common, the South was overwhelmingly rural.
====From British peasants to American farmers====
The seaboard colonial settlements gave priority to land ownership for individual farmers, and as the population grew they pushed westward for fresh farmland. Unlike Britain, where a small number of landlords owned most of the land, ownership in America was cheap, easy and widespread. Land ownership brought a degree of independence as well as a vote for local and provincial offices. The typical New England settlements were quite compact and small, under a square mile. Conflict with the Native Americans arose out of political issues, namely who would rule. Early frontier areas east of the Appalachian Mountains included the Connecticut River valley, and northern New England (which was a move to the north, not the west).

====Wars with French and with natives====
Settlers on the frontier often connected isolated incidents to indicate Indian conspiracies to attack them, but these lacked a French diplomatic dimension after 1763, or a Spanish connection after 1820.

Most of the frontiers experienced numerous conflicts. The French and Indian War broke out between Britain and France, with the French making up for their small colonial population base by enlisting Native war parties as allies. The series of large wars spilling over from European wars ended in a complete victory for the British in the worldwide Seven Years&#x27; War. In the peace treaty of 1763, France ceded practically everything, as the lands west of the Mississippi River, in addition to Florida and New Orleans, went to Spain. Otherwise, lands east of the Mississippi River and what is now Canada went to Britain.

====Steady migration to frontier lands====
Regardless of wars, Americans were moving across the Appalachians into western Pennsylvania, what is now West Virginia, and areas of the Ohio Country, Kentucky, and Tennessee. In the southern settlements via the Cumberland Gap, their most famous leader was Daniel Boone. Young George Washington promoted settlements in western Virginia and what is now West Virginia on lands awarded to him and his soldiers by the Royal government in payment for their wartime service in Virginia&#x27;s militia. Settlements west of the Appalachian Mountains were curtailed briefly by the Royal Proclamation of 1763, forbidding settlement in this area. The Treaty of Fort Stanwix (1768) re-opened most of the western lands for frontiersmen to settle.

===New nation===
The nation was at peace after 1783. The states gave Congress control of the western lands and an effective system for population expansion was developed. The Northwest Ordinance of 1787 abolished slavery in the area north of the Ohio River and promised statehood when a territory reached a threshold population, as Ohio did in 1803.

The first major movement west of the Appalachian mountains originated in Pennsylvania, Virginia, and North Carolina as soon as the Revolutionary War ended in 1781. Pioneers housed themselves in a rough lean-to or at most a one-room log cabin. The main food supply at first came from hunting deer, turkeys, and other abundant game.

In a few years, the pioneer added hogs, sheep, and cattle, and perhaps acquired a horse. Homespun clothing replaced the animal skins. The more restless pioneers grew dissatisfied with over civilized life and uprooted themselves again to move 50 or a hundred miles (80 or 160 km) further west.

====Land policy====
The land policy of the new nation was conservative, paying special attention to the needs of the settled East. The goals sought by both parties in the 1790–1820 era were to grow the economy, avoid draining away the skilled workers needed in the East, distribute the land wisely, sell it at prices that were reasonable to settlers yet high enough to pay off the national debt, clear legal titles, and create a diversified Western economy that would be closely interconnected with the settled areas with minimal risk of a breakaway movement. By the 1830s, however, the West was filling up with squatters who had no legal deed, although they may have paid money to previous settlers. The Jacksonian Democrats favored the squatters by promising rapid access to cheap land. By contrast, Henry Clay was alarmed at the &quot;lawless rabble&quot; heading West who were undermining the utopian concept of a law-abiding, stable middle-class republican community. Rich southerners, meanwhile, looked for opportunities to buy high-quality land to set up slave plantations. The Free Soil movement of the 1840s called for low-cost land for free white farmers, a position enacted into law by the new Republican Party in 1862, offering free 160 acres (65 ha) homesteads to all adults, male and female, black and white, native-born or immigrant.

After winning the Revolutionary War (1783), American settlers in large numbers poured into the west. In 1788, American pioneers to the Northwest Territory established Marietta, Ohio, as the first permanent American settlement in the Northwest Territory.

In 1775, Daniel Boone blazed a trail for the Transylvania Company from Virginia through the Cumberland Gap into central Kentucky. It was later lengthened to reach the Falls of the Ohio at Louisville. The Wilderness Road was steep and rough, and it could only be traversed on foot or horseback, but it was the best route for thousands of settlers moving into Kentucky. In some areas they had to face Native attacks. In 1784 alone, Natives killed over 100 travelers on the Wilderness Road. Kentucky at this time had been depopulated—it was &quot;empty of Indian villages.&quot; However raiding parties sometimes came through. One of those intercepted was Abraham Lincoln&#x27;s grandfather, who was scalped in 1784 near Louisville.

====Acquisition of native lands====
The War of 1812 marked the final confrontation involving major British and Native forces fighting to stop American expansion. The British war goal included the creation of an Indian barrier state under British auspices in the Midwest which would halt American expansion westward. American frontier militiamen under General Andrew Jackson defeated the Creeks and opened the Southwest, while militia under Governor William Henry Harrison defeated the Native-British alliance at the Battle of the Thames in Canada in 1813. The death in battle of the Native leader Tecumseh dissolved the coalition of hostile Native tribes. Meanwhile, General Andrew Jackson ended the Native military threat in the Southeast at the Battle of Horseshoe Bend in 1814 in Alabama. In general, the frontiersmen battled the Natives with little help from the U.S. Army or the federal government.

To end the war, American diplomats negotiated the Treaty of Ghent, signed towards the end of 1814, with Britain. They rejected the British plan to set up a Native state in U.S. territory south of the Great Lakes. They explained the American policy toward the acquisition of Native lands:

====New territories and states====
As settlers poured in, the frontier districts first became territories, with an elected legislature and a governor appointed by the president. Then when the population reached 100,000 the territory applied for statehood. Frontiersmen typically dropped the legalistic formalities and restrictive franchise favored by eastern upper classes and adopting more democracy and more egalitarianism.

In 1810, the western frontier had reached the Mississippi River. St. Louis, Missouri, was the largest town on the frontier, the gateway for travel westward, and a principal trading center for Mississippi River traffic and inland commerce but remained under Spanish control until 1803.

====Louisiana Purchase====
Thomas Jefferson thought of himself as a man of the frontier and was keenly interested in expanding and exploring the West. Jefferson&#x27;s Louisiana Purchase of 1803 doubled the size of the nation at the cost of $15 million, or about $0.04 per acre ($ million in dollars, less than 42 cents per acre). Federalists opposed the expansion, but Jeffersonians hailed the opportunity to create millions of new farms to expand the domain of land-owning yeomen; the ownership would strengthen the ideal republican society, based on agriculture (not commerce), governed lightly, and promoting self-reliance and virtue, as well as form the political base for Jeffersonian Democracy.

France was paid for its sovereignty over the territory in terms of international law. Between 1803 and the 1870s, the federal government purchased the land from the Native tribes then in possession of it. 20th-century accountants and courts have calculated the value of the payments made to the Natives, which included future payments of cash, food, horses, cattle, supplies, buildings, schooling, and medical care. In cash terms, the total paid to the tribes in the area of the Louisiana Purchase amounted to about $2.6 billion, or nearly $9 billion in 2016 dollars. Additional sums were paid to the Natives living east of the Mississippi for their lands, as well as payments to Natives living in parts of the west outside the Louisiana Purchase.

Even before the purchase, Jefferson was planning expeditions to explore and map the lands. He charged Lewis and Clark to &quot;explore the Missouri River, and such principal stream of it, as, by its course and communication with the waters of the Pacific Ocean; whether the Columbia, Oregon, Colorado, or any other river may offer the most direct and practicable communication across the continent for commerce&quot;. Jefferson also instructed the expedition to study the region&#x27;s native tribes (including their morals, language, and culture), weather, soil, rivers, commercial trading, and animal and plant life.

Entrepreneurs, most notably John Jacob Astor quickly seized the opportunity and expanded fur trading operations into the Pacific Northwest. Astor&#x27;s &quot;Fort Astoria&quot; (later Fort George), at the mouth of the Columbia River, became the first permanent white settlement in that area, although it was not profitable for Astor. He set up the American Fur Company in an attempt to break the hold that the Hudson&#x27;s Bay Company monopoly had over the region. By 1820, Astor had taken over independent traders to create a profitable monopoly; he left the business as a multi-millionaire in 1834.

====Fur trade====

As the frontier moved west, trappers and hunters moved ahead of settlers, searching out new supplies of beaver and other skins for shipment to Europe. The hunters were the first Europeans in much of the Old West and they formed the first working relationships with the Native Americans in the West. They added extensive knowledge of the Northwest terrain, including the important South Pass through the central Rocky Mountains. Discovered about 1812, it later became a major route for settlers to Oregon and Washington. By 1820, however, a new &quot;brigade-rendezvous&quot; system sent company men in &quot;brigades&quot; cross-country on long expeditions, bypassing many tribes. It also encouraged &quot;free trappers&quot; to explore new regions on their own. At the end of the gathering season, the trappers would &quot;rendezvous&quot; and turn in their goods for pay at river ports along the Green River, Upper Missouri, and the Upper Mississippi. St. Louis was the largest of the rendezvous towns. By 1830, however, fashions changed and beaver hats were replaced by silk hats, ending the demand for expensive American furs. Thus ended the era of the mountain men, trappers, and scouts such as Jedediah Smith, Hugh Glass, Davy Crockett, Jack Omohundro, and others. The trade in beaver fur virtually ceased by 1845.

====The federal government and westward expansion====
There was wide agreement on the need to settle the new territories quickly, but the debate polarized over the price the government should charge. The conservatives and Whigs, typified by the president John Quincy Adams, wanted a moderated pace that charged the newcomers enough to pay the costs of the federal government. The Democrats, however, tolerated a wild scramble for land at very low prices. The final resolution came in the Homestead Law of 1862, with a moderated pace that gave settlers 160 acres free after they worked on it for five years.

The private profit motive dominated the movement westward, but the federal government played a supporting role in securing the land through treaties and setting up territorial governments, with governors appointed by the President. The federal government first acquired western territory through treaties with other nations or native tribes. Then it sent surveyors to map and document the land. By the 20th century, Washington bureaucracies managed the federal lands such as the United States General Land Office in the Interior Department, and after 1891, the Forest Service in the Department of Agriculture. After 1900, dam building and flood control became major concerns.

Transportation was a key issue and the Army (especially the Army Corps of Engineers) was given full responsibility for facilitating navigation on the rivers. The steamboat, first used on the Ohio River in 1811, made possible inexpensive travel using the river systems, especially the Mississippi and Missouri rivers and their tributaries. Army expeditions up the Missouri River in 1818–1825 allowed engineers to improve the technology. For example, the Army&#x27;s steamboat &quot;Western Engineer&quot; of 1819 combined a very shallow draft with one of the earliest stern wheels. In 1819–1825, Colonel Henry Atkinson developed keelboats with hand-powered paddle wheels.

The federal postal system played a crucial role in national expansion. It facilitated expansion into the West by creating an inexpensive, fast, convenient communication system. Letters from early settlers provided information and boosterism to encourage increased migration to the West, helped scattered families stay in touch and provide neutral help, assisted entrepreneurs to find business opportunities, and made possible regular commercial relationships between merchants and the West and wholesalers and factories back east. The postal service likewise assisted the Army in expanding control over the vast western territories. The widespread circulation of important newspapers by mail, such as the &quot;New York Weekly Tribune&quot;, facilitated coordination among politicians in different states. The postal service helped to integrate already established areas with the frontier, creating a spirit of nationalism and providing a necessary infrastructure.

The army early on assumed the mission of protecting settlers along with the Westward Expansion Trails, a policy that was described by U.S. Secretary of War John B. Floyd in 1857:

A line of posts running parallel without frontier, but near to the Indians&#x27; usual habitations, placed at convenient distances and suitable positions, and occupied by infantry, would exercise a salutary restraint upon the tribes, who would feel that any foray by their warriors upon the white settlements would meet with prompt retaliation upon their own homes.

There was a debate at the time about the best size for the forts with Jefferson Davis, Winfield Scott, and Thomas Jesup supporting forts that were larger but fewer in number than Floyd. Floyd&#x27;s plan was more expensive but had the support of settlers and the general public who preferred that the military remain as close as possible. The frontier area was vast and even Davis conceded that &quot;concentration would have exposed portions of the frontier to Native hostilities without any protection.&quot;

====Scientists, artists, and explorers====
Government and private enterprise sent many explorers to the West. In 1805–1806, Army lieutenant Zebulon Pike (1779–1813) led a party of 20 soldiers to find the headwaters of the Mississippi. He later explored the Red and Arkansas Rivers in Spanish territory, eventually reaching the Rio Grande. On his return, Pike sighted the peak in Colorado named after him. Major Stephen Harriman Long (1784–1864) led the Yellowstone and Missouri expeditions of 1819–1820, but his categorizing in 1823 of the Great Plains as arid and useless led to the region getting a bad reputation as the &quot;Great American Desert&quot;, which discouraged settlement in that area for several decades.

In 1811, naturalists Thomas Nuttall (1786–1859) and John Bradbury (1768–1823) traveled up the Missouri River documenting and drawing plant and animal life. Artist George Catlin (1796–1872) painted accurate paintings of Native American culture. Swiss artist Karl Bodmer made compelling landscapes and portraits. John James Audubon (1785–1851) is famous for classifying and painting in minute details 500 species of birds, published in &quot;Birds of America&quot;.

The most famous of the explorers was John Charles Frémont (1813–1890), an Army officer in the Corps of Topographical Engineers. He displayed a talent for exploration and a genius at self-promotion that gave him the sobriquet of &quot;Pathmarker of the West&quot; and led him to the presidential nomination of the new Republican Party in 1856. He led a series of expeditions in the 1840s which answered many of the outstanding geographic questions about the little-known region. He crossed through the Rocky Mountains by five different routes and mapped parts of Oregon and California. In 1846–1847, he played a role in conquering California. In 1848–1849, Frémont was assigned to locate a central route through the mountains for the proposed transcontinental railroad, but his expedition ended in near-disaster when it became lost and was trapped by heavy snow. His reports mixed narrative of exciting adventure with scientific data and detailed practical information for travelers. It caught the public imagination and inspired many to head west. Goetzman says it was &quot;monumental in its breadth, a classic of exploring literature&quot;.

While colleges were springing up across the Northeast, there was little competition on the western frontier for Transylvania University, founded in Lexington, Kentucky, in 1780. It boasted of a law school in addition to its undergraduate and medical programs. Transylvania attracted politically ambitious young men from across the Southwest, including 50 who became United States senators, 101 representatives, 36 governors, and 34 ambassadors, as well as Jefferson Davis, the president of the Confederacy.

===Antebellum West===

====Religion====

Most frontiersmen showed little commitment to religion until traveling evangelists began to appear and to produce &quot;revivals&quot;. The local pioneers responded enthusiastically to these events and, in effect, evolved their populist religions, especially during the Second Great Awakening (1790–1840), which featured outdoor camp meetings lasting a week or more and which introduced many people to organized religion for the first time. One of the largest and most famous camp meetings took place at Cane Ridge, Kentucky, in 1801.

The local Baptists set up small independent churches—Baptists abjured centralized authority; each local church was founded on the principle of independence of the local congregation. On the other hand, bishops of the well-organized, centralized Methodists assigned circuit riders to specific areas for several years at a time, then moved them to fresh territory. Several new denominations were formed, of which the largest was the Disciples of Christ.

The established Eastern churches were slow to meet the needs of the frontier. The Presbyterians and Congregationalists, since they depended on well-educated ministers, were shorthanded in evangelizing the frontier. They set up a Plan of Union of 1801 to combine resources on the frontier.

====Democracy in the Midwest====
Historian Mark Wyman calls Wisconsin a &quot;palimpsest&quot; of layer upon layer of peoples and forces, each imprinting permanent influences. He identified these layers as multiple &quot;frontiers&quot; over three centuries: Native American frontier, French frontier, English frontier, fur-trade frontier, mining frontier, and the logging frontier. Finally, the coming of the railroad brought the end of the frontier.

Frederick Jackson Turner grew up in Wisconsin during its last frontier stage, and in his travels around the state, he could see the layers of social and political development. One of Turner&#x27;s last students, Merle Curti used an in-depth analysis of local Wisconsin history to test Turner&#x27;s thesis about democracy. Turner&#x27;s view was that American democracy, &quot;involved widespread participation in the making of decisions affecting the common life, the development of initiative and self-reliance, and equality of economic and cultural opportunity. It thus also involved Americanization of immigrant.&quot; Curti found that from 1840 to 1860 in Wisconsin the poorest groups gained rapidly in land ownership, and often rose to political leadership at the local level. He found that even landless young farmworkers were soon able to obtain their farms. Free land on the frontier, therefore, created opportunity and democracy, for both European immigrants as well as old stock Yankees.

====Southwest====

From the 1770s to the 1830s, pioneers moved into the new lands that stretched from Kentucky to Alabama to Texas. Most were farmers who moved in family groups.

Historian Louis Hacker shows how wasteful the first generation of pioneers was; they were too ignorant to cultivate the land properly and when the natural fertility of virgin land was used up, they sold out and moved west to try again. Hacker describes that in Kentucky about 1812:

Hacker adds that the second wave of settlers reclaimed the land, repaired the damage, and practiced more sustainable agriculture. Historian Frederick Jackson Turner explored the individualistic worldview and values of the first generation:

====Manifest destiny====

Manifest Destiny was the controversial belief that the United States was preordained to expand from the Atlantic coast to the Pacific coast, and efforts made to realize that belief. The concept has appeared during colonial times, but the term was coined in the 1840s by a popular magazine which editorialized, &quot;the fulfillment of our manifest destiny...to overspread the continent allotted by Providence for the free development of our yearly multiplying millions.&quot; As the nation grew, &quot;Manifest Destiny&quot; became a rallying cry for expansionists in the Democratic Party. In the 1840s, the Tyler and Polk administrations (1841–1849) successfully promoted this nationalistic doctrine. However, the Whig Party, which represented business and financial interests, stood opposed to Manifest Destiny. Whig leaders such as Henry Clay and Abraham Lincoln called for deepening the society through modernization and urbanization instead of simple horizontal expansion. Starting with the annexation of Texas, the expansionists got the upper hand. John Quincy Adams, an anti-slavery Whig, felt the Texas annexation in 1845 to be &quot;the heaviest calamity that ever befell myself and my country&quot;.

Helping settlers move westward were the emigrant &quot;guide books&quot; of the 1840s featuring route information supplied by the fur traders and the Frémont expeditions, and promising fertile farmland beyond the Rockies.

====Mexico and Texas====

Mexico became independent of Spain in 1821 and took over Spain&#x27;s northern possessions stretching from Texas to California. American caravans began delivering goods to the Mexican city Santa Fe along the Santa Fe Trail, over the journey which took 48 days from Kansas City, Missouri (then known as Westport). Santa Fe was also the trailhead for the &quot;El Camino Real&quot; (the King&#x27;s Highway), a trade route which carried American manufactured goods southward deep into Mexico and returned silver, furs, and mules northward (not to be confused with another &quot;Camino Real&quot; which connected the missions in California). A branch also ran eastward near the Gulf (also called the Old San Antonio Road). Santa Fe connected to California via the Old Spanish Trail.

The Spanish and Mexican governments attracted American settlers to Texas with generous terms. Stephen F. Austin became an &quot;empresario&quot;, receiving contracts from the Mexican officials to bring in immigrants. In doing so, he also became the &quot;de facto&quot; political and military commander of the area. Tensions rose, however, after an abortive attempt to establish the independent nation of Fredonia in 1826. William Travis, leading the &quot;war party&quot;, advocated for independence from Mexico, while the &quot;peace party&quot; led by Austin attempted to get more autonomy within the current relationship. When Mexican president Santa Anna shifted alliances and joined the conservative Centralist party, he declared himself dictator and ordered soldiers into Texas to curtail new immigration and unrest. However, immigration continued and 30,000 Anglos with 3,000 slaves were settled in Texas by 1835. In 1836, the Texas Revolution erupted. Following losses at the Alamo and Goliad, the Texians won the decisive Battle of San Jacinto to secure independence. At San Jacinto, Sam Houston, commander-in-chief of the Texian Army and future President of the Republic of Texas famously shouted &quot;Remember the Alamo! Remember Goliad&quot;. The U.S. Congress declined to annex Texas, stalemated by contentious arguments over slavery and regional power. Thus, the Republic of Texas remained an independent power for nearly a decade before it was annexed as the 28th state in 1845. The government of Mexico, however, viewed Texas as a runaway province and asserted its ownership.

====Mexican–American War====

Mexico refused to recognize the independence of Texas in 1836, but the U.S. and European powers did so. Mexico threatened war if Texas joined the U.S., which it did in 1845. American negotiators were turned away by a Mexican government in turmoil. When the Mexican army killed 16 American soldiers in disputed territory war was at hand. Whigs such as Congressman Abraham Lincoln denounced the war, but it was quite popular outside New England.

The Mexican strategy was defensive; the American strategy was a three-pronged offensive, using large numbers of volunteer soldiers. Overland forces seized New Mexico with little resistance and headed to California, which quickly fell to the American land and naval forces. From the main American base at New Orleans, General Zachary Taylor led forces into northern Mexico, winning a series of battles that ensued. The U.S. Navy transported General Winfield Scott to Veracruz. He then marched his 12,000-man force west to Mexico City, winning the final battle at Chapultepec. Talk of acquiring all of Mexico fell away when the army discovered the Mexican political and cultural values were so alien to America&#x27;s. As the &quot;Cincinnati Herald&quot; asked, what would the U.S. do with eight million Mexicans &quot;with their idol worship, heathen superstition, and degraded mongrel races?&quot;

The Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo of 1848 ceded the territories of California and New Mexico to the United States for $18.5 million (which included the assumption of claims against Mexico by settlers). The Gadsden Purchase in 1853 added southern Arizona, which was needed for a railroad route to California. In all Mexico ceded half a million square miles (1.3 million km2) and included the states-to-be of California, Utah, Arizona, Nevada, New Mexico, and parts of Colorado and Wyoming, in addition to Texas. Managing the new territories and dealing with the slavery issue caused intense controversy, particularly over the Wilmot Proviso, which would have outlawed slavery in the new territories. Congress never passed it, but rather temporarily resolved the issue of slavery in the West with the Compromise of 1850. California entered the Union in 1850 as a free state; the other areas remained territories for many years.

====Growth of Texas====
The new state grew rapidly as migrants poured into the fertile cotton lands of east Texas. German immigrants started to arrive in the early 1840s because of negative economic, social, and political pressures in Germany. With their investments in cotton lands and slaves, planters established cotton plantations in the eastern districts. The central area of the state was developed more by subsistence farmers who seldom owned slaves.

Texas in its Wild West days attracted men who could shoot straight and possessed the zest for adventure, &quot;for masculine renown, patriotic service, martial glory, and meaningful deaths&quot;.

====California Gold Rush====


In 1846, about 10,000 Californios (Hispanics) lived in California, primarily on cattle ranches in what is now the Los Angeles area. A few hundred foreigners were scattered in the northern districts, including some Americans. With the outbreak of war with Mexico in 1846 the U.S. sent in Frémont and a U.S. Army unit, as well as naval forces, and quickly took control. As the war was ending, gold was discovered in the north, and the word soon spread worldwide.

Thousands of &quot;Forty-Niners&quot; reached California, by sailing around South America (or taking a short-cut through disease-ridden Panama), or walked the California trail. The population soared to over 200,000 in 1852, mostly in the gold districts that stretched into the mountains east of San Francisco.

Housing in San Francisco was at a premium, and abandoned ships whose crews had headed for the mines were often converted to temporary lodging. In the goldfields themselves, living conditions were primitive, though the mild climate proved attractive. Supplies were expensive and food poor, typical diets consisting mostly of pork, beans, and whiskey. These highly male, transient communities with no established institutions were prone to high levels of violence, drunkenness, profanity, and greed-driven behavior. Without courts or law officers in the mining communities to enforce claims and justice, miners developed their ad hoc legal system, based on the &quot;mining codes&quot; used in other mining communities abroad. Each camp had its own rules and often handed out justice by popular vote, sometimes acting fairly and at times exercising vigilantes; with Native Americans (Indians), Mexicans, and Chinese generally receiving the harshest sentences.

The gold rush radically changed the California economy and brought in an array of professionals, including precious metal specialists, merchants, doctors, and attorneys, who added to the population of miners, saloon keepers, gamblers, and prostitutes. A San Francisco newspaper stated, &quot;The whole country... resounds to the sordid cry of gold! Gold! &quot;Gold!&quot; while the field is left half planted, the house half-built, and everything neglected but the manufacture of shovels and pickaxes.&quot; Over 250,000 miners found a total of more than $200 million in gold in the five years of the California Gold Rush. As thousands arrived, however, fewer and fewer miners struck their fortune, and most ended exhausted and broke.

Violent bandits often preyed upon the miners, such as the case of Jonathan R. Davis&#x27; killing of eleven bandits single-handedly. Camps spread out north and south of the American River and eastward into the Sierras. In a few years, nearly all of the independent miners were displaced as mines were purchased and run by mining companies, who then hired low-paid salaried miners. As gold became harder to find and more difficult to extract, individual prospectors gave way to paid work gangs, specialized skills, and mining machinery. Bigger mines, however, caused greater environmental damage. In the mountains, shaft mining predominated, producing large amounts of waste. Beginning in 1852, at the end of the &#x27;49 gold rush, through 1883, hydraulic mining was used. Despite huge profits being made, it fell into the hands of a few capitalists, displaced numerous miners, vast amounts of waste entered river systems, and did heavy ecological damage to the environment. Hydraulic mining ended when the public outcry over the destruction of farmlands led to the outlawing of this practice.

The mountainous areas of the triangle from New Mexico to California to South Dakota contained hundreds of hard rock mining sites, where prospectors discovered gold, silver, copper and other minerals (as well as some soft-rock coal). Temporary mining camps sprang up overnight; most became ghost towns when the ores were depleted. Prospectors spread out and hunted for gold and silver along the Rockies and in the southwest. Soon gold was discovered in Colorado, Utah, Arizona, New Mexico, Idaho, Montana, and South Dakota (by 1864).
The discovery of the Comstock Lode, containing vast amounts of silver, resulted in the Nevada boomtowns of Virginia City, Carson City, and Silver City. The wealth from silver, more than from gold, fueled the maturation of San Francisco in the 1860s and helped the rise of some of its wealthiest families, such as that of George Hearst.

====Oregon Trail====

To get to the rich new lands of the West Coast, there were three options: some sailed around the southern tip of South America during a six-month voyage, some took the treacherous journey across the Panama Isthmus, but 400,000 others walked there on an overland route of more than 2,000 miles (3,200 km); their wagon trains usually left from Missouri. They moved in large groups under an experienced wagonmaster, bringing their clothing, farm supplies, weapons, and animals. These wagon trains followed major rivers, crossed prairies and mountains, and typically ended in Oregon and California. Pioneers generally attempted to complete the journey during a single warm season, usually for six months. By 1836, when the first migrant wagon train was organized in Independence, Missouri, a wagon trail had been cleared to Fort Hall, Idaho. Trails were cleared further and further west, eventually reaching the Willamette Valley in Oregon. This network of wagon trails leading to the Pacific Northwest was later called the Oregon Trail. The eastern half of the route was also used by travelers on the California Trail (from 1843), Mormon Trail (from 1847), and Bozeman Trail (from 1863) before they turned off to their separate destinations.

In the &quot;Wagon Train of 1843&quot;, some 700 to 1,000 emigrants headed for Oregon; missionary Marcus Whitman led the wagons on the last leg. In 1846, the Barlow Road was completed around Mount Hood, providing a rough but passable wagon trail from the Missouri River to the Willamette Valley: about 2,000 miles (3,200 km). Though the main direction of travel on the early wagon trails was westward, people also used the Oregon Trail to travel eastward. Some did so because they were discouraged and defeated. Some returned with bags of gold and silver. Most were returning to pick up their families and move them all back west. These &quot;gobacks&quot; were a major source of information and excitement about the wonders and promises—and dangers and disappointments—of the far West.

Not all emigrants made it to their destination. The dangers of the overland route were numerous: snakebites, wagon accidents, violence from other travelers, suicide, malnutrition, stampedes, Native attacks, a variety of diseases (dysentery, typhoid, and cholera were among the most common), exposure, avalanches, etc. One particularly well-known example of the treacherous nature of the journey is the story of the ill-fated Donner Party, which became trapped in the Sierra Nevada mountains during the winter of 1846–1847. Half of the 90 people traveling with the group died from starvation and exposure, and some resorted to cannibalism to survive. Another story of cannibalism featured Alferd Packer and his trek to Colorado in 1874. There were also frequent attacks from bandits and highwaymen, such as the infamous Harpe brothers who patrolled the frontier routes and targeted migrant groups.

====Mormons and Utah====


In Missouri and Illinois, animosity between the Mormon settlers and locals grew, which would mirror those in other states such as Utah years later. Violence finally erupted on October 24, 1838, when militias from both sides clashed and a mass killing of Mormons in Livingston County occurred 6 days later. A Mormon Extermination Order was filed during these conflicts, and the Mormons were forced to scatter. Brigham Young, seeking to leave American jurisdiction to escape religious persecution in Illinois and Missouri, led the Mormons to the valley of the Great Salt Lake, owned at the time by Mexico but not controlled by them. A hundred rural Mormon settlements sprang up in what Young called &quot;Deseret&quot;, which he ruled as a theocracy. It later became Utah Territory. Young&#x27;s Salt Lake City settlement served as the hub of their network, which reached into neighboring territories as well. The communalism and advanced farming practices of the Mormons enabled them to succeed. The Mormons often sold goods to wagon trains passing through. After the Battle at Fort Utah in 1850, Brigham Young began to articulate an Indian policy often paraphrased as &quot;It is cheaper to feed them than to fight them.&quot; However, Wakara&#x27;s War and Utah&#x27;s Black Hawk War demonstrate that hostilities persisted until federal and territorial leaders came to agree that the nearby Indigenous people should all be displaced to the Uinta Reservation. Education became a high priority to protect the beleaguered group, reduce heresy and maintain group solidarity.

Following the end of the Mexican-American War in 1848, Utah was ceded to the United States by Mexico. Though the Mormons in Utah had supported U.S. efforts during the war; the federal government, pushed by the Protestant churches, rejected theocracy and polygamy. Founded in 1852, the Republican Party was openly hostile towards the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints (LDS Church) in Utah over the practice of polygamy, viewed by most of the American public as an affront to religious, cultural, and moral values of modern civilization. Confrontations verged on open warfare in the late 1850s as President Buchanan sent in troops. Although there were no military battles fought, and negotiations led to a stand down, violence still escalated and there were several casualties. After the Civil War, the federal government systematically took control of Utah, the LDS Church was legally disincorporated in the territory and members of the church&#x27;s hierarchy, including Young, were summarily removed and barred from virtually every public office. Meanwhile, successful missionary work in the U.S. and Europe brought a flood of Mormon converts to Utah. During this time, Congress refused to admit Utah into the Union as a state and statehood would mean an end to direct federal control over the territory and the possible ascension of politicians chosen and controlled by the LDS Church into most if not all federal, state and local elected offices from the new state. Finally, in 1890, the church leadership announced polygamy was no longer a central tenet, thereafter a compromise. In 1896, Utah was admitted as the 45th state with the Mormons dividing between Republicans and Democrats.

====Pony Express and the telegraph====

The federal government provided subsidies for the development of mail and freight delivery, and by 1856, Congress authorized road improvements and an overland mail service to California. The new commercial wagon trains service primarily hauled freight. In 1858 John Butterfield (1801–1869) established a stage service that went from Saint Louis to San Francisco in 24 days along a southern route. This route was abandoned in 1861 after Texas joined the Confederacy, in favor of stagecoach services established via Fort Laramie and Salt Lake City, a 24-day journey, with Wells Fargo &amp; Co. as the foremost provider (initially using the old &quot;Butterfield&quot; name).

William Russell, hoping to get a government contract for more rapid mail delivery service, started the Pony Express in 1860, cutting delivery time to ten days. He set up over 150 stations about apart.

In 1861, Congress passed the Land-Grant Telegraph Act which financed the construction of Western Union&#x27;s transcontinental telegraph lines. Hiram Sibley, Western Union&#x27;s head, negotiated exclusive agreements with railroads to run telegraph lines along their right-of-way. Eight years before the transcontinental railroad opened, the first transcontinental telegraph linked Omaha, Nebraska, to San Francisco on October 24, 1861. The Pony Express ended in just 18 months because it could not compete with the telegraph.

====Bleeding Kansas====

Constitutionally, Congress could not deal with slavery in the states but it did have jurisdiction in the western territories. California unanimously rejected slavery in 1850 and became a free state. New Mexico allowed slavery, but it was rarely seen there. Kansas was off-limits to slavery by the Compromise of 1820. Free Soil elements feared that if slavery were allowed rich planters would buy up the best lands and work them with gangs of slaves, leaving little opportunity for free white men to own farms. Few Southern planters were interested in Kansas, but the idea that slavery was illegal there implied they had a second-class status that was intolerable to their sense of honor, and seemed to violate the principle of states&#x27; rights. With the passage of the extremely controversial Kansas–Nebraska Act in 1854, Congress left the decision up to the voters on the ground in Kansas. Across the North, a new major party was formed to fight slavery: the Republican Party, with numerous westerners in leadership positions, most notably Abraham Lincoln of Illinois. To influence the territorial decision, anti-slavery elements (also called &quot;Jayhawkers&quot; or &quot;Free-soilers&quot;) financed the migration of politically determined settlers. But pro-slavery advocates fought back with pro-slavery settlers from Missouri. Violence on both sides was the result; in all 56 men were killed by the time the violence abated in 1859. By 1860 the pro-slavery forces were in control—but Kansas had only two slaves. The antislavery forces took over by 1861, as Kansas became a free state. The episode demonstrated that a democratic compromise between North and South over slavery was impossible and served to hasten the Civil War.

===Civil War in the West===
Despite its large territory, the trans-Mississippi West had a small population and its wartime story has to a large extent been underplayed in the historiography of the American Civil War.

====Trans-Mississippi theater====
The Confederacy engaged in several important campaigns in the West. However, Kansas, a major area of conflict building up to the war, was the scene of only one battle, at Mine Creek. But its proximity to Confederate lines enabled pro-Confederate guerrillas, such as Quantrill&#x27;s Raiders, to attack Union strongholds and massacre the residents.

In Texas, citizens voted to join the Confederacy; anti-war Germans were hanged. Local troops took over the federal arsenal in San Antonio, with plans to grab the territories of northern New Mexico, Utah, and Colorado, and possibly California. Confederate Arizona was created by Arizona citizens who wanted protection against Apache raids after the United States Army units were moved out. The Confederacy then sets its sight to gain control of the New Mexico Territory. General Henry Hopkins Sibley was tasked for the campaign, and together with his New Mexico Army, marched right up the Rio Grande in an attempt to take the mineral wealth of Colorado as well as California. The First Regiment of Volunteers discovered the rebels, and they immediately warned and joined the Yankees at Fort Union. The Battle of Glorieta Pass soon erupted, and the Union ended the Confederate campaign and the area west of Texas remained in Union hands.

Missouri, a Border South state where slavery was legal, became a battleground when the pro-secession governor, against the vote of the legislature, led troops to the federal arsenal at St. Louis; he was aided by Confederate forces from Arkansas and Louisiana. The Governor of Missouri and part of the state legislature signed an Ordinance of Secession at Neosho, forming the Confederate government of Missouri, and the Confederacy controlling Southern Missouri. However, Union General Samuel Curtis regained St. Louis and all of Missouri for the Union. The state was the scene of numerous raids and guerrilla warfare in the west.

====Peacekeeping====
The U.S. Army after 1850 established a series of military posts across the frontier, designed to stop warfare among Native tribes or between Natives and settlers. Throughout the 19th century, Army officers typically built their careers in peacekeeper roles moving from fort to fort until retirement. Actual combat experience was uncommon for any one soldier.

The most dramatic conflict was the Sioux war in Minnesota in 1862 when Dakota tribes systematically attacked German farms to drive out the settlers. For several days, Dakota attacks at the Lower Sioux Agency, New Ulm, and Hutchinson killed 300 to 400 white settlers. The state militia fought back and Lincoln sent in federal troops. The ensuing battles at Fort Ridgely, Birch Coulee, Fort Abercrombie, and Wood Lake punctuated a six-week war, which ended in an American victory. The federal government tried 425 Natives for murder, and 303 were convicted and sentenced to death. Lincoln pardoned the majority, but 38 leaders were hanged.

The decreased presence of Union troops in the West left behind untrained militias; hostile tribes used the opportunity to attack settlers. The militia struck back hard, most notably by attacking the winter quarters of the Cheyenne and Arapaho tribes, filled with women and children, at the Sand Creek massacre in eastern Colorado in late 1864.

Kit Carson and the U.S. Army in 1864 trapped the entire Navajo tribe in New Mexico, where they had been raiding settlers and put them on a reservation. Within the Indian Territory, now Oklahoma, conflicts arose among the Five Civilized Tribes, most of which sided with the South being slaveholders themselves.

In 1862, Congress enacted two major laws to facilitate settlement of the West: the Homestead Act and the Pacific Railroad Act. The result by 1890 was millions of new farms in the Plains states, many operated by new immigrants from Germany and Scandinavia.

===Postwar West===

====Territorial governance after the Civil War====
With the war over and slavery abolished, the federal government focused on improving the governance of the territories. It subdivided several territories, preparing them for statehood, following the precedents set by the Northwest Ordinance of 1787. It standardized procedures and the supervision of territorial governments, taking away some local powers, and imposing much &quot;red tape&quot;, growing the federal bureaucracy significantly.

Federal involvement in the territories was considerable. In addition to direct subsidies, the federal government maintained military posts, provided safety from Native attacks, bankrolled treaty obligations, conducted surveys and land sales, built roads, staffed land offices, made harbor improvements, and subsidized overland mail delivery. Territorial citizens came to both decry federal power and local corruption, and at the same time, lament that more federal dollars were not sent their way.

Territorial governors were political appointees and beholden to Washington so they usually governed with a light hand, allowing the legislatures to deal with the local issues. In addition to his role as civil governor, a territorial governor was also a militia commander, a local superintendent of Native affairs, and the state liaison with federal agencies. The legislatures, on the other hand, spoke for the local citizens and they were given considerable leeway by the federal government to make local law.

These improvements to governance still left plenty of room for profiteering. As Mark Twain wrote while working for his brother, the secretary of Nevada, &quot;The government of my country snubs honest simplicity but fondles artistic villainy, and I think I might have developed into a very capable pickpocket if I had remained in the public service a year or two.&quot; &quot;Territorial rings&quot;, corrupt associations of local politicians and business owners buttressed with federal patronage, embezzled from Native tribes and local citizens, especially in the Dakota and New Mexico territories.

====Federal land system====
In acquiring, preparing, and distributing public land to private ownership, the federal government generally followed the system set forth by the Land Ordinance of 1785. Federal exploration and scientific teams would undertake reconnaissance of the land and determine Native American habitation. Through treaties, the land titles would be ceded by the resident tribes. Then surveyors would create detailed maps marking the land into squares of six miles (10 km) on each side, subdivided first into one square mile blocks, then into lots. Townships would be formed from the lots and sold at public auction. Unsold land could be purchased from the land office at a minimum price of $1.25 per acre.

As part of public policy, the government would award public land to certain groups such as veterans, through the use of &quot;land script&quot;. The script traded in a financial market, often at below the $1.25 per acre minimum price set by law, which gave speculators, investors, and developers another way to acquire large tracts of land cheaply. Land policy became politicized by competing factions and interests, and the question of slavery on new lands was contentious. As a counter to land speculators, farmers formed &quot;claims clubs&quot; to enable them to buy larger tracts than the allotments by trading among themselves at controlled prices.

In 1862, Congress passed three important bills that transformed the land system. The Homestead Act granted free to each settler who improved the land for five years; citizens and non-citizens including squatters and women were all eligible. The only cost was a modest filing fee. The law was especially important in the settling of the Plains states. Many took a free homestead and others purchased their land from railroads at low rates.

The Pacific Railroad Act of 1862 provided for the land needed to build the transcontinental railroad. The land was given the railroads alternated with government-owned tracts saved for free distribution to homesteaders. To be equitable, the federal government reduced each tract to because of its perceived higher value given its proximity to the rail line. Railroads had up to five years to sell or mortgage their land, after tracks were laid, after which unsold land could be purchased by anyone. Often railroads sold some of their government acquired land to homesteaders immediately to encourage settlement and the growth of markets the railroads would then be able to serve. Nebraska railroads in the 1870s were strong boosters of lands along their routes. They sent agents to Germany and Scandinavia with package deals that included cheap transportation for the family as well as its furniture and farm tools, and they offered long-term credit at low rates. Boosterism succeeded in attracting adventurous American and European families to Nebraska, helping them purchase land grant parcels on good terms. The selling price depended on such factors as soil quality, water, and distance from the railroad.

The Morrill Act of 1862 provided land grants to states to begin colleges of agriculture and mechanical arts (engineering). Black colleges became eligible for these land grants in 1890. The Act succeeded in its goals to open new universities and make farming more scientific and profitable.

====Transcontinental railroads====

In the 1850s, the U.S. government sponsored surveys that charted the remaining unexplored regions of the West in order to plan possible routes for a transcontinental railroad. Much of this work was undertaken by the Corps of Engineers, Corps of Topographical Engineers, and Bureau of Explorations and Surveys, and became known as &quot;The Great Reconnaissance&quot;. Regionalism animated debates in Congress regarding the choice of a northern, central, or southern route. Engineering requirements for the rail route were an adequate supply of water and wood, and as nearly-level route as possible, given the weak locomotives of the era.

Proposals to build a transcontinental failed because of Congressional disputes over slavery. With the secession of the Confederate states in 1861, the modernizers in the Republican party took over Congress and wanted a line to link to California. Private companies were to build and operate the line. Construction would be done by unskilled laborers who would live in temporary camps along the way. Immigrants from China and Ireland did most of the construction work. Theodore Judah, the chief engineer of the Central Pacific surveyed the route from San Francisco east. Judah&#x27;s tireless lobbying efforts in Washington were largely responsible for the passage of the 1862 Pacific Railroad Act, which authorized construction of both the Central Pacific and the Union Pacific (which built west from Omaha). In 1862 four rich San Francisco merchants (Leland Stanford, Collis Huntington, Charles Crocker, and Mark Hopkins) took charge, with Crocker in charge of construction. The line was completed in May 1869. Coast-to-coast passenger travel in 8 days now replaced wagon trains or sea voyages that took 6 to 10 months and cost much more.

The road was built with mortgages from New York, Boston, and London, backed by land grants. There were no federal cash subsidies, But there was a loan to the Central Pacific that was eventually repaid at six percent interest. The federal government offered land-grants in a checkerboard pattern. The railroad sold every-other square, with the government opening its half to homesteaders. The government also loaned money—later repaid—at $16,000 per mile on level stretches, and $32,000 to $48,000 in mountainous terrain. Local and state governments also aided the financing.

Most of the manual laborers on the Central Pacific were new arrivals from China. Kraus shows how these men lived and worked, and how they managed their money. He concludes that senior officials quickly realized the high degree of cleanliness and reliability of the Chinese. The Central Pacific employed over 12,000 Chinese workers, 90% of its manual workforce. Ong explores whether or not the Chinese railroad workers were exploited by the railroad, with whites in better positions. He finds the railroad set different wage rates for whites and Chinese and used the latter in the more menial and dangerous jobs, such as the handling and the pouring of nitroglycerin. However the railroad also provided camps and food the Chinese wanted and protected the Chinese workers from threats from whites.
Building the railroad required six main activities: surveying the route, blasting a right of way, building tunnels and bridges, clearing and laying the roadbed, laying the ties and rails, and maintaining and supplying the crews with food and tools. The work was highly physical, using horse-drawn plows and scrapers, and manual picks, axes, sledgehammers, and handcarts. A few steam-driven machines, such as shovels, were used. The rails were iron (steel came a few years later), weighed and required five men to lift. For blasting, they used black powder. The Union Pacific construction crews, mostly Irish Americans, averaged about two miles (3 km) of new track per day.

Six transcontinental railroads were built in the Gilded Age (plus two in Canada); they opened up the West to farmers and ranchers. From north to south they were the Northern Pacific, Milwaukee Road, and Great Northern along the Canada–U.S. border; the Union Pacific/Central Pacific in the middle, and to the south the Santa Fe, and the Southern Pacific. All but the Great Northern of James J. Hill relied on land grants. The financial stories were often complex. For example, the Northern Pacific received its major land grant in 1864. Financier Jay Cooke (1821–1905) was in charge until 1873 when he went bankrupt. Federal courts, however, kept bankrupt railroads in operation. In 1881 Henry Villard (1835–1900) took over and finally completed the line to Seattle. But the line went bankrupt in the Panic of 1893 and Hill took it over. He then merged several lines with financing from J.P. Morgan, but President Theodore Roosevelt broke them up in 1904.

In the first year of operation, 1869–70, 150,000 passengers made the long trip. Settlers were encouraged with promotions to come West on free scouting trips to buy railroad land on easy terms spread over several years. The railroads had &quot;Immigration Bureaus&quot; which advertised package low-cost deals including passage and land on easy terms for farmers in Germany and Scandinavia. The prairies, they were promised, did not mean backbreaking toil because &quot;settling on the prairie which is ready for the plow is different from plunging into a region covered with timber&quot;. The settlers were customers of the railroads, shipping their crops and cattle out, and bringing in manufactured products. All manufacturers benefited from the lower costs of transportation and the much larger radius of business.

White concludes with a mixed verdict. The transcontinentals did open up the West to settlement, brought in many thousands of high-tech, highly paid workers and managers, created thousands of towns and cities, oriented the nation onto an east–west axis, and proved highly valuable for the nation as a whole. On the other hand, too many were built, and they were built too far ahead of actual demand. The result was a bubble that left heavy losses to investors and led to poor management practices. By contrast, as White notes, the lines in the Midwest and East supported by a very large population base, fostered farming, industry, and mining while generating steady profits and receiving few government benefits.

====Migration after the Civil War====
After the Civil War, many from the East Coast and Europe were lured west by reports from relatives and by extensive advertising campaigns promising &quot;the Best Prairie Lands&quot;, &quot;Low Prices&quot;, &quot;Large Discounts For Cash&quot;, and &quot;Better Terms Than Ever!&quot;. The new railroads provided the opportunity for migrants to go out and take a look, with special family tickets, the cost of which could be applied to land purchases offered by the railroads. Farming the plains was indeed more difficult than back east. Water management was more critical, lightning fires were more prevalent, the weather was more extreme, rainfall was less predictable.

The fearful stayed home. The actual migrants looked beyond fears of the unknown. Their chief motivation to move west was to find a better economic life than the one they had. Farmers sought larger, cheaper, and more fertile land; merchants and tradesmen sought new customers and new leadership opportunities. Laborers wanted higher paying work and better conditions. As settlers moved west, they had to face challenges along the way, such as the lack of wood for housing, bad weather like blizzards and droughts, and fearsome tornadoes. In the treeless prairies homesteaders built sod houses. One of the greatest plagues that hit the homesteaders was the 1874 Locust Plague which devastated the Great Plains. These challenges hardened these settlers in taming the frontier.

====Alaska Purchase====
After Russia&#x27;s defeat in the Crimean War, Tsar Alexander II of Russia decided to sell the Russian American territory of Alaska to the United States. The decision was motivated in part by a need for money and in part a recognition amongst the Russian state that Britain could easily capture Alaska in any future conflict between the two nations. U.S. Secretary of State William Seward negotiated with the Russians to acquire the tremendous landmass of Alaska, an area roughly one-fifth the size of the rest of the United States. On March 30, 1867, the U.S. purchased the territory from the Russians for $7.2 million ($ in dollars). The transfer ceremony was completed in Sitka on October 18, 1867, as Russian soldiers handed over the territory to the United States Army.

Seward and other proponents of the Alaska Purchase had intended to continue acquiring territory on the northern frontier, with purchases of Arctic regions such as Greenland potentially culminating in an annexation of Canada, or after its 1867 Confederation, at least the western regions that had not yet joined Canada. Critics at the time decried the purchase as &quot;Seward&#x27;s Folly&quot;, reasoning that there were no natural resources in the new territory and no one can be bothered to live in such a cold, icy climate. Although the development and settlement of Alaska grew slowly, the discovery of goldfields during the Klondike Gold Rush in 1896, Nome Gold Rush in 1898, and Fairbanks Gold Rush in 1902 brought thousands of miners into the territory, thus propelling Alaska&#x27;s prosperity for decades to come. Major oil discoveries in the late 20th century made the state rich.

====Oklahoma Land Rush====
In 1889, Washington opened of unoccupied lands in the Oklahoma territory. On April 22, over 100,000 settlers and cattlemen (known as &quot;boomers&quot;) lined up at the border, and when the army&#x27;s guns and bugles giving the signal, began a mad dash to stake their claims in the Land Run of 1889. A witness wrote, &quot;The horsemen had the best of it from the start. It was a fine race for a few minutes, but soon the riders began to spread out like a fan, and by the time they reached the horizon they were scattered about as far as the eye could see&quot;. In a single day, the towns of Oklahoma City, Norman, and Guthrie came into existence. In the same manner, millions of acres of additional land were opened up and settled in the following four years.

===Indian Wars===


Indian wars have occurred throughout the United States though the conflicts are generally separated into two categories; the Indian wars east of the Mississippi River and the Indian wars west of the Mississippi. The U.S. Bureau of the Census (1894) provided an estimate of deaths:

Historian Russell Thornton estimates that from 1800 to 1890, the Native population declined from 600,000 to as few as 250,000. The depopulation was principally caused by disease as well as warfare. Many tribes in Texas, such as the Karankawan, Akokisa, Bidui and others, were extinguished due to conflicts with Texan settlers. The rapid depopulation of the Native Americans after the Civil War alarmed the U.S. government, and the Doolittle Committee was formed to investigate the causes as well as provide recommendations for preserving the population. The solutions presented by the committee, such as the establishment of the five boards of inspection to prevent Native abuses, had little effect as large Western migration commenced.

====Indian Wars east of the Mississippi====

=====Trail of Tears=====
The expansion of migration into the Southeastern United States in the 1820s to the 1830s forced the federal government to deal with the &quot;Indian question&quot;. The Natives were under federal control but were independent of state governments. State legislatures and state judges had no authority on their lands, and the states demanded control. Politically the new Democratic Party of President Andrew Jackson demanded the removal of the Natives out of the southeastern states to new lands in the west, while the Whig Party and the Protestant churches were opposed to removal. The Jacksonian Democracy proved irresistible, as it won the presidential elections of 1828, 1832, and 1836. By 1837 the &quot;Indian Removal policy&quot; began, to implement the act of Congress signed by Andrew Jackson in 1830. Many historians have sharply attacked Jackson. The 1830 law theoretically provided for voluntary removal and had safeguards for the rights of Natives, but in reality, the removal was involuntary, brutal and ignored safeguards. Jackson justified his actions by stating that Natives had &quot;neither the intelligence, the industry, the moral habits, nor the desire of improvements&quot;.

The forced march of about twenty tribes included the &quot;Five Civilized Tribes&quot; (Cherokee, Chickasaw, Choctaw, Creek, and Seminole). To motivate Natives reluctant to move, the federal government also promised rifles, blankets, tobacco, and cash. By 1835 the Cherokee, the last Native nation in the South, had signed the removal treaty and relocated to Oklahoma. All the tribes were given new land in the &quot;Indian Territory&quot; (which later became Oklahoma). Of the approximate 70,000 Natives removed, about 18,000 died from disease, starvation, and exposure on the route. This exodus has become known as the Trail of Tears (in Cherokee &quot;Nunna dual Tsuny&quot;, &quot;The Trail Where they Cried&quot;). The impact of the removals was severe. The transplanted tribes had considerable difficulty adapting to their new surroundings and sometimes clashed with the tribes native to the area.

The only way for a Native to remain and avoid removal was to accept the federal offer of or more of land (depending on family size) in exchange for leaving the tribe and becoming a state citizen subject to state law and federal law. However, many Natives who took the offer were defrauded by &quot;ravenous speculators&quot; who stole their claims and sold their land to whites. In Mississippi alone, fraudulent claims reached . Of the five tribes, the Seminole offered the most resistance, hiding out in the Florida swamps and waging a war which cost the U.S. Army 1,500 lives and $20 million.

====Indian Wars west of the Mississippi====
Native warriors in the West, using their traditional style of limited, battle-oriented warfare, confronted the U.S. Army. The Natives emphasized bravery in combat while the Army put its emphasis not so much on individual combat as on building networks of forts, developing a logistics system, and using the telegraph and railroads to coordinate and concentrate its forces. Plains Indian intertribal warfare bore no resemblance to the &quot;modern&quot; warfare practiced by the Americans along European lines, using its vast advantages in population and resources. Many tribes avoided warfare and others supported the U.S. Army. The tribes hostile to the government continued to pursue their traditional brand of fighting and, therefore, were unable to have any permanent success against the Army.

Indian wars were fought throughout the western regions, with more conflicts in the states bordering Mexico than in the interior states. Arizona ranked highest, with 310 known battles fought within the state&#x27;s boundaries between Americans and the Natives. Arizona ranked highest in war deaths, with 4,340 killed, including soldiers, civilians, and Native Americans. That was more than twice as many as occurred in Texas, the second-highest-ranking state. Most of the deaths in Arizona were caused by the Apache. Michno also says that fifty-one percent of the Indian war battles between 1850 and 1890 took place in Arizona, Texas, and New Mexico, as well as thirty-seven percent of the casualties in the county west of the Mississippi River. The Comanche fought a number of conflicts against Spanish and later Mexican and American armies. Comanche power peaked in the 1840s when they conducted large-scale raids hundreds of miles into Mexico proper, while also warring against the Anglo-Americans and Tejanos who had settled in independent Texas.

One of the deadliest Indian wars fought was the Snake War in 1864–1868, which was conducted by a confederacy of Northern Paiute, Bannock and Shoshone Native Americans, called the &quot;Snake Indians&quot; against the United States Army in the states of Oregon, Nevada, California, and Idaho which ran along the Snake River. The war started when tension arose between the local Natives and the flooding pioneer trains encroaching through their lands, which resulted in competition for food and resources. Natives included in this group attacked and harassed emigrant parties and miners crossing the Snake River Valley, which resulted in further retaliation of the white settlements and the intervention of the United States army. The war resulted in a total of 1,762 men who have been killed, wounded, and captured from both sides. Unlike other Indian Wars, the Snake War has widely forgotten in United States history due to having only limited coverage of the war.

The Colorado War fought by Cheyenne, Arapaho and Sioux, was fought in the territories of Colorado to Nebraska. The conflict was fought in 1863–1865 while the American Civil War was still ongoing. Caused by dissolution between the Natives and the white settlers in the region, the war was infamous for the atrocities done between the two parties. White militias destroyed Native villages and killed Native women and children such as the bloody Sand Creek massacre, and the Natives also raided ranches, farms and killed white families such as the American Ranch massacre and Raid on Godfrey Ranch.

In the Apache Wars, Colonel Christopher &quot;Kit&quot; Carson forced the Mescalero Apache onto a reservation in 1862. In 1863–1864, Carson used a scorched earth policy in the Navajo Campaign, burning Navajo fields and homes, and capturing or killing their livestock. He was aided by other Native tribes with long-standing enmity toward the Navajos, chiefly the Utes. Another prominent conflict of this war was Geronimo&#x27;s fight against settlements in Texas in the 1880s. The Apaches under his command conducted ambushes on US cavalries and forts, such as their attack on Cibecue Creek, while also raiding upon prominent farms and ranches, such as their infamous attack on the Empire Ranch that killed three cowboys. The U.S. finally induced the last hostile Apache band under Geronimo to surrender in 1886.

During the Comanche Campaign, the Red River War was fought in 1874–1875 in response to the Comanche&#x27;s dwindling food supply of buffalo, as well as the refusal of a few bands to be inducted in reservations. Comanches started raiding small settlements in Texas, which led to the Battle of Buffalo Wallow and Second Battle of Adobe Walls fought by buffalo hunters, and the Battle of Lost Valley against the Texas Rangers. The war finally ended with a final confrontation between the Comanches and the U.S. Cavalry in Palo Duro Canyon. The last Comanche war chief, Quanah Parker, surrendered in June 1875, which would finally end the wars fought by Texans and Natives.

Red Cloud&#x27;s War was led by the Lakota chief Red Cloud against the military who were erecting forts along the Bozeman Trail. It was the most successful campaign against the U.S. during the Indian Wars. By the Treaty of Fort Laramie (1868), the U.S. granted a large reservation to the Lakota, without military presence; it included the entire Black Hills. Captain Jack was a chief of the Native American Modoc tribe of California and Oregon, and was their leader during the Modoc War. With 53 Modoc warriors, Captain Jack held off 1,000 men of the U.S. Army for seven months. Captain Jack killed Edward Canby.

In June 1877, in the Nez Perce War the Nez Perce under Chief Joseph, unwilling to give up their traditional lands and move to a reservation, undertook a 1,200-mile (2,000 km) fighting retreat from Oregon to near the Canada–U.S. border in Montana. Numbering only 200 warriors, the Nez Perce &quot;battled some 2,000 American regulars and volunteers of different military units, together with their Native auxiliaries of many tribes, in a total of eighteen engagements, including four major battles and at least four fiercely contested skirmishes.&quot; The Nez Perce were finally surrounded at the Battle of Bear Paw and surrendered. The Great Sioux War of 1876 was conducted by the Lakota under Sitting Bull and Crazy Horse. The conflict began after repeated violations of the Treaty of Fort Laramie (1868) once gold was discovered in the hills. One of its famous battles was the Battle of the Little Bighorn, in which combined Sioux and Cheyenne forces defeated the 7th Cavalry, led by General George Armstrong Custer. The Ute War, fought by the Ute people against settlers in Utah and Colorado, led to two battles; the Meeker massacre which killed 11 Native agents, and the Pinhook massacre which killed 13 armed ranchers and cowboys. The Ute conflicts finally ended after the events of the Posey War in 1923 which was fought against settlers and law enforcement.

The end of the major Indian wars came at the Wounded Knee massacre on December 29, 1890, where the 7th Cavalry attempted to disarm a Sioux man and precipitated a massacre in which about 150 Sioux men, women, and children were killed. Only thirteen days before, Sitting Bull had been killed with his son Crow Foot in a gun battle with a group of Native police that had been sent by the American government to arrest him. Additional conflicts and incidents though, such as the Bluff War (1914–1915) and Posey War, would occur into the early 1920s. The last combat engagement between U.S. Army soldiers and Native Americans though occurred in the Battle of Bear Valley on January 9, 1918.

====Forts and outposts====
As the frontier moved westward, the establishment of U.S. military forts moved with it, representing and maintaining federal sovereignty over new territories. The military garrisons usually lacked defensible walls but were seldom attacked. They served as bases for troops at or near strategic areas, particularly for counteracting the Native presence. For example, Fort Bowie protected Apache Pass in southern Arizona along the mail route between Tucson and El Paso and was used to launch attacks against Cochise and Geronimo. Fort Laramie and Fort Kearny helped protect immigrants crossing the Great Plains and a series of posts in California protected miners. Forts were constructed to launch attacks against the Sioux. As Indian reservations sprang up, the military set up forts to protect them. Forts also guarded the Union Pacific and other rail lines. Other important forts were Fort Sill, Oklahoma, Fort Smith, Arkansas, Fort Snelling, Minnesota, Fort Union, New Mexico, Fort Worth, Texas, and Fort Walla Walla in Washington. Fort Omaha, Nebraska, was home to the Department of the Platte, and was responsible for outfitting most Western posts for more than 20 years after its founding in the late 1870s. Fort Huachuca in Arizona was also originally a frontier post and is still in use by the United States Army.

====Indian reservations====

Settlers on their way overland to Oregon and California became targets of Native threats. Robert L. Munkres read 66 diaries of parties traveling the Oregon Trail between 1834 and 1860 to estimate the actual dangers they faced from Native attacks in Nebraska and Wyoming. The vast majority of diarists reported no armed attacks at all. However many did report harassment by Natives who begged or demanded tolls, and stole horses and cattle. Madsen reports that the Shoshoni and Bannock tribes north and west of Utah were more aggressive toward wagon trains. The federal government attempted to reduce tensions and create new tribal boundaries in the Great Plains with two new treaties in early 1850, The Treaty of Fort Laramie established tribal zones for the Sioux, Cheyennes, Arapahos, Crows, and others, and allowed for the building of roads and posts across the tribal lands. A second treaty secured safe passage along the Santa Fe Trail for wagon trains. In return, the tribes would receive, for ten years, annual compensation for damages caused by migrants. The Kansas and Nebraska territories also became contentious areas as the federal government sought those lands for the future transcontinental railroad. In the Far West settlers began to occupy land in Oregon and California before the federal government secured title from the native tribes, causing considerable friction. In Utah, the Mormons also moved in before federal ownership was obtained.

A new policy of establishing reservations came gradually into shape after the boundaries of the &quot;Indian Territory&quot; began to be ignored. In providing for Indian reservations, Congress and the Office of Indian Affairs hoped to de-tribalize Native Americans and prepare them for integration with the rest of American society, the &quot;ultimate incorporation into the great body of our citizen population&quot;. This allowed for the development of dozens of riverfront towns along the Missouri River in the new Nebraska Territory, which was carved from the remainder of the Louisiana Purchase after the Kansas–Nebraska Act. Influential pioneer towns included Omaha, Nebraska City, and St. Joseph.

American attitudes towards Natives during this period ranged from malevolence (&quot;the only good Indian is a dead Indian&quot;) to misdirected humanitarianism (Indians live in &quot;inferior&quot; societies and by assimilation into white society they can be redeemed) to somewhat realistic (Native Americans and settlers could co-exist in separate but equal societies, dividing up the remaining western land). Dealing with nomadic tribes complicated the reservation strategy and decentralized tribal power made treaty making difficult among the Plains Indians. Conflicts erupted in the 1850s, resulting in various Indian wars. In these times of conflict, Natives become more stringent about white men entering their territory. Such as in the case of Oliver Loving, they would sometimes attack cowboys and their cattle if ever caught crossing in the borders of their land. They would also prey upon livestock if the food was scarce during hard times. However, the relationship between cowboys and Native Americans were more mutual than they are portrayed, and the former would occasionally pay a fine of 10 cents per cow for the latter to allow them to travel through their land. Natives also preyed upon stagecoaches travelling in the frontier for its horses and valuables.

After the Civil War, as the volunteer armies disbanded, the regular army cavalry regiments increased in number from six to ten, among them Custer&#x27;s U.S. 7th Cavalry Regiment of Little Bighorn fame, and the African-American U.S. 9th Cavalry Regiment and U.S. 10th Cavalry Regiment. The black units, along with others (both cavalry and infantry), collectively became known as the Buffalo Soldiers. According to Robert M. Utley:

===Social history===

====Democratic society====
Westerners were proud of their leadership in the movement for democracy and equality, a major theme for Frederick Jackson Turner. The new states of Kentucky, Tennessee, Alabama, and Ohio were more democratic than the parent states back East in terms of politics and society. The Western states were the first to give women the right to vote. By 1900 the West, especially California and Oregon, led the Progressive movement.

Scholars have examined the social history of the west in search of the American character. The history of Kansas, argued historian Carl L. Becker a century ago, reflects American ideals. He wrote: &quot;The Kansas spirit is the American spirit double distilled. It is a new grafted product of American individualism, American idealism, American intolerance. Kansas is America in microcosm.&quot;

Scholars have compared the emergence of democracy in America with other countries, regarding the frontier experience. Selwyn Troen has made the comparison with Israel. The American frontiersmen relied on individual effort, in the context of very large quantities of unsettled land with weak external enemies. Israel by contrast, operated in a very small geographical zone, surrounded by more powerful neighbors. The Jewish pioneer was not building an individual or family enterprise, but was a conscious participant in nation-building, with a high priority on collective and cooperative planned settlements. The Israeli pioneers brought in American experts on irrigation and agriculture to provide technical advice. However, they rejected the American frontier model in favor of a European model that supported their political and security concerns.

====Urban frontier====
The cities played an essential role in the development of the frontier, as transportation hubs, financial and communications centers, and providers of merchandise, services, and entertainment. As the railroads pushed westward into the unsettled territory after 1860, they build service towns to handle the needs of railroad construction crews, train crews, and passengers who ate meals at scheduled stops. In most of the South, there were very few cities of any size for miles around, and this pattern held for Texas as well, so railroads did not arrive until the 1880s. They then shipped the cattle out and cattle drives became short-distance affairs. However, the passenger trains were often the targets of armed gangs.
Denver&#x27;s economy before 1870 had been rooted in mining; it then grew by expanding its role in railroads, wholesale trade, manufacturing, food processing, and servicing the growing agricultural and ranching hinterland. Between 1870 and 1890, manufacturing output soared from $600,000 to $40 million, and the population grew by a factor of 20 times to 107,000. Denver had always attracted miners, workers, whores, and travelers. Saloons and gambling dens sprung up overnight. The city fathers boasted of its fine theaters, and especially the Tabor Grand Opera House built in 1881. By 1890, Denver had grown to be the 26th largest city in America, and the fifth-largest city west of the Mississippi River. The boom times attracted millionaires and their mansions, as well as hustlers, poverty, and crime. Denver gained regional notoriety with its range of bawdy houses, from the sumptuous quarters of renowned madams to the squalid &quot;cribs&quot; located a few blocks away. Business was good; visitors spent lavishly, then left town. As long as madams conducted their business discreetly, and &quot;crib girls&quot; did not advertise their availability too crudely, authorities took their bribes and looked the other way. Occasional cleanups and crack downs satisfied the demands for reform.

With its giant mountain of copper, Butte, Montana, was the largest, richest, and rowdiest mining camp on the frontier. It was an ethnic stronghold, with the Irish Catholics in control of politics and of the best jobs at the leading mining corporation Anaconda Copper. City boosters opened a public library in 1894. Ring argues that the library was originally a mechanism of social control, &quot;an antidote to the miners&#x27; proclivity for drinking, whoring, and gambling&quot;. It was also designed to promote middle-class values and to convince Easterners that Butte was a cultivated city.

====Race and ethnicity====

=====European immigrants=====
European immigrants often built communities of similar religious and ethnic backgrounds. For example, many Finns went to Minnesota and Michigan, Swedes and Norwegians to Minnesota and the Dakotas, Irish to railroad centers along the transcontinental lines, Volga Germans to North Dakota, English converts to the LDS church went to Utah including English immigrants who settled in the Rocky Mountain states (Colorado,Wyoming and Idaho) and German Jews to Portland, Oregon.

=====African Americans=====
African Americans moved West as soldiers, as well as cowboys (see Black cowboy), farmhands, saloon workers, cooks, and outlaws. The Buffalo Soldiers were soldiers in the all-black 9th and 10th Cavalry regiments, and 24th and 25th Infantry Regiments of the U.S. Army. They had white officers and served in numerous western forts.

About 4,000 black people came to California in Gold Rush days. In 1879, after the end of Reconstruction in the South, several thousand Freedmen moved from Southern states to Kansas. Known as the Exodusters, they were lured by the prospect of good, cheap Homestead Law land and better treatment. The all-black town of Nicodemus, Kansas, which was founded in 1877, was an organized settlement that predates the Exodusters but is often associated with them.

=====Asians=====
The California Gold Rush included thousands of Mexican and Chinese arrivals. Chinese migrants, many of whom were impoverished peasants, provided the major part of the workforce for the building of the Central Pacific portion of the transcontinental railroad. Most of them went home by 1870 when the railroad was finished. Those who stayed on worked in mining, agriculture, and opened small shops such as groceries, laundries, and restaurants. Hostility against the Chinese remained high in the western states/territories as seen by the Chinese Massacre Cove episode and the Rock Springs massacre. The Chinese were generally forced into self-sufficient &quot;Chinatowns&quot; in cities such as San Francisco, Portland, Seattle, and Los Angeles. In Los Angeles, the last major anti-Chinese riot took place in 1871, after which local law enforcement grew stronger. In the late 19th century, Chinatowns were squalid slums known for their vice, prostitution, drugs, and violent battles between &quot;tongs&quot;. By the 1930s, however, Chinatowns had become clean, safe and attractive tourist destinations.

The first Japanese arrived in the U.S. in 1869, with the arrival of 22 people from samurai families, settling in Placer County, California, to establish the Wakamatsu Tea and Silk Farm Colony. Japanese were recruited to work on plantations in Hawaii, beginning in 1885. By the late 19th century, more Japanese emigrated to Hawaii and the American mainland. The Issei, or first-generation Japanese immigrants, were not allowed to become U.S. citizens because they were not &quot;free white person[s]&quot;, per the United States Naturalization Law of 1790. This did not change until the passage of the Immigration and Nationality Act of 1952, known as the McCarran-Walter Act, which allowed Japanese immigrants to become naturalized U.S. citizens.

By 1920, Japanese-American farmers produced US$67 million worth of crops, more than ten percent of California&#x27;s total crop value. There were 111,000 Japanese Americans in the U.S., of which 82,000 were immigrants and 29,000 were U.S. born. Congress passed the Immigration Act of 1924 effectively ending all Japanese immigration to the U.S. The U.S.-born children of the Issei were citizens, in accordance to the 14th Amendment to the United States Constitution.

=====Hispanics=====

The great majority of Hispanics who had been living in the former territories of New Spain remained and became American citizens in 1848. The 10,000 or so Californios also became U.S. citizens. They lived in southern California and after 1880 were overshadowed by the hundreds of thousands of new arrivals from the eastern states. Those in New Mexico dominated towns and villages that changed little until well into the 20th century. New arrivals from Mexico arrived, especially after the Revolution of 1911 terrorized thousands of villages all across Mexico. Most refugees went to Texas or California, and soon poor barrios appeared in many border towns. The California &quot;Robin Hood&quot;, Joaquin Murrieta, led a gang in the 1850s which burned houses, killed exploiting miners, robbed stagecoaches of landowners and fought against violence and discrimination against Latin Americans. In Texas, Juan Cortina led a 20-year campaign against Anglos and the Texas Rangers, starting around 1859.

====Family life====
On the Great Plains very few single men attempted to operate a farm or ranch; farmers clearly understood the need for a hard-working wife, and numerous children, to handle the many chores, including child-rearing, feeding, and clothing the family, managing the housework, and feeding the hired hands. During the early years of settlement, farm women played an integral role in assuring family survival by working outdoors. After a generation or so, women increasingly left the fields, thus redefining their roles within the family. New conveniences such as sewing and washing machines encouraged women to turn to domestic roles. The scientific housekeeping movement, promoted across the land by the media and government extension agents, as well as county fairs which featured achievements in home cookery and canning, advice columns for women in the farm papers, and home economics courses in the schools all contributed to this trend.

Although the eastern image of farm life on the prairies emphasizes the isolation of the lonely farmer and farm life, in reality, rural folk created a rich social life for themselves. They often sponsored activities that combined work, food, and entertainment such as barn raisings, corn huskings, quilting bees, Grange meetings, church activities, and school functions. The womenfolk organized shared meals and potluck events, as well as extended visits between families.

=====Childhood=====
Childhood on the American frontier is contested territory. One group of scholars, following the lead of novelists Willa Cather and Laura Ingalls Wilder, argue the rural environment was beneficial to the child&#x27;s upbringing. Historians Katherine Harris and Elliott West write that rural upbringing allowed children to break loose from urban hierarchies of age and gender, promoted family interdependence, and at the end produced children who were more self-reliant, mobile, adaptable, responsible, independent and more in touch with nature than their urban or eastern counterparts. On the other hand, historians Elizabeth Hampsten and Lillian Schlissel offer a grim portrait of loneliness, privation, abuse, and demanding physical labor from an early age. Riney-Kehrberg takes a middle position.

====Prostitution and gambling====
Entrepreneurs set up shops and businesses to cater to the miners. World-famous were the houses of prostitution found in every mining camp worldwide. Prostitution was a growth industry attracting sex workers from around the globe, pulled in by the money, despite the harsh and dangerous working conditions and low prestige. Chinese women were frequently sold by their families and taken to the camps as prostitutes; they had to send their earnings back to the family in China. In Virginia City, Nevada, a prostitute, Julia Bulette, was one of the few who achieved &quot;respectable&quot; status. She nursed victims of an influenza epidemic; this gave her acceptance in the community and the support of the sheriff. The townspeople were shocked when she was murdered in 1867; they gave her a lavish funeral and speedily tried and hanged her assailant. Until the 1890s, madams predominantly ran the businesses, after which male pimps took over, and the treatment of the women generally declined. It was not uncommon for bordellos in Western towns to operate openly, without the stigma of East Coast cities. Gambling and prostitution were central to life in these western towns, and only later—as the female population increased, reformers moved in, and other civilizing influences arrived—did prostitution become less blatant and less common. After a decade or so the mining towns attracted respectable women who ran boarding houses, organized church societies, worked as laundresses and seamstresses and strove for independent status.

Whenever a new settlement or mining camp started one of the first buildings or tents erected would be a gambling hall. As the population grew, gambling halls were typically the largest and most ornately decorated buildings in any town and often housed a bar, stage for entertainment, and hotel rooms for guests. These establishments were a driving force behind the local economy and many towns measured their prosperity by the number of gambling halls and professional gamblers they had. Towns that were friendly to gambling were typically known to sports as &quot;wide-awake&quot; or &quot;wide-open&quot;. Cattle towns in Texas, Oklahoma, Kansas, and Nebraska became famous centers of gambling. The cowboys had been accumulating their wages and postponing their pleasures until they finally arrived in town with money to wager. Abilene, Dodge City, Wichita, Omaha, and Kansas City all had an atmosphere that was convivial to gaming. Such an atmosphere also invited trouble and such towns also developed reputations as lawless and dangerous places.

====Law and order====
Historian Waddy W. Moore uses court records to show that on the sparsely settled Arkansas frontier lawlessness was common. He distinguished two types of crimes: unprofessional (dueling, crimes of drunkenness, selling whiskey to the Natives, cutting trees on federal land) and professional (rustling, highway robbery, counterfeiting). Criminals found many opportunities to rob pioneer families of their possessions, while the few underfunded lawmen had great difficulty detecting, arresting, holding, and convicting wrongdoers. Bandits, typically in groups of two or three, rarely attacked stagecoaches with a guard carrying a sawed-off, double-barreled shotgun; it proved less risky to rob teamsters, people on foot, and solitary horsemen, while bank robberies themselves were harder to pull off due to the security of the establishment. According to historian Brian Robb, the earliest form of organized crime in America was born from the gangs of the Old West.

When criminals were convicted, the punishment was severe. Aside from the occasional Western sheriff and Marshal, there were other various law enforcement agencies throughout the American frontier, such as the Texas Rangers. These lawmen were not just instrumental in keeping the peace, but also in protecting the locals from Native and Mexican threats at the border. Law enforcement tended to be more stringent in towns than in rural areas. Law enforcement emphasized maintaining stability more than armed combat, focusing on drunkenness, disarming cowboys who violated gun-control edicts and dealing with flagrant breaches of gambling and prostitution ordinances.

Dykstra argues that the violent image of the cattle towns in film and fiction is largely a myth. The real Dodge City, he says, was the headquarters for the buffalo-hide trade of the Southern Plains and one of the West&#x27;s principal cattle towns, a sale and shipping point for cattle arriving from Texas. He states there is a &quot;second Dodge City&quot; that belongs to the popular imagination and thrives as a cultural metaphor for violence, chaos, and depravity. For the cowboy arriving with money in hand after two months on the trail, the town was exciting. A contemporary eyewitness of Hays City, Kansas, paints a vivid image of this cattle town:

It has been acknowledged that the popular portrayal of Dodge City in film and fiction carries a note of truth, however, as gun crime was rampant in the city before the establishment of a local government. Soon after the city&#x27;s residents officially established their first municipal government, however, a law banning concealed firearms was enacted and crime was reduced soon afterward. Similar laws were passed in other frontier towns to reduce the rate of gun crime as well. As UCLA law professor Adam Wrinkler noted:

Tombstone, Arizona, was a turbulent mining town that flourished longer than most, from 1877 to 1929. Silver was discovered in 1877, and by 1881 the town had a population of over 10,000. In 1879 the newly arrived Earp brothers bought shares in the Vizina mine, water rights, and gambling concessions, but Virgil, Wyatt, and Morgan Earp obtained positions at different times as federal and local lawmen. After more than a year of threats and feuding, they, along with Doc Holliday, killed three outlaws in the Gunfight at the O.K. Corral, the most famous gunfight of the Old West. In the aftermath, Virgil Earp was maimed in an ambush, and Morgan Earp was assassinated while playing billiards. Wyatt and others, including his brothers James Earp and Warren Earp, pursued those they believed responsible in an extra-legal vendetta and warrants were issued for their arrest in the murder of Frank Stilwell. The Cochise County Cowboys were one of the first organized crime syndicates in the United States, and their demise came at the hands of Wyatt Earp.

Western story tellers and film makers featured the gunfight in many Western productions. Walter Noble Burns&#x27;s novel &quot;Tombstone&quot; (1927) made Earp famous. Hollywood celebrated Earp&#x27;s Tombstone days with John Ford&#x27;s &quot;My Darling Clementine&quot; (1946), John Sturges&#x27;s &quot;Gunfight at the O.K. Corral&quot; (1957) and &quot;Hour of the Gun&quot; (1967), Frank Perry&#x27;s &quot;Doc&quot; (1971), George Cosmatos&#x27;s &quot;Tombstone&quot; (1993), and Lawrence Kasdan&#x27;s &quot;Wyatt Earp&quot; (1994). They solidified Earp&#x27;s modern reputation as the Old West&#x27;s deadliest gunman.

=====Banditry=====
The major type of banditry was conducted by the infamous outlaws of the West, including the James–Younger Gang, Billy the Kid, the Dalton Gang, Black Bart, Sam Bass, Butch Cassidy&#x27;s Wild Bunch, and hundreds of others who preyed on banks, trains, stagecoaches, and in some cases even armed government transports such as the Wham Paymaster robbery and the Skeleton Canyon robbery. Some of the outlaws, such as Jesse James, were products of the violence of the Civil War (James had ridden with Quantrill&#x27;s Raiders) and others became outlaws during hard times in the cattle industry. Many were misfits and drifters who roamed the West avoiding the law. In rural areas Joaquin Murieta, Jack Powers, Augustine Chacon and other bandits terrorized the state. When outlaw gangs were near, towns would occasionally raise a posse to drive them out or capture them. Seeing that the need to combat the bandits was a growing business opportunity, Allan Pinkerton ordered his National Detective Agency, founded in 1850, to open branches in the West, and they got into the business of pursuing and capturing outlaws. To take refuge from the law, outlaws would use the advantages of the open range, remote passes, and badlands to hide. While some settlements and towns in the frontier also house outlaws and criminals, which were called &quot;outlaw towns&quot;.

Banditry was a major issue in California after 1849, as thousands of young men detached from family or community moved into a land with few law enforcement mechanisms. To combat this, the San Francisco Committee of Vigilance was established to give drumhead trials and death sentences to well-known offenders. As such, other earlier settlements created their private agencies to protect communities due to the lack of peace-keeping establishments. These vigilance committees reflected different occupations in the frontier, such as land clubs, cattlemen&#x27;s associations and mining camps. Similar vigilance committees also existed in Texas, and their main objective was to stamp out lawlessness and rid communities of desperadoes and rustlers. These committees would sometimes form mob rule for private vigilante groups, but usually were made up of responsible citizens who wanted only to maintain order. Criminals caught by these vigilance committees were treated cruelly; often hung or shot without any form of trial.

Civilians also took arms to defend themselves in the Old West, sometimes siding with lawmen (Coffeyville Bank Robbery), or siding with outlaws (Battle of Ingalls). In the Post-Civil War frontier, over 523 whites, 34 blacks, and 75 others were victims of lynching. However, cases of lynching in the Old West wasn&#x27;t primarily caused by the absence of a legal system, but also because of social class. Historian Michael J. Pfeifer writes, &quot;Contrary to the popular understanding, early territorial lynching did not flow from an absence or distance of law enforcement but rather from the social instability of early communities and their contest for property, status, and the definition of social order.&quot;

=====Feuds=====

Range wars were infamous armed conflicts that took place in the &quot;open range&quot; of the American frontier. The subject of these conflicts was the control of lands freely used for farming and cattle grazing which gave the conflict its name. Range wars became more common by the end of the American Civil War, and numerous conflicts were fought such as the Pleasant Valley War, Johnson County War, Pecos War, Mason County War, Colorado Range War, Fence Cutting War, Colfax County War, Castaic Range War, Spring Creek raid, Porum Range War, Barber–Mizell feud, San Elizario Salt War and others. During a range war in Montana, a vigilante group called Stuart&#x27;s Stranglers, which were made up of cattlemen and cowboys, killed up to 20 criminals and range squatters in 1884 alone. In Nebraska, stock grower Isom Olive led a range war in 1878 that killed a number of homesteaders from lynchings and shootouts before eventually leading to his own murder. Another infamous type of open range conflict were the Sheep Wars, which were fought between sheep ranchers and cattle ranchers over grazing rights and mainly occurred in Texas, Arizona and the border region of Wyoming and Colorado. In most cases, formal military involvement were used to quickly put an end to these conflicts. Other conflicts over land and territory were also fought such as the Regulator–Moderator War, Cortina Troubles, Las Cuevas War and the Bandit War.

Feuds involving families and bloodlines also occurred much in the frontier. Since private agencies and vigilance committees were the substitute for proper courts, many families initially depended on themselves and their communities for their security and justice. These wars include the Lincoln County War, Tutt–Everett War, Flynn–Doran feud, Early–Hasley feud, Brooks-Baxter War, Sutton–Taylor feud, Horrell Brothers feud, Brooks–McFarland Feud, Reese–Townsend feud and the Earp Vendetta Ride.

====Cattle====

The end of the bison herds opened up millions of acres for cattle ranching. Spanish cattlemen had introduced cattle ranching and longhorn cattle to the Southwest in the 17th century, and the men who worked the ranches, called &quot;vaqueros&quot;, were the first &quot;cowboys&quot; in the West. After the Civil War, Texas ranchers raised large herds of longhorn cattle. The nearest railheads were 800 or more miles (1300+ km) north in Kansas (Abilene, Kansas City, Dodge City, and Wichita). So once fattened, the ranchers and their cowboys drove the herds north along the Western, Chisholm, and Shawnee trails. The cattle were shipped to Chicago, St. Louis, and points east for slaughter and consumption in the fast-growing cities. The Chisholm Trail, laid out by cattleman Joseph McCoy along an old trail marked by Jesse Chisholm, was the major artery of cattle commerce, carrying over 1.5 million head of cattle between 1867 and 1871 over the from south Texas to Abilene, Kansas. The long drives were treacherous, especially crossing water such as the Brazos and the Red River and when they had to fend off Natives and rustlers looking to make off with their cattle. A typical drive would take three to four months and contained two miles (3 km) of cattle six abreast. Despite the risks, a successful drive proved very profitable to everyone involved, as the price of one steer was $4 in Texas and $40 in the East.

By the 1870s and 1880s, cattle ranches expanded further north into new grazing grounds and replaced the bison herds in Wyoming, Montana, Colorado, Nebraska, and the Dakota territory, using the rails to ship to both coasts. Many of the largest ranches were owned by Scottish and English financiers. The single largest cattle ranch in the entire West was owned by American John W. Iliff, &quot;cattle king of the Plains&quot;, operating in Colorado and Wyoming. Gradually, longhorns were replaced by the British breeds of Hereford and Angus, introduced by settlers from the Northwest. Though less hardy and more disease-prone, these breeds produced better-tasting beef and matured faster.

The funding for the cattle industry came largely from British sources, as the European investors engaged in a speculative extravaganza—a &quot;bubble&quot;. Graham concludes the mania was founded on genuine opportunity, as well as &quot;exaggeration, gullibility, inadequate communications, dishonesty, and incompetence&quot;. A severe winter engulfed the plains toward the end of 1886 and well into 1887, locking the prairie grass under ice and crusted snow which starving herds could not penetrate. The British lost most of their money—as did eastern investors like Theodore Roosevelt, but their investments did create a large industry that continues to cycle through boom and bust periods.

On a much smaller scale, sheep grazing was locally popular; sheep were easier to feed and needed less water. However, Americans did not eat mutton. As farmers moved in open range cattle ranching came to an end and was replaced by barbed wire spreads where water, breeding, feeding, and grazing could be controlled. This led to &quot;fence wars&quot; which erupted over disputes about water rights.

=====Cowtowns=====
Anchoring the booming cattle industry of the 1860s and 1870s were the cattle towns in Kansas and Missouri. Like the mining towns in California and Nevada, cattle towns such as Abilene, Dodge City, and Ellsworth experienced a short period of boom and bust lasting about five years. The cattle towns would spring up as land speculators would rush in ahead of a proposed rail line and build a town and the supporting services attractive to the cattlemen and the cowboys. If the railroads complied, the new grazing ground and supporting town would secure the cattle trade. However, unlike the mining towns which in many cases became ghost towns and ceased to exist after the ore played out, cattle towns often evolved from cattle to farming and continued after the grazing lands were exhausted.

===Conservation and environmentalism===

The concern with the protection of the environment became a new issue in the late 19th century, pitting different interests. On the one side were the lumber and coal companies who called for maximum exploitation of natural resources to maximize jobs, economic growth, and their own profit.

In the center were the conservationists, led by Theodore Roosevelt and his coalition of outdoorsmen, sportsmen, bird watchers, and scientists. They wanted to reduce waste; emphasized the value of natural beauty for tourism and ample wildlife for hunters; and argued that careful management would not only enhance these goals but also increase the long-term economic benefits to society by planned harvesting and environmental protections. Roosevelt worked his entire career to put the issue high on the national agenda. He was deeply committed to conserving natural resources. He worked closely with Gifford Pinchot and used the Newlands Reclamation Act of 1902 to promote federal construction of dams to irrigate small farms and placed 230 million acres (360,000 mi or 930,000 km) under federal protection. Roosevelt set aside more Federal land, national parks, and nature preserves than all of his predecessors combined.

Roosevelt explained his position in 1910:

The third element, smallest at first but growing rapidly after 1870, were the environmentalists who honored nature for its own sake, and rejected the goal of maximizing human benefits. Their leader was John Muir (1838–1914), a widely read author and naturalist and pioneer advocate of preservation of wilderness for its own sake, and founder of the Sierra Club. Muir, a Scottish-American based in California, in 1889 started organizing support to preserve the sequoias in the Yosemite Valley; Congress did pass the Yosemite National Park bill (1890). In 1897 President Grover Cleveland created thirteen protected forests but lumber interests had Congress cancel the move. Muir, taking the persona of an Old Testament prophet, crusaded against the lumberman, portraying it as a contest &quot;between landscape righteousness and the devil&quot;. A master publicist, Muir&#x27;s magazine articles, in &quot;Harper&#x27;s Weekly&quot; (June 5, 1897) and the &quot;Atlantic Monthly&quot; turned the tide of public sentiment. He mobilized public opinion to support Roosevelt&#x27;s program of setting aside national monuments, national forest reserves, and national parks. However, Muir broke with Roosevelt and especially President William Howard Taft on the Hetch Hetchy dam, which was built in the Yosemite National Park to supply water to San Francisco. Biographer Donald Worster says, &quot;Saving the American soul from a total surrender to materialism was the cause for which he fought.&quot;

====Buffalo====

The rise of the cattle industry and the cowboy is directly tied to the demise of the huge herds of bison—usually called the &quot;buffalo&quot;. Once numbering over 25 million on the Great Plains, the grass-eating herds were a vital resource animal for the Plains Indians, providing food, hides for clothing and shelter, and bones for implements. Loss of habitat, disease, and over-hunting steadily reduced the herds through the 19th century to the point of near extinction. The last 10–15 million died out in a decade 1872–1883; only 100 survived. The tribes that depended on the buffalo had little choice but to accept the government offer of reservations, where the government would feed and supply them. Conservationists founded the American Bison Society in 1905; it lobbied Congress to establish public bison herds. Several national parks in the U.S. and Canada were created, in part to provide a sanctuary for bison and other large wildlife. The bison population reached 500,000 by 2003.

===End of the frontier===
Following the 1890 U.S. census, the superintendent announced that there was no longer a clear line of advancing settlement, and hence no longer a contiguous frontier in the continental United States. When examining the later 1900 U.S. census results though, the contiguous frontier line does remain. But by the 1910 U.S. census, only pockets of the frontier remain without a clear westward line, allowing travel across the continent without ever crossing a frontier line.

Virgin farmland was increasingly hard to find after 1890—although the railroads advertised some in eastern Montana. Bicha shows that nearly 600,000 American farmers sought cheap land by moving to the Prairie frontier of the Canadian West from 1897 to 1914. However, about two-thirds of them grew disillusioned and returned to the U.S. Despite this, homesteaders claimed more land in the first two decades of the 20th century than the 19th century. The Homestead Acts and proliferation of railroads are often credited as being important factors in shrinking the frontier, by efficiently bringing in settlers and required infrastructure. The increased size of land grants from 160 to 320 acres in 1909 and then rangeland to 640 acres in 1916 accelerated this process. Barbed wire is also reasoned to reduce the traditional open range. In addition, the growing adoption of automobiles and their required network of adequate roads, first federally subsidized by the Federal Aid Highway Act of 1916, solidified the frontier&#x27;s end.

The admission of Oklahoma as a state in 1907 upon the combination of the Oklahoma Territory and the last remaining Indian Territory, and the Arizona and New Mexico territories as states in 1912, marks the end of the frontier story for many scholars. Due to their low and uneven populations during this period though, frontier territory remained for the meantime. Of course, a few typical frontier episodes still happened such as the last stagecoach robbery occurred in Nevada&#x27;s remaining frontier in December 1916. A period known as &quot;The Western Civil War of Incorporation&quot; that often was violent, lasted from the 1850s to 1919.

The Mexican Revolution also led to significant conflict reaching across the US-Mexico border which was still mostly within frontier territory, known as the Mexican Border War (1910–1919). Flashpoints included the Battle of Columbus (1916) and the Punitive Expedition (1916–1917). The Bandit War (1915–1919) involved attacks targeted against Texan settlers. Also, skirmishes involving Natives happened as late as the Bluff War (1914–1915) and the Posey War (1923).

The westward expansion of American influence and jurisdiction across the Pacific in the late 19th century was in some sense a new &quot;Asia–Pacific frontier&quot;, with Frederick Jackson Turner arguing this to be a necessary element of the U.S.&#x27;s growth, as its identity as a civilized and ideals-based nation depended on constantly overcoming a savage &#x27;other&#x27;.

Alaska was not admitted as a state until 1959. With that, the driving ethos and storyline of the &quot;American frontier&quot; had passed.

==People of the American frontier==

===Cowboys===
Central to the myth and the reality of the West is the American cowboy. In actuality, the life of a cowboy was a hard one and revolved around two annual roundups, spring and fall, the subsequent drives to market, and the time off in the cattle towns spending their hard-earned money on food, clothing, firearms, gambling, and prostitution. During winter, many cowboys hired themselves out to ranches near the cattle towns, where they repaired and maintained equipment and buildings. Working the cattle was not just a routine job but also a lifestyle that exulted in the freedom of the wide unsettled outdoors on horseback. Long drives hired one cowboy for about 250 head of cattle. Saloons were ubiquitous (outside Mormondom), but on the trail, the cowboys were forbidden to drink alcohol. Often, hired cowboys were trained and knowledgeable in their trade such as herding, ranching and protecting cattle. To protect their herd from wild animals, hostile Natives, and rustlers, cowboys carried with them their iconic weaponry such as the Bowie knife, lasso, bullwhip, revolvers, rifles, and shotguns.

Many of the cowboys in the late 1860s, 1870s, and 1880s were veterans of the Civil War: a diverse group, they included Blacks, Hispanics, Native Americans, and immigrants from many lands. The earliest cowboys in Texas learned their trade, adapted their clothing, and took their jargon from the Mexican vaqueros or &quot;buckaroos&quot;, the heirs of Spanish cattlemen from the middle-south of Spain. Chaps, the heavy protective leather trousers worn by cowboys, got their name from the Spanish &quot;chaparreras&quot;, and the lariat, or rope, was derived from &quot;la reata&quot;. All the distinct clothing of the cowboy—boots, saddles, hats, pants, chaps, slickers, bandannas, gloves, and collar-less shirts—were practical and adaptable, designed for protection and comfort. The cowboy hat quickly developed the capability, even in the early years, to identify its wearer as someone associated with the West; it came to symbolize the frontier. The most enduring fashion adapted from the cowboy, popular nearly worldwide today, are &quot;blue jeans&quot;, originally made by Levi Strauss for miners in 1850.

Before a drive, a cowboy&#x27;s duties included riding out on the range and bringing together the scattered cattle. The best cattle would be selected, roped, and branded, and most male cattle were castrated. The cattle also needed to be dehorned and examined and treated for infections. On the long drives, the cowboys had to keep the cattle moving and in line. The cattle had to be watched day and night as they were prone to stampedes and straying. While camping every night, cowboys would often sing to their herd to keep them calm. The workdays often lasted fourteen hours, with just six hours of sleep. It was grueling, dusty work, with just a few minutes of relaxation before and at the end of a long day. On the trail, drinking, gambling, and brawling were often prohibited and fined, and sometimes cursing as well. It was monotonous and boring work, with food to match: bacon, beans, bread, coffee, dried fruit, and potatoes. On average, cowboys earned $30 to $40 per month, because of the heavy physical and emotional toll, it was unusual for a cowboy to spend more than seven years on the range. As open range ranching and the long drives gave way to fenced-in ranches in the 1880s, by the 1890s the glory days of the cowboy came to an end, and the myths about the &quot;free-living&quot; cowboy began to emerge.

===Miners===
In 1849, James W. Marshall was building a sawmill for Sutter&#x27;s Fort on the riverside of the American River when he noticed metal flakes under the waterwheel. He recognized the flakes to be gold. However, the sawmill he was building was not his, meaning that when he finished building the sawmill, his client John Sutter would also notice. Word quickly spread of gold in the American River, leading to a surge of westward migration to California in the hope of striking it rich. This was the start of the California Gold Rush. 

The California Gold Rush had positive and negative benefits for America: it simultaneously increased the population of California to almost 100,000 people, which helped with the modernization of California, but it also reduced the population of other states. Their employment rates took a hit as well, as people were quitting their jobs so they could embark on their journeys. The California Gold Rush finally came to an end in 1855. The extraction of gold from the river was done by dust panning; with most dust panning normally done by prospectors.

Even after the California Gold Rush, mining was still a common occupation. Most mountainside towns likely had a mineshaft. Most miners were poor, as mining was a very labor-intensive job. Miners would use pickaxes in order to mine into the mountains. They mined gold, zinc, copper, and other metals. These metals were sold to shopkeepers and rich people for currency. Miners were paid a salary of $1.70 per day.

Similarly, other gold rushes happened in other territories as other expeditions were happening. Events such as the Black Hills Gold Rush in the Dakota Territory following the Black Hills Expedition. Or the Pike&#x27;s Peak Gold Rush in the Nebraska Territory.

===Women===
Laws were less restrictive in the West for white women. Western states allowed women to vote long before the eastern states did and had more liberal divorce laws. Minority women did not experience the same freedoms. Native women were forced onto reservations, but still tried to maintain their ways of life and support their families. Chinese women immigrated to work in the laundries, inns, and saloons of mining camps. Some were sold to work in mining camps by their impoverished families in China. Some women were also forced to work in the sex industry.

The main occupation of women was running the household and raising children. Tasks included cooking, cleaning, making clothes, gardening, and helping out on the farm. Sometimes women were the sole operators of farms. Women were also entrepreneurs, running saloons, boarding houses, laundries, and inns. Independent women earned a living through teaching or sex work. In towns with male-dominated industries such as logging and mining, the gender imbalance led to different roles for women. Women were paid for domestic work that was traditionally unpaid.

Some women also worked in predominantly male positions; there were cowgirls, female business owners, female gunslingers and female bounty hunters.

Women had less lawful protection compared to men.

===Loggers===
Being a lumberjack was a labor-intensive occupation. The job was a fairly common occupation to have in this era, similarly to miners and railroad workers, many people pursued these careers, but was ultimately very dangerous. Loggers were paid more than both miners and railroaders combined, making $3.20 every day.

To cut down trees, lumberjacks had many tools to help them in the process. To cut down trees, they would send multiple loggers depending on the size of the tree. From there, they would use double-sided axes to chop the base of the tree. After the tree collapsed, if the tree was too big to chop with the double-sided axes, they would use a gigantic saw called a crosscut. These saws could be over 12 feet in length.

And for transportation, they would either float the logs down a river (a profession known as log driving), or use a high-wheel loader to lift the massive logs that were strapped together using rope. Another rope was tied to oxen, then the oxen would pull the logs to wherever they needed to be.

===Frontiersmen===
The frontiersmen were the explorers of the Old West. In 1803, Thomas Jefferson closed the deal of the Louisiana Purchase for 15 million dollars. With the 828,000 square miles of gained territory. He sent Meriwether Lewis and William Clark along with 45 other men to go explore the new territory. Their expedition across the Western United States turned into the famous Lewis and Clark Expedition. There were many dangers on the trail; they had to travel up, portage and ford rivers, suffer injuries, disease, famine, and fending off grizzly bears and hostile Native American tribes. The Lewis and Clark expedition did take place before the Wild West era, but it was a major event in United States history, and was one of the main reasons the Wild West era began.

Besides Lewis and Clark, the Wild West era brought many other frontiersmen. They were very self-sufficient compared to normal townspeople. They cleared their own land, built their own shelter, and farmed and foraged for their food. Their nomadic lifestyle was hurtful for America&#x27;s economy, as unemployment made it difficult for more money to go into circulation, and stores were going bankrupt from a lack of customers. This also caused territorial disputes with the Native Americans. For example, Charles Bent&#x27;s arrival into Colorado caused the Taos Revolt. Bent shortly died from an assault from multiple Pueblo warriors.

===Gunfighters===
The names and exploits of Western gunslingers took a major role in American folklore, fiction and film. Their guns and costumes became children&#x27;s toys for make-believe shootouts. The stories became immensely popular in Germany and other European countries, which produced their novels and films about the American frontier. The image of a Wild West filled with countless gunfights was a myth based on repeated exaggerations. Actual gunfights in the Old West were more episodic rather than being a common thing, but when gunfights did occur, the cause for each varied. Some were simply the result of the heat of the moment, while others were longstanding feuds, or between bandits and lawmen. Although mostly romanticized, there were instances of &quot;quick draw&quot; that did occur though rarely, such as Wild Bill Hickok – Davis Tutt shootout and Luke Short-Jim Courtright duel. Fatal duels were fought to uphold personal honor in the West. The most notable and well-known took place in Arizona, New Mexico, Kansas, Oklahoma, and Texas. To prevent gunfights, towns such as Dodge City and Tombstone prohibited firearms in town.

===Acculturated places===

====Spanish West====
In 1848, when the U.S. won the Mexican–American War, it gained seven new territories: California, Arizona, New Mexico, Texas, Colorado, Nevada, and Utah. This was one of the main causes of the Wild West era. When people relocated to the underdeveloped badlands, a pure culture was developed within Western America. Sonora&#x27;s culture was also acculturated to the Wild West.

====Canadians====
On June 13, 1898, the Yukon Territory Act created Yukon as a separate Canadian territory. One of the most important cities on the trail, Dawson City, gave prospectors access to gold mines. causing the Klondike Gold Rush. The Klondike Trail was a dangerous place; many wild animals attacked the prospectors, and contagious diseases spread throughout the trail. In total, over 1,000 died on the trail from various causes.

==American frontier in popular culture==
The exploration, settlement, exploitation, and conflicts of the &quot;American Old West&quot; form a unique tapestry of events, which has been celebrated by Americans and foreigners alike—in art, music, dance, novels, magazines, short stories, poetry, theater, video games, movies, radio, television, song, and oral tradition—which continues in the modern era. Beth E. Levy argues that the physical and mythological west inspired composers Aaron Copland, Roy Harris, Virgil Thomson, Charles Wakefield Cadman, and Arthur Farwell.

Religious themes have inspired many environmentalists as they contemplate the pristine West before the frontiersmen violated its spirituality. Actually, as a historian William Cronon has demonstrated, the concept of &quot;wilderness&quot; was highly negative and the antithesis of religiosity before the romantic movement of the 19th century.

The Frontier Thesis of historian Frederick Jackson Turner, proclaimed in 1893, established the main lines of historiography which fashioned scholarship for three or four generations and appeared in the textbooks used by practically all American students.

===Popularizing Western lore===
The mythologizing of the West began with minstrel shows and popular music in the 1840s. During the same period, P. T. Barnum presented Native chiefs, dances, and other Wild West exhibits in his museums. However, large scale awareness took off when the dime novel appeared in 1859, the first being &quot;Malaeska, the Indian Wife of the White Hunter&quot;. By simplifying reality and grossly exaggerating the truth, the novels captured the public&#x27;s attention with sensational tales of violence and heroism and fixed in the public&#x27;s mind stereotypical images of heroes and villains—courageous cowboys and savage Natives, virtuous lawmen and ruthless outlaws, brave settlers and predatory cattlemen. Millions of copies and thousands of titles were sold. The novels relied on a series of predictable literary formulas appealing to mass tastes and were often written in as little as a few days. The most successful of all dime novels was Edward S. Ellis&#x27; &quot;Seth Jones&quot; (1860). Ned Buntline&#x27;s stories glamorized Buffalo Bill Cody, and Edward L. Wheeler created &quot;Deadwood Dick&quot; and &quot;Hurricane Nell&quot; while featuring Calamity Jane.

Buffalo Bill Cody was the most effective popularizer of the Old West in the U.S. and Europe. He presented the first &quot;Wild West&quot; show in 1883, featuring a recreation of famous battles (especially Custer&#x27;s Last Stand), expert marksmanship, and dramatic demonstrations of horsemanship by cowboys and natives, as well as sure-shooting Annie Oakley.

Elite Eastern writers and artists of the late 19th century promoted and celebrated western lore. Theodore Roosevelt, wearing his hats as a historian, explorer, hunter, rancher, and naturalist, was especially productive. Their work appeared in upscale national magazines such as &quot;Harper&#x27;s Weekly&quot; featured illustrations by artists Frederic Remington, Charles M. Russell, and others. Readers bought action-filled stories by writers like Owen Wister, conveying vivid images of the Old West. Remington lamented the passing of an era he helped to chronicle when he wrote:

===20th-century imagery===
Theodore Roosevelt wrote many books on the west and the frontier, and made frequent reference to it as president.

From the late 19th century the railroads promoted tourism in the west, with guided tours of western sites, especially national parks like Yellowstone National Park.

Both tourists to the West, and avid fiction readers enjoyed the visual imagery of the frontier. After 1900, Western movies provided the most famous examples, as in the numerous films of John Ford. He was especially enamored of Monument Valley. Critic Keith Phipps says, &quot;its have defined what decades of moviegoers think of when they imagine the American West.&quot; The heroic stories coming out of the building of the transcontinental railroad in the mid-1860s enlivened many dime novels and illustrated many newspapers and magazines with the juxtaposition of the traditional environment with the iron horse of modernity.

====Cowboy images====
The cowboy has for over a century been an iconic American image both in the country and abroad.

Heather Cox Richardson argues for a political dimension to the cowboy image:The timing of the cattle industry’s growth meant that cowboy imagery grew to have extraordinary power. Entangled in the vicious politics of the postwar years, Democrats, especially those in the old Confederacy, imagined the West as a land untouched by Republican politicians they hated. They developed an image of the cowboys as men who worked hard, played hard, lived by a code of honor, protected themselves, and asked nothing of the government. In the hands of Democratic newspaper editors, the realities of cowboy life—the poverty, the danger, the debilitating hours—became romantic. Cowboys embodied virtues Democrats believed Republicans were destroying by creating a behemoth government catering to lazy ex-slaves. By the 1860s, cattle drives were a feature of the plains landscape, and Democrats had made cowboys a symbol of rugged individual independence, something they insisted Republicans were destroying. 

The most famous popularizers of the image included part-time cowboy and &quot;Rough Rider&quot; President Theodore Roosevelt (1858–1919), a Republican who made &quot;cowboy&quot; internationally synonymous with the brash aggressive American. He was followed by trick roper Will Rogers (1879–1935), the leading humorist of the 1920s.

Roosevelt had conceptualized the herder (cowboy) as a stage of civilization distinct from the sedentary farmer—a theme well expressed in the 1944 Hollywood hit &quot;Oklahoma!&quot; that highlights the enduring conflict between cowboys and farmers. Roosevelt argued that the manhood typified by the cowboy—and outdoor activity and sports generally—was essential if American men were to avoid the softness and rot produced by an easy life in the city.

Will Rogers, the son of a Cherokee judge in Oklahoma, started with rope tricks and fancy riding, but by 1919 discovered his audiences were even more enchanted with his wit in his representation of the wisdom of the common man.

Others who contributed to enhancing the romantic image of the American cowboy include Charles Siringo (1855–1928) and Andy Adams (1859–1935). Cowboy, Pinkerton detective, and western author, Siringo was the first authentic cowboy autobiographer. Adams spent the 1880s in the cattle industry in Texas and the 1890s mining in the Rockies. When an 1898 play&#x27;s portrayal of Texans outraged Adams, he started writing plays, short stories, and novels drawn from his own experiences. His &quot;The Log of a Cowboy&quot; (1903) became a classic novel about the cattle business, especially the cattle drive. It described a fictional drive of the Circle Dot herd from Texas to Montana in 1882 and became a leading source on cowboy life; historians retraced its path in the 1960s, confirming its basic accuracy. His writings are acclaimed and criticized for realistic fidelity to detail on the one hand and thin literary qualities on the other. Many regard &quot;Red River&quot; (1948), directed by Howard Hawks, and starring John Wayne and Montgomery Clift, as an authentic cattle drive depiction.

The unique skills of the cowboys are highlighted in the rodeo. It began in an organized fashion in the West in the 1880s, when several Western cities followed up on touring Wild West shows and organized celebrations that included rodeo activities. The establishment of major cowboy competitions in the East in the 1920s led to the growth of rodeo sports. Trail cowboys who were also known as gunfighters like John Wesley Hardin, Luke Short and others, were known for their prowess, speed and skill with their pistols and other firearms. Their violent escapades and reputations morphed over time into the stereotypical image of violence endured by the &quot;cowboy hero&quot;.

===Code of the West===
Historians of the American West have written about the mythic West; the west of western literature, art, and of people&#x27;s shared memories. The phenomenon is &quot;the Imagined West&quot;. The &quot;Code of the West&quot; was an unwritten, socially agreed upon set of informal laws shaping the cowboy culture of the Old West. Over time, the cowboys developed a personal culture of their own, a blend of values that even retained vestiges of chivalry. Such hazardous work in isolated conditions also bred a tradition of self-dependence and individualism, with great value put on personal honesty, exemplified in songs and cowboy poetry. The code also included the gunfighter, who sometimes followed a form of code duello adopted from the Old South, in order to solve disputes and duels. Extrajudicial justice seen during the frontier days such as lynching, vigilantism and gunfighting, in turn popularized by the Western genre, would later be known in modern times as examples of &quot;frontier justice.&quot;

==Historiography==
Scores of Frederick Jackson Turner&#x27;s students became professors in history departments in the western states and taught courses on the frontier influenced by his ideas. Scholars have debunked many of the myths of the frontier, but they nevertheless live on in community traditions, folklore, and fiction. In the 1970s a historiographical range war broke out between the traditional frontier studies, which stress the influence of the frontier on all of American history and culture, and the &quot;New Western History&quot; which narrows the geographical and temporal framework to concentrate on the trans-Mississippi West after 1850. It avoids the word &quot;frontier&quot; and stresses cultural interaction between white culture and groups such as Natives and Hispanics. History professor William Weeks of the University of San Diego argues that in this &quot;New Western History&quot; approach:

By 2005, Steven Aron argues that the two sides had &quot;reached an equilibrium in their rhetorical arguments and critiques&quot;. Since then, however, the field of American frontier and western regional history has become increasingly inclusive. The field&#x27;s more recent focus was captured in the language of the 2024 Call for Papers of the Western History Association:

Meanwhile, environmental history has emerged, in large part from the frontier historiography, hence its emphasis on wilderness. It plays an increasingly large role in frontier studies. Historians approached the environment for the frontier or regionalism. The first group emphasizes human agency on the environment; the second looks at the influence of the environment. William Cronon has argued that Turner&#x27;s famous 1893 essay was environmental history in an embryonic form. It emphasized the vast power of free land to attract and reshape settlers, making a transition from wilderness to civilization.

Journalist Samuel Lubell saw similarities between the frontier&#x27;s Americanization of immigrants that Turner described and the social climbing by later immigrants in large cities as they moved to wealthier neighborhoods. He compared the effects of the railroad opening up Western lands to urban transportation systems and the automobile, and Western settlers&#x27; &quot;land hunger&quot; to poor city residents seeking social status. Just as the Republican party benefited from support from &quot;old&quot; immigrant groups that settled on frontier farms, &quot;new&quot; urban immigrants formed an important part of the Democratic New Deal coalition that began with Franklin Delano Roosevelt&#x27;s victory in the 1932 presidential election.

Since the 1960s an active center is the history department at the University of New Mexico, along with the University of New Mexico Press. Leading historians there include Gerald D. Nash, Donald C. Cutter, Richard N. Ellis, Richard Etulain, Ferenc Szasz, Margaret Connell-Szasz, Paul Hutton, Virginia Scharff, and Samuel Truett. The department has collaborated with other departments and emphasizes Southwestern regionalism, minorities in the Southwest, and historiography.

==See also==
===General===
* The Oregon-California Trails Association preserves, protects and shares the histories of emigrants who followed these trails westward.
* Canadian frontier
* American Indian wars, conflicts that took place between American settlers and American Indian tribes over land ownership. 
* Indian massacre, list of massacres done by Indian tribes and American settlers against each other.
* March (territorial entity) Medieval European term with some similarities
* National Cowboy &amp; Western Heritage Museum: museum and art gallery, in Oklahoma City, Oklahoma, housing one of the largest collections in the world of the Western, American cowboy, American rodeo, and American Native art, artifacts, and archival materials.
* Rodeo: demonstration of cattle wrangling skills.
* Territories of the United States
* The West As America
* Timeline of the American Old West
* Wanted poster: a poster, popular in mythic scenes of the west, let the public know of criminals whom authorities wish to apprehend.
* Western United States, for developments after frontier ended
* Western lifestyle
* Wild West shows: a following of the Wild West shows of the American frontier.

===People===
* Gunfighter
* List of American Old West outlaws: list of known outlaws and gunfighters of the American frontier popularly known as the &quot;Wild West&quot;.
* List of cowboys and cowgirls
* List of Western lawmen: list of notable law enforcement officials of the American frontier. They occupied positions as sheriff, marshal, Texas Rangers, and others.
* Schoolmarm: A female teacher that usually works in a one-room schoolhouse
* :Category:Gunslingers of the American Old West
* :Category:Lawmen of the American Old West
* :Category:Outlaws of the American Old West

===Study===
* &quot;Desert Magazine&quot;
* &quot;Journal of the West&quot;
* &quot;True West Magazine&quot;
* Western History Association

===Literature===
* Chris Enss: author of historical nonfiction that documents the forgotten women of the Old West.
* Zane Grey: author of many popular novels on the Old West
* Louis L&#x27;Amour: writer of many western books; author of more than 100 novels of the &quot;frontier&quot; genre
* Karl May: best selling German writer of all time, noted chiefly for wild west books set in the American West.
* Lorin Morgan-Richards: author of Old West titles and The Goodbye Family series.
* Winnetou: American-Indian hero of several novels written by Karl May.

===Games===
* &quot;Aces &amp; Eights: Shattered Frontier&quot;: an award-winning alternate history western role-playing gaming.
* &quot;Boot Hill&quot;: One of the early alternative RPGs from TSR and using a similar system to &quot;Dungeons &amp; Dragons&quot;.
* &quot;Deadlands&quot;: an alternate history western horror role-playing game.
* &quot;Dust Devils&quot;: a western role-playing game modeled after Clint Eastwood films and similar darker Westerns.
* The &quot;Red Dead&quot; series takes place in the days of the Wild West.
* List of Western computer and video games: a list of computer and video games patterned after Westerns.

==Explanatory notes==
==References==
==Further reading==

* Comprehensive coverage.
** Also published as Focus on violent episodes.

==External links==

===Culture===
* Western Folklife Center

===History===
* Autry National Center of the American West – Los Angeles, California
* American West History
* New Perspectives on &#x27;The West&#x27;. The West Film Project, WETA-TV, 2001
* Dodge City, Kansas &#x27;Cowboy Capital&#x27;
* Fort Dodge, Kansas History by Ida Ellen Rath, 1964 w/ photos
* Old West Kansas
* Tombstone Arizona History
* &quot;The American West&quot;, BBC Radio 4 discussion with Frank McLynn, Jenni Calder and Christopher Frayling (&quot;In Our Time&quot;, June 13, 2002)

===Media===
* &quot;The Frontier: A Frontier Town Three Months Old&quot; by Ward Platt – 1908 book on the real West. Free to read and full-text search.
* 161 photographs of frontier geography and personalities; these are pre-1923 and out of copyright</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q14947899" start="4" end="21" title="American frontier" label="American frontier"/>
<link wikidata="Q14947899" start="41" end="49" title="American frontier" label="Old West"/>
<link wikidata="Q14947899" start="78" end="87" title="American frontier" label="Wild West"/>
<link wikidata="Q787170" start="183" end="201" title="United States territorial acquisitions" label="American expansion"/>
<link wikidata="Q49" start="214" end="227" title="North America" label="North America"/>
<link wikidata="Q184716" start="244" end="265" title="European colonization of the Americas" label="European colonization"/>
<link wikidata="Q11812" start="489" end="505" title="Thomas Jefferson" label="Thomas Jefferson"/>
<link wikidata="Q193155" start="520" end="543" title="Louisiana Purchase" label="1803 Louisiana Purchase"/>
<link wikidata="Q1031250" start="564" end="576" title="Expansionism" label="expansionist"/>
<link wikidata="Q474184" start="625" end="641" title="manifest destiny" label="manifest destiny"/>
<link wikidata="Q548462" start="662" end="686" title="Frederick Jackson Turner" label="Frederick Jackson Turner"/>
<link wikidata="Q2917318" start="701" end="716" title="Frontier Thesis" label="Frontier Thesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5506051" start="824" end="837" title="frontier myth" label="frontier myth"/>
<link wikidata="Q21590660" start="929" end="942" title="Western (genre)" label="Western genre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1044835" start="1009" end="1035" title="Culture of the United States" label="American national identity"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="1283" end="1301" title="American Civil War" label="American Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q884921" start="1352" end="1372" title="William Rush Merriam" label="William Rush Merriam"/>
<link wikidata="Q2095711" start="1496" end="1512" title="1890 United States census" label="1890 U.S. Census"/>
<link wikidata="Q3042056" start="1570" end="1581" title="1920 United States census" label="1920 Census"/>
<link wikidata="Q131454" start="1607" end="1626" title="Library of Congress" label="Library of Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q34433" start="1631" end="1651" title="University of Oxford" label="University of Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="1778" end="1789" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q884921" start="2292" end="2312" title="William Rush Merriam" label="William Rush Merriam"/>
<link wikidata="" start="2796" end="2812" title=":File:Distribution of US Rural Population during 1910.pdf" label="1910 U.S. census"/>
<link wikidata="Q1355821" start="3139" end="3147" title="frontier" label="frontier"/>
<link wikidata="Q548462" start="3221" end="3245" title="Frederick Jackson Turner" label="Frederick Jackson Turner"/>
<link wikidata="Q49297" start="3880" end="3895" title="Native Americans in the United States" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q1497" start="3914" end="3931" title="Mississippi River" label="Mississippi River"/>
<link wikidata="Q186545" start="3952" end="3959" title="Midwestern United States" label="Midwest"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439" start="3961" end="3966" title="Texas" label="Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q12707" start="3972" end="3984" title="Great Plains" label="Great Plains"/>
<link wikidata="Q5463" start="3990" end="4005" title="Rocky Mountains" label="Rocky Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q858847" start="4011" end="4020" title="Southwestern United States" label="Southwest"/>
<link wikidata="Q12606" start="4030" end="4040" title="West Coast of the United States" label="West Coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q12612" start="4089" end="4110" title="Western United States" label="Western United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q858847" start="4127" end="4136" title="Southwestern United States" label="Southwest"/>
<link wikidata="Q21590660" start="4371" end="4378" title="Western (genre)" label="Western"/>
<link wikidata="Q7988576" start="4405" end="4421" title="Westerns on television" label="television shows"/>
<link wikidata="Q367591" start="4423" end="4429" title="Western fiction" label="novels"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057354" start="4431" end="4442" title="Western comics" label="comic books"/>
<link wikidata="Q6604037" start="4444" end="4455" title="List of Western video games" label="video games"/>
<link wikidata="Q49297" start="5216" end="5229" title="Native Americans in the United States" label="native tribes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2917318" start="5570" end="5585" title="Frontier Thesis" label="Frontier Thesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q171995" start="5780" end="5793" title="individualism" label="individualism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1355821" start="5888" end="5896" title="frontier" label="frontier"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="5960" end="5973" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="6016" end="6034" title="United States Census Bureau" label="U.S. Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q4268" start="6347" end="6357" title="East Coast of the United States" label="East Coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q12606" start="6651" end="6661" title="West Coast of the United States" label="West Coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q65" start="6710" end="6721" title="Los Angeles" label="Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q23337" start="6726" end="6740" title="Salt Lake City" label="Salt Lake City"/>
<link wikidata="Q12612" start="6765" end="6769" title="Western United States" label="West"/>
<link wikidata="Q186545" start="6845" end="6852" title="Midwest" label="Midwest"/>
<link wikidata="Q49042" start="6857" end="6871" title="American South" label="American South"/>
<link wikidata="Q32099" start="7129" end="7137" title="Meridian (geography)" label="meridian"/>
<link wikidata="Q36477" start="7156" end="7165" title="longitude" label="longitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055643" start="7393" end="7405" title="Colonial history of the United States" label="colonial era"/>
<link wikidata="Q323813" start="7513" end="7522" title="Jamestown, Virginia" label="Jamestown"/>
<link wikidata="Q918254" start="7796" end="7803" title="British colonization of the Americas" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q1990219" start="7805" end="7811" title="French colonization of the Americas" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047607" start="7813" end="7820" title="Spanish colonization of the Americas" label="Spanish"/>
<link wikidata="Q5556538" start="7826" end="7831" title="Dutch colonization of the Americas" label="Dutch"/>
<link wikidata="Q3298567" start="7944" end="7953" title="habitants" label="habitants"/>
<link wikidata="Q134750" start="7984" end="8002" title="St. Lawrence River" label="St. Lawrence River"/>
<link wikidata="Q999403" start="8245" end="8264" title="Kaskaskia, Illinois" label="Kaskaskia, Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q34404" start="8303" end="8314" title="New Orleans" label="New Orleans"/>
<link wikidata="Q2326031" start="8461" end="8468" title="patroon" label="patroon"/>
<link wikidata="Q188958" start="8910" end="8921" title="Egalitarianism" label="egalitarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q93332" start="9040" end="9061" title="Appalachian Mountains" label="Appalachian Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q56304279" start="10069" end="10094" title="landed gentry" label="small number of landlords"/>
<link wikidata="Q18389" start="10284" end="10295" title="New England" label="New England"/>
<link wikidata="Q154697" start="10919" end="10940" title="French and Indian War" label="French and Indian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q33143" start="11208" end="11229" title="Seven Years&amp;#x27; War" label="Seven Years&amp;#x27; War"/>
<link wikidata="Q156211" start="11238" end="11258" title="Treaty of Paris (1763)" label="peace treaty of 1763"/>
<link wikidata="Q2016453" start="11664" end="11676" title="Ohio Country" label="Ohio Country"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143695" start="11739" end="11753" title="Cumberland Gap" label="Cumberland Gap"/>
<link wikidata="Q316661" start="11784" end="11796" title="Daniel Boone" label="Daniel Boone"/>
<link wikidata="Q23" start="11804" end="11821" title="George Washington" label="George Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q209573" start="12099" end="12125" title="Royal Proclamation of 1763" label="Royal Proclamation of 1763"/>
<link wikidata="Q246501" start="12167" end="12189" title="Treaty of Fort Stanwix" label="Treaty of Fort Stanwix"/>
<link wikidata="Q280537" start="12437" end="12456" title="Northwest Ordinance" label="Northwest Ordinance"/>
<link wikidata="Q11292170" start="12594" end="12610" title="History of Ohio" label="Ohio did in 1803"/>
<link wikidata="Q40949" start="12744" end="12761" title="American Revolutionary War" label="Revolutionary War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1040924" start="13944" end="13964" title="Jacksonian democracy" label="Jacksonian Democrats"/>
<link wikidata="Q319630" start="14041" end="14051" title="Henry Clay" label="Henry Clay"/>
<link wikidata="Q974556" start="14502" end="14512" title="Homestead Act of 1862" label="homesteads"/>
<link wikidata="Q40949" start="14607" end="14624" title="American Revolutionary War" label="Revolutionary War"/>
<link wikidata="Q4745512" start="14699" end="14743" title="American pioneers to the Northwest Territory" label="American pioneers to the Northwest Territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q985482" start="14756" end="14770" title="Marietta, Ohio" label="Marietta, Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q669315" start="14822" end="14841" title="Northwest Territory" label="Northwest Territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q316661" start="14853" end="14865" title="Daniel Boone" label="Daniel Boone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1806491" start="14889" end="14909" title="Transylvania Company" label="Transylvania Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143695" start="14936" end="14950" title="Cumberland Gap" label="Cumberland Gap"/>
<link wikidata="Q3064799" start="15011" end="15028" title="Falls of the Ohio" label="Falls of the Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q43668" start="15032" end="15042" title="Louisville, Kentucky" label="Louisville"/>
<link wikidata="Q1603" start="15202" end="15210" title="Kentucky" label="Kentucky"/>
<link wikidata="Q91" start="15497" end="15512" title="Abraham Lincoln" label="Abraham Lincoln"/>
<link wikidata="Q26013" start="15615" end="15626" title="War of 1812" label="War of 1812"/>
<link wikidata="Q21070813" start="15786" end="15806" title="Indian barrier state" label="Indian barrier state"/>
<link wikidata="Q11817" start="15934" end="15948" title="Andrew Jackson" label="Andrew Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q11869" start="16024" end="16046" title="William Henry Harrison" label="William Henry Harrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q645288" start="16091" end="16111" title="Battle of the Thames" label="Battle of the Thames"/>
<link wikidata="Q257808" start="16172" end="16180" title="Tecumseh" label="Tecumseh"/>
<link wikidata="Q11817" start="16250" end="16264" title="Andrew Jackson" label="Andrew Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q4871247" start="16322" end="16346" title="Battle of Horseshoe Bend (1814)" label="Battle of Horseshoe Bend"/>
<link wikidata="Q1324198" start="16530" end="16545" title="Treaty of Ghent" label="Treaty of Ghent"/>
<link wikidata="Q1497" start="17242" end="17259" title="Mississippi River" label="Mississippi River"/>
<link wikidata="Q38022" start="17261" end="17280" title="St. Louis, Missouri" label="St. Louis, Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q11812" start="17509" end="17525" title="Thomas Jefferson" label="Thomas Jefferson"/>
<link wikidata="Q193155" start="17650" end="17668" title="Louisiana Purchase" label="Louisiana Purchase"/>
<link wikidata="Q42189" start="17813" end="17824" title="Federalist Party" label="Federalists"/>
<link wikidata="Q42186" start="17852" end="17865" title="Democratic-Republican Party" label="Jeffersonians"/>
<link wikidata="Q862823" start="17957" end="17963" title="yeomen" label="yeomen"/>
<link wikidata="Q3278039" start="18160" end="18182" title="Jeffersonian Democracy" label="Jeffersonian Democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q505802" start="19036" end="19051" title="Lewis and Clark" label="Lewis and Clark"/>
<link wikidata="Q57423" start="19582" end="19598" title="John Jacob Astor" label="John Jacob Astor"/>
<link wikidata="Q12603" start="19675" end="19692" title="Pacific Northwest" label="Pacific Northwest"/>
<link wikidata="Q3499810" start="19713" end="19725" title="Fort Astoria" label="Fort Astoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q76039" start="19965" end="19990" title="Hudson&amp;#x27;s Bay Company" label="Hudson&amp;#x27;s Bay Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q34168" start="20205" end="20213" title="Trapping" label="trappers"/>
<link wikidata="Q502534" start="20218" end="20225" title="North American fur trade" label="hunters"/>
<link wikidata="Q81056" start="20281" end="20287" title="American beaver" label="beaver"/>
<link wikidata="Q1779610" start="20557" end="20567" title="South Pass (Wyoming)" label="South Pass"/>
<link wikidata="Q952429" start="21075" end="21086" title="Green River (Colorado River)" label="Green River"/>
<link wikidata="Q2308103" start="21334" end="21346" title="mountain men" label="mountain men"/>
<link wikidata="Q465232" start="21377" end="21391" title="Jedediah Smith" label="Jedediah Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q4139550" start="21393" end="21403" title="Hugh Glass" label="Hugh Glass"/>
<link wikidata="Q311070" start="21405" end="21418" title="Davy Crockett" label="Davy Crockett"/>
<link wikidata="Q440882" start="21420" end="21434" title="Texas Jack Omohundro" label="Jack Omohundro"/>
<link wikidata="Q11816" start="21754" end="21771" title="John Quincy Adams" label="John Quincy Adams"/>
<link wikidata="Q3265969" start="22119" end="22132" title="profit motive" label="profit motive"/>
<link wikidata="Q3217020" start="22586" end="22619" title="United States General Land Office" label="United States General Land Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q1891156" start="22668" end="22682" title="United States Forest Service" label="Forest Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q22969554" start="23265" end="23281" title="Western Engineer" label="Western Engineer"/>
<link wikidata="Q668687" start="23460" end="23481" title="United States Postal Service" label="federal postal system"/>
<link wikidata="Q7989796" start="24498" end="24523" title="Westward Expansion Trails" label="Westward Expansion Trails"/>
<link wikidata="Q2419102" start="24556" end="24577" title="United States Secretary of War" label="U.S. Secretary of War"/>
<link wikidata="Q542938" start="24578" end="24591" title="John B. Floyd" label="John B. Floyd"/>
<link wikidata="Q162269" start="25039" end="25054" title="Jefferson Davis" label="Jefferson Davis"/>
<link wikidata="Q354759" start="25056" end="25070" title="Winfield Scott" label="Winfield Scott"/>
<link wikidata="Q3525256" start="25076" end="25088" title="Thomas Jesup" label="Thomas Jesup"/>
<link wikidata="Q169549" start="25621" end="25633" title="Zebulon Pike" label="Zebulon Pike"/>
<link wikidata="Q160636" start="25808" end="25818" title="Rio Grande" label="Rio Grande"/>
<link wikidata="Q665321" start="25848" end="25884" title="Pike&amp;#x27;s Peak" label="the peak in Colorado named after him"/>
<link wikidata="Q2712366" start="25892" end="25913" title="Stephen Harriman Long" label="Stephen Harriman Long"/>
<link wikidata="Q12707" start="26021" end="26033" title="Great Plains" label="Great Plains"/>
<link wikidata="Q728337" start="26224" end="26238" title="Thomas Nuttall" label="Thomas Nuttall"/>
<link wikidata="Q3068728" start="26255" end="26268" title="John Bradbury (naturalist)" label="John Bradbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q455133" start="26366" end="26379" title="George Catlin" label="George Catlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q124099" start="26460" end="26471" title="Karl Bodmer" label="Karl Bodmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q182882" start="26514" end="26532" title="John James Audubon" label="John James Audubon"/>
<link wikidata="Q169011" start="26705" end="26725" title="John Charles Frémont" label="John Charles Frémont"/>
<link wikidata="Q956056" start="27924" end="27947" title="Transylvania University" label="Transylvania University"/>
<link wikidata="Q285667" start="28631" end="28653" title="Second Great Awakening" label="Second Great Awakening"/>
<link wikidata="Q5032200" start="28865" end="28885" title="Cane Ridge, Kentucky" label="Cane Ridge, Kentucky"/>
<link wikidata="Q1541206" start="29328" end="29347" title="Disciples of Christ" label="Disciples of Christ"/>
<link wikidata="Q7200932" start="29579" end="29600" title="Plan of Union of 1801" label="Plan of Union of 1801"/>
<link wikidata="Q548462" start="30093" end="30117" title="Frederick Jackson Turner" label="Frederick Jackson Turner"/>
<link wikidata="Q787077" start="30305" end="30316" title="Merle Curti" label="Merle Curti"/>
<link wikidata="Q548462" start="31695" end="31719" title="Frederick Jackson Turner" label="Frederick Jackson Turner"/>
<link wikidata="Q42183" start="32537" end="32547" title="Whig Party (United States)" label="Whig Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q319630" start="32657" end="32667" title="Henry Clay" label="Henry Clay"/>
<link wikidata="Q91" start="32672" end="32687" title="Abraham Lincoln" label="Abraham Lincoln"/>
<link wikidata="Q11816" start="32877" end="32894" title="John Quincy Adams" label="John Quincy Adams"/>
<link wikidata="Q38555" start="33471" end="33479" title="Santa Fe, New Mexico" label="Santa Fe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1856887" start="33490" end="33504" title="Santa Fe Trail" label="Santa Fe Trail"/>
<link wikidata="Q819217" start="33979" end="33999" title="Old San Antonio Road" label="Old San Antonio Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q1467414" start="34043" end="34060" title="Old Spanish Trail (trade route)" label="Old Spanish Trail"/>
<link wikidata="Q250040" start="34157" end="34174" title="Stephen F. Austin" label="Stephen F. Austin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2508152" start="34468" end="34476" title="Fredonian Rebellion" label="Fredonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q711818" start="34486" end="34500" title="William Travis" label="William Travis"/>
<link wikidata="Q189145" start="34712" end="34722" title="Antonio López de Santa Anna" label="Santa Anna"/>
<link wikidata="Q638530" start="34998" end="35014" title="Texas Revolution" label="Texas Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q235344" start="35048" end="35053" title="Alamo" label="Alamo"/>
<link wikidata="Q9030262" start="35058" end="35064" title="Goliad massacre" label="Goliad"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049712" start="35070" end="35077" title="Texians" label="Texians"/>
<link wikidata="Q841278" start="35095" end="35116" title="Battle of San Jacinto" label="Battle of San Jacinto"/>
<link wikidata="Q216547" start="35157" end="35168" title="Sam Houston" label="Sam Houston"/>
<link wikidata="Q16157683" start="35219" end="35253" title="President of the Republic of Texas" label="President of the Republic of Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q170588" start="35442" end="35459" title="Republic of Texas" label="Republic of Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q42183" start="36025" end="36030" title="Whig Party (United States)" label="Whigs"/>
<link wikidata="Q91" start="36051" end="36066" title="Abraham Lincoln" label="Abraham Lincoln"/>
<link wikidata="Q11896" start="36458" end="36472" title="Zachary Taylor" label="Zachary Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q354759" start="36581" end="36595" title="Winfield Scott" label="Winfield Scott"/>
<link wikidata="Q173270" start="36599" end="36607" title="Veracruz, Veracruz" label="Veracruz"/>
<link wikidata="Q616109" start="37037" end="37064" title="Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo" label="Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo"/>
<link wikidata="Q827212" start="37237" end="37253" title="Gadsden Purchase" label="Gadsden Purchase"/>
<link wikidata="Q1661295" start="37656" end="37670" title="Wilmot Proviso" label="Wilmot Proviso"/>
<link wikidata="Q39392" start="37830" end="37848" title="Compromise of 1850" label="Compromise of 1850"/>
<link wikidata="Q9212" start="38946" end="38955" title="U.S. Army" label="U.S. Army"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="39126" end="39138" title="California_gold_rush#Forty-niners" label="Forty-Niners"/>
<link wikidata="Q6274202" start="41180" end="41197" title="Jonathan R. Davis" label="Jonathan R. Davis"/>
<link wikidata="Q466699" start="41287" end="41301" title="American River" label="American River"/>
<link wikidata="Q26777" start="41324" end="41331" title="Sierra Nevada (U.S.)" label="Sierras"/>
<link wikidata="Q3062592" start="41860" end="41876" title="hydraulic mining" label="hydraulic mining"/>
<link wikidata="Q1117425" start="42280" end="42292" title="Dakota Territory" label="South Dakota"/>
<link wikidata="Q74047" start="42498" end="42509" title="ghost towns" label="ghost towns"/>
<link wikidata="Q331895" start="42661" end="42669" title="Pike&amp;#x27;s Peak Gold Rush" label="Colorado"/>
<link wikidata="Q1122817" start="42763" end="42776" title="Comstock Lode" label="Comstock Lode"/>
<link wikidata="Q987262" start="42849" end="42862" title="Virginia City, Nevada" label="Virginia City"/>
<link wikidata="Q40881" start="42864" end="42875" title="Carson City, Nevada" label="Carson City"/>
<link wikidata="Q2604104" start="42881" end="42892" title="Silver City, Nevada" label="Silver City"/>
<link wikidata="Q561826" start="43063" end="43076" title="George Hearst" label="George Hearst"/>
<link wikidata="Q24603" start="43863" end="43885" title="Independence, Missouri" label="Independence, Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q5471267" start="43921" end="43937" title="Fort Hall" label="Fort Hall, Idaho"/>
<link wikidata="Q1703681" start="44009" end="44026" title="Willamette Valley" label="Willamette Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q862312" start="44121" end="44133" title="Oregon Trail" label="Oregon Trail"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026956" start="44199" end="44215" title="California Trail" label="California Trail"/>
<link wikidata="Q379356" start="44229" end="44241" title="Mormon Trail" label="Mormon Trail"/>
<link wikidata="Q896134" start="44259" end="44272" title="Bozeman Trail" label="Bozeman Trail"/>
<link wikidata="Q979972" start="44439" end="44453" title="Marcus Whitman" label="Marcus Whitman"/>
<link wikidata="Q3443993" start="44499" end="44510" title="Barlow Road" label="Barlow Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q129279" start="45359" end="45368" title="dysentery" label="dysentery"/>
<link wikidata="Q83319" start="45370" end="45377" title="Typhoid fever" label="typhoid"/>
<link wikidata="Q12090" start="45383" end="45390" title="cholera" label="cholera"/>
<link wikidata="Q788771" start="45554" end="45566" title="Donner Party" label="Donner Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q26777" start="45596" end="45609" title="Sierra Nevada" label="Sierra Nevada"/>
<link wikidata="Q670661" start="45817" end="45830" title="Alferd Packer" label="Alferd Packer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1261" start="45847" end="45855" title="Colorado" label="Colorado"/>
<link wikidata="Q11242506" start="45915" end="45925" title="highwaymen" label="highwaymen"/>
<link wikidata="Q16200796" start="45948" end="45962" title="Harpe brothers" label="Harpe brothers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2572004" start="46080" end="46089" title="1838 Mormon War" label="animosity"/>
<link wikidata="Q4870807" start="46278" end="46285" title="Battle of Crooked River" label="clashed"/>
<link wikidata="Q1034431" start="46292" end="46304" title="Haun&amp;#x27;s Mill massacre" label="mass killing"/>
<link wikidata="Q3859295" start="46362" end="46388" title="Missouri Executive Order 44" label="Mormon Extermination Order"/>
<link wikidata="Q203559" start="46463" end="46476" title="Brigham Young" label="Brigham Young"/>
<link wikidata="Q3177118" start="46583" end="46590" title="Mormons" label="Mormons"/>
<link wikidata="Q178741" start="46612" end="46627" title="Great Salt Lake" label="Great Salt Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q1150921" start="46757" end="46764" title="State of Deseret" label="Deseret"/>
<link wikidata="Q23337" start="46848" end="46862" title="Salt Lake City" label="Salt Lake City"/>
<link wikidata="Q27588890" start="47121" end="47140" title="Battle at Fort Utah" label="Battle at Fort Utah"/>
<link wikidata="Q104853831" start="47290" end="47307" title="Wakara&amp;#x27;s War" label="Wakara&amp;#x27;s War"/>
<link wikidata="Q4920891" start="47324" end="47338" title="Black Hawk War (1865–1872)" label="Black Hawk War"/>
<link wikidata="Q42504" start="47956" end="48003" title="the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints" label="the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501025" start="48173" end="48187" title="Utah War" label="Confrontations"/>
<link wikidata="Q67202805" start="49882" end="49894" title="Fort Laramie" label="Fort Laramie"/>
<link wikidata="Q23337" start="49899" end="49913" title="Salt Lake City" label="Salt Lake City"/>
<link wikidata="Q744149" start="49938" end="49959" title="Wells Fargo" label="Wells Fargo &amp;amp; Co."/>
<link wikidata="Q859130" start="50145" end="50157" title="Pony Express" label="Pony Express"/>
<link wikidata="Q3136211" start="50388" end="50400" title="Hiram Sibley" label="Hiram Sibley"/>
<link wikidata="Q5453918" start="50586" end="50618" title="first transcontinental telegraph" label="first transcontinental telegraph"/>
<link wikidata="Q48527" start="51524" end="51543" title="states&amp;#x27; rights" label="states&amp;#x27; rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q619762" start="51593" end="51612" title="Kansas–Nebraska Act" label="Kansas–Nebraska Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q5870609" start="51760" end="51776" title="History of the Republican Party (United States)" label="Republican Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q91" start="51841" end="51856" title="Abraham Lincoln" label="Abraham Lincoln"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="52523" end="52532" title="American Civil War" label="Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q4871740" start="52958" end="52968" title="Battle of Mine Creek" label="Mine Creek"/>
<link wikidata="Q7268957" start="53053" end="53077" title="Quantrill&amp;#x27;s Raiders" label="Quantrill&amp;#x27;s Raiders"/>
<link wikidata="Q2364118" start="53379" end="53398" title="Confederate Arizona" label="Confederate Arizona"/>
<link wikidata="Q1739881" start="53564" end="53576" title="New Mexico Campaign" label="gain control"/>
<link wikidata="Q616138" start="53614" end="53634" title="Henry Hopkins Sibley" label="Henry Hopkins Sibley"/>
<link wikidata="Q4352526" start="53686" end="53701" title="Army of New Mexico" label="New Mexico Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q580651" start="53937" end="53960" title="Battle of Glorieta Pass" label="Battle of Glorieta Pass"/>
<link wikidata="Q1952344" start="54073" end="54081" title="Missouri in the American Civil War" label="Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q7589559" start="54239" end="54267" title="St. Louis Arsenal" label="federal arsenal at St. Louis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5159757" start="54448" end="54482" title="Confederate government of Missouri" label="Confederate government of Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q197539" start="54558" end="54571" title="Samuel Ryan Curtis" label="Samuel Curtis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1851858" start="55120" end="55142" title="Dakota War of 1862" label="Sioux war in Minnesota"/>
<link wikidata="Q15243032" start="55274" end="55292" title="Lower Sioux Agency" label="Lower Sioux Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q545119" start="55294" end="55301" title="New Ulm, Minnesota" label="New Ulm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1986612" start="55307" end="55317" title="Hutchinson, Minnesota" label="Hutchinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q4871052" start="55441" end="55453" title="Battle of Fort Ridgely" label="Fort Ridgely"/>
<link wikidata="Q4870488" start="55455" end="55467" title="Battle of Birch Coulee" label="Birch Coulee"/>
<link wikidata="Q825070" start="55469" end="55485" title="Fort Abercrombie" label="Fort Abercrombie"/>
<link wikidata="Q4872754" start="55491" end="55500" title="Battle of Wood Lake" label="Wood Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q2164344" start="56014" end="56033" title="Sand Creek massacre" label="Sand Creek massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q379673" start="56069" end="56079" title="Kit Carson" label="Kit Carson"/>
<link wikidata="Q108266" start="56125" end="56131" title="Navajo" label="Navajo"/>
<link wikidata="Q868245" start="56232" end="56248" title="Indian Territory" label="Indian Territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q319421" start="56290" end="56311" title="Five Civilized Tribes" label="Five Civilized Tribes"/>
<link wikidata="Q974556" start="56463" end="56476" title="Homestead Act of 1862" label="Homestead Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q3360194" start="56485" end="56505" title="Pacific Railroad Act of 1862" label="Pacific Railroad Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q280537" start="56929" end="56948" title="Northwest Ordinance" label="Northwest Ordinance"/>
<link wikidata="Q7245" start="58242" end="58252" title="Mark Twain" label="Mark Twain"/>
<link wikidata="Q3217022" start="58937" end="58959" title="Land Ordinance of 1785" label="Land Ordinance of 1785"/>
<link wikidata="Q25041901" start="59381" end="59395" title="public auction" label="public auction"/>
<link wikidata="Q974556" start="60229" end="60242" title="Homestead Act of 1862" label="Homestead Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q3360194" start="60588" end="60616" title="Pacific Railroad Act of 1862" label="Pacific Railroad Act of 1862"/>
<link wikidata="Q751536" start="61629" end="61637" title="Nebraska Territory" label="Nebraska"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066087" start="61799" end="61810" title="Morrill Act" label="Morrill Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049334" start="62338" end="62356" title="United States Army Corps of Engineers" label="Corps of Engineers"/>
<link wikidata="Q5172595" start="62358" end="62390" title="Corps of Topographical Engineers" label="Corps of Topographical Engineers"/>
<link wikidata="Q5893463" start="63229" end="63243" title="Theodore Judah" label="Theodore Judah"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053930" start="63271" end="63286" title="Central Pacific Railroad" label="Central Pacific"/>
<link wikidata="Q3360194" start="63437" end="63457" title="Pacific Railroad Act" label="Pacific Railroad Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q23016960" start="63525" end="63538" title="History of the Union Pacific Railroad" label="Union Pacific"/>
<link wikidata="Q382109" start="63613" end="63628" title="Leland Stanford" label="Leland Stanford"/>
<link wikidata="Q1109882" start="63630" end="63647" title="Collis Huntington" label="Collis Huntington"/>
<link wikidata="Q2958817" start="63649" end="63664" title="Charles Crocker" label="Charles Crocker"/>
<link wikidata="Q1900117" start="63670" end="63682" title="Mark Hopkins, Jr." label="Mark Hopkins"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="64871" end="64895" title="History of Chinese Americans#Transcontinental railroad" label="Chinese railroad workers"/>
<link wikidata="Q162867" start="65130" end="65143" title="nitroglycerin" label="nitroglycerin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1753636" start="65997" end="66007" title="Gilded Age" label="Gilded Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071804" start="66131" end="66145" title="Milwaukee Road" label="Milwaukee Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q1272318" start="66151" end="66165" title="Great Northern Railway (U.S.)" label="Great Northern"/>
<link wikidata="Q753942" start="66266" end="66274" title="Atchison, Topeka and Santa Fe Railway" label="Santa Fe"/>
<link wikidata="Q771991" start="66332" end="66345" title="James J. Hill" label="James J. Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q3163222" start="66494" end="66503" title="Jay Cooke" label="Jay Cooke"/>
<link wikidata="Q91417" start="66635" end="66648" title="Henry Villard" label="Henry Villard"/>
<link wikidata="Q2418422" start="66748" end="66761" title="Panic of 1893" label="Panic of 1893"/>
<link wikidata="Q54168" start="66834" end="66845" title="J.P. Morgan" label="J.P. Morgan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7058959" start="66880" end="66901" title="Northern Securities Co. v. United States" label="broke them up in 1904"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="68485" end="68494" title="American Civil War" label="Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q634550" start="69804" end="69822" title="Rocky Mountain locust" label="1874 Locust Plague"/>
<link wikidata="Q34266" start="69954" end="69960" title="Russian Empire" label="Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q254106" start="69982" end="69993" title="Crimean War" label="Crimean War"/>
<link wikidata="Q83171" start="70000" end="70022" title="Alexander II of Russia" label="Alexander II of Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2345070" start="70043" end="70058" title="Russian America" label="Russian America"/>
<link wikidata="Q797" start="70073" end="70079" title="Alaska" label="Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q297308" start="70322" end="70336" title="William Seward" label="William Seward"/>
<link wikidata="Q79804" start="70623" end="70628" title="Sitka, Alaska" label="Sitka"/>
<link wikidata="Q223" start="70887" end="70896" title="Greenland" label="Greenland"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="70927" end="70947" title="Movements for the annexation of Canada to the United States#1860s" label="annexation of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q1520743" start="70967" end="70980" title="Canadian Confederation" label="Confederation"/>
<link wikidata="Q631489" start="71354" end="71372" title="Klondike Gold Rush" label="Klondike Gold Rush"/>
<link wikidata="Q7048516" start="71382" end="71396" title="Nome Gold Rush" label="Nome Gold Rush"/>
<link wikidata="Q5430013" start="71410" end="71429" title="Fairbanks Gold Rush" label="Fairbanks Gold Rush"/>
<link wikidata="Q631498" start="71928" end="71944" title="Land Run of 1889" label="Land Run of 1889"/>
<link wikidata="Q34863" start="72239" end="72252" title="Oklahoma City" label="Oklahoma City"/>
<link wikidata="Q40347" start="72254" end="72260" title="Norman, Oklahoma" label="Norman"/>
<link wikidata="Q777577" start="72266" end="72273" title="Guthrie, Oklahoma" label="Guthrie"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="72645" end="72670" title="United States Census Bureau" label="U.S. Bureau of the Census"/>
<link wikidata="Q166231" start="72881" end="72888" title="Infectious diseases" label="disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q1728967" start="72943" end="72953" title="Karankawa people" label="Karankawan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1561062" start="72955" end="72962" title="Akokisa" label="Akokisa"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="73142" end="73161" title="James Rood Doolittle#Senator" label="Doolittle Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q5870571" start="73888" end="73904" title="History of the Democratic Party (United States)" label="Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q11817" start="73918" end="73932" title="Andrew Jackson" label="Andrew Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q42183" start="74036" end="74046" title="Whig Party (United States)" label="Whig Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1040924" start="74104" end="74124" title="Jacksonian Democracy" label="Jacksonian Democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q11817" start="74304" end="74318" title="Andrew Jackson" label="Andrew Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q105405" start="74804" end="74812" title="Cherokee" label="Cherokee"/>
<link wikidata="Q622728" start="74814" end="74823" title="Chickasaw" label="Chickasaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q324516" start="74825" end="74832" title="Choctaw" label="Choctaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q51705" start="74834" end="74839" title="Muscogee" label="Creek"/>
<link wikidata="Q474202" start="74845" end="74853" title="Seminole" label="Seminole"/>
<link wikidata="Q868245" start="75133" end="75149" title="Indian Territory" label="Indian Territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q750448" start="75337" end="75351" title="Trail of Tears" label="Trail of Tears"/>
<link wikidata="Q812" start="76130" end="76137" title="Florida" label="Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q900693" start="76158" end="76161" title="Seminole Wars" label="war"/>
<link wikidata="Q102090" start="77568" end="77574" title="Apache" label="Apache"/>
<link wikidata="Q117133" start="77809" end="77817" title="Comanche" label="Comanche"/>
<link wikidata="Q5150525" start="77827" end="77846" title="Comanche Wars" label="number of conflicts"/>
<link wikidata="Q170603" start="77855" end="77862" title="New Spain" label="Spanish"/>
<link wikidata="Q648279" start="77902" end="77916" title="Comancheria" label="Comanche power"/>
<link wikidata="Q5150532" start="77957" end="77974" title="Comanche–Mexico Wars" label="large-scale raids"/>
<link wikidata="Q474891" start="78024" end="78031" title="Texas–Indian wars" label="warring"/>
<link wikidata="Q45321045" start="78064" end="78071" title="Tejanos" label="Tejanos"/>
<link wikidata="Q170588" start="78103" end="78108" title="Republic of Texas" label="Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q7547104" start="78159" end="78168" title="Snake War" label="Snake War"/>
<link wikidata="Q12642162" start="78223" end="78238" title="Northern Paiute" label="Northern Paiute"/>
<link wikidata="Q806902" start="78240" end="78247" title="Bannock people" label="Bannock"/>
<link wikidata="Q26774" start="78252" end="78260" title="Shoshone" label="Shoshone"/>
<link wikidata="Q272074" start="78709" end="78720" title="Snake River" label="Snake River"/>
<link wikidata="Q2602070" start="79081" end="79093" title="Colorado War" label="Colorado War"/>
<link wikidata="Q322951" start="79104" end="79112" title="Cheyenne" label="Cheyenne"/>
<link wikidata="Q2164344" start="79520" end="79539" title="Sand Creek massacre" label="Sand Creek massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q4744790" start="79622" end="79645" title="American Ranch massacre" label="American Ranch massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q22058730" start="79650" end="79671" title="Raid on Godfrey Ranch" label="Raid on Godfrey Ranch"/>
<link wikidata="Q617827" start="79681" end="79692" title="Apache Wars" label="Apache Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q379673" start="79702" end="79736" title="Kit Carson" label="Christopher &amp;quot;Kit&amp;quot; Carson"/>
<link wikidata="Q56585" start="79748" end="79757" title="Mescalero" label="Mescalero"/>
<link wikidata="Q208485" start="79821" end="79835" title="scorched earth" label="scorched earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q3778744" start="79850" end="79865" title="Navajo Wars" label="Navajo Campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q1253290" start="80036" end="80040" title="Ute Tribe" label="Utes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2791" start="80085" end="80093" title="Geronimo" label="Geronimo"/>
<link wikidata="Q4870747" start="80240" end="80263" title="Battle of Cibecue Creek" label="attack on Cibecue Creek"/>
<link wikidata="Q5374113" start="80355" end="80367" title="Empire Ranch" label="Empire Ranch"/>
<link wikidata="Q2791" start="80455" end="80463" title="Geronimo" label="Geronimo"/>
<link wikidata="Q5150511" start="80498" end="80515" title="Comanche Campaign" label="Comanche Campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q3119025" start="80521" end="80534" title="Red River War" label="Red River War"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="80769" end="80793" title="Buffalo wallow#Battle of Buffalo Wallow" label="Battle of Buffalo Wallow"/>
<link wikidata="Q4127869" start="80798" end="80826" title="Second Battle of Adobe Walls" label="Second Battle of Adobe Walls"/>
<link wikidata="Q4985764" start="80837" end="80852" title="Buffalo Hunters&amp;#x27; War" label="buffalo hunters"/>
<link wikidata="Q4871974" start="81006" end="81022" title="Battle of Palo Duro Canyon" label="Palo Duro Canyon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1343075" start="81053" end="81066" title="Quanah Parker" label="Quanah Parker"/>
<link wikidata="Q474891" start="81122" end="81126" title="Texas–Indian wars" label="wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q2060306" start="81158" end="81178" title="Red Cloud&amp;#x27;s War" label="Red Cloud&amp;#x27;s War"/>
<link wikidata="Q333049" start="81194" end="81200" title="Lakota people" label="Lakota"/>
<link wikidata="Q312721" start="81207" end="81216" title="Red Cloud" label="Red Cloud"/>
<link wikidata="Q1481957" start="81371" end="81400" title="Treaty of Fort Laramie (1868)" label="Treaty of Fort Laramie (1868)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1397673" start="81517" end="81529" title="Kintpuash" label="Captain Jack"/>
<link wikidata="Q1515972" start="81565" end="81570" title="Modoc people" label="Modoc"/>
<link wikidata="Q824" start="81595" end="81601" title="Oregon" label="Oregon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2635052" start="81635" end="81644" title="Modoc War" label="Modoc War"/>
<link wikidata="Q9212" start="81709" end="81718" title="U.S. Army" label="U.S. Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190016" start="81757" end="81769" title="Edward Canby" label="Edward Canby"/>
<link wikidata="Q1456086" start="81793" end="81806" title="Nez Perce War" label="Nez Perce War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1123923" start="81811" end="81820" title="Nez Perce" label="Nez Perce"/>
<link wikidata="Q453666" start="81827" end="81839" title="Chief Joseph" label="Chief Joseph"/>
<link wikidata="Q824" start="81969" end="81975" title="Oregon" label="Oregon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1212" start="82010" end="82017" title="Montana" label="Montana"/>
<link wikidata="Q4870436" start="82369" end="82387" title="Battle of Bear Paw" label="Battle of Bear Paw"/>
<link wikidata="Q430053" start="82409" end="82432" title="Great Sioux War of 1876" label="Great Sioux War of 1876"/>
<link wikidata="Q43527" start="82467" end="82479" title="Sitting Bull" label="Sitting Bull"/>
<link wikidata="Q44555" start="82484" end="82495" title="Crazy Horse" label="Crazy Horse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1481957" start="82549" end="82578" title="Treaty of Fort Laramie (1868)" label="Treaty of Fort Laramie (1868)"/>
<link wikidata="Q205422" start="82652" end="82680" title="Battle of the Little Bighorn" label="Battle of the Little Bighorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q107434" start="82700" end="82705" title="Sioux" label="Sioux"/>
<link wikidata="Q322951" start="82710" end="82718" title="Cheyenne" label="Cheyenne"/>
<link wikidata="Q188205" start="82767" end="82790" title="George Armstrong Custer" label="George Armstrong Custer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7902616" start="82796" end="82803" title="Ute War" label="Ute War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1253290" start="82819" end="82829" title="Ute people" label="Ute people"/>
<link wikidata="Q28227623" start="82893" end="82908" title="Meeker massacre" label="Meeker massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q4274610" start="83065" end="83074" title="Posey War" label="Posey War"/>
<link wikidata="Q108413" start="83184" end="83205" title="Wounded Knee massacre" label="Wounded Knee massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q269574" start="83238" end="83249" title="7th Cavalry Regiment" label="7th Cavalry"/>
<link wikidata="Q2464077" start="83442" end="83451" title="Crow Foot" label="Crow Foot"/>
<link wikidata="Q4930681" start="83614" end="83623" title="Bluff War" label="Bluff War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2888116" start="83783" end="83804" title="Battle of Bear Valley" label="Battle of Bear Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q3077790" start="84218" end="84228" title="Fort Bowie" label="Fort Bowie"/>
<link wikidata="Q2858094" start="84239" end="84250" title="Apache Pass" label="Apache Pass"/>
<link wikidata="Q439152" start="84358" end="84365" title="Cochise" label="Cochise"/>
<link wikidata="Q2791" start="84370" end="84378" title="Geronimo" label="Geronimo"/>
<link wikidata="Q67202805" start="84380" end="84392" title="Fort Laramie" label="Fort Laramie"/>
<link wikidata="Q5471425" start="84397" end="84408" title="Fort Kearny" label="Fort Kearny"/>
<link wikidata="Q1018681" start="84738" end="84747" title="Fort Sill" label="Fort Sill"/>
<link wikidata="Q3078083" start="84759" end="84769" title="Fort Smith National Historic Site" label="Fort Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q480993" start="84781" end="84794" title="Fort Snelling" label="Fort Snelling"/>
<link wikidata="Q623124" start="84807" end="84817" title="Fort Union National Monument" label="Fort Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q16558" start="84831" end="84841" title="Fort Worth" label="Fort Worth"/>
<link wikidata="Q5472237" start="84854" end="84870" title="Fort Walla Walla" label="Fort Walla Walla"/>
<link wikidata="Q5471778" start="84886" end="84896" title="Fort Omaha" label="Fort Omaha"/>
<link wikidata="Q14704844" start="84924" end="84948" title="Department of the Platte" label="Department of the Platte"/>
<link wikidata="Q1327004" start="85065" end="85078" title="Fort Huachuca" label="Fort Huachuca"/>
<link wikidata="Q2241487" start="85906" end="85928" title="Treaty of Fort Laramie (1851)" label="Treaty of Fort Laramie"/>
<link wikidata="Q107434" start="85962" end="85967" title="Sioux" label="Sioux"/>
<link wikidata="Q322951" start="85969" end="85978" title="Cheyennes" label="Cheyennes"/>
<link wikidata="Q626136" start="85980" end="85988" title="Arapahos" label="Arapahos"/>
<link wikidata="Q331789" start="85990" end="85995" title="Crow Nation" label="Crows"/>
<link wikidata="Q1856887" start="86129" end="86143" title="Santa Fe Trail" label="Santa Fe Trail"/>
<link wikidata="Q1753108" start="86392" end="86417" title="First transcontinental railroad" label="transcontinental railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q3177118" start="86602" end="86609" title="Mormons" label="Mormons"/>
<link wikidata="Q1010563" start="86865" end="86889" title="Office of Indian Affairs" label="Office of Indian Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q5419" start="87156" end="87170" title="Missouri River" label="Missouri River"/>
<link wikidata="Q751536" start="87182" end="87200" title="Nebraska Territory" label="Nebraska Territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q619762" start="87274" end="87293" title="Kansas–Nebraska Act" label="Kansas–Nebraska Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q43199" start="87330" end="87335" title="Omaha, Nebraska" label="Omaha"/>
<link wikidata="Q286025" start="87337" end="87350" title="Nebraska City, Nebraska" label="Nebraska City"/>
<link wikidata="Q745120" start="87356" end="87366" title="St. Joseph, Missouri" label="St. Joseph"/>
<link wikidata="Q7087670" start="88121" end="88134" title="Oliver Loving" label="Oliver Loving"/>
<link wikidata="Q178521" start="88164" end="88170" title="cowboy" label="cowboy"/>
<link wikidata="Q339249" start="88575" end="88587" title="stagecoaches" label="stagecoaches"/>
<link wikidata="Q269574" start="88799" end="88824" title="U.S. 7th Cavalry Regiment" label="U.S. 7th Cavalry Regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q205422" start="88828" end="88842" title="Battle of the Little Bighorn" label="Little Bighorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q4646526" start="88874" end="88899" title="U.S. 9th Cavalry Regiment" label="U.S. 9th Cavalry Regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q4547016" start="88904" end="88930" title="U.S. 10th Cavalry Regiment" label="U.S. 10th Cavalry Regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1002108" start="89029" end="89044" title="Buffalo Soldier" label="Buffalo Soldier"/>
<link wikidata="Q7347189" start="89060" end="89075" title="Robert M. Utley" label="Robert M. Utley"/>
<link wikidata="Q548462" start="89231" end="89255" title="Frederick Jackson Turner" label="Frederick Jackson Turner"/>
<link wikidata="Q2635158" start="89529" end="89549" title="Progressive Era" label="Progressive movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q5865093" start="89647" end="89664" title="history of Kansas" label="history of Kansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1039506" start="89683" end="89697" title="Carl L. Becker" label="Carl L. Becker"/>
<link wikidata="Q3307301" start="91431" end="91444" title="Cattle drives in the United States" label="cattle drives"/>
<link wikidata="Q467664" start="92878" end="92892" title="Butte, Montana" label="Butte, Montana"/>
<link wikidata="Q2845063" start="93094" end="93109" title="Anaconda Copper" label="Anaconda Copper"/>
<link wikidata="Q3072663" start="93604" end="93609" title="Finnish Americans" label="Finns"/>
<link wikidata="Q115026" start="93642" end="93648" title="Swedish Americans" label="Swedes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193808" start="93653" end="93663" title="Norwegian Americans" label="Norwegians"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075293" start="93694" end="93699" title="Irish Americans" label="Irish"/>
<link wikidata="Q312574" start="93754" end="93767" title="Volga Germans" label="Volga Germans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344183" start="93785" end="93792" title="English Americans" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q1097673" start="93809" end="93819" title="Latter Day Saint movement" label="LDS church"/>
<link wikidata="Q5463" start="93881" end="93895" title="Rocky Mountains" label="Rocky Mountain"/>
<link wikidata="Q7330" start="93936" end="93947" title="History of the Jews in Germany" label="German Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q40510792" start="94064" end="94076" title="Black cowboys" label="Black cowboy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1002108" start="94130" end="94145" title="Buffalo Soldier" label="Buffalo Soldier"/>
<link wikidata="Q5420574" start="94523" end="94532" title="Exoduster" label="Exoduster"/>
<link wikidata="Q7028911" start="94645" end="94662" title="Nicodemus, Kansas" label="Nicodemus, Kansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q17550" start="94805" end="94825" title="California Gold Rush" label="California Gold Rush"/>
<link wikidata="Q5100529" start="95337" end="95358" title="Chinese Massacre Cove" label="Chinese Massacre Cove"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059463" start="95375" end="95396" title="Rock Springs massacre" label="Rock Springs massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q2555601" start="95532" end="95543" title="Chinatown, Los Angeles" label="Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q5100835" start="95576" end="95593" title="Los Angeles Chinese massacre of 1871" label="anti-Chinese riot"/>
<link wikidata="Q11616376" start="96061" end="96095" title="Wakamatsu Tea and Silk Farm Colony" label="Wakamatsu Tea and Silk Farm Colony"/>
<link wikidata="Q2612823" start="96418" end="96458" title="Naturalization Act of 1790" label="United States Naturalization Law of 1790"/>
<link wikidata="Q1660068" start="96505" end="96544" title="Immigration and Nationality Act of 1952" label="Immigration and Nationality Act of 1952"/>
<link wikidata="Q188116" start="97069" end="97117" title="Fourteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution" label="14th Amendment to the United States Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q170603" start="97222" end="97231" title="New Spain" label="New Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1761572" start="97758" end="97764" title="barrio" label="barrio"/>
<link wikidata="Q522843" start="97836" end="97852" title="Joaquin Murrieta" label="Joaquin Murrieta"/>
<link wikidata="Q124490" start="97978" end="97986" title="violence" label="violence"/>
<link wikidata="Q169207" start="97991" end="98005" title="discrimination" label="discrimination"/>
<link wikidata="Q16799549" start="98014" end="98029" title="latinamericans" label="Latin Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q2915954" start="98041" end="98053" title="Juan Cortina" label="Juan Cortina"/>
<link wikidata="Q510865" start="98100" end="98113" title="Texas Ranger Division" label="Texas Rangers"/>
<link wikidata="Q12707" start="98165" end="98177" title="Great Plains" label="Great Plains"/>
<link wikidata="Q4861314" start="99363" end="99375" title="barn raising" label="barn raising"/>
<link wikidata="Q7753183" start="99408" end="99423" title="The National Grange of the Order of Patrons of Husbandry" label="Grange meetings"/>
<link wikidata="Q229480" start="99703" end="99715" title="Willa Cather" label="Willa Cather"/>
<link wikidata="Q237514" start="99720" end="99740" title="Laura Ingalls Wilder" label="Laura Ingalls Wilder"/>
<link wikidata="Q2079755" start="100572" end="100584" title="Prostitution in the United States" label="Prostitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1711826" start="100939" end="100952" title="Julia Bulette" label="Julia Bulette"/>
<link wikidata="Q321292" start="102787" end="102794" title="Abilene, Kansas" label="Abilene"/>
<link wikidata="Q647127" start="102796" end="102806" title="Dodge City" label="Dodge City"/>
<link wikidata="Q49266" start="102808" end="102815" title="Wichita, Kansas" label="Wichita"/>
<link wikidata="Q43199" start="102817" end="102822" title="Omaha" label="Omaha"/>
<link wikidata="Q41819" start="102828" end="102839" title="Kansas City, Missouri" label="Kansas City"/>
<link wikidata="Q191503" start="103207" end="103214" title="dueling" label="dueling"/>
<link wikidata="Q2661898" start="103320" end="103328" title="rustling" label="rustling"/>
<link wikidata="Q11242506" start="103330" end="103345" title="highway robbery" label="highway robbery"/>
<link wikidata="Q502918" start="103347" end="103361" title="counterfeiting" label="counterfeiting"/>
<link wikidata="Q46952" start="103924" end="103939" title="organized crime" label="organized crime"/>
<link wikidata="Q578478" start="104085" end="104092" title="sheriff" label="sheriff"/>
<link wikidata="Q934866" start="104097" end="104104" title="United States Marshals Service" label="Marshal"/>
<link wikidata="Q510865" start="104202" end="104215" title="Texas Rangers (Law Enforcement)" label="Texas Rangers"/>
<link wikidata="Q79873" start="105841" end="105859" title="Tombstone, Arizona" label="Tombstone, Arizona"/>
<link wikidata="Q7026073" start="106053" end="106066" title="Nicholas Porter Earp" label="Earp brothers"/>
<link wikidata="Q931824" start="106145" end="106151" title="Virgil Earp" label="Virgil"/>
<link wikidata="Q44616" start="106153" end="106158" title="Wyatt Earp" label="Wyatt"/>
<link wikidata="Q709373" start="106164" end="106175" title="Morgan Earp" label="Morgan Earp"/>
<link wikidata="Q44987" start="106307" end="106319" title="Doc Holliday" label="Doc Holliday"/>
<link wikidata="Q3696357" start="106328" end="106341" title="The Cowboys (Cochise County)" label="three outlaws"/>
<link wikidata="Q1347682" start="106349" end="106376" title="Gunfight at the O.K. Corral" label="Gunfight at the O.K. Corral"/>
<link wikidata="Q931824" start="106438" end="106449" title="Virgil Earp" label="Virgil Earp"/>
<link wikidata="Q709373" start="106479" end="106490" title="Morgan Earp" label="Morgan Earp"/>
<link wikidata="Q3806537" start="106574" end="106584" title="James Earp" label="James Earp"/>
<link wikidata="Q4018268" start="106589" end="106600" title="Warren Earp" label="Warren Earp"/>
<link wikidata="Q4009495" start="106660" end="106668" title="Earp Vendetta Ride" label="vendetta"/>
<link wikidata="Q3751931" start="106728" end="106742" title="Frank Stilwell" label="Frank Stilwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q46952" start="106793" end="106808" title="organized crime" label="organized crime"/>
<link wikidata="Q370252" start="107137" end="107158" title="My Darling Clementine" label="My Darling Clementine"/>
<link wikidata="Q232222" start="107199" end="107226" title="Gunfight at the O.K. Corral (film)" label="Gunfight at the O.K. Corral"/>
<link wikidata="Q389773" start="107250" end="107265" title="Hour of the Gun" label="Hour of the Gun"/>
<link wikidata="Q205903" start="107305" end="107308" title="Doc (film)" label="Doc"/>
<link wikidata="Q1420651" start="107352" end="107361" title="Tombstone (film)" label="Tombstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1355172" start="107409" end="107419" title="Wyatt Earp (film)" label="Wyatt Earp"/>
<link wikidata="Q942440" start="107633" end="107651" title="James–Younger Gang" label="James–Younger Gang"/>
<link wikidata="Q44200" start="107653" end="107666" title="Billy the Kid" label="Billy the Kid"/>
<link wikidata="Q934918" start="107672" end="107683" title="Dalton Gang" label="Dalton Gang"/>
<link wikidata="Q880069" start="107685" end="107695" title="Black Bart (outlaw)" label="Black Bart"/>
<link wikidata="Q2330543" start="107697" end="107705" title="Sam Bass (outlaw)" label="Sam Bass"/>
<link wikidata="Q3077264" start="107707" end="107738" title="Butch Cassidy&amp;#x27;s Wild Bunch" label="Butch Cassidy&amp;#x27;s Wild Bunch"/>
<link wikidata="Q7990590" start="107869" end="107891" title="Wham Paymaster robbery" label="Wham Paymaster robbery"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="107900" end="107923" title="Skeleton Canyon massacres#1879 Skeleton Canyon massacre" label="Skeleton Canyon robbery"/>
<link wikidata="Q7268957" start="108037" end="108061" title="Quantrill&amp;#x27;s Raiders" label="Quantrill&amp;#x27;s Raiders"/>
<link wikidata="Q522843" start="108215" end="108230" title="Joaquin Murieta" label="Joaquin Murieta"/>
<link wikidata="Q3157293" start="108232" end="108243" title="Jack Powers" label="Jack Powers"/>
<link wikidata="Q4821159" start="108245" end="108261" title="Augustine Chacon" label="Augustine Chacon"/>
<link wikidata="Q365650" start="108484" end="108499" title="Allan Pinkerton" label="Allan Pinkerton"/>
<link wikidata="Q7096405" start="108721" end="108731" title="open range" label="open range"/>
<link wikidata="Q5879920" start="108733" end="108746" title="Hole-in-the-Wall" label="remote passes"/>
<link wikidata="Q272921" start="108752" end="108760" title="badlands" label="badlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q3471444" start="109086" end="109122" title="San Francisco Committee of Vigilance" label="San Francisco Committee of Vigilance"/>
<link wikidata="Q2295933" start="109147" end="109161" title="drumhead trial" label="drumhead trial"/>
<link wikidata="Q2661898" start="109635" end="109643" title="Cattle rustling" label="rustlers"/>
<link wikidata="Q124653834" start="109704" end="109713" title="vigilante" label="vigilante"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="110015" end="110039" title="Dalton Gang#Coffeyville Bank Robbery" label="Coffeyville Bank Robbery"/>
<link wikidata="Q4871274" start="110066" end="110083" title="Battle of Ingalls" label="Battle of Ingalls"/>
<link wikidata="Q7292715" start="110655" end="110664" title="Range war" label="Range war"/>
<link wikidata="Q7204086" start="111016" end="111035" title="Pleasant Valley War" label="Pleasant Valley War"/>
<link wikidata="Q6268269" start="111037" end="111055" title="Johnson County War" label="Johnson County War"/>
<link wikidata="Q113456687" start="111057" end="111066" title="Pecos War" label="Pecos War"/>
<link wikidata="Q6783561" start="111068" end="111084" title="Mason County War" label="Mason County War"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="111086" end="111104" title="Tom Horn#Colorado Range War" label="Colorado Range War"/>
<link wikidata="Q5442980" start="111106" end="111123" title="Fence Cutting War" label="Fence Cutting War"/>
<link wikidata="Q23020585" start="111125" end="111142" title="Colfax County War" label="Colfax County War"/>
<link wikidata="Q23020464" start="111144" end="111161" title="Castaic Range War" label="Castaic Range War"/>
<link wikidata="Q7580459" start="111163" end="111180" title="Spring Creek raid" label="Spring Creek raid"/>
<link wikidata="Q113570498" start="111182" end="111197" title="Porum Range War" label="Porum Range War"/>
<link wikidata="Q16164305" start="111199" end="111217" title="Barber–Mizell feud" label="Barber–Mizell feud"/>
<link wikidata="Q7413801" start="111219" end="111240" title="San Elizario Salt War" label="San Elizario Salt War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1212" start="111275" end="111282" title="Montana" label="Montana"/>
<link wikidata="Q7626226" start="111309" end="111333" title="Stuart&amp;#x27;s Stranglers" label="Stuart&amp;#x27;s Stranglers"/>
<link wikidata="Q7492431" start="111667" end="111677" title="Sheep Wars" label="Sheep Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q7309711" start="112009" end="112032" title="Regulator–Moderator War" label="Regulator–Moderator War"/>
<link wikidata="Q5173309" start="112034" end="112050" title="Cortina Troubles" label="Cortina Troubles"/>
<link wikidata="Q6492180" start="112052" end="112066" title="Las Cuevas War" label="Las Cuevas War"/>
<link wikidata="Q4854630" start="112075" end="112085" title="Bandit War" label="Bandit War"/>
<link wikidata="Q6619508" start="112088" end="112093" title="Family feuds in the United States" label="Feuds"/>
<link wikidata="Q1784900" start="112375" end="112393" title="Lincoln County War" label="Lincoln County War"/>
<link wikidata="Q7857043" start="112395" end="112411" title="Tutt–Everett War" label="Tutt–Everett War"/>
<link wikidata="Q5910456" start="112413" end="112429" title="Hot Springs Gunfight" label="Flynn–Doran feud"/>
<link wikidata="Q5326916" start="112431" end="112448" title="Early–Hasley feud" label="Early–Hasley feud"/>
<link wikidata="Q4975141" start="112450" end="112467" title="Brooks-Baxter War" label="Brooks-Baxter War"/>
<link wikidata="Q17152536" start="112469" end="112487" title="Sutton–Taylor feud" label="Sutton–Taylor feud"/>
<link wikidata="Q5904977" start="112489" end="112505" title="Horrell Brothers" label="Horrell Brothers"/>
<link wikidata="Q4975144" start="112512" end="112533" title="Brooks–McFarland Feud" label="Brooks–McFarland Feud"/>
<link wikidata="Q7307012" start="112535" end="112554" title="Reese–Townsend feud" label="Reese–Townsend feud"/>
<link wikidata="Q4009495" start="112563" end="112581" title="Earp Vendetta Ride" label="Earp Vendetta Ride"/>
<link wikidata="Q477217" start="113337" end="113351" title="Chisholm Trail" label="Chisholm Trail"/>
<link wikidata="Q321292" start="113566" end="113581" title="Abilene, Kansas" label="Abilene, Kansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q156032" start="113670" end="113679" title="Red River of the South" label="Red River"/>
<link wikidata="Q737173" start="114539" end="114547" title="Hereford (cattle)" label="Hereford"/>
<link wikidata="Q212348" start="114552" end="114557" title="Angus (cattle)" label="Angus"/>
<link wikidata="Q33866" start="115275" end="115293" title="Theodore Roosevelt" label="Theodore Roosevelt"/>
<link wikidata="Q7096405" start="115569" end="115579" title="open range" label="open range"/>
<link wikidata="Q321292" start="115995" end="116002" title="Abilene, Kansas" label="Abilene"/>
<link wikidata="Q647127" start="116004" end="116014" title="Dodge City" label="Dodge City"/>
<link wikidata="Q180666" start="116020" end="116029" title="Ellsworth, Kansas" label="Ellsworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q74047" start="116448" end="116458" title="ghost town" label="ghost town"/>
<link wikidata="Q548599" start="116851" end="116884" title="exploitation of natural resources" label="exploitation of natural resources"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088777" start="116966" end="116982" title="conservation movement" label="conservationists"/>
<link wikidata="Q33866" start="116991" end="117009" title="Theodore Roosevelt" label="Theodore Roosevelt"/>
<link wikidata="Q534301" start="117543" end="117558" title="Gifford Pinchot" label="Gifford Pinchot"/>
<link wikidata="Q9367416" start="117572" end="117596" title="Newlands Reclamation Act" label="Newlands Reclamation Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q46169" start="117790" end="117803" title="national park" label="national park"/>
<link wikidata="Q179049" start="117810" end="117825" title="nature preserve" label="nature preserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q379580" start="118112" end="118121" title="John Muir" label="John Muir"/>
<link wikidata="Q508775" start="118259" end="118270" title="Sierra Club" label="Sierra Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q3476361" start="118280" end="118297" title="Scottish Americans" label="Scottish-American"/>
<link wikidata="Q149851" start="118370" end="118378" title="Sequoiadendron giganteum" label="sequoias"/>
<link wikidata="Q1996389" start="118386" end="118401" title="Yosemite Valley" label="Yosemite Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q180402" start="118425" end="118447" title="Yosemite National Park" label="Yosemite National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q35171" start="118479" end="118495" title="Grover Cleveland" label="Grover Cleveland"/>
<link wikidata="Q3127693" start="118814" end="118834" title="Harper&amp;#x27;s Weekly" label="Harper&amp;#x27;s Weekly"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542536" start="118870" end="118886" title="Atlantic Monthly" label="Atlantic Monthly"/>
<link wikidata="Q35648" start="119137" end="119156" title="William Howard Taft" label="William Howard Taft"/>
<link wikidata="Q1616130" start="119164" end="119176" title="Hetch Hetchy" label="Hetch Hetchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1240502" start="119273" end="119287" title="Donald Worster" label="Donald Worster"/>
<link wikidata="Q12707" start="119605" end="119617" title="Great Plains" label="Great Plains"/>
<link wikidata="Q907924" start="119679" end="119693" title="Plains Indians" label="Plains Indians"/>
<link wikidata="Q5162978" start="120130" end="120146" title="Conservation in the United States" label="Conservationists"/>
<link wikidata="Q4743179" start="120159" end="120181" title="American Bison Society" label="American Bison Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q2095711" start="120458" end="120474" title="1890 United States census" label="1890 U.S. census"/>
<link wikidata="Q1311513" start="120669" end="120685" title="1900 United States census" label="1900 U.S. census"/>
<link wikidata="Q3042032" start="120755" end="120771" title="1910 United States census" label="1910 U.S. census"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364746" start="121117" end="121154" title="Canadian Prairies" label="Prairie frontier of the Canadian West"/>
<link wikidata="Q974556" start="121369" end="121383" title="Homestead Acts" label="Homestead Acts"/>
<link wikidata="Q974556" start="121609" end="121616" title="Enlarged Homestead Act" label="in 1909"/>
<link wikidata="Q7617845" start="121649" end="121656" title="Stock-Raising Homestead Act" label="in 1916"/>
<link wikidata="Q5440004" start="121879" end="121910" title="Federal Aid Road Act of 1916" label="Federal Aid Highway Act of 1916"/>
<link wikidata="Q2017330" start="122022" end="122040" title="Oklahoma Territory" label="Oklahoma Territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q868245" start="122064" end="122080" title="Indian Territory" label="Indian Territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q3042032" start="122227" end="122257" title="1910 United States census" label="populations during this period"/>
<link wikidata="Q6159579" start="122382" end="122405" title="Jarbidge Stage Robbery" label="last stagecoach robbery"/>
<link wikidata="Q214426" start="122598" end="122616" title="Mexican Revolution" label="Mexican Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q2615472" start="122750" end="122768" title="Mexican Border War (1910–1919)" label="Mexican Border War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2488483" start="122807" end="122825" title="Battle of Columbus (1916)" label="Battle of Columbus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1926257" start="122841" end="122860" title="Pancho Villa Expedition" label="Punitive Expedition"/>
<link wikidata="Q4854630" start="122878" end="122888" title="Bandit War" label="Bandit War"/>
<link wikidata="Q4930681" start="123010" end="123019" title="Bluff War" label="Bluff War"/>
<link wikidata="Q4274610" start="123040" end="123049" title="Posey War" label="Posey War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070940" start="123195" end="123207" title="Asia–Pacific" label="Asia–Pacific"/>
<link wikidata="Q913644" start="123453" end="123483" title="Alaska Statehood Act" label="admitted as a state until 1959"/>
<link wikidata="Q178521" start="123693" end="123699" title="cowboy" label="cowboy"/>
<link wikidata="Q178664" start="124667" end="124678" title="Bowie knife" label="Bowie knife"/>
<link wikidata="Q840507" start="124680" end="124685" title="lasso" label="lasso"/>
<link wikidata="Q4997069" start="124687" end="124695" title="bullwhip" label="bullwhip"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062810" start="125383" end="125388" title="chaps" label="chaps"/>
<link wikidata="Q101444738" start="125400" end="125408" title="bandanna" label="bandanna"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138175" start="125513" end="125523" title="cowboy hat" label="cowboy hat"/>
<link wikidata="Q156343" start="125808" end="125820" title="Levi Strauss" label="Levi Strauss"/>
<link wikidata="Q7096405" start="126951" end="126961" title="open range" label="open range"/>
<link wikidata="Q253373" start="127188" end="127205" title="James W. Marshall" label="James W. Marshall"/>
<link wikidata="Q505213" start="127221" end="127228" title="sawmill" label="sawmill"/>
<link wikidata="Q2792626" start="127233" end="127251" title="Sutter&amp;#x27;s Fort" label="Sutter&amp;#x27;s Fort"/>
<link wikidata="Q466699" start="127276" end="127290" title="American River" label="American River"/>
<link wikidata="Q124428" start="127492" end="127503" title="John Sutter" label="John Sutter"/>
<link wikidata="Q17550" start="127688" end="127708" title="California Gold Rush" label="California Gold Rush"/>
<link wikidata="Q99" start="127831" end="127841" title="California" label="California"/>
<link wikidata="Q1113494" start="128196" end="128208" title="Gold panning" label="dust panning"/>
<link wikidata="Q1650350" start="128250" end="128261" title="prospectors" label="prospectors"/>
<link wikidata="Q44497" start="128301" end="128307" title="mining" label="mining"/>
<link wikidata="Q232254" start="128469" end="128476" title="pickaxe" label="pickaxe"/>
<link wikidata="Q758" start="128532" end="128536" title="zinc" label="zinc"/>
<link wikidata="Q753" start="128538" end="128544" title="copper" label="copper"/>
<link wikidata="Q273182" start="128694" end="128703" title="gold rush" label="gold rush"/>
<link wikidata="Q3453700" start="128792" end="128813" title="Black Hills Gold Rush" label="Black Hills Gold Rush"/>
<link wikidata="Q1117425" start="128821" end="128837" title="Dakota Territory" label="Dakota Territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q662506" start="128852" end="128874" title="Black Hills Expedition" label="Black Hills Expedition"/>
<link wikidata="Q331895" start="128883" end="128909" title="Pike&amp;#x27;s Peak Gold Rush" label="Pike&amp;#x27;s Peak Gold Rush"/>
<link wikidata="Q751536" start="128917" end="128935" title="Nebraska Territory" label="Nebraska Territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q185387" start="129035" end="129042" title="Suffrage" label="to vote"/>
<link wikidata="Q5398059" start="129196" end="129208" title="Indian reservation" label="reservations"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146100" start="129285" end="129298" title="Chinese Americans" label="Chinese women"/>
<link wikidata="Q178521" start="130132" end="130140" title="cowgirls" label="cowgirls"/>
<link wikidata="Q43845" start="130149" end="130163" title="business owner" label="business owner"/>
<link wikidata="Q619851" start="130173" end="130184" title="Gunfighter" label="gunslingers"/>
<link wikidata="Q621613" start="130196" end="130209" title="bounty hunter" label="bounty hunter"/>
<link wikidata="Q2992784" start="130303" end="130318" title="Labor intensity" label="labor-intensive"/>
<link wikidata="Q3565868" start="130415" end="130431" title="Rail transport" label="railroad workers"/>
<link wikidata="Q10884" start="130681" end="130685" title="tree" label="tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q39397" start="130796" end="130799" title="axe" label="axe"/>
<link wikidata="Q291319" start="130956" end="130964" title="Crosscut saw" label="crosscut"/>
<link wikidata="Q15008046" start="131104" end="131115" title="log driving" label="log driving"/>
<link wikidata="Q217416" start="131138" end="131144" title="Loader (equipment)" label="loader"/>
<link wikidata="Q473194" start="131235" end="131237" title="ox" label="ox"/>
<link wikidata="Q6502154" start="131352" end="131361" title="Geographical exploration" label="explorers"/>
<link wikidata="Q313492" start="131530" end="131546" title="Meriwether Lewis" label="Meriwether Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q355348" start="131551" end="131564" title="William Clark" label="William Clark"/>
<link wikidata="Q12612" start="131650" end="131671" title="Western United States" label="Western United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q168247" start="131835" end="131841" title="famine" label="famine"/>
<link wikidata="Q171004" start="131859" end="131871" title="grizzly bear" label="grizzly bear"/>
<link wikidata="Q188540" start="132362" end="132384" title="Economy of the United States" label="America&amp;#x27;s economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q152074" start="132481" end="132489" title="Bankruptcy" label="bankrupt"/>
<link wikidata="Q852835" start="132505" end="132513" title="customer" label="customer"/>
<link wikidata="Q375010" start="132594" end="132606" title="Charles Bent" label="Charles Bent"/>
<link wikidata="Q1261" start="132627" end="132635" title="Colorado" label="Colorado"/>
<link wikidata="Q7684314" start="132647" end="132658" title="Taos Revolt" label="Taos Revolt"/>
<link wikidata="Q365680" start="132686" end="132693" title="assault" label="assault"/>
<link wikidata="Q852431" start="132708" end="132714" title="Puebloans" label="Pueblo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3091173" start="133556" end="133594" title="Wild Bill Hickok – Davis Tutt shootout" label="Wild Bill Hickok – Davis Tutt shootout"/>
<link wikidata="Q1750513" start="133599" end="133629" title="Luke Short – Jim Courtright duel" label="Luke Short-Jim Courtright duel"/>
<link wikidata="Q647127" start="133825" end="133835" title="Dodge City" label="Dodge City"/>
<link wikidata="Q79873" start="133840" end="133849" title="Tombstone, Arizona" label="Tombstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q6683" start="133959" end="133979" title="Mexican–American War" label="Mexican–American War"/>
<link wikidata="Q816" start="134026" end="134033" title="Arizona" label="Arizona"/>
<link wikidata="Q1522" start="134035" end="134045" title="New Mexico" label="New Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439" start="134047" end="134052" title="Texas" label="Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1227" start="134064" end="134070" title="Nevada" label="Nevada"/>
<link wikidata="Q829" start="134076" end="134080" title="Utah" label="Utah"/>
<link wikidata="Q272921" start="134180" end="134188" title="badlands" label="badlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q46422" start="134243" end="134249" title="Sonora" label="Sonora"/>
<link wikidata="Q2009" start="134374" end="134379" title="Yukon" label="Yukon"/>
<link wikidata="Q372324" start="134461" end="134472" title="Dawson City" label="Dawson City"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071389" start="134501" end="134511" title="Gold mining" label="gold mines"/>
<link wikidata="Q631489" start="134525" end="134543" title="Klondike Gold Rush" label="Klondike Gold Rush"/>
<link wikidata="Q24062033" start="134549" end="134563" title="Klondike Trail" label="Klondike Trail"/>
<link wikidata="Q241741" start="134592" end="134604" title="Wildlife" label="wild animals"/>
<link wikidata="Q2995419" start="134635" end="134653" title="contagious disease" label="contagious disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q192185" start="135226" end="135239" title="Aaron Copland" label="Aaron Copland"/>
<link wikidata="Q959136" start="135241" end="135251" title="Roy Harris" label="Roy Harris"/>
<link wikidata="Q544485" start="135253" end="135267" title="Virgil Thomson" label="Virgil Thomson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066383" start="135269" end="135293" title="Charles Wakefield Cadman" label="Charles Wakefield Cadman"/>
<link wikidata="Q709337" start="135299" end="135313" title="Arthur Farwell" label="Arthur Farwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q8007305" start="135484" end="135498" title="William Cronon" label="William Cronon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2917318" start="135664" end="135679" title="Frontier Thesis" label="Frontier Thesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q548462" start="135693" end="135717" title="Frederick Jackson Turner" label="Frederick Jackson Turner"/>
<link wikidata="Q223766" start="136060" end="136072" title="P. T. Barnum" label="P. T. Barnum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1593709" start="136200" end="136210" title="dime novel" label="dime novel"/>
<link wikidata="Q348979" start="136944" end="136956" title="Ned Buntline" label="Ned Buntline"/>
<link wikidata="Q202285" start="136983" end="137000" title="Buffalo Bill Cody" label="Buffalo Bill Cody"/>
<link wikidata="Q26222256" start="137006" end="137023" title="Edward Lytton Wheeler" label="Edward L. Wheeler"/>
<link wikidata="Q5245748" start="137038" end="137051" title="Deadwood Dick" label="Deadwood Dick"/>
<link wikidata="Q236795" start="137105" end="137118" title="Calamity Jane" label="Calamity Jane"/>
<link wikidata="Q230935" start="137467" end="137479" title="Annie Oakley" label="Annie Oakley"/>
<link wikidata="Q3127693" start="137766" end="137786" title="Harper&amp;#x27;s Weekly" label="Harper&amp;#x27;s Weekly"/>
<link wikidata="Q560787" start="137827" end="137845" title="Frederic Remington" label="Frederic Remington"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065418" start="137847" end="137865" title="Charles M. Russell" label="Charles M. Russell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1281119" start="137932" end="137943" title="Owen Wister" label="Owen Wister"/>
<link wikidata="Q33866" start="138092" end="138110" title="Theodore Roosevelt" label="Theodore Roosevelt"/>
<link wikidata="Q351" start="138345" end="138370" title="Yellowstone National Park" label="Yellowstone National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q51114" start="138559" end="138568" title="John Ford" label="John Ford"/>
<link wikidata="Q192017" start="138600" end="138615" title="Monument Valley" label="Monument Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q24321994" start="139122" end="139144" title="Heather Cox Richardson" label="Heather Cox Richardson"/>
<link wikidata="Q33866" start="140224" end="140242" title="Theodore Roosevelt" label="Theodore Roosevelt"/>
<link wikidata="Q457840" start="140391" end="140402" title="Will Rogers" label="Will Rogers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364648" start="140618" end="140627" title="Oklahoma!" label="Oklahoma!"/>
<link wikidata="Q1639788" start="141218" end="141233" title="Charles Siringo" label="Charles Siringo"/>
<link wikidata="Q525235" start="141250" end="141260" title="Andy Adams (writer)" label="Andy Adams"/>
<link wikidata="Q525235" start="141624" end="141643" title="The Log of a Cowboy" label="The Log of a Cowboy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133647" start="142083" end="142111" title="Red River (1948 film)" label="&amp;quot;Red River&amp;quot; (1948)"/>
<link wikidata="Q207703" start="142282" end="142287" title="rodeo" label="rodeo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2460778" start="142635" end="142653" title="John Wesley Hardin" label="John Wesley Hardin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1750513" start="142655" end="142665" title="Luke Short" label="Luke Short"/>
<link wikidata="Q12655902" start="142708" end="142713" title="Fast draw" label="speed"/>
<link wikidata="Q7988500" start="143223" end="143237" title="cowboy culture" label="cowboy culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1056721" start="143370" end="143378" title="chivalry" label="chivalry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425111" start="143540" end="143545" title="List of famous Cowboy songs" label="songs"/>
<link wikidata="Q5179572" start="143550" end="143563" title="cowboy poetry" label="cowboy poetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q619851" start="143592" end="143602" title="gunfighter" label="gunfighter"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="143637" end="143648" title="Code duello#Western Code Duello" label="code duello"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="143708" end="143713" title="Gunfighter#Real-life Wild West duels" label="duels"/>
<link wikidata="Q3352817" start="143715" end="143736" title="Extrajudicial punishment" label="Extrajudicial justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q486775" start="143775" end="143783" title="lynching" label="lynching"/>
<link wikidata="Q124653834" start="143785" end="143796" title="Vigilante" label="vigilantism"/>
<link wikidata="Q914841" start="143914" end="143930" title="frontier justice" label="frontier justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q548462" start="143968" end="143992" title="Frederick Jackson Turner" label="Frederick Jackson Turner"/>
<link wikidata="Q7012401" start="144460" end="144479" title="New Western History" label="New Western History"/>
<link wikidata="Q262663" start="144774" end="144797" title="University of San Diego" label="University of San Diego"/>
<link wikidata="Q1561862" start="145248" end="145269" title="environmental history" label="environmental history"/>
<link wikidata="Q8007305" start="145607" end="145621" title="William Cronon" label="William Cronon"/>
<link wikidata="Q63247964" start="145858" end="145871" title="Samuel Lubell" label="Samuel Lubell"/>
<link wikidata="Q3623858" start="145977" end="145992" title="social climbing" label="social climbing"/>
<link wikidata="Q15975718" start="146483" end="146501" title="New Deal coalition" label="New Deal coalition"/>
<link wikidata="Q8007" start="146518" end="146543" title="Franklin Delano Roosevelt" label="Franklin Delano Roosevelt"/>
<link wikidata="Q179868" start="146566" end="146592" title="1932 United States presidential election" label="1932 presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190812" start="146661" end="146685" title="University of New Mexico" label="University of New Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q7101024" start="147103" end="147139" title="Oregon-California Trails Association" label="Oregon-California Trails Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q1355821" start="147236" end="147253" title="Canadian frontier" label="Canadian frontier"/>
<link wikidata="Q849680" start="147256" end="147276" title="American Indian Wars" label="American Indian wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q3296930" start="147381" end="147396" title="List of Indian massacres" label="Indian massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q7695" start="147482" end="147508" title="March (territorial entity)" label="March (territorial entity)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6971981" start="147557" end="147602" title="National Cowboy &amp;amp; Western Heritage Museum" label="National Cowboy &amp;amp; Western Heritage Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q207703" start="147819" end="147824" title="Rodeo" label="Rodeo"/>
<link wikidata="Q8037570" start="147850" end="147859" title="Wrangler (profession)" label="wrangling"/>
<link wikidata="Q1352230" start="147870" end="147902" title="Territories of the United States" label="Territories of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q7774262" start="147905" end="147924" title="The West As America" label="The West As America"/>
<link wikidata="Q7806309" start="147927" end="147960" title="Timeline of the American Old West" label="Timeline of the American Old West"/>
<link wikidata="Q616865" start="147963" end="147976" title="Wanted poster" label="Wanted poster"/>
<link wikidata="Q12612" start="148097" end="148118" title="Western United States" label="Western United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q7988500" start="148160" end="148177" title="Western lifestyle" label="Western lifestyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q3568132" start="148180" end="148195" title="Wild West shows" label="Wild West shows"/>
<link wikidata="Q619851" start="148274" end="148284" title="Gunfighter" label="Gunfighter"/>
<link wikidata="Q3243990" start="148287" end="148320" title="List of American Old West outlaws" label="List of American Old West outlaws"/>
<link wikidata="Q254508" start="148336" end="148342" title="outlaw" label="outlaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q619851" start="148348" end="148358" title="gunfighter" label="gunfighter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1828713" start="148433" end="148461" title="List of cowboys and cowgirls" label="List of cowboys and cowgirls"/>
<link wikidata="Q6592858" start="148464" end="148486" title="List of Western lawmen" label="List of Western lawmen"/>
<link wikidata="Q578478" start="148583" end="148590" title="sheriff" label="sheriff"/>
<link wikidata="Q111837" start="148592" end="148599" title="marshal" label="marshal"/>
<link wikidata="Q510865" start="148601" end="148614" title="Texas Ranger Division" label="Texas Rangers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1308121" start="148683" end="148703" title="one-room schoolhouse" label="one-room schoolhouse"/>
<link wikidata="" start="148706" end="148752" title=":Category:Gunslingers of the American Old West" label=":Category:Gunslingers of the American Old West"/>
<link wikidata="" start="148755" end="148796" title=":Category:Lawmen of the American Old West" label=":Category:Lawmen of the American Old West"/>
<link wikidata="" start="148799" end="148841" title=":Category:Outlaws of the American Old West" label=":Category:Outlaws of the American Old West"/>
<link wikidata="Q5263971" start="148863" end="148878" title="Desert Magazine" label="Desert Magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q6296211" start="148893" end="148912" title="Journal of the West" label="Journal of the West"/>
<link wikidata="Q7847552" start="148927" end="148945" title="True West Magazine" label="True West Magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q7987932" start="148954" end="148981" title="Western History Association" label="Western History Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q5106505" start="149002" end="149012" title="Chris Enss" label="Chris Enss"/>
<link wikidata="Q146763" start="149100" end="149109" title="Zane Grey" label="Zane Grey"/>
<link wikidata="Q379895" start="149159" end="149177" title="Louis L&amp;#x27;Amour" label="Louis L&amp;#x27;Amour"/>
<link wikidata="Q22714" start="149276" end="149284" title="Karl May" label="Karl May"/>
<link wikidata="Q17486589" start="149388" end="149409" title="Lorin Morgan-Richards" label="Lorin Morgan-Richards"/>
<link wikidata="Q38197386" start="149441" end="149459" title="The Goodbye Family" label="The Goodbye Family"/>
<link wikidata="Q828542" start="149470" end="149478" title="Winnetou" label="Winnetou"/>
<link wikidata="" start="149561" end="149598" title="Aces &amp;amp; Eights: Shattered Frontier" label="Aces &amp;amp; Eights: Shattered Frontier"/>
<link wikidata="Q3642315" start="149672" end="149693" title="Boot Hill (role-playing game)" label="&amp;quot;Boot Hill&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1543201" start="149734" end="149737" title="TSR, Inc." label="TSR"/>
<link wikidata="Q1375" start="149774" end="149796" title="Dungeons &amp;amp; Dragons" label="Dungeons &amp;amp; Dragons"/>
<link wikidata="Q1180909" start="149812" end="149821" title="Deadlands" label="Deadlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q16967584" start="149892" end="149903" title="Dust Devils (game)" label="Dust Devils"/>
<link wikidata="Q3422689" start="150009" end="150036" title="Red Dead" label="&amp;quot;Red Dead&amp;quot; series"/>
<link wikidata="Q6604037" start="150081" end="150121" title="List of Western computer and video games" label="List of Western computer and video games"/>
<link wikidata="Q7889" start="150133" end="150156" title="computer and video game" label="computer and video game"/>
<link wikidata="Q7949064" start="150555" end="150562" title="WETA-TV" label="WETA-TV"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="252510" wikidata="Q887117" url="?curid=252510" title="Governor of Massachusetts">
<text>The governor of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts is the chief executive officer of the government of Massachusetts. The governor is the head of the state cabinet and the commander-in-chief of the commonwealth&#x27;s military forces.

Massachusetts has a republican system of government that is akin to a presidential system. The governor acts as the head of government while having a distinct role from that of the legislative branch. The governor has far-reaching political obligations, including ceremonial and political duties. The governor also signs bills into law and has veto power. The governor is a member of the Massachusetts Governor&#x27;s Council, a popularly elected council with eight members who provide advice and consent on certain legal matters and appointments.

Beginning with the Massachusetts Bay Company in 1629, the role of the governor has changed throughout its history in terms of powers and selection. The modern form of the position was created in the 1780 Constitution of Massachusetts, which called for the position of a &quot;supreme executive magistrate&quot;.

Governors of Massachusetts are elected every four years during state elections that are held on the first Tuesday of November after November 1. As of November 2022, the most recent Massachusetts gubernatorial election was held in 2022. Following each gubernatorial election, the elected governor is inaugurated on the Thursday after the first Wednesday in January following the election. There are no term limits restricting how long a governor may serve. The longest-serving Massachusetts governor is Michael Dukakis, who served 12 years; Dukakis was in office from 1975 to 1979 and from 1983 to 1991. The current governor is Maura Healey, a Democrat who won the 2022 gubernatorial election.

==Qualifications==
Any person seeking to become governor of Massachusetts must meet the following requirements:
* Be at least eighteen years of age
* Be a registered voter in Massachusetts
* Be a Massachusetts resident for at least seven years when elected
* Receive 10,000 signatures from registered voters on nomination papers

== Election and term ==
The governor is an elected position. The term of office is four years, with no term limit. 

Elections for governor are held on a four-year basis concurrently with elections for the offices of lieutenant governor, attorney general, secretary of the commonwealth, state treasurer, and state auditor.

==History==

The role of governor has existed in Massachusetts since the Royal Charter of 1628. The original role was one of a president of the board of a joint-stock company, namely the Massachusetts Bay Company. The governor would be elected by freemen, who were shareholders of the company. These shareholders were mostly colonists themselves who fit certain religious requirements. The governor acted in a vice-regal manner, overseeing the governance and functioning of the colony. Originally they were supposed to reside in London, as was the case with other colonial company governors, although this protocol was broken when John Winthrop was appointed governor. The governor served as the executive of the colony, originally elected annually, they were joined by a Council of Assistants. This council was a group of magistrates who performed judicial functions, acted as an upper house of the General Court, and provided advice and consent to the governor. The early governors of Massachusetts Bay were staunchly Puritan colonists who wished to form a state that coincided with religious law.

With the founding of the Dominion of New England by James II of England, the New England colonies were combined with the Province of New York, Province of West Jersey, and the Province of East Jersey. During this period (1686–1689) Massachusetts had no governor of its own. Instead there existed a royally appointed governor who resided in Boston and served at the King&#x27;s pleasure. Though there existed a council which served as a quasi-legislature, however the logistics of calling the council to meet were so arduous that the Dominion was essentially governed by the Crown through the royal governor. The reason for the creation of such a post was there existed tremendous hostility between the Kingdom of England and the colonists of Massachusetts Bay. In an effort to bring the colonies under tighter control the Crown dismantled the old assembly system and created the Viceroy system based on the Spanish model in New Spain. This model of government was greatly disliked by the colonists all throughout British North America but especially in New England where colonists at one time did have some semblance of democratic and local control. With the Glorious Revolution and the Boston Revolt the Dominion was abolished in 1689.

With the creation of the Massachusetts Charter in 1691, the role of civilian governor was restored in Massachusetts Bay. Now the Province of Massachusetts Bay, the colony then encompassed the territory of the Massachusetts Bay Colony, the Plymouth Colony, and areas of what is now the state of Maine. The governor however would not be chosen by the electorate, instead the position would remain a royal appointment. In order to ease tensions with royal authorities and the colonists the General Court was reestablished and given significant powers. This created acrimony between the governors and the assembly of the General Court. The governor could veto any decision made by the assembly and had control over the militia, however the General Court had authority of the treasury and provincial finances. This meant that in the event the governor did not agree with or consent with the rulings and laws of the General Court then the assembly would threaten to withhold any pay for the governor and other Royal Officers.

From 1765 on the unraveling of the Province into a full political crisis only increased the tensions between the governor and the people of Massachusetts Bay. Following the passage of the Stamp Act Governor Thomas Hutchinson had his home broken into and ransacked. The early stages of the American Revolution saw political turmoil in Massachusetts Bay. With the passage of the Intolerable Acts the then Royal Governor Thomas Gage dissolved the General Court and began to govern the province by decree. In 1774 the Massachusetts Provincial Congress was formed as an alternative revolutionary government to the royal government in Boston. With Massachusetts Bay declaring its independence in May 1776 the role of governor was vacant for four years. The executive role during this time was filled by the Governor&#x27;s Council, the Committee of Safety, and the president of the Congress when in session.

With the adoption of the Constitution of Massachusetts in 1780 the role of an elected civilian governor was restored. John Hancock was elected as the first governor of the independent commonwealth on October 25, 1780.

==Constitutional role==
Part the Second, Chapter II, Section I, Article I of the Massachusetts Constitution reads,
The governor of Massachusetts is the chief executive of the commonwealth, and is supported by a number of subordinate officers. He, like most other state officers, senators, and representatives, was originally elected annually. In 1918 this was changed to a two-year term, and since 1966 the office of governor has carried a four-year term. The governor of Massachusetts does not receive a mansion or other official residence and resides in their own private residence. However, the governor does receive a housing allowance/stipend for $65,000. The title &quot;His Excellency&quot; is a holdover from the royally appointed governors of the Province of Massachusetts Bay. The first governor to use the title was Richard Coote, 1st Earl of Bellomont, in 1699; since he was an Earl, it was thought proper to call him &quot;Your Excellency.&quot; The title was retained until 1742, when an order from King George II forbade its further use. However, the framers of the state constitution revived it because they found it fitting to dignify the governor with this title.

The governor also serves as commander-in-chief of the commonwealth&#x27;s armed forces.

==Succession==

According to the Massachusetts State Constitution:Whenever the chair of the governor shall be vacant, by reason of his death, or absence from the commonwealth, or otherwise, the lieutenant governor, for the time being, shall, during such vacancy, perform all the duties incumbent upon the governor, and shall have and exercise all the powers and authorities, which by this constitution the governor is vested with, when personally present.The Constitution does not use the term &quot;acting governor&quot;, but the practice in Massachusetts has been that the lieutenant governor retains the position and title as &quot;lieutenant governor&quot; and becomes acting governor, not governor. The lieutenant governor, when acting as governor, is referred to as &quot;the lieutenant-governor, acting governor&quot; in official documents.

Despite this terminology, the Massachusetts courts have found that the full authority of the office of the governor devolves to the lieutenant governor upon vacancy in the office of governor, and that there is no circumstance short of death, resignation, or impeachment that would relieve the acting governor from the full gubernatorial responsibilities.

The first use of the succession provision occurred in 1785, five years after the constitution&#x27;s adoption, when Governor John Hancock resigned the post, leaving Lieutenant Governor Thomas Cushing as acting governor. Most recently, Jane Swift became acting governor upon the resignation of Paul Cellucci.

When the constitution was first adopted, the Governor&#x27;s Council was charged with acting as governor in the event that both the governorship and lieutenant governorship were vacant. This occurred in 1799 when Governor Increase Sumner died in office on June 7, 1799, leaving Lieutenant Governor Moses Gill as acting governor. Acting Governor Gill never received a lieutenant and died on May 20, 1800, between that year&#x27;s election and the inauguration of Governor-elect Caleb Strong. The Governor&#x27;s Council served as the executive for ten days; the council&#x27;s chair, Thomas Dawes was at no point named governor or acting governor.

Article LV of the Constitution, enacted in 1918, created a new line of succession:
==Cabinet==
The governor has a 10-person cabinet, each of whom oversees a portion of the government under direct administration (as opposed to independent executive agencies). See Government of Massachusetts for a complete listing.

==Traditions==
The front doors of the State House are only opened when a governor leaves office, a head of state or the president of the United States comes to visit the State House, or for the return of flags from Massachusetts regiments at the end of wars. The tradition of the ceremonial door originated when departing governor Benjamin Butler kicked open the front door and walked out by himself in 1884.

Incoming governors usually choose at least one past governor&#x27;s portrait to hang in their office.

Immediately before being sworn into office, the governor-elect receives four symbols from the departing governor: the ceremonial pewter &quot;Key&quot; for the governor&#x27;s office door, the Butler Bible, the &quot;Gavel&quot;, and a two-volume set of the Massachusetts General Statutes with a personal note from the departing governor to their successor added to the back of the text. The governor-elect is then escorted by the sergeant-at-arms to the House Chamber and sworn in by the President of the Senate before a joint session of the House and Senate.

===Lone walk===
Upon completion of their term, the departing governor takes a &quot;lone walk&quot; down the Grand Staircase, through the House of Flags, into Doric Hall, out the central doors, and down the steps of the Massachusetts State House. The governor then crosses the street into Boston Common, thereby symbolically rejoining the commonwealth as a private citizen. Benjamin Butler started the tradition in 1884. Some walks have been modified with some past governors having their wives, friends, or staff accompany them. A 19-gun salute is offered during the walk, and frequently the steps are lined by the outgoing governor&#x27;s friends and supporters.

In January 1991, outgoing lieutenant governor Evelyn Murphy, the first woman elected to statewide office in Massachusetts, walked down the stairs before Governor Michael Dukakis. In a break from tradition, the January 2007 inauguration of Governor Deval Patrick took place the day after outgoing governor Mitt Romney took the lone walk down the front steps.

==Governor&#x27;s residence==
Despite several proposals for establishing an official residence for the governor of Massachusetts, the Commonwealth of Massachusetts does not have a governor&#x27;s mansion.

In 1955, Governor Foster Furcolo turned down a proposal to establish the Shirley–Eustis House in Roxbury, built by royal Governor William Shirley, as the official residence.

At one time, Governor John A. Volpe accepted the donation of the Endicott Estate in Dedham from the heirs of Henry Bradford Endicott. He intended to renovate the 19th-century mansion into a splendid governor&#x27;s residence. After Volpe resigned to become United States Secretary of Transportation in the Nixon administration, the plan was aborted by his successor in consideration of budgetary constraints and because the location was considered too far from the seat of power, the State House in Boston.

Prior to their respective demolitions in 1922 and 1863, the Province House and the Hancock Manor were also proposed as official residences.

Since the governor has no official residence, the expression &quot;corner office&quot;, rather than &quot;governor&#x27;s mansion&quot;, is commonly used in the press as a metonym for the office of governor. This refers instead to the governor&#x27;s office on the third floor of the State House.

== List of governors ==

Since 1780, 65 people have been elected governor, six to non-consecutive terms (John Hancock, Caleb Strong, Marcus Morton, John Davis, John Volpe, and Michael Dukakis), and seven lieutenant governors have acted as governor without subsequently being elected governor. Thomas Talbot served a stint as acting governor, but was elected governor several years later. Prior to 1918 constitutional reforms, both the governor&#x27;s office and that of lieutenant governor were vacant on one occasion, when the state was governed by the Governor&#x27;s Council.

===Colonial Massachusetts===

The colonial history of Massachusetts begins with the founding first of the Plymouth Colony in 1620, and then the Massachusetts Bay Colony in 1628. The Dominion of New England combined these and other New England colonies into a single unit in 1686, but collapsed in 1689. In 1692 the Province of Massachusetts Bay was established, merging Plymouth and Massachusetts Bay, which then included the territory of present-day Maine.

Colonial governors of Plymouth and the Massachusetts Bay Colony were elected annually by a limited subset of the male population (known as freemen), while Dominion officials and those of the 1692 province were appointed by the British crown. In 1774 General Thomas Gage became the last royally appointed governor of Massachusetts. He was recalled to England after the Battle of Bunker Hill in June 1775, by which time the Massachusetts Provincial Congress exercised &quot;de facto&quot; control of Massachusetts territory outside British-occupied Boston. Between 1775 and the establishment of the Massachusetts State Constitution in 1780 the state was governed by the provincial congress and an executive council.

===Commonwealth of Massachusetts: 1780–present===
The constitution of Massachusetts created the offices of governor and lieutenant governor, to be elected annually. Terms were lengthened to two years in 1918, to last until their successor was inaugurated, which would be at least the first Wednesday in the January after their election. This was changed to the Thursday following the first Wednesday in the January after the election in 1950, and terms were lengthened to four years in 1966.


==Notes==
==References==
Citations
Sources
* (five volume history of Massachusetts until the early 20th century; volume 3 deals with the provisional period and post-independence history until 1820)
*
* 
* 
*


==External links==
* . (Various documents).</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q887117" start="4" end="49" title="Governor of Massachusetts" label="governor of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q484876" start="57" end="80" title="chief executive officer" label="chief executive officer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5589247" start="88" end="115" title="government of Massachusetts" label="government of Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q132050" start="121" end="129" title="governor" label="governor"/>
<link wikidata="Q484876" start="137" end="141" title="chief executive" label="head"/>
<link wikidata="Q380782" start="171" end="189" title="commander-in-chief" label="commander-in-chief"/>
<link wikidata="Q6784323" start="217" end="232" title="Massachusetts National Guard" label="military forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q877848" start="255" end="265" title="Republicanism" label="republican"/>
<link wikidata="Q49892" start="305" end="324" title="presidential system" label="presidential system"/>
<link wikidata="Q2285706" start="351" end="369" title="head of government" label="head of government"/>
<link wikidata="Q1453540" start="416" end="434" title="Massachusetts General Court" label="legislative branch"/>
<link wikidata="Q178074" start="579" end="589" title="Veto" label="veto power"/>
<link wikidata="Q6784274" start="623" end="660" title="Massachusetts Governor&amp;#x27;s Council" label="Massachusetts Governor&amp;#x27;s Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q4686796" start="721" end="739" title="advice and consent" label="advice and consent"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191350" start="803" end="828" title="Massachusetts Bay Colony" label="Massachusetts Bay Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q196171" start="983" end="1017" title="Constitution of Massachusetts" label="1780 Constitution of Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q60528252" start="1327" end="1331" title="2022 Massachusetts gubernatorial election" label="2022"/>
<link wikidata="Q7702558" start="1498" end="1509" title="Term limits in the United States" label="term limits"/>
<link wikidata="Q319099" start="1599" end="1614" title="Michael Dukakis" label="Michael Dukakis"/>
<link wikidata="Q16205062" start="1724" end="1736" title="Maura Healey" label="Maura Healey"/>
<link wikidata="Q60528252" start="1761" end="1788" title="2022 Massachusetts gubernatorial election" label="2022 gubernatorial election"/>
<link wikidata="Q771" start="1851" end="1864" title="Massachusetts" label="Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1980404" start="1946" end="1962" title="registered voter" label="registered voter"/>
<link wikidata="Q7702558" start="2224" end="2234" title="Term limits in the United States" label="term limit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1274366" start="2338" end="2357" title="Lieutenant Governor of Massachusetts" label="lieutenant governor"/>
<link wikidata="Q3406492" start="2359" end="2375" title="Massachusetts Attorney General" label="attorney general"/>
<link wikidata="Q12061506" start="2377" end="2406" title="Massachusetts Secretary of the Commonwealth" label="secretary of the commonwealth"/>
<link wikidata="Q7836752" start="2408" end="2423" title="Treasurer and Receiver-General of Massachusetts" label="state treasurer"/>
<link wikidata="Q6784375" start="2429" end="2442" title="Massachusetts State Auditor" label="state auditor"/>
<link wikidata="Q85751649" start="2518" end="2531" title="Charter of the Massachusetts Bay Company" label="Royal Charter"/>
<link wikidata="Q134161" start="2600" end="2619" title="joint-stock company" label="joint-stock company"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191350" start="2632" end="2657" title="Massachusetts Bay Colony" label="Massachusetts Bay Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q5500983" start="2692" end="2699" title="Freeman (Thirteen Colonies)" label="freemen"/>
<link wikidata="Q381136" start="2710" end="2722" title="shareholders" label="shareholders"/>
<link wikidata="Q244741" start="2855" end="2865" title="Viceroy" label="vice-regal"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="2974" end="2980" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q720766" start="3076" end="3089" title="John Winthrop" label="John Winthrop"/>
<link wikidata="Q4686796" start="3373" end="3391" title="advice and consent" label="advice and consent"/>
<link wikidata="Q137073" start="3465" end="3472" title="Puritans" label="Puritan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2748571" start="3571" end="3594" title="Dominion of New England" label="Dominion of New England"/>
<link wikidata="Q126188" start="3598" end="3617" title="James II of England" label="James II of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q18389" start="3623" end="3634" title="New England" label="New England"/>
<link wikidata="Q769668" start="3667" end="3687" title="Province of New York" label="Province of New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q6273074" start="3689" end="3712" title="West Jersey" label="Province of West Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q845760" start="3722" end="3745" title="East Jersey" label="Province of East Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q100" start="3886" end="3892" title="Boston" label="Boston"/>
<link wikidata="Q179876" start="4248" end="4266" title="Kingdom of England" label="Kingdom of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q170603" start="4470" end="4479" title="New Spain" label="New Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q189508" start="4705" end="4724" title="Glorious Revolution" label="Glorious Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q3136592" start="4733" end="4746" title="1689 Boston revolt" label="Boston Revolt"/>
<link wikidata="Q17109474" start="4809" end="4830" title="Massachusetts Charter" label="Massachusetts Charter"/>
<link wikidata="Q2079909" start="4913" end="4942" title="Province of Massachusetts Bay" label="Province of Massachusetts Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q126195" start="5023" end="5038" title="Plymouth Colony" label="Plymouth Colony"/>
<link wikidata="Q724" start="5078" end="5083" title="Maine" label="Maine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1453540" start="5271" end="5284" title="Massachusetts General Court" label="General Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q6784323" start="5499" end="5506" title="Massachusetts National Guard" label="militia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1335777" start="5993" end="6002" title="Stamp Act 1765" label="Stamp Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q1892842" start="6012" end="6029" title="Thomas Hutchinson (governor)" label="Thomas Hutchinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q192769" start="6094" end="6113" title="American Revolution" label="American Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365292" start="6182" end="6198" title="Intolerable Acts" label="Intolerable Acts"/>
<link wikidata="Q581935" start="6223" end="6234" title="Thomas Gage" label="Thomas Gage"/>
<link wikidata="Q3297405" start="6319" end="6352" title="Massachusetts Provincial Congress" label="Massachusetts Provincial Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q196171" start="6733" end="6762" title="Constitution of Massachusetts" label="Constitution of Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q272774" start="6826" end="6838" title="John Hancock" label="John Hancock"/>
<link wikidata="Q196171" start="7008" end="7034" title="Constitution of Massachusetts" label="Massachusetts Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q2079909" start="7683" end="7712" title="Province of Massachusetts Bay" label="Province of Massachusetts Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q3934786" start="7754" end="7790" title="Richard Coote, 1st Earl of Bellomont" label="Richard Coote, 1st Earl of Bellomont"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128240" start="7817" end="7821" title="Earl" label="Earl"/>
<link wikidata="Q131981" start="7940" end="7954" title="George II of Great Britain" label="King George II"/>
<link wikidata="Q380782" start="8138" end="8156" title="commander-in-chief" label="commander-in-chief"/>
<link wikidata="Q196171" start="8232" end="8264" title="Constitution of Massachusetts" label="Massachusetts State Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q272774" start="9529" end="9541" title="John Hancock" label="John Hancock"/>
<link wikidata="Q781134" start="9589" end="9603" title="Thomas Cushing" label="Thomas Cushing"/>
<link wikidata="Q449745" start="9639" end="9649" title="Jane Swift" label="Jane Swift"/>
<link wikidata="Q718335" start="9697" end="9710" title="Paul Cellucci" label="Paul Cellucci"/>
<link wikidata="Q6784274" start="9758" end="9781" title="Massachusetts Governor&amp;#x27;s Council" label="Governor&amp;#x27;s Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q343769" start="9935" end="9950" title="Increase Sumner" label="Increase Sumner"/>
<link wikidata="Q675934" start="10011" end="10021" title="Moses Gill" label="Moses Gill"/>
<link wikidata="Q546613" start="10190" end="10202" title="Caleb Strong" label="Caleb Strong"/>
<link wikidata="Q7788890" start="10296" end="10308" title="Thomas Dawes" label="Thomas Dawes"/>
<link wikidata="Q5589247" start="10624" end="10651" title="Government of Massachusetts" label="Government of Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q817488" start="11008" end="11023" title="Benjamin Butler" label="Benjamin Butler"/>
<link wikidata="Q7241341" start="11679" end="11702" title="President of the Massachusetts Senate" label="President of the Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1150259" start="11972" end="11997" title="Massachusetts State House" label="Massachusetts State House"/>
<link wikidata="Q49132" start="12041" end="12054" title="Boston Common" label="Boston Common"/>
<link wikidata="Q817488" start="12126" end="12141" title="Benjamin Butler" label="Benjamin Butler"/>
<link wikidata="Q49095233" start="12284" end="12297" title="21-gun salute" label="19-gun salute"/>
<link wikidata="Q5416387" start="12464" end="12477" title="Evelyn Murphy" label="Evelyn Murphy"/>
<link wikidata="Q319099" start="12580" end="12595" title="Michael Dukakis" label="Michael Dukakis"/>
<link wikidata="Q11100" start="12666" end="12679" title="Deval Patrick" label="Deval Patrick"/>
<link wikidata="Q4496" start="12723" end="12734" title="Mitt Romney" label="Mitt Romney"/>
<link wikidata="Q481289" start="12853" end="12871" title="official residence" label="official residence"/>
<link wikidata="Q880342" start="13001" end="13015" title="Foster Furcolo" label="Foster Furcolo"/>
<link wikidata="Q7498675" start="13056" end="13076" title="Shirley–Eustis House" label="Shirley–Eustis House"/>
<link wikidata="Q20138" start="13080" end="13087" title="Roxbury, Boston" label="Roxbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q331323" start="13113" end="13128" title="William Shirley" label="William Shirley"/>
<link wikidata="Q368192" start="13180" end="13193" title="John A. Volpe" label="John A. Volpe"/>
<link wikidata="Q5376125" start="13223" end="13238" title="Endicott Estate" label="Endicott Estate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1758615" start="13242" end="13248" title="Dedham, Massachusetts" label="Dedham"/>
<link wikidata="Q19879628" start="13267" end="13290" title="Henry Bradford Endicott" label="Henry Bradford Endicott"/>
<link wikidata="Q967737" start="13415" end="13456" title="United States Secretary of Transportation" label="United States Secretary of Transportation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7241106" start="13464" end="13484" title="Presidency of Richard Nixon" label="Nixon administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q7252551" start="13726" end="13740" title="Province House (Boston, Massachusetts)" label="Province House"/>
<link wikidata="Q5647050" start="13749" end="13762" title="Hancock Manor" label="Hancock Manor"/>
<link wikidata="Q41966" start="13979" end="13986" title="Metonymy" label="metonym"/>
<link wikidata="Q272774" start="14210" end="14222" title="John Hancock" label="John Hancock"/>
<link wikidata="Q546613" start="14224" end="14236" title="Caleb Strong" label="Caleb Strong"/>
<link wikidata="Q880670" start="14238" end="14251" title="Marcus Morton" label="Marcus Morton"/>
<link wikidata="Q880346" start="14253" end="14263" title="John Davis (Massachusetts governor)" label="John Davis"/>
<link wikidata="Q368192" start="14265" end="14275" title="John Volpe" label="John Volpe"/>
<link wikidata="Q319099" start="14281" end="14296" title="Michael Dukakis" label="Michael Dukakis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1274366" start="14309" end="14329" title="Lieutenant Governor of Massachusetts" label="lieutenant governors"/>
<link wikidata="Q440238" start="14398" end="14411" title="Thomas Talbot (Massachusetts politician)" label="Thomas Talbot"/>
<link wikidata="Q6784274" start="14659" end="14682" title="Massachusetts Governor&amp;#x27;s Council" label="Governor&amp;#x27;s Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q126195" start="14791" end="14806" title="Plymouth Colony" label="Plymouth Colony"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191350" start="14829" end="14853" title="Massachusetts Bay Colony" label="Massachusetts Bay Colony"/>
<link wikidata="Q2748571" start="14867" end="14890" title="Dominion of New England" label="Dominion of New England"/>
<link wikidata="Q18389" start="14916" end="14927" title="New England" label="New England"/>
<link wikidata="Q2079909" start="15000" end="15029" title="Province of Massachusetts Bay" label="Province of Massachusetts Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q724" start="15136" end="15141" title="Maine" label="Maine"/>
<link wikidata="Q5500983" start="15283" end="15290" title="freeman (Colonial)" label="freemen"/>
<link wikidata="Q581935" start="15402" end="15413" title="Thomas Gage" label="Thomas Gage"/>
<link wikidata="Q334029" start="15512" end="15533" title="Battle of Bunker Hill" label="Battle of Bunker Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q3297405" start="15566" end="15599" title="Massachusetts Provincial Congress" label="Massachusetts Provincial Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q100" start="15691" end="15697" title="Boston" label="Boston"/>
<link wikidata="Q196171" start="15741" end="15773" title="Constitution of Massachusetts" label="Massachusetts State Constitution"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="252515" wikidata="Q16197464" url="?curid=252515" title="List of governors of Puerto Rico">
<text>This list of governors of Puerto Rico includes all persons who have held that post, either under Spanish or American rule. The governor of Puerto Rico is the head of government of the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico. The position was first established by the Spanish Empire during the 16th century following the archipelago&#x27;s colonization.

The first person to officially occupy the position was Spanish conquistador Juan Ponce de León in 1509.
At the time, the Spanish monarchy was responsible for appointing the functionary who would perform this office. The first native Puerto Rican to perform the function was Juan Ponce de León II, as interim governor in 1579. During this administration, all of those appointed to take the position had served another function within the empire&#x27;s government or the Roman Catholic Church. In 1898, the United States invaded Puerto Rico and the Spanish government ceded control of the island to the United States. During the first two years, the entire government in Puerto Rico was appointed by the president of the United States. In 1900, the American government approved the establishment of the Foraker Act as a federal law, this act established a civilian government in the island. In 1947, the federal Elective Governor Act was enacted, which created a new system where, since 1948, the governor is elected through a democratic process every four years. The governor is in charge of Puerto Rico&#x27;s executive branch and is responsible for appointing executive branch agency heads, including the Secretary of State, who fulfills the role of lieutenant governor, the legislative branch&#x27;s ombudsman and comptroller and all judges in the judicial branch.

==Duties and succession==
In the governor&#x27;s absence, or if the governor dies or is unable to perform the executive duties, the Secretary of State of Puerto Rico takes control of the executive position, as acting governor during a temporary absence or inability, and as governor in case of death, resignation or impeachment and conviction. The elected governor must designate a number of secretaries and other agency heads that will control the individual administrative agencies during his time in office, the selected secretaries are in charge of the island&#x27;s health, natural resources, economy, correctional and judicial agencies and the department of consumer concerns, among others. The Governor&#x27;s four-year term begins on January 2, the day after the New Year&#x27;s Day holiday.

On July 24, 2019, Ricardo Rosselló became the first governor to resign his office. This happened after more than a week of protests due to a chain of corruption arrests and a leaked Telegram chat which contained offensive remarks made by the governor.

==List of governors of Puerto Rico==
=== Governors under Spanish Crown ===
=== Governors under U.S. colonial administration ===
====Military government====
====Post-Foraker Act of 1900====


=== Governors under the Constitution of the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico ===
 (8)&lt;br&gt;
 (7)

US party affiliation

 (10)&lt;br&gt;
 (4)&lt;br&gt;
 (1)

==See also==

* First ladies and gentlemen of Puerto Rico
* Resident Commissioner of Puerto Rico
* History of Puerto Rico
* Politics of Puerto Rico
* List of Legislative Assemblies of Puerto Rico

==Notes==
==References==
==External links==
* List of Puerto Rico Governors — on WorldStatesmen.org</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q16197464" start="5" end="37" title="List of governors of Puerto Rico" label="list of governors of Puerto Rico"/>
<link wikidata="Q456951" start="127" end="150" title="governor of Puerto Rico" label="governor of Puerto Rico"/>
<link wikidata="Q2285706" start="158" end="176" title="head of government" label="head of government"/>
<link wikidata="Q609591" start="184" end="196" title="Commonwealth (U.S. insular area)" label="Commonwealth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1183" start="200" end="211" title="Puerto Rico" label="Puerto Rico"/>
<link wikidata="Q80702" start="255" end="269" title="Spanish Empire" label="Spanish Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q815962" start="327" end="339" title="colonization" label="colonization"/>
<link wikidata="Q29" start="397" end="404" title="Spain" label="Spanish"/>
<link wikidata="Q126236" start="405" end="417" title="conquistador" label="conquistador"/>
<link wikidata="Q185974" start="418" end="436" title="Juan Ponce de León" label="Juan Ponce de León"/>
<link wikidata="Q889833" start="463" end="479" title="Monarchy of Spain" label="Spanish monarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q893594" start="575" end="587" title="Puerto Rican people" label="Puerto Rican"/>
<link wikidata="Q3810907" start="616" end="637" title="Juan Ponce de León II" label="Juan Ponce de León II"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="811" end="832" title="Roman Catholic Church" label="Roman Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q11696" start="1044" end="1074" title="president of the United States" label="president of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q3299425" start="1143" end="1154" title="Foraker Act" label="Foraker Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q5354804" start="1349" end="1356" title="Elections in Puerto Rico" label="elected"/>
<link wikidata="Q7258748" start="1644" end="1653" title="Puerto Rico Ombudsman" label="ombudsman"/>
<link wikidata="Q5157198" start="1658" end="1669" title="Comptroller of Puerto Rico" label="comptroller"/>
<link wikidata="Q4676866" start="1920" end="1935" title="acting governor" label="acting governor"/>
<link wikidata="Q132050" start="1984" end="1992" title="governor" label="governor"/>
<link wikidata="Q196627" start="2481" end="2500" title="New Year&amp;#x27;s Day" label="New Year&amp;#x27;s Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q5453164" start="3127" end="3168" title="First ladies and gentlemen of Puerto Rico" label="First ladies and gentlemen of Puerto Rico"/>
<link wikidata="Q1294433" start="3171" end="3207" title="Resident Commissioner of Puerto Rico" label="Resident Commissioner of Puerto Rico"/>
<link wikidata="Q173840" start="3210" end="3232" title="History of Puerto Rico" label="History of Puerto Rico"/>
<link wikidata="Q963402" start="3235" end="3258" title="Politics of Puerto Rico" label="Politics of Puerto Rico"/>
<link wikidata="Q129485817" start="3261" end="3306" title="List of Legislative Assemblies of Puerto Rico" label="List of Legislative Assemblies of Puerto Rico"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="252518" wikidata="Q888807" url="?curid=252518" title="List of governors of the Northern Mariana Islands">
<text>The following is a list of persons who served as governor of Northern Mariana Islands. The term of office is 4 years. The longest-serving governors in CNMI history are Pedro Tenorio, who served 12 years in office from 1982 to 1990 and from 1998 to 2002, and Benigno Fitial, who served 7 years, one month, and 11 days from 2006 to 2013. The Northern Mariana Islands is one of the few U.S. states or territories that currently does not have a governor&#x27;s mansion or other official residence.

The current governor is Arnold Palacios, since January 9, 2023.

==List==
; Parties

===Resident Commissioners===
===Governors===
==Succession==
==See also==
* List of governors of the Spanish Mariana Islands
* List of governors of Guam
* High Commissioner of the Trust Territory of the Pacific Islands
* Lieutenant Governor of the Northern Mariana Islands

==Footnotes==
==References==
==External links==
* Former CNMI Governor Guerrero Passes Away</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q16644" start="61" end="85" title="Northern Mariana Islands" label="Northern Mariana Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q3374135" start="168" end="181" title="Pedro Pangelinan Tenorio" label="Pedro Tenorio"/>
<link wikidata="Q939760" start="258" end="272" title="Benigno Fitial" label="Benigno Fitial"/>
<link wikidata="Q1682357" start="383" end="409" title="List of states and territories of the United States" label="U.S. states or territories"/>
<link wikidata="Q6621790" start="441" end="464" title="List of governors&amp;#x27; residences in the United States" label="governor&amp;#x27;s mansion"/>
<link wikidata="Q481289" start="474" end="492" title="official residence" label="official residence"/>
<link wikidata="Q4795194" start="519" end="534" title="Arnold Palacios" label="Arnold Palacios"/>
<link wikidata="Q56277656" start="655" end="703" title="List of governors of the Spanish Mariana Islands" label="List of governors of the Spanish Mariana Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q888795" start="706" end="731" title="List of governors of Guam" label="List of governors of Guam"/>
<link wikidata="Q3128423" start="734" end="797" title="High Commissioner of the Trust Territory of the Pacific Islands" label="High Commissioner of the Trust Territory of the Pacific Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q6544442" start="800" end="851" title="Lieutenant Governor of the Northern Mariana Islands" label="Lieutenant Governor of the Northern Mariana Islands"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="252520" wikidata="Q878605" url="?curid=252520" title="List of governors of Kentucky">
<text>The governor of the Commonwealth of Kentucky is the head of government of Kentucky, and serves as commander-in-chief of the state&#x27;s military forces. The governor has a duty to enforce state laws; the power to either approve or veto bills passed by the Kentucky General Assembly; the power to convene the legislature; and the power to grant pardons, except in cases of treason and impeachment. The governor is also empowered to reorganize the state government or reduce it in size. Historically, the office has been regarded as one of the most powerful executive positions in the United States.

Fifty-nine individuals have held the office of governor. Prior to a 1992 amendment to the state&#x27;s constitution, the governor was prohibited from succeeding himself or herself in office, though four men (Isaac Shelby, John L. Helm, James B. McCreary and Happy Chandler) served multiple non-consecutive terms. Paul E. Patton, the first Kentucky governor eligible for a second consecutive term under the amendment, won his reelection bid in 1999. James Garrard succeeded himself in 1800, before the constitutional provision existed. Garrard is also the longest serving governor, serving for a total period of eight years and 90 days. In 2023 Democrat Andy Beshear became the 3rd incumbent governor in Kentucky history to be reelected to a second consecutive term. 

William Goebel, who was elected to the office in the disputed election of 1899, remains the only governor of any U.S. state to die from assassination while in office. Goebel is also the shortest serving governor, serving for a period of only three days. Martha Layne Collins, who held the office from 1983 to 1987, was the first woman to serve as governor and was only the third woman to serve as governor of any U.S. state who was not the wife or widow of a previous governor. The 63rd and current Kentucky governor is Democrat Andy Beshear, who took office on December 10, 2019.

==Governors==
Kentucky County, Virginia was admitted to the Union as Kentucky on June 1, 1792. There have been 59 governors, serving 63 distinct terms.

An unelected group proclaimed Kentucky&#x27;s secession from the Union on November 20, 1861, and it was annexed by the Confederate States of America on December 10, 1861. The Confederate government elected two governors, but it never held much control over the state.

The original 1792 Kentucky Constitution had the governor chosen by an electoral college for a term of four years, commencing on the first day of June. The second constitution in 1799 changed this to a popular vote, prevented governors from succeeding themselves within seven years of their terms, and moved the start date to the fourth Tuesday after the election. The third constitution in 1850 reduced the succession limitation to four years, and moved the start date of the term to the fifth Tuesday after the election. A 1992 amendment allowed governors to have a second term before being prevented from succeeding themselves for four years. Originally, should the office of governor be vacant, the speaker of the Senate would exercise the powers of the office; in 1799, the office of lieutenant governor was created to fill this role, and, as of 1992, is elected on the same ticket as the governor.


==Confederate governors==

During the Civil War, a group of secessionists met at Russellville to form a Confederate government for the Commonwealth of Kentucky. This government never successfully displaced the government in Frankfort, and Kentucky remained in the Union through the entire war. Two men were elected governor of the Confederate government: George W. Johnson, who served from November 20, 1861, to his death on April 8, 1862, at the Battle of Shiloh, and, on Johnson&#x27;s death, Richard Hawes, who served until the Confederate surrender on April 9, 1865. The Confederate government disbanded shortly after the end of the war in 1865.

==See also==
* Timeline of Kentucky history
* List of Kentucky General Assemblies

==Notes==
==References==

;General
* 
* 
* 
* 


;Constitution
* 
* 
;Specific
==External links==
*Office of the Governor of Kentucky</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q4151335" start="4" end="44" title="governor of the Commonwealth of Kentucky" label="governor of the Commonwealth of Kentucky"/>
<link wikidata="Q2285706" start="52" end="70" title="head of government" label="head of government"/>
<link wikidata="Q1603" start="74" end="82" title="Kentucky" label="Kentucky"/>
<link wikidata="Q380782" start="98" end="116" title="commander-in-chief" label="commander-in-chief"/>
<link wikidata="Q6392317" start="137" end="152" title="Kentucky National Guard" label="military forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q178074" start="232" end="236" title="veto" label="veto"/>
<link wikidata="Q686822" start="237" end="242" title="Bill (law)" label="bills"/>
<link wikidata="Q6392265" start="257" end="282" title="Kentucky General Assembly" label="Kentucky General Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q537151" start="345" end="351" title="pardon" label="pardon"/>
<link wikidata="Q160128" start="373" end="380" title="treason" label="treason"/>
<link wikidata="Q1949797" start="385" end="396" title="Impeachment in the United States" label="impeachment"/>
<link wikidata="Q6392204" start="690" end="715" title="Kentucky Constitution" label="state&amp;#x27;s constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q878398" start="808" end="820" title="Isaac Shelby" label="Isaac Shelby"/>
<link wikidata="Q359435" start="822" end="834" title="John L. Helm" label="John L. Helm"/>
<link wikidata="Q734713" start="836" end="853" title="James B. McCreary" label="James B. McCreary"/>
<link wikidata="Q573029" start="858" end="872" title="Happy Chandler" label="Happy Chandler"/>
<link wikidata="Q889216" start="913" end="927" title="Paul E. Patton" label="Paul E. Patton"/>
<link wikidata="Q735147" start="1049" end="1062" title="James Garrard" label="James Garrard"/>
<link wikidata="Q6392220" start="1244" end="1252" title="Kentucky Democratic Party" label="Democrat"/>
<link wikidata="Q21572825" start="1253" end="1265" title="Andy Beshear" label="Andy Beshear"/>
<link wikidata="Q732204" start="1368" end="1382" title="William Goebel" label="William Goebel"/>
<link wikidata="Q6392439" start="1430" end="1446" title="1899 Kentucky gubernatorial election" label="election of 1899"/>
<link wikidata="Q459745" start="1622" end="1642" title="Martha Layne Collins" label="Martha Layne Collins"/>
<link wikidata="Q6392220" start="1888" end="1896" title="Kentucky Democratic Party" label="Democrat"/>
<link wikidata="Q21572825" start="1897" end="1909" title="Andy Beshear" label="Andy Beshear"/>
<link wikidata="Q2882150" start="1964" end="1989" title="Kentucky County, Virginia" label="Kentucky County, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q18350273" start="1994" end="2015" title="admitted to the Union" label="admitted to the Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q214102" start="2168" end="2173" title="Union (American Civil War)" label="Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q81931" start="2222" end="2251" title="Confederate States of America" label="Confederate States of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q6392204" start="2390" end="2411" title="Kentucky Constitution" label="Kentucky Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141323" start="2442" end="2459" title="electoral college" label="electoral college"/>
<link wikidata="Q15145017" start="3251" end="3257" title="ticket (election)" label="ticket"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="3315" end="3324" title="American Civil War" label="Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1991004" start="3358" end="3370" title="Russellville, Kentucky" label="Russellville"/>
<link wikidata="Q3112525" start="3381" end="3403" title="Confederate government of Kentucky" label="Confederate government"/>
<link wikidata="Q28603" start="3501" end="3510" title="Frankfort, Kentucky" label="Frankfort"/>
<link wikidata="Q5545661" start="3632" end="3649" title="George W. Johnson (governor)" label="George W. Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q943277" start="3724" end="3740" title="Battle of Shiloh" label="Battle of Shiloh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1447602" start="3772" end="3785" title="Richard Hawes" label="Richard Hawes"/>
<link wikidata="Q7805778" start="3943" end="3971" title="Timeline of Kentucky history" label="Timeline of Kentucky history"/>
<link wikidata="Q129485701" start="3974" end="4009" title="List of Kentucky General Assemblies" label="List of Kentucky General Assemblies"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="252532" wikidata="Q243190" url="?curid=252532" title="Yuan T. Lee">
<text>Yuan Tseh Lee (; born 19 November 1936) is a Taiwanese chemist. He is a professor emeritus at the University of California, Berkeley and honorary director of the Nagoya University Institute for Advanced Study along with Ryoji Noyori. He was the first and currently the only Taiwanese Nobel Prize laureate who, along with the Hungarian-Canadian John C. Polanyi and American Dudley R. Herschbach, won the Nobel Prize in Chemistry in 1986 &quot;for their contributions to the dynamics of chemical elementary processes&quot;.

Lee&#x27;s particular physical chemistry work was related to the use of advanced chemical kinetics techniques to investigate and manipulate the behavior of chemical reactions using crossed molecular beams. From 15 January 1994 to 19 October 2006, Lee served as the President of the Academia Sinica of Taiwan. In 2011, he was elected head of the International Council for Science.

== Early life and education ==
Lee was born to a Hoklo Taiwanese family in Shinchiku City (modern-day Hsinchu city) in northern Taiwan, which was then under Japanese rule, to Lee Tze-fan, an artist, and Ts&#x27;ai P&#x27;ei (), an elementary school teacher from , Taichū Prefecture (Wuqi, Taichung). Lee is a Hokkien with ancestry from Nan&#x27;an City, China. Lee played on the baseball and ping-pong teams of Hsinchu Elementary School, and later studied at the Hsinchu Senior High School, where he played tennis, trombone, and the flute.

He was exempted from the entrance examination and directly admitted to National Taiwan University. He earned a B.S. in 1959. He earned his M.S. from National Tsing Hua University in 1961 and his Ph.D. from the University of California, Berkeley, in 1965 under the supervision of Bruce H. Mahan. He was a member of the Chemistry International Board from 1977 to 1984.

== Scientific career ==
=== Chemistry ===
In February 1967, he started working with Dudley Herschbach at Harvard University on reactions between hydrogen atoms and diatomic alkali molecules and the construction of a universal crossed molecular beams apparatus. After the postdoctoral year with Herschbach he joined the University of Chicago faculty in 1968. In 1974, he returned to Berkeley as professor of chemistry and principal investigator at the Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, becoming a U.S. citizen the same year. Lee is a University Professor Emeritus of the University of California system.

=== Nobel prize ===
One of the major goals of chemistry is the study of material transformations where chemical kinetics plays an important role. Scientists during the 19th century stated macroscopic chemical processes consist of many elementary chemical reactions that are themselves simply a series of encounters between atomic or molecular species. In order to understand the time dependence of chemical reactions, chemical kineticists have traditionally focused on sorting out all of the elementary chemical reactions involved in a macroscopic chemical process and determining their respective rates.

Swedish chemist Svante Arrhenius studied this phenomenon during the late 1880s, and stated the relations between reactive molecular encounters and rates of reactions (formulated in terms of activation energies).

Other scientists at the time also stated a chemical reaction is fundamentally a mechanical event, involving the rearrangement of atoms and molecules
during a collision. Although these initial theoretical studies were only qualitative, they heralded a new era in the field of chemical kinetics; allowing the prediction of the dynamical course of a chemical reaction.

In the 1950s, 1960s and 1970s, with the development of many sophisticated experimental techniques, it became possible to study the dynamics of elementary chemical reactions in the laboratory. Such as the analysis of the threshold operating conditions of a chemical laser or the spectra obtained using various linear or non-linear laser spectroscopic techniques.

Professor Lee&#x27;s research focused on the possibility to control the energies of the reagents, and to understand the dependence of chemical reactivity on molecular orientation, among other studies related to the nature of reaction intermediates, decay dynamics, and identifying complex reaction mechanisms. To do so, Professor Lee used a breakthrough laboratory technique at the time, called the &quot;crossed molecular beams technique&quot;, where the information derived from the measurements of angular and velocity distributions allowed him and his team to understand the dynamics of elementary chemical reactions.

In 2021, Lee donated his Nobel Prize medal to the National Museum of Taiwan History for exhibition.

==Later career==
During his tenure, Lee has worked to create new research institutes, advance scientific research within Taiwan, and to recruit and cultivate top scholars for the Academia Sinica.

In 2010, Lee said that global warming would be much more serious than scientists previously thought, and that Taiwanese people needed to cut their per-capita carbon emissions from the current 12 tons per year to just three. This would take more than a few slogans, turning off the lights for one hour, or cutting meat consumption, noting: &quot;We will have to learn to live the simple lives of our ancestors.&quot; Without such efforts, he said, &quot;Taiwanese will be unable to survive long into the future&quot;.

Lee was appointed the president of Academia Sinica in 1994 and renounced his U.S. citizenship to take the post. As president of Academia Sinica he presided over the creation of the Taiwanese history textbook &quot;Knowing Taiwan&quot;.

At the request of president Chen Shui-bian, Lee was Taiwan&#x27;s representative in the 2002 APEC leaders&#x27; summit in Mexico. (Presidents of the Republic of China have been barred from joining the APEC summits because of objections from the People&#x27;s Republic of China.) Lee represented Chen again in the 2003 and 2004 APEC summits in Thailand and Chile, respectively.

In July 2024, Lee accepted president Lai Ching-te&#x27;s invitation to serve as a consultant on the newly formed National Climate Change Strategy Committee.

Lee was then elected President of the International Council for Science in 2008 and started his term in 2011. He has been involved with the Malta Conferences, an initiative designed to bring together Middle Eastern scientists. As part of the initiative, he offered six fellowships to work on the synchrotron in Taiwan. He is also a member of International Advisory Council in Universiti Tunku Abdul Rahman.

== Personal life ==

Lee&#x27;s father was a painter in Taiwan, and his mother was an elementary school teacher. His elder brother Yuan-Chuan Lee has been a professor at Johns Hopkins University for 40 years and was awarded the honor Special Chair Lectureship in Academia Sinica in Taiwan. His younger brother Yuan-Pern Lee was also awarded this honor. Lee&#x27;s sister Chi-Mei Lee has served as a professor at National Chung Hsing University.

In 2003, he was one of 22 Nobel Laureates who signed the Humanist Manifesto.

===Politics===
During the 2000 Taiwanese presidential election, Lee supported the pan-green coalition which advocates Taiwan independence. In the last week of the election he announced his support for the candidacy of Chen Shui-bian who subsequently defeated James Soong in the election. Chen intended to nominate Lee to become premier.

In January 2004, he and industrial tycoon Wang Yung-ching and theatre director Lin Hwai-min issued a joint statement to both Chen Shui-bian and Lien Chan. He backed Chen again in the 2004 elections, issuing a statement of support for the DPP on 17 March, three days before polls opened.

During the 2012 presidential election, Lee expressed his support for DPP candidate Tsai Ing-wen. In early 2016, he appeared and addressed a rally by New Power Party, a party formed by student activists involved in the Sunflower Movement.

===Climate change===
Yuan Lee has signed the 2015 Mainau Declaration expressing concern about anthropogenic climate change.

===Wu Chien-Shiung Foundation===
Lee was one of the four Nobelists who established the Wu Chien-Shiung Foundation.

== Recognition ==
In addition to the Nobel Prize, his awards and distinctions include Sloan Fellow (1969); Fellow of American Academy of Arts and Sciences (1975); Fellow Am. Phys. Soc. (1976); Guggenheim Fellow (1977); Member National Academy of Sciences (1979); Member International Academy of Science, Munich, Member Academia Sinica (1980); E.O. Lawrence Award (1981); Miller Professor, Berkeley (1981); Fairchild Distinguished Scholar (1983); Harrison Howe Award (1983); Peter Debye Award (1986); National Medal of Science (1986); Golden Plate Award of the American Academy of Achievement (1987) and Faraday Lectureship Prize (1992). Yuan Tseh Lee was awarded the Othmer Gold Medal in 2008 in recognition of his outstanding contributions to progress in chemistry and science. His post-doctoral supervisor and fellow Nobel Laureate Dudley Herschbach congratulated Lee. In 2019 Yuan T. Lee was also awarded the Fray International Sustainability Award by FLOGEN Star Outreach at SIPS 2019.

== References ==
== Publications ==
* Lee, Y. T. &quot;Crossed Molecular Beam Studies and Dynamics of Decomposition of Chemically Activated Radicals&quot;, University of Chicago, United States Department of Energy (through predecessor agency the Atomic Energy Commission), (September 1973).
* Lee, Y. T. &amp; S. J. Sibener. &quot;Internal Energy Dependence of Molecular Condensation Coefficients Determined from Molecular Beam Surface Scattering Experiments&quot;, Lawrence Berkeley Laboratory, University of California, Berkeley, United States Department of Energy, (May 1978).
* Lee, Y. T., Sibener, S. J. &amp; R. J. Buss. &quot;Development of a Supersonic Atomic Oxygen Nozzle Beam Source for Crossed Beam Scattering Experiments&quot;, Lawrence Berkeley Laboratory, University of California, Berkeley, United States Department of Energy, (May 1978).
* Lee, Y. T., Baseman, R. J., Guozhong, H. &amp; R. J. Buss. &quot;Reaction Mechanism of Oxygen Atoms with Unsaturated Hydrocarbons by the Crossed-Molecular-Beams Method&quot;, Lawrence Berkeley Laboratory, University of California, Berkeley, United States Department of Energy-Office of Basic Energy Science, (April 1982).
* Lee, Y. T. &quot;Molecular-beam Studies of Primary Photochemical Processes&quot;, Lawrence Berkeley Laboratory, University of California, Berkeley, United States Department of Energy, (December 1982).
* Lee, Y. T., Continetti, R. E. &amp; B. A. Balko. &quot;Molecular Beam Studies of Hot Atom Chemical Reactions: Reactive Scattering of Energetic Deuterium Atoms&quot;, Lawrence Berkeley Laboratory, United States Department of Energy, (February 1989).
* Lee, Y.T., &quot;Energy, Environment, and the Responsibility of Scientists&quot;, (2007).

== External links ==
* 
* “Yuan T Lee – Science Video Interview”, Vega Science Trust (Archive) 
* “Yuan Lee, Taiwan”, Global Ideas
* “Sustainability of the human society (part1)“, Akademi Sains Malaysia ASM
* “Sustainability of the human society (part2)“, ASM 
* “Sustainability of the human society (part3)“, ASM 
* “Dynamics of Chemical Reactions and Photochemical Processes (Lecture + Discussion)”, Yuan T. Lee (2010), Lindau Nobel Laureate Meetings</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q243190" start="0" end="13" title="Yuan T. Lee" label="Yuan Tseh Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q593644" start="55" end="62" title="chemist" label="chemist"/>
<link wikidata="Q168756" start="98" end="132" title="University of California, Berkeley" label="University of California, Berkeley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191132" start="162" end="179" title="Nagoya University" label="Nagoya University"/>
<link wikidata="Q157210" start="220" end="232" title="Ryoji Noyori" label="Ryoji Noyori"/>
<link wikidata="Q237825" start="344" end="359" title="John C. Polanyi" label="John C. Polanyi"/>
<link wikidata="Q243196" start="373" end="393" title="Dudley R. Herschbach" label="Dudley R. Herschbach"/>
<link wikidata="Q44585" start="403" end="427" title="Nobel Prize in Chemistry" label="Nobel Prize in Chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q11372" start="545" end="563" title="physical chemistry" label="physical chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q209082" start="604" end="621" title="chemical kinetics" label="chemical kinetics"/>
<link wikidata="Q906605" start="704" end="726" title="crossed molecular beam" label="crossed molecular beam"/>
<link wikidata="Q337266" start="805" end="820" title="Academia Sinica" label="Academia Sinica"/>
<link wikidata="Q865" start="824" end="830" title="Taiwan" label="Taiwan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1162568" start="868" end="901" title="International Council for Science" label="International Council for Science"/>
<link wikidata="Q7223451" start="953" end="968" title="Hoklo Taiwanese" label="Hoklo Taiwanese"/>
<link wikidata="Q249994" start="1006" end="1013" title="Hsinchu" label="Hsinchu"/>
<link wikidata="Q137816" start="1061" end="1074" title="Taiwan under Japanese rule" label="Japanese rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q6515376" start="1079" end="1090" title="Lee Tze-fan" label="Lee Tze-fan"/>
<link wikidata="Q697890" start="1168" end="1185" title="Taichū Prefecture" label="Taichū Prefecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q569644" start="1187" end="1191" title="Wuqi District" label="Wuqi"/>
<link wikidata="Q245023" start="1193" end="1201" title="Taichung" label="Taichung"/>
<link wikidata="Q1209464" start="1240" end="1256" title="Nan&amp;#x27;an City" label="Nan&amp;#x27;an City"/>
<link wikidata="Q5369" start="1283" end="1291" title="baseball" label="baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q3930" start="1296" end="1305" title="ping-pong" label="ping-pong"/>
<link wikidata="Q6973433" start="1367" end="1393" title="Hsinchu Senior High School" label="Hsinchu Senior High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q847" start="1411" end="1417" title="tennis" label="tennis"/>
<link wikidata="Q8350" start="1419" end="1427" title="trombone" label="trombone"/>
<link wikidata="Q11405" start="1437" end="1442" title="flute" label="flute"/>
<link wikidata="Q759860" start="1470" end="1490" title="entrance examination" label="entrance examination"/>
<link wikidata="Q32746" start="1516" end="1542" title="National Taiwan University" label="National Taiwan University"/>
<link wikidata="Q787674" start="1556" end="1560" title="Bachelor of Science" label="B.S."/>
<link wikidata="Q950900" start="1584" end="1588" title="Master of Science" label="M.S."/>
<link wikidata="Q43406" start="1594" end="1623" title="National Tsing Hua University" label="National Tsing Hua University"/>
<link wikidata="Q752297" start="1640" end="1645" title="Ph.D." label="Ph.D."/>
<link wikidata="Q168756" start="1655" end="1689" title="University of California, Berkeley" label="University of California, Berkeley"/>
<link wikidata="Q4977598" start="1724" end="1738" title="Bruce H. Mahan" label="Bruce H. Mahan"/>
<link wikidata="Q243196" start="1897" end="1914" title="Dudley Herschbach" label="Dudley Herschbach"/>
<link wikidata="Q13371" start="1918" end="1936" title="Harvard University" label="Harvard University"/>
<link wikidata="Q556" start="1958" end="1966" title="hydrogen" label="hydrogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q485742" start="1986" end="1992" title="alkali" label="alkali"/>
<link wikidata="Q131252" start="2132" end="2153" title="University of Chicago" label="University of Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133630" start="2264" end="2301" title="Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory" label="Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory"/>
<link wikidata="Q184478" start="2388" end="2412" title="University of California" label="University of California"/>
<link wikidata="Q2329" start="2468" end="2477" title="chemistry" label="chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q209082" start="2525" end="2542" title="chemical kinetics" label="chemical kinetics"/>
<link wikidata="Q9121" start="2745" end="2749" title="atom" label="atom"/>
<link wikidata="Q11369" start="2755" end="2772" title="molecule" label="molecular species"/>
<link wikidata="Q36534" start="2820" end="2837" title="chemical reaction" label="chemical reaction"/>
<link wikidata="Q11372" start="2840" end="2860" title="physical chemistry" label="chemical kineticists"/>
<link wikidata="Q165192" start="3028" end="3035" title="Swedish people" label="Swedish"/>
<link wikidata="Q80956" start="3044" end="3060" title="Svante Arrhenius" label="Svante Arrhenius"/>
<link wikidata="Q3394849" start="3175" end="3193" title="rate of reaction" label="rates of reactions"/>
<link wikidata="Q190474" start="3218" end="3237" title="activation energy" label="activation energies"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3321" end="3337" title="mechanical event" label="mechanical event"/>
<link wikidata="Q238053" start="3399" end="3408" title="collision" label="collision"/>
<link wikidata="Q38867" start="3873" end="3878" title="laser" label="laser"/>
<link wikidata="Q654182" start="3886" end="3893" title="spectrum" label="spectra"/>
<link wikidata="Q11448" start="4220" end="4225" title="nuclear decay" label="decay"/>
<link wikidata="Q373406" start="4260" end="4278" title="reaction mechanism" label="reaction mechanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q483242" start="4325" end="4345" title="laboratory technique" label="laboratory technique"/>
<link wikidata="Q3330712" start="4644" end="4677" title="National Museum of Taiwan History" label="National Museum of Taiwan History"/>
<link wikidata="Q337266" start="4874" end="4889" title="Academia Sinica" label="Academia Sinica"/>
<link wikidata="Q337266" start="5445" end="5460" title="Academia Sinica" label="Academia Sinica"/>
<link wikidata="Q55641557" start="5473" end="5503" title="Renunciation of United States citizenship" label="renounced his U.S. citizenship"/>
<link wikidata="Q4300967" start="5624" end="5638" title="Knowing Taiwan" label="Knowing Taiwan"/>
<link wikidata="Q22368" start="5675" end="5689" title="Chen Shui-bian" label="Chen Shui-bian"/>
<link wikidata="Q6567024" start="5713" end="5727" title="List of Chinese Taipei representatives to APEC" label="representative"/>
<link wikidata="Q170481" start="5740" end="5744" title="APEC" label="APEC"/>
<link wikidata="Q96" start="5769" end="5775" title="Mexico" label="Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q887003" start="5778" end="5813" title="President of the Republic of China" label="Presidents of the Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q869" start="5990" end="5998" title="Thailand" label="Thailand"/>
<link wikidata="Q298" start="6003" end="6008" title="Chile" label="Chile"/>
<link wikidata="Q3847080" start="6062" end="6074" title="Lai Ching-te" label="Lai Ching-te"/>
<link wikidata="Q1162568" start="6221" end="6254" title="International Council for Science" label="International Council for Science"/>
<link wikidata="Q7894438" start="6559" end="6588" title="Universiti Tunku Abdul Rahman" label="Universiti Tunku Abdul Rahman"/>
<link wikidata="Q16905426" start="6722" end="6736" title="Yuan-Chuan Lee" label="Yuan-Chuan Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q193727" start="6761" end="6785" title="Johns Hopkins University" label="Johns Hopkins University"/>
<link wikidata="Q16905427" start="6901" end="6914" title="Yuan-Pern Lee" label="Yuan-Pern Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q707573" start="7003" end="7034" title="National Chung Hsing University" label="National Chung Hsing University"/>
<link wikidata="Q4152020" start="7094" end="7112" title="Humanism and Its Aspirations" label="Humanist Manifesto"/>
<link wikidata="Q710233" start="7141" end="7177" title="2000 Taiwanese presidential election" label="2000 Taiwanese presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q715136" start="7197" end="7216" title="pan-green coalition" label="pan-green coalition"/>
<link wikidata="Q708772" start="7233" end="7252" title="Taiwan independence" label="Taiwan independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q22368" start="7333" end="7347" title="Chen Shui-bian" label="Chen Shui-bian"/>
<link wikidata="Q706723" start="7374" end="7385" title="James Soong" label="James Soong"/>
<link wikidata="Q702650" start="7443" end="7450" title="Premier of the Republic of China" label="premier"/>
<link wikidata="Q697939" start="7495" end="7510" title="Wang Yung-ching" label="Wang Yung-ching"/>
<link wikidata="Q528265" start="7532" end="7544" title="Lin Hwai-min" label="Lin Hwai-min"/>
<link wikidata="Q558718" start="7597" end="7606" title="Lien Chan" label="Lien Chan"/>
<link wikidata="Q714786" start="7636" end="7650" title="2004 Taiwanese presidential election" label="2004 elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q707411" start="7752" end="7778" title="2012 Taiwanese presidential election" label="2012 presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q233984" start="7824" end="7836" title="Tsai Ing-wen" label="Tsai Ing-wen"/>
<link wikidata="Q19825637" start="7890" end="7905" title="New Power Party" label="New Power Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q15972916" start="7959" end="7977" title="Sunflower Movement" label="Sunflower Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163489" start="8030" end="8048" title="Mainau Declaration" label="Mainau Declaration"/>
<link wikidata="Q125928" start="8074" end="8102" title="global warming" label="anthropogenic climate change"/>
<link wikidata="Q450317" start="8192" end="8207" title="Wu Chien-Shiung" label="Wu Chien-Shiung"/>
<link wikidata="Q2294287" start="8307" end="8319" title="Sloan Fellow" label="Sloan Fellow"/>
<link wikidata="Q463303" start="8338" end="8375" title="American Academy of Arts and Sciences" label="American Academy of Arts and Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q1316544" start="8414" end="8431" title="Guggenheim Fellow" label="Guggenheim Fellow"/>
<link wikidata="Q270794" start="8447" end="8475" title="United States National Academy of Sciences" label="National Academy of Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q337266" start="8540" end="8555" title="Academia Sinica" label="Academia Sinica"/>
<link wikidata="Q737051" start="8721" end="8746" title="National Medal of Science" label="National Medal of Science"/>
<link wikidata="Q2842834" start="8781" end="8812" title="Academy of Achievement" label="American Academy of Achievement"/>
<link wikidata="Q1994574" start="8824" end="8849" title="Faraday Lectureship Prize" label="Faraday Lectureship Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q17291441" start="8888" end="8905" title="Othmer Gold Medal" label="Othmer Gold Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q243196" start="9055" end="9072" title="Dudley Herschbach" label="Dudley Herschbach"/>
<link wikidata="Q131252" start="9368" end="9389" title="University of Chicago" label="University of Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q217810" start="9391" end="9425" title="United States Department of Energy" label="United States Department of Energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q939090" start="9458" end="9482" title="United States Atomic Energy Commission" label="Atomic Energy Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133630" start="9678" end="9706" title="Lawrence Berkeley Laboratory" label="Lawrence Berkeley Laboratory"/>
<link wikidata="Q168756" start="9708" end="9742" title="University of California, Berkeley" label="University of California, Berkeley"/>
<link wikidata="Q217810" start="9744" end="9778" title="United States Department of Energy" label="United States Department of Energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133630" start="9953" end="9981" title="Lawrence Berkeley Laboratory" label="Lawrence Berkeley Laboratory"/>
<link wikidata="Q168756" start="9983" end="10017" title="University of California, Berkeley" label="University of California, Berkeley"/>
<link wikidata="Q217810" start="10019" end="10053" title="United States Department of Energy" label="United States Department of Energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133630" start="10244" end="10272" title="Lawrence Berkeley Laboratory" label="Lawrence Berkeley Laboratory"/>
<link wikidata="Q168756" start="10274" end="10308" title="University of California, Berkeley" label="University of California, Berkeley"/>
<link wikidata="Q217810" start="10310" end="10344" title="United States Department of Energy" label="United States Department of Energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133630" start="10475" end="10503" title="Lawrence Berkeley Laboratory" label="Lawrence Berkeley Laboratory"/>
<link wikidata="Q168756" start="10505" end="10539" title="University of California, Berkeley" label="University of California, Berkeley"/>
<link wikidata="Q217810" start="10541" end="10575" title="United States Department of Energy" label="United States Department of Energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133630" start="10762" end="10790" title="Lawrence Berkeley Laboratory" label="Lawrence Berkeley Laboratory"/>
<link wikidata="Q217810" start="10792" end="10826" title="United States Department of Energy" label="United States Department of Energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q835775" start="11360" end="11390" title="Lindau Nobel Laureate Meetings" label="Lindau Nobel Laureate Meetings"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="252534" wikidata="Q170495" url="?curid=252534" title="Topkapı Palace">
<text>The Topkapı Palace (; ), or the Seraglio, is a large museum and library in the east of the Fatih district of Istanbul in Turkey. From the 1460s to the completion of Dolmabahçe Palace in 1856, it served as the administrative center of the Ottoman Empire, and was the main residence of its sultans.

Construction, ordered by the Sultan Mehmed the Conqueror, began in 1459, six years after the conquest of Constantinople. Topkapı was originally called the &quot;New Palace&quot; ( or ) to distinguish it from the Old Palace ( or ) in Beyazıt Square. It was given the name , meaning Cannon Gate, in the 19th century. The complex expanded over the centuries, with major renovations after the 1509 earthquake and the 1665 fire. The palace complex consists of four main courtyards and many smaller buildings. Female members of the Sultan&#x27;s family lived in the harem, and leading state officials, including the Grand Vizier, held meetings in the Imperial Council building.

After the 17th century, Topkapı gradually lost its importance. The sultans of that period preferred to spend more time in their new palaces along the Bosphorus. In 1856 Sultan Abdulmejid I decided to move the court to the newly built Dolmabahçe Palace. Topkapı retained some of its functions, including the imperial treasury, library and mint.

After the end of the Ottoman Empire in 1923, a government decree dated April 3, 1924 transformed Topkapı into a museum. Turkey&#x27;s Ministry of Culture and Tourism now administers the Topkapı Palace Museum. The palace complex has hundreds of rooms and chambers, but only the most important are accessible to the public including the Ottoman Imperial Harem and the treasury, called where the Spoonmaker&#x27;s Diamond and the Topkapi Dagger are on display. The museum collection also includes Ottoman clothing, weapons, armor, miniatures, religious relics, and illuminated manuscripts such as the Topkapi manuscript. Officials of the ministry as well as armed guards of the Turkish military guard the complex. The Topkapı Palace forms a part the Historic Areas of Istanbul, a group of sites in Istanbul that UNESCO recognised as a World Heritage Site in 1985.

==Name==
The name of the palace was (, &#x27;Imperial New Palace&#x27;) until the 18th century. The palace received its current name during Mahmud I&#x27;s reign; when , the seaside palace, was destroyed in a fire its name was transferred to the palace. In Turkish the current name of the palace, , means &#x27;Cannon Gate&#x27;.

==History==

The palace complex is located on the Seraglio Point (, ), a promontory overlooking the Golden Horn, where the Bosphorus Strait meets the Sea of Marmara. The terrain is hilly and the palace itself is located at one of the highest points close to the sea. During Greek and Byzantine times, the acropolis of the ancient Greek city of Byzantion stood here.

After Sultan Mehmed II&#x27;s conquest of Constantinople (known since 1930 in English as Istanbul) in 1453, the Great Palace of Constantinople was largely in ruins. The Ottoman court was initially set up in the Old Palace (, ), today the site of Istanbul University in Beyazit Square. Mehmed II ordered that construction of Topkapı Palace begin in 1459. According to an account of the contemporary historian Critobulus of Imbros the sultan &quot;took care to summon the very best workmen from everywhere – masons and stonecutters and carpenters ... For he was constructing great edifices which were to be worth seeing and should in every respect vie with the greatest and best of the past.&quot; Accounts differ as to when construction of the inner core of the palace started and was finished. Critobulus gives the dates 1459–1465; other sources suggest construction was completed in the late 1460s.
Mehmed II established the basic layout of the palace. His private quarters would be located at the highest point of the promontory. Various buildings and pavilions surrounded the innermost core and winded down the promontory towards the shores of the Bosphorus. The entire complex was surrounded by high walls, some of which date back to the Byzantine acropolis. This basic layout governed the pattern of future renovations and extensions. The layout and appearance of Topkapı Palace was unique amongst not only European travellers, but also Islamic or oriental palaces. European travellers described it as &quot;irregular, asymmetric, non-axial, and [of] un-monumental proportions&quot;. Ottomans called it &quot;The Palace of Felicity&quot;. A strict, ceremonial, codified daily life ensured imperial seclusion from the rest of world. One of the central tenets was the observation of silence in the inner courtyards. The principle of imperial seclusion is a tradition that was codified by Mehmed II in 1477 and 1481 in the Code, which regulated the rank order of court officials, the administrative hierarchy, and protocol matters. This principle of increased seclusion over time was reflected in the construction style and arrangements of various halls and buildings. The architects had to ensure that even within the palace, the sultan and his family could enjoy a maximum of privacy and discretion, making use of grilled windows and building secret passageways.

Later sultans made various modifications to the palace, though Mehmed II&#x27;s basic layout was mostly preserved. The palace was significantly expanded between 1520 and 1560, during the reign of Suleyman the Magnificent. The Ottoman Empire had expanded rapidly and Suleyman wanted his residence to reflect its growing power. The chief architect in this period was the Persian Alaüddin, also known as Acem Ali. He was also responsible for the expansion of the Harem.

In 1574, after a great fire destroyed the kitchens, Mimar Sinan was entrusted by Sultan Selim II to rebuild the damaged parts of the palace. Mimar Sinan restored and expanded not only the damaged areas, but also the Harem, baths, the Privy Chamber and various shoreline pavilions.

By the end of the 16th century, the palace had acquired its present appearance. The palace is an extensive complex rather than a single monolithic structure, with an assortment of low buildings constructed around courtyards, interconnected with galleries and passages. Few of the buildings exceed two stories. Seen from above, the palace grounds are divided into four main courtyards and the harem. The first courtyard was the most accessible, while the fourth courtyard and the harem were the most inaccessible. Access to these courtyards was restricted by high walls and controlled with gates. Apart from the four to five main courtyards, various other small to mid-sized courtyards exist throughout the complex. Estimates of the total size of the complex varies from around to .

To the west and south the complex is bordered by the large imperial flower park, known today as Gülhane Park. Various related buildings such as small summer palaces (, ), pavilions, kiosks (, ) and other structures for royal pleasures and functions formerly existed at the shore in an area known as the Fifth Courtyard, but have disappeared over time due to neglect and the construction of the shoreline railroad in the 19th century. The last remaining seashore structure that still exists today is the Basketmakers&#x27; Kiosk, constructed in 1592 by Sultan Murad III.

==Imperial Gate==
The main street leading to the palace is the Byzantine processional Mese avenue, known today as (&#x27;Council Street&#x27;). This street was used for imperial processions during the Byzantine and Ottoman era. It leads directly to the Hagia Sophia and turns northwest towards the palace square to the Fountain of Ahmed III.

The Imperial Gate is the main entrance into the First Courtyard. The sultan would enter the palace through the Imperial Gate (, meaning &#x27;royal gate&#x27; in Persian, or ) located to the south of the palace. This massive gate, originally dating from 1478, is now covered in 19th-century marble. Its central arch leads to a high-domed passage; gilded Ottoman calligraphy adorns the structure at the top, with verses from the Qur&#x27;an and tughras of the sultans. The tughras of Mehmed II and Abdulaziz, who renovated the gate, have been identified.

According to old documents, there was a wooden apartment above the gate area until the second half of the 19th century. It was used as a pavilion by Mehmed, a depository for the properties of those who died inside the palace without heirs and the receiving department of the treasury. It has also been used as a vantage point for the ladies of the harem on special occasions.

==First Courtyard==
Surrounded by high walls, the First Courtyard (&quot;I. Avlu&quot; or &quot;Alay Meydanı&quot;) functioned as an outer precinct or park and is the largest of all the courtyards of the palace. The steep slopes leading towards the sea had already been terraced under Byzantine rule. Some of the historical structures of the First Courtyard no longer exist. The structures that remain are the former Imperial Mint (&quot;Darphane-i Âmire&quot;, constructed in 1727), the church of Hagia Irene and various fountains. The Byzantine church of Hagia Irene was used by the Ottomans as a storehouse and imperial armoury. This courtyard was also known as the Court of the Janissaries or the Parade Court. Court officials and janissaries would line the path dressed in their best garb. Visitors entering the palace would follow the path towards the Gate of Salutation and the Second Courtyard of the palace.

The large Gate of Salutation, also known as the Middle Gate (Turkish: &quot;Orta Kapı&quot;), leads into the palace and the Second Courtyard. This crenellated gate has two large, pointed octagonal towers. Its date of construction is uncertain; the architecture of the towers appears to be of Byzantine influence. An inscription at the door dates this gate to at least 1542. The gate is richly decorated with religious inscriptions and monograms of sultans. Passage through the gate was tightly controlled and all visitors had to dismount, since only the sultan was allowed to enter the gate on horseback. This was also a Byzantine tradition taken from the Chalke Gate of the Great Palace. The Fountain of the Executioner (&quot;Cellat Çeşmesi&quot;) is where the executioner purportedly washed his hands and sword after a decapitation, though there is disagreement about whether the fountain was actually used for this purpose. It is located on the right side when facing the Gate of Salutation from the First Courtyard.
In April 2021, archaeologists uncovered a Roman period gallery consisting of three sections during the underground researches carried out in Topkapı Palace. The gallery located near the Imperial Gate was revealed during the excavation of the First Courtyard.

==Second Courtyard==


Through the middle gate is the Second Courtyard (&quot;II. Avlu&quot;), or Divan Square (&quot;Divan Meydanı&quot;). The courtyard was probably completed around 1465, during the reign of Mehmed II. It received its final appearance around 1525–1529 during the reign of Suleyman I. It is surrounded by the former palace hospital, bakery, Janissary quarters, stables, the imperial harem and Divan to the north and the kitchens to the south. At the end of the courtyard, the Gate of Felicity marks the entrance to the Third Courtyard. Numerous artifacts from the Roman and Byzantine periods that have been found on the palace site during recent excavations, including sarcophagi, are on display in the Second Courtyard in front of the imperial kitchens. Located underneath the Second Courtyard is a cistern that dates to Byzantine times. During Ottoman times this courtyard would have been full of peacocks and gazelles. It was used as a gathering place for courtiers. The Sultan, seated on the gold-plated Bayram throne, used to hold audiences in the second courtyard. Some foreign dignitaries, including the French ambassador Philippe du Fresne-Canaye, have written accounts about these audiences.

The imperial stables (&quot;Istabl-ı Âmire&quot;), located around five to six meters below ground level, were constructed under Mehmed II and renovated under Suleyman. A vast collection of harness &quot;treasures&quot; (&quot;Raht Hazinesi&quot;) are kept in the privy stables. This area also has a small 18th-century mosque and the bath of Beşir Ağa (&quot;Beşir Ağa Camii ve Hamamı&quot;), who was the chief black eunuch of Mahmud I.

At the end of the imperial stables are the Dormitories of the Halberdiers with Tresses (&quot;Zülüflü Baltacılar Koğuşu&quot;). The responsibilities of the halberdiers included carrying wood to the palace rooms and service for some of the palace quarters. The halberdiers wore long to signify their higher position. The first mention of this corps is around 1527, when they were established to clear the roads ahead of the army during a campaign. The dormitory was founded in the 15th century. It was enlarged by the chief architect Davud Ağa in 1587, during the reign of Sultan Murad III. The dormitories are constructed around a main courtyard in the traditional layout of an Ottoman house, with baths and a mosque, as well as recreational rooms such as a pipe-room. On the outside and inside of the complex, many pious foundation inscriptions about the various duties and upkeep of the quarters can be found. In contrast to the rest of the palace, the quarters are constructed of red and green painted wood.

===Palace kitchens and porcelain collection===
The palace kitchens (&quot;Saray Mutfakları&quot;) were built when the palace was first constructed in the 15th century and expanded during the reign of Suleyman the Magnificent. They were modeled on the kitchens of Edirne Palace. After the fire of 1574, which damaged the kitchens, they were remodeled by the court architect Mimar Sinan. The rebuilt kitchens form two rows of 20 wide chimneys; these chimneys were added by Mimar Sinan.

The kitchens are located on an internal street stretching between the Second Courtyard and the Marmara Sea. The entrance to this section is through the three doors in the portico of the Second Courtyard: the Imperial commissariat (lower kitchen) door, imperial kitchen door and the confectionery kitchen door. The palace kitchens consist of 10 domed buildings: Imperial kitchen, (palace school), &quot;Harem&quot; (women&#x27;s quarters), &quot;Birûn&quot; (outer service section of the palace), kitchens, beverages kitchen, confectionery kitchen, creamery, storerooms and rooms for the cooks. They were the largest kitchens in the Ottoman Empire. Food was prepared for about 4,000 people and the kitchen staff consisted of more than 800 people. The kitchens included dormitories, baths and a mosque for the employees, most of which disappeared over time.

Apart from exhibiting kitchen utensils, today the buildings contain a silver gifts collection, as well as a large collection of porcelain. The Ottomans had access to Chinese porcelains from the mid-fifteenth century onward. Although official Chinese sources have documented that some Ottoman envoys paid tributary visits to China and received gifts, including porcelain wares, from the Chinese emperor as rewards, no sources on the Ottoman side substantiate such official missions. The collection of 10,700 pieces of 

Chinese porcelain is among the finest porcelain collections in the world. Porcelains often entered the palace collection as parts of the estates of deceased persons, and were sometimes circulated as gifts amongst members of the royal family or other leading officials. Records indicate that by the 18th century the palace collection had 16,566 pieces of Chinese porcelain, compared to 400 pieces in the 16th century and 3,645 pieces in the 17th century. The Chinese porcelain collection ranges from the late Song Dynasty (960–1279) and the Yuan Dynasty (1280–1368), through the Ming Dynasty (1368–1644) to the Qing Dynasty (1644–1911). The pieces include celadons as well as blue and white porcelain. The Japanese collection is mainly Imari porcelain, dating from the 17th to the 19th centuries. The collection also includes around 5,000 European pieces. Researchers believe that Ottoman tastes changed over time to favor various types of European porcelain by the 18th century.

===Imperial Council===


The Imperial Council (&quot;Dîvân-ı Hümâyûn&quot;) building is the chamber where the Imperial Council—consisting of the Grand Vizier (&quot;Vazīr-e Azam&quot;) and other council ministers (&quot;Dîvân Heyeti&quot;)—held meetings. The domed chamber of the building is called &quot;Kubbealtı&quot;, which means &quot;under the dome&quot;. The council building situated in the northwestern corner of the courtyard next to the Gate of Felicity.

The Imperial Council building was first built during the reign of Mehmed II. The present building dates from the period of Süleyman the Magnificent; the chief architect was Alseddin. It had to be restored after the Harem fire of 1665. According to the entrance inscription it was also restored during the periods of Selim III and Mahmud II; on its façade are verse inscriptions that mention the restoration work carried out in 1792 and 1819 by Sultan Selim III and Mahmud II. The rococo decorations on the façade and inside the Imperial Council date from this period.

There are multiple entrances to the council hall, both from inside the palace and from the courtyard. The porch consists of multiple marble and porphyry pillars, with an ornate green and white-coloured wooden ceiling decorated with gold. The exterior entrances into the hall are in the rococo style, with gilded grills to admit natural light. While the pillars are an earlier Ottoman style, the wall paintings and decorations are from the later rococo period. Inside, the Imperial Council building consists of three adjoining main rooms. The 15th century &quot;Divanhane&quot;, built with a wooden portico at the corner of the Divan Court, was later used as the mosque of the council. There are three domed chambers: the first chamber where the Imperial Council held its deliberations is called the &quot;Kubbealtı&quot;, the second was occupied by the secretarial staff of the Imperial Council, and the third—called &quot;Defterhāne&quot;—is where the head clerks kept records of the council meetings. The main chamber &quot;Kubbealtı&quot; is, however, decorated with Ottoman Kütahya tiles.

The Sultan or the Valide sultan was able to follow deliberations of the council without being noticed from a window with a golden grill. The window could be reached from the imperial quarters in the adjacent Tower of Justice (&quot;Adalet Kulesi&quot;). The window is mentioned for the first time in 1527 by the scholar Celalzade Mustafa Çelebi: &quot;His Majesty [...] had built a high throne and a lofty loggia above the outer Council Hall where viziers sat, inventing a veiled window overlooking the Council Hall below. From this window, his Noble Excellency sometimes watched the events of the divan, checking the truth of affairs.&quot; The Tower of Justice (&quot;Adalet Kulesi&quot;) is located between the Imperial Council and the Harem.

The Tower of Justice is several stories high and the tallest structure in the palace, making it clearly visible from the Bosphorus as a landmark. The tower was probably originally constructed under Mehmed II and then renovated and enlarged by Suleiman I between 1527 and 1529. Sultan Mahmud II rebuilt the lantern of the tower in 1825 while retaining the Ottoman base. The tall windows with engaged columns and the Renaissance pediments evoke the Palladian style.

===Imperial Treasury===
The building where the arms and armor are exhibited was originally one of the palace treasuries (&quot;Dîvân-ı Hümâyûn Hazinesi / Hazine-ı Âmire&quot;). Since there was another (&quot;inner&quot;) treasury in the Third Courtyard, this one was also called &quot;outer treasury&quot; (&quot;dış hazine&quot;). Although it contains no dated inscriptions, its construction technique and plan suggest that it was built at the end of the 15th century during the reign of Süleiman I. It subsequently underwent numerous alterations and renovations. It is a hall built of stone and brick with eight domes, each 5 x 11.40 m.

This treasury was used to finance the administration of the state. The kaftans given as presents to the viziers, ambassadors and residents of the palace by the financial department and the sultan and other valuable objects were also stored here. The janissaries were paid their quarterly wages (called &quot;ulufe&quot;) from this treasury, which was closed by the imperial seal entrusted to the grand vizier. In 1928, four years after the Topkapı Palace was converted into a museum, its collection of arms and armor was put on exhibition in this building.

During excavations in 1937 in front of this building, remains of a religious Byzantine building dating from the 5th century were found. Since it could not be identified with any of the churches known to have been built on the palace site, it is now known as &quot;the Basilica of the Topkapı Palace&quot; or simply Palace Basilica.

Also located outside the treasury building is a target stone (&quot;Nişan Taşı&quot;), which is over two metres tall. This stone was erected in commemoration of a record rifle shot by Selim III in 1790. It was brought to the palace from Levend in the 1930s.

====Arms collection====
The arms collection (&quot;Silah Seksiyonu Sergi Salonu&quot;), which consists primarily of weapons that remained in the palace at the time of its conversion, is one of the richest assemblages of Islamic arms in the world, with examples spanning 1,300 years from the 7th to the 20th centuries. The palace&#x27;s collection of arms and armor consists of objects manufactured by the Ottomans themselves, or gathered from foreign conquests, or given as presents. Ottoman weapons form the bulk of the collection, but it also includes examples of Umayyad and Abbasid swords, as well as Mamluk and Persian armor, helmets, swords and axes. A lesser number of European and Asian arms make up the remainder of the collection. Currently on exhibition are some 400 weapons, most of which bear inscriptions.

===Gate of Felicity===
The Gate of Felicity (&quot;Bâbüssaâde&quot; or &quot;Bab-üs Saadet&quot;) is the entrance into the Inner Court (&quot;Enderûn&quot; meaning &quot;inside&quot; in Persian), also known as the Third Courtyard, marking the border to the Outer Court or &quot;Birûn&quot; (meaning &quot;outside&quot; in Persian). The Third Courtyard comprises the private and residential areas of the palace. The gate has a dome supported by lean marble pillars. It represents the presence of the Sultan in the palace. No one could pass this gate without the authority of the Sultan. Even the Grand Vizier was only granted authorisation on specified days and under specified conditions.

The gate was probably constructed under Mehmed II in the 15th century. It was redecorated in the rococo style in 1774 under Sultan Mustafa III and during the reign of Mahmud II. The gate is further decorated with Qur&#x27;anic verses above the entrance and &quot;tuğra&quot;s. The ceiling is partly painted and gold-leafed, with a golden ball hanging from the middle. The sides with baroque decorative elements and miniature paintings of landscapes.

The Sultan used this gate and the &quot;Divan Meydanı&quot; square only for special ceremonies. The Sultan sat before the gate on his Bayram throne on religious, festive days and accession, when the subjects and officials perform their homage standing. The funerals of the Sultan were also conducted in front of the gate.

On either side of this colonnaded passage, under control of the Chief Eunuch of the Sultan&#x27;s Harem (called the &quot;Bâbüssaâde Ağası&quot;) and the staff under him, were the quarters of the eunuchs as well as the small and large rooms of the palace school.

The small, indented stone on the ground in front of the gate marks the place where the banner of Muhammad was unfurled. The Grand Vizier or the commander going to war was entrusted with this banner in a solemn ceremony.

==Third Courtyard==
Beyond the Gate of Felicity is the Third Courtyard (&quot;III. Avlu&quot;), also called the Inner Palace (&quot;Enderûn Avlusu&quot;), which is the heart of the palace. It is a lush garden surrounded by the Hall of the Privy Chamber (&quot;Has Oda&quot;), the treasury, the harem and the library of Ahmed III.

The Third Courtyard is surrounded by the quarters of the &quot;Ağas&quot;, page boys in the service of the sultan. They were taught the arts, such as music, painting and calligraphy. The best could become the &quot;Has Oda Ağası&quot; or high-ranking officials.

The layout of the Third Courtyard was established by Mehmed II. While Mehmed II would not sleep in the harem, successive sultans after him became more secluded and moved to the more intimate Fourth Courtyard and the harem section.

The &quot;Hünername&quot; miniature from 1584 shows the Third Courtyard and the surrounding outer gardens.

===Audience Chamber===

The Audience Chamber, also known as the Chamber of Petitions (&quot;Arz Odası&quot;), is right behind the Gate of Felicity. This square building is an Ottoman kiosk, surrounded by a colonnade of 22 columns supporting the large roof with hanging eaves. The building dates from the 15th century. The ceiling of the chamber was painted in ultramarine blue and studded with golden stars. The walls were lined with blue, white and turquoise tiles. The chamber was further decorated with precious carpets and pillows. The chamber was renovated in 1723 by Sultan Ahmed III. It was destroyed in the fire of 1856 and rebuilt during the reign of Abdülmecid I.

The main throne room is located inside the audience chamber. According to a contemporary account by envoy Cornelius Duplicius de Schepper in 1533: &quot;The Emperor was seated on a slightly elevated throne completely covered with gold cloth, replete and strewn with numerous precious stones, and there were on all sides many cushions of inestimable value; the walls of the chamber were covered with mosaic works spangled with azure and gold; the exterior of the fireplace of this chamber of solid silver and covered with gold, and at one side of the chamber from a fountain water gushed forth from a wall.&quot; The present throne in the form of a baldachin was made on the order of Mehmed III. On the lacquered ceiling of the throne, studded with jewels, are foliage patterns accompanied by the depiction of the fight of a dragon, symbol of power, with &quot;simurg&quot;, a mythical bird. On the throne there is a cover made of several pieces of brocade on which emerald and ruby plaques and pearls are sown.

Embossed inscriptions at the main visitors&#x27; door, dating from 1856, contain laudatory words for Sultan Abdülmecid I. The main door is surmounted by an embossed &quot;besmele&quot;, the common Muslim benediction, meaning &quot;In the Name of God the Compassionate, the Merciful&quot;, dating from 1723. This inscription was added during the reign of Sultan Ahmed III. The tile panels on either side of the door were placed during later repair work.

There is a small fountain by the entrance from the time of Suleiman I. The Persian inscriptions calls the sultan &quot;the fountainhead of generosity, justice and the sea of beneficence.&quot;

Gifts presented by ambassadors were placed in front of the large window in the middle of the main facade between the two doors. The Pişkeş Gate to the left (&quot;Pişkeş Kapısı&quot;, Pişkeş meaning gift brought to a superior) is surmounted by an inscription from the reign of Mahmud II, which dates from 1810.

Behind the Audience Chamber on the eastern side is the Dormitory of the Expeditionary Force (&quot;Seferli Koğuşu&quot;), which houses the Imperial Wardrobe Collection (&quot;Padişhah Elbiseleri Koleksiyonu&quot;). This collection is made up of around 2,500 garments, including the precious kaftans of the Sultans. It also houses a collection of 360 ceramic objects. The dormitory was constructed under Sultan Murad IV in 1635. The building was restored by Sultan Ahmed III in the early 18th century. The dormitory is vaulted and is supported by 14 columns. Adjacent to the dormitory, located northeast, is the Conqueror&#x27;s Pavilion, which houses the Imperial Treasury.

===The Imperial Treasury===


The Conqueror&#x27;s Pavilion, also called the &quot;Conqueror&#x27;s Kiosk&quot; (&quot;Fatih Köşkü&quot;) is one of the oldest buildings inside the palace. It was built , when the palace was first constructed. It consists of two floors raised on a terrace above the garden, built at the top of the promontory on a cliff with views from its porch of the Sea of Marmara and the Bosporus. The lower floor consisted of service rooms, while the upper floor was a suite of four apartments and a large loggia with double arches. All the rooms open onto the Third Courtyard through a monumental arcade. The colonnaded portico on the side of the garden is connected to each of the four halls by a large door. The pavilion was used as the treasury for the revenues from Egypt under Sultan Selim I. During excavations in the basement, a small Byzantine baptistery built along a trefoil plan was found. It houses the Imperial Treasury (&quot;Hazine-i Âmire&quot;).
The Imperial Treasury is a vast collection of artworks, jewelry, heirlooms and money belonging to the Ottoman dynasty. The Chief Treasurer (&quot;Hazinedarbaşı&quot;) was responsible for the Imperial Treasury.

The first room of the treasury houses one of the armours of Sultan Mustafa III, consisting of an iron coat of mail decorated with gold and encrusted with jewels. His gilded sword, shield and stirrups are also on display. The ebony throne of Murad IV, inlaid with nacre and ivory may also be found in this room. Other pieces include several pearl embellished Qur&#x27;an covers belonging to the sultans and jewel-encrusted looking glasses. There is a music box from India with a gold elephant dating from the 19th century. 

The second room houses the Topkapı Dagger. The golden hilt is ornamented with three large emeralds, topped by a golden watch with an emerald lid. The golden scabbard is covered with diamonds and enamel. In 1747, the Sultan Mahmud I had this dagger made for Nader Shah of Persia, but the Shah was assassinated in connection with a revolt before the emissary had left the Ottoman Empire&#x27;s boundaries. This dagger gained more fame as the object of the heist depicted of the film &quot;Topkapi&quot;. In the middle of the second room stands the walnut throne of Ahmed I, inlaid with nacre and tortoise shell, built by Sedekhar Mehmed Agha. Below the baldachin hangs a golden pendant with a large emerald. The next displays show the ostentatious aigrettes of the sultans and their horses, studded with diamonds, emeralds and rubies. A jade bowl, shaped like a vessel, was a present of Czar Nicholas II of Russia.

The most eye-catching jewel in the third room is the Spoonmaker&#x27;s Diamond, set in silver and surrounded in two ranks with 49 cut diamonds. Legend has it that this diamond was bought by a vizier in a bazaar, the owner thinking it was a worthless piece of crystal. Another, perhaps more likely history for the gem places it among the possessions of Tepedeleni Ali Pasha, confiscated by the Sultan after his execution. Still more fanciful and romantic versions link the diamond&#x27;s origins with Napoleon Bonaparte&#x27;s mother Letizia Ramolino.

Among the exhibits are two enormous solid gold candleholders, each weighing 48 kg and mounted with 6,666 cut diamonds, a present of Sultan Abdülmecid I to the Kaaba in the holy city of Mecca. They were brought back to Istanbul shortly before the Ottoman Empire lost control over Mecca. The gold ceremonial Bayram throne, mounted with tourmalines, was made in 1585 by order of the vizier Ibrahim Pasha and presented to Sultan Murad III. This throne would be set up in front of the Gate of Felicity on special audiences.

The throne of Sultan Mahmud I is the centerpiece of the fourth room. This gold-plated throne in Indian style, decorated with pearls and emeralds, was a gift of the Persian ruler Nader Shah in the 18th century. Another exhibit shows the forearm and the hand of St. John the Baptist (&quot;Yahya&quot;), set in a golden covering. Several displays show an assembly of flintlock guns, swords, spoons, all decorated with gold and jewels. Of special interest is the gold shrine that used to contain the cloak of Mohammed.

===Miniature and Portrait Gallery===
Adjacent to the north of the Imperial Treasury lays the pages dormitory, which has been turned into the Miniature and Portrait Gallery (&quot;Müzesi Müdüriyeti&quot;). On the lower floor is a collection of important calligraphies and miniatures. In the displays, one can see old and very precious Qur&#x27;ans (12th to 17th centuries), hand-painted and hand-written in Kufic, and also a Bible from the 4th century, written in Arabic. A priceless item of this collection is the first world map by the Turkish admiral Piri Reis (1513). The map shows parts of the western coasts of Europe and North Africa with reasonable accuracy, and the coast of Brazil is also easily recognizable. The upper part of the gallery contains 37 portraits of different sultans, most of which are copies since the original paintings are too delicate to be publicly shown. The portrait of Mehmed II was painted by the Venetian painter Gentile Bellini. Other precious Ottoman miniature paintings that are either kept in this gallery, the palace library or in other parts are the &quot;Hünername&quot;, &quot;Şahanşahname&quot;, the &quot;Sarayı Albums&quot;, &quot;Siyer-ı Nebi&quot;, &quot;Surname-ı Hümayun&quot;, &quot;Surname-ı Vehbi&quot;, and the &quot;Süleymanname&quot; among many others.

===Enderûn Library (Library of Ahmed III)===

The Neo-classical Enderûn Library (&quot;Enderûn Kütüphanesi&quot;), also known as &quot;Library of Sultan Ahmed III&quot; (&quot;III. Ahmed Kütüphanesi&quot;), is located directly behind the Audience Chamber (&quot;Arz Odası&quot;) in the centre of the Third Court. It was built on the foundations of the earlier &quot;Havuzlu&quot; kiosk by the royal architect Mimar Beşir Ağa in 1719 on orders of Ahmed III for use by officials of the royal household. The colonnade of this earlier kiosk now probably stands in front of the present Treasury.

The library is an example of Ottoman architecture of the 18th century. The exterior of the building is faced with marble. The library has the form of a Greek cross with a domed central hall and three rectangular bays. The fourth arm of the cross consists of the porch, which can be approached by a flight of stairs on either side. Beneath the central arch of the portico is an elaborate drinking fountain with niches on each side. The building is set on a low basement to protect the precious books of the library against moisture.

The walls above the windows are decorated with 16th- and 17th-century İznik tiles of variegated design. The central dome and the vaults of the rectangular bays have been painted. The decoration inside the dome and vaults are typical of the so-called Tulip period, which lasted from 1703 to 1730. The books were stored in cupboards built into the walls. The niche opposite the entrance was the private reading corner of the sultan.

The library contained books on theology, Islamic law and similar works of scholarship in Ottoman Turkish, Arabic and Persian. The library collection consisted of more than 3,500 manuscripts. Some are fine examples of inlay work with nacre and ivory. Today these books are kept in the Mosque of the Ağas (&quot;Ağalar Camii&quot;), which is located to the west of the library. One of the most important items there is the Topkapi manuscript, a copy of the Qur&#x27;an from the time of the third Caliph Uthman Ibn Affan. &quot;The New Library,&quot; as it took to being called following the palace&#x27;s museum designation, houses a unique collection containing more than 20,000 manuscripts - both Islamic and non-Islamic. The collection also boasts a wide array of valuable maps not found anywhere else in the world. The library contains several first edition copies of a variety of books, both Eastern and Western. The stunning collection of Islamic Miniatures exceeds 15,000. Additionally, the sultanate&#x27;s private collection of 2,999 rare books is kept here as well. The rare and valuable collection also contains some of the world&#x27;s finest examples of Islamic calligraphy. Over 3,000 Qurans written in Kufic script which date as far back as the eight century are kept in a special wing of the library called &quot;The Rooms of the Sacred Trust&quot;.
The most precious books in the library are those hailing from the courts of the Ilkhanids - descendants of the Mongols - and their dynasties in 13th- and 14th-century Iran, and the exquisite books of the Timurid court in Herat of what is today Afghanistan. Persian manuscripts dating from the Safavi period - the 16th and 17th centuries - are also housed within the New Library and they are veritable works of art.

===Mosque of the Ağas===
The Mosque of the Ağas (&quot;Ağalar Camii&quot;) is the largest mosque in the palace. It is also one of the oldest constructions, dating from the 15th century during the reign of Mehmed II. The Sultan, the ağas and pages would come here to pray. The mosque is aligned in a diagonal line in the courtyard to make the minbar face Mecca. In 1928 the books of the Enderûn Library, among other works, were moved here as the Palace Library (&quot;Sarayı Kütüphanesi&quot;), housing a collection of about 13,500 Turkish, Arabic, Persian and Greek books and manuscripts, collected by the Ottomans. Located next to the mosque to the northeast is the Imperial Portraits Collection.

===Dormitory of the royal pages===
The Dormitory of the Royal Pages (&quot;Hasoda Koğuşu&quot;) houses the Imperial Portraits Collection (&quot;Padişah Portreleri Sergi Salonu&quot;) was part of the Sultan&#x27;s chambers. The painted portraits depict all the Ottoman sultans and some rare photographs of the later ones, the latter being kept in glass cases. The room is air-conditioned and the temperature regulated and monitored to protect the paintings. Since the sultans rarely appeared in public, and to respect Islamic sensitivity to artistic depictions of people, the earlier portraits are idealisations. Only since the reforms of the moderniser Mahmud II have realistic portraits of the rulers been made. An interesting feature is a large painted family tree of the Ottoman rulers. The domed chamber is supported by pillars, some of Byzantine origin since a cross is engraved on one of them.

===Privy Chamber===

The Privy Chamber houses the Chamber of the Sacred Relics (&quot;Kutsal Emanetler Dairesi&quot;), which includes the Pavilion of the Holy Mantle. The chamber was constructed by Sinan under the reign of Sultan Murad III. It used to house offices of the Sultan.

It houses what are considered to be &quot;the most sacred relics of the Muslim world&quot;: the cloak of Muhammad, two swords, a bow, one tooth, a hair of his beard, his battle sabres, an autographed letter and other relics which are known as the Sacred Trusts. Several other sacred objects are on display, such as the swords of the first four Caliphs, the Staff of Moses, the turban of Joseph and a carpet of the daughter of Mohammed. Even the Sultan and his family were permitted entrance only once a year, on the 15th day of Ramadan, during the time when the palace was a residence. Now any visitor can see these items, although in very dim light to protect the relics, and many Muslims make a pilgrimage for this purpose.

The Arcade of the Chamber of the Holy Mantle was added in the reign of Murad III, but was altered when the Circumcision Room was added. This arcade may have been built on the site of the Temple of Poseidon that was transformed before the 10th century into the Church of St. Menas.

The Privy Chamber was converted into an accommodation for the officials of the Mantle of Felicity in the second half of the 19th century by adding a vault to the colonnades of the Privy Chamber in the Enderun Courtyard.

==Harem==

The Imperial Harem (&quot;Harem-i Hümayûn&quot;) occupied one of the sections of the private apartments of the sultan; it contained more than 400 rooms. The harem was home to the sultan&#x27;s mother, the Valide sultan; the concubines and wives of the sultan; and the rest of his family, including children; and their servants. The harem consists of a series of buildings and structures, connected through hallways and courtyards. Every service team and hierarchical group residing in the harem had its own living space clustered around a courtyard. The number of rooms is not determined, with probably over 100, of which only a few are open to the public. These apartments (&quot;Daires&quot;) were occupied respectively by the harem eunuchs, the Chief Harem Eunuch (&quot;Darüssaade Ağası&quot;), the concubines, the queen mother, the sultan&#x27;s consorts, the princes and the favourites. There was no trespassing beyond the gates of the harem, except for the sultan, the queen mother, the sultan&#x27;s consorts and favourites, the princes and the concubines as well as the eunuchs guarding the harem.

The harem wing was only added at the end of the 16th century. Many of the rooms and features in the Harem were designed by Mimar Sinan. The harem section opens into the Second Courtyard (&quot;Divan Meydanı&quot;), which the Gate of Carriages (&quot;Arabalar Kapısı&quot;) also opens to. The structures expanded over time towards the Golden Horn side and evolved into a huge complex. The buildings added to this complex from its initial date of construction in the 15th century to the early 19th century capture the stylistic development of palace design and decoration. Parts of the harem were redecorated under the sultans Mahmud I and Osman III in an Italian-inspired Ottoman Baroque style. These decorations contrast with those of the Ottoman classical age.

===Gate of Carts/Domed Cupboard Chamber===
The entrance gate from the Second Courtyard is the Gate of Carts (&quot;Arabalar Kapısı&quot;), which leads into the Domed Cupboard Room (&quot;Dolaplı Kubbe&quot;). This place was built as a vestibule to the harem in 1587 by Murad III. The harem treasury worked here. In its cupboards, records of deeds of trust were kept, administered by the Chief Harem Eunuch. This treasury stored money from the pious foundations of the harem and other foundations, and financial records of the sultans and the imperial family.

===Hall of the Ablution Fountain===
The Hall of the Ablution Fountain, also known as &quot;Sofa with Fountain&quot; (&quot;Şadirvanli Sofa&quot;), was renovated after the Harem fire of 1666. This second great fire took place on 24 July 1665. This space was an entrance hall into the harem, guarded by the harem eunuchs. The &quot;Büyük Biniş&quot; and the &quot;Şal Kapısı&quot;, which connected the Harem, the Privy Garden, the Mosque of the Harem Eunuchs and the Tower of Justice from where the sultan watched the deliberations of the Imperial Council, led to this place.
The walls are revetted with 17th-century Kütahya tiles.
The horse block in front of the mosque served the sultan to mount his horse and the sitting benches were for the guards.
The fountain that gives the space its name was moved and is now in the pool of the Privy Chamber of Murad III.

On the left is the small mosque of the black eunuchs. The tiles in watery green, dirty white and middle blue all date from the 17th century (reign of Mehmed IV). Their design is of a high artistic level but the execution is of minor quality compared to 16th-century tiles, and the paint on these tiles blurs.

===Courtyard of the Eunuchs===

Another door leads to the Courtyard of the (Black) Eunuchs (&quot;Harem Ağaları Taşlığı&quot;), with their apartments on the left side. At the end of the court is the apartment of the black chief eunuch (&quot;Kızlar Ağası&quot;), the fourth high-ranking official in the official protocol. In between is the school for the imperial princes, with precious tiles from the 17th and 18th centuries and gilded wainscoting. At the end of the court is the main gate to the harem (&quot;Cümle Kapısi&quot;). The narrow corridor on the left side leads to the apartments of the odalisques (white slaves given as a gift to the sultan).

Many of the eunuchs’ quarters face this courtyard, which is the first one of the Harem, since they also acted as guards under the command of the Chief Harem Eunuch.
The spaces surrounding this courtyard were rebuilt after the great fire of 1665. The complex includes the dormitory of the Harem eunuchs behind the portico, the quarters of the Chief Harem Eunuch (&quot;Darüssaade Ağası&quot;) and the School of Princes as well as the Gentlemen-in-Waiting of the Sultan (&quot;Musahipler Dairesi&quot;) and the sentry post next to it. The main entrance gate of the Harem and the gate of the Kuşhane connected the Enderûn court leads out into the Kuşhane door.

The dormitories of the Harem eunuchs (&quot;Harem Ağaları Koğuşu&quot;) date to the 16th century. They are arranged around an inner courtyard in three storeys.
The inscription on the façade of the dormitory includes the deeds of trust of the Sultans Mustafa IV, Mahmud II and Abdülmejid I dating from the 19th century.
The rooms on the upper stories were for novices and those below overlooking the courtyard were occupied by the eunuchs who had administrative functions.
There is a monumental fireplace revetted with the 18th-century Kütahya tiles at the far end.
The Chief Harem Eunuch&#x27;s apartment (&quot;Darüssaade Ağasi Dairesi&quot;) adjacent to the dormitory contains a bath, living rooms and bedrooms.
The school room of the princes under the control of the Chief Harem eunuch was on the upper story.
The walls were revetted with 18th-century European tiles with baroque decorations.

===Harem main entrance===
The main entrance (&quot;Cümle Kapisi&quot;) separates the harem in which the family and the concubines of the sultan resided from the Courtyard of the Eunuchs. The door leads out into the sentry post (&quot;Nöbet Yeri&quot;) to which the three main sections of the harem are connected. The door on the left of the sentry post leads through the Passage of the Concubines to the Court of the Concubines (&quot;Kadınefendiler Taşlığı&quot;). The door in the middle leads to the Court of the Queen Mother (&quot;Valide Taşlığı&quot;) and the door to the right leads through the Golden Road (&quot;Altınyol&quot;) to the sultan&#x27;s quarters. The large mirrors in this hall date from the 18th century.

===Courtyard of the Queen Mother===

After the main entrance and before turning to the Passage of Concubines is the Courtyard of the Queen Mother.

===Passage of Concubines===
The Passage of Concubines (&quot;Cariye Koridoru&quot;) leads into the Courtyard of the Sultan&#x27;s Chief Consorts and Concubines.
On the counters along the passage, the eunuchs placed the dishes they brought from the kitchens in the palace.

===Courtyard of the Sultan&#x27;s Consorts and the Concubines===
The Courtyard of the Sultan&#x27;s Consorts and the Concubines (&quot;Kadın Efendiler Taşlığı / Cariye Taşlığı&quot;) was constructed at the same time as the courtyard of the eunuchs in the middle of the 16th century.
It underwent restoration after the 1665 fire and is the smallest courtyard of the Harem.
The porticoed courtyard is surrounded by baths (&quot;Cariye Hamamı&quot;), a laundry fountain, a laundry, dormitories, the apartments of the Sultan&#x27;s chief consort and the apartments of the stewardesses (&quot;Kalfalar Dairesi&quot;).
The three independent tiled apartments with fireplaces overlooking the Golden Horn were the quarters where the consorts of the Sultan lived. These constructions covered the site of the courtyard in the late 16th century.
At the entrance to the quarters of the Queen Mother, wall frescoes from the late 18th century depict landscapes, reflecting the western influence.
The staircase, called the &quot;Forty Steps&quot; (&quot;Kirkmerdiven&quot;), leads to the Hospital of the Harem (&quot;Harem Hastanesi&quot;), the dormitories of the concubines at the basement of the Harem and Harem Gardens.

===Apartments of the Queen Mother===
The Apartments of the Queen Mother (&quot;Valide Sultan Dairesi&quot;), together with the apartments of the sultan, form the largest and most important section in the harem. It was constructed after the Queen Mother moved into the Topkapı Palace in the late 16th century from the Old Palace (&quot;Eski Saray&quot;), but had to be rebuilt after the fire of 1665 between 1666 and 1668. Some rooms, such as the small music room, have been added to this section in the 18th century.
Only two of these rooms are open to the public: the dining room with, in the upper gallery, the reception room and her bedroom with, behind a lattice work, a small room for prayer. On the lower stories of the apartments are the quarters of the concubines, while the upper story rooms are those of the Queen Mother and her ladies-in-waiting (&quot;kalfas&quot;). The apartments of the Queen Mother are connected by a passage, leading into the Queen Mother&#x27;s bathroom, to the quarters of the sultan.

These are all enriched with blue-and-white or yellow-and-green tiles with flowery motifs and İznik porcelain from the 17th century. The panel representing Mecca or Medina, signed by Osman İznikli Mehmetoğlu, represents a new style in İznik tiles. The paintwork with panoramic views in the upper rooms is in the Western European style of the 18th and 19th centuries.

Situated on top of the apartments of the Queen Mother are the apartments of Mihirisah in the rococo style.
Leading from the apartments to the baths lays the apartment of Abdül Hamid I. Close to that is Selim&#x27;s III love chamber constructed in 1790. A long, narrow corridor connects this to the kiosk of Osman III dated to 1754.

===Baths of the Sultan and the Queen Mother===
The next rooms are the Baths of the Sultan and the Queen Mother (&quot;Hünkâr ve Vâlide Hamamları&quot;). This double bath dates from the late 16th century and consists of multiple rooms. It was redecorated in the rococo style in the middle of the 18th century. Both baths present the same design, consisting of a caldarium, a tepidarium and a frigidarium. Each room either has a dome, or the ceilings are at some point glassed in a honeycomb structure to let the natural sunlight in. The floor is clad in white and grey marble. The marble tub with an ornamental fountain in the caldarium and the gilded iron grill are characteristic features. The golden lattice work was to protect the bathing sultan or his mother from murder attempts. The sultan&#x27;s bath was decorated by Sinan with high-quality İznik polychrome tiles. But much of the tile decoration of the harem, from structures damaged by the fire of 1574, was recycled by Sultan Ahmed I for decoration in his new Sultan Ahmed Mosque in Istanbul. The walls are now either clad in marble or white-washed.

===Imperial Hall===

The Imperial Hall (&quot;Hünkâr Sofası&quot;), also known as the Imperial Sofa, Throne Room Within or Hall of Diversions, is a domed hall in the Harem, believed to have been built in the late 16th century. It has the largest dome in the palace. The hall served as the official reception hall of the sultan as well as for the entertainment of the Harem. Here the sultan received his confidants, guests, his mother, his first wife (&quot;Hasseki&quot;), consorts, and his children. Entertainments, paying of homage during religious festivals, and wedding ceremonies took place here in the presence of the members of the dynasty.

After the Great Harem Fire of 1666, the hall was renovated in the rococo style during the reign of Sultan Osman III. The tile belt surrounding the walls bearing calligraphic inscriptions were revetted with 18th-century blue-and-white Delftware and mirrors of Venetian glass. But the domed arch and pendentives still bear classical paintings dating from the original construction.

In the hall stands the sultan&#x27;s throne. The gallery was occupied by the consorts of the sultan, headed by the Queen Mother. The gilded chairs are a present of Emperor Wilhelm II of Germany, while the clocks are a gift of Queen Victoria. A pantry, where musical instruments are exhibited, opens to the Imperial Hall, which provides access into the sultan&#x27;s private apartments.

A secret door behind a mirror allowed the sultan a safe passage. One door admits to the Queen Mother&#x27;s apartments, another to the sultan&#x27;s hammam. The opposite doors lead to the small dining chamber (rebuilt by Ahmed III) and the great bedchamber, while the other admits to a series of ante-chambers, including the room with the fountain (&quot;Çeşmeli Sofa&quot;), which were all retiled and redecorated in the 17th century.

===Privy Chamber of Murat III===
The Privy Chamber of Murat III (&quot;III. Murad Has Odası&quot;) is the oldest and finest surviving room in the harem, having retained its original interior. It was a design of the master architect Sinan and dates from the 16th century. Its dome is only slightly smaller than that of the Throne Room. Its hall has one of the finest doors of the palace and leads past the wing of the crown princes (&quot;Kafes&quot;). The room is decorated with blue-and-white and coral-red İznik tiles. The rich floral designs are framed in thick orange borders of the 1570s. A band of inscriptional tiles runs around the room above the shelf and door level. The large arabesque patterns of the dome have been regilded and repainted in black and red. The large fireplace with gilded hood (&quot;ocak&quot;) stands opposite a two-tiered fountain (&quot;çeşme&quot;), skilfully decorated in coloured marble. The flow of water was meant to prevent any eavesdropping, while providing a relaxed atmosphere to the room. The two gilded baldachin beds date from the 18th century.

===Privy Chamber of Ahmed I===
On the other side of the great bedchamber there are two smaller rooms: first the Privy Chamber of Ahmed I (&quot;I. Ahmed Has Odası&quot;), richly decorated with İznik glazed tiles. The cabinet doors, the window shutters, a small table and a Qur&#x27;an lectern are decorated with nacre and ivory.

===Privy Chamber of Ahmed III===
Next to it is the small but very colourful Privy Chamber of Ahmed III (&quot;III. Ahmed Has Odası&quot;) with walls painted with panels of floral designs and bowls of fruit and with an intricate tiles fireplace (&quot;ocak&quot;). This room is therefore also known as the Fruit Room (&quot;Yemis Odası&quot;) and was probably used for dining purposes.

===Twin Kiosk/apartments of the Crown Prince===

The Twin Kiosk / Apartments of the Crown Prince (&quot;Çifte Kasırlar / Veliahd Dairesi&quot;) consists of two privy chambers built in the 17th century, at different times. The building is connected to the palace and consists of only one storey built on an elevated platform to give a better view from inside and shield views from the outside.

The interior consists of two large rooms, dating from the reign of Sultan Murat III, but are more probably from the reign of Ahmed I. The ceiling is not flat but conical in the kiosk style, evoking the traditional tents of the early Ottomans. As in tents, there is no standing furniture but sofas set on the carpeted floor on the side of the walls for seating. These chambers represent all the details of the classical style used in other parts of the palace.
The pavilion has been completely redecorated, and most of the Baroque woodwork has been removed. The decorative tiles, reflecting the high quality craftsmanship of the İznik tile industry of the 17th century, were removed in accordance with the original concept and replaced with modern copies. The paintwork of the wooden dome is still original and is an example of the rich designs of the late 16th/early 17th centuries. The fireplace in the second room has a tall, gilded hood and has been restored to its original appearance. The window shutters next to the fireplace are decorated with nacre intarsia. The windows in coloured glass look out across the high terrace and the garden of the pool below. The spigots in these windows are surrounded with red, black and gold designs.

The crown prince (&quot;Şehzadeler&quot;) lived here in seclusion; therefore, the apartments were also called &quot;kafes&quot; (cage). The crown prince and other princes were trained in the discipline of the Ottoman Harem until they reached adulthood. Afterwards, they were sent as governors to Anatolian provinces, where they were further trained in the administration of state affairs. From the beginning of the 17th century onward, the princes lived in the Harem, which started to have a voice in the palace administration. The Twin Kiosk was used as the privy chamber of the crown prince from the 18th century onward.

===Courtyard of the Favourites===
The Courtyard of the Favourites (&quot;Gözdeler / Mabeyn Taşlığı ve Dairesi&quot;) forms the last section of the Harem and overlooks a large pool and the Boxwood Garden (&quot;Şimşirlik Bahçesi&quot;). The courtyard was expanded in the 18th century by the addition of the Interval (&quot;Mabeyn&quot;) and Favourites (&quot;İkballer&quot;) apartments. The apartment of the Sultan&#x27;s Favourite Consort along with the Golden Road (&quot;Altın Yol&quot;) and the Mabeyn section at the ground floor also included the Hall with the Mirrors. This was the space where Abdül Hamid I lived with his harem. The wooden apartment is decorated in the rococo style.

The favourites of the sultan (&quot;Gözdeler / İkballer&quot;) were conceived as the instruments of the perpetuation of the dynasty in the harem organisation. When the favourites became pregnant they assumed the title and powers of the official consort (&quot;Kadınefendi&quot;) of the sultan.

===Golden Road===
The Golden Road (&quot;Altınyol&quot;) is a narrow passage that forms the axis of the Harem, dating from the 15th century. It extends between the Courtyard of the Harem Eunuch (&quot;Harem Ağaları Taşlığı&quot;) and the Privy Chamber (&quot;Has Oda&quot;). The sultan used this passage to pass to the Harem, the Privy Chamber and the Sofa-i Hümâyûn, the Imperial terrace. The Courtyard of the Queen Mother (&quot;Valide Sultan Taşlığı’&quot;), the Courtyard of the Chief Consort of the Sultan (&quot;Baş Haseki&quot;), the apartments of the Princes (&quot;Şehzadegân Daireleri&quot;), and the apartments of the Sultan (&quot;Hünkâr Dairesi&quot;) open to this passage. The walls are painted a plain white colour. It is believed that the attribute &quot;golden&quot; is due to the sultan&#x27;s throwing of golden coins to be picked up by the concubines at festive days, although this is disputed by some scholars.

===Aviary / Harem Gate===
Until the late 19th century, there had been a small inner court in this corner of the Enderûn Courtyard. This court led through the Kuşhane Gate into the harem. Today this is the gate from which the visitors exit from the Harem. Birds were raised for the sultan&#x27;s table in the buildings around the gate. On the inscription over the Kuşhane door one reads that Mahmud I had the kitchen of the Kuşhane repaired. The balcony of the aviary facing the Harem Gate was constructed during repair work in 1916. The building&#x27;s facade resembles traditional aviaries.
==Fourth Courtyard==
The Fourth Courtyard (&quot;IV. Avlu&quot;), also known as the Imperial Sofa (&quot;Sofa-ı Hümâyûn&quot;), was more of an innermost private sanctuary of the sultan and his family, and consists of a number of pavilions, kiosks (&quot;köşk&quot;), gardens and terraces. It was originally a part of the Third Courtyard but recent scholars have identified it as more separate to better distinguish it.

===Circumcision Room===

In 1640, Sultan Ibrahim I added the Circumcision Room (&quot;Sünnet Odası&quot;), a summer kiosk (&quot;Yazlik Oda&quot;) dedicated to the circumcision of young princes, which is a religious tradition in Islam for cleanliness and purity. Its interior and exterior are decorated with a mixed collection of rare recycled tiles such as the blue tiles with flower motifs at the exterior. The most important of these are the blue and white tile panels influenced by far-eastern ceramics on the chamber facade, dated 1529. These once embellished ceremonial buildings of Sultan Suleiman I, such as the building of the Council Hall and the Inner Treasury (both in the Second Courtyard) and the Throne Room (in the Third Courtyard). They were moved here out of nostalgia and reverence for the golden age of his reign. These tiles then served as prototypes for the decoration of the Yerevan and Baghdad kiosks. The room itself is symmetrically proportioned and relatively spacious for the palace, with windows, each with a small fountain. The windows above contain some stained-glass panels. On the right side of the entrance stands a fireplace with a gilded hood. Sultan Ibrahim also built the arcaded roof around the Chamber of the Holy Mantle and the upper terrace between this room and the Baghdad kiosk.

The royal architect Hasan Ağa under Sultan Murat IV constructed during 1635–36 the Yerevan Kiosk (&quot;Revan Köşkü&quot;) and in 1638–1639 the Baghdad Kiosk (&quot;Bağdat Köşkü&quot;) to celebrate the Ottoman victories at Yerevan and Baghdad. Both contain most of their original decoration, with projecting eaves, a central dome and interior with recessed cupboards and woodwork with inlaid nacre tesserae. Both are based on the classical four-iwan plan with sofas filling the rectangular bays.

===Yerevan Kiosk===
The Yerevan Kiosk (&quot;Revan Köşkü&quot;) served as a religious retreat of 40 days. It is a rather small pavilion with a central dome and three apses for sofas and textiles. The fourth wall contains the door and a fireplace. The wall facing the colonnade is set with marble, the other walls with low-cost İznik blue-and-white tiles, patterned after those of a century earlier.

===Baghdad Kiosk===
The Baghdad Kiosk (&quot;Bağdat Köşkü&quot;) is situated on the right side of the terrace with a fountain. It was built to commemorate the Baghdad Campaign of Murad IV after 1638.

It closely resembles the Yerevan Kiosk. The three doors to the porch are located between the sofas. The façade is covered with marble, strips of porphyry and verd antique. The marble panelling of the portico is executed in Cairene Mamluk style. The interior is an example of an ideal Ottoman room. The recessed shelves and cupboards are decorated with early 16th-century green, yellow and blue tiles. The blue-and-white tiles on the walls are copies of the tiles of the Circumcision Room, right across the terrace. With its tiles dating to the 17th century, mother-of-pearl, tortoise-shell decorated cupboard and window panels, this pavilion is one of the last examples of the classical palace architecture.

The doors have very fine inlay work. On the right side of the entrance is a fireplace with a gilded hood. In the middle of the room is a silver &#x27;mangal&#x27; (charcoal stove), a present of King Louis XIV of France. From the mid-18th century onwards, the building was used as the library of the Privy Chamber.

===İftar Kiosk===
The gilded İftar Pavilion, also known as İftar Kiosk or İftar bower (&quot;İftariye Köşkü&quot; or &quot;İftariye Kameriyesi&quot;) offers a view on the Golden Horn and is a magnet for tourists today for photo opportunities. Its ridged cradle vault with the gilded roof was a first in Ottoman architecture with echoes of China and India. The sultan is reported to have had the custom to break his fast (&quot;iftar&quot;) under this bower during the fasting month of ramadan after sunset. Some sources mention this resting place as the &quot;Moonlit Seat&quot;. Special gifts like the showering of gold coins to officials by the sultan also sometimes occurred here. The marbled terrace gained its current appearance during the reign of Sultan Ibrahim (1640–48).

===Terrace Kiosk===

The rectilinear Terrace Kiosk (&quot;Sofa Köşku / Merdiven Başı Kasrı&quot;), also erroneously known as Kiosk of Kara Mustafa Pasha (&quot;Mustafa Paşa Köşkü&quot;), was a belvedere built in the second half of the 16th century. It was restored in 1704 by Sultan Ahmed III and rebuilt in 1752 by Mahmud I in the Rococo style. It is the only wooden building in the innermost part of the palace. It consists of rooms with the backside supported by columns.

The kiosk consists of the main hall called &quot;Divanhane&quot;, the prayer room (&quot;Namaz Odası&quot;) and the Room for Sweet Fruit Beverages (&quot;Şerbet Odası&quot;). From the kiosk the sultan would watch sporting events in the garden and other organised entertainment. This open building with large windows was originally used as a restroom and later, during the Tulip era (1718–1730), as a lodge for guests. It is situated next to the Tulip Garden.

===Tower of the Head Tutor / Chamber of the Chief Physician===
The square Tower of the Head Tutor (&quot;Başlala Kulesi&quot;), also known as the Chamber of the Chief Physician and court drugstore (&quot;Hekimbaşı Odası ve ilk eczane&quot;), dates from the 15th century and is the oldest building in the Fourth Courtyard. It was built as a watch tower, probably during the time of Mehmed II. It has few windows, and its walls are almost two metres thick. The physician had his private chamber at the top, while below was a store for drugs and medicine.

The first court pharmacy was established during the reign of Mehmed II. There were also other pharmacies and infirmaries at the palace besides this particular one. According to a legend, Enderunlu Tayyar Efendi, who was the Chief Tutor (&quot;Baş Lala&quot;) during the reign of Sultan Selim III, saw from the upper floor of this tower the rebels coming to the palace to assassinate the sultan and alarmed the sultan&#x27;s loyalists. The historian Afa writes that the tower was more than two floors higher than today but today it only has two storeys left.

The Chief Physician (&quot;Hekim Başı&quot;) and the Chief Tutor shared this place as their residence. The Chief Physician was responsible for the health of the sultan and the imperial family and used to prepare the medicines here. Under his supervision and those of the chief tutor the palace drugs were prepared, mixed and sealed in bottles, jars, boxes or bowls and given to the patients.

The Chief Physician was also a companion of the sultan outside the palace, accompanying him even on battles. The office of the chief physician was traditionally held by Jews. After the 17th century, there were increasingly Muslim physicians along with Jewish and European physicians. The last Chief Physician was Abdülhak Molla, who lived during the reign of Sultan Abdülmecid I. After the sultan moved away from Topkapı, the tower was used as a music conservatory and later used for the cleaning of palace arms. It was restored in 1911 and houses the medical objects collection.

===Stone throne===
A stone throne (&quot;Taş Taht&quot;) was made for Murad IV to watch the sports activities of pages. The inscription on the throne states that in 1636 Murad IV, who was an accomplished sportsman himself, threw an oak cudgel 120 meters.

===Grand Kiosk===
The Grand Kiosk, also known as the Mecidiye Kiosk, Grand Pavilion or Kiosk of Abdül Mecid I (&quot;Mecidiye Köşkü&quot;), built in 1840, was the last significant addition to the palace, along with the neighbouring Wardrobe Chamber (&quot;Esvap Odası&quot;). Both were built on the orders of Sultan Abdül Mecid I as an imperial reception and resting place because of its splendid location, giving a panoramic view on the Sea of Marmara and the Bosphorus. The sultans would stay here whenever they visited Topkapı from their seaside palaces. These constructions were erected on the vaulted basement of another kiosk dating from the 15th century. The architect Sarkis Balyan constructed it in an eclectic Europeanized style, mixed with traditional Ottoman style. Inside it is furnished in the Empire style. The two buildings were also used occasionally to accommodate foreign guests.
Located next to the Grand Kiosk is a high-end restaurant which has been visited by guests such as Queen Elizabeth II of the United Kingdom, First Lady Jackie Kennedy, President Richard Nixon, and boxer Mohammed Ali.

===Terrace Mosque===
The Terrace Mosque, also called Sofa Mosque (&quot;Sofa Camii&quot;), was constructed under Mahmud II in the Empire style for the use of the corps called &quot;Sofa Ocağ&quot;i in the 19th century. The Kiosk of the Swordbearer (&quot;Silahdar Köşkü&quot;) used to stand in its place. The inscription at the gate of the mosque indicated that it was restored under Sultan Abdülmecid I in 1858.

==Outer gardens==
Surrounding the whole complex of the First to the Fourth Courtyard are the outer palace gardens. A part of this area that is facing the sea is also known as the Fifth Palace.

Mehmed II also had three pavilions, or kiosks, constructed, of which only the Tiled Kiosk (&quot;Çinili Köşkü&quot;) has survived. The Tiled Pavilion dates to around 1473 and houses the Islamic ceramics collection of the Istanbul Archaeology Museums.

Along the shore a number of pavilions were constructed for the sultan&#x27;s viewing pleasure. These included the Shore Kiosk, Pearl Kiosk, Marble Kiosk and the Basketmakers&#x27; Kiosk. Most of the pavilions along with some of the seaside walls and gates were destroyed when the railway lines leading to the Sirkeci railway station were constructed in the late 19th century. The Basketmakers&#x27; Kiosk however was saved.

Located next to the First Courtyard towards the city lies the Gülhane Park, the old imperial rose garden, which belonged to the larger complex of the palace. This park is open to the public. Located at the gate to the park is the Procession Kiosk.

==Trees==
The trees in the Topkapı Palace complex are remarkable, as many have fallen victim to a fungus that has completely hollowed out their trunks, over the course of centuries. The trees nonetheless survive and remain standing. In other cases, two trees of a different kind have grown and fused together, such as a fig tree that grew in the hollow of another tree and effectively grafted with it. This phenomenon can be seen in the second courtyard.

==Security concerns==
The palace has been deemed lax on security and preservation by some experts, who point out that the palace has no climate-controlled rooms or storage and is a &quot;security nightmare&quot;.

Since many of the walls of the palace are 3 metres thick, it mostly escaped structural damage during the 1999 İzmit earthquake. Following this catastrophe, the museum director placed the porcelain collection on more secure mounts in the palace.

During a 1999 robbery, thieves stole portions of a 12th-century Qur&#x27;an from a locked exhibit in the library.

On 30 November 2011, Libyan ex-police and revolutionary Samir Salem Ali Elmadhavri, apparently copying the act of Norwegian extremist Anders Behring Breivik, attempted to massacre hundreds of tourists visiting the palace in the early hours. Stopped at the Bab-i Humayun entrance by the Palace Guards, he opened fire on soldiers and security guards, injuring Private Şerafettin Eray Topçu and security guard Mehmet Ballıcı. Then he entered the main courtyard of the palace, but was forced to retreat and seek shelter in the entrance upon encountering Palace Guard forces. After a gunfight lasting over one hour, he was killed by Turkish Police.

==Copies==
The resort hotel World Of Wonders Resorts &amp; Hotels Topkapı Palace in Antalya is a reconstruction of some of the buildings, such as the Audience Chamber, the palace kitchens and the Tower of Justice.

==See also==

* Dolmabahçe Palace – imperial residence from 1853 until 1889, and from 1909 until 1922
* Yıldız Palace – imperial residence from 1889 until 1909
* Ottoman architecture
* State organisation of the Ottoman Empire
* Military of the Ottoman Empire

==Literature==
*Turhan Can, &quot;Topkapi Palace&quot;, Orient Turistik Yayinlar Ve Hizmetler Ltd., Istanbul, 1994;
*Turner, J. (ed.) - Grove Dictionary of Art - Oxford University Press, USA; New edition (January 2, 1996); 
*
* Topkapi Palace Museum. &quot;The Imperial Treasury&quot;. MAS Publications. 2001. 
*
* Ahmet Ertuğ. &quot;Topkapi: The Palace of Felicity&quot;. Ertug &amp; Kokabiyik. 1989. ASIN B0006F4CM6
* Tahsin Oz. &quot;Topkapi Saray Museum 50 Masterpieces&quot;. Turkish Press. ASIN B000VHIQCG
* J. M. Rogers. &quot;The Topkapi Saray Museum. Architecture; the Harem and other buildings&quot;. New York Graphic Society. 1988. ASIN B000MKDDF2
* Hulya Tezcan, J. M. Rogers. &quot;The Topkapi Saray Museum: Textiles&quot;. Bulfinch Press. 1986. 
* J. M. Rogers (Author), Cengiz Koseoglu. &quot;Topkapi Saray Museum&quot;. Bulfinch Press. 1988. 
* Filiz Pcafgman (Author), J. M. Rogers. &quot;The Topkapi Saray Museum: Manuscripts&quot;. Bulfinch Press. 1986. 
* Regina Krahl (Author), Nurdan Erbahar (Author), John Ayers (Author). &quot;Chinese Ceramics in Topkapi Saray Museum, Istanbul: A Complete Catalogue&quot;. Sotheby Parke Bernet Publications. 1986. 
* Zeynep M. Durukan. &quot;The Harem of the Topkapi Palace&quot;. Hilal Matbaacilik Koll. 1973. ASIN B000OLCZPI
* Esin Atil. &quot;Suleymanname: The Illustrated History of Suleyman the Magnificent&quot;. Harry N Abrams. 1986. 
* Fanny Davis. &quot;Palace of Topkapi in Istanbul&quot;. 1970. ASIN B000NP64Z2
* Turhan Can. &quot;Topkapi Palace&quot;. Orient Touristic Publishing Service. 1997. ASIN B000JERAEQ
* Sabahattin Turkoglu. &quot;The Topkapi Palace&quot;. NET. 1989. 
* Ilhan Aksit. &quot;Topkapi Palace&quot;. Istanbul. 1994. ASIN B000MPGBGK
* Ergun, Nilgün, and Özge İskender. 2003. &quot;Gardens of the Topkapi Palace: An example of Turkish garden art&quot;. Studies in the History of Gardens &amp; Designed Landscapes, vol.23, no.i: 57–71.
* Ilber Ortaylı. &quot;Topkapi Palace&quot;. Tughra Books. Somerset, New Jersey (2008). 
* İlhan Akşit. &quot;The Mystery of the Ottoman Harem&quot;. Akşit Kültür Turizm Yayınları. 

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q170495" start="4" end="18" title="Topkapı Palace" label="Topkapı Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q15304525" start="32" end="40" title="Seraglio" label="Seraglio"/>
<link wikidata="Q732923" start="91" end="96" title="Fatih" label="Fatih"/>
<link wikidata="Q1029189" start="97" end="105" title="List of districts of Istanbul" label="district"/>
<link wikidata="Q406" start="109" end="117" title="Istanbul" label="Istanbul"/>
<link wikidata="Q43" start="121" end="127" title="Turkey" label="Turkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q274141" start="165" end="182" title="Dolmabahçe Palace" label="Dolmabahçe Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="238" end="252" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q43292" start="288" end="294" title="sultan" label="sultan"/>
<link wikidata="Q34503" start="334" end="354" title="Mehmed the Conqueror" label="Mehmed the Conqueror"/>
<link wikidata="Q160077" start="391" end="417" title="Fall of Constantinople" label="conquest of Constantinople"/>
<link wikidata="Q170495" start="459" end="469" title="Topkapı Palace" label="New Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q6000313" start="510" end="520" title="Eski Saray" label="Old Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q6043077" start="531" end="545" title="Beyazıt Square" label="Beyazıt Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q170495" start="579" end="590" title="Topkapı Palace" label="Cannon Gate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1188930" start="687" end="702" title="1509 Constantinople earthquake" label="1509 earthquake"/>
<link wikidata="Q165853" start="858" end="863" title="harem" label="harem"/>
<link wikidata="Q18811" start="908" end="920" title="Grand Vizier" label="Grand Vizier"/>
<link wikidata="Q35958" start="1121" end="1130" title="Bosphorus" label="Bosphorus"/>
<link wikidata="Q174772" start="1147" end="1159" title="Abdulmejid I" label="Abdulmejid I"/>
<link wikidata="Q274141" start="1205" end="1222" title="Dolmabahçe Palace" label="Dolmabahçe Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q3809270" start="1326" end="1351" title="end of the Ottoman Empire" label="end of the Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q3136957" start="1450" end="1481" title="Ministry of Culture and Tourism (Turkey)" label="Ministry of Culture and Tourism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1797528" start="1651" end="1673" title="Ottoman Imperial Harem" label="Ottoman Imperial Harem"/>
<link wikidata="Q1841554" start="1709" end="1734" title="Spoonmaker&amp;#x27;s Diamond" label="Spoonmaker&amp;#x27;s Diamond"/>
<link wikidata="Q106696016" start="1743" end="1757" title="Topkapi Dagger" label="Topkapi Dagger"/>
<link wikidata="Q7109946" start="1810" end="1826" title="Ottoman clothing" label="Ottoman clothing"/>
<link wikidata="Q7109978" start="1828" end="1835" title="Ottoman weapons" label="weapons"/>
<link wikidata="Q268639" start="1844" end="1853" title="Ottoman miniature" label="miniature"/>
<link wikidata="Q656831" start="1878" end="1901" title="Islamic calligraphy" label="illuminated manuscripts"/>
<link wikidata="Q7824891" start="1914" end="1932" title="Topkapi manuscript" label="Topkapi manuscript"/>
<link wikidata="Q501053" start="1991" end="2007" title="Turkish military" label="Turkish military"/>
<link wikidata="Q5773394" start="2063" end="2089" title="Historic Areas of Istanbul" label="Historic Areas of Istanbul"/>
<link wikidata="Q7809" start="2125" end="2131" title="UNESCO" label="UNESCO"/>
<link wikidata="Q9259" start="2148" end="2167" title="World Heritage Site" label="World Heritage Site"/>
<link wikidata="Q199481" start="2318" end="2326" title="Mahmud I" label="Mahmud I"/>
<link wikidata="Q256" start="2435" end="2442" title="Turkish language" label="Turkish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247633" start="2559" end="2573" title="Seraglio Point" label="Seraglio Point"/>
<link wikidata="Q1245089" start="2582" end="2592" title="promontory" label="promontory"/>
<link wikidata="Q179839" start="2609" end="2620" title="Golden Horn" label="Golden Horn"/>
<link wikidata="Q35958" start="2632" end="2648" title="Bosphorus Strait" label="Bosphorus Strait"/>
<link wikidata="Q35367" start="2659" end="2673" title="Sea of Marmara" label="Sea of Marmara"/>
<link wikidata="Q131668" start="2814" end="2823" title="acropolis" label="acropolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q23725" start="2853" end="2862" title="Byzantion" label="Byzantion"/>
<link wikidata="Q16869" start="2918" end="2932" title="Constantinople" label="Constantinople"/>
<link wikidata="Q406" start="2965" end="2973" title="Istanbul" label="Istanbul"/>
<link wikidata="Q475338" start="2988" end="3018" title="Great Palace of Constantinople" label="Great Palace of Constantinople"/>
<link wikidata="Q192964" start="3122" end="3141" title="Istanbul University" label="Istanbul University"/>
<link wikidata="Q648868" start="3284" end="3304" title="Michael Critobulus" label="Critobulus of Imbros"/>
<link wikidata="Q35958" start="4027" end="4036" title="Bosphorus" label="Bosphorus"/>
<link wikidata="Q8474" start="5440" end="5464" title="Suleyman the Magnificent" label="Suleyman the Magnificent"/>
<link wikidata="Q5600" start="5764" end="5775" title="Mimar Sinan" label="Mimar Sinan"/>
<link wikidata="Q161872" start="5793" end="5808" title="Sultan Selim II" label="Sultan Selim II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1560106" start="6873" end="6885" title="Gülhane Park" label="Gülhane Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q4867763" start="7280" end="7304" title="Basketmakers&amp;#x27; Kiosk" label="Basketmakers&amp;#x27; Kiosk"/>
<link wikidata="Q159934" start="7336" end="7345" title="Murad III" label="Murad III"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247312" start="7434" end="7438" title="Mese (Constantinople)" label="Mese"/>
<link wikidata="Q12506" start="7601" end="7613" title="Hagia Sophia" label="Hagia Sophia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3076126" start="7667" end="7688" title="Fountain of Ahmed III" label="Fountain of Ahmed III"/>
<link wikidata="Q9168" start="7853" end="7860" title="Persian language" label="Persian"/>
<link wikidata="Q656831" start="8045" end="8064" title="Ottoman calligraphy" label="Ottoman calligraphy"/>
<link wikidata="Q428" start="8119" end="8130" title="Qur&amp;#x27;an" label="Qur&amp;#x27;an"/>
<link wikidata="Q189985" start="8135" end="8141" title="tughra" label="tughra"/>
<link wikidata="Q34503" start="8174" end="8183" title="Mehmed II" label="Mehmed II"/>
<link wikidata="Q151500" start="8188" end="8197" title="Abdulaziz" label="Abdulaziz"/>
<link wikidata="Q464780" start="9049" end="9053" title="Mint (coin)" label="Mint"/>
<link wikidata="Q736676" start="9121" end="9132" title="Hagia Irene" label="Hagia Irene"/>
<link wikidata="Q130263" start="9305" end="9316" title="Janissaries" label="Janissaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q2724254" start="10197" end="10203" title="Chalke" label="Chalke"/>
<link wikidata="Q475338" start="10216" end="10228" title="Great Palace of Constantinople" label="Great Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q204933" start="10363" end="10375" title="decapitation" label="decapitation"/>
<link wikidata="Q130263" start="11181" end="11190" title="Janissary" label="Janissary"/>
<link wikidata="Q165853" start="11223" end="11228" title="Harem (household)" label="harem"/>
<link wikidata="Q18693391" start="11233" end="11238" title="Divan-ı Hümayun" label="Divan"/>
<link wikidata="Q48634" start="11509" end="11519" title="sarcophagus" label="sarcophagi"/>
<link wikidata="Q838858" start="11640" end="11647" title="cistern" label="cistern"/>
<link wikidata="Q201251" start="11739" end="11746" title="peacock" label="peacock"/>
<link wikidata="Q29001815" start="11752" end="11759" title="gazelle" label="gazelle"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11848" end="11861" title="Bayram throne" label="Bayram throne"/>
<link wikidata="Q3379496" start="11969" end="11994" title="Philippe du Fresne-Canaye" label="Philippe du Fresne-Canaye"/>
<link wikidata="Q3127570" start="12231" end="12238" title="Horse harness" label="harness"/>
<link wikidata="Q16896780" start="12446" end="12464" title="chief black eunuch" label="chief black eunuch"/>
<link wikidata="Q185623" start="12739" end="12746" title="halberd" label="halberd"/>
<link wikidata="Q12810881" start="13012" end="13021" title="Davud Ağa" label="Davud Ağa"/>
<link wikidata="Q159934" start="13058" end="13067" title="Murad III" label="Murad III"/>
<link wikidata="Q6092391" start="13754" end="13767" title="Edirne Palace" label="Edirne Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q5600" start="13864" end="13875" title="Mimar Sinan" label="Mimar Sinan"/>
<link wikidata="Q21582166" start="14356" end="14369" title="Enderun School" label="palace school"/>
<link wikidata="Q5159627" start="14501" end="14514" title="confectionery" label="confectionery"/>
<link wikidata="Q61140231" start="14524" end="14532" title="creamery" label="creamery"/>
<link wikidata="Q7462" start="15860" end="15872" title="Song Dynasty" label="Song Dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q7313" start="15892" end="15904" title="Yuan Dynasty" label="Yuan Dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q9903" start="15930" end="15942" title="Ming Dynasty" label="Ming Dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q8733" start="15962" end="15974" title="Qing Dynasty" label="Qing Dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054559" start="16007" end="16014" title="celadon" label="celadon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501567" start="16087" end="16102" title="Imari ware" label="Imari porcelain"/>
<link wikidata="Q18693391" start="16442" end="16458" title="Imperial Council (Ottoman Empire)" label="Imperial Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q199633" start="17115" end="17124" title="Selim III" label="Selim III"/>
<link wikidata="Q174791" start="17129" end="17138" title="Mahmud II" label="Mahmud II"/>
<link wikidata="Q122960" start="17279" end="17285" title="rococo" label="rococo"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17929" end="17938" title="Divanhane" label="Divanhane"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17995" end="18006" title="Divan Court" label="Divan Court"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18446" end="18459" title="Kütahya tiles" label="Kütahya tiles"/>
<link wikidata="Q754089" start="18480" end="18493" title="Valide sultan" label="Valide sultan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7310451" start="18782" end="18806" title="Reis ül-Küttab" label="Celalzade Mustafa Çelebi"/>
<link wikidata="Q4692" start="19624" end="19635" title="Renaissance" label="Renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q264649" start="19656" end="19665" title="Palladian architecture" label="Palladian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2932927" start="20385" end="20391" title="kaftan" label="kaftan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7126153" start="21187" end="21202" title="Palace Basilica" label="Palace Basilica"/>
<link wikidata="Q7109978" start="21948" end="21963" title="Ottoman weapons" label="Ottoman weapons"/>
<link wikidata="Q8575586" start="22030" end="22037" title="Umayyad" label="Umayyad"/>
<link wikidata="Q12536" start="22042" end="22049" title="Abbasid" label="Abbasid"/>
<link wikidata="Q947784" start="22069" end="22075" title="Mamluk" label="Mamluk"/>
<link wikidata="Q2670172" start="22427" end="22434" title="Enderûn" label="Enderûn"/>
<link wikidata="Q9168" start="22471" end="22478" title="Persian language" label="Persian"/>
<link wikidata="Q20988321" start="22563" end="22568" title="Birûn" label="Birûn"/>
<link wikidata="Q9168" start="22607" end="22614" title="Persian language" label="Persian"/>
<link wikidata="Q199484" start="23106" end="23117" title="Mustafa III" label="Mustafa III"/>
<link wikidata="Q188219" start="23188" end="23208" title="Qur&amp;#x27;anic verses" label="Qur&amp;#x27;anic verses"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="23560" end="23573" title="Bayram throne" label="Bayram throne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1567001" start="23871" end="23887" title="Bâbüssaâde Ağası" label="Bâbüssaâde Ağası"/>
<link wikidata="Q9458" start="24110" end="24118" title="Muhammad" label="Muhammad"/>
<link wikidata="Q1797528" start="24528" end="24533" title="Ottoman Imperial Harem" label="harem"/>
<link wikidata="Q199482" start="24553" end="24562" title="Ahmed III" label="Ahmed III"/>
<link wikidata="Q393436" start="24628" end="24631" title="Agha (Ottoman Empire)" label="Ağa"/>
<link wikidata="Q12681" start="24735" end="24746" title="calligraphy" label="calligraphy"/>
<link wikidata="Q163972" start="25437" end="25441" title="eave" label="eave"/>
<link wikidata="Q199482" start="25748" end="25757" title="Ahmed III" label="Ahmed III"/>
<link wikidata="Q174772" start="25828" end="25840" title="Abdülmecid I" label="Abdülmecid I"/>
<link wikidata="Q2296251" start="25949" end="25980" title="Cornelis de Schepper" label="Cornelius Duplicius de Schepper"/>
<link wikidata="Q273639" start="27026" end="27033" title="besmele" label="besmele"/>
<link wikidata="Q174762" start="28225" end="28233" title="Murad IV" label="Murad IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q186637" start="29109" end="29115" title="Arcade (architecture)" label="arcade"/>
<link wikidata="Q79" start="29282" end="29287" title="Egypt" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q494660" start="29301" end="29308" title="Selim I" label="Selim I"/>
<link wikidata="Q210077" start="29364" end="29374" title="baptistery" label="baptistery"/>
<link wikidata="Q199484" start="29753" end="29764" title="Mustafa III" label="Mustafa III"/>
<link wikidata="Q659631" start="29788" end="29800" title="coat of mail" label="coat of mail"/>
<link wikidata="Q174762" start="29927" end="29935" title="Murad IV" label="Murad IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q661140" start="30367" end="30375" title="scabbard" label="scabbard"/>
<link wikidata="Q199481" start="30433" end="30441" title="Mahmud I" label="Mahmud I"/>
<link wikidata="Q192868" start="30467" end="30477" title="Nader Shah" label="Nader Shah"/>
<link wikidata="Q1516287" start="30697" end="30704" title="Topkapi (film)" label="Topkapi"/>
<link wikidata="Q114749" start="30773" end="30780" title="Ahmed I" label="Ahmed I"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="30829" end="30849" title="Sedekhar Mehmed Agha" label="Sedekhar Mehmed Agha"/>
<link wikidata="Q335571" start="30861" end="30870" title="baldachin" label="baldachin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2849494" start="30956" end="30964" title="aigrette" label="aigrette"/>
<link wikidata="Q175089" start="31045" end="31049" title="jade" label="jade"/>
<link wikidata="Q40787" start="31100" end="31121" title="Nicholas II of Russia" label="Nicholas II of Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1841554" start="31177" end="31202" title="Spoonmaker&amp;#x27;s Diamond" label="Spoonmaker&amp;#x27;s Diamond"/>
<link wikidata="Q517" start="31624" end="31642" title="Napoleon Bonaparte" label="Napoleon Bonaparte"/>
<link wikidata="Q151995" start="31657" end="31673" title="Letizia Ramolino" label="Letizia Ramolino"/>
<link wikidata="Q29466" start="31835" end="31840" title="Kaaba" label="Kaaba"/>
<link wikidata="Q5806" start="31861" end="31866" title="Mecca" label="Mecca"/>
<link wikidata="Q179911" start="32010" end="32020" title="tourmaline" label="tourmaline"/>
<link wikidata="Q40662" start="32460" end="32476" title="John the Baptist" label="John the Baptist"/>
<link wikidata="Q12681" start="32966" end="32979" title="Calligraphy" label="calligraphies"/>
<link wikidata="Q428" start="33047" end="33058" title="Qur&amp;#x27;an" label="Qur&amp;#x27;an"/>
<link wikidata="Q29647" start="33119" end="33124" title="Kufic" label="Kufic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1845" start="33137" end="33142" title="Bible" label="Bible"/>
<link wikidata="Q13955" start="33176" end="33182" title="Arabic" label="Arabic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128599" start="33227" end="33242" title="Piri Reis map" label="first world map"/>
<link wikidata="Q217915" start="33266" end="33275" title="Piri Reis" label="Piri Reis"/>
<link wikidata="Q155" start="33396" end="33402" title="Brazil" label="Brazil"/>
<link wikidata="Q290407" start="33661" end="33676" title="Gentile Bellini" label="Gentile Bellini"/>
<link wikidata="Q22909152" start="33984" end="33996" title="Süleymanname" label="Süleymanname"/>
<link wikidata="Q199482" start="34469" end="34478" title="Ahmed III" label="Ahmed III"/>
<link wikidata="Q2696793" start="35218" end="35229" title="İznik tiles" label="İznik tiles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1343901" start="35398" end="35410" title="Tulip period" label="Tulip period"/>
<link wikidata="Q34178" start="35611" end="35619" title="theology" label="theology"/>
<link wikidata="Q7824891" start="36001" end="36019" title="Topkapi manuscript" label="Topkapi manuscript"/>
<link wikidata="Q37731" start="36081" end="36097" title="Uthman Ibn Affan" label="Uthman Ibn Affan"/>
<link wikidata="Q443676" start="37702" end="37708" title="minbar" label="minbar"/>
<link wikidata="Q174791" start="38712" end="38721" title="Mahmud II" label="Mahmud II"/>
<link wikidata="Q189977" start="38814" end="38825" title="family tree" label="family tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q1334583" start="39025" end="39038" title="Sacred Relics (Topkapı Palace)" label="Sacred Relics"/>
<link wikidata="Q159934" start="39190" end="39199" title="Murad III" label="Murad III"/>
<link wikidata="Q187616" start="39459" end="39464" title="relic" label="relic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1334583" start="39485" end="39502" title="the Sacred Trusts" label="the Sacred Trusts"/>
<link wikidata="Q131401" start="39586" end="39592" title="Caliph" label="Caliph"/>
<link wikidata="Q2893333" start="39599" end="39613" title="Staff of Moses" label="Staff of Moses"/>
<link wikidata="Q145746" start="39629" end="39635" title="Joseph (Hebrew Bible)" label="Joseph"/>
<link wikidata="Q41662" start="39770" end="39777" title="Ramadan" label="Ramadan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1644573" start="39939" end="39949" title="pilgrimage" label="pilgrimage"/>
<link wikidata="Q41127" start="40166" end="40174" title="Poseidon" label="Poseidon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1797528" start="40487" end="40501" title="Imperial Harem" label="Imperial Harem"/>
<link wikidata="Q754089" start="40688" end="40701" title="Valide sultan" label="Valide sultan"/>
<link wikidata="Q96197547" start="40707" end="40716" title="concubinage in Islam" label="concubine"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="41218" end="41224" title="Eunuch (court official)#Ottoman Empire" label="eunuch"/>
<link wikidata="Q16896780" start="41257" end="41273" title="Darüssaade Ağası" label="Darüssaade Ağası"/>
<link wikidata="Q199481" start="42216" end="42224" title="Mahmud I" label="Mahmud I"/>
<link wikidata="Q199825" start="42229" end="42238" title="Osman III" label="Osman III"/>
<link wikidata="Q108760735" start="42262" end="42277" title="Ottoman Baroque" label="Ottoman Baroque"/>
<link wikidata="Q705914" start="42695" end="42699" title="deed" label="deed"/>
<link wikidata="Q188894" start="43529" end="43536" title="Kütahya" label="Kütahya"/>
<link wikidata="Q170514" start="43927" end="43936" title="Mehmed IV" label="Mehmed IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q622630" start="44687" end="44696" title="odalisque" label="odalisque"/>
<link wikidata="Q199830" start="45654" end="45664" title="Mustafa IV" label="Mustafa IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q179839" start="48133" end="48144" title="Golden Horn" label="Golden Horn"/>
<link wikidata="Q5806" start="49833" end="49838" title="Mecca" label="Mecca"/>
<link wikidata="Q35484" start="49842" end="49848" title="Medina" label="Medina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026403" start="50739" end="50748" title="caldarium" label="caldarium"/>
<link wikidata="Q601970" start="50752" end="50762" title="tepidarium" label="tepidarium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142866" start="50769" end="50780" title="frigidarium" label="frigidarium"/>
<link wikidata="Q123339" start="50858" end="50867" title="honeycomb" label="honeycomb"/>
<link wikidata="Q114749" start="51365" end="51372" title="Ahmed I" label="Ahmed I"/>
<link wikidata="Q80541" start="51399" end="51418" title="Sultan Ahmed Mosque" label="Sultan Ahmed Mosque"/>
<link wikidata="Q1184151" start="52373" end="52382" title="Delftware" label="Delftware"/>
<link wikidata="Q2116707" start="52398" end="52412" title="Venetian glass" label="Venetian glass"/>
<link wikidata="Q2677" start="52692" end="52713" title="Wilhelm II of Germany" label="Wilhelm II of Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q9439" start="52752" end="52760" title="Queen Victoria" label="Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q159934" start="53398" end="53407" title="Murat III" label="Murat III"/>
<link wikidata="Q186599" start="54031" end="54040" title="Arabesque (Islamic art)" label="arabesque"/>
<link wikidata="Q215865" start="56596" end="56601" title="nacre" label="nacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q832266" start="56602" end="56610" title="intarsia" label="intarsia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1721042" start="56904" end="56909" title="kafes" label="kafes"/>
<link wikidata="Q51614" start="57084" end="57092" title="Anatolia" label="Anatolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1363025" start="59913" end="59921" title="aviary" label="aviaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q693369" start="60163" end="60168" title="kiosk" label="kiosk"/>
<link wikidata="Q168776" start="60384" end="60393" title="Ibrahim of the Ottoman Empire" label="Ibrahim I"/>
<link wikidata="Q83345" start="60507" end="60519" title="circumcision" label="circumcision"/>
<link wikidata="Q432" start="60572" end="60577" title="Islam" label="Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q174762" start="61711" end="61719" title="Murat IV" label="Murat IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q1953" start="61891" end="61898" title="Yerevan" label="Yerevan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1530" start="61903" end="61910" title="Baghdad" label="Baghdad"/>
<link wikidata="Q215865" start="62060" end="62065" title="nacre" label="nacre"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="62066" end="62074" title=":wikt:tessera" label="tesserae"/>
<link wikidata="Q636232" start="62108" end="62122" title="four-iwan plan" label="four-iwan plan"/>
<link wikidata="Q337238" start="62911" end="62919" title="Porphyry (geology)" label="porphyry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1223325" start="62924" end="62936" title="verd antique" label="verd antique"/>
<link wikidata="Q7742" start="63674" end="63693" title="Louis XIV of France" label="Louis XIV of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q577401" start="64217" end="64222" title="iftar" label="iftar"/>
<link wikidata="Q41662" start="64275" end="64282" title="ramadan" label="ramadan"/>
<link wikidata="Q816265" start="64764" end="64773" title="belvedere (structure)" label="belvedere"/>
<link wikidata="Q583628" start="68526" end="68539" title="Sarkis Balyan" label="Sarkis Balyan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2537632" start="68561" end="68569" title="Eclecticism in art" label="eclectic"/>
<link wikidata="Q9682" start="68853" end="68887" title="Elizabeth II of the United Kingdom" label="Elizabeth II of the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q165421" start="68900" end="68914" title="Jackie Kennedy" label="Jackie Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q9588" start="68926" end="68939" title="Richard Nixon" label="Richard Nixon"/>
<link wikidata="Q36107" start="68951" end="68963" title="Muhammad Ali" label="Mohammed Ali"/>
<link wikidata="Q3294735" start="69652" end="69663" title="Tiled Kiosk" label="Tiled Kiosk"/>
<link wikidata="Q636978" start="69795" end="69823" title="Istanbul Archaeology Museums" label="Istanbul Archaeology Museums"/>
<link wikidata="Q7501299" start="69940" end="69951" title="Shore Kiosk" label="Shore Kiosk"/>
<link wikidata="Q116701696" start="69953" end="69964" title="Pearl Kiosk" label="Pearl Kiosk"/>
<link wikidata="Q6755196" start="69966" end="69978" title="Marble Kiosk" label="Marble Kiosk"/>
<link wikidata="Q4867763" start="69987" end="70011" title="Basketmakers&amp;#x27; Kiosk" label="Basketmakers&amp;#x27; Kiosk"/>
<link wikidata="Q800974" start="70135" end="70158" title="Sirkeci Station" label="Sirkeci railway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q1560106" start="70313" end="70325" title="Gülhane Park" label="Gülhane Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q7247329" start="70481" end="70497" title="Procession Kiosk" label="Procession Kiosk"/>
<link wikidata="Q764" start="70598" end="70604" title="fungus" label="fungus"/>
<link wikidata="Q59798" start="70820" end="70828" title="fig tree" label="fig tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q222958" start="70885" end="70892" title="grafted" label="grafted"/>
<link wikidata="Q367449" start="71275" end="71296" title="1999 İzmit earthquake" label="1999 İzmit earthquake"/>
<link wikidata="Q44220" start="71665" end="71687" title="Anders Behring Breivik" label="Anders Behring Breivik"/>
<link wikidata="Q6487" start="72260" end="72267" title="Antalya" label="Antalya"/>
<link wikidata="Q274141" start="72407" end="72424" title="Dolmabahçe Palace" label="Dolmabahçe Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q911734" start="72495" end="72508" title="Yıldız Palace" label="Yıldız Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q527449" start="72553" end="72573" title="Ottoman architecture" label="Ottoman architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q3141882" start="72576" end="72616" title="State organisation of the Ottoman Empire" label="State organisation of the Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q729125" start="72619" end="72649" title="Military of the Ottoman Empire" label="Military of the Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q21431157" start="72787" end="72810" title="Grove Dictionary of Art" label="Grove Dictionary of Art"/>
<link wikidata="Q401825" start="72966" end="72977" title="Ahmet Ertuğ" label="Ahmet Ertuğ"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="252535" wikidata="Q963107" url="?curid=252535" title="Herbert Howells">
<text>Herbert Norman Howells (17 October 1892 – 23 February 1983) was an English composer, organist, and teacher, most famous for his large output of Anglican church music.

==Life==

===Background and early education===

Howells was born in Lydney, Gloucestershire, the youngest of six children of Oliver Howells, a plumber, painter, decorator and builder, and his wife Elizabeth. His father played the organ at the local Baptist church, and Herbert showed early musical promise, first deputising for his father, and then moving at the age of eleven to the local Church of England parish church as choirboy and unofficial deputy organist.

The Howells family&#x27;s risky financial situation came to a head when Oliver filed for bankruptcy in September 1904, when Herbert was nearly 12. This was a deep humiliation in a small community at the time and one from which Howells never fully recovered. Financially assisted by a member of the family of Charles Bathurst, 1st Viscount Bledisloe, who had taken an interest in the budding musician, Howells began music lessons in 1905 with Herbert Brewer, the organist of Gloucester Cathedral, and at sixteen became his articled pupil at the Cathedral alongside Ivor Novello and Ivor Gurney. Howells and Gurney became close friends, going on long walks through the Gloucestershire countryside discussing their shared love of music and English literature.

Another formative experience for the young Howells was the premiere in September 1910 at the Gloucester Three Choirs Festival of Ralph Vaughan Williams&#x27; &quot;Fantasia on a Theme by Thomas Tallis&quot;. Howells related in later years how Vaughan Williams sat next to him for the remainder of the concert and shared his score of Edward Elgar&#x27;s &quot;The Dream of Gerontius&quot; with the awestruck aspiring composer. Both Vaughan Williams and the Tudor composers (including Tallis) profoundly influenced Howells&#x27; work.

===Study at the Royal College of Music===
In 1912, following the example of Ivor Gurney, Howells moved to London to study at the Royal College of Music, where his teachers included Charles Villiers Stanford, Hubert Parry and Charles Wood. Among Howells&#x27; contemporaries in the student body were Gurney, Arthur Bliss and Arthur Benjamin.

Howells blossomed in what he considered the &quot;cosy family&quot; atmosphere of the College, and his &quot;Mass in the Dorian Mode&quot; was performed at Westminster Cathedral under R. R. Terry within weeks of his arrival. For the most part, however, his music at this time was orchestral; works included a piano concerto, withdrawn after its first performance, a light orchestral suite, &quot;The B&#x27;s&quot;, portraying three of his friends at the college (Arthur Bliss, Arthur Benjamin, and Francis Purcell &quot;Bunny&quot; Warren), and the &quot;Three Dances&quot; for violin and orchestra. More typical of the works with which Howells was later associated were his earliest important compositions for organ, the first set of &quot;Psalm Preludes&quot; (1915–16) and the first of the op. 17 &quot;Rhapsodies&quot;.

Howells&#x27; promise was imperilled in 1915 when he was diagnosed with Graves&#x27; disease and given six months to live. His poor health prevented him from being conscripted in World War I, arguably preserving him from the worse fate awaiting Gurney and others of his friends and contemporaries. At St Thomas&#x27; Hospital he was given the previously untried radium injections in the neck, administered twice a week over a period of two years. For much of this time Howells travelled between London for treatment and Lydney where he was nursed by his mother. He was nonetheless still able to compose and in 1916 produced the first work of his maturity. The Piano Quartet in A minor, dedicated to &quot;the hill at Chosen and Ivor Gurney who knows it&quot; was in the following year one of the first works published under the auspices of the Carnegie United Kingdom Trust. In the following year Howells became assistant organist at Salisbury Cathedral, but held the post for only a few months, finding the repeated journeys to London for treatment too difficult. Friends then arranged for a grant from the Carnegie Trust, which paid for Howells to assist R. R. Terry in editing the Latin Tudor repertoire that Terry and his choir were reviving at Westminster Cathedral. The work was to lead to a multi-volume edition of &quot;Tudor Church Music&quot; by Oxford University Press in the 1920s. It provided Howells with a comfortable income and enabled him to absorb the English Renaissance style which he loved and would evoke in his own music. His first significant works for choir, the &quot;Three Carol-Anthems&quot; (&quot;Here is the Little Door&quot;, &quot;A Spotless Rose&quot; and &quot;Sing Lullaby&quot;) were written around this time.

===Marriage and teaching===
In 1920 Howells married Dorothy Eveline Goozee (1891–1975), informally adopted daughter of John and Alma Dawe. Dorothy was a singer whom he had met in 1911 when deputising as her accompanist. The marriage endured despite Howells&#x27; frequent infidelities, and produced two children, Ursula (1922–2005), later an actress, and Michael (1926–1935).

In the same year he joined the staff of the Royal College of Music, where he was to remain until 1979. Among his pupils were Robert Simpson, Gordon Jacob, James Bernard, Paul Spicer, Madeleine Dring, and Imogen Holst. The post at the RCM, which from 1925 he combined with the position of Director of Music at St Paul&#x27;s Girls&#x27; School, and frequent work as a competition adjudicator, was to reduce the amount of time he could devote to composition; but he continued to write orchestral and chamber music, including the string quartet &quot;In Gloucestershire&quot; (originally written 1916, but rewritten in whole or in part several times and not reaching its final form until the 1930s), the overture &quot;Merry Eye&quot; (1920) and the second Piano Concerto (1925). The first performance of the last named work occasioned a demonstration in the concert hall from a hostile critic. Howells, always over-sensitive to criticism, withdrew the work and produced few significant compositions for several years. Howells&#x27; friend and fellow composer, Martin Sumpter, encouraged this temporary hiatus from composing large-scale works. One exception was &quot;Lambert&#x27;s Clavichord&quot; (1928), a rare example of a composition by a 20th-century composer for that instrument. It was inspired by a clavichord lent to Howells by his friend Herbert Lambert, an instrument maker and photographer based in Bath. Several other major compositions written around this time, however, remained unperformed, notably an &quot;a capella Requiem&quot; to English words written in 1932, and a choral work, &quot;A Kent Yeoman&#x27;s Wooing Song&quot;, written the following year.

===Family tragedy and the war===
In September 1935 Howells&#x27; nine-year-old son Michael contracted polio during a family holiday, dying in London three days later. Michael was buried in the churchyard of St Matthew&#x27;s Church in Twigworth, Gloucestershire.

Howells was deeply affected and continued to commemorate the event until the end of his life. At the suggestion of his daughter Ursula he sought to channel his grief into music, and over the next three years composed much of the large-scale choral work which was eventually to become &quot;Hymnus Paradisi&quot;, drawing on material from the still unpublished &quot;Requiem&quot; of 1932. This remained, in Howells&#x27; words, &quot;a personal, almost secret document&quot; until 1950. Other commemorative works written around this time include the &quot;Concerto for Strings&quot; (written in 1938), the slow movement of which is in joint memory of Michael and Edward Elgar, and the unfinished &quot;Cello Concerto&quot;, on which Howells had been working at the time of the boy&#x27;s death and which he found himself unable to complete. &quot;A Sequence for St Michael&quot; and the motet &quot;Take Him, Earth, for Cherishing&quot; have also been associated with Howells&#x27;s grief for Michael, as have two of Howells&#x27;s hymn tunes, the best-known of which is his tune for the hymn &quot;All My Hope on God is Founded&quot; by Robert Bridges (&quot;A Hymn Tune for Charterhouse&quot;), which was renamed &quot;Michael&quot; for its publication in &quot;The Clarendon Hymn Book&quot; in 1936. Howells also wrote the tune &quot;Twigworth&quot; (1968) for the hymn &quot;God is love, let heaven adore him&quot;. To a greater or lesser extent, however, much of Howells&#x27; subsequent music shows the influence of this loss.

From the late 1930s, Howells turned increasingly to choral and organ music, composing a second series of &quot;Psalm Preludes&quot; followed by a set of &quot;Six Pieces&quot; (begun 1939), of which the third, &quot;Master Tallis&#x27;s Testament&quot;, a particular favourite of the composer&#x27;s, recalled his formative experience of Vaughan Williams&#x27; &quot;Tallis Fantasia&quot;. A set of &quot;Four Anthems&quot;, originally titled &quot;In Time of War&quot; and including the popular &quot;O Pray for the Peace of Jerusalem&quot; and &quot;Like as the Hart&quot;, followed in early 1941. In August of that year, Howells was invited to serve as acting organist of St John&#x27;s College, Cambridge, replacing Robin Orr who was away on active service in World War II. Howells&#x27; association with Cambridge, which lasted until the end of the war in 1945, was a productive and happy period for him, and led directly to the works for which he is most remembered. He later recalled being challenged by the Dean of King&#x27;s College, Eric Milner-White, to write a set of canticles for the choir. The result was the Te Deum and Jubilate of the service known as &quot;Collegium Regale&quot;, performed in 1944, followed the next year by the Magnificat and Nunc Dimittis, and completed in 1956 by the &quot;Office of Holy Communion&quot;. &quot;Collegium Regale&quot;, the &quot;Gloucester Service&quot; (for Gloucester Cathedral, 1946) and the &quot;St Paul&#x27;s Service&quot; (for St Paul&#x27;s Cathedral, 1951) remain the best known and most admired of the many settings of the Anglican liturgy written by Howells for particular choirs and buildings over the next thirty years.

===&quot;Hymnus Paradisi&quot; and after===

In 1949, the organist Herbert Sumsion asked Howells if he had anything that could be performed at the 1950 Three Choirs Festival to be held at Gloucester. Howells decided to bring out the incomplete choral work he had written in his son Michael&#x27;s memory between 1936 and 1938. (In later years Howells claimed it was at the urging of Vaughan Williams that the piece was disinterred). The work, retitled &quot;Hymnus Paradisi&quot; at Sumsion&#x27;s suggestion, was completed and orchestrated in time for its first performance on 7 September 1950, the day after the 15th anniversary of Michael&#x27;s death. It was Howells&#x27; greatest public and critical success, and for many years was his best known work. Shorter choral works written around this time include the carol-anthem &quot;Long long ago&quot; (1951), the introit &quot;Behold O God our Defender&quot; for the coronation of Queen Elizabeth II in 1953, and &quot;The House of the Mind&quot; (1954) for chorus and strings.

Though not an orthodox Christian, Howells was chiefly identified with the composition of religious music. His follow-up work to the &quot;Hymnus Paradisi&quot; was an extended setting of the Latin Mass for soloists, chorus and orchestra, named &quot;Missa Sabrinensis&quot; after the River Severn and first performed in Worcester Cathedral as part of the Three Choirs Festival in 1954. It was considered a disappointment after the success of the earlier work, and its extreme complexity and difficulty has prevented it becoming widely known. Howells followed it with &quot;An English Mass&quot; (1956), a smaller-scale setting to English words for chorus, strings and organ. His final large-scale choral work was the &quot;Stabat Mater&quot;, setting a text whose subsidiary theme of a parent mourning a child had obvious personal significance. He began it in 1959 but found it difficult to complete; it was not performed until 1965. The motet &quot;Take Him, Earth, For Cherishing&quot;, a posthumous tribute to President John F. Kennedy, was written in late spring of 1964. It premiered as part of a 22 November 1964 Canadian tribute to Kennedy at Washington&#x27;s National Gallery of Art sung by the Choir of St George&#x27;s Cathedral, Kingston, Ontario, Canada, under the direction of George N. Maybee. Maybee brought the St George&#x27;s choir to England in September 1965, and they performed the piece at King&#x27;s College, Cambridge with Howells in attendance. &quot;Take Him, Earth&quot; is described by Howells&#x27; pupil Paul Spicer as &quot;a classic of twentieth century choral music&quot; and &quot;an undoubted masterpiece&quot;.

Howells continued to compose until his late 80s, but wrote nothing further on the scale of the &quot;Stabat Mater&quot;. One of the last works to appear in his lifetime was the &quot;Requiem&quot;, edited for performance from his manuscripts in 1980 and published the following year, almost fifty years after its composition.
He died on 23 February 1983 at the age of 90, in a nursing home in Putney, one day after his good friend Sir Adrian Boult, and his ashes were interred in Westminster Abbey.

==Honours and legacy==
Howells was appointed Commander of the Order of the British Empire in 1953 and Member of the Order of the Companions of Honour in 1972. His academic awards included an honorary doctorate from the University of Cambridge, awarded in 1961. A &quot;Herbert Howells Society&quot;, started by his daughter Ursula in 1987, and a &quot;Herbert Howells Trust&quot;, founded after her death in 2005, exist to promote his works.

There are several portraits of Howells. A 1974 oil painting by Leonard Boden hangs in the collection of the Royal College of Music, and in the National Portrait Gallery, London there is a chalk sketch by Boden, an oil portrait by Howard James Morgan and photographic portraits by Herbert Lambert, Clive Barda and Elliott &amp; Fry. 
The cellist Julian Lloyd Webber was Howells&#x27; godson.

==Compositions==

Howells composed a range of orchestral, choral and chamber works. He is best known for his sacred choral music, notably his settings of services for Mattins (morning service with , and ) and choral Evensong (evening service with and ), many of which are dedicated to specific places of worship such as Gloucester Cathedral (&quot;Gloucester Service&quot;), King&#x27;s College, Cambridge (&quot;Collegium Regale&quot;) and St Paul&#x27;s Cathedral (&quot;St Paul&#x27;s Service&quot;) He also composed several hymn tunes and a Requiem.

==Notes==
==References==
* 
* 
* 
* 

==External links==

* Herbert Howells Trust
* &quot;Note: compositions by Howells remain in copyright in most jurisdictions, but those published more than 95 years ago are considered to be public domain music in the United States&quot;</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q963107" start="0" end="22" title="Herbert Howells" label="Herbert Norman Howells"/>
<link wikidata="Q4763552" start="144" end="165" title="Anglican church music" label="Anglican church music"/>
<link wikidata="Q540012" start="236" end="242" title="Lydney" label="Lydney"/>
<link wikidata="Q93191" start="417" end="424" title="Baptists" label="Baptist"/>
<link wikidata="Q82708" start="558" end="575" title="Church of England" label="Church of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q5075473" start="943" end="983" title="Charles Bathurst, 1st Viscount Bledisloe" label="Charles Bathurst, 1st Viscount Bledisloe"/>
<link wikidata="Q3133437" start="1077" end="1091" title="Herbert Brewer" label="Herbert Brewer"/>
<link wikidata="Q262500" start="1109" end="1129" title="Gloucester Cathedral" label="Gloucester Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q436693" start="1199" end="1211" title="Ivor Novello" label="Ivor Novello"/>
<link wikidata="Q323048" start="1216" end="1227" title="Ivor Gurney" label="Ivor Gurney"/>
<link wikidata="Q3525932" start="1497" end="1518" title="Three Choirs Festival" label="Three Choirs Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q207947" start="1522" end="1544" title="Ralph Vaughan Williams" label="Ralph Vaughan Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q2608920" start="1557" end="1593" title="Fantasia on a Theme by Thomas Tallis" label="Fantasia on a Theme by Thomas Tallis"/>
<link wikidata="Q179631" start="1726" end="1738" title="Edward Elgar" label="Edward Elgar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2065731" start="1752" end="1774" title="The Dream of Gerontius" label="The Dream of Gerontius"/>
<link wikidata="Q207789" start="1876" end="1882" title="Thomas Tallis" label="Tallis"/>
<link wikidata="Q304985" start="2056" end="2078" title="Royal College of Music" label="Royal College of Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q368264" start="2108" end="2133" title="Charles Villiers Stanford" label="Charles Villiers Stanford"/>
<link wikidata="Q354250" start="2135" end="2147" title="Hubert Parry" label="Hubert Parry"/>
<link wikidata="Q246913" start="2152" end="2164" title="Charles Wood (composer)" label="Charles Wood"/>
<link wikidata="Q508953" start="2234" end="2246" title="Arthur Bliss" label="Arthur Bliss"/>
<link wikidata="Q177229" start="2251" end="2266" title="Arthur Benjamin" label="Arthur Benjamin"/>
<link wikidata="Q739364" start="2425" end="2446" title="Westminster Cathedral" label="Westminster Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q7328780" start="2453" end="2464" title="Richard Runciman Terry" label="R. R. Terry"/>
<link wikidata="Q125580654" start="2768" end="2809" title="Francis Purcell Warren" label="Francis Purcell &amp;quot;Bunny&amp;quot; Warren)"/>
<link wikidata="Q16483" start="3167" end="3187" title="Graves&amp;#x27; disease" label="Graves&amp;#x27; disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="3274" end="3285" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143779" start="3396" end="3420" title="St Thomas&amp;#x27; Hospital" label="St Thomas&amp;#x27; Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128" start="3457" end="3463" title="radium" label="radium"/>
<link wikidata="Q5105340" start="3812" end="3818" title="Chosen Hill, Gloucestershire" label="Chosen"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043979" start="3939" end="3968" title="Carnegie United Kingdom Trust" label="Carnegie United Kingdom Trust"/>
<link wikidata="Q390150" start="4029" end="4048" title="Salisbury Cathedral" label="Salisbury Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q7328780" start="4252" end="4263" title="Richard Terry (musicologist)" label="R. R. Terry"/>
<link wikidata="Q739364" start="4344" end="4365" title="Westminster Cathedral" label="Westminster Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q7901249" start="5156" end="5162" title="Ursula Howells" label="Ursula"/>
<link wikidata="Q1936004" start="5345" end="5359" title="Robert Simpson (composer)" label="Robert Simpson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1350215" start="5361" end="5373" title="Gordon Jacob" label="Gordon Jacob"/>
<link wikidata="Q540969" start="5375" end="5388" title="James Bernard (composer)" label="James Bernard"/>
<link wikidata="Q7153728" start="5390" end="5401" title="Paul Spicer (musician)" label="Paul Spicer"/>
<link wikidata="Q11340661" start="5403" end="5418" title="Madeleine Dring" label="Madeleine Dring"/>
<link wikidata="Q444380" start="5424" end="5436" title="Imogen Holst" label="Imogen Holst"/>
<link wikidata="Q4638918" start="5529" end="5562" title="St Paul&amp;#x27;s Girls&amp;#x27; School" label="St Paul&amp;#x27;s Girls&amp;#x27; School"/>
<link wikidata="Q191823" start="6400" end="6410" title="Clavichord" label="Clavichord"/>
<link wikidata="Q5734890" start="6567" end="6582" title="Herbert Lambert" label="Herbert Lambert"/>
<link wikidata="Q22889" start="6630" end="6634" title="Bath, Somerset" label="Bath"/>
<link wikidata="Q111913654" start="6753" end="6760" title="Requiem (Howells)" label="Requiem"/>
<link wikidata="Q12195" start="6997" end="7002" title="Poliomyelitis" label="polio"/>
<link wikidata="Q664855" start="7130" end="7139" title="Twigworth" label="Twigworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q179631" start="7822" end="7834" title="Edward Elgar" label="Edward Elgar"/>
<link wikidata="Q5956785" start="8191" end="8200" title="hymn tune" label="hymn tune"/>
<link wikidata="Q4729106" start="8258" end="8287" title="All My Hope on God is Founded" label="All My Hope on God is Founded"/>
<link wikidata="Q925991" start="8297" end="8311" title="Robert Bridges" label="Robert Bridges"/>
<link wikidata="Q691283" start="9368" end="9401" title="St John&amp;#x27;s College, Cambridge" label="St John&amp;#x27;s College, Cambridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q783883" start="9413" end="9422" title="Robin Orr" label="Robin Orr"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="9457" end="9469" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q924289" start="9716" end="9735" title="King&amp;#x27;s College, Cambridge" label="King&amp;#x27;s College"/>
<link wikidata="Q5387107" start="9737" end="9754" title="Eric Milner-White" label="Eric Milner-White"/>
<link wikidata="Q1033831" start="9774" end="9782" title="canticle" label="canticle"/>
<link wikidata="Q743376" start="9818" end="9825" title="Te Deum" label="Te Deum"/>
<link wikidata="Q3068829" start="9830" end="9838" title="Psalm 100" label="Jubilate"/>
<link wikidata="Q2274182" start="9846" end="9853" title="service (music)" label="service"/>
<link wikidata="Q85753337" start="9869" end="9885" title="Collegium Regale (Howells)" label="Collegium Regale"/>
<link wikidata="Q200809" start="9942" end="9952" title="Magnificat" label="Magnificat"/>
<link wikidata="Q725548" start="9957" end="9970" title="Nunc Dimittis" label="Nunc Dimittis"/>
<link wikidata="Q48699702" start="10073" end="10103" title="Magnificat and Nunc dimittis for Gloucester Cathedral" label="&amp;quot;Gloucester Service&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q262500" start="10109" end="10129" title="Gloucester Cathedral" label="Gloucester Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q42291501" start="10145" end="10179" title="Magnificat and Nunc dimittis for St Paul&amp;#x27;s Cathedral" label="&amp;quot;St Paul&amp;#x27;s Service&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q731087" start="10452" end="10467" title="Herbert Sumsion" label="Herbert Sumsion"/>
<link wikidata="Q5956895" start="10843" end="10858" title="Hymnus Paradisi" label="Hymnus Paradisi"/>
<link wikidata="Q224377" start="11253" end="11260" title="introit" label="introit"/>
<link wikidata="Q3797766" start="11307" end="11339" title="coronation of Queen Elizabeth II" label="coronation of Queen Elizabeth II"/>
<link wikidata="Q19682" start="11703" end="11715" title="River Severn" label="River Severn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1630367" start="11739" end="11758" title="Worcester Cathedral" label="Worcester Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q210080" start="12142" end="12154" title="Stabat Mater" label="Stabat Mater"/>
<link wikidata="Q7588098" start="12632" end="12658" title="St. George&amp;#x27;s Cathedral (Kingston, Ontario)" label="St George&amp;#x27;s Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q7153728" start="12955" end="12966" title="Paul Spicer (musician)" label="Paul Spicer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2465220" start="13462" end="13468" title="Putney" label="Putney"/>
<link wikidata="Q372697" start="13500" end="13516" title="Adrian Boult" label="Sir Adrian Boult"/>
<link wikidata="Q5933" start="13549" end="13566" title="Westminster Abbey" label="Westminster Abbey"/>
<link wikidata="Q14420" start="13614" end="13658" title="Commander of the Order of the British Empire" label="Commander of the Order of the British Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137694" start="13671" end="13718" title="Member of the Order of the Companions of Honour" label="Member of the Order of the Companions of Honour"/>
<link wikidata="Q35794" start="13788" end="13811" title="University of Cambridge" label="University of Cambridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q16014330" start="14075" end="14088" title="Leonard Boden" label="Leonard Boden"/>
<link wikidata="Q238587" start="14155" end="14188" title="National Portrait Gallery, London" label="National Portrait Gallery, London"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14242" end="14261" title="Howard James Morgan" label="Howard James Morgan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5734890" start="14292" end="14307" title="Herbert Lambert" label="Herbert Lambert"/>
<link wikidata="Q27889037" start="14309" end="14320" title="Clive Barda" label="Clive Barda"/>
<link wikidata="Q3502848" start="14325" end="14342" title="Elliott &amp;amp; Fry" label="Elliott &amp;amp; Fry"/>
<link wikidata="Q319434" start="14357" end="14376" title="Julian Lloyd Webber" label="Julian Lloyd Webber"/>
<link wikidata="Q65049593" start="14571" end="14578" title="Mattins" label="Mattins"/>
<link wikidata="Q1381907" start="14613" end="14628" title="choral Evensong" label="choral Evensong"/>
<link wikidata="Q262500" start="14724" end="14744" title="Gloucester Cathedral" label="Gloucester Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q48699702" start="14752" end="14770" title="Gloucester Service" label="Gloucester Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q924289" start="14779" end="14809" title="King&amp;#x27;s College, Cambridge" label="King&amp;#x27;s College, Cambridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q85753337" start="14817" end="14833" title="Collegium Regale (Howells)" label="Collegium Regale"/>
<link wikidata="Q173882" start="14845" end="14869" title="St Paul&amp;#x27;s Cathedral" label="St Paul&amp;#x27;s Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q42291501" start="14877" end="14899" title="St Paul&amp;#x27;s Service" label="St Paul&amp;#x27;s Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q5956785" start="14932" end="14941" title="hymn tune" label="hymn tune"/>
<link wikidata="Q111913654" start="14949" end="14956" title="Requiem (Howells)" label="Requiem"/>
<link wikidata="Q7257727" start="15186" end="15205" title="public domain music" label="public domain music"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="252536" wikidata="Q3354857" url="?curid=252536" title="Operation Span (deception plan)">
<text>During World War II, Operation Span was an Allied military deception operation in support of the landings in southern France in 1944. 

After the &quot;Dragoon&quot; landings, landing craft and other amphibious vessels were used to approach likely landing areas elsewhere in southern France coast and along the Italian coast. This tied down German troops and prevented their deployment against the beachhead.

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="7" end="19" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q3354857" start="21" end="35" title="Operation Span (deception plan)" label="Operation Span"/>
<link wikidata="Q2832578" start="50" end="68" title="military deception" label="military deception"/>
<link wikidata="Q221111" start="97" end="124" title="Operation Dragoon" label="landings in southern France"/>
<link wikidata="Q841751" start="176" end="189" title="landing craft" label="landing craft"/>
<link wikidata="Q4875869" start="398" end="407" title="beachhead" label="beachhead"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="252538" wikidata="Q568731" url="?curid=252538" title="Mission Dove">
<text>In World War II, Mission Dove (Allies, 1944) was the glider-borne assault conducted as part of the invasion of southern France (Operation Dragoon) on 15 August 1944. The original parachute landing, Mission Albatross comprising 396 aircraft carrying 5,600 paratroopers and 150 field guns arrived over the drop zone at 0430hrs. Fog and low cloud resulting in 600 paratroops landing 10 miles away, others were closer, but some ended up 15 miles away.

Three hundred and thirty five Waco CG-4 gliders carried the 55th Glider Infantry Battalion together with equipment to reinforce paratroopers who had already landed, came in at 1810hrs.

Dove was one of three reinforcement operations, the other two being:
* Mission Bluebird - 35 Horsa and 40 Waco CG-4 gliders mainly carrying artillery. The Horsa&#x27;s turned back because of thick fog, 33 CG-4 managed to land.
Most of the gliders returned that afternoon and managed to land.
* Mission Canary - A parachute reinforcement from 41 transports, landing from 1804hrs.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="3" end="15" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q568731" start="17" end="29" title="Mission Dove" label="Mission Dove"/>
<link wikidata="Q329888" start="31" end="37" title="Allies of World War II" label="Allies"/>
<link wikidata="Q601924" start="53" end="59" title="military glider" label="glider"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="120" end="126" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q221111" start="128" end="145" title="Operation Dragoon" label="Operation Dragoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1752671" start="479" end="488" title="Waco CG-4" label="Waco CG-4"/>
<link wikidata="Q601924" start="489" end="495" title="military glider" label="glider"/>
<link wikidata="Q749387" start="577" end="588" title="paratrooper" label="paratrooper"/>
<link wikidata="Q409210" start="728" end="733" title="Airspeed Horsa" label="Horsa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1752671" start="741" end="750" title="Waco CG-4" label="Waco CG-4"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="252539" wikidata="Q891612" url="?curid=252539" title="Raytheon BBN">
<text>Raytheon BBN (originally Bolt, Beranek and Newman, Inc.) is an American research and development company based in Cambridge, Massachusetts.

In 1966, the Franklin Institute awarded the firm the Frank P. Brown Medal, in 1999 BBN received the IEEE Corporate Innovation Recognition, and on 1 February 2013, BBN was awarded the National Medal of Technology and Innovation, the highest honors that the U.S. government bestows upon scientists, engineers and inventors, by President Barack Obama. It became a wholly owned subsidiary of Raytheon in 2009.

== History ==

BBN has its roots in an initial partnership formed on 15 October 1948 between Leo Beranek and Richard Bolt, professors at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. Bolt had won a commission to be an acoustic consultant for the new United Nations permanent headquarters to be built in New York City. Realizing the magnitude of the project at hand, Bolt had pulled in his MIT colleague Beranek for help and the partnership between the two was born. The firm, Bolt and Beranek, started out in two rented rooms on the MIT campus. Robert Newman joined the firm soon after in 1950, and the firm became Bolt Beranek Newman. Beranek remained the company&#x27;s president and chief executive officer until 1967, and Bolt was chairman until 1976.

From 1957 to 1962, J. C. R. Licklider served as vice president of engineering psychology for BBN. Foreseeing the potential to obtain federal grants for basic computer research, Licklider convinced the BBN leadership to purchase a then state-of-the-art Royal McBee LGP-30 digital computer in 1958 for US$25,000. Within a year, Ken Olsen, president of the newly formed Digital Equipment Corporation (DEC), approached BBN to test the prototype of DEC&#x27;s first computer, the PDP-1. Within one month, BBN completed its tests and recommendations of the PDP-1. BBN ultimately purchased the first PDP-1 for around US$150,000 and received the machine in November 1960.

After the PDP-1 arrived, BBN hired two of Licklider&#x27;s friends from MIT, John McCarthy and Marvin Minsky, as consultants. McCarthy had been unsuccessful in convincing MIT engineers to build time-sharing systems for computers. He had more success at BBN though, working with Ed Fredkin and Sheldon Boilen in implementing one of the first timesharing systems, the BBN Time-Sharing System. In 1962, BBN would install one such time-shared information system at Massachusetts General Hospital where doctors and nurses could create and access patients&#x27; information at various nurses&#x27; stations connected to a central computer. BBN would soon begin more research about integrating computers and medicine, hiring Bob Taylor in 1965 and MIT Lincoln Laboratory computer systems engineer Frank Heart in 1966.

As BBN began focusing on computer technology, it gained a reputation as &quot;the third university&quot; in Cambridge alongside Harvard and MIT, and its offices expanded on a site near Fresh Pond in western Cambridge. By 1968, the company had over 600 employees. By the early 1970s, BBN bought a laundromat on Moulton Street and tore it down for a new, seven-story headquarters.

In 1980, the U.S. federal government charged BBN with contracts fraud, alleging that from 1972 to 1978, BBN altered time sheets to hide overcharging the government. That year, two top financial officers plea bargained for suspended sentences and US$20,000 fines, and the company paid a US$700,000 fine.

BBN&#x27;s September 1994 celebration of the 25th anniversary of ARPANET generated much local and national news coverage from outlets including &quot;The Boston Globe&quot;, &quot;Newsweek&quot;, and National Public Radio. By that year, Heart retired from BBN after 28 years; his final position was president of the systems and technology division.

== Notable achievements ==

BBN is best known for its DARPA-sponsored research. It has made notable advances in a wide variety of fields, including acoustics, computer technologies, quantum information, and synthetic biology. In recent years, BBN has led a wide range of research and development projects, including the standardization effort for the security extension to the Border Gateway Protocol (BGPsec), mobile ad hoc networks, advanced speech recognition, the military&#x27;s Boomerang mobile shooter detection system, cognitive radio spectrum use via the DARPA XG program. In the early 2000s, BBN created the world&#x27;s first quantum key distribution network, the DARPA Quantum Network, which operated for 3 years across Cambridge and Boston, and which included the world&#x27;s first fully operational prototype of a superconducting nanowire single-photon detector. BBN also led the Global Environment for Network Innovations (GENI) project for the National Science Foundation, which ultimately built out programmable &quot;future Internet&quot; infrastructure across approximately 60 university campuses.

=== Interface Message Processor ===
In August 1968, BBN was selected by ARPA to build the Interface Message Processors (IMPs) for the ARPANET, the precursor to the modern Internet. The IMPs were the very first generation of gateways, known today as routers. Under the leadership of Frank Heart and Bob Kahn, four IMPs were produced for nearly US$1 million from September to December 1969. The first IMP was shipped to the University of California, Los Angeles in September 1969 and the second to the Stanford Research Institute a month later. The first message between the two IMPs was &quot;LO&quot; — phonetically, &quot;Hello&quot; — but the SRI host crashed before the UCLA researcher could complete typing the &quot;LOGIN&quot; command.

=== Acoustics ===
Well-known acoustics commissions include MIT&#x27;s Kresge Auditorium (1954), Tanglewood&#x27;s Koussevitzky Music Shed (1959), Lincoln Center&#x27;s Avery Fisher Hall (1962), Clowes Memorial Hall (1963) in Indianapolis, the National Gallery of Victoria (1968), the Cultural Center of the Philippines (1969), Baltimore&#x27;s Joseph Meyerhoff Symphony Hall (1978) and Louise M. Davies Symphony Hall (1979).

The architectural acoustics division of BBN faced controversy in the early 1960s with its acoustics design project for the Philharmonic Hall (now David Geffen Hall) at the Lincoln Center in New York City. Beranek and BBN&#x27;s chief architect were criticized for ignoring important acoustical principles in concert hall design. Many failed minor adjustments led the walls, balconies, and ceilings to be torn out and dumped, and a new consultant oversaw a repair that cost millions of dollars over several years. The division also produced poor results at the Louise M. Davies Symphony Hall in San Francisco. The hall&#x27;s large volume and seating capacity initially resulted in less than ideal results. Kirkegaard Associates completed acoustical renovations in 1992 at a cost of US$10 million which resulted in substantial improvement.

In the 1960s and 1970s, experts at the company examined audio tapes related to notable events in U.S. history, including the John F. Kennedy assassination Dictabelt recording, an audio recording from the 1970 Kent State shootings, and during the 1974 Watergate scandal, the tape of President Richard Nixon that had 18.5 minutes erased.

The substantial calculations required for acoustics work led to an interest, and later business opportunities, in computing. BBN was a pioneer in developing computer models of roadway and aircraft noise, and in designing noise barriers near highways. Some of this technology was used in landmark legal cases where BBN scientists were expert witnesses.

In early 2004, BBN applied its acoustics expertise to design, develop, and deliver the Boomerang shooter detection system in a little over two months to combat the sniper threat US troops faced in Operation Iraqi Freedom. The system immediately pinpoints the location of hostile fire. Since then, more than 11,000 Boomerang systems have been deployed by U.S. and allied forces.

=== Computer technologies ===
BBN bought a number of computers in the late 1950s and early 1960s, notably the first production PDP-1 from Digital Equipment Corporation, on which it implemented the BBN Time-Sharing System (1962).

Ray Tomlinson of BBN is widely credited as having invented the first person-to-person network email in 1971 and the use of the @ sign in an email address.

BBN has had a very distinguished career in natural-language understanding, ranging from speech recognition through machine translation and more recently machine understanding of the causality of events and accurate forecasts for the Intelligence Advanced Research Projects Activity (IARPA).

BBN&#x27;s education group, led by Wally Feurzeig, created the Logo programming language, conceived by BBN consultant Seymour Papert as a programming language that school-age children could learn. Other well-known BBN computer-related innovations include Interlisp programming language, the TENEX operating system, and the &quot;Colossal Cave Adventure&quot; game. BBN also is well known for its parallel computing systems, including the Pluribus, and the BBN Butterfly computers, which have been used for such tasks as warfare simulation for the U.S. Navy. BBN also developed the RS/1, RS/Explore, RS/Discover and the Cornerstone statistical software systems, and played a pioneering role in the development of today&#x27;s semantic web, including participating in the DARPA Agent Markup Language project and chairing Web Ontology Language standardization.

=== Networking technologies ===
BBN was involved in building some of the earliest computer networks, including the implementation and operation of the ARPANET and its Interface Message Processors;, as well as SATNET, PRNET, MILNET, SIMNET, the Terrestrial Wideband Network, the Defense Simulation Internet, CSNET, and NEARNET. In the course of these activities, BBN researchers invented the first link-state routing protocol.

BBN was a key participant in the creation of the Internet. It was the first organization to receive an Autonomous System Number (AS1) for network identification. ASNs are an essential identification element used for Internet Backbone Routing; lower numbers generally indicate a longer established presence on the Internet. AS1 is now operated by Level 3 Communications following their acquisition of BBN&#x27;s Genuity internet service provider. BBN registered the &quot;bbn.com&quot; domain on 24 April 1985, making it the second oldest domain name on the internet. In addition, BBN researchers participated in the development of TCP, created the Voice Funnel, an early predecessor of voice over IP, helped lead the creation of the first email security standard, Privacy Enhanced Mail (PEM), chaired development of the &quot;core&quot; Internet Protocol security suite (IPsec) standards, and performed extensive work to secure the Border Gateway Protocol (BGP).

BBN also created a series of mobile ad hoc networks starting in the 1970s with DARPA&#x27;s experimental PRNET and SURAN systems. Later BBN efforts included the networking portions of the Near-term digital radio (NTDR) and High-capacity data radio (HCDR), the Wideband Networking Software in the Joint Tactical Radio System and the Wireless Network after Next (WNaN). It also created the networking portions of the U.S. Army&#x27;s Mobile Subscriber Equipment (MSE) and Canada&#x27;s Iris Digital Communications System.


=== Notable BBNers ===
A number of well-known computer luminaries have worked at BBN, including Daniel Bobrow, Ron Brachman, John Seely Brown, Edmund Clarke, Allan Collins, William Crowther, John Curran, Chip Elliott, Wally Feurzeig, Ed Fredkin, Bob Kahn, Steve Kent, J. C. R. Licklider, John Makhoul, John McCarthy, Marvin Minsky, Dan Murphy, Severo Ornstein, Seymour Papert, Craig Partridge, Radia Perlman, Richard Pew, Oliver Selfridge, Cynthia Solomon, Warren Teitelman, Bob Thomas, Ray Tomlinson, Bill Woods, and Peiter &quot;Mudge&quot; Zatko. Former BBNer Dedre Gentner is Alice Gabrielle Twight Professor of Psychology at Northwestern University. Former board members include Jim Breyer, Anita K. Jones and Gilman Louie.

=== Spin-offs and mergers === 
* In 1971, BBN&#x27;s TELCOMP subsidiary was sold.
* In the 1970s, BBN created Telenet, Inc., to run the first public packet-switched network.
* In 1983, BBN Instruments was sold to Vibro-Meter Corp..
* In 1989, BBN&#x27;s acoustical consulting business was spun off into a new corporation, Acentech Incorporated, located across the street from BBN headquarters in Cambridge.
* In 1994, LightStream Corp., a joint venture with Ungermann-Bass, Inc. created in 1992 to manufacture asynchronous transfer mode (ATM) switches, was sold to Cisco Systems Inc. for US$120 million.
* BBN formed an early Internet service provider in 1994 as its BBN Planet division. Previously traded as &quot;BBN&quot; on the stock market, the company was purchased by GTE in 1997 as a wholly owned subsidiary. BBN Planet was joined with GTE&#x27;s national fiber network to become GTE Internetworking, &quot;powered by BBN&quot;. When GTE and Bell Atlantic merged to become Verizon in 2000, the Internet service provider division of BBN was included in assets spun off as Genuity to satisfy Federal Communications Commission (FCC) requirements, leaving behind the remainder of BBN Technologies. Genuity was later acquired out of bankruptcy by Level 3 Communications in 2003. In March 2004, Verizon sold the remainder of the company, by then known as BBNT Solutions LLC, to a group of private investors from Accel Partners, General Catalyst Partners, In-Q-Tel and BBN&#x27;s own management, making BBN an independent company for the next five years.
* In September 2009, Raytheon entered into an agreement to acquire BBN as a wholly owned subsidiary. The acquisition was completed on 29 October 2009 and the company was valued at approximately US$350 million. BBN owned the domain bbn.com, the second oldest currently registered domain name on the Internet, which ran continuously from April 1985 to mid-December 2019.
* Digital Force Technologies (DFT) of San Diego, California was a wholly owned BBN subsidiary, purchased in June 2008, and spun out in 2018.
* Former BBN employees have formed about a hundred startup companies, including Parlance Corporation and EveryZing.

== Locations and subsidiaries ==
As of 2013, Raytheon BBN maintains offices in:
* Cambridge Highlands, Cambridge, Massachusetts
* Columbia, Maryland
* St. Louis Park, Minnesota
* O&#x27;Fallon, Illinois
* Newport East, Middletown, Rhode Island near Naval Station Newport
* Rosslyn, Arlington, Virginia near Washington, D.C.

== See also ==
* Oldest registered domain names
* DARWARS, a military simulation game developed with DARPA since 2003
* George G. Robertson
* Richard E. Hayden
* Interlisp

== Notes ==
== References ==
== Bibliography ==
* 

== External links ==
* with various figures about BBN and the ARPANET, Charles Babbage Institute, University of Minnesota. Figures include the following: Vinton G. Cerf; Frank Heart; Robert E. Kahn; Leonard Kleinrock; Alexander A. McKenzie; Severo Ornstein; David C. Walden; Charles A. Zraket; and others.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q891612" start="0" end="12" title="Raytheon BBN" label="Raytheon BBN"/>
<link wikidata="Q891612" start="25" end="55" title="Raytheon BBN" label="Bolt, Beranek and Newman, Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q49111" start="114" end="138" title="Cambridge, Massachusetts" label="Cambridge, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q339484" start="154" end="172" title="Franklin Institute" label="Franklin Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q19873358" start="194" end="214" title="Frank P. Brown Medal" label="Frank P. Brown Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q15995003" start="241" end="278" title="IEEE Corporate Innovation Recognition" label="IEEE Corporate Innovation Recognition"/>
<link wikidata="Q937629" start="324" end="367" title="National Medal of Technology and Innovation" label="National Medal of Technology and Innovation"/>
<link wikidata="Q76" start="476" end="488" title="Barack Obama" label="Barack Obama"/>
<link wikidata="Q156644" start="529" end="537" title="Raytheon" label="Raytheon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344028" start="641" end="652" title="Leo Beranek" label="Leo Beranek"/>
<link wikidata="Q4014752" start="657" end="669" title="Richard Bolt" label="Richard Bolt"/>
<link wikidata="Q49108" start="689" end="726" title="Massachusetts Institute of Technology" label="Massachusetts Institute of Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="795" end="809" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q92778" start="1321" end="1339" title="J. C. R. Licklider" label="J. C. R. Licklider"/>
<link wikidata="Q7374941" start="1554" end="1565" title="Royal McBee" label="Royal McBee"/>
<link wikidata="Q6458339" start="1566" end="1572" title="LGP-30" label="LGP-30"/>
<link wikidata="Q454315" start="1628" end="1637" title="Ken Olsen" label="Ken Olsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q690079" start="1669" end="1698" title="Digital Equipment Corporation" label="Digital Equipment Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1758866" start="1777" end="1782" title="PDP-1" label="PDP-1"/>
<link wikidata="Q92739" start="2044" end="2057" title="John McCarthy (computer scientist)" label="John McCarthy"/>
<link wikidata="Q204815" start="2062" end="2075" title="Marvin Minsky" label="Marvin Minsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q913876" start="2161" end="2173" title="time-sharing" label="time-sharing"/>
<link wikidata="Q63862312" start="2333" end="2356" title="BBN Time-Sharing System" label="BBN Time-Sharing System"/>
<link wikidata="Q126412" start="2428" end="2458" title="Massachusetts General Hospital" label="Massachusetts General Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q93038" start="2685" end="2695" title="Robert Taylor (computer scientist)" label="Bob Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q3138607" start="2708" end="2730" title="MIT Lincoln Laboratory" label="MIT Lincoln Laboratory"/>
<link wikidata="Q24950965" start="2757" end="2768" title="Frank Heart" label="Frank Heart"/>
<link wikidata="Q13371" start="2907" end="2914" title="Harvard University" label="Harvard"/>
<link wikidata="Q49108" start="2919" end="2922" title="MIT" label="MIT"/>
<link wikidata="Q7331959" start="2964" end="2974" title="Fresh Pond (Cambridge, Massachusetts)" label="Fresh Pond"/>
<link wikidata="Q824451" start="3613" end="3629" title="The Boston Globe" label="The Boston Globe"/>
<link wikidata="Q188413" start="3643" end="3651" title="Newsweek" label="Newsweek"/>
<link wikidata="Q671510" start="3663" end="3684" title="National Public Radio" label="National Public Radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q207361" start="3867" end="3872" title="DARPA" label="DARPA"/>
<link wikidata="Q82811" start="3961" end="3970" title="acoustics" label="acoustics"/>
<link wikidata="Q2122243" start="3995" end="4014" title="quantum information" label="quantum information"/>
<link wikidata="Q862838" start="4020" end="4037" title="synthetic biology" label="synthetic biology"/>
<link wikidata="Q11155" start="4190" end="4213" title="Border Gateway Protocol" label="Border Gateway Protocol"/>
<link wikidata="Q48743422" start="4215" end="4221" title="BGPsec" label="BGPsec"/>
<link wikidata="Q4085781" start="4224" end="4245" title="mobile ad hoc network" label="mobile ad hoc network"/>
<link wikidata="Q189436" start="4257" end="4275" title="speech recognition" label="speech recognition"/>
<link wikidata="Q3738557" start="4297" end="4306" title="Boomerang (mobile shooter detection system)" label="Boomerang"/>
<link wikidata="Q3235733" start="4340" end="4355" title="cognitive radio" label="cognitive radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q5204298" start="4377" end="4385" title="DARPA XG" label="DARPA XG"/>
<link wikidata="Q1027298" start="4450" end="4474" title="quantum key distribution" label="quantum key distribution"/>
<link wikidata="Q66740224" start="4488" end="4509" title="DARPA Quantum Network" label="DARPA Quantum Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q7643175" start="4642" end="4689" title="superconducting nanowire single-photon detector" label="superconducting nanowire single-photon detector"/>
<link wikidata="Q5570284" start="4708" end="4750" title="Global Environment for Network Innovations" label="Global Environment for Network Innovations"/>
<link wikidata="Q304878" start="4774" end="4801" title="National Science Foundation" label="National Science Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q207361" start="5004" end="5008" title="DARPA" label="ARPA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1451440" start="5022" end="5050" title="Interface Message Processor" label="Interface Message Processors"/>
<link wikidata="Q177524" start="5066" end="5073" title="ARPANET" label="ARPANET"/>
<link wikidata="Q487365" start="5156" end="5164" title="Gateway (telecommunications)" label="gateways"/>
<link wikidata="Q5318" start="5181" end="5188" title="Router (computing)" label="routers"/>
<link wikidata="Q24950965" start="5214" end="5225" title="Frank Heart" label="Frank Heart"/>
<link wikidata="Q62843" start="5230" end="5238" title="Bob Kahn" label="Bob Kahn"/>
<link wikidata="Q174710" start="5354" end="5391" title="University of California, Los Angeles" label="University of California, Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q604924" start="5432" end="5459" title="Stanford Research Institute" label="Stanford Research Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q6436787" start="5745" end="5762" title="Kresge Auditorium" label="Kresge Auditorium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1528686" start="5771" end="5781" title="Tanglewood" label="Tanglewood"/>
<link wikidata="Q581044" start="5821" end="5835" title="Lincoln Center" label="Lincoln Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q790654" start="5843" end="5860" title="Avery Fisher Hall" label="Avery Fisher Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q5136015" start="5869" end="5889" title="Clowes Memorial Hall" label="Clowes Memorial Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q1464509" start="5918" end="5946" title="National Gallery of Victoria" label="National Gallery of Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q3544802" start="5959" end="5993" title="Cultural Center of the Philippines" label="Cultural Center of the Philippines"/>
<link wikidata="Q14692083" start="6019" end="6049" title="Joseph Meyerhoff Symphony Hall" label="Joseph Meyerhoff Symphony Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q6688842" start="6061" end="6091" title="Louise M. Davies Symphony Hall" label="Louise M. Davies Symphony Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q790654" start="6247" end="6264" title="David Geffen Hall" label="David Geffen Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q581044" start="6273" end="6287" title="Lincoln Center" label="Lincoln Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q6688842" start="6661" end="6691" title="Louise M. Davies Symphony Hall" label="Louise M. Davies Symphony Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q62" start="6695" end="6708" title="San Francisco" label="San Francisco"/>
<link wikidata="Q16685058" start="6743" end="6759" title="seating capacity" label="seating capacity"/>
<link wikidata="Q6415646" start="6807" end="6828" title="Kirkegaard Associates" label="Kirkegaard Associates"/>
<link wikidata="Q3402783" start="7066" end="7115" title="John F. Kennedy assassination Dictabelt recording" label="John F. Kennedy assassination Dictabelt recording"/>
<link wikidata="Q482635" start="7150" end="7170" title="Kent State shootings" label="Kent State shootings"/>
<link wikidata="Q42761" start="7192" end="7209" title="Watergate scandal" label="Watergate scandal"/>
<link wikidata="Q9588" start="7233" end="7246" title="Richard Nixon" label="Richard Nixon"/>
<link wikidata="Q598572" start="7466" end="7480" title="aircraft noise" label="aircraft noise"/>
<link wikidata="Q601510" start="7499" end="7512" title="noise barrier" label="noise barrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q1758866" start="8137" end="8142" title="PDP-1" label="PDP-1"/>
<link wikidata="Q690079" start="8148" end="8177" title="Digital Equipment Corporation" label="Digital Equipment Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q63862312" start="8207" end="8230" title="BBN Time-Sharing System" label="BBN Time-Sharing System"/>
<link wikidata="Q92631" start="8240" end="8253" title="Ray Tomlinson" label="Ray Tomlinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q9158" start="8334" end="8339" title="email" label="email"/>
<link wikidata="Q10714" start="8367" end="8368" title="@" label="@"/>
<link wikidata="Q1078276" start="8439" end="8469" title="natural-language understanding" label="natural-language understanding"/>
<link wikidata="Q189436" start="8484" end="8502" title="speech recognition" label="speech recognition"/>
<link wikidata="Q79798" start="8511" end="8530" title="machine translation" label="machine translation"/>
<link wikidata="Q6043864" start="8629" end="8677" title="Intelligence Advanced Research Projects Activity" label="Intelligence Advanced Research Projects Activity"/>
<link wikidata="Q5814314" start="8723" end="8737" title="Wally Feurzeig" label="Wally Feurzeig"/>
<link wikidata="Q201436" start="8751" end="8776" title="Logo programming language" label="Logo programming language"/>
<link wikidata="Q335027" start="8806" end="8820" title="Seymour Papert" label="Seymour Papert"/>
<link wikidata="Q4386338" start="8943" end="8952" title="Interlisp" label="Interlisp"/>
<link wikidata="Q2992529" start="8979" end="9001" title="TENEX (operating system)" label="TENEX operating system"/>
<link wikidata="Q379904" start="9017" end="9040" title="Colossal Cave Adventure" label="Colossal Cave Adventure"/>
<link wikidata="Q232661" start="9084" end="9102" title="parallel computing" label="parallel computing"/>
<link wikidata="Q7205551" start="9126" end="9134" title="Pluribus" label="Pluribus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3631728" start="9144" end="9157" title="BBN Butterfly" label="BBN Butterfly"/>
<link wikidata="Q11220" start="9235" end="9244" title="United States Navy" label="U.S. Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q54837" start="9413" end="9425" title="semantic web" label="semantic web"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151701" start="9458" end="9485" title="DARPA Agent Markup Language" label="DARPA Agent Markup Language"/>
<link wikidata="Q826165" start="9507" end="9528" title="Web Ontology Language" label="Web Ontology Language"/>
<link wikidata="Q1301371" start="9629" end="9646" title="Computer network" label="computer networks"/>
<link wikidata="Q177524" start="9698" end="9705" title="ARPANET" label="ARPANET"/>
<link wikidata="Q1451440" start="9714" end="9741" title="Interface Message Processor" label="Interface Message Processor"/>
<link wikidata="Q63865474" start="9756" end="9762" title="SATNET" label="SATNET"/>
<link wikidata="Q63887933" start="9764" end="9769" title="PRNET" label="PRNET"/>
<link wikidata="Q1446027" start="9771" end="9777" title="MILNET" label="MILNET"/>
<link wikidata="Q7390397" start="9779" end="9785" title="SIMNET" label="SIMNET"/>
<link wikidata="Q64685744" start="9791" end="9819" title="Terrestrial Wideband Network" label="Terrestrial Wideband Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q64686725" start="9825" end="9852" title="Defense Simulation Internet" label="Defense Simulation Internet"/>
<link wikidata="Q2357779" start="9854" end="9859" title="CSNET" label="CSNET"/>
<link wikidata="Q6953385" start="9865" end="9872" title="NEARNET" label="NEARNET"/>
<link wikidata="Q1755411" start="9944" end="9971" title="link-state routing protocol" label="link-state routing protocol"/>
<link wikidata="Q75" start="10023" end="10031" title="Internet" label="Internet"/>
<link wikidata="Q749245" start="10077" end="10101" title="Autonomous System Number" label="Autonomous System Number"/>
<link wikidata="Q322320" start="10320" end="10342" title="Level 3 Communications" label="Level 3 Communications"/>
<link wikidata="Q11371" start="10393" end="10418" title="internet service provider" label="internet service provider"/>
<link wikidata="Q8803" start="10605" end="10608" title="Transmission Control Protocol" label="TCP"/>
<link wikidata="Q7939484" start="10622" end="10634" title="Voice Funnel" label="Voice Funnel"/>
<link wikidata="Q81945" start="10660" end="10673" title="voice over IP" label="voice over IP"/>
<link wikidata="Q1840684" start="10738" end="10759" title="Privacy Enhanced Mail" label="Privacy Enhanced Mail"/>
<link wikidata="Q210214" start="10845" end="10850" title="IPsec" label="IPsec"/>
<link wikidata="Q11155" start="10906" end="10929" title="Border Gateway Protocol" label="Border Gateway Protocol"/>
<link wikidata="Q4085781" start="10967" end="10988" title="mobile ad hoc network" label="mobile ad hoc network"/>
<link wikidata="Q63887933" start="11043" end="11048" title="PRNET" label="PRNET"/>
<link wikidata="Q7395035" start="11053" end="11058" title="SURAN" label="SURAN"/>
<link wikidata="Q6984322" start="11126" end="11149" title="Near-term digital radio" label="Near-term digital radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q5754473" start="11161" end="11185" title="High-capacity data radio" label="High-capacity data radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1596292" start="11234" end="11261" title="Joint Tactical Radio System" label="Joint Tactical Radio System"/>
<link wikidata="Q64682600" start="11270" end="11297" title="Wireless Network after Next" label="Wireless Network after Next"/>
<link wikidata="Q65045850" start="11422" end="11456" title="Iris Digital Communications System" label="Iris Digital Communications System"/>
<link wikidata="Q92691" start="11556" end="11569" title="Daniel Bobrow" label="Daniel Bobrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q7364966" start="11571" end="11583" title="Ronald J. Brachman" label="Ron Brachman"/>
<link wikidata="Q6257227" start="11585" end="11601" title="John Seely Brown" label="John Seely Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q92819" start="11603" end="11616" title="Edmund M. Clarke" label="Edmund Clarke"/>
<link wikidata="Q4730800" start="11618" end="11631" title="Allan M. Collins" label="Allan Collins"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344970" start="11633" end="11649" title="William Crowther (programmer)" label="William Crowther"/>
<link wikidata="Q16195484" start="11651" end="11662" title="John Curran (businessman)" label="John Curran"/>
<link wikidata="Q67005949" start="11664" end="11676" title="Chip Elliott" label="Chip Elliott"/>
<link wikidata="Q5814314" start="11678" end="11692" title="Wally Feurzeig" label="Wally Feurzeig"/>
<link wikidata="Q1292266" start="11694" end="11704" title="Ed Fredkin" label="Ed Fredkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q62843" start="11706" end="11714" title="Bob Kahn" label="Bob Kahn"/>
<link wikidata="Q29536384" start="11716" end="11726" title="Stephen Kent (network security)" label="Steve Kent"/>
<link wikidata="Q92778" start="11728" end="11746" title="J. C. R. Licklider" label="J. C. R. Licklider"/>
<link wikidata="Q47486259" start="11748" end="11760" title="John Makhoul" label="John Makhoul"/>
<link wikidata="Q92739" start="11762" end="11775" title="John McCarthy (computer scientist)" label="John McCarthy"/>
<link wikidata="Q204815" start="11777" end="11790" title="Marvin Minsky" label="Marvin Minsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q528318" start="11792" end="11802" title="Daniel Murphy (computer scientist)" label="Dan Murphy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7457991" start="11804" end="11819" title="Severo Ornstein" label="Severo Ornstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q335027" start="11821" end="11835" title="Seymour Papert" label="Seymour Papert"/>
<link wikidata="Q65962998" start="11837" end="11852" title="Craig Partridge" label="Craig Partridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q7558" start="11854" end="11867" title="Radia Perlman" label="Radia Perlman"/>
<link wikidata="Q7328396" start="11869" end="11880" title="Richard Pew" label="Richard Pew"/>
<link wikidata="Q2651957" start="11882" end="11898" title="Oliver Selfridge" label="Oliver Selfridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q4815998" start="11900" end="11915" title="Cynthia Solomon" label="Cynthia Solomon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7970519" start="11917" end="11933" title="Warren Teitelman" label="Warren Teitelman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139499" start="11935" end="11945" title="Creeper virus" label="Bob Thomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q92631" start="11947" end="11960" title="Ray Tomlinson" label="Ray Tomlinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q8004092" start="11962" end="11972" title="William Aaron Woods" label="Bill Woods"/>
<link wikidata="Q3327412" start="11978" end="12008" title="Peiter Zatko" label="Peiter &amp;quot;Mudge&amp;quot; Zatko"/>
<link wikidata="Q5249842" start="12023" end="12036" title="Dedre Gentner" label="Dedre Gentner"/>
<link wikidata="Q4096251" start="12144" end="12154" title="Jim Breyer" label="Jim Breyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q9895" start="12156" end="12170" title="Anita K. Jones" label="Anita K. Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q5562474" start="12175" end="12187" title="Gilman Louie" label="Gilman Louie"/>
<link wikidata="Q7669982" start="12243" end="12250" title="TELCOMP" label="TELCOMP"/>
<link wikidata="Q7696386" start="12300" end="12307" title="Telenet" label="Telenet"/>
<link wikidata="Q7884469" start="12648" end="12662" title="Ungermann-Bass" label="Ungermann-Bass"/>
<link wikidata="Q206047" start="12700" end="12726" title="Asynchronous Transfer Mode" label="asynchronous transfer mode"/>
<link wikidata="Q173395" start="12755" end="12773" title="Cisco Systems Inc." label="Cisco Systems Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q11371" start="12816" end="12841" title="Internet service provider" label="Internet service provider"/>
<link wikidata="Q3759492" start="12965" end="12968" title="GTE" label="GTE"/>
<link wikidata="Q467752" start="13140" end="13153" title="Bell Atlantic" label="Bell Atlantic"/>
<link wikidata="Q467752" start="13171" end="13178" title="Verizon" label="Verizon"/>
<link wikidata="Q322320" start="13269" end="13276" title="Genuity (Internet company)" label="Genuity"/>
<link wikidata="Q128831" start="13288" end="13321" title="Federal Communications Commission" label="Federal Communications Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q322320" start="13440" end="13462" title="Level 3 Communications" label="Level 3 Communications"/>
<link wikidata="Q2578125" start="13604" end="13618" title="Accel Partners" label="Accel Partners"/>
<link wikidata="Q3109467" start="13647" end="13655" title="In-Q-Tel" label="In-Q-Tel"/>
<link wikidata="Q156644" start="13767" end="13775" title="Raytheon" label="Raytheon"/>
<link wikidata="Q16552" start="14153" end="14174" title="San Diego, California" label="San Diego, California"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14361" end="14370" title="EveryZing" label="EveryZing"/>
<link wikidata="Q5025439" start="14455" end="14474" title="Cambridge Highlands" label="Cambridge Highlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q49111" start="14476" end="14500" title="Cambridge, Massachusetts" label="Cambridge, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q397905" start="14503" end="14521" title="Columbia, Maryland" label="Columbia, Maryland"/>
<link wikidata="Q988741" start="14524" end="14549" title="St. Louis Park, Minnesota" label="St. Louis Park, Minnesota"/>
<link wikidata="Q577960" start="14552" end="14575" title="O&amp;#x27;Fallon, Illinois" label="O&amp;#x27;Fallon, Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q4246992" start="14578" end="14590" title="Newport East, Rhode Island" label="Newport East"/>
<link wikidata="Q1013038" start="14592" end="14616" title="Middletown, Rhode Island" label="Middletown, Rhode Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q6981941" start="14622" end="14643" title="Naval Station Newport" label="Naval Station Newport"/>
<link wikidata="Q7369880" start="14646" end="14674" title="Rosslyn, Arlington, Virginia" label="Rosslyn, Arlington, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="14680" end="14696" title="Washington, D.C." label="Washington, D.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q6643185" start="14715" end="14745" title="List of the oldest currently registered Internet domain names" label="Oldest registered domain names"/>
<link wikidata="Q5204309" start="14748" end="14755" title="DARWARS" label="DARWARS"/>
<link wikidata="Q357104" start="14759" end="14783" title="military exercise" label="military simulation game"/>
<link wikidata="Q5539559" start="14818" end="14837" title="George G. Robertson" label="George G. Robertson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7325377" start="14840" end="14857" title="Richard E. Hayden" label="Richard E. Hayden"/>
<link wikidata="Q4386338" start="14860" end="14869" title="Interlisp" label="Interlisp"/>
<link wikidata="Q5975167" start="14994" end="15019" title="Charles Babbage Institute" label="Charles Babbage Institute"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="252540" wikidata="Q686861" url="?curid=252540" title="Mamma Mia! (musical)">
<text>Mamma Mia! (promoted as Benny Andersson &amp; Björn Ulvaeus&#x27; Mamma Mia!) is a jukebox musical written by British playwright Catherine Johnson, based on songs recorded by Swedish group ABBA and composed by members Benny Andersson and Björn Ulvaeus. The musical&#x27;s title is taken from the group&#x27;s 1975 chart-topper &quot;Mamma Mia&quot;. Ulvaeus and Andersson were involved in the development of the show from the beginning, while singer Anni-Frid Lyngstad was involved financially in the production and also appeared at many of the premieres around the world.

The musical includes hits such as &quot;Super Trouper&quot;, &quot;Lay All Your Love on Me&quot;, &quot;Dancing Queen&quot;, &quot;Knowing Me, Knowing You&quot;, &quot;Take a Chance on Me&quot;, &quot;Thank You for the Music&quot;, &quot;Money, Money, Money&quot;, &quot;The Winner Takes It All&quot;, &quot;Voulez-Vous&quot;, &quot;SOS&quot; and &quot;Mamma Mia&quot;. Over 70 million people have seen the show, which has grossed $4.5 billion worldwide since its 1999 debut. A film adaptation starring Meryl Streep, Colin Firth, Pierce Brosnan, Amanda Seyfried, Christine Baranski, Stellan Skarsgård and Julie Walters was released in 2008. 

As of 2024, the show has productions in London&#x27;s West End, where it is the fifth longest-running show in West End history and the third longest-running musical, as well as various foreign productions. Its Broadway incarnation closed on 12 September 2015 after running for nearly 14 years, making it the ninth longest-running show in Broadway history.

==Background==

&quot;Mamma Mia!&quot; is based on the songs of ABBA, a Swedish pop/dance group active from 1972 to 1982 and one of the most popular international pop groups of all time, repeatedly topping the charts in Europe, North and South America and Australia. Following the premiere of the musical in London in 1999, topped the charts in the United Kingdom again. Producer Judy Craymer met songwriters Björn Ulvaeus and Benny Andersson in 1983 when they were working with Tim Rice on &quot;Chess&quot;. It was the song &quot;The Winner Takes It All&quot; that suggested to her the theatrical potential of their pop songs. Though unenthusiastic, the duo were not completely opposed to the idea.

In 1997, Craymer commissioned Catherine Johnson to write the book for the musical. In 1998, Phyllida Lloyd became the director for the show.

Various reviewers have noted a similarity in the plot between &quot;Mamma Mia!&quot; and the 1968 film &quot;Buona Sera, Mrs. Campbell&quot;, previously adapted as the 1979 musical &quot;Carmelina&quot;, which is about a woman who doesn&#x27;t know which of three men is her daughters father. Critic John Simon speculated that &quot;Mamma Mia!&quot; is set in Greece and not Italy (which might have fit in better with the musical&#x27;s title) to make the connection to the film less obvious. However, Johnson has denied being inspired by &quot;Buona Sera, Mrs. Campbell&quot;.

==Productions==

===Original West End production===
The musical opened in the West End at the Prince Edward Theatre on 6 April 1999, and transferred to the Prince of Wales Theatre on 9 June 2004, where it played until 6 September 2012, when it moved to the Novello Theatre. Directed by Phyllida Lloyd with choreography by Anthony Van Laast, the original cast featured Siobhan McCarthy, Lisa Stokke, and Hilton McRae.

The show closed in March 2020 due to the COVID-19 pandemic in the United Kingdom, and reopened at the Novello Theatre on 25 August 2021. On 17 July 2024, &quot;Mamma Mia!&quot; celebrated its 10,000th performance in the West End.

===Original North American productions===
The first North American production, opening in Toronto at the Royal Alexandra Theatre in May 2000, played for five years. The US debut followed in San Francisco, California, at the Orpheum Theatre from 17 November 2000, to 17 February 2001, moving next to Los Angeles, California, at the Shubert Theatre from 26 February to 12 May 2001, and finally to Chicago, Illinois, at the Cadillac Palace Theatre from 13 May to 12 August 2001.

====Broadway run====
The musical opened on Broadway at the Winter Garden Theatre on 18 October 2001, after beginning previews on 5 October. The director was Phyllida Lloyd with choreography by Anthony Van Laast. As of October 2017, it was the ninth longest-running Broadway show and the longest-running jukebox musical in Broadway history. On 18 April 2013, it was announced that &quot;Mamma Mia!&quot; would transfer from its home at the Winter Garden Theatre to the Broadhurst Theatre later that year to make way for the musical adaptation of &quot;Rocky&quot;. The show played its final performance at the Winter Garden Theatre on 19 October 2013, and began performances at the Broadhurst Theatre on 2 November 2013.

It was announced on 9 April 2015, that the show would close on 5 September 2015. On 21 April 2015, it was then announced that the show would play an additional week and would instead close on 12 September 2015. &quot;Mamma Mia!&quot; played 5,773 performances on Broadway before closing.

===Foreign and touring productions===
&quot;Mamma Mia!&quot; has been played in more than 60 countries in all 6 continents, including Argentina, Australia, Austria, Belgium, Brazil, Bulgaria, Canada, Chile, China, Colombia, Croatia, Czech Republic, Denmark, Dominican Republic, Germany, Estonia, Fiji, Finland, France, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Jordan, Latvia, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malaysia, Malta, Mexico, Monaco, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Panama, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Romania, Russia, Serbia, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, South Africa, South Korea, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sweden, Switzerland, Taiwan, Thailand, Turkey, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom, and United States, and has been translated into multiple languages. It has been performed in over 440 major cities and has been seen by over 70 million people worldwide, setting the record for premiering in more cities faster than any other musical in history.

The first city to produce the show after London was Toronto, where it ran from 23 May 2000, to 22 May 2005, being the North America premiere of &quot;Mamma Mia!&quot;. The original cast included Louise Pitre as Donna and Tina Maddigan as Sophie, who both of them later reprised their roles in first US Tour and Broadway premiere.

&quot;Mamma Mia!&quot; played in Las Vegas, opening at the Mandalay Bay in February 2003 and closing on 4 January 2009. In June 2005, &quot;Mamma Mia!&quot; played its 1000th performance in Las Vegas, becoming the longest-running West End/Broadway musical in Las Vegas. The clothes and scenarios from this production are now used in Brazil. The show returned to Las Vegas on 16 May 2014, at the Tropicana Hotel &amp; Casino, but announced its closing soon after on 22 July.

The first North American tour started in San Francisco, California, on 15 November 2000, and closed in Boston, Massachusetts, on 29 August 2004. A second national tour opened in Providence, Rhode Island, on 26 February 2002, and closed in Appleton, Wisconsin, on 26 August 2012. This was followed by a non-Equity tour that opened in Orange, Texas, on 28 September 2016, and closed in St. Louis, Missouri, on 30 July 2017. A 25th anniversary equity tour kicked off on 26 October 2023 in Elmira, New York.

The first non-English version of the show debuted in Hamburg at the Operettenhaus, where it ran from 3 November 2002, to 8 September 2007. With the productions of Stuttgart (2004) and Essen (2007), &quot;Mamma Mia!&quot; became the first major musical to play concurrently in three German cities.

The show has had (and in some cases, still has) permanent productions in London, Toronto, Melbourne, New York, Hamburg, Tokyo (later transferred to Osaka, Fukuoka and Nagoya), Las Vegas, Utrecht, Seoul (later transferred to Seongnam and Daegu), Stuttgart, Madrid (later transferred to Barcelona), Stockholm (later transferred to Gothenburg), Antwerp, Moscow, Essen, Berlin, Oslo, Mexico City, Milan (later transferred to Rome), Copenhagen (later transferred to Aarhus), Paris, São Paulo, Shanghai, Buenos Aires, Vienna and Helsinki.

Since its premiere in Dublin on 9 September 2004 (with Helen Hobson as Donna) the international tour been seen by 5 million people. In addition there have been several touring productions worldwide, including Asia, Australia, China, Denmark, France, Germany, Japan, Netherlands, South Africa, South Korea, Spain, and United Kingdom.

The Dutch actress Lone van Roosendaal has played Donna in three different countries: Netherlands, Belgium and Germany.

In the Original Danish Tivoli Copenhagen Cast it was actually Kristine Yde Eriksen as Sophie and Nadia Barbara Abrahamsen as Ali. But when the production moved to Aarhus Stine Louise Henriksen took over for Kristine Yde Eriksen as Sophie and Nadin Reiness took over for Nadia Barbara Abrahamsen as Ali. Stine Louise Henriksen was actually Kristine&#x27;s understudy in Tivoli, Copenhagen and so was Nadin Reiness for Nadia.

The South African tour, conducted at the Artscape Theatre in Cape Town on 11 August 2010, and 3 months later at The Teatro, Montecasino in Johannesburg, featured an all local cast.

The first Chinese production opened on 11 July 2011, at the Shanghai Grand Theatre and closed on 18 January 2012, at Shanghai Cultural Square after a small tour, marking the first time that a blockbuster contemporary Western musical were presented in Mandarin in Shanghai (there was a previous Mandarin production of &quot;Beauty and the Beast&quot; in Beijing in 1999). It was seen by 250,000 people across six venues, with a total of 190 performances. Two Chinese actresses, Tian Shui, and Shadow Zhang both played the role of Donna in turn. In the following years, the production toured around China from time to time, performing 100~150 shows per year, until 2017. A revival of this production is now touring in China again, with the role of Donna played by Adia Chan Chung Ling, a Hong Kong TV/film star and pop singer famous in 1980~90&#x27;.

On 24 January 2012, Mamma Mia! opened in Manila at the Main Theater of the Cultural Center of the Philippines as part of the international Tour. The show was originally set to stay only for a week but with the positive response, the organisers decided that it would play until 19 February 2012. The show features Sara Poyzer as Donna Sheridan and Charlotte Wakefield as Sophie. The cast also included Kate Graham (Tanya), Jenny Dale (Rosie) and David Roberts (Sky).

A New Zealand tour production of Mamma Mia! opened at the Auckland Civic Theatre on 4 March 2014, featuring an all new set design by John Harding. International theatre star Deliah Hannah played Donna, and popular New Zealand entertainment icon Jackie Clark plays Rosie. The NZ tour visited 11 cities in 2014–2016.

The musical was originally performed on sailings of Royal Caribbean&#x27;s &quot;Quantum of the Seas&quot; but was later moved to &quot;Allure of the Seas&quot;. Unlike other cruise ship performances of musicals, the show is performed in its entirety.

In Prague, the capital of the Czech Republic, the musical had its premiere on 12 December 2014. Czech is the seventeenth language in which the musical was performed. At the date of the premiere a record 70,000 tickets were sold.

On 21 February 2015, the musical premiered in Warsaw, Poland at Roma Musical Theatre.

The Belgrade, Serbia – Terazije Theatre (Pozorište na Terazijama) premiere was on 27 March 2015.

On 15 June 2015, in Ljubljana, the capital of Slovenia, premiere of Slovene production took place in Križanke Outdoor Theatre as a part of Ljubljana Summer Festival (Poletni festival Ljubljana).

On 18 March 2016, Mamma Mia! opened for the first time in Panama City, Panama, at the Anayansi Theatre in the Atlapa Convention Centre, directed by Aaron Zebede.

On 27 May 2016, the first regional production opened at the Barter Theatre in Abingdon, Virginia.

On 31 August 2016, it was announced that the musical would once again tour Australia as a new, non-replica production to be directed by Gary Young. The premier was held in Canberra in November 2017 before continuing on a 1-year national tour to Brisbane, Sydney, Perth, Melbourne and finally Adelaide. The cast included Sarah Morrison as Sophie, Natalie O&#x27;Donnell as Donna, Jayde Westaby as Tanya, Alicia Gardiner as Rose, Ian Stenlake as Sam, Phillip Lowe as Harry, Josef Ber as Bill and Stephen Mahy as Sky. The production was nominated for the following Helpmann Awards: Best Musical, Best Choreography (Tom Hodgson), Best Actress (Natalie O&#x27;Donnell) and Best Actor (Ian Stenlake).

On 26 November 2016, the musical opened at the theatre Vanemuine in Tartu, Estonia. The original Estonian cast included Birgit Sarrap as Sophie, Ele Millistfer and Merle Jalakas as Donna, Kaire Vilgats as Rosie and Kaarel Targo as Sky among others. As of April 2019, the show keeps playing open end for high public demand.

From 28 to 30 July 2017, &quot;Mamma Mia!&quot; was performed at the Hollywood Bowl. Directed and choreographed by Kathleen Marshall, the show starred Jennifer Nettles as Donna, Dove Cameron as Sophie, Corbin Bleu as Sky, Jaime Camil as Sam, Tisha Campbell-Martin as Tanya, and Lea Delaria as Rosie.

Nová scéna Theatre in Bratislava, Slovakia opened on 11 November 2017, for the first time in Slovak. In Slovakia were formerly performed Czech and original version.

A Finnish-language production premiered at the Messukeskus Helsinki in Helsinki, Finland on 4 May 2018.

The Romanian production opened in Bucharest on May 24, 2018, produced by private companies at Sala Palatului. Director was Razvan Ioan Dinca, conductor Daniel Jinga, choreographer Violeta Dinca and Romanian language translator of the lyrics&amp;spoken text was Ernest Fazekas. The show is still running and won the “Show of the Year” Award. 

A Bulgarian production opened on 18 July 2018, at the National opera and ballet in Sofia. There will be other shows on 19, 20, 21 and 22 July 2018.

A revival of the Dutch production premiered at the Beatrix Theater Utrecht in Utrecht, Netherlands on 6 September 2018.

A production of the musical by East West Players (EWP) in Los Angeles from May to June 2019 featured a cast with all artists of colour, a majority of them Asian-Pacific Islander. The production made several allusions to Filipino culture (as this rendition of Donna and Sophie are a Filipina family living abroad), including Tagalog phrases, the tinikling folk dance, and traditional Filipino fashion The production was lauded for its inclusive casting decisions as well as its authentic portrayal of Filipino culture.

In 2019 a UK and International tour will run into 2020 starting at the Edinburgh Playhouse in September 2019 before heading to La Seine Musicale in October, The Bradford Alhambra Theatre in November, Bord Gais Energy Theatre in Dublin over the Christmas and new year period before continuing on 22 January 2020 at the Theatre Royal Newcastle before continuing to the Southampton Mayflower Theatre, Hull New Theatre, Liverpool Empire Theatre, Birmingham Hippodrome, Bristol Hippodrome and finishing in August at the Theatre Royal Plymouth. More dates are to be added.

Also in 2019, a French-speaking adaptation produced by Just for Laughs was made in Quebec, having a run in Montreal in June, July, and December at the Théâtre Saint-Denis, immediately followed by Quebec City in August at the Salle Albert-Rousseau. The production sold over 75 000 tickets over its limited run.

A non-replica Mexican revival opened in Mexico City on 10 March 2023 at the Teatro de los Insurgentes.

Since 2019, the Merybi theatre company from Gemona del Friuli (Udine, Italy) has been representing &quot;Mamma Mia – Ce Spetacul,&quot; a very unique adaptation of the musical with Friulian settings and many dialogues and jokes in Friulian; as of May 2023, the musical has been performed seven times in various theatres in the region.

==Synopsis==
Before the curtain rises, the orchestra starts playing the overture, which is a montage of instrumental versions of some of Abba&#x27;s hit songs.

===Act I===

On the fictional Greek island of Kalokairi, 20-year-old Sophie is preparing to marry her fiancé, Sky. She wants her father to walk her down the aisle but doesn&#x27;t know his identity (&quot;Prologue&quot;). She discovers her mother Donna&#x27;s diary and finds old entries that describe dates with three possible fathers: an American architect named Sam Carmichael, an Australian writer and adventurer named Bill Austin, and a British banker named Harry Bright. She sends each an invitation to her wedding without telling Donna. All three men accept (&quot;Honey, Honey&quot;).

Donna reunites with her long-time best friends, Tanya, a rich woman who has been married and divorced thrice, and Rosie, an unmarried and carefree woman, at her taverna. The trio used to comprise a girl group called &quot;Donna and the Dynamos&quot;. Donna laments about the struggles of running the taverna singlehandedly (&quot;Money, Money, Money&quot;).

Later that day, Sam, Bill, and Harry arrive at the island. They meet Sophie who convinces them not to tell Donna that she had invited them (&quot;Thank You for the Music&quot;). Donna is astonished to see her ex-lovers and runs off in tears (&quot;Mamma Mia&quot;). Tanya and Rosie attempt to comfort Donna (&quot;Chiquitita&quot;), and convince her that she can still be the girl she once was (&quot;Dancing Queen&quot;).

Sophie tells Sky about her confusion regarding her father&#x27;s real identity, but still doesn&#x27;t reveal that she had invited them. Sky assures her he will be the only man she ever needs, right before his buddies take him to his bachelor party (&quot;Lay All Your Love on Me&quot;). At Sophie&#x27;s hen party, Donna and the Dynamos don their old costumes and perform a song (&quot;Super Trouper&quot;). Sam, Bill, and Harry accidentally walk in on the party, and the guests persuade them to stay (&quot;Gimme! Gimme! Gimme! (A Man After Midnight)&quot;).

Sophie is unable to find any concrete answers from talking to either Sam or Harry, however she learns from Bill that he has an aunt &quot;Sophia&quot; who once lived with Donna and funded the taverna&#x27;s construction. This leads both to believe Bill is Sophie&#x27;s father and he reluctantly agrees to walk her down the aisle (&quot;The Name of the Game&quot;). The bachelor and bachelorette parties converge, where both Sam and Harry respectively tell Sophie they believe they&#x27;re her father and promise to walk her down the aisle the next day. Hopelessly confused, Sophie leaves the party, unsure who to believe (&quot;Voulez-Vous&quot;).

===Act II===
(&quot;Entr&#x27;acte&quot;) Sophie has a nightmare, involving her three possible fathers all fighting for the right to walk her down the aisle and wakes up distressed (&quot;Under Attack&quot;). Donna is confused as to why Sophie is so upset on her wedding day, while Sophie emotionally blames Donna for raising her without a father. Donna is left to reminisce on her past relationships (&quot;One of Us&quot;). She gets into an argument with Sam; despite their conflict, Donna and Sam still love one another and wish their relationship had worked out differently (&quot;SOS&quot;).

At the beach, a worker at Donna&#x27;s taverna named Pepper makes advances to Tanya, but she rebuffs him (&quot;Does Your Mother Know&quot;). Sky figures out Sophie&#x27;s plan and feels betrayed that she kept it a secret from him. Sam tries to give Sophie some fatherly advice by describing his own failed marriage (&quot;Knowing Me, Knowing You&quot;), but Sophie is not consoled. Harry offers Donna to pay for the wedding, and they reminisce about their fling (&quot;Our Last Summer&quot;). 

Donna helps Sophie get dressed for the wedding, in disbelief that her daughter is going to be a bride (&quot;Slipping Through My Fingers&quot;). They reconcile and Sophie asks Donna to walk her down the aisle, since she&#x27;s the most active parental figure in her life. Sam tries speaking to Donna again, and a bitter confrontation ensues as Donna tells Sam that he broke her heart (&quot;The Winner Takes It All&quot;). Rosie is making final wedding preparations when Bill expresses disappointment that Donna has been selected to walk Sophie down the aisle. Bill reaffirms his commitment to single life, but Rosie confesses she has grown attracted to him, and urges him to reconsider (&quot;Take a Chance on Me&quot;). They become intimate just before getting interrupted by the arrival of guests, leaving Rosie quite stunned.

The wedding begins, with Donna walking Sophie down the aisle. Donna interrupts the ceremony and acknowledges to everyone that Sophie&#x27;s father is present. Sophie finally tells her mother that she had secretly invited the three men, and Donna reveals she is also unsure which one is her father. Everyone involved agrees that the identity of Sophie&#x27;s biological father doesn&#x27;t matter, and all three are happy to be &quot;one-third of a father&quot; and a part of her life at last. During this discussion, Harry reveals he&#x27;s in a committed gay relationship. Just as the wedding is about to resume, Sophie calls a halt to the proceedings and Sky agrees they aren&#x27;t ready to get married yet. Sam seizes his chance and proposes to Donna to prevent the wedding preparations from going to waste. He explains that he always loved her, and years ago had ended his own engagement and returned to the island only to find Donna had gone off with another man (Bill). Donna accepts and the two marry spontaneously (&quot;I Do, I Do, I Do, I Do, I Do&quot;). At the end of the night, Sophie and Sky depart Kalokairi to tour the world together (&quot;I Have a Dream&quot;).

===Finale and encore===
After their final bows to the audience, the ensemble performs a reprise of &quot;Mamma Mia&quot;. A reprise of &quot;Dancing Queen&quot; follows, during which Donna, Tanya and Rosie are revealed wearing brightly colored ABBA inspired costumes. The cast ends the finale with &quot;Waterloo&quot;, during which Sam, Bill, and Harry join the rest of the cast onstage in brightly colored costumes that match the leading ladies. The Dynamos and the dads often invite the audience to clap, dance, and sing along during the finale.

==Musical numbers==

;Act I
* &quot;Overture/Prologue&quot; – Sophie
* &quot;Honey, Honey&quot; – Sophie, Ali &amp; Lisa
* &quot;Money, Money, Money&quot; – Donna, Tanya, Rosie, Pepper &amp; Company
* &quot;Thank You for the Music&quot; – Sophie, Sam, Harry &amp; Bill
* &quot;Mamma Mia&quot; – Donna &amp; Company
* &quot;Chiquitita&quot; – Donna, Tanya &amp; Rosie 
* &quot;Dancing Queen&quot; – Donna, Tanya &amp; Rosie
* &quot;Lay All Your Love on Me&quot; – Sky, Sophie &amp; Male Ensemble 
* &quot;Super Trouper&quot; – Donna, Tanya, Rosie &amp; Female Ensemble
* &quot;Gimme! Gimme! Gimme! (A Man After Midnight)&quot; – Female Ensemble
* &quot;The Name of the Game&quot; – Sophie &amp; Bill
* &quot;Voulez-Vous&quot; – Company

;Act II
* &quot;Entr&#x27;acte&quot; – Orchestra
* &quot;Under Attack&quot; – Sophie &amp; Company 
* &quot;One of Us&quot; – Donna
* &quot;SOS&quot; – Donna &amp; Sam
* &quot;Does Your Mother Know&quot; – Tanya, Pepper &amp; Company
* &quot;Knowing Me, Knowing You&quot; – Sam
* &quot;Our Last Summer&quot; – Harry &amp; Donna
* &quot;Slipping Through My Fingers&quot; – Donna &amp; Sophie
* &quot;The Winner Takes It All&quot; – Donna
* &quot;Take a Chance on Me&quot; – Rosie &amp; Bill
* &quot;I Do, I Do, I Do, I Do, I Do&quot; – Sam, Donna &amp; Company 
* &quot;I Have a Dream&quot; – Sophie

Encore
* &quot;Mamma Mia&quot; – Company
* &quot;Dancing Queen&quot; – Donna, Tanya, Rosie &amp; Company
* &quot;Waterloo&quot; – Company

===Notes on the music===
During the preview period in London, the musical had the song &quot;Summer Night City&quot; just after the prologue. The &quot;Summer Night City&quot; scene was a wedding rehearsal and during the song, Ali, Lisa, Tanya, and Rosie arrived on the island. The song was removed, although a small instrumental part of it remains as underscoring to connect the end of &quot;The Winner Takes It All&quot; and &quot;Take a Chance on Me&quot;. Several lines of &quot;Summer Night City&quot; are also heard in the &quot;Entr&#x27;acte&quot;.

Donna hums a few lines of &quot;Fernando&quot; when she repairs the doors of the taverna just before she sees her three former lovers.

The song that Sky briefly sings before starting &quot;Lay All Your Love on Me&quot; varies from one production to another, including &quot;King Kong Song&quot;, &quot;Summer Night City&quot;, &quot;Dum Dum Diddle&quot;, and &quot;She&#x27;s My Kind of Girl&quot;, a Björn &amp; Benny song.

The wedding march that is played as Sophie walks down the aisle is a slower arrangement of &quot;Dancing Queen&quot;.

The creators also intended to include &quot;Just Like That&quot;, an unreleased ABBA song recorded in 1982. The song was apparently dropped just before the first public previews in March 1999, though it was listed in the program available during the preview period.

The last three songs, performed as an encore/finale by the whole cast are: &quot;Mamma Mia&quot;, &quot;Dancing Queen&quot; and &quot;Waterloo&quot;. The version of &quot;Mamma Mia&quot; used in the encore/finale is sung by the Company. The finale song Mamma Mia has been extended in theatres where Donna and the Dynamos had to go downstairs for taking the stage lift in Dancing Queen. Then, during the intro of &quot;Dancing Queen&quot;, Donna, Tanya and Rosie join the Company (as the girl-power band &quot;Donna and the Dynamos&quot;, wearing ABBA&#x27;s 1970s-style colourful and flashy costumes). Sam, Bill and Harry join them during Waterloo, wearing male versions of the girls&#x27; ABBA&#x27;s costumes. The Encore is included on the 5th Anniversary Cast Recording (commemorating said anniversary for the Broadway production).

==Principal roles and casts==
== Film adaptations ==

&quot;Mamma Mia!&quot; was adapted as a film, produced by Judy Craymer and Gary Goetzman, written by Catherine Johnson directed by Phyllida Lloyd and with Tom Hanks, Rita Wilson, Björn Ulvaeus, and Benny Andersson as executive producers. Meryl Streep stars as Donna Sheridan with Amanda Seyfried as Sophie and Pierce Brosnan as Sam Carmichael. The movie also features Christine Baranski, Dominic Cooper, Colin Firth, Stellan Skarsgård and Julie Walters. It premiered 18 July 2008, in the US. Most of the songs remained intact with the exceptions of &quot;Under Attack&quot;, &quot;One of Us&quot;, &quot;Knowing Me, Knowing You&quot;, and &quot;Thank You for the Music&quot;. &quot;Knowing Me, Knowing You&quot; was used as the wedding music and &quot;Thank You for the Music&quot; is sung during the second half of the end credits. The first half is occupied with a &quot;Dancing Queen&quot; reprise and &quot;Waterloo&quot;, with a &quot;Mamma Mia&quot; reprise and &quot;I Have a Dream&quot; sung before the credits (though the latter is sung as Sophie mails the invitations at the start of the film). &quot;When All Is Said and Done&quot;, a song not used in the musical, was added for the film sung by Sam, Donna, and the company. &quot;Our Last Summer&quot; was used earlier in the movie, with Sophie, Bill, Sam, and Harry singing it. &quot;The Name of the Game&quot;, while filmed, was subsequently edited out of the film for the final cut. The song is included in full on the motion picture soundtrack – an abbreviated version of the song and scene appear on the DVD/Blu-ray as a supplement. In addition, &quot;Thank You for the Music&quot; is used as a hidden track, and is performed by Amanda Seyfried.

A sequel to the film titled &quot;Mamma Mia! Here We Go Again&quot; was released in 2018. It tells the story of how Donna met each of the 3 men who are potentially Sophie&#x27;s father. &quot;One of Us&quot; and &quot;Knowing Me, Knowing You&quot; are both included in this film.

==Awards and nominations==

===Original West End production===
===Original Broadway production===
===Original North American tour===
==Response==

===Box office and business===

On 15 May 2005, &quot;Mamma Mia!&quot; exceeded the original Broadway runs of &quot;The Sound of Music&quot;, &quot;The King and I&quot;, and &quot;Damn Yankees&quot; with 1,500 performances. On 6 March 2014, it surpassed &quot;Rent&quot; to become the 8th longest-running Broadway musical and 9th longest-running show of all time with 5,124 performances, then surpassed &quot;Beauty and the Beast&#x27;s&quot; 5,462 performances that same year, on 14 December, to become Broadway&#x27;s 7th longest-running musical and 8th longest-running show. The Broadway run ended, with its 5,758th performance on 12 September 2015. Two years later (16 August 2017) &quot;Wicked&quot; passed &quot;Mama Mia!&quot; and moved it down one spot, in the list of longest-running Broadway shows.

When &quot;Mamma Mia!&quot; opened in Russia, it received a positive response. As of January 2008, &quot;Mamma Mia!&quot; became the longest daily running show in the history of Russian theatre.

==See also==
* &quot;Abbacadabra&quot;, another musical based on the songs of ABBA

==References==
== Further reading ==
* George Rodosthenous: &quot;Mamma Mia! and the Aesthetics of the Twenty-First-Century Jukebox Musical&quot;. In: Robert Gordon (ed.), Olaf Jubin (ed.): &quot;The Oxford Handbook of the British Musical&quot;. Oxford University Press, 2017, pp. 613–632
* Malcom Womack: &quot;Thank You For the Music: Catherine Johnson&#x27;s feminist revoicings in Mamma Mia!&quot;. In: &quot;Studies in Musical Theatre&quot;, volume 3, no. 2, November 2009, pp. 201–211
* Jana B. Wild: &quot;On a Romantic Island: Shakespeare and Mamma mia&quot;. In: &quot; Multicultural Shakespeare: Translation, Appropriation and Performance&quot;, 2019, pp. 151–161
* Naomi Graber: &quot;Memories that remain: Mamma Mia! and the disruptive potential of nostalgia&quot;. In: &quot;Studies in Musical Theatre&quot;, volume 9, no. 2, June 2015, pp. 187–198
* Elaine Aston: &quot;Work, Family, Romance and the Utopian Sensibilities of the Chick Megamusical Mamma Mia!&quot;. In: &quot;A Good Night Out for the Girls.&quot; Palgrave Macmillan, London, 2013, pp. 114–133

==External links==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q643684" start="83" end="98" title="jukebox musical" label="jukebox musical"/>
<link wikidata="Q467766" start="129" end="146" title="Catherine Johnson (playwright)" label="Catherine Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q18233" start="189" end="193" title="ABBA" label="ABBA"/>
<link wikidata="Q214582" start="218" end="233" title="Benny Andersson" label="Benny Andersson"/>
<link wikidata="Q179682" start="238" end="251" title="Björn Ulvaeus" label="Björn Ulvaeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131308" start="333" end="342" title="Mamma Mia (ABBA song)" label="Mamma Mia"/>
<link wikidata="Q201908" start="450" end="468" title="Anni-Frid Lyngstad" label="Anni-Frid Lyngstad"/>
<link wikidata="Q114159" start="614" end="627" title="Super Trouper (song)" label="Super Trouper"/>
<link wikidata="Q2092859" start="641" end="664" title="Lay All Your Love on Me" label="Lay All Your Love on Me"/>
<link wikidata="Q870786" start="678" end="691" title="Dancing Queen" label="Dancing Queen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1513140" start="705" end="728" title="Knowing Me, Knowing You" label="Knowing Me, Knowing You"/>
<link wikidata="Q1418336" start="742" end="761" title="Take a Chance on Me" label="Take a Chance on Me"/>
<link wikidata="Q1298754" start="775" end="798" title="Thank You for the Music" label="Thank You for the Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q929870" start="812" end="831" title="Money, Money, Money" label="Money, Money, Money"/>
<link wikidata="Q682132" start="845" end="868" title="The Winner Takes It All" label="The Winner Takes It All"/>
<link wikidata="Q2001623" start="882" end="893" title="Voulez-Vous (song)" label="Voulez-Vous"/>
<link wikidata="Q1585621" start="907" end="910" title="SOS (ABBA song)" label="SOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131308" start="927" end="936" title="Mamma Mia (ABBA song)" label="Mamma Mia"/>
<link wikidata="Q188850" start="1052" end="1067" title="Mamma Mia! (film)" label="film adaptation"/>
<link wikidata="Q873" start="1077" end="1089" title="Meryl Streep" label="Meryl Streep"/>
<link wikidata="Q162492" start="1091" end="1102" title="Colin Firth" label="Colin Firth"/>
<link wikidata="Q81520" start="1104" end="1118" title="Pierce Brosnan" label="Pierce Brosnan"/>
<link wikidata="Q189226" start="1120" end="1135" title="Amanda Seyfried" label="Amanda Seyfried"/>
<link wikidata="Q229134" start="1137" end="1155" title="Christine Baranski" label="Christine Baranski"/>
<link wikidata="Q208667" start="1157" end="1174" title="Stellan Skarsgård" label="Stellan Skarsgård"/>
<link wikidata="Q228747" start="1179" end="1192" title="Julie Walters" label="Julie Walters"/>
<link wikidata="Q1359589" start="1271" end="1279" title="West End theatre" label="West End"/>
<link wikidata="Q16150998" start="1297" end="1323" title="List of the longest-running West End shows" label="fifth longest-running show"/>
<link wikidata="Q1828856" start="1525" end="1571" title="List of the longest-running Broadway shows" label="ninth longest-running show in Broadway history"/>
<link wikidata="Q18233" start="1638" end="1642" title="ABBA" label="ABBA"/>
<link wikidata="Q6304401" start="1954" end="1966" title="Judy Craymer" label="Judy Craymer"/>
<link wikidata="Q298295" start="2053" end="2061" title="Tim Rice" label="Tim Rice"/>
<link wikidata="Q843284" start="2071" end="2076" title="Chess (musical)" label="Chess"/>
<link wikidata="Q467766" start="2306" end="2323" title="Catherine Johnson (playwright)" label="Catherine Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q237696" start="2368" end="2382" title="Phyllida Lloyd" label="Phyllida Lloyd"/>
<link wikidata="Q1040848" start="2527" end="2552" title="Buona Sera, Mrs. Campbell" label="Buona Sera, Mrs. Campbell"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043344" start="2605" end="2614" title="Carmelina" label="Carmelina"/>
<link wikidata="Q6257894" start="2718" end="2728" title="John Simon (critic)" label="John Simon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1359589" start="3075" end="3083" title="West End theatre" label="West End"/>
<link wikidata="Q1431387" start="3091" end="3112" title="Prince Edward Theatre" label="Prince Edward Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q587234" start="3153" end="3176" title="Prince of Wales Theatre" label="Prince of Wales Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q12064499" start="3254" end="3269" title="Novello Theatre" label="Novello Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q237696" start="3283" end="3297" title="Phyllida Lloyd" label="Phyllida Lloyd"/>
<link wikidata="Q4773635" start="3319" end="3336" title="Anthony Van Laast" label="Anthony Van Laast"/>
<link wikidata="Q3242449" start="3383" end="3394" title="Lisa Stokke" label="Lisa Stokke"/>
<link wikidata="Q84167106" start="3456" end="3495" title="COVID-19 pandemic in the United Kingdom" label="COVID-19 pandemic in the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q172" start="3736" end="3743" title="Toronto" label="Toronto"/>
<link wikidata="Q3527553" start="3751" end="3774" title="Royal Alexandra Theatre" label="Royal Alexandra Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q7103971" start="3870" end="3885" title="Orpheum Theatre (San Francisco, California)" label="Orpheum Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q14683969" start="3977" end="3992" title="Shubert Theatre (Los Angeles)" label="Shubert Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q5016482" start="4067" end="4090" title="Cadillac Palace Theatre" label="Cadillac Palace Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q235065" start="4166" end="4174" title="Broadway theatre" label="Broadway"/>
<link wikidata="Q3569403" start="4182" end="4203" title="Winter Garden Theatre" label="Winter Garden Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1828856" start="4366" end="4401" title="List of the longest-running Broadway shows" label="ninth longest-running Broadway show"/>
<link wikidata="Q643684" start="4426" end="4441" title="jukebox musical" label="jukebox musical"/>
<link wikidata="Q3569403" start="4562" end="4583" title="Winter Garden Theatre" label="Winter Garden Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q4972203" start="4591" end="4609" title="Broadhurst Theatre" label="Broadhurst Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q15505318" start="4674" end="4679" title="Rocky the Musical" label="Rocky"/>
<link wikidata="Q172" start="6185" end="6192" title="Toronto" label="Toronto"/>
<link wikidata="Q2624848" start="6497" end="6506" title="Las Vegas Valley" label="Las Vegas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368043" start="6523" end="6535" title="Mandalay Bay" label="Mandalay Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q100" start="7042" end="7048" title="Boston" label="Boston"/>
<link wikidata="Q18383" start="7117" end="7141" title="Providence, Rhode Island" label="Providence, Rhode Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q94928" start="7178" end="7197" title="Appleton, Wisconsin" label="Appleton, Wisconsin"/>
<link wikidata="Q4677733" start="7245" end="7251" title="Actors&amp;#x27; Equity Association" label="Equity"/>
<link wikidata="Q982388" start="7272" end="7285" title="Orange, Texas" label="Orange, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q38022" start="7323" end="7342" title="St. Louis, Missouri" label="St. Louis, Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q934135" start="7425" end="7441" title="Elmira, New York" label="Elmira, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055" start="7497" end="7504" title="Hamburg" label="Hamburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q2026630" start="7512" end="7525" title="Operettenhaus" label="Operettenhaus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1022" start="7607" end="7616" title="Stuttgart" label="Stuttgart"/>
<link wikidata="Q2066" start="7628" end="7633" title="Essen" label="Essen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1761" start="8298" end="8304" title="Dublin" label="Dublin"/>
<link wikidata="Q557606" start="9196" end="9212" title="Artscape Theatre" label="Artscape Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9267" end="9290" title="Montecasino#Teatro" label="The Teatro, Montecasino"/>
<link wikidata="Q1325611" start="9397" end="9419" title="Shanghai Grand Theatre" label="Shanghai Grand Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q152715" start="9660" end="9680" title="Beauty and the Beast (musical)" label="Beauty and the Beast"/>
<link wikidata="Q1461" start="10228" end="10234" title="Manila" label="Manila"/>
<link wikidata="Q3544802" start="10262" end="10296" title="Cultural Center of the Philippines" label="Cultural Center of the Philippines"/>
<link wikidata="Q4391509" start="10712" end="10734" title="Auckland Civic Theatre" label="Auckland Civic Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q929872" start="11022" end="11044" title="Royal Caribbean International" label="Royal Caribbean&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q18128240" start="11051" end="11070" title="MS Quantum of the Seas" label="Quantum of the Seas"/>
<link wikidata="Q83257" start="11106" end="11124" title="MS Allure of the Seas" label="Allure of the Seas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1085" start="11226" end="11232" title="Prague" label="Prague"/>
<link wikidata="Q213" start="11253" end="11267" title="Czech Republic" label="Czech Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q270" start="11499" end="11505" title="Warsaw" label="Warsaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q36" start="11507" end="11513" title="Poland" label="Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q3711" start="11544" end="11552" title="Belgrade" label="Belgrade"/>
<link wikidata="Q403" start="11554" end="11560" title="Serbia" label="Serbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6593509" start="11563" end="11579" title="Terazije Theatre" label="Terazije Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q437" start="11658" end="11667" title="Ljubljana" label="Ljubljana"/>
<link wikidata="Q215" start="11684" end="11692" title="Slovenia" label="Slovenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6438656" start="11739" end="11747" title="Križanke" label="Križanke"/>
<link wikidata="Q6660941" start="11777" end="11802" title="Ljubljana Summer Festival" label="Ljubljana Summer Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q804" start="11905" end="11911" title="Panama" label="Panama"/>
<link wikidata="Q25906786" start="11944" end="11968" title="Atlapa Convention Centre" label="Atlapa Convention Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q4662567" start="11982" end="11994" title="Aaron Zebede" label="Aaron Zebede"/>
<link wikidata="Q55390805" start="12658" end="12673" title="18th Helpmann Awards" label="Helpmann Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q191" start="12867" end="12874" title="Estonia" label="Estonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q433003" start="12912" end="12925" title="Birgit Sarrap" label="Birgit Sarrap"/>
<link wikidata="Q6348259" start="12980" end="12993" title="Kaire Vilgats" label="Kaire Vilgats"/>
<link wikidata="Q976218" start="13185" end="13199" title="Hollywood Bowl" label="Hollywood Bowl"/>
<link wikidata="Q6376821" start="13231" end="13248" title="Kathleen Marshall" label="Kathleen Marshall"/>
<link wikidata="Q2627462" start="13267" end="13283" title="Jennifer Nettles" label="Jennifer Nettles"/>
<link wikidata="Q13560423" start="13294" end="13306" title="Dove Cameron" label="Dove Cameron"/>
<link wikidata="Q4617" start="13318" end="13329" title="Corbin Bleu" label="Corbin Bleu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1278135" start="13338" end="13349" title="Jaime Camil" label="Jaime Camil"/>
<link wikidata="Q264960" start="13358" end="13379" title="Tisha Campbell-Martin" label="Tisha Campbell-Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3228613" start="13394" end="13405" title="Lea Delaria" label="Lea Delaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q3501826" start="13417" end="13427" title="Nová scéna" label="Nová scéna"/>
<link wikidata="Q1780" start="13439" end="13449" title="Bratislava" label="Bratislava"/>
<link wikidata="Q214" start="13451" end="13459" title="Slovakia" label="Slovakia"/>
<link wikidata="Q9058" start="13510" end="13516" title="Slovak language" label="Slovak"/>
<link wikidata="Q2945550" start="13630" end="13650" title="Messukeskus Helsinki" label="Messukeskus Helsinki"/>
<link wikidata="Q803" start="14258" end="14278" title="Utrecht" label="Utrecht, Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q5329662" start="14332" end="14349" title="East West Players" label="East West Players"/>
<link wikidata="Q4806708" start="14456" end="14478" title="Asian Pacific American" label="Asian-Pacific Islander"/>
<link wikidata="Q934605" start="14521" end="14537" title="Culture of the Philippines" label="Filipino culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q34057" start="14625" end="14632" title="Tagalog language" label="Tagalog"/>
<link wikidata="Q1552228" start="14646" end="14655" title="tinikling" label="tinikling"/>
<link wikidata="Q5338244" start="14891" end="14910" title="Edinburgh Playhouse" label="Edinburgh Playhouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q19944990" start="14947" end="14964" title="La Seine Musicale" label="La Seine Musicale"/>
<link wikidata="Q4954584" start="14977" end="15006" title="Bradford Alhambra" label="The Bradford Alhambra Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q4944429" start="15020" end="15044" title="Bord Gáis Energy Theatre" label="Bord Gais Energy Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q7777436" start="15138" end="15161" title="Theatre Royal, Newcastle" label="Theatre Royal Newcastle"/>
<link wikidata="Q6797243" start="15187" end="15216" title="Mayflower Theatre" label="Southampton Mayflower Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q5935948" start="15218" end="15234" title="Hull New Theatre" label="Hull New Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q6658420" start="15236" end="15260" title="Liverpool Empire Theatre" label="Liverpool Empire Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q4916717" start="15262" end="15283" title="Birmingham Hippodrome" label="Birmingham Hippodrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q4968925" start="15285" end="15303" title="Bristol Hippodrome" label="Bristol Hippodrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q7777439" start="15335" end="15357" title="Theatre Royal, Plymouth" label="Theatre Royal Plymouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1362509" start="15443" end="15458" title="Just for Laughs" label="Just for Laughs"/>
<link wikidata="Q176" start="15471" end="15477" title="Quebec" label="Quebec"/>
<link wikidata="Q340" start="15495" end="15503" title="Montreal" label="Montreal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1115701" start="15539" end="15558" title="Théâtre Saint-Denis" label="Théâtre Saint-Denis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2145" start="15584" end="15595" title="Quebec City" label="Quebec City"/>
<link wikidata="Q1637094" start="15775" end="15800" title="Teatro de los Insurgentes" label="Teatro de los Insurgentes"/>
<link wikidata="Q53265" start="15847" end="15864" title="Gemona del Friuli" label="Gemona del Friuli"/>
<link wikidata="Q2790" start="15866" end="15871" title="Udine" label="Udine"/>
<link wikidata="Q202287" start="16211" end="16219" title="overture" label="overture"/>
<link wikidata="Q920285" start="16505" end="16513" title="Prologue" label="Prologue"/>
<link wikidata="Q1626845" start="16872" end="16884" title="Honey, Honey" label="Honey, Honey"/>
<link wikidata="Q15097623" start="17055" end="17062" title="taverna" label="taverna"/>
<link wikidata="Q929870" start="17224" end="17243" title="Money, Money, Money" label="Money, Money, Money"/>
<link wikidata="Q1298754" start="17399" end="17422" title="Thank You for the Music" label="Thank You for the Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131308" start="17501" end="17510" title="Mamma Mia (ABBA song)" label="Mamma Mia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074676" start="17567" end="17577" title="Chiquitita" label="Chiquitita"/>
<link wikidata="Q870786" start="17654" end="17667" title="Dancing Queen" label="Dancing Queen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057959" start="17911" end="17925" title="bachelor party" label="bachelor party"/>
<link wikidata="Q2092859" start="17933" end="17956" title="Lay All Your Love on Me" label="Lay All Your Love on Me"/>
<link wikidata="Q56707" start="17982" end="17991" title="Bachelorette party" label="hen party"/>
<link wikidata="Q114159" start="18064" end="18077" title="Super Trouper (song)" label="Super Trouper"/>
<link wikidata="Q1123081" start="18186" end="18229" title="Gimme! Gimme! Gimme! (A Man After Midnight)" label="Gimme! Gimme! Gimme! (A Man After Midnight)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1808429" start="18576" end="18596" title="The Name of the Game (ABBA song)" label="The Name of the Game"/>
<link wikidata="Q2001623" start="18868" end="18879" title="Voulez-Vous (song)" label="Voulez-Vous"/>
<link wikidata="Q730674" start="19077" end="19089" title="Under Attack" label="Under Attack"/>
<link wikidata="Q625383" start="19297" end="19306" title="One of Us (ABBA song)" label="One of Us"/>
<link wikidata="Q1585621" start="19474" end="19477" title="SOS (ABBA song)" label="SOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1234579" start="19599" end="19620" title="Does Your Mother Know" label="Does Your Mother Know"/>
<link wikidata="Q1513140" start="19810" end="19833" title="Knowing Me, Knowing You" label="Knowing Me, Knowing You"/>
<link wikidata="Q629159" start="19957" end="19972" title="Our Last Summer" label="Our Last Summer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2375697" start="20092" end="20119" title="Slipping Through My Fingers" label="Slipping Through My Fingers"/>
<link wikidata="Q682132" start="20374" end="20397" title="The Winner Takes It All" label="The Winner Takes It All"/>
<link wikidata="Q1418336" start="20677" end="20696" title="Take a Chance on Me" label="Take a Chance on Me"/>
<link wikidata="Q1522046" start="21844" end="21872" title="I Do, I Do, I Do, I Do, I Do" label="I Do, I Do, I Do, I Do, I Do"/>
<link wikidata="Q1514055" start="21972" end="21986" title="I Have a Dream (song)" label="I Have a Dream"/>
<link wikidata="Q5195599" start="22032" end="22042" title="curtain call" label="final bows"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131308" start="22101" end="22110" title="Mamma Mia (ABBA song)" label="Mamma Mia"/>
<link wikidata="Q870786" start="22137" end="22150" title="Dancing Queen" label="Dancing Queen"/>
<link wikidata="Q32503" start="22300" end="22308" title="Waterloo (ABBA song)" label="Waterloo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1626845" start="22623" end="22635" title="Honey, Honey" label="Honey, Honey"/>
<link wikidata="Q929870" start="22675" end="22694" title="Money, Money, Money" label="Money, Money, Money"/>
<link wikidata="Q1298754" start="22753" end="22776" title="Thank You for the Music" label="Thank You for the Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131308" start="22823" end="22832" title="Mamma Mia (ABBA song)" label="Mamma Mia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074676" start="22869" end="22879" title="Chiquitita" label="Chiquitita"/>
<link wikidata="Q870786" start="22922" end="22935" title="Dancing Queen" label="Dancing Queen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2092859" start="22977" end="23000" title="Lay All Your Love on Me" label="Lay All Your Love on Me"/>
<link wikidata="Q114159" start="23050" end="23063" title="Super Trouper (song)" label="Super Trouper"/>
<link wikidata="Q1123081" start="23122" end="23165" title="Gimme! Gimme! Gimme! (A Man After Midnight)" label="Gimme! Gimme! Gimme! (A Man After Midnight)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1808429" start="23198" end="23218" title="The Name of the Game (ABBA song)" label="The Name of the Game"/>
<link wikidata="Q2001623" start="23253" end="23264" title="Voulez-Vous (song)" label="Voulez-Vous"/>
<link wikidata="Q730674" start="23339" end="23351" title="Under Attack" label="Under Attack"/>
<link wikidata="Q625383" start="23390" end="23399" title="One of Us (ABBA song)" label="One of Us"/>
<link wikidata="Q1585621" start="23422" end="23425" title="SOS (ABBA song)" label="SOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1234579" start="23458" end="23479" title="Does Your Mother Know" label="Does Your Mother Know"/>
<link wikidata="Q1513140" start="23524" end="23547" title="Knowing Me, Knowing You" label="Knowing Me, Knowing You"/>
<link wikidata="Q629159" start="23568" end="23583" title="Our Last Summer" label="Our Last Summer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2375697" start="23618" end="23645" title="Slipping Through My Fingers" label="Slipping Through My Fingers"/>
<link wikidata="Q682132" start="23681" end="23704" title="The Winner Takes It All" label="The Winner Takes It All"/>
<link wikidata="Q1418336" start="23727" end="23746" title="Take a Chance on Me" label="Take a Chance on Me"/>
<link wikidata="Q1522046" start="23780" end="23808" title="I Do, I Do, I Do, I Do, I Do" label="I Do, I Do, I Do, I Do, I Do"/>
<link wikidata="Q1514055" start="23851" end="23865" title="I Have a Dream (song)" label="I Have a Dream"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131308" start="23897" end="23906" title="Mamma Mia (ABBA song)" label="Mamma Mia"/>
<link wikidata="Q870786" start="23931" end="23944" title="Dancing Queen" label="Dancing Queen"/>
<link wikidata="Q32503" start="23995" end="24003" title="Waterloo (ABBA song)" label="Waterloo"/>
<link wikidata="Q590220" start="24114" end="24131" title="Summer Night City" label="Summer Night City"/>
<link wikidata="Q27623" start="24611" end="24619" title="Fernando (song)" label="Fernando"/>
<link wikidata="Q2500285" start="24854" end="24868" title="King Kong Song" label="King Kong Song"/>
<link wikidata="Q590220" start="24882" end="24899" title="Summer Night City" label="Summer Night City"/>
<link wikidata="Q4037675" start="24913" end="24927" title="Dum Dum Diddle" label="Dum Dum Diddle"/>
<link wikidata="Q4049397" start="24945" end="24971" title="She&amp;#x27;s My Kind of Girl" label="She&amp;#x27;s My Kind of Girl"/>
<link wikidata="Q870786" start="25103" end="25116" title="Dancing Queen" label="Dancing Queen"/>
<link wikidata="Q4041945" start="25169" end="25183" title="Just Like That (Gemini song)" label="Just Like That"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131308" start="25473" end="25482" title="Mamma Mia (ABBA song)" label="Mamma Mia"/>
<link wikidata="Q870786" start="25496" end="25509" title="Dancing Queen" label="Dancing Queen"/>
<link wikidata="Q32503" start="25526" end="25534" title="Waterloo (ABBA song)" label="Waterloo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131308" start="25563" end="25572" title="Mamma Mia (ABBA song)" label="Mamma Mia"/>
<link wikidata="Q870786" start="25810" end="25823" title="Dancing Queen" label="Dancing Queen"/>
<link wikidata="Q188850" start="26309" end="26326" title="Mamma Mia! (film)" label="adapted as a film"/>
<link wikidata="Q2263" start="26437" end="26446" title="Tom Hanks" label="Tom Hanks"/>
<link wikidata="Q234144" start="26448" end="26459" title="Rita Wilson" label="Rita Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q179682" start="26461" end="26474" title="Björn Ulvaeus" label="Björn Ulvaeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q214582" start="26480" end="26495" title="Benny Andersson" label="Benny Andersson"/>
<link wikidata="Q873" start="26520" end="26532" title="Meryl Streep" label="Meryl Streep"/>
<link wikidata="Q189226" start="26562" end="26577" title="Amanda Seyfried" label="Amanda Seyfried"/>
<link wikidata="Q81520" start="26592" end="26606" title="Pierce Brosnan" label="Pierce Brosnan"/>
<link wikidata="Q229134" start="26650" end="26668" title="Christine Baranski" label="Christine Baranski"/>
<link wikidata="Q317761" start="26670" end="26684" title="Dominic Cooper" label="Dominic Cooper"/>
<link wikidata="Q162492" start="26686" end="26697" title="Colin Firth" label="Colin Firth"/>
<link wikidata="Q208667" start="26699" end="26716" title="Stellan Skarsgård" label="Stellan Skarsgård"/>
<link wikidata="Q228747" start="26721" end="26734" title="Julie Walters" label="Julie Walters"/>
<link wikidata="Q2562512" start="27766" end="27791" title="Mamma Mia! The Movie Soundtrack" label="motion picture soundtrack"/>
<link wikidata="Q927803" start="27944" end="27956" title="hidden track" label="hidden track"/>
<link wikidata="Q36951175" start="28030" end="28057" title="Mamma Mia! Here We Go Again" label="Mamma Mia! Here We Go Again"/>
<link wikidata="Q1022513" start="28539" end="28557" title="The Sound of Music" label="The Sound of Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q6431690" start="28571" end="28585" title="The King and I" label="The King and I"/>
<link wikidata="Q1158684" start="28603" end="28615" title="Damn Yankees" label="Damn Yankees"/>
<link wikidata="Q553890" start="28683" end="28687" title="Rent (musical)" label="Rent"/>
<link wikidata="Q1828856" start="28708" end="28744" title="List of the longest-running Broadway shows" label="8th longest-running Broadway musical"/>
<link wikidata="Q152715" start="28832" end="28859" title="Beauty and the Beast (musical)" label="Beauty and the Beast&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q616439" start="29115" end="29121" title="Wicked (musical)" label="Wicked"/>
<link wikidata="Q2820226" start="29450" end="29461" title="Abbacadabra" label="Abbacadabra"/>
<link wikidata="Q18233" start="29507" end="29511" title="ABBA" label="ABBA"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="252541" wikidata="Q2244445" url="?curid=252541" title="Mission Detroit">
<text>Mission Detroit was a pre-dawn glider-borne combat assault in the American airborne landings in Normandy, made by elements of the U.S. 82nd Airborne Division on the early morning of June 6, 1944, during World War II. It was part of Operation Neptune, the assault portion of the Allied invasion of Normandy, Operation Overlord. Originally slated to be the main assault for the 82nd Airborne, the glider operation instead became the first reinforcement mission after the main parachute combat assault, Mission Boston. The landing zone for mission Detroit was near Sainte-Mère-Église, to the west of Utah Beach.

The objective of the division was to secure the town of Sainte-Mère-Église and to take the bridges along the Merderet River. By doing this, the U.S. 4th Infantry Division coming in at Utah Beach would have easy access to making their way northwards towards the ports at Cherbourg.

Casualties for the 82nd Airborne Division on D-Day were about 1,260 of 6,600, or about 20%. On 6 June 1944 the heavier elements of the division landed by glider in Mission Elmira.

== Air movement table - mission Detroit ==

==See also==
* Mission Chicago
* Mission Elmira
* Operation Tonga

==Further reading==
* 

==External links==
* D-Day : Etat des Lieux : Glider missions in Normandy</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2244445" start="0" end="15" title="Mission Detroit" label="Mission Detroit"/>
<link wikidata="Q601924" start="31" end="43" title="Military glider" label="glider-borne"/>
<link wikidata="Q29009" start="66" end="104" title="American airborne landings in Normandy" label="American airborne landings in Normandy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2358" start="130" end="157" title="82nd Airborne Division" label="U.S. 82nd Airborne Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="203" end="215" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q16470" start="232" end="249" title="Normandy landings" label="Operation Neptune"/>
<link wikidata="Q329888" start="278" end="284" title="Allies of World War II" label="Allied"/>
<link wikidata="Q8641370" start="285" end="305" title="invasion of Normandy" label="invasion of Normandy"/>
<link wikidata="Q8641370" start="307" end="325" title="Operation Overlord" label="Operation Overlord"/>
<link wikidata="Q749387" start="474" end="490" title="Paratrooper" label="parachute combat"/>
<link wikidata="Q16207866" start="500" end="514" title="Mission Boston" label="Mission Boston"/>
<link wikidata="Q28464386" start="562" end="580" title="Sainte-Mère-Église" label="Sainte-Mère-Église"/>
<link wikidata="Q757273" start="597" end="607" title="Utah Beach" label="Utah Beach"/>
<link wikidata="Q28464386" start="666" end="684" title="Sainte-Mère-Église" label="Sainte-Mère-Église"/>
<link wikidata="Q666042" start="719" end="733" title="Merderet" label="Merderet River"/>
<link wikidata="Q231293" start="754" end="780" title="4th Infantry Division (United States)" label="U.S. 4th Infantry Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q757273" start="794" end="804" title="Utah Beach" label="Utah Beach"/>
<link wikidata="Q516202" start="880" end="889" title="Battle of Cherbourg" label="Cherbourg"/>
<link wikidata="Q16470" start="937" end="942" title="Normandy landings" label="D-Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q3354700" start="1056" end="1070" title="Mission Elmira" label="Mission Elmira"/>
<link wikidata="Q2311651" start="1132" end="1147" title="Mission Chicago" label="Mission Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q3354700" start="1150" end="1164" title="Mission Elmira" label="Mission Elmira"/>
<link wikidata="Q1756029" start="1167" end="1182" title="Operation Tonga" label="Operation Tonga"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="252542" wikidata="Q2311651" url="?curid=252542" title="Mission Chicago">
<text>Mission Chicago was a pre-dawn glider-borne combat assault in the American airborne landings in Normandy, made by elements of the 101st Airborne Division on the early morning of June 6, 1944 during the Normandy landings of World War II. It was part of Operation Neptune, the assault portion of the Allied invasion of Normandy, codenamed Operation Overlord. Originally slated to be the main assault for the 101st Airborne Division, the glider operation instead became the first reinforcement mission after the main parachute combat assault, Mission Albany. Because the area of responsibility for the division was in close proximity to Utah Beach, the use of glider reinforcement was limited in scale, with most division support units transported by sea.

==Overview==
The 101st Airborne Division&#x27;s objectives were to secure the four causeway exits behind Utah Beach, destroy a German coastal artillery battery at Saint-Martin-de-Varreville, capture buildings nearby at Mezières believed used as barracks and a command post for the artillery battery, capture the Douve River lock at la Barquette (opposite Carentan), capture two footbridges spanning the Douve River at la Porte opposite Brevands, destroy the highway bridges over the Douve at Sainte-Come-du-Mont, and secure the Douve River valley.

In the process units would also disrupt German communications, establish roadblocks to hamper the movement of German reinforcements, establish a defensive line between the beachhead and Valognes, clear the area of the drop zones to the unit boundary at Les Forges, and link up with the veteran 82nd Airborne Division.

==Mission description==

Mission Chicago was the 27th serial of the airborne assault, and was flown by the troop carrier C-47 Skytrains of the 434th Troop Carrier Group at RAF Aldermaston. 52 aircraft acted as tugs for an equal number of CG-4A Waco gliders carrying 155 troops, a Clark CA1 bulldozer, sixteen 57-mm (6-pounder) antitank guns, and 25 small vehicles. 2.5 tons of ammunition and 11 tons of equipment were also transported, including an SCR-499 radio set for the division headquarters command post.

Chicago was primarily an artillery reinforcement mission. Aboard 44 gliders were Batteries A and B of the 81st Airborne Antiaircraft Battalion - both batteries were antitank batteries and equipped with the 57-mm (6-pounder) antitank guns. The other 8 gliders carried small elements of the 326th Airborne Engineer Battalion, the 101st Signal Company, the antitank platoon of the 327th Glider Infantry Regiment (GIR), and a surgical team of the 326th Airborne Medical Company. Also accompanying the glider serial in a last-minute change was the assistant division commander (ADC) of the 101st Airborne Division, Brigadier General Don Pratt, who had been designated to command the seaborne echelon.

The mission had originally been planned for glider release at civil twilight on the evening before the amphibious landings, but to protect the gliders from ground fire the time was changed on May 27 to 04:00 on D-Day, 2 hours before dawn. The designated destination in France was Landing Zone (LZ) E, an area co-located with and slightly overlapping one of the paratroop drop zones, DZ C. The area was chosen as central to the operations of the division and because a BUPS beacon (&quot;Beacon, Ultra Portable S-band&quot;) was to be in place there on which the serial commander could guide using the SCR-717 search radars installed in the aircraft of flight leaders.

The landing zone was a triangle-shaped area a mile in width at its mile-long base along the road connecting les Forges (a hamlet south of Sainte-Mère-Église) and Sainte-Marie-du-Mont. The zone was in depth and its eastern edge ran through Hiesville, the division command post two miles (3 km) west of Ste. Marie-du-Mont. In addition to its central locality, the fields within the zone were on average twice the length of most others in the vicinity. Many of the fields, however, were bordered by trees in height and not hedgerows, a fact that did not show up well on aerial reconnaissance photographs.

==Glider assault==
The first of 52 aircraft took off at 01:19. Bright moonlight enabled the tugs to assemble in thirteen flights of four aircraft-glider combinations in an &quot;echelon of four to the right&quot; formation. Shortly after assembly the glider carrying the command post radio broke loose from its tug and landed. The radio was retrieved and transported that evening in mission Keokuk, but the accident meant that the 101st Airborne Division would be out of radio contact with other invasion forces until after link-up with the 4th Infantry Division coming off Utah Beach.

The weather along its route had moderated from the dense cloud bank and ground fog that had severely disrupted the parachute drops two hours earlier. Because they were in trail and not in close formation vees, the tugs and gliders were able to penetrate the clouds without losing formation. The columns drew ground fire, however, and one C-47 and its glider went down near Pont l&#x27;Abbé on the Douve River, west of the landing zone. Seven transports and several gliders also incurred damage.

The commander of the 434th TCG was guided to LZ E by a &quot;Eureka&quot; transponding radar beacon set up there by the pathfinders (the BUPS AN/UPN-1 beacons had been damaged in landing and were inoperable). Although it had been placed in the wrong section of the LZ, the &#x27;Tee&#x27; shape formed by green Holophane marker lights was observed by pilots of the arriving C-47s. At 0354, six minutes early, 49 of the 50 remaining pilots released their gliders at the designated point from an altitude of MSL. The 50th, wandering out of formation, released its glider south of Carentan.

During the specified 270° left turns after release, most of the Waco glider pilots lost sight of the marker lights. The moon was setting by release time and obscured by scattered clouds so that without reference to the markers the glider pilots no longer recognized the landing zone. Just six landed on the LZ itself and only 15 others in fields within a half mile. A group of ten landed in a field near les Forges. Of the remaining 18, all but one landed in fields to the east within two miles (3 km).

Almost all crash-landed in the smaller fields outside the LZ after overshooting to clear unexpected trees. German ground fire was ineffective in the dark, and even though most gliders struck a tree or ditch, most loads were successfully landed without harm. In one glider Gen. Pratt was killed along with the co-pilot (the aftermath of this incident is fictionalized in the film &quot;Saving Private Ryan&quot;). Total casualties were 5 dead, 17 injured, and 7 missing.

At dawn the division command post sent out a large patrol to assist the reinforcements in removing their equipment from the crushed gliders (very few were crushed so badly that the equipment could not be removed immediately) and to guide them to Hiesville. Collecting and assembling the equipment was a lengthy process, but at noon the patrol returned with 3 jeeps, 6 AT guns, 115 glider troops, and 35 German prisoners. A USAF history of the airborne landings concluded that Mission Chicago had &quot;succeeded beyond expectation&quot;.
==Notes==

==Sources==
* Warren, Dr. John C. &quot;USAF Historical Study 97: Airborne Operations in World War II, European Theater&quot; (1956). Air University.
* U.S. Airborne in Cotentin Peninsula

==Further reading==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2311651" start="0" end="15" title="Mission Chicago" label="Mission Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q601924" start="31" end="43" title="Military glider" label="glider-borne"/>
<link wikidata="Q29009" start="66" end="104" title="American airborne landings in Normandy" label="American airborne landings in Normandy"/>
<link wikidata="Q165256" start="130" end="153" title="101st Airborne Division" label="101st Airborne Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q16470" start="202" end="219" title="Normandy landings" label="Normandy landings"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="223" end="235" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q16470" start="252" end="269" title="Normandy landings" label="Operation Neptune"/>
<link wikidata="Q329888" start="298" end="304" title="Allies of World War II" label="Allied"/>
<link wikidata="Q8641370" start="305" end="325" title="invasion of Normandy" label="invasion of Normandy"/>
<link wikidata="Q8641370" start="337" end="355" title="Operation Overlord" label="Operation Overlord"/>
<link wikidata="Q3354959" start="540" end="554" title="Mission Albany" label="Mission Albany"/>
<link wikidata="Q757273" start="634" end="644" title="Utah Beach" label="Utah Beach"/>
<link wikidata="Q757273" start="859" end="869" title="Utah Beach" label="Utah Beach"/>
<link wikidata="Q1252782" start="1066" end="1077" title="Douve" label="Douve River"/>
<link wikidata="Q242091" start="1109" end="1117" title="Carentan" label="Carentan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2358" start="1597" end="1619" title="82nd Airborne Division" label="82nd Airborne Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q714326" start="1743" end="1756" title="C-47 Skytrain" label="C-47 Skytrain"/>
<link wikidata="Q2123951" start="1794" end="1809" title="RAF Aldermaston" label="RAF Aldermaston"/>
<link wikidata="Q1752671" start="1860" end="1870" title="CG-4 Waco" label="CG-4A Waco"/>
<link wikidata="Q96375091" start="1902" end="1911" title="Clark CA1" label="Clark CA1"/>
<link wikidata="Q131677" start="1912" end="1921" title="bulldozer" label="bulldozer"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1931" end="1961" title="QF 6-pounder gun" label="57-mm (6-pounder) antitank gun"/>
<link wikidata="Q7389267" start="2071" end="2078" title="SCR-499" label="SCR-499"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2423" end="2456" title="326th Airborne Engineer Battalion (United States)" label="326th Airborne Engineer Battalion"/>
<link wikidata="Q13625292" start="2512" end="2542" title="327th Infantry Regiment (United States)" label="327th Glider Infantry Regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q40821" start="2556" end="2569" title="surgery" label="surgical team"/>
<link wikidata="Q4967196" start="2744" end="2761" title="Brigadier general (United States)" label="Brigadier General"/>
<link wikidata="Q5293339" start="2762" end="2771" title="Don Pratt" label="Don Pratt"/>
<link wikidata="Q164160" start="2893" end="2907" title="civil twilight" label="civil twilight"/>
<link wikidata="Q2018880" start="3341" end="3347" title="S band" label="S-band"/>
<link wikidata="Q28464386" start="3638" end="3656" title="Sainte-Mère-Église" label="Sainte-Mère-Église"/>
<link wikidata="Q658513" start="3662" end="3682" title="Sainte-Marie-du-Mont, Manche" label="Sainte-Marie-du-Mont"/>
<link wikidata="Q21662260" start="3763" end="3775" title="command post" label="command post"/>
<link wikidata="Q235779" start="4020" end="4029" title="hedgerows" label="hedgerows"/>
<link wikidata="Q2448421" start="4281" end="4309" title="echelon formation" label="echelon of four to the right"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4486" end="4500" title="mission Keokuk" label="mission Keokuk"/>
<link wikidata="Q231293" start="4644" end="4665" title="4th Infantry Division (United States)" label="4th Infantry Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q7301640" start="5247" end="5253" title="Eureka beacon" label="Eureka"/>
<link wikidata="Q849640" start="5260" end="5278" title="transponder" label="transponding radar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1428424" start="5306" end="5317" title="Pathfinders (military)" label="pathfinders"/>
<link wikidata="Q5884247" start="5497" end="5506" title="Holophane" label="Holophane"/>
<link wikidata="Q125465" start="5692" end="5695" title="Sea level" label="MSL"/>
<link wikidata="Q165817" start="6664" end="6683" title="Saving Private Ryan" label="Saving Private Ryan"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="252543" wikidata="Q3376737" url="?curid=252543" title="Peter Mansbridge">
<text>Peter Mansbridge (born July 6, 1948) is a British-born Canadian retired news anchor. From 1988 to 2017, he was chief correspondent for CBC News and anchor of &quot;The National,&quot; CBC Television&#x27;s flagship nightly newscast. He was also host of CBC News Network&#x27;s &quot;Mansbridge One on One&quot;. Mansbridge has received many awards and accolades for his journalistic work, including an honorary doctorate from Mount Allison University, where he served as chancellor until the end of 2017. On September 5, 2016, the Canadian Broadcasting Corporation announced that Mansbridge would be stepping down as chief correspondent and anchor on July 1, 2017, after the coverage of Canada&#x27;s 150th-anniversary celebrations.

==Early life==
Mansbridge was born on July 6, 1948, in London, England. He and his siblings Paul and Wendy were the children of Stanley Harry Mansbridge, DFC (1918–2005), an RAF Wing Commander who worked as a civil servant in England, Malaya, and Canada; and Brenda Louise Mansbridge (&quot;née&quot; Harris-Jones, died 2008). His father received a Distinguished Flying Cross (DFC) medal for his service as a navigator aboard an Avro Lancaster bomber during World War II. His grandfather Sgt Harry Frederick Mansbridge (1896-1969) was Canadian and a member of the Princess Patricia&#x27;s Canadian Light Infantry. After moving to Ottawa, Ontario, Mansbridge attended high school at the Glebe Collegiate Institute, but dropped out or quit before graduating Grade 12 in 1966. He next served in the Royal Canadian Navy (RCN) in 1966 and 1967 as a Royal Canadian Navy Pilot Trainee (Venture Officer&#x27;s Plan) but left because this two year RCN Officer training plan required everyone joining to be a High School graduate.

==Newscasting career==
Mansbridge worked as a ticket agent for Transair at Churchill Airport in Churchill, Manitoba. In 1968, Mansbridge was discovered by Gaston Charpentier, a station manager for the local Canadian Broadcasting Corporation (CBC) radio station CHFC, when he heard Mansbridge making a flight announcement. Charpentier hired the 19-year-old Mansbridge as the host of CHFC&#x27;s late night music program. In 1971, Mansbridge moved to Winnipeg to continue as a reporter for the CBW radio station and in the next year, he joined CBWT-TV as a reporter.

In 1975, Mansbridge became a reporter in Saskatchewan for the CBC&#x27;s flagship evening news program &quot;The National&quot;. In 1976, he relocated to Ottawa to become parliamentary correspondent. Following a decade of political coverage, Mansbridge had become a substitute anchor for Knowlton Nash and in 1988, CBS offered him a job as a co-anchor for a morning show. To keep Mansbridge in Canada, Nash retired from his anchoring duties at the CBC.
Mansbridge was also the announcer of CBC News&#x27; &quot;This Week In Parliament&quot; (1981–1993), which was hosted by colleague Don Newman; Mansbridge provided the voice-over for the opening, intro, and ending of the program.

On May 1, 1988, Mansbridge debuted as the sole anchor of &quot;The National&quot;. In 1992 he became co-anchor with Pamela Wallin of &quot;CBC Prime Time News&quot;, which replaced &quot;The National&quot; as CBC Television&#x27;s main network newscast; when the newscast reverted to the name &quot;The National&quot; in 1995, Mansbridge resumed his role as the program&#x27;s sole anchor.

During his tenure as anchor, he covered Canadian news stories including federal elections, party leadership conventions, the Meech Lake Accord negotiations, the Charlottetown Accord and its referendum, the 1995 Quebec referendum, floods in Manitoba in 1997, ice storms in Ontario and Quebec in 1998, the six days in September 2000 that marked the death and state funeral of Pierre Trudeau, the 2003 blackout across much of Eastern North America and the death and state funeral of Jack Layton. His coverage of the blackout was notable because the normally clean-shaven Mansbridge had grown a beard during his summer hiatus (as he did every summer), and the news of the blackout broke with no time for him to shave. Thus, Canadian viewers saw a bearded Peter Mansbridge reporting on the events of that day.

He has also anchored coverage of many world events, both in the studio and on the scene. In the studio, he anchored coverage of the Gulf War, the War in Kosovo, the September 11 attacks and the 2014 Parliament Hill shootings. He was on the air live when the 2003 invasion of Iraq began and anchored coverage of it. On the scene, he anchored coverage of the fall of the Berlin Wall, the funerals of Diana, Princess of Wales and Pope John Paul II, numerous royal, papal, and US presidential visits to Canada, numerous Olympic Games, and the inauguration of US President Barack Obama. He reported extensively from Normandy both 50 and then 60 years after D-Day and from the United Kingdom and the Netherlands for the fiftieth anniversary of V-E Day. He also reported from the Netherlands for the sixtieth anniversary of V-E Day.

In 1999, he launched a new program, &quot;Mansbridge One on One&quot;, in which he interviewed newsmakers.
With the retirement of Lloyd Robertson of &quot;CTV National News&quot; on September 1, 2011, Mansbridge became the longest-serving active anchor among the big three networks in Canada, as Dawna Friesen had taken over as anchor at &quot;Global National&quot; only in 2010. Lisa LaFlamme taking over for Robertson also meant that Mansbridge is the only male chief anchor among the big three English networks in Canada (Mansbridge, LaFlamme, and Friesen).

===Controversies===
====Salary speculation====
In 2011, Conservative Member of Parliament, Brent Rathgeber, had questions regarding the compensation of Peter Mansbridge and other CBC personalities. The former Canadian Heritage Minister, James Moore, stated that, while Mansbridge could disclose his salary on his own accord, the Canadian Government could not be compelled to do so. In 2014, the CBC provided a document to the Canadian Senate Committee on Transport and Communications indicating that Peter Mansbridge earned $80,000 per year. Later that year, CBC released additional documents to both the Senate and on its own webpage demonstrating that four CBC &quot;on-air&quot; employees earned more than $300,000 per year (the average salary of these four employees was $485,667 per year in 2014); while the CBC did not disclose the name of these employees, it was speculated that Peter Mansbridge was likely in this group of four. While the CBC still releases a Compensation Report online, it does not include prior years; however some screen captures of the 2014 compensation report were made available by media outlets. In 2016, an anonymous source revealed CBC internal documents to CANADALAND&#x27;s Jesse Brown indicating Peter Mansbridge&#x27;s salary, including additional remunerations on top of his base pay, was roughly $1.1 million per year for a number of years prior to 2014. Despite there being screen captures of Mansbridge&#x27;s alleged employee file and salary numbers, Mansbridge has strongly denied the veracity of the $1.1 million per year salary figure.

====Speaking fees controversy====
In 2014, Mansbridge faced criticism for accepting speaking fees. Mansbridge defended himself saying he gave about 20 speeches each year, about half of them unpaid, and that he often donates part of the money to charity. However, he had recently made a paid speech at the Investment Symposium organized by the Canadian Association of Petroleum Producers (CAPP), a lobby group that promotes the pro-oil-sands-development side of the debate. Media critics felt accepting payment from an agency actively trying to influence public policy, even if it was only as a speaking fee, could be a conflict of interest. Mansbridge was the second CBC employee discovered to be accepting money from outside agencies for speaking fees. Rex Murphy of CBC&#x27;s Cross Country Check-up was the first. CBC president Hubert Lacroix defended the practice stating that the CBC was aware of the speaking engagements and payments, having pre-vetted them for any potential conflict of interest. Nevertheless, the CBC reviewed its policies following the controversy. In 2016, anonymous insider sources from the CBC told CANADALAND that the CBC compensated Mansbridge for losing earnings from speaking fees; Mansbridge denies this claim.

===Retirement===
In 2016, Mansbridge announced his retirement from hosting &quot;The National&quot;, and step down as Chief Correspondent of CBC News after anchoring CBC&#x27;s Canada Day coverage on the country&#x27;s 150th anniversary. He made his final broadcast from &quot;The National&quot; on June 30, 2017; and made his final live coverage during Canada Day on July 1, 2017, paving the way for his retirement.

From October to December 2017, Mansbridge undertook a 17-stop cross-Canada storytelling tour. 

Since his retirement, he made appearances in CBC including as guest co-host on CBC&#x27;s coverage of the wedding of Prince Harry and Meghan Markle in May 2018, and as a guest contributor for the 2019 federal election.

==Personal life==
Mansbridge has been married three times. His previous marriage to CBC colleague Wendy Mesley (January 6, 1989 – 1992) became regular tabloid fodder in &quot;Frank&quot; magazine as their marriage ended. He has been married to Canadian actress Cynthia Dale since November 14, 1998, and they have a son, William, born in 1999. Mansbridge has two daughters from a first marriage to Parm Dhillon, which ended in 1975. He lives in Stratford, Ontario with his family, and also has a summer cottage in the Gatineau Hills.

Among his hobbies, Mansbridge collects small mementos from his travels around the world, including rocks, soil and other “sentimental” items from various prominent historical places. He kept pebbles from a visit to the Battle of Dieppe site in France, dirt from Vimy Ridge, and sand from the beaches at Normandy, as well as pieces of the Berlin Wall and the Great Wall of China. A silver bracelet was bought on his trip to South Africa for Nelson Mandela&#x27;s funeral, which is engraved only with the numerals “46664” — Mandela&#x27;s prisoner number on Robben Island.

Mansbridge was and is also an avid and longtime fan of the original Winnipeg Jets and the current Winnipeg Jets, having attended the signing of Bobby Hull in 1972 while working as a reporter for CBWT. Mansbridge&#x27;s past public support for both Jets franchises – including use of his Twitter account – is often seen as a humorous contrast to his balanced reporting style. To underline this image, Mansbridge is also known to occasionally make jokes at the expense of the Toronto Maple Leafs. Nonetheless, he continues to support his childhood Maple Leafs in a secondary capacity.

Mansbridge had a voice cameo in the 2016 Walt Disney Animation Studios film &quot;Zootopia&quot; as &quot;Peter Moosebridge,&quot; an anthropomorphic moose news anchor. Ahead of his final broadcast in 2017, a space in the Canadian Broadcasting Centre in Toronto was renamed as Mansbridge Hall in his honor.

Since the 2019 Canadian federal election, Mansbridge has hosted a daily podcast called The Bridge.

==Awards and honorary degrees==
Mansbridge has won several honours throughout his career, including 13 Gemini awards. In 2008, he was made an Officer of the Order of Canada, the second grade of nation&#x27;s second highest civilian honour. In that capacity, the Queen Elizabeth II Diamond Jubilee Medal was also conferred upon him in 2012.

Peter Mansbridge has received a number of honorary degrees; these include:

*1989: Lakehead University, Doctor of Humane Letters (DHL)
*1996: Mount Royal University, Bachelor of Applied Communications (Journalism)
*1999: Mount Allison University, Doctor of Laws (LL.D)
*2001: University of Manitoba, Doctor of Laws (LL.D)
*2005: Ryerson University, Doctor of Journalism
*2008: University of Western Ontario, Doctor of Laws (LL.D)
*2010: University of Windsor, Doctor of Laws (LL.D)
*2011: York University, Doctor of Laws (LL.D)
*2014: Carleton University, Doctor of Laws (LL.D)
*2017: University of Calgary, Doctor of Laws (LL.D)
*2017: McMaster University, Doctor of Laws (LL.D)
*2017: University of Toronto, Doctor of Laws (LL.D)

==References==
==External links==
* CBC Personalities - Peter Mansbridge
* CBC Newsworld - Mansbridge One on One
* &quot;The Canadian Encyclopedia&quot;: Mansbridge, Peter
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3376737" start="0" end="16" title="Peter Mansbridge" label="Peter Mansbridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q2931014" start="135" end="143" title="CBC News" label="CBC News"/>
<link wikidata="Q2413021" start="164" end="176" title="The National (CBC)" label="The National"/>
<link wikidata="Q1022955" start="184" end="198" title="CBC Television" label="CBC Television"/>
<link wikidata="Q2062629" start="253" end="269" title="CBC News Network" label="CBC News Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q281680" start="283" end="304" title="Mansbridge One on One" label="Mansbridge One on One"/>
<link wikidata="Q742150" start="426" end="450" title="Mount Allison University" label="Mount Allison University"/>
<link wikidata="Q61061" start="471" end="481" title="chancellor (education)" label="chancellor"/>
<link wikidata="Q461761" start="531" end="564" title="Canadian Broadcasting Corporation" label="Canadian Broadcasting Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="789" end="795" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q1229534" start="888" end="891" title="Distinguished Flying Cross (United Kingdom)" label="DFC"/>
<link wikidata="Q165862" start="908" end="911" title="Royal Air Force" label="RAF"/>
<link wikidata="Q4891933" start="912" end="926" title="Wing commander (rank)" label="Wing Commander"/>
<link wikidata="Q203622" start="1163" end="1177" title="Avro Lancaster" label="Avro Lancaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="1192" end="1204" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q3061319" start="1298" end="1346" title="Princess Patricia&amp;#x27;s Canadian Light Infantry" label="Princess Patricia&amp;#x27;s Canadian Light Infantry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1930" start="1364" end="1370" title="Ottawa" label="Ottawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1904" start="1372" end="1379" title="Ontario" label="Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q3151867" start="1420" end="1446" title="Glebe Collegiate Institute" label="Glebe Collegiate Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q25387" start="1530" end="1549" title="Royal Canadian Navy" label="Royal Canadian Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7833747" start="1819" end="1827" title="Transair (Canada)" label="Transair"/>
<link wikidata="Q2875820" start="1831" end="1848" title="Churchill Airport" label="Churchill Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q744553" start="1852" end="1861" title="Churchill, Manitoba" label="Churchill"/>
<link wikidata="Q1948" start="1863" end="1871" title="Manitoba" label="Manitoba"/>
<link wikidata="Q461761" start="1963" end="1996" title="Canadian Broadcasting Corporation" label="Canadian Broadcasting Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5009346" start="2017" end="2021" title="CBWK-FM" label="CHFC"/>
<link wikidata="Q2135" start="2205" end="2213" title="Winnipeg" label="Winnipeg"/>
<link wikidata="Q5009347" start="2248" end="2251" title="CBW (AM)" label="CBW"/>
<link wikidata="Q2931061" start="2298" end="2305" title="CBWT-DT" label="CBWT-TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q1989" start="2363" end="2375" title="Saskatchewan" label="Saskatchewan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2413021" start="2431" end="2443" title="The National (CBC)" label="The National"/>
<link wikidata="Q475689" start="2493" end="2506" title="Parliament of Canada" label="parliamentary"/>
<link wikidata="Q3198060" start="2610" end="2623" title="Knowlton Nash" label="Knowlton Nash"/>
<link wikidata="Q43380" start="2637" end="2640" title="CBS" label="CBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q743674" start="2906" end="2916" title="Don Newman (broadcaster)" label="Don Newman"/>
<link wikidata="Q3361787" start="3121" end="3134" title="Pamela Wallin" label="Pamela Wallin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2931016" start="3144" end="3163" title="CBC Prime Time News" label="CBC Prime Time News"/>
<link wikidata="Q849095" start="3468" end="3485" title="List of Canadian federal general elections" label="federal elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q426273" start="3493" end="3514" title="leadership convention" label="leadership convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q835352" start="3521" end="3538" title="Meech Lake Accord" label="Meech Lake Accord"/>
<link wikidata="Q2081029" start="3557" end="3577" title="Charlottetown Accord" label="Charlottetown Accord"/>
<link wikidata="Q943044" start="3602" end="3624" title="1995 Quebec referendum" label="1995 Quebec referendum"/>
<link wikidata="Q4592748" start="3626" end="3652" title="1997 Red River flood" label="floods in Manitoba in 1997"/>
<link wikidata="Q2090886" start="3654" end="3694" title="North American Ice Storm of 1998" label="ice storms in Ontario and Quebec in 1998"/>
<link wikidata="Q16829142" start="3743" end="3784" title="death and state funeral of Pierre Trudeau" label="death and state funeral of Pierre Trudeau"/>
<link wikidata="Q2991760" start="3790" end="3840" title="Northeast blackout of 2003" label="2003 blackout across much of Eastern North America"/>
<link wikidata="Q5247275" start="3849" end="3887" title="death and state funeral of Jack Layton" label="death and state funeral of Jack Layton"/>
<link wikidata="Q42804" start="3987" end="3992" title="beard" label="beard"/>
<link wikidata="Q37643" start="4334" end="4342" title="Gulf War" label="Gulf War"/>
<link wikidata="Q190029" start="4348" end="4361" title="Kosovo War" label="War in Kosovo"/>
<link wikidata="Q10806" start="4367" end="4387" title="September 11 attacks" label="September 11 attacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q18338238" start="4396" end="4426" title="2014 shootings at Parliament Hill, Ottawa" label="2014 Parliament Hill shootings"/>
<link wikidata="Q107802" start="4460" end="4481" title="2003 invasion of Iraq" label="2003 invasion of Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q5086" start="4571" end="4582" title="Berlin Wall" label="Berlin Wall"/>
<link wikidata="Q2918374" start="4600" end="4624" title="Funeral of Diana, Princess of Wales" label="Diana, Princess of Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131707" start="4629" end="4646" title="Funeral of Pope John Paul II" label="Pope John Paul II"/>
<link wikidata="Q645968" start="4657" end="4662" title="British Royal Family" label="royal"/>
<link wikidata="Q19546" start="4664" end="4669" title="Pope" label="papal"/>
<link wikidata="Q11696" start="4675" end="4690" title="President of the United States" label="US presidential"/>
<link wikidata="Q5389" start="4718" end="4731" title="Olympic Games" label="Olympic Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q25094" start="4741" end="4782" title="First inauguration of Barack Obama" label="inauguration of US President Barack Obama"/>
<link wikidata="Q15878" start="4813" end="4821" title="Normandy" label="Normandy"/>
<link wikidata="Q16470" start="4854" end="4859" title="Normandy landings" label="D-Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="4873" end="4887" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q55" start="4896" end="4907" title="Netherlands" label="Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q622365" start="4940" end="4947" title="Victory in Europe Day" label="V-E Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q281680" start="5071" end="5092" title="Mansbridge One on One" label="Mansbridge One on One"/>
<link wikidata="Q3257540" start="5159" end="5174" title="Lloyd Robertson" label="Lloyd Robertson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1024520" start="5184" end="5201" title="CTV National News" label="CTV National News"/>
<link wikidata="Q5242572" start="5325" end="5338" title="Dawna Friesen" label="Dawna Friesen"/>
<link wikidata="Q5570508" start="5373" end="5388" title="Global National" label="Global National"/>
<link wikidata="Q3242417" start="5409" end="5422" title="Lisa LaFlamme" label="Lisa LaFlamme"/>
<link wikidata="Q16955235" start="7517" end="7560" title="Canadian Association of Petroleum Producers" label="Canadian Association of Petroleum Producers"/>
<link wikidata="Q3428839" start="7928" end="7938" title="Rex Murphy" label="Rex Murphy"/>
<link wikidata="Q639756" start="8597" end="8607" title="Canada Day" label="Canada Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q43890449" start="9040" end="9081" title="wedding of Prince Harry and Meghan Markle" label="wedding of Prince Harry and Meghan Markle"/>
<link wikidata="Q24190721" start="9130" end="9151" title="2019 Canadian federal election" label="2019 federal election"/>
<link wikidata="Q3567254" start="9252" end="9264" title="Wendy Mesley" label="Wendy Mesley"/>
<link wikidata="Q3082477" start="9329" end="9334" title="Frank (magazine)" label="Frank"/>
<link wikidata="Q534520" start="9415" end="9427" title="Cynthia Dale" label="Cynthia Dale"/>
<link wikidata="Q740756" start="9598" end="9616" title="Stratford, Ontario" label="Stratford, Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q5527417" start="9671" end="9685" title="Gatineau Hills" label="Gatineau Hills"/>
<link wikidata="Q5086" start="10026" end="10037" title="Berlin Wall" label="Berlin Wall"/>
<link wikidata="Q12501" start="10046" end="10065" title="Great Wall of China" label="Great Wall of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q8023" start="10128" end="10142" title="Nelson Mandela" label="Nelson Mandela"/>
<link wikidata="Q192493" start="10244" end="10257" title="Robben Island" label="Robben Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q576406" start="10319" end="10341" title="Winnipeg Jets (1972–1996)" label="original Winnipeg Jets"/>
<link wikidata="Q472741" start="10358" end="10371" title="Winnipeg Jets" label="Winnipeg Jets"/>
<link wikidata="Q456688" start="10404" end="10414" title="Bobby Hull" label="Bobby Hull"/>
<link wikidata="Q2931061" start="10455" end="10459" title="CBWT-DT" label="CBWT"/>
<link wikidata="Q918" start="10547" end="10554" title="Twitter" label="Twitter"/>
<link wikidata="Q203384" start="10734" end="10753" title="Toronto Maple Leafs" label="Toronto Maple Leafs"/>
<link wikidata="Q203384" start="10806" end="10817" title="Toronto Maple Leafs" label="Maple Leafs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047410" start="10885" end="10914" title="Walt Disney Animation Studios" label="Walt Disney Animation Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q15270647" start="10926" end="10934" title="Zootopia" label="Zootopia"/>
<link wikidata="Q132987" start="10978" end="10993" title="Anthropomorphism" label="anthropomorphic"/>
<link wikidata="Q35517" start="10994" end="10999" title="moose" label="moose"/>
<link wikidata="Q2935781" start="11066" end="11094" title="Canadian Broadcasting Centre" label="Canadian Broadcasting Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q24190721" start="11162" end="11192" title="2019 Canadian federal election" label="2019 Canadian federal election"/>
<link wikidata="Q923408" start="11355" end="11368" title="Gemini Awards" label="Gemini awards"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11394" end="11424" title="Order of Canada#Officer" label="Officer of the Order of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q1545795" start="11446" end="11490" title="Orders, decorations, and medals of Canada" label="nation&amp;#x27;s second highest civilian honour"/>
<link wikidata="Q194540" start="11514" end="11554" title="Queen Elizabeth II Diamond Jubilee Medal" label="Queen Elizabeth II Diamond Jubilee Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165215" start="11676" end="11695" title="Lakehead University" label="Lakehead University"/>
<link wikidata="Q849697" start="11697" end="11721" title="Doctorate" label="Doctor of Humane Letters"/>
<link wikidata="Q13650869" start="11735" end="11757" title="Mount Royal University" label="Mount Royal University"/>
<link wikidata="Q516445" start="11759" end="11806" title="Bachelor" label="Bachelor of Applied Communications (Journalism)"/>
<link wikidata="Q742150" start="11814" end="11838" title="Mount Allison University" label="Mount Allison University"/>
<link wikidata="Q959320" start="11840" end="11854" title="Doctor of Laws" label="Doctor of Laws"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191833" start="11869" end="11891" title="University of Manitoba" label="University of Manitoba"/>
<link wikidata="Q959320" start="11893" end="11907" title="Doctor of Laws" label="Doctor of Laws"/>
<link wikidata="Q611723" start="11922" end="11940" title="Toronto Metropolitan University" label="Ryerson University"/>
<link wikidata="Q849697" start="11942" end="11962" title="Doctorate" label="Doctor of Journalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144262" start="11970" end="11999" title="University of Western Ontario" label="University of Western Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q959320" start="12001" end="12015" title="Doctor of Laws" label="Doctor of Laws"/>
<link wikidata="Q2065769" start="12030" end="12051" title="University of Windsor" label="University of Windsor"/>
<link wikidata="Q959320" start="12053" end="12067" title="Doctor of Laws" label="Doctor of Laws"/>
<link wikidata="Q849751" start="12082" end="12097" title="York University" label="York University"/>
<link wikidata="Q959320" start="12099" end="12113" title="Doctor of Laws" label="Doctor of Laws"/>
<link wikidata="Q1041737" start="12128" end="12147" title="Carleton University" label="Carleton University"/>
<link wikidata="Q959320" start="12149" end="12163" title="Doctor of Laws" label="Doctor of Laws"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067471" start="12178" end="12199" title="University of Calgary" label="University of Calgary"/>
<link wikidata="Q959320" start="12201" end="12215" title="Doctor of Laws" label="Doctor of Laws"/>
<link wikidata="Q632891" start="12230" end="12249" title="McMaster University" label="McMaster University"/>
<link wikidata="Q959320" start="12251" end="12265" title="Doctor of Laws" label="Doctor of Laws"/>
<link wikidata="Q180865" start="12280" end="12301" title="University of Toronto" label="University of Toronto"/>
<link wikidata="Q959320" start="12303" end="12317" title="Doctor of Laws" label="Doctor of Laws"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="252544" wikidata="Q47345" url="?curid=252544" title="Kyle Broflovski">
<text>Kyle Broflovski is a fictional character in the adult animated sitcom &quot;South Park&quot;. He is voiced by and loosely based on series co-creator Matt Stone. Kyle is one of the series&#x27; four central characters, along with his friends Stan Marsh, Kenny McCormick, and Eric Cartman. He debuted on television when &quot;South Park&quot; first aired on August 13, 1997, after having first appeared in &quot;The Spirit of Christmas&quot; shorts created by Stone and long-time collaborator Trey Parker in 1992 (&quot;Jesus vs. Frosty&quot;) and 1995 (&quot;Jesus vs. Santa&quot;).

Kyle is an elementary school student who commonly has extraordinary experiences not typical of conventional small-town life in his fictional hometown of South Park, Colorado. Kyle is distinctive as one of the few Jewish children on the show, and because of this, he often feels like an outsider among the core group of characters. His portrayal in this role is often dealt with satirically, and has elicited both praise and criticism from Jewish viewers. He is currently 10 years old.

Like the other &quot;South Park&quot; characters, Kyle is animated by computer in a way to emulate the show&#x27;s original method of cutout animation. He also appears in the 1999 full-length feature film &quot;South Park: Bigger, Longer &amp; Uncut&quot;, as well as &quot;South Park&quot;-related media and merchandise. While Parker and Stone portray Kyle as having common childlike tendencies, his dialogue is often intended to reflect stances and views on more adult-oriented issues, and has been cited in numerous publications by experts in the fields of politics, religion, popular culture, and philosophy.

==Role in &quot;South Park&quot;==
Kyle attends South Park Elementary as part of Mr. Garrison&#x27;s class. During the show&#x27;s first 58 episodes, Kyle and the other students were in the third grade following which they have been in the fourth grade. He lives in South Park with his father Gerald, a lawyer, and his overprotective mother Sheila, a housewife who fits the mold of a Jewish mother stereotype. Gerald and Sheila have been referred to have Polish and Russian Jewish background, and they mutually share a strong devotion to their Jewish religion, while expressing deep concern during the multiple times Kyle&#x27;s faith in Judaism becomes enervated. Kyle has a younger brother named Ike, who Kyle learns was adopted and originally from Canada in the episode &quot;Ike&#x27;s Wee Wee&quot;.

Gerald often attempts to teach Kyle important morals. Although his mother&#x27;s outspoken, manipulative nature usually overwhelms Kyle, he tends to show that he truly loves her, and takes offense to any insult Cartman may offer about her. Although he engages in the reckless act of punting Ike like a football, Kyle shows concern for his brother&#x27;s well-being. He was initially reluctant to embrace Ike as his brother upon learning that Ike was adopted, but Ike&#x27;s genuine affection for his older brother persuaded Kyle to love him in return, and regard him as &quot;true family&quot;.

Kyle is modeled after Stone, while Stan is modeled after Parker. Kyle and Stan are best friends, and their relationship, which is supposed to reflect the real-life friendship between Parker and Stone, is a common topic throughout the series. The two do have their disagreements, but always reconcile without any long-term damage to their friendship. The show&#x27;s official website defines Kyle&#x27;s role amongst his friends as &quot;the smart one&quot;. He often provides a sober thought to plans or ideas made by the other boys, and explains a moral outlook while drawing upon his vast knowledge and intelligence. He tends to offer reasonable or scientific explanations both to situations most others view as supernatural in nature, and in opposition of propaganda dispensed by Cartman.

Several episodes focus on Kyle and his religion, and being the lone Jew has resulted in an enmity with the Antisemitic Cartman that has become significantly more pronounced as the series progresses. Parker and Stone have compared the relationship to the one shared by Archie Bunker and Michael Stivic on the 1970s sitcom &quot;All in the Family&quot;. Kyle makes cracks at Cartman&#x27;s weight and is horrified and disgusted with Cartman&#x27;s immorality, cruelty, bigotry, and greed. Their rivalry often elevates to the point where Kyle becomes so obsessed with beating Cartman at whatever he does, he sometimes neglects Stan and Kenny in the process. He has a tendency to make what he thinks are safe bets with Cartman, often losing these bets when the improbable actions promised by Cartman are accomplished. Though he has claimed Kenny was not his friend, in order to avoid having to spend the night at his poverty-stricken household, Kyle has professed a friendship with Kenny and shown genuine concern for Kenny&#x27;s health and safety. Kyle normally has the angrier reaction of yelling &quot;You bastards!&quot; following Stan&#x27;s exclamation of the popular catchphrase &quot;Oh my God, they killed Kenny&quot; after one of Kenny&#x27;s trademark deaths.

Near the end of the production run of the show&#x27;s fifth season (2001), Parker and Stone contemplated having an episode in which Kyle was killed off. The reasoning behind the idea was to genuinely surprise fans, and to allow an opportunity to provide a major role for Butters Stotch, a breakout character whose popularity was growing with the viewers and creators of the show. Parker and Stone initially chose Kyle because they deemed him as being too similar to Stan in terms of personality. Instead, the character of Kenny was chosen, and he was seemingly killed off for good in the episode &quot;Kenny Dies&quot;. The duo claimed they grew tired of upholding the tradition of having Kenny die in each episode, and regarded the character as a &quot;prop&quot;.

In many episodes, Kyle draws upon his sense of social purpose and moral outrage, and reflects on the lessons he has learned during the course of an episode, with a speech that often begins &quot;You know, I learned something today...&quot;. Kyle acknowledged this trend in the season five (2001) episode &quot;Cartmanland&quot; when he states that he often gives the speech each week in an attempt to &quot;try and better myself&quot;, and again in the season seven (2003) episode &quot;Butt Out&quot; where he repeatedly reminds his friends that they continuously allow potentially riotous events to occur, and are only able to defuse the situation by giving such a speech to the gathered townsfolk.

Kyle&#x27;s mother reveals in the episode &quot;Cherokee Hair Tampons&quot; that Kyle is diabetic and had to get a kidney transplant. His diabetes could explain why he gets sick more often than his classmates.

Kyle has a democratic political stance, as seen in the episode The Wacky Molestation Adventure, where he brings democracy to the previously communist Cuba.

==Character==

===Creation and design===

An unnamed precursor to Kyle first appeared in the first &quot;The Spirit of Christmas&quot; short, dubbed &quot;Jesus vs. Frosty&quot;, created by Parker and Stone in 1992 while they were students at the University of Colorado. The character was composed of construction paper cutouts and animated using stop motion. When asked three years later by friend Brian Graden to create another short as a video Christmas card that he could send to friends, Parker and Stone created another similarly-animated &quot;The Spirit of Christmas&quot; short, dubbed &quot;Jesus vs. Santa&quot;. In this short, which was the first appearance of Kyle styled as he is in the series, he is given his first name. When developing the character, Parker recalled there being only one Jewish student in his entire hometown of Conifer, Colorado, and described her as being &quot;the token Jewish person&quot;. Kyle next appeared on August 13, 1997, when &quot;South Park&quot; debuted on Comedy Central with the episode &quot;Cartman Gets an Anal Probe&quot;.

From the show&#x27;s second episode, &quot;Weight Gain 4000&quot; (season one, 1997), Kyle, like all other characters on the show, has been animated using computer software, though he is presented to give the impression that the show still utilizes its original technique. In keeping with the show&#x27;s animation style, Kyle is composed of simple geometrical shapes. He is not offered the same free range of motion associated with hand-drawn characters; his character is generally shown from only one angle, and his movements are animated in an intentionally jerky fashion.

Kyle is usually depicted wearing winter attire that consists of a bright green ushanka, a bright orange jacket, dark green jeans, and lime-green mittens/gloves. The rare instances in which he is shown without his cap, he has a bright red-to-auburn Jewfro. His hat and hairstyle were influenced by those of James Humphrey, a character whom Matt Stone portrayed in the 1993 film &quot;Cannibal! The Musical&quot;. Matt also had a hat just like Kyle&#x27;s as a kid. Stone cited that he came up with the voice of Kyle while he and Parker were in film class, where they would speak in high-pitched childish voices that would often get them into trouble. The recorded audio is edited with Pro Tools, and the pitch altered to make the voice sound more like that of a fourth grader.

===Personality and traits===
Like his friends, Kyle is foul-mouthed as a means for Parker and Stone to display how they claim young boys really talk when they are alone. Parker notes that while Kyle is sometimes cynical and profane, there is an &quot;underlying sweetness&quot; to the character, and &quot;Time&quot; described Kyle and his friends as &quot;sometimes cruel but with a core of innocence&quot;. He is amused by bodily functions and toilet humor, and his favorite television personalities are Terrance and Phillip, a Canadian duo whose comedy routines on their show-within-the-show revolve substantially around fart jokes.

Kyle often displays the highest moral standard of all the boys and is usually depicted as the most intelligent. When describing Kyle, Stone states that both he and the character are &quot;reactionary&quot;, and susceptible to irritability and impatience. In some instances, Kyle is the only child in his class to not initially indulge in a fad or fall victim to a ploy. This has resulted in both his eagerness to fit in, and his resentment and frustration.

As a Jew, Kyle often defends and shows pride in his religion and ancestry. He is nevertheless lonely in this regard, particularly around Christmas time, though he takes solace in anticipating the annual appearance of Mr. Hankey, an anthropomorphic piece of feces who emerges from the sewer to spread Christmas cheer.

A recurring plot element is the depiction of Kyle as insecure about Jewish traditions and beliefs. Already regarding God as cruel for allowing him to suffer from a life-threatening hemorrhoid while Cartman enjoys a million-dollar inheritance, Kyle became further appalled after being read the story of Job. He also once feared damnation for not having grown up as a Catholic. During both instances, he renounced his affiliation with Judaism, only to have his faith restored by events occurring at the end of an episode. After watching &quot;The Passion of the Christ&quot;, a shameful Kyle suddenly felt that Cartman&#x27;s antisemitism was justified, and suggested to angry members of his synagogue that the Jews apologize for the death of Jesus. Kyle&#x27;s guilt is quickly alleviated when he encounters Mel Gibson, the film&#x27;s director, and perceives him to be nothing more than a deranged masochist.

Kyle has a first cousin also named Kyle, whom he resents for being the embodiment of Jewish stereotypes and causing Kyle to question whether or not he was a self-hating Jew. Kyle is hopelessly inept at choreographed dancing; in the eyes of Cartman, he perpetuated the stereotype that &quot;Jews have no rhythm&quot;. His birthday is May 26, the same day as Stone. Kyle was conceived in New Jersey.

==In other media==
Kyle had a major role in &quot;South Park: Bigger, Longer &amp; Uncut&quot;, the full-length film based on the series, and appeared on the film&#x27;s soundtrack singing the same musical numbers performed in the movie. As a tribute to the Dead Parrot sketch, a short that features Kyle as the owner of a shop to where Cartman attempts to return a dead Kenny aired during a 1999 BBC television special commemorating the 30th anniversary of &quot;Monty Python&#x27;s Flying Circus&quot;. Kyle also featured in the documentary film &quot;The Aristocrats&quot;, listening to Cartman tell his version of the film&#x27;s titular joke, and in &quot;The Gauntlet&quot;, a short spoofing both &quot;Gladiator&quot; and &quot;Battlefield Earth&quot; which aired during the 2000 MTV Movie Awards. Stone performs as Kyle on tracks for &quot;Chef Aid: The South Park Album&quot; and &quot;Mr. Hankey&#x27;s Christmas Classics&quot;.

Kyle also appears in six &quot;South Park&quot;-related video games: In &quot;South Park&quot;, Kyle is controlled by the player through the first-person shooter mode who attempts to ward off enemies from terrorizing the town of South Park. In &quot;South Park: Chef&#x27;s Luv Shack&quot;, a user has the option of playing as Kyle when participating in the game&#x27;s several &quot;mini-games&quot; based on other popular arcade games. In the racing game &quot;South Park Rally&quot;, a user can race as Kyle against other players, selecting from a variety of vehicles. In &quot;South Park Let&#x27;s Go Tower Defense Play!&quot;, Kyle can be selected as a playable character used to establish a tower defense against the game&#x27;s antagonists. Kyle role-plays as the Elf King in the 2014 game, &quot;The Stick of Truth&quot;, as well as in its sequel, &quot;The Fractured but Whole&quot;, where he role-plays as the Human Kite.

==Cultural impact==
Kyle&#x27;s depiction on the show has drawn both praise and criticism from the Jewish community. Detractors of the character cite his own habit of eschewing common Jewish practices and reiterating negative stereotypes for comedic purposes. Supportive Jewish viewers commend the show for using Kyle to accurately portray what it is like for a young Jew to have to endure loneliness and bigotry as an ethnic and religious minority. One of the show&#x27;s more popular episodes, &quot;The Passion of the Jew&quot; (season eight, 2004), deals largely with Kyle&#x27;s religious anxiety. The episode was independently released on DVD along with two other religion-themed episodes from the series.

Over the seasons Kyle has addressed topics such as brotherhood, excessive litigation, hate crime legislation, civil liberties, profanity in television, hybrid vehicle ownership, and the economy. In the season 10 (2006) episode &quot;Cartoon Wars Part II&quot;, Kyle expresses his opinions on censorship, and iterates Parker and Stone&#x27;s sentiments on the topic by telling a television executive &quot;Either it&#x27;s all okay, or none of it is&quot; in regard to whether any subject should remain off-limits to satire. To Parker and Stone&#x27;s disappointment, the episode received more attention for its criticism of the show &quot;Family Guy&quot; than it did for Kyle&#x27;s proclamation.

Kyle&#x27;s opinions have been the subject of much critical analysis in the media and literary world. The book &quot;South Park and Philosophy: You Know, I Learned Something Today&quot; includes an essay in which Bridgewater State College philosophy professor William J. Devlin references the teachings of Socrates and Friedrich Nietzsche when describing Kyle&#x27;s role in the show. Essays in the books &quot;South Park and Philosophy: Bigger, Longer, and More Penetrating&quot;, &quot;Blame Canada! South Park and Contemporary Culture&quot;, and &quot;Taking South Park Seriously&quot; have also analyzed Kyle&#x27;s perspectives within the framework of popular philosophical, theological, and political concepts.

==See also==

*South Park (Park County, Colorado)
*South Park City
==Notes==
==References==
* 


==External links==

* Kyle Broflovski at South Park Studios</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q47345" start="0" end="15" title="Kyle Broflovski" label="Kyle Broflovski"/>
<link wikidata="Q3249257" start="48" end="62" title="adult animation" label="adult animated"/>
<link wikidata="Q16538" start="76" end="86" title="South Park" label="South Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q44410" start="149" end="159" title="Matt Stone" label="Matt Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q47255" start="241" end="251" title="Stan Marsh" label="Stan Marsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q47386" start="253" end="268" title="Kenny McCormick" label="Kenny McCormick"/>
<link wikidata="Q47352" start="274" end="286" title="Eric Cartman" label="Eric Cartman"/>
<link wikidata="Q278560" start="410" end="433" title="The Spirit of Christmas (short film)" label="The Spirit of Christmas"/>
<link wikidata="Q44414" start="491" end="502" title="Trey Parker" label="Trey Parker"/>
<link wikidata="Q1261" start="748" end="756" title="Colorado" label="Colorado"/>
<link wikidata="Q9268" start="796" end="802" title="Judaism" label="Jewish"/>
<link wikidata="Q2291325" start="1203" end="1219" title="cutout animation" label="cutout animation"/>
<link wikidata="" start="1280" end="1318" title="South Park: Bigger, Longer &amp;amp; Uncut" label="South Park: Bigger, Longer &amp;amp; Uncut"/>
<link wikidata="Q47622" start="1764" end="1776" title="Mr. Garrison" label="Mr. Garrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q47443" start="1976" end="1982" title="Gerald and Sheila Broflovski" label="Gerald"/>
<link wikidata="Q47443" start="2024" end="2030" title="Gerald and Sheila Broflovski" label="Sheila"/>
<link wikidata="Q7611291" start="2067" end="2091" title="Jewish mother stereotype" label="Jewish mother stereotype"/>
<link wikidata="Q1516823" start="2138" end="2144" title="History of the Jews in Poland" label="Polish"/>
<link wikidata="Q2031644" start="2149" end="2163" title="Russian Jews" label="Russian Jewish"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2381" end="2384" title="List of South Park families#Kyle Broflovski" label="Ike"/>
<link wikidata="Q16" start="2434" end="2440" title="Canada" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q743065" start="2462" end="2480" title="Ike&amp;#x27;s Wee Wee" label="Ike&amp;#x27;s Wee Wee"/>
<link wikidata="Q22649" start="3985" end="3996" title="Antisemitism" label="Antisemitic"/>
<link wikidata="Q321663" start="4146" end="4159" title="Archie Bunker" label="Archie Bunker"/>
<link wikidata="Q6834640" start="4164" end="4178" title="Michael Stivic" label="Michael Stivic"/>
<link wikidata="Q170238" start="4192" end="4198" title="situation comedy" label="sitcom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048856" start="4205" end="4222" title="All in the Family" label="All in the Family"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5115" end="5144" title="Kenny McCormick#Deaths" label="Kenny&amp;#x27;s trademark deaths"/>
<link wikidata="Q518281" start="5201" end="5213" title="South Park (season 5)" label="fifth season"/>
<link wikidata="Q47958" start="5418" end="5432" title="Butters Stotch" label="Butters Stotch"/>
<link wikidata="Q388155" start="5436" end="5454" title="List of breakout characters" label="breakout character"/>
<link wikidata="Q635472" start="5749" end="5759" title="Kenny Dies" label="Kenny Dies"/>
<link wikidata="Q518281" start="6191" end="6202" title="South Park (season 5)" label="season five"/>
<link wikidata="Q858752" start="6224" end="6235" title="Cartmanland" label="Cartmanland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1445583" start="6367" end="6379" title="South Park (season 7)" label="season seven"/>
<link wikidata="Q835666" start="6401" end="6409" title="Butt Out" label="Butt Out"/>
<link wikidata="Q836927" start="6664" end="6685" title="Cherokee Hair Tampons" label="Cherokee Hair Tampons"/>
<link wikidata="Q12206" start="6705" end="6713" title="diabetic" label="diabetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7174" start="6838" end="6848" title="Democracy" label="democratic"/>
<link wikidata="Q838656" start="6890" end="6921" title="The Wacky Molestation Adventure" label="The Wacky Molestation Adventure"/>
<link wikidata="Q6186" start="6967" end="6976" title="communism" label="communist"/>
<link wikidata="Q241" start="6977" end="6981" title="Cuba" label="Cuba"/>
<link wikidata="Q736674" start="7231" end="7253" title="University of Colorado at Boulder" label="University of Colorado"/>
<link wikidata="Q2442243" start="7285" end="7303" title="construction paper" label="construction paper"/>
<link wikidata="Q308876" start="7331" end="7342" title="stop motion" label="stop motion"/>
<link wikidata="Q912251" start="7383" end="7395" title="Brian Graden" label="Brian Graden"/>
<link wikidata="Q622508" start="7431" end="7445" title="Christmas card" label="Christmas card"/>
<link wikidata="Q5161057" start="7830" end="7847" title="Conifer, Colorado" label="Conifer, Colorado"/>
<link wikidata="Q492145" start="7886" end="7891" title="tokenism" label="token"/>
<link wikidata="Q131439" start="7991" end="8005" title="Comedy Central" label="Comedy Central"/>
<link wikidata="Q930486" start="8029" end="8055" title="Cartman Gets an Anal Probe" label="Cartman Gets an Anal Probe"/>
<link wikidata="Q388457" start="8107" end="8123" title="Weight Gain 4000" label="Weight Gain 4000"/>
<link wikidata="Q2318670" start="8131" end="8141" title="South Park (season 1)" label="season one"/>
<link wikidata="Q2291325" start="8369" end="8384" title="Cutout animation" label="animation style"/>
<link wikidata="Q488509" start="8720" end="8727" title="ushanka" label="ushanka"/>
<link wikidata="Q388036" start="8889" end="8895" title="Jewfro" label="Jewfro"/>
<link wikidata="Q779121" start="9024" end="9045" title="Cannibal! The Musical" label="Cannibal! The Musical"/>
<link wikidata="Q247670" start="9325" end="9334" title="Pro Tools" label="Pro Tools"/>
<link wikidata="Q43297" start="9724" end="9728" title="Time (magazine)" label="Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q2284331" start="9864" end="9876" title="toilet humour" label="toilet humor"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9924" end="9944" title="List of supporting characters on South Park#Terrance and Phillip" label="Terrance and Phillip"/>
<link wikidata="Q19809" start="10650" end="10659" title="Christmas" label="Christmas"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10730" end="10740" title="List of supporting characters on South Park#Mr. Mackey" label="Mr. Hankey"/>
<link wikidata="Q132987" start="10745" end="10760" title="anthropomorphism" label="anthropomorphic"/>
<link wikidata="Q496" start="10770" end="10775" title="feces" label="feces"/>
<link wikidata="Q179962" start="11133" end="11136" title="Job (Bible)" label="Job"/>
<link wikidata="Q1513117" start="11158" end="11167" title="damnation" label="damnation"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="11197" end="11205" title="Catholicism" label="Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q51668" start="11372" end="11397" title="The Passion of the Christ" label="The Passion of the Christ"/>
<link wikidata="Q34627" start="11521" end="11530" title="synagogue" label="synagogue"/>
<link wikidata="Q302" start="11572" end="11577" title="Jesus" label="Jesus"/>
<link wikidata="Q42229" start="11638" end="11648" title="Mel Gibson" label="Mel Gibson"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11776" end="11780" title="List of South Park families#Kyle Schwartz" label="Kyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1508980" start="11898" end="11913" title="self-hating Jew" label="self-hating Jew"/>
<link wikidata="Q1408" start="12127" end="12137" title="New Jersey" label="New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="" start="12190" end="12228" title="South Park: Bigger, Longer &amp;amp; Uncut" label="South Park: Bigger, Longer &amp;amp; Uncut"/>
<link wikidata="" start="12298" end="12320" title="South Park: Bigger, Longer &amp;amp; Uncut (soundtrack)" label="film&amp;#x27;s soundtrack"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196138" start="12398" end="12416" title="Dead Parrot sketch" label="Dead Parrot sketch"/>
<link wikidata="Q16401" start="12604" end="12637" title="Monty Python&amp;#x27;s Flying Circus" label="Monty Python&amp;#x27;s Flying Circus"/>
<link wikidata="Q93204" start="12671" end="12687" title="documentary film" label="documentary film"/>
<link wikidata="Q3281221" start="12694" end="12709" title="The Aristocrats (film)" label="The Aristocrats"/>
<link wikidata="Q128518" start="12849" end="12858" title="Gladiator (2000 film)" label="Gladiator"/>
<link wikidata="Q811023" start="12875" end="12892" title="Battlefield Earth (film)" label="Battlefield Earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1715837" start="12922" end="12943" title="2000 MTV Movie Awards" label="2000 MTV Movie Awards"/>
<link wikidata="" start="12988" end="13018" title="Chef Aid: The South Park Album" label="Chef Aid: The South Park Album"/>
<link wikidata="Q724154" start="13035" end="13071" title="Mr. Hankey&amp;#x27;s Christmas Classics" label="Mr. Hankey&amp;#x27;s Christmas Classics"/>
<link wikidata="Q2636173" start="13158" end="13168" title="South Park (video game)" label="South Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q185029" start="13221" end="13241" title="first-person shooter" label="first-person shooter"/>
<link wikidata="" start="13330" end="13363" title="South Park: Chef&amp;#x27;s Luv Shack" label="South Park: Chef&amp;#x27;s Luv Shack"/>
<link wikidata="Q530973" start="13543" end="13559" title="South Park Rally" label="South Park Rally"/>
<link wikidata="Q3965580" start="13661" end="13705" title="South Park Let&amp;#x27;s Go Tower Defense Play!" label="South Park Let&amp;#x27;s Go Tower Defense Play!"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137896" start="13778" end="13791" title="tower defense" label="tower defense"/>
<link wikidata="Q1361181" start="13834" end="13844" title="Role-playing" label="role-plays"/>
<link wikidata="" start="13885" end="13903" title="South Park: The Stick of Truth" label="The Stick of Truth"/>
<link wikidata="" start="13943" end="13966" title="South Park: The Fractured but Whole" label="The Fractured but Whole"/>
<link wikidata="Q249445" start="14516" end="14538" title="The Passion of the Jew" label="The Passion of the Jew"/>
<link wikidata="Q3469106" start="14546" end="14558" title="South Park (season 8)" label="season eight"/>
<link wikidata="Q5294" start="14659" end="14662" title="DVD" label="DVD"/>
<link wikidata="Q31184" start="14778" end="14789" title="Sibling" label="brotherhood"/>
<link wikidata="Q697327" start="14801" end="14811" title="lawsuit" label="litigation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5681217" start="14813" end="14835" title="Hate crime laws in the United States" label="hate crime legislation"/>
<link wikidata="Q29556" start="14837" end="14852" title="civil liberties" label="civil liberties"/>
<link wikidata="Q184439" start="14854" end="14863" title="profanity" label="profanity"/>
<link wikidata="Q193075" start="14879" end="14893" title="hybrid vehicle" label="hybrid vehicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q154510" start="14913" end="14920" title="Great Recession" label="economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439548" start="14929" end="14938" title="South Park (season 10)" label="season 10"/>
<link wikidata="Q2512218" start="14960" end="14980" title="Cartoon Wars Part II" label="Cartoon Wars Part II"/>
<link wikidata="Q543" start="15019" end="15029" title="censorship" label="censorship"/>
<link wikidata="Q5930" start="15366" end="15376" title="Family Guy" label="Family Guy"/>
<link wikidata="" start="15543" end="15605" title="South Park and Philosophy: You Know, I Learned Something Today" label="South Park and Philosophy: You Know, I Learned Something Today"/>
<link wikidata="Q3446076" start="15639" end="15664" title="Bridgewater State College" label="Bridgewater State College"/>
<link wikidata="Q5891" start="15665" end="15675" title="philosophy" label="philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q913" start="15732" end="15740" title="Socrates" label="Socrates"/>
<link wikidata="Q3290848" start="15745" end="15764" title="Philosophy of Friedrich Nietzsche" label="Friedrich Nietzsche"/>
<link wikidata="" start="15837" end="15900" title="South Park and Philosophy: Bigger, Longer, and More Penetrating" label="South Park and Philosophy: Bigger, Longer, and More Penetrating"/>
<link wikidata="Q951038" start="16159" end="16193" title="South Park (Park County, Colorado)" label="South Park (Park County, Colorado)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2304558" start="16195" end="16210" title="South Park City" label="South Park City"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="252546" wikidata="Q13615" url="?curid=252546" title="Cagayan Valley">
<text>Cagayan Valley (; ), designated as Region II, is an administrative region in the Philippines. Located in the northeastern section of Luzon, it is composed of five Philippine provinces: Batanes, Cagayan, Isabela, Nueva Vizcaya, and Quirino. The region hosts four chartered cities: Cauayan, Ilagan, Santiago, and Tuguegarao (the regional center and largest city).

Most of its land area lies in the valley between the Cordilleras and the Sierra Madre mountain ranges. The eponymous Cagayan River, the country&#x27;s largest and longest, runs through the region, flows from the Caraballo Mountains, and ends in Aparri. Cagayan Valley is the second-largest Philippine administrative region by land area. According to a literacy survey in 2019, 93% of Cagayan Valley&#x27;s citizens (ages 10 to 64) are functionally literate, which is 5th out of the 17 regions of the Philippines. 

== History ==

=== Spanish colonial era ===
During the Spanish era, Cagayan Valley had a larger territory than today, then named &quot;Provincia de Cagayan.&quot; Then it included the territories of the above-mentioned provinces and the eastern parts of the Cordillera provinces of Apayao, Kalinga, Mountain Province, Ifugao and Benguet, and the north part of Aurora. Historian and missionary Jose Burgues said, &quot;The old Cagayan Valley comprises the province of Cagayan, Isabela and Nueva Vizcaya as well as the military Districts of Apayao, Itaves, Quiangan, Cayapa and Bintangan, plus the area of the Sierra Madre to the Pacific Ocean in the said trajectory.&quot; The exception is Palanan, which was established in 1625 by Spanish forces who arrived by ship from the Pacific coastal town of Baler in Tayabas province (now part of Aurora). Thus, Palanan was originally a part of Pampanga, then to Laguna, Tayabas (now Quezon Province; Tayabas became independent from Laguna), and Nueva Ecija, before being transferred to Nueva Vizcaya and finally Isabela. Also, unlike the rest of Cagayan Valley, it was served by Franciscan missionaries from Baler rather than the Dominicans. The population of the town was natively Paranan, then subsequently augmented by local Negritos, migrants from Baler who are Tagalogs and outlaws from Cagayan Valley, with the lingua franca of the settlement being Tagalog as opposed to Ilocano or Ibanag. The &quot;Atta&quot; or Negritos, the first people in valley, were later moved to the uplands or variably assimilated by the Austronesians, from whom the Ibanags, Itawes, Yogads, Gaddangs, Irayas, Malawegs, and Paranans descended - who actually came from one ethnicity. These are the people found by the Spaniards in the different villages along the rivers all over Cagayan Valley. The Spaniards rightly judged that these various villagers came from a single racial stock and decided to make the Ibanag language the &quot;lingua franca&quot;, both civilly and ecclesiastically for the entire people of Cagayan which they called collectively as the &quot;Cagayanes&quot; which later was transliterated to become &quot;Cagayanos&quot;. Various other peoples, mainly the Ilocanos, Pangasinenses, Kapampangans and Tagalogs, as well as Visayans, Moros, Ivatans, and even foreigners like the Chinese, Indians, Arabs, Spaniards and others were further infused to the native Cagayanes to become the modern &quot;Cagayano&quot; that we know today.
In 1818, Nueva Ecija annexed the towns of Palanan from Isabela, as well as Cagayan, Nueva Vizcaya, Quirino, Baler, Casiguran, Infanta (formerly called Binangonan de Lampon) and Polillo Islands from Tayabas, and part of Rizal. In the nineteenth and 20th centuries, the prosperity found in tobacco cultivation caused many Ilokano people to settle here, it was only in this large-scale Ilocano settlement that made Ilocano language replace Ibanag as the &quot;lingua franca&quot; of the region. Ilocano settlers already migrated to Nueva Vizcaya (including present-day Quirino) earlier in 1700s also to work on the tobacco plantations, and later immigrants with skills construct churches and other structures needed for development, as the native Igorot tribes rejected labor imposed by the Spaniards. Tobacco is still a major factor in the economy of Cagayan, though a special economic zone and free port has been created to strengthen and diversify the provincial economy.

=== During World War II ===
During World War II, at Balete Pass in Nueva Vizcaya, the retreating Japanese Imperial Army under General Tomoyuki Yamashita dug in and held on for three months against the American and Filipino forces who eventually drove them out; the pass is now called Dalton Pass in honor of General Dalton, USA, who was killed in the fighting. 

=== During the Marcos dictatorship ===

Loan-funded government spending to promote Ferdinand Marcos&#x27; 1969 reelection campaign caused the Philippine economy to take a sudden downwards turn in the form of the 1969 Philippine balance of payments crisis, which in turn led to social unrest throughout the country. Cagayan Valley became one of the flashpoints of conflict, with many previously-moderate young people joining the armed resistance against Marcos after being radicalized by various crackdowns.

With only a year left in his last constitutionally allowed term as president, Ferdinand Marcos placed the Philippines under Martial Law in September 1972 and thus retained the position for fourteen more years. This period in Philippine history is remembered for the Marcos administration&#x27;s record of human rights abuses, particularly targeting political opponents, student activists, journalists, religious workers, farmers, and others who fought against the Marcos dictatorship.

In Isabela, protests erupted when Marcos crony Danding Cojuangco managed to block a Spanish-era grant which was supposed to see the return of Hacienda San Antonio and Hacienda Santa Isabel in Ilagan to local farmers, displacing tens of thousands of farmers who were supposed to get those lands back a hundred years after the Spanish accosted them. The Roman Catholic Diocese of Ilagan led efforts to support the farmers in their cause, succeeding in forcing the Marcos administration to finally concede land titles to 4,000 farmers, but earning the ire of the dicatatorship against leading church figures such as Ilagan Bishop Miguel Purugganan, Diocesan Social Action Center researcher Sabino &quot;Abe&quot; Padilla, and the various nuns and lay workers of the Diocese.

Also during that time, logging concessions were awarded to Juan Ponce Enrile, Herminio Disini, and other cronies, leading to the severe degradation of forest cover in the region, which contributed to widespread flooding and other environmental issues that persist today.

==== Integration of new provinces ====

Kalinga-Apayao and Ifugao were transferred to the Cagayan Valley region in 1972, and afterwards Ferdinand Marcos imposed a migration policy for Ilokanos into those provinces; the natives of Apayao called Isnag become minority there.

=== Later 20th Century ===

After the People Power Revolution in 1986, many of the activists who had joined the underground movement against Marcos decided to &quot;surface,&quot; as the new administration of Corazon Aquino released political prisoners and initiated peace talks. However, anti-left sentiment in her new cabinet, which included individuals who had aligned themselves with the Reform the Armed Forces Movement, made the peace process difficult. Negotiations eventually collapsed, and unrest in Cagayan valley persisted.

When the Cordillera Administrative Region was formed in 1987 under Corazon Aquino, the indigenous provinces of Ifugao and Kalinga-Apayao (later divided into the provinces of Kalinga and Apayao) were transferred into the newly formed region.

=== Contemporary history ===
==== COVID-19 pandemic ====

During the worldwide COVID-19 pandemic, the severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 () virus reached Cagayan Valley on March 21, 2020, when the first case of the disease was confirmed in Tuguegarao. All provinces have confirmed at least one COVID-19 case, with Batanes being the last province to confirm a COVID-19 case on September 28, 2020.

==== Extreme climate events ====

In November 2020, Typhoon Vamco (known in the Philippines as &quot;Typhoon Ulysses&quot;) crossed the island of Luzon, causing dam operators from all around the island to release large amounts of water into their impounds as they neared their spilling points. All seven of Magat Dam&#x27;s gates were opened to prevent dam failure, but the overflow into the Cagayan River and caused widespread floods in Cagayan and Isabela. This event was worsened by the information gap had developed b as a result of the recent shutdown of the ABS-CBN broadcast network, because those areas had previously gotten weather updates primarily from the network.

==Geography==
Cagayan Valley is the large mass of land in the northeastern region of Luzon, comprising the provinces of Cagayan, Isabela, Nueva Vizcaya, Quirino, and the Batanes group of islands. It is bordered to the west by the Cordillera mountain range, to the east by the Sierra Madre, to the south by the Caraballo Mountains, and to the north by the Luzon Strait. Politically, it is bordered by the Cordillera Administrative Region to the west, the Ilocos Region to the northwest and southwest, and Central Luzon to the south.

The region contains two landlocked provinces, Quirino and Nueva Vizcaya, which are ruggedly mountainous and heavily forested. Nueva Vizcaya is the remnant of the southern province created when Cagayan Province was divided in two in 1839. They are ethnically and linguistically diverse, with a substrate of Agtas, Negritos who are food-gatherers with no fixed abodes, overlaid by Ilongots and others in a number of tribes, some of whom were fierce head-hunters (they have given up the practice), with the latest but largest element of the population being the Ilocanos, closely followed by the Ibanags.

===Administrative divisions===
Cagayan Valley comprises five provinces, one independent city, three component cities, 89 municipalities, and 2,311 barangays.

====Provinces====

===== Governors and vice governors =====
==== Cities and Municipalities ====


==Demographics==


===Languages===
Ilocano is the main lingua franca (orally) of the region. Other languages include Ibanag and Ivatan, the main language of Batanes. The use of Tagalog and English also serve as the region&#x27;s language in education, governance, tourism, popular culture, and commerce inside and outside the region.

==Economy==


The province of Isabela and the city of Santiago are notably the most progressive province and richest city in the region, respectively. Isabela was the 9th richest province in the Philippines in 2021, being the only province from the region to be included in the list.

The city of Tuguegarao is the center of excellence in education, commerce, trade and culture and as the economic center of the region, the city continuously aims for outstanding performance and competence in administration, citizen participation, community and economic development, cultural arts, education, fiscal management, infrastructure, intergovernmental cooperation, planning, public safety, recreation and leisure services, social services, and technology. Its economy gradually shifted from agriculture to secondary/tertiary economic activities such as trading, commerce and services. The shift was ushered by city&#x27;s role as the &quot;Regional Government Center&quot; and &quot;Center of Commerce in Northern Luzon&quot;.

Tuguegarao City was included to be one of the digital cities for 2025 to sustain the rapid growth of the Information Technology and Business Process Management and to promote development in the city. The program (Digital Cities 2025) was created through a partnership between the DICT, the IT and Business Process Association of the Philippines (IBPAP), and Leechiu Property Consultants (LPC).

Cauayan is a component city in the province of Isabela. It is dubbed as the &quot;Ideal City of the North&quot; and the host city for the proposed Isabela Special Economic Zone and the Regional Agro-Industrial Growth Center. It is the home of Cosmos Bottling Corporation, now acquired by the giant multinational business conglomerate San Miguel Corporation manufactures soft drinks in the area and the Mega Asia Bottling Corporation with its newly built plant for RC Cola brand. It is also here where the regional sales offices of several multi-national companies are located. As a young city, it has enormous potential for small to large enterprises and its real estate industry is just beginning. Medium size commercial centers or subdivisions are the appropriate ventures to put up.

Ilagan is a component city and the capital of the province of Isabela. The city is the &quot;Corn Capital of the Philippines&quot; and has been considered as the &quot;Primary Growth Center of Region 2&quot;. Most of the industries in the city are agri-based. Over the past decades, there has been a great number of local investments in poultry and hog raising. There are several poultry contract growers and small and medium scale hog raisers in the city. Other support facilities, warehouses and small and big rice mills, strategically located in the different barangays of the city to address the storage needs of farmers during the harvest season. Of all cities in the country, Ilagan ranks as the top producer of corn. As an agriculture-based city, it produces ample supply of corn, rice, vegetables and legumes. Fruits like the banana are year-round products especially in the mountainous areas of the city. Ilagan also produces seasonal fruits such as mangoes and pomelo. Commerce and trade is considered to be the city&#x27;s second economic-based income. It is also the hub of the Coca-Cola FEMSA Philippines, Inc., one of the industrial complexes in the region.

Solano is a first class municipality and the main commercial and financial center of the province of Nueva Vizcaya. It also has the most fast food restaurants chains and the most banks among the municipalities in the entire region. According to the 2016 Cities and Municipalities Competitiveness Index conducted by the National Competitiveness Council, Solano took the 25th spot overall and ranked 30th among the first class and second class municipalities in the Philippines. This further solidified the status of Solano as the undisputed premier town of Cagayan Valley being the premier town in Nueva Vizcaya and the fastest-growing municipality in the region.

Cagayan has several attractions which include beaches, swimming, snorkeling, skin-diving, fishing in the river and the sea, hiking in primeval forest, mountain-climbing, archaeological sites, the collection of the provincial museum, the Callao Caves, and many churches.
The Cagayan Economic Zone Authority (CEZA) is situated in Santa Ana, Cagayan.

Quirino is the youngest province in the region. With its agricultural based nature, the vast vegetative agricultural covers reveal the major source of living of the people. Farming has been the main industry in the province, with rice and corn as major crops as with other provinces in the region. Virgin forest and wealthy bodies of water have been great contributors in its development. Small scale industries like furniture making, basketry, rattan craft, and dried/fossilized flower production, where the province was famously known, are prevalent. Banana products also sold in and out the province and also for export purposes. The small scale business and associations also make their own products like banana chips, peanuts, patupats and others. The province also produces a substantial amount of fruits/crops like mango, citrus, pineapple, coffee, coconut, papaya, &quot;lanzones&quot;, &quot;rambutan&quot; and vegetables.

The province of Nueva Vizcaya has basically an agricultural economy with commerce, trade, and industry contributing to its growth and development. Among other major economic activities are farming and cattle and swine raising. Primary crops are &quot;palay&quot; and corn. The province produces quality onions and vegetables often sold in Metro Manila. Oranges and mangoes are now major crops being exported fresh to other Asian countries; earning its title as the &quot;Citrus Capital of the Philippines&quot;.

Batanes is the northernmost and smallest province in the region as well as in the whole Philippines. It is the only province located outside the mainland Cagayan Valley. Due to its geographical location, fishing is considered as a major industry and source of livelihood for the people. Garlic and cattle are major export crops. Ivatans also plant &quot;camote&quot; (sweet potato), cassava, gabi or tuber and a unique variety of white &quot;uvi&quot;. Sugarcane is raised to produce &quot;palek&quot;, a kind of native wine, and vinegar. Tourism also contributes to the province&#x27;s thriving economy.

===Agriculture===

Cagayan Valley being the country&#x27;s second largest region in terms of land area. As of 2022, Cagayan Valley region remains to be the top producer of corn in the whole country and second in rice production. Isabela is now dubbed as the top producer of Corn in the Philippines and the Rice Granary of the North.

===Trade and industry===
In 2014, retail giants like Robinsons Land and SM Prime opened its pioneer malls in the region, the Robinsons Place Santiago and SM City Cauayan in Santiago City and Cauayan respectively. The two retail companies further strengthened their presence in the region with the opening of SM Center Tuguegarao Downtown in 2017 and Robinsons Place Tuguegarao in 2018, both are located in the region&#x27;s capital, Tuguegarao City. In 2022, SM Prime opened SM City Tuguegarao, its third in the region and second in Tuguegarao City.

In 2018, Vista Land and Life Scapes, Inc. announced the establishment of its first high-end mall in the region that is Vista Mall Santiago in Santiago City, and they are also putting up Vista Mall in Tuguegarao City it will be second on the region after Vista Mall Santiago.

===Aquaculture and fishing industry===

On January 11, 2008, the Bureau of Fisheries and Aquatic Resources (BFAR) stated that tilapia (species of cichlid fishes from the tilapiine cichlid tribe) production grew and Cagayan Valley is now the Philippines&#x27; tilapia capital (Saint Peter&#x27;s fish).
 Production supply grew 37.25% since 2003, with 14,000 metric tons (MT) in 2007. The recent aquaculture congress found that the growth of tilapia production was due to government interventions: provision of fast-growing species, accreditation of private hatcheries to ensure supply of quality fingerlings, establishment of demonstration farms, providing free fingerlings to newly constructed fishponds, and the dissemination of tilapia to Nueva Vizcaya (in Diadi town). Cagayan Valley is one of the largest tilapia producing regions in the country, with Isabela as the leading producer. The development of the tilapia farming industry in the province came about with the water supply provided by the Magat Reservoir for irrigating rice fields. The high demand for food fish in the region was also a contributing factor. Based on the data from the Bureau Fisheries and Aquatic Resources in 2020, there are about 1,000 hectares of freshwater ponds in Isabela, producing around 16,000 metric tons of tilapia a year.

Cagayan&#x27;s coastline is one of the longest in the country having almost 73% of Cagayan Valley Region&#x27;s coastal seaboards. This is aside from the large rivers and their tributaries, lakes, creeks and streams which are also rich fishing and aquaculture grounds. Untapped coastal fishing grounds stretch from the towns of Santa Praxedes in the west to Santa Ana on the east, on its northern coast facing the Babuyan Channel; and from Santa Ana down to Peñablanca on its eastern coast facing the Philippine Sea. Despite this endowment, the province&#x27;s fish production is not even enough to supply and sustain its own fish requirements. Deep sea fishing is not a common occurrence in the province – thus, foreign poachers are the ones reaping the bounties of its seas. Cagayan&#x27;s deep seas are known for species like tuna, tuna-like fishes, hairtail, snapper, scad, slipmouth, mullet, grouper, shrimp, squid, and lobsters. The inland waters are used primarily by subsistence fishermen. Few privately-operated fishponds and fish cages contribute to the overall fish supply of the Province.

The coastal waters of Isabela are big sources of marine life that could supply the fish requirements of the region, according to a study commissioned by the Bureau of Fisheries and Aquatic Resources (BFAR). The study stated that Isabela waters are rich in untapped fisheries and marine resources and also has extensive sea grass beds and coral reefs that are home to variety of fish species which include sardines and mackerel and have sizable chunks of oceanic tunas, which thrive throughout the year. The fishing ground has 238 marine fish species. High species diversity could be an indication that the habitat is still good and undisturbed.

The fishing industry in Cagayan Valley has been in perturbed condition owing to the declining pattern of production for the past years. Since 2015, average annual reduction in fisheries production in the region was estimated at three thousand metric tons or more than five percent decrease per year. In 2020, the latest estimated production at 45,382 metric tons is 4.6 percent lower than the 2018 total fish production of 47,572 metric tons and almost one third lower than the highest production realized in 2011 at 64,876 metric tons.

By fishing grounds classification in the region, there is an inland municipal fisheries production and marine municipal fisheries production, the latter, particularly in provinces with coastal areas in the provinces of Cagayan, Isabela and Batanes. According to the Philippine Statistics Authority (PSA), inland municipal production for 2021 has gone up close to 2,000 metric tons, while marine municipal production reached close to 3,300 metric tons, both as an initial production in the first quarter of 2020.

According to the Bureau Fisheries and Aquatic Resources (BFAR), since 2010 to 2015, the fish sufficiency level in Cagayan Valley is on downtrend level because of the various threats to the industry. Several problems have affected the sector in the recent years including the weather disturbances, use of illegal fishing gears and methods and the increasing demand of a fast-growing population. The provinces of Batanes and Cagayan have passed the 100 percent sufficiency level at 138 percent while Cagayan recorded 96 percent. However, the performances of Isabela, Quirino and Nueva Vizcaya at 17 percent, 11 percent and 10 percent, respectively, have affected the total performance of the region. Data obtained from the Bureau Fisheries and Aquatic Resources showed that from 2006 to 2015, the sufficiency level has dropped significantly in 2010 until it reached its lowest level at 44 percent in the last five years. However, the overall fisheries production in the region grew by one percent in 3rd Quarter of 2020. From the total output of 11,954 metric tons in 2019, it accelerated to 12,075 metric tons in 2020.

===Citrus industry===

Cagayan Valley is positioned to become the country&#x27;s &quot;Citrus Capital&quot; through a program undertaken by the Nueva Vizcaya State University (NVSU) with funding from the &quot;Philippine Council for Agriculture, Aquatic and Natural Resources Research and Development of the Department of Science and Technology (DoST-PCAARRD).&quot; The country&#x27;s domestic supply of citrus is currently insufficient to meet local demand, according to DoST-PCAARRD, due to &quot;high incidence of pest and diseases, poor orchard management, and low adoption of improved management practices, among many other factors.&quot; The NVSU&#x27;s citrus research and development program includes yield improvement, setting up a gene bank, and value chain analysis. It targets a 233% increase in yield — from 4.5 tons per hectare ha (t/ha) to 15 t/ha — and a 60% reduction in post-harvest losses from 25% to 10% by 2019. The targets are part of the &quot;Citrus Industry Strategic S&amp;T Program (ISP)&quot; of DoST-PCAARRD. By the end of 2017, the program team is expected to produce value chain maps for &quot;calamansi&quot;, &quot;orange&quot;, and &quot;pomelo&quot; in the region; characterize fifteen species for the database system of the gene bank study; improve NVSU and &quot;Municipal Agriculture Office (MAGRO)&quot; citrus nurseries producing 10,000 and 2,000 budded seedlings, respectively; establish new 1-hectare orchard with planting materials from NVSU; and generate data on the description of local citrus pests and diseases.
==Infrastructure==
===Roads and Bridges===
* Pigalo Bridge - The Pigalo Bridge traverses over the Cagayan River in Angadanan, Isabela. This bridge also connects the two municipalities of Angadanan, Northeast Isabela and San Guillermo, Isabela at Southwest. The proposed construction of the Pigolo Bridge approaches the span of about 450 lin. meters across the Cagayan River, the project started on April 10, 2017, and was completed on April 29, 2019.
* Buntun Bridge - Buntun Bridge took three administrations to finish the construction from 1960 to 1969 connecting the municipality of Solana and Tuguegarao City. considered to be one of the longest bridge in the country crossing the longest river in the country called Cagayan River also known as the Rio Grande de Cagayan. The bridge was stretched to 1,369 m (meters) in length.

==Image gallery==
==Notable people==
==See also==
* List of Cultural Properties of the Philippines in Cagayan Valley

==References==
== External links ==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q13615" start="0" end="14" title="Cagayan Valley" label="Cagayan Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q13615" start="35" end="44" title="Cagayan Valley" label="Region II"/>
<link wikidata="Q24698" start="52" end="73" title="Regions of the Philippines" label="administrative region"/>
<link wikidata="Q928" start="81" end="92" title="Philippines" label="Philippines"/>
<link wikidata="Q125384" start="133" end="138" title="Luzon" label="Luzon"/>
<link wikidata="Q24746" start="163" end="183" title="Provinces of the Philippines" label="Philippine provinces"/>
<link wikidata="Q13740" start="185" end="192" title="Batanes" label="Batanes"/>
<link wikidata="Q13759" start="194" end="201" title="Cagayan" label="Cagayan"/>
<link wikidata="Q13826" start="203" end="210" title="Isabela (province)" label="Isabela"/>
<link wikidata="Q13866" start="212" end="225" title="Nueva Vizcaya" label="Nueva Vizcaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q13873" start="231" end="238" title="Quirino" label="Quirino"/>
<link wikidata="Q50178" start="280" end="287" title="Cauayan, Isabela" label="Cauayan"/>
<link wikidata="Q50179" start="289" end="295" title="Ilagan" label="Ilagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q50180" start="297" end="305" title="Santiago, Isabela" label="Santiago"/>
<link wikidata="Q2200" start="311" end="321" title="Tuguegarao" label="Tuguegarao"/>
<link wikidata="Q2087864" start="416" end="427" title="Cordillera Central (Luzon)" label="Cordilleras"/>
<link wikidata="Q2166028" start="436" end="448" title="Sierra Madre (Philippines)" label="Sierra Madre"/>
<link wikidata="Q545808" start="480" end="493" title="Cagayan River" label="Cagayan River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1035274" start="575" end="594" title="Caraballo Mountains" label="Caraballo Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q43517" start="608" end="614" title="Aparri" label="Aparri"/>
<link wikidata="Q152545" start="798" end="819" title="Functional literacy" label="functionally literate"/>
<link wikidata="Q24698" start="848" end="874" title="regions of the Philippines" label="regions of the Philippines"/>
<link wikidata="Q13606" start="1136" end="1146" title="Cordillera Administrative Region" label="Cordillera"/>
<link wikidata="Q13728" start="1160" end="1166" title="Apayao" label="Apayao"/>
<link wikidata="Q13827" start="1168" end="1175" title="Kalinga (province)" label="Kalinga"/>
<link wikidata="Q13861" start="1177" end="1194" title="Mountain Province" label="Mountain Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q13812" start="1196" end="1202" title="Ifugao" label="Ifugao"/>
<link wikidata="Q13750" start="1207" end="1214" title="Benguet" label="Benguet"/>
<link wikidata="Q13730" start="1238" end="1244" title="aurora (province)" label="Aurora"/>
<link wikidata="Q50102" start="1567" end="1574" title="Palanan" label="Palanan"/>
<link wikidata="Q53081" start="1677" end="1682" title="Baler, Aurora" label="Baler"/>
<link wikidata="Q13870" start="1764" end="1772" title="Pampanga" label="Pampanga"/>
<link wikidata="Q13840" start="1782" end="1788" title="Laguna (province)" label="Laguna"/>
<link wikidata="Q13872" start="1803" end="1818" title="quezon" label="Quezon Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q13865" start="1865" end="1876" title="Nueva Ecija" label="Nueva Ecija"/>
<link wikidata="Q1262011" start="2186" end="2194" title="tagalog people" label="Tagalogs"/>
<link wikidata="Q845985" start="2340" end="2347" title="Negrito" label="Negrito"/>
<link wikidata="Q1432323" start="2470" end="2477" title="Ibanag people" label="Ibanags"/>
<link wikidata="Q6094161" start="2479" end="2485" title="Itawes" label="Itawes"/>
<link wikidata="Q15623133" start="2495" end="2503" title="gaddang people" label="Gaddangs"/>
<link wikidata="Q6741412" start="2513" end="2521" title="malaweg language" label="Malawegs"/>
<link wikidata="Q7135433" start="2527" end="2535" title="paranan language" label="Paranans"/>
<link wikidata="Q2527423" start="3084" end="3092" title="Ilocano people" label="Ilocanos"/>
<link wikidata="Q1294121" start="3094" end="3107" title="Pangasinan people" label="Pangasinenses"/>
<link wikidata="Q2526737" start="3109" end="3121" title="Kapampangan people" label="Kapampangans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1262011" start="3126" end="3134" title="Tagalog people" label="Tagalogs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1290600" start="3147" end="3155" title="Visayans" label="Visayans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048545" start="3157" end="3162" title="Moro people" label="Moros"/>
<link wikidata="Q3847372" start="3164" end="3171" title="ivatan people" label="Ivatans"/>
<link wikidata="Q13865" start="3364" end="3375" title="Nueva Ecija" label="Nueva Ecija"/>
<link wikidata="Q103921" start="3481" end="3488" title="infanta, Quezon" label="Infanta"/>
<link wikidata="Q2101315" start="3532" end="3547" title="Polillo Islands" label="Polillo Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q13872" start="3553" end="3560" title="quezon" label="Tayabas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2527423" start="3675" end="3689" title="Ilokano people" label="Ilokano people"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="4363" end="4375" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q5211709" start="4380" end="4391" title="Balete Pass" label="Balete Pass"/>
<link wikidata="Q276535" start="4425" end="4447" title="Japanese Imperial Army" label="Japanese Imperial Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q254004" start="4462" end="4480" title="Tomoyuki Yamashita" label="Tomoyuki Yamashita"/>
<link wikidata="Q55647794" start="4774" end="4821" title="Ferdinand Marcos&amp;#x27; 1969 reelection campaign" label="Ferdinand Marcos&amp;#x27; 1969 reelection campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q107556331" start="4903" end="4945" title="1969 Philippine balance of payments crisis" label="1969 Philippine balance of payments crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q60740956" start="5323" end="5334" title="Martial Law under Ferdinand Marcos" label="Martial Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q55647921" start="5504" end="5523" title="Human rights abuses of the Marcos dictatorship" label="human rights abuses"/>
<link wikidata="Q55608583" start="5719" end="5731" title="Marcos crony" label="Marcos crony"/>
<link wikidata="Q2191695" start="5732" end="5749" title="Danding Cojuangco" label="Danding Cojuangco"/>
<link wikidata="Q869679" start="6037" end="6069" title="Roman Catholic Diocese of Ilagan" label="Roman Catholic Diocese of Ilagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1522523" start="6312" end="6329" title="Miguel Purugganan" label="Miguel Purugganan"/>
<link wikidata="Q145881" start="6517" end="6534" title="Juan Ponce Enrile" label="Juan Ponce Enrile"/>
<link wikidata="Q55608583" start="6536" end="6551" title="Herminio Disini" label="Herminio Disini"/>
<link wikidata="Q4067912" start="6974" end="6979" title="isnag people" label="Isnag"/>
<link wikidata="Q1274389" start="7042" end="7065" title="People Power Revolution" label="People Power Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1480" start="7213" end="7227" title="Corazon Aquino" label="Corazon Aquino"/>
<link wikidata="Q7307438" start="7396" end="7428" title="Reform the Armed Forces Movement" label="Reform the Armed Forces Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q13606" start="7549" end="7581" title="Cordillera Administrative Region" label="Cordillera Administrative Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q1480" start="7607" end="7621" title="Corazon Aquino" label="Corazon Aquino"/>
<link wikidata="Q3550632" start="7662" end="7676" title="Kalinga-Apayao" label="Kalinga-Apayao"/>
<link wikidata="Q518554" start="7684" end="7691" title="partition (politics)" label="divided"/>
<link wikidata="Q13827" start="7714" end="7721" title="Kalinga province" label="Kalinga"/>
<link wikidata="Q13728" start="7726" end="7732" title="Apayao" label="Apayao"/>
<link wikidata="Q81068910" start="7861" end="7878" title="COVID-19 pandemic" label="COVID-19 pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7884" end="7931" title="severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2" label="severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q2200" start="8035" end="8045" title="Tuguegarao" label="Tuguegarao"/>
<link wikidata="Q13740" start="8109" end="8116" title="Batanes" label="Batanes"/>
<link wikidata="Q101437849" start="8244" end="8257" title="Typhoon Vamco" label="Typhoon Vamco"/>
<link wikidata="Q125384" start="8338" end="8343" title="Luzon" label="Luzon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1637455" start="8499" end="8508" title="Magat Dam" label="Magat Dam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1033074" start="8545" end="8556" title="dam failure" label="dam failure"/>
<link wikidata="Q545808" start="8584" end="8597" title="Cagayan River" label="Cagayan River"/>
<link wikidata="Q13759" start="8630" end="8637" title="Cagayan" label="Cagayan"/>
<link wikidata="Q13826" start="8642" end="8649" title="Isabela (province)" label="Isabela"/>
<link wikidata="Q93467772" start="8740" end="8781" title="ABS-CBN franchise renewal controversy" label="shutdown of the ABS-CBN broadcast network"/>
<link wikidata="Q125384" start="8955" end="8960" title="Luzon" label="Luzon"/>
<link wikidata="Q13759" start="8990" end="8997" title="Cagayan" label="Cagayan"/>
<link wikidata="Q13826" start="8999" end="9006" title="Isabela (province)" label="Isabela"/>
<link wikidata="Q13866" start="9008" end="9021" title="Nueva Vizcaya" label="Nueva Vizcaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q13873" start="9023" end="9030" title="Quirino" label="Quirino"/>
<link wikidata="Q13740" start="9040" end="9047" title="Batanes" label="Batanes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2087864" start="9100" end="9110" title="Cordillera Central (Luzon)" label="Cordillera"/>
<link wikidata="Q2166028" start="9146" end="9158" title="Sierra Madre (Philippines)" label="Sierra Madre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1035274" start="9180" end="9199" title="Caraballo Mountains" label="Caraballo Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q908741" start="9225" end="9237" title="Luzon Strait" label="Luzon Strait"/>
<link wikidata="Q13606" start="9274" end="9306" title="Cordillera Administrative Region" label="Cordillera Administrative Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q12933" start="9324" end="9337" title="Ilocos Region" label="Ilocos Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q13617" start="9374" end="9387" title="Central Luzon" label="Central Luzon"/>
<link wikidata="Q381898" start="9709" end="9714" title="Agta people" label="Agtas"/>
<link wikidata="Q845985" start="9716" end="9723" title="Negrito" label="Negrito"/>
<link wikidata="Q7045225" start="9753" end="9767" title="no fixed abode" label="no fixed abode"/>
<link wikidata="Q633388" start="9782" end="9790" title="Ilongot people" label="Ilongots"/>
<link wikidata="Q2527423" start="9962" end="9970" title="Ilocano people" label="Ilocanos"/>
<link wikidata="Q1432323" start="9996" end="10003" title="Ibanag people" label="Ibanags"/>
<link wikidata="Q24746" start="10067" end="10076" title="Provinces of the Philippines" label="provinces"/>
<link wikidata="Q104157" start="10094" end="10098" title="Cities of the Philippines" label="city"/>
<link wikidata="Q104157" start="10116" end="10122" title="Cities of the Philippines" label="cities"/>
<link wikidata="Q24764" start="10127" end="10141" title="Municipalities of the Philippines" label="municipalities"/>
<link wikidata="Q24746" start="10169" end="10178" title="Provinces of the Philippines" label="Provinces"/>
<link wikidata="Q104157" start="10230" end="10236" title="Cities of the Philippines" label="Cities"/>
<link wikidata="Q24764" start="10241" end="10255" title="Municipalities of the Philippines" label="Municipalities"/>
<link wikidata="Q35936" start="10298" end="10305" title="Ilocano language" label="Ilocano"/>
<link wikidata="Q1775596" start="10380" end="10386" title="Ibanag language" label="Ibanag"/>
<link wikidata="Q3547080" start="10391" end="10397" title="Ivatan language" label="Ivatan"/>
<link wikidata="Q13740" start="10420" end="10427" title="Batanes" label="Batanes"/>
<link wikidata="Q34057" start="10440" end="10447" title="Tagalog language" label="Tagalog"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860" start="10452" end="10459" title="English language" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q13826" start="10628" end="10635" title="Isabela (province)" label="Isabela"/>
<link wikidata="Q50180" start="10652" end="10660" title="Santiago, Isabela" label="Santiago"/>
<link wikidata="Q928" start="10793" end="10804" title="Philippines" label="Philippines"/>
<link wikidata="Q2200" start="10895" end="10905" title="Tuguegarao" label="Tuguegarao"/>
<link wikidata="Q2200" start="11621" end="11636" title="Tuguegarao" label="Tuguegarao City"/>
<link wikidata="Q50178" start="12016" end="12023" title="Cauayan, Isabela" label="Cauayan"/>
<link wikidata="Q50179" start="12803" end="12809" title="Ilagan" label="Ilagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5139059" start="13893" end="13926" title="Coca-Cola FEMSA Philippines" label="Coca-Cola FEMSA Philippines, Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q51494" start="13976" end="13982" title="Solano, Nueva Vizcaya" label="Solano"/>
<link wikidata="Q5017299" start="14914" end="14945" title="Cagayan Economic Zone Authority" label="Cagayan Economic Zone Authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q49337" start="14968" end="14986" title="Santa Ana, Cagayan" label="Santa Ana, Cagayan"/>
<link wikidata="Q13873" start="14989" end="14996" title="Quirino Province" label="Quirino"/>
<link wikidata="Q13866" start="15938" end="15951" title="Nueva Vizcaya" label="Nueva Vizcaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q13740" start="16435" end="16442" title="Batanes" label="Batanes"/>
<link wikidata="Q7353125" start="17428" end="17442" title="Robinsons Malls" label="Robinsons Land"/>
<link wikidata="Q7391503" start="17447" end="17455" title="SM Prime" label="SM Prime"/>
<link wikidata="Q17086680" start="17500" end="17524" title="Robinsons Place Santiago" label="Robinsons Place Santiago"/>
<link wikidata="Q7391458" start="17529" end="17544" title="SM City Cauayan" label="SM City Cauayan"/>
<link wikidata="Q50180" start="17548" end="17561" title="Santiago, Isabela" label="Santiago City"/>
<link wikidata="Q50178" start="17566" end="17573" title="Cauayan, Isabela" label="Cauayan"/>
<link wikidata="Q41988391" start="17683" end="17712" title="SM Center Tuguegarao Downtown" label="SM Center Tuguegarao Downtown"/>
<link wikidata="Q7353125" start="17725" end="17751" title="Robinsons Malls" label="Robinsons Place Tuguegarao"/>
<link wikidata="Q2200" start="17808" end="17823" title="Tuguegarao City" label="Tuguegarao City"/>
<link wikidata="Q7391503" start="17834" end="17842" title="SM Prime" label="SM Prime"/>
<link wikidata="Q7391510" start="17850" end="17868" title="SM Supermalls" label="SM City Tuguegarao"/>
<link wikidata="Q61092130" start="17935" end="17966" title="Vista Land" label="Vista Land and Life Scapes, Inc"/>
<link wikidata="Q50180" start="18068" end="18081" title="Santiago, Isabela" label="Santiago City"/>
<link wikidata="Q2200" start="18126" end="18141" title="Tuguegarao" label="Tuguegarao City"/>
<link wikidata="Q47793" start="18328" end="18335" title="tilapia" label="tilapia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7432" start="18337" end="18344" title="species" label="species"/>
<link wikidata="Q3406" start="18348" end="18355" title="cichlid" label="cichlid"/>
<link wikidata="Q152" start="18356" end="18362" title="fishes" label="fishes"/>
<link wikidata="Q140604" start="18372" end="18389" title="tilapiine cichlid" label="tilapiine cichlid"/>
<link wikidata="Q133311" start="18390" end="18395" title="tribe" label="tribe"/>
<link wikidata="Q928" start="18443" end="18454" title="Philippines" label="Philippines"/>
<link wikidata="Q47793" start="18461" end="18468" title="tilapia" label="tilapia"/>
<link wikidata="Q33923" start="18478" end="18489" title="Saint Peter" label="Saint Peter"/>
<link wikidata="Q13866" start="18943" end="18956" title="Nueva Vizcaya" label="Nueva Vizcaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q51481" start="18961" end="18966" title="Diadi" label="Diadi"/>
<link wikidata="Q49339" start="19846" end="19860" title="Santa Praxedes, Cagayan" label="Santa Praxedes"/>
<link wikidata="Q49337" start="19876" end="19885" title="Santa Ana, Cagayan" label="Santa Ana"/>
<link wikidata="Q908741" start="19932" end="19947" title="Babuyan Channel" label="Babuyan Channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q49327" start="19976" end="19986" title="Peñablanca, Cagayan" label="Peñablanca"/>
<link wikidata="Q159183" start="20019" end="20033" title="Philippine Sea" label="Philippine Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q17067223" start="22070" end="22101" title="Philippine Statistics Authority" label="Philippine Statistics Authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q1452568" start="23580" end="23617" title="Nueva Vizcaya State University" label="Nueva Vizcaya State University (NVSU)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1905347" start="24178" end="24187" title="gene bank" label="gene bank"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="25061" end="25074" title="Pigalo Bridge" label="Pigalo Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q2397585" start="25465" end="25478" title="Buntun Bridge" label="Buntun Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q6568161" start="25881" end="25945" title="List of Cultural Properties of the Philippines in Cagayan Valley" label="List of Cultural Properties of the Philippines in Cagayan Valley"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="252551" wikidata="Q3302016" url="?curid=252551" title="Langston University">
<text>Langston University (LU) is a public land-grant historically black university in Langston, Oklahoma. It is the only historically black college in the state and the westernmost four-year public HBCU in the United States. The main campus in Langston is a rural setting east of Guthrie. The university also serves an urban mission with centers in Tulsa (at the same campus as the OSU-Tulsa facility) and Oklahoma City. The university is a member-school of the Thurgood Marshall College Fund.

==History==
The school was founded in 1897 and was known as the Oklahoma Colored Agricultural and Normal University. From 1898 to 1916 its president was Inman E. Page. Langston University was created as a result of the second Morrill Act in 1890. The law required states with land-grant colleges (such as Oklahoma State University, then known as Oklahoma A&amp;M) to either admit African Americans or provide an alternative school for them to attend as a condition of receiving federal funds. The university was renamed as Langston University in 1941 in honor of John Mercer Langston (1829–1897), civil rights pioneer, first African-American member of Congress from Virginia, founder of the Howard University Law School, and American consul-general to Haiti.

Poet Melvin B. Tolson taught at Langston from 1947 until 1964. Tolson was portrayed by Denzel Washington in the film &quot;The Great Debaters&quot;.

In August 2021, former university President Kent J. Smith Jr announced the university would use COVID-19 relief money to forgive the debt of students enrolled between spring 2020 and summer 2021, forgiving $4.65 million in student debt.

Langston University commemorated the opening of a new allied health facility on its Tulsa Campus on March 30, 2023. The facility was dedicated as the Jack Henderson Allied Health Facility on August 2, 2024. The 17,000 square-foot building is home of the Langston University School of Nursing and Health Professions.

President Kent J. Smith Jr announced his retirement as the university&#x27;s 16th president effective at the end of the Spring 2023 semester. The Oklahoma Agricultural &amp; Mechanical Colleges Board of Regents unanimously appointed Ruth Ray Jackson as interim president beginning July 6, 2023. In April 2024, she was appointed the institution&#x27;s 17th president with the investiture on March 14, 2025.

==Academics==

Six schools house the degree programs of Langston University: Sherman Lewis School of Agriculture and Applied Sciences; School of Arts and Sciences; School of Business; School of Education and Behavioral Sciences; School of Nursing and Health Professions; and the School of Physical Therapy. A total of 30 undergraduate and six graduate degree programs are offered at LU.

According to &quot;US News and World Report&quot;, Langston had an 18% graduation rate within the standard four-year period of study in 2025.

The university offers the Edwin P. McCabe Honors Program for highly motivated undergraduate students with exceptional academic records.

The university was accredited with a Doctorate of Physical Therapy (DPT) program in 2005. It is the university&#x27;s only doctoral program and one of two DPT programs in the state.

Langston University is accredited by the Higher Learning Commission.

==Athletics==
The Langston athletic teams are called the Lions. The university is a member of the National Association of Intercollegiate Athletics (NAIA), primarily competing in the Sooner Athletic Conference since the 2018–19 academic year. The Lions previously competed as a member of the Red River Athletic Conference (RRAC) from 1998–99 to 2017–18. They were also a member of the Southwestern Athletic Conference (SWAC) from 1931–32 to 1956–57, which is currently an NCAA Division I FCS athletic conference.

Langston competes in nine intercollegiate varsity sports: Men&#x27;s sports include basketball, football and track &amp; field; while women&#x27;s sports include basketball, cheer, softball, track &amp; field and volleyball.

===Marching Pride===
Langston&#x27;s marching band is known as the &quot;Langston University Marching Pride&quot;. It is a major ambassador of the university, a supporter at athletic events, and serves as a training center for students interested in pursuing a career in music and/or developing pertinent life skills. Charlie Wilson, of The Gap Band, once served as Drum Major.

==Notable alumni and attendees==








==See also==
*KALU, Langston U. Public Radio Station 89.3 FM

==References==
==External links==
* Official athletics website</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3302016" start="0" end="19" title="Langston University" label="Langston University"/>
<link wikidata="Q3302016" start="21" end="23" title="Langston University" label="LU"/>
<link wikidata="Q875538" start="30" end="36" title="public university" label="public"/>
<link wikidata="Q615150" start="37" end="47" title="Land-grant university" label="land-grant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1620945" start="48" end="77" title="Historically black colleges and universities" label="historically black university"/>
<link wikidata="Q534059" start="81" end="99" title="Langston, Oklahoma" label="Langston, Oklahoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q1620945" start="193" end="197" title="HBCU" label="HBCU"/>
<link wikidata="Q777577" start="275" end="282" title="Guthrie, Oklahoma" label="Guthrie"/>
<link wikidata="Q44989" start="344" end="349" title="Tulsa, Oklahoma" label="Tulsa"/>
<link wikidata="Q7082390" start="377" end="386" title="OSU-Tulsa" label="OSU-Tulsa"/>
<link wikidata="Q34863" start="401" end="414" title="Oklahoma City" label="Oklahoma City"/>
<link wikidata="Q7799283" start="457" end="487" title="Thurgood Marshall College Fund" label="Thurgood Marshall College Fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q27460715" start="643" end="656" title="Inman E. Page" label="Inman E. Page"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="716" end="727" title="Morrill Land-Grant Acts#Expansion" label="Morrill Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q615150" start="766" end="785" title="land-grant university" label="land-grant colleges"/>
<link wikidata="Q749718" start="795" end="820" title="Oklahoma State University" label="Oklahoma State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1701067" start="1053" end="1073" title="John Mercer Langston" label="John Mercer Langston"/>
<link wikidata="Q191600" start="1087" end="1099" title="civil rights" label="civil rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q49085" start="1115" end="1131" title="African-American" label="African-American"/>
<link wikidata="Q11268" start="1142" end="1150" title="U.S. Congress" label="Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370" start="1156" end="1164" title="Virginia" label="Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5921126" start="1181" end="1209" title="Howard University Law School" label="Howard University Law School"/>
<link wikidata="Q790" start="1242" end="1247" title="Haiti" label="Haiti"/>
<link wikidata="Q3854319" start="1255" end="1271" title="Melvin B. Tolson" label="Melvin B. Tolson"/>
<link wikidata="Q42101" start="1337" end="1354" title="Denzel Washington" label="Denzel Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q1768470" start="1373" end="1391" title="The Great Debaters" label="The Great Debaters"/>
<link wikidata="Q84263196" start="1496" end="1504" title="COVID-19" label="COVID-19"/>
<link wikidata="Q125890459" start="2188" end="2204" title="Ruth Ray Jackson" label="Ruth Ray Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q848629" start="2769" end="2793" title="U.S. News &amp;amp; World Report" label="US News and World Report"/>
<link wikidata="Q186005" start="3080" end="3096" title="Physical Therapy" label="Physical Therapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7739633" start="3254" end="3280" title="Higher Learning Commission" label="Higher Learning Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q927765" start="3381" end="3430" title="National Association of Intercollegiate Athletics" label="National Association of Intercollegiate Athletics"/>
<link wikidata="Q7562699" start="3466" end="3492" title="Sooner Athletic Conference" label="Sooner Athletic Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q7304830" start="3575" end="3604" title="Red River Athletic Conference" label="Red River Athletic Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q946006" start="3668" end="3700" title="Southwestern Athletic Conference" label="Southwestern Athletic Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q2842604" start="3755" end="3770" title="NCAA Division I" label="NCAA Division I"/>
<link wikidata="Q86660967" start="3771" end="3774" title="NCAA Division I Football Championship Subdivision" label="FCS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067043" start="4341" end="4355" title="Charlie Wilson (singer)" label="Charlie Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q992295" start="4360" end="4372" title="The Gap Band" label="The Gap Band"/>
<link wikidata="Q6325071" start="4457" end="4461" title="KALU" label="KALU"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="252559" wikidata="Q421700" url="?curid=252559" title="Calcium channel blocker">
<text>Calcium channel blockers (CCB), calcium channel antagonists or calcium antagonists are a group of medications that disrupt the movement of calcium () through calcium channels. Calcium channel blockers are used as antihypertensive drugs, i.e., as medications to decrease blood pressure in patients with hypertension. CCBs are particularly effective against large vessel stiffness, one of the common causes of elevated systolic blood pressure in elderly patients. Calcium channel blockers are also frequently used to alter heart rate (especially from atrial fibrillation), to prevent peripheral and cerebral vasospasm, and to reduce chest pain caused by angina pectoris.

N-type, L-type, and T-type voltage-dependent calcium channels are present in the zona glomerulosa of the human adrenal gland, and CCBs can directly influence the biosynthesis of aldosterone in adrenocortical cells, with consequent impact on the clinical treatment of hypertension with these agents.

CCBs have been shown to be slightly more effective than beta blockers at lowering cardiovascular mortality associated with stroke, but they are associated with more side effects. Potential major risks however were mainly found to be associated with short-acting CCBs.

==Classes==

=== Dihydropyridine ===

Dihydropyridine (DHP) calcium channel blockers are derived from the molecule dihydropyridine and often used to reduce systemic vascular resistance and arterial pressure. Sometimes when they are used to treat angina, the vasodilation and hypotension can lead to reflex tachycardia, which can be detrimental for patients with ischemic symptoms because of the resulting increase in myocardial oxygen demand. Dihydropyridine calcium channel blockers can worsen proteinuria in patients with nephropathy.

This CCB class is easily identified by the suffix &quot;-dipine&quot;.
* Amlodipine (Norvasc)
* Aranidipine (Sapresta)
* Azelnidipine (Calblock)
* Barnidipine (HypoCa)
* Benidipine (Coniel)
* Cilnidipine (Atelec, Cinalong, Siscard) Not available in US
* Clevidipine (Cleviprex)
* Efonidipine (Landel)
* Felodipine (Plendil)
* Isradipine (DynaCirc, Prescal)
* Lacidipine (Motens, Lacipil)
* Lercanidipine (Zanidip)
* Manidipine (Calslot, Madipine)
* Nicardipine (Cardene, Carden SR)
* Nifedipine (Procardia, Adalat)
* Nilvadipine (Nivadil)
* Nimodipine (Nimotop) This substance can pass the blood-brain barrier and is used to prevent cerebral vasospasm.
* Nisoldipine (Baymycard, Sular, Syscor)
* Nitrendipine (Cardif, Nitrepin, Baylotensin)
* Pranidipine (Acalas)

===Non-dihydropyridine===

==== Phenylalkylamine ====
Phenylalkylamine calcium channel blockers are relatively selective for myocardium, reduce myocardial oxygen demand and reverse coronary vasospasm, and are often used to treat angina. They have minimal vasodilatory effects compared with dihydropyridines and therefore cause less reflex tachycardia, making it appealing for treatment of angina, where tachycardia can be the most significant contributor to the heart&#x27;s need for oxygen. Therefore, as vasodilation is minimal with the phenylalkylamines, the major mechanism of action is causing negative inotropy. Phenylalkylamines are thought to access calcium channels from the intracellular side, although the evidence is somewhat mixed.
* Fendiline
* Gallopamil
* Verapamil (Calan, Isoptin)

==== Benzothiazepine ====
Benzothiazepine calcium channel blockers belong to the benzothiazepine class of compounds and are an intermediate class between phenylalkylamine and dihydropyridines in their selectivity for vascular calcium channels. By having both cardiac depressant and vasodilator actions, benzothiazepines are able to reduce arterial pressure without producing the same degree of reflex cardiac stimulation caused by dihydropyridines.
* Diltiazem (Cardizem) (also used experimentally to prevent migraine)

====Nonselective====
While most of the agents listed above are relatively selective, there are additional agents that are considered nonselective. These include mibefradil, bepridil, flunarizine (BBB crossing), fluspirilene (BBB crossing), and fendiline.

====Others====
Gabapentinoids, such as gabapentin and pregabalin, bind selectively to the α2δ protein that was first described as an integral part of voltage-gated calcium channels. These drugs do not directly block calcium channels but can alter the transport of functional calcium channels to the cell membrane and they also reduce the release of certain excitatory neurotransmitters. They are used primarily to treat epilepsy and neuropathic pain. More recently, the α2δ-1 protein has been found to bind directly and to interact with certain glutamate receptors and to the interstitial protein thombospondin, independently from their action at calcium channels.

Ziconotide, a peptide compound derived from the omega-conotoxin, is a selective N-type calcium channel blocker that has potent analgesic properties that are equivalent to approximate 1,000 times that of morphine. It must be delivered via the intrathecal (directly into the cerebrospinal fluid) route via an intrathecal infusion pump.

Naturally occurring compounds and elements such as magnesium have also been shown to act as calcium channel blockers when administered orally.

==Side effects==
Side effects of these drugs may include but are not limited to:
* Constipation
* Peripheral edema, which can occur in as much as 70% of people receiving calcium channel blocker, is caused by calcium channel blockers&#x27; preferential arteriolar or precapillary dilation without commensurate dilation in the venous or postcapillary circulation. Since lymphatic drainage relies on contraction of the smooth muscle inside the lymphatic vessel supported by voltage-gated calcium channels, inhibition of voltage-gated calcium channel poses a threat towards lymphatic removal of interstitial fluid essential for normal lymphatic system functioning. (See also: Lymphedema.)
* Gingival overgrowth

===Toxicity===

Mild CCB toxicity is treated with supportive care. Nondihydropyridine CCBs may produce profound toxicity, and early decontamination, especially for slow-release agents, is essential. For severe overdoses, treatment usually includes close monitoring of vital signs and the addition of vasopressive agents and intravenous fluids for blood pressure support. Intravenous calcium gluconate (or calcium chloride if a central line is available) and atropine are first-line therapies. If the time of the overdose is known and presentation is within two hours of ingestion, activated charcoal, gastric lavage, and polyethylene glycol may be used to decontaminate the gut. Efforts for gut decontamination may be extended to within 8 hours of ingestion with extended-release preparations.

Hyperinsulinemia-euglycemia therapy has emerged as a viable form of treatment. Although the mechanism is unclear, increased insulin may mobilize glucose from peripheral tissues to serve as an alternative fuel source for the heart (the heart mainly relies on oxidation of fatty acids). Theoretical treatment with lipid emulsion therapy has been considered in severe cases, but is not yet standard of care.

Caution should be taken when using verapamil with a beta blocker due to the risk of severe bradycardia. If unsuccessful, ventricular pacing should be used.

==Non-medical calcium channel inhibitors==
===Ethanol===
Research indicates ethanol is involved in the inhibition of L-type calcium channels. One study showed the nature of ethanol binding to L-type calcium channels is according to first-order kinetics with a Hill coefficient around 1. This indicates ethanol binds independently to the channel, expressing noncooperative binding. Early studies showed a link between calcium and the release of vasopressin by the secondary messenger system. Vasopressin levels are reduced after the ingestion of alcohol. The lower levels of vasopressin from the consumption of alcohol have been linked to ethanol acting as an antagonist to voltage-gated calcium channels (VGCCs). Studies conducted by Treistman et al. in the aplysia confirm inhibition of VGCC by ethanol. Voltage clamp recordings have been done on the aplysia neuron. VGCCs were isolated and calcium current was recorded using patch clamp technique having ethanol as a treatment. Recordings were replicated at varying concentrations (0, 10, 25, 50, and 100 mM) at a voltage clamp of +30 mV. Results showed calcium current decreased as concentration of ethanol increased. Similar results have shown to be true in single-channel recordings from isolated nerve terminal of rats that ethanol does in fact block VGCCs.

Studies done by Katsura et al. in 2006 on mouse cerebral cortical neurons, show the effects of prolonged ethanol exposure. Neurons were exposed to sustained ethanol concentrations of 50 mM for 3 days &quot;in vitro&quot;. Western blot and protein analysis were conducted to determine the relative amounts of VGCC subunit expression. α1C, α1D, and α2/δ1 subunits showed an increase of expression after sustained ethanol exposure. However, the β4 subunit showed a decrease. Furthermore, α1A, α1B, and α1F subunits did not alter in their relative expression. Thus, sustained ethanol exposure may participate in the development of ethanol dependence in neurons.

Other experiments done by Malysz et al. have looked into ethanol effects on voltage-gated calcium channels on detrusor smooth muscle cells in guinea pigs. Perforated patch clamp technique was used having intracellular fluid inside the pipette and extracellular fluid in the bath with added 0.3% vol/vol (about 50-mM) ethanol. Ethanol decreased the current in DSM cells and induced muscle relaxation. Ethanol inhibits VGCCs and is involved in alcohol-induced relaxation of the urinary bladder.

=== Agatoxin in spider venom ===
Research on the desert grass spider, &quot;Agelenopsis aperta,&quot; has shown that agatoxins IVA and IVB found in their venom selectively block calcium channels. These agatoxins are found in other spider species as well. Desert grass spider bites to insects result in rapid paralysis, but bites to humans are not considered medically significant.

==Mechanism of action==

In the body&#x27;s tissues, the concentration of calcium ions () outside cells is normally about 10,000-fold higher than the concentration inside cells. Embedded in the membrane of some cells are calcium channels. When these cells receive a certain signal, the channels open, letting calcium rush into the cell. The resulting increase in intracellular calcium has different effects in different types of cells. Calcium channel blockers prevent or reduce the opening of these channels and thereby reduce these effects.

Several types of calcium channels occur, with a number of classes of blockers, but almost all of them preferentially or exclusively block the L-type voltage-gated calcium channel.

Voltage-dependent calcium channels are responsible for excitation-contraction coupling of skeletal, smooth, and cardiac muscle and for regulating aldosterone and cortisol secretion in endocrine cells of the adrenal cortex. In the heart, they are also involved in the conduction of the pacemaker signals. CCBs used as medications primarily have four effects:
* By acting on vascular smooth muscle, they reduce contraction of the arteries and cause an increase in arterial diameter, a phenomenon called vasodilation (CCBs do not work on venous smooth muscle).
* By acting on cardiac muscles (myocardium), they reduce the force of contraction of the heart.
* By slowing down the conduction of electrical activity within the heart, they slow down the heart beat.
* By blocking the calcium signal on adrenal cortex cells, they directly reduce aldosterone production, which correlates to lower blood pressure.

Since blood pressure is in intimate feedback with cardiac output and peripheral resistance, with relatively low blood pressure, the afterload on the heart decreases; this decreases how hard the heart must work to eject blood into the aorta, so the amount of oxygen required by the heart decreases accordingly. This can help ameliorate symptoms of ischaemic heart disease such as angina pectoris.

Reducing the force of contraction of the myocardium is known as the negative inotropic effect of calcium channel blockers.

Slowing down the conduction of electrical activity within the heart, by blocking the calcium channel during the plateau phase of the action potential of the heart (see: cardiac action potential), results in a negative chronotropic effect, or a lowering of heart rate. This can increase the potential for heart block. The negative chronotropic effects of CCBs make them a commonly used class of agents in individuals with atrial fibrillation or flutter in whom control of the heart rate is generally a goal. Negative chronotropy can be beneficial when treating a variety of disease processes because lower heart rates represent lower cardiac oxygen requirements. Elevated heart rate can result in significantly higher &quot;cardiac work&quot;, which can result in symptoms of angina.

The class of CCBs known as dihydropyridines mainly affect arterial vascular smooth muscle and lower blood pressure by causing vasodilation. The phenylalkylamine class of CCBs mainly affect the cells of the heart and have negative inotropic and negative chronotropic effects. The benzothiazepine class of CCBs combine effects of the other two classes.

Because of the negative inotropic effects, the nondihydropyridine calcium channel blockers should be avoided (or used with caution) in individuals with cardiomyopathy.

Unlike beta blockers, calcium channel blockers do not decrease the responsiveness of the heart to input from the sympathetic nervous system. Since moment-to-moment blood pressure regulation is carried out by the sympathetic nervous system (via the baroreceptor reflex), calcium channel blockers allow blood pressure to be maintained more effectively than do beta blockers. However, because dihydropyridine CCBs result in a decrease in blood pressure, the baroreceptor reflex often initiates a reflexive increase in sympathetic activity leading to increased heart rate and contractility.

Ionic calcium is antagonized by magnesium ions in the nervous system. Because of this, bioavailable supplements of magnesium, possibly including magnesium chloride, magnesium lactate, and magnesium aspartate, may increase or enhance the effects of calcium channel blockade.

N-type calcium channels are found in neurons and are involved in the release of neurotransmitter at synapses. Ziconotide is a selective blocker of these calcium channels and acts as an analgesic.

==History==

Calcium channel blockers came into wide use in the 1960s, having been first identified in the lab of German pharmacologist Albrecht Fleckenstein in 1964.

==References==
==External links==
* 
* Video – Calcium Channel Blockers</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q421700" start="0" end="24" title="Calcium channel blocker" label="Calcium channel blockers"/>
<link wikidata="Q421700" start="26" end="29" title="Calcium channel blocker" label="CCB"/>
<link wikidata="Q421700" start="32" end="59" title="Calcium channel blocker" label="calcium channel antagonists"/>
<link wikidata="Q421700" start="63" end="82" title="Calcium channel blocker" label="calcium antagonists"/>
<link wikidata="Q12140" start="98" end="108" title="medication" label="medication"/>
<link wikidata="Q706" start="139" end="146" title="calcium" label="calcium"/>
<link wikidata="Q15322916" start="158" end="173" title="calcium channel" label="calcium channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q575890" start="213" end="234" title="antihypertensive drug" label="antihypertensive drug"/>
<link wikidata="Q82642" start="270" end="284" title="blood pressure" label="blood pressure"/>
<link wikidata="Q41861" start="302" end="314" title="hypertension" label="hypertension"/>
<link wikidata="Q496359" start="417" end="425" title="Systole" label="systolic"/>
<link wikidata="Q437458" start="444" end="460" title="elderly care" label="elderly patients"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073121" start="521" end="531" title="heart rate" label="heart rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q5064103" start="597" end="615" title="cerebral vasospasm" label="cerebral vasospasm"/>
<link wikidata="Q693058" start="631" end="641" title="chest pain" label="chest pain"/>
<link wikidata="Q180762" start="652" end="667" title="angina pectoris" label="angina pectoris"/>
<link wikidata="Q26916851" start="670" end="676" title="N-type calcium channel" label="N-type"/>
<link wikidata="Q2600696" start="678" end="684" title="L-type calcium channel" label="L-type"/>
<link wikidata="Q2487620" start="690" end="696" title="T-type calcium channel" label="T-type"/>
<link wikidata="Q14905735" start="697" end="730" title="voltage-dependent calcium channel" label="voltage-dependent calcium channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q3551060" start="751" end="767" title="zona glomerulosa" label="zona glomerulosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q712294" start="775" end="794" title="adrenal gland" label="human adrenal gland"/>
<link wikidata="Q851162" start="832" end="844" title="biosynthesis" label="biosynthesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q184564" start="848" end="859" title="aldosterone" label="aldosterone"/>
<link wikidata="Q19065" start="863" end="883" title="adrenal cortex" label="adrenocortical cells"/>
<link wikidata="Q41861" start="937" end="949" title="hypertension" label="hypertension"/>
<link wikidata="Q912807" start="961" end="967" title="active ingredient" label="agents"/>
<link wikidata="Q816759" start="1026" end="1039" title="beta blockers" label="beta blockers"/>
<link wikidata="Q11068" start="1052" end="1066" title="cardiovascular" label="cardiovascular"/>
<link wikidata="Q58702" start="1067" end="1076" title="Mortality rate" label="mortality"/>
<link wikidata="Q3269441" start="1135" end="1147" title="side effects" label="side effects"/>
<link wikidata="Q39094" start="1354" end="1369" title="dihydropyridine" label="dihydropyridine"/>
<link wikidata="Q180762" start="1485" end="1491" title="angina pectoris" label="angina"/>
<link wikidata="Q209583" start="1545" end="1556" title="tachycardia" label="tachycardia"/>
<link wikidata="Q188151" start="1601" end="1609" title="ischemic" label="ischemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q84133" start="1656" end="1666" title="myocardial" label="myocardial"/>
<link wikidata="Q570197" start="1734" end="1745" title="proteinuria" label="proteinuria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054718" start="1763" end="1774" title="nephropathy" label="nephropathy"/>
<link wikidata="Q411347" start="1850" end="1860" title="Amlodipine" label="Amlodipine"/>
<link wikidata="Q4784109" start="1873" end="1884" title="Aranidipine" label="Aranidipine"/>
<link wikidata="Q4832365" start="1898" end="1910" title="Azelnidipine" label="Azelnidipine"/>
<link wikidata="Q925327" start="1924" end="1935" title="Barnidipine" label="Barnidipine"/>
<link wikidata="Q113514917" start="1947" end="1957" title="Benidipine" label="Benidipine"/>
<link wikidata="Q731525" start="1969" end="1980" title="Cilnidipine" label="Cilnidipine"/>
<link wikidata="Q5132338" start="2031" end="2042" title="Clevidipine" label="Clevidipine"/>
<link wikidata="Q5347555" start="2057" end="2068" title="Efonidipine" label="Efonidipine"/>
<link wikidata="Q420644" start="2080" end="2090" title="Felodipine" label="Felodipine"/>
<link wikidata="Q414873" start="2103" end="2113" title="Isradipine" label="Isradipine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163827" start="2136" end="2146" title="Lacidipine" label="Lacidipine"/>
<link wikidata="Q410492" start="2167" end="2180" title="Lercanidipine" label="Lercanidipine"/>
<link wikidata="Q921133" start="2193" end="2203" title="Manidipine" label="Manidipine"/>
<link wikidata="Q729213" start="2226" end="2237" title="Nicardipine" label="Nicardipine"/>
<link wikidata="Q39111" start="2261" end="2271" title="Nifedipine" label="Nifedipine"/>
<link wikidata="Q7037489" start="2294" end="2305" title="Nilvadipine" label="Nilvadipine"/>
<link wikidata="Q421429" start="2318" end="2328" title="Nimodipine" label="Nimodipine"/>
<link wikidata="Q221694" start="2367" end="2386" title="Blood brain barrier" label="blood-brain barrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q5064103" start="2410" end="2428" title="cerebral vasospasm" label="cerebral vasospasm"/>
<link wikidata="Q3342150" start="2432" end="2443" title="Nisoldipine" label="Nisoldipine"/>
<link wikidata="Q416584" start="2473" end="2485" title="Nitrendipine" label="Nitrendipine"/>
<link wikidata="Q7238365" start="2520" end="2531" title="Pranidipine" label="Pranidipine"/>
<link wikidata="Q999767" start="3289" end="3298" title="Fendiline" label="Fendiline"/>
<link wikidata="Q412127" start="3301" end="3311" title="Gallopamil" label="Gallopamil"/>
<link wikidata="Q410291" start="3314" end="3323" title="Verapamil" label="Verapamil"/>
<link wikidata="Q3523992" start="3423" end="3438" title="Thiazepine" label="benzothiazepine"/>
<link wikidata="Q422229" start="3793" end="3802" title="Diltiazem" label="Diltiazem"/>
<link wikidata="Q6827783" start="4023" end="4033" title="mibefradil" label="mibefradil"/>
<link wikidata="Q4890934" start="4035" end="4043" title="bepridil" label="bepridil"/>
<link wikidata="Q416237" start="4045" end="4056" title="flunarizine" label="flunarizine"/>
<link wikidata="Q221694" start="4058" end="4061" title="blood–brain barrier" label="BBB"/>
<link wikidata="Q408300" start="4073" end="4085" title="fluspirilene" label="fluspirilene"/>
<link wikidata="Q221694" start="4087" end="4090" title="blood–brain barrier" label="BBB"/>
<link wikidata="Q999767" start="4106" end="4115" title="fendiline" label="fendiline"/>
<link wikidata="Q18207292" start="4133" end="4146" title="Gabapentinoid" label="Gabapentinoid"/>
<link wikidata="Q410352" start="4157" end="4167" title="gabapentin" label="gabapentin"/>
<link wikidata="Q412174" start="4172" end="4182" title="pregabalin" label="pregabalin"/>
<link wikidata="Q17854930" start="4208" end="4219" title="CACNA2D1" label="α2δ protein"/>
<link wikidata="Q14905735" start="4268" end="4297" title="voltage-gated calcium channel" label="voltage-gated calcium channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q41571" start="4538" end="4546" title="epilepsy" label="epilepsy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2798704" start="4551" end="4567" title="neuropathic pain" label="neuropathic pain"/>
<link wikidata="Q198473" start="4784" end="4794" title="Ziconotide" label="Ziconotide"/>
<link wikidata="Q172847" start="4798" end="4805" title="peptide" label="peptide"/>
<link wikidata="Q417238" start="4838" end="4847" title="conotoxin" label="conotoxin"/>
<link wikidata="Q26916851" start="4864" end="4886" title="N-type calcium channel" label="N-type calcium channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q173235" start="4911" end="4920" title="analgesic" label="analgesic"/>
<link wikidata="Q81225" start="4987" end="4995" title="morphine" label="morphine"/>
<link wikidata="Q660" start="5170" end="5179" title="magnesium" label="magnesium"/>
<link wikidata="Q178436" start="5346" end="5358" title="Constipation" label="Constipation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7168709" start="5361" end="5377" title="Peripheral edema" label="Peripheral edema"/>
<link wikidata="Q4797540" start="5502" end="5623" title="Arteriolar vasodilator" label="preferential arteriolar or precapillary dilation without commensurate dilation in the venous or postcapillary circulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q208453" start="5679" end="5692" title="smooth muscle" label="smooth muscle"/>
<link wikidata="Q11238641" start="5704" end="5720" title="lymphatic vessel" label="lymphatic vessel"/>
<link wikidata="Q916398" start="5935" end="5945" title="Lymphedema" label="Lymphedema"/>
<link wikidata="Q2637111" start="5950" end="5969" title="Gingival enlargement" label="Gingival overgrowth"/>
<link wikidata="Q274160" start="5996" end="6004" title="toxicity" label="toxicity"/>
<link wikidata="Q17008689" start="6103" end="6118" title="decontamination" label="decontamination"/>
<link wikidata="Q3505252" start="6181" end="6190" title="overdoses" label="overdoses"/>
<link wikidata="Q413739" start="6354" end="6371" title="calcium gluconate" label="calcium gluconate"/>
<link wikidata="Q208451" start="6376" end="6392" title="calcium chloride" label="calcium chloride"/>
<link wikidata="Q1663054" start="6541" end="6550" title="ingestion" label="ingestion"/>
<link wikidata="Q190878" start="6552" end="6570" title="activated carbon" label="activated charcoal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1755116" start="6572" end="6586" title="gastric lavage" label="gastric lavage"/>
<link wikidata="Q410083" start="6592" end="6611" title="polyethylene glycol" label="polyethylene glycol"/>
<link wikidata="Q217111" start="7263" end="7274" title="bradycardia" label="bradycardia"/>
<link wikidata="Q47146337" start="7405" end="7412" title="alcohol (drug)" label="ethanol"/>
<link wikidata="Q2554020" start="7589" end="7605" title="Hill coefficient" label="Hill coefficient"/>
<link wikidata="Q2902610" start="7686" end="7708" title="cooperative binding" label="noncooperative binding"/>
<link wikidata="Q21124841" start="7773" end="7784" title="vasopressin" label="vasopressin"/>
<link wikidata="Q899814" start="7792" end="7818" title="secondary messenger system" label="secondary messenger system"/>
<link wikidata="Q136564" start="8087" end="8094" title="aplysia" label="aplysia"/>
<link wikidata="Q10290897" start="8134" end="8147" title="Voltage clamp" label="Voltage clamp"/>
<link wikidata="Q176366" start="8256" end="8267" title="patch clamp" label="patch clamp"/>
<link wikidata="Q48743" start="8866" end="8878" title="Western blot" label="Western blot"/>
<link wikidata="Q568055" start="9413" end="9421" title="Detrusor urinae muscle" label="detrusor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2121033" start="9873" end="9891" title="Agelenopsis aperta" label="Agelenopsis aperta"/>
<link wikidata="Q29548" start="10373" end="10381" title="cell membrane" label="membrane"/>
<link wikidata="Q15322916" start="10400" end="10415" title="calcium channel" label="calcium channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2600696" start="10865" end="10871" title="L-type calcium channel" label="L-type"/>
<link wikidata="Q14905735" start="10904" end="10937" title="Voltage-dependent calcium channel" label="Voltage-dependent calcium channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q127006" start="10970" end="10981" title="muscle contraction" label="contraction"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048687" start="10994" end="11002" title="skeletal muscle" label="skeletal"/>
<link wikidata="Q208453" start="11004" end="11010" title="smooth muscle" label="smooth"/>
<link wikidata="Q84133" start="11016" end="11030" title="cardiac muscle" label="cardiac muscle"/>
<link wikidata="Q184564" start="11050" end="11061" title="aldosterone" label="aldosterone"/>
<link wikidata="Q190875" start="11066" end="11074" title="cortisol" label="cortisol"/>
<link wikidata="Q11078" start="11088" end="11103" title="Endocrine system" label="endocrine cells"/>
<link wikidata="Q19065" start="11111" end="11125" title="adrenal cortex" label="adrenal cortex"/>
<link wikidata="Q3635544" start="11189" end="11198" title="cardiac pacemaker" label="pacemaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q7916469" start="11277" end="11299" title="vascular smooth muscle" label="vascular smooth muscle"/>
<link wikidata="Q9655" start="11366" end="11374" title="artery" label="arterial"/>
<link wikidata="Q14859627" start="11405" end="11417" title="vasodilation" label="vasodilation"/>
<link wikidata="Q9609" start="11439" end="11445" title="vein" label="venous"/>
<link wikidata="Q84133" start="11494" end="11504" title="myocardium" label="myocardium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1299082" start="11941" end="11950" title="afterload" label="afterload"/>
<link wikidata="Q844935" start="12156" end="12179" title="ischaemic heart disease" label="ischaemic heart disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q180762" start="12188" end="12203" title="angina pectoris" label="angina pectoris"/>
<link wikidata="Q575278" start="12283" end="12292" title="inotropic" label="inotropic"/>
<link wikidata="Q194277" start="12463" end="12479" title="action potential" label="action potential"/>
<link wikidata="Q2882301" start="12499" end="12523" title="cardiac action potential" label="cardiac action potential"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088369" start="12548" end="12560" title="chronotropic" label="chronotropic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073121" start="12586" end="12596" title="heart rate" label="heart rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1361515" start="12634" end="12645" title="heart block" label="heart block"/>
<link wikidata="Q815819" start="12751" end="12770" title="atrial fibrillation" label="atrial fibrillation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1506572" start="12774" end="12781" title="atrial flutter" label="flutter"/>
<link wikidata="Q847583" start="13618" end="13632" title="cardiomyopathy" label="cardiomyopathy"/>
<link wikidata="Q816759" start="13642" end="13654" title="beta blocker" label="beta blocker"/>
<link wikidata="Q187215" start="13748" end="13774" title="sympathetic nervous system" label="sympathetic nervous system"/>
<link wikidata="Q808725" start="13883" end="13902" title="baroreceptor reflex" label="baroreceptor reflex"/>
<link wikidata="Q265414" start="14368" end="14386" title="magnesium chloride" label="magnesium chloride"/>
<link wikidata="Q594836" start="14388" end="14405" title="magnesium lactate" label="magnesium lactate"/>
<link wikidata="Q6731379" start="14411" end="14430" title="magnesium aspartate" label="magnesium aspartate"/>
<link wikidata="Q26916851" start="14498" end="14520" title="N-type calcium channel" label="N-type calcium channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q43054" start="14535" end="14541" title="neuron" label="neuron"/>
<link wikidata="Q162657" start="14578" end="14594" title="neurotransmitter" label="neurotransmitter"/>
<link wikidata="Q187181" start="14598" end="14605" title="synapse" label="synapse"/>
<link wikidata="Q198473" start="14608" end="14618" title="Ziconotide" label="Ziconotide"/>
<link wikidata="Q173235" start="14683" end="14692" title="analgesic" label="analgesic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2639772" start="14831" end="14852" title="Albrecht Fleckenstein" label="Albrecht Fleckenstein"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="252563" wikidata="Q746448" url="?curid=252563" title="Recreational vehicle">
<text>A recreational vehicle, often abbreviated as RV, is a motor vehicle or trailer that includes living quarters designed for accommodation. Types of RVs include motorhomes, campervans, coaches, caravans (also known as travel trailers and campers), fifth-wheel trailers, popup campers, and truck campers.

Typical amenities of an RV include a kitchen, a bathroom, and one or more beds. RVs can range from utilitarian – containing only sleeping quarters and basic cooking facilities – to luxurious, with features like air conditioning (AC), water heaters, televisions and satellite receivers, and quartz countertops.

==Types==
RVs can be either trailers that are towed by vehicles or vehicles that drive themselves. Most RVs have one level, but there are also some with two levels. To save space while traveling, larger RVs often have slide-outs or canopies that open up when parked. Self-driving RVs can be categorized into pushers, which have the engine at the back, and pullers, which have the engine at the front. Generally, pushers use diesel fuel, while pullers use gasoline.

==History==
The first recreational vehicles were horse-drawn. They evolved during the second half of the nineteenth century as adaptations of vehicles used for other purposes, including public transport caravans (UK, also known as stage wagons), gypsy vardos (Europe), living vans (UK), ambulance wagons (US) and sheep herders wagons (US).

The first, currently-known, purpose-built RV was the horse-drawn &quot;Wanderer&quot; (UK), commissioned from the Bristol Wagon Works Company by Dr. Gordon Stables in 1884. Stables was a pioneer of the UK&#x27;s &quot;Gentlemen Gypsy&quot; movement (1885–1914) which promoted the restorative benefits of horse-drawn leisure caravanning and inspired the formation of the world&#x27;s first RV club, The Caravan Club (UK), in 1907. &quot;The Wanderer&quot; was closely followed by the McMaster Camping Car (US,1889).Camping-vehicle In the 1890s, US RV pioneers self-built timber &#x27;houses on wheels&#x27; for health, leisure and hunting purposes. The most widely reported of these were those of Morgan Lasley and his family. Horse-drawn RV use declined after the First World War as many horses were killed during the war and automobiles became cheaper, more powerful and more widely available.

The first powered RVs were steam-drawn trailers from France including the &quot;Grande Diligence&quot; of Prince Oldenburg (1896) and the De Dion Bouton trailer of Monsieur Rénodier (1898). The first steam-driven motorhome was the &quot;Quo Vadis&quot; (France,1900) and the first gasoline-driven motorhome was the &quot;Passe Partout&quot; (France, 1902). The first recorded powered motorhomes in America were the &#x27;camp cars&#x27; of Roy Faye and Freeman Young of 1904–06 (a 1904 Rambler, 1905 Thomas Flyer and 1906 Matheson). Lightweight tent trailers were especially popular in the US from 1911, thanks to improved roads, new national parks and the affordability of tow vehicles such as the Ford Model T. At the other end of the price scale, luxury touring limousines, developed in France by De Dietrich in 1904, were built in small numbers in the US by Welch (1909) and Pierce Arrow (1910). The first US RV club, the Tin Can Tourists, was formed in 1919. The first known, recreational fifth wheeler was the Auto Salon Deluxe built in Belgium for Baron Crawhez by Auto-Mixte Pescatore in 1913.

In the early twentieth century RV builders in the UK (Navarac, Piggott Bros, Eccles, Bertram Hutchings), the US (Detroit Trailer Company, Welch, Graham Brothers, Pierce-Arrow) and France (De Dietrich, Cadel) experimented with a wide range of RV types including caravans and trailers, motorhomes, touring limousines, tent trailers and fifth wheelers. Early motorhomes (&#x27;house cars&#x27; in the US) were usually converted goods trucks and were heavy, noisy, inflexible and expensive, restricting their use to the wealthy or self-builders. The &#x27;one box&#x27; RV was not seen in large numbers until the small, lightweight Volkswagen Kombi of 1950. During the 1920s and 1930s, caravans (travel trailers) became the dominant form of RV in the UK due to their low cost, weather-resistance and flexibility. There was likewise a travel trailer boom in the US in the 1930s as automobile production-line manufacturing techniques were used in travel trailer manufacturing to meet growing demand from recreational users and those seeking low-cost housing during The Great Depression. Self-built trailers were highly popular in the US during the 1930s and travel trailers featured in a number of Hollywood movies including Mickey&#x27;s Trailer (1938).

The 1920s and 1930s, saw some influential, maverick builders construct innovative RVs in small numbers. These included Bertram Hutchings (UK, 1930–39, streamlined caravans), Charles Louvet (France, 1924–34, aircraft-inspired, coach-built motorhomes and trailers), Noel Pemberton Billing (UK, 1927, &quot;Road Yacht&quot; motorhome), Glenn Curtiss (US, 1918–30, Adams Motorbungalo, Curtiss Aerocar, Aero Coupler hitch) and William Hawley Bowlus (US, 1934, aluminum monocoque trailers). Wally Byam&#x27;s Airstream (US, 1931 onwards) was a successful trailer builder of the period and is the only survivor of over 400 pre-WW2 US RV manufacturers. These early advancements in RV and trailer design established the foundation for a burgeoning industry that would continue to develop over the subsequent decades.

Prior to WW2 a number of other countries developed their own small-scale RV manufacturing industries including Germany, Australia, New Zealand and the Netherlands. Germany had a particular focus on small, lightweight caravans towable by low-cost automobiles whilst Australia developed &#x27;pop-top&#x27; caravans with good ventilation, ample water storage and high ground clearance. During WW2 RV production was halted in most countries except when required as accommodation for military personnel or essential workers.

Between 1945 and 1960, RVs flourished in many western countries as disposable income and leisure time grew. Dedicated RV parks were established to cater to the needs of both short and long-term RV users. Improvements in RV technology including batteries, fridges, gas cookers, toilets and lightweight construction techniques dramatically improved RV comfort levels. More powerful gasoline and diesel engines allowed RVs to increase in size, weight and speed. Regulations were introduced in many countries to control how RVs were manufactured and used.

== Industry ==
In the United States, about 85 percent of recreational vehicles sold are manufactured in Indiana, and roughly two-thirds of that production in Elkhart County, which calls itself &quot;the RV Capital of the World&quot;, population 206,000. The industry has US$32.4 billion annual economic impact in Indiana, pays US$3.1 billion in taxes to the state and supports 126,140 jobs and US$7.8 billion in wages, according to the RV Industry Association.

The recreational vehicle industry around Elkhart is part of a large network of related transport equipment companies, including utility trailer makers and specialty bus manufacturers, who source from the same supply chains. The industry has taken hits from US tariffs on steel and aluminum and other duties on RV parts made in China, from plumbing fixtures to electronic components to vinyl seat covers. Tariff-related price hikes forced manufacturers to pass on some of the increased costs through higher RV prices, which in turn has contributed to slower sales. Shipments of RVs to dealers fell 22% percent in the first five months of 2019, compared to the same period a year earlier, after dropping 4% in 2018.

== Usage ==

RVs are most commonly used for living quarters while traveling. People may choose to take a road trip in their RV and use the RV to sleep in, rather than a hotel room. They may even decide to tow their car from the back of the RV so they can use that to travel around more easily when they reach their destination.

Although the most common usage of an RV is as temporary accommodation when traveling, some people use an RV as their main residence. In fact, one million Americans live in RVs. In the United States and Canada, traveling south each winter to a warmer climate is referred to as snowbirding. In Australia, the slang term for a retired person who travels in a recreational vehicle is a &quot;grey nomad&quot;.

There are local and national RV rental companies, such as Adventure KT and Outdoorsy that specialize in renting RVs to families for vacationing purposes. People enjoy the road trip and luxuries an RV provides while traveling without having a long-term expense. This is similar to home vacation rentals but is cheaper and also offers the flexibility of itinerary planning.

While it is legal in all of the United States to live in an RV, there are laws regarding where and for how long RVs can be parked.

Some owners fit solar panels to the roof of their RV. It is possible for RV users to live off the electrical grid while still having access to internet, making remote working feasible.

Usage of RVs is common at rural festivals such as Burning Man, but most festivals have strict rules about operating an RV during the event. Burning Man is strict about RV water leaks, and generator usage is another of the restrictions that festivals put on the use of RVs. Bluegrass Festivals regularly host RVs; they become the locations for afterhours jamming by participants.

Recently, RVs have been proposed as a partial solution to the homelessness problems found in cities across the US. RVs for Homeless (https://rvforhomeless.com/) has been formed as a coalition to encourage the donation of older vehicles to alleviate homelessness. This is distinct from the simple use of older vehicles as temporary shelters in homeless encampments.

==Demographics==
===United States===
As of 2016, the average age of RV owners in the United States was 45, a three-year decrease since 2015. Per 2020 research reports, more millennials are interested in buying RVs due to their increased demand for camping and outdoor recreational activities, especially in the US.

Due to the COVID-19 pandemic, sales of RVs in the United States have increased, and as of March 2021, 11.3 million households own an RV, which is a 26 percent increase over the past ten years. In the month of October 2021, 58,000 RVs were manufactured in North America, the most ever in a single month.

== Current trends ==

* Wholesale recreational vehicle (RV) shipments during the first four months of 2021 rose more than 86% over 2020, because consumer demand for RVs has soared since the pandemic&#x27;s onset.
* Analysts expect industry revenue to increase 1.1% through 2026 as U.S. residents continue to plan domestic trips because of continued travel restrictions around the globe.

==See also==

* Alternative housing
* Fulltiming
* Housetrucker
* Motorhome
* List of recreational vehicle manufacturers
* List of recreational vehicles
* Living Vehicle
* Recreational vehicle terms
* Rest area
* RV park
* Tiny-house movement
* Vardo (Romani wagon)
* Van-dwelling
==References==
==Further reading==
* 
* 

== External links ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q746448" start="2" end="22" title="Recreational vehicle" label="recreational vehicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q746448" start="45" end="47" title="Recreational vehicle" label="RV"/>
<link wikidata="Q752870" start="54" end="67" title="motor vehicle" label="motor vehicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q216146" start="71" end="78" title="trailer (vehicle)" label="trailer"/>
<link wikidata="Q13553228" start="158" end="167" title="motorhome" label="motorhome"/>
<link wikidata="Q5357662" start="170" end="179" title="campervan" label="campervan"/>
<link wikidata="Q12334006" start="182" end="189" title="coach (bus)" label="coaches"/>
<link wikidata="Q216040" start="191" end="199" title="Caravan (trailer)" label="caravans"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="245" end="265" title="Caravan (trailer)#Fifth-wheel trailer" label="fifth-wheel trailers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2529645" start="267" end="279" title="popup camper" label="popup camper"/>
<link wikidata="Q17154490" start="286" end="298" title="truck camper" label="truck camper"/>
<link wikidata="Q43164" start="339" end="346" title="kitchen" label="kitchen"/>
<link wikidata="Q190771" start="350" end="358" title="bathroom" label="bathroom"/>
<link wikidata="Q42177" start="376" end="379" title="bed" label="bed"/>
<link wikidata="Q55633866" start="1310" end="1321" title="stage wagon" label="stage wagon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2236124" start="1325" end="1337" title="Vardo (Romani wagon)" label="gypsy vardos"/>
<link wikidata="Q25312920" start="1348" end="1358" title="living van" label="living van"/>
<link wikidata="Q5870744" start="1366" end="1382" title="History of the ambulance" label="ambulance wagons"/>
<link wikidata="Q16824402" start="1534" end="1561" title="Bristol Wagon &amp;amp; Carriage Works" label="Bristol Wagon Works Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q8010028" start="1565" end="1583" title="William Gordon Stables" label="Dr. Gordon Stables"/>
<link wikidata="Q2034074" start="2802" end="2809" title="Rambler (automobile)" label="Rambler"/>
<link wikidata="Q1622656" start="2816" end="2828" title="Thomas Motor Company" label="Thomas Flyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q6786960" start="2838" end="2846" title="Matheson (automobile)" label="Matheson"/>
<link wikidata="Q800137" start="2930" end="2944" title="Good Roads Movement" label="improved roads"/>
<link wikidata="Q5870040" start="2950" end="2964" title="History of the National Park Service" label="national parks"/>
<link wikidata="Q182323" start="3015" end="3027" title="Ford Model T" label="Ford Model T"/>
<link wikidata="Q574579" start="3116" end="3127" title="Lorraine-Dietrich" label="De Dietrich"/>
<link wikidata="Q63347823" start="3178" end="3183" title="Welch Motor Car Company" label="Welch"/>
<link wikidata="Q40978" start="3195" end="3207" title="Pierce-Arrow Motor Car Company" label="Pierce Arrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q784711" start="3388" end="3408" title="Auto-Mixte" label="Auto-Mixte Pescatore"/>
<link wikidata="Q63347823" start="3557" end="3562" title="Welch Motor Car Company" label="Welch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1541900" start="3564" end="3579" title="Graham-Paige" label="Graham Brothers"/>
<link wikidata="Q40978" start="3581" end="3593" title="Pierce-Arrow Motor Car Company" label="Pierce-Arrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q574579" start="3607" end="3618" title="Lorraine-Dietrich" label="De Dietrich"/>
<link wikidata="Q216040" start="3680" end="3688" title="Caravan (towed trailer)" label="caravans"/>
<link wikidata="Q13553228" start="3703" end="3712" title="motorhome" label="motorhome"/>
<link wikidata="Q2529645" start="3735" end="3748" title="Popup camper" label="tent trailers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2506917" start="4047" end="4063" title="Volkswagen Kombi" label="Volkswagen Kombi"/>
<link wikidata="Q455037" start="4295" end="4321" title="Assembly line" label="automobile production-line"/>
<link wikidata="Q8698" start="4478" end="4498" title="Great Depression" label="The Great Depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q540931" start="4638" end="4659" title="Mickey&amp;#x27;s Trailer" label="Mickey&amp;#x27;s Trailer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7047162" start="4933" end="4955" title="Noel Pemberton Billing" label="Noel Pemberton Billing"/>
<link wikidata="Q454544" start="5002" end="5015" title="Glenn Curtiss" label="Glenn Curtiss"/>
<link wikidata="Q959422" start="5091" end="5112" title="Hawley Bowlus" label="William Hawley Bowlus"/>
<link wikidata="Q409230" start="5172" end="5181" title="Airstream" label="Airstream"/>
<link wikidata="Q60456301" start="6118" end="6125" title="RV park" label="RV park"/>
<link wikidata="Q1415" start="6657" end="6664" title="Indiana" label="Indiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q24645" start="6711" end="6725" title="Elkhart County, Indiana" label="Elkhart County"/>
<link wikidata="Q50335907" start="7272" end="7282" title="First Trump tariffs" label="US tariffs"/>
<link wikidata="Q17035944" start="8335" end="8346" title="Snowbird (people)" label="snowbirding"/>
<link wikidata="Q774583" start="8987" end="8998" title="solar panel" label="solar panel"/>
<link wikidata="Q152518" start="9207" end="9218" title="Burning Man" label="Burning Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q81068910" start="10230" end="10247" title="COVID-19 pandemic" label="COVID-19 pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q55639160" start="10927" end="10946" title="Alternative housing" label="Alternative housing"/>
<link wikidata="Q5508326" start="10949" end="10959" title="Fulltiming" label="Fulltiming"/>
<link wikidata="Q5915995" start="10962" end="10974" title="Housetrucker" label="Housetrucker"/>
<link wikidata="Q13553228" start="10977" end="10986" title="Motorhome" label="Motorhome"/>
<link wikidata="Q6636174" start="10989" end="11031" title="List of recreational vehicle manufacturers" label="List of recreational vehicle manufacturers"/>
<link wikidata="Q6636175" start="11034" end="11063" title="List of recreational vehicles" label="List of recreational vehicles"/>
<link wikidata="Q122942426" start="11066" end="11080" title="Living Vehicle" label="Living Vehicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q55631304" start="11083" end="11109" title="Recreational vehicle terms" label="Recreational vehicle terms"/>
<link wikidata="Q786014" start="11112" end="11121" title="Rest area" label="Rest area"/>
<link wikidata="Q60456301" start="11124" end="11131" title="RV park" label="RV park"/>
<link wikidata="Q30531" start="11134" end="11153" title="Tiny-house movement" label="Tiny-house movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q2236124" start="11156" end="11176" title="Vardo (Romani wagon)" label="Vardo (Romani wagon)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7914561" start="11179" end="11191" title="Van-dwelling" label="Van-dwelling"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="252567" wikidata="Q2462696" url="?curid=252567" title="Snodland">
<text>Snodland is a town in the borough of Tonbridge and Malling in Kent, England. It lies on the River Medway, between Rochester and Maidstone, and from central London. At the 2011 Census, it had a population of 10,211.

== History ==

&quot;Snoddingland&quot; is first mentioned in a charter of 838 in which King Egbert of Wessex gave &quot;four ploughlands in the place called Snoddingland and Holanbeorge&quot; (Holborough) to Beornmod, the Bishop of Rochester. Since -ingland names are mostly derived from personal names, the name appears to refer to &#x27;cultivated land connected with Snodd&#x27; or Snodda. The Domesday Book of 1086 refers to it as &quot;Esnoiland&quot;.

The first Roman advance in the conquest of Britain may have crossed the River Medway near Snodland, although there are other possible locations. The supposed crossing place is marked by a memorial on the opposite side of the river from Snodland, close to Burham. Near this spot, a ferry later carried pilgrims bound for Canterbury along the Pilgrims&#x27; Way.

Bishop Gundulph, at the end of the 11th century, built a palace at Halling, which was used by his successors until the 16th century.

Lime working had been carried out at Snodland for centuries, but expanded dramatically in the 19th century, as building boomed. The firm of Poynder and Medlicott began quarrying on the Snodland-Halling border in the early 19th century and the company was taken over by William Lee in 1846. Others followed and the last one was built in 1923 by W. L. H. Roberts at Holborough. Lime for building Waterloo and other London bridges came from the area.

The paper-making industry came to Snodland around 1740, when the May family built a mill which the Hook family took over in 1854. New manufacturing techniques and the coming of the railway in the 1850s improved paper production from five to 70 tons a week. Snodland&#x27;s population doubled between 1840 and 1857. After the Medway Valley railway was opened on 18 June 1856, the village trebled in size between 1861 and 1881. As a result, the parish boundary was re-aligned in 1898 and again in 1988, both changes absorbing areas of Birling parish, known locally as &quot;Lower Birling&quot;.

Snodland is now under a 10-year development plan by Tonbridge and Malling Borough Council to redevelop and expand the Holborough part of Snodland. In 2005, Berkeley Homes began the construction of around 1,200 houses on the former Holborough Quarry.

== Government ==
Fifteen members sit on Snodland Town Council. Snodland East ward elects two councillors and Snodland West three councillors on Tonbridge and Malling Borough Council. In the 2011 election, the West ward elected three Conservative councillors, and East ward elected one Conservative and one Labour. Sarah Hohler is the town&#x27;s member on Kent County Council, and the town is part of the Chatham and Aylesford constituency, represented at Westminster since 2024 by Tris Osborne of the Labour Party.

== Geography ==
The town is situated between the North Downs to the west and the river Medway to the east. Leybourne Lakes Country Park was created from disused gravel pits to the south that have been flooded and landscaped to make fishing and wildlife lakes; across the river is the Burham Marsh nature reserve, a tidal reed bed.

== Demography ==
At the 2011 census, Snodland had a population of 10,211.

== Economy ==
Since 1903, Snodland has been the home of the Mid Kent Water Company. After privatisation of the water companies, the owners of Mid Kent Water in October 2006 also bought South East Water, although regulatory issues dragged on until 2007. The two companies were then merged under the name &quot;South East Water&quot;, whilst retaining the headquarters facilities in Rocfort Road. The company supplies 2.1 million customers in Kent, Sussex, Surrey, Hampshire and Berkshire.

== Culture and community ==
Since 1986, Snodland has been twinned with Moyeuvre-Grande, a town of similar size, located near Metz in North East France. The towns planned to celebrate the thirtieth anniversary of the partnership in May 2016.

Snodland has two public houses, The Freemasons Arms and The Monks Head, and two working men&#x27;s clubs, Snodland WMC and Ham Hill WMC.

== Landmarks ==
The Roman villa in Church Field has survived quite well and has been partially excavated. Aside from the churches (see below), Woodlands Farmhouse on Constitution Hill is a Grade II* listed building dating to the early-mid 15th century. The Mulberry Cottages on the High Street were originally a classical Wealden hall house dating to c1450; there&#x27;s another hall house at 72 Holborough Rd. There are a number of more recent listed structures, perhaps the most unusual is a mock ruin, built c1850 to the south of the water company headquarters on the High St.

== Transport ==
The town is situated on the A228 road connecting the Medway Towns with Tonbridge. The M20 motorway junction 4 is two miles south of the town and affords good access to London and the Channel Ports. The Snodland by-pass takes heavy commercial traffic away from the town centre. 

The railway station was opened on 18 June 1856, on an extension of the North Kent Line from Strood to Maidstone (SER) along the Medway Valley Line. There are peak-time services via HS1 direct to St Pancras; otherwise, passengers for London need to change at Strood or Maidstone Barracks/Maidstone East.

== Media ==
Local news and television programmes are provided by BBC South East and ITV Meridian. Television signals are received from the Bluebell Hill TV transmitter, BBC London and ITV London can also be received from the Crystal Palace TV transmitter. 

Local radio stations are BBC Radio Kent on 96.7 FM, Heart South on 103.1 FM, Gold Radio on 1242 AM and KMFM Maidstone on 105.6 FM. 

The town is served by the local newspaper, Kent Messenger. 

== Education ==
The Holmesdale School is a Foundation school formerly known as Holmesdale Technology College. It still specialises in technology and is linked to The Malling School in The Malling Holmesdale Federation Trust. There are two primary schools in the village, St Katherine&#x27;s Primary School and Snodland Church of England Primary School.

== Religious sites ==
All Saints Church dates from the 12th century, and is a Grade I listed building.

Christ Church, in the south of the town, was built after the population growth in the 19th century led to the requirement for a new church. It was designed by Percy Monkton in Early English Gothic Revival style.

St Benedict&#x27;s Church, Paddlesworth is a Norman church on the Pilgrim&#x27;s Way about a mile west of the town. It dates from the early 12th century but has spent much of its life as a farm building and is currently in the care of the Churches Conservation Trust.

There is a Kingdom Hall on Church Field, used by local Jehovah&#x27;s Witnesses.

In the late 1940s, the defunct Grand Picture Palace cinema on Holborough Road was converted into the Catholic Church of St. Thomas of Canterbury, but it was closed in 2007 and redeveloped.

A Primitive Methodist Chapel on Chapel Road closed in 1976 and is now a car showroom.

The Swedenborgian Church of the New Jerusalem on the High St was used until the 1980s but is now a private house, and is called Church House.

The United Church on the High Street closed in 2011 after becoming structurally unsound. The cemetery was opened in 1896, with the house and chapel being designed by Hubert Bensted of Maidstone.

== Sport ==
The Snodland Sports Association was set up in 2008. The 2012–13 season saw the merger of all the senior and junior football clubs in the town. Snodland Town F.C. competes in the Southern Counties East Football League, Division One. The other 13 teams include Snodland Town Reserves FC, Snodland Town Sunday FC and Snodland Town Nomads FC.

Snodland Community Cricket Club play at Rectory Meadow, just off Rocfort Road car park. The Snodland Chess Club, established in 2003, uses the Cricket Pavilion as its playing venue. The chess club has been national champions in two sections of the National Chess Club Championship.

== Notable people ==
The postal pioneer Thomas Fletcher Waghorn (1800–50), shortened the mail route to India from three months to between 35 and 45 days by going through the Egyptian desert. He is buried in the churchyard.

The white reggae singer Judge Dread (real name Alex Hughes, 1945–98) lived in Snodland. Alex Hughes Close is now named after him. Several Judge Dread songs refer to Snodland, such as &quot;Belle of Snodland Town&quot; and &quot;Last Tango in Snodland&quot;.

== Cultural references ==
Samuel Beckett used the name &quot;Snodland&quot; in his short play &quot;Play&quot; of 1963. 

&quot;Before I could do anything he disappeared. That meant she had won. That slut! I couldn&#x27;t credit it. I lay stricken for weeks. Then I drove over to her place. It was all bolted and barred. All grey with frozen dew. On the way back by Ash and Snodland&quot; 
The British jazz/rock band Soft Machine included a track titled &quot;Snodland&quot; on their 1973 album &quot;Seven&quot;.
== See also ==
*Dode, Kent – an extinct village in the hills above Snodland that was wiped out by the Black Death.

== References ==
== Further reading ==
* &quot;A village sacrificed to industry&quot;, by Stephen Rayner, Memories page, &quot;Medway News&quot;, August 2003.

== External links ==

*Snodland Historical Society</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2462696" start="0" end="8" title="Snodland" label="Snodland"/>
<link wikidata="Q596743" start="37" end="58" title="Tonbridge and Malling" label="Tonbridge and Malling"/>
<link wikidata="Q23298" start="62" end="66" title="Kent" label="Kent"/>
<link wikidata="Q1434222" start="92" end="104" title="River Medway" label="River Medway"/>
<link wikidata="Q507517" start="114" end="123" title="Rochester, Kent" label="Rochester"/>
<link wikidata="Q213180" start="128" end="137" title="Maidstone" label="Maidstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q2354215" start="148" end="162" title="central London" label="central London"/>
<link wikidata="Q154934" start="309" end="325" title="Egbert of Wessex" label="Egbert of Wessex"/>
<link wikidata="Q4890882" start="425" end="433" title="Beornmod" label="Beornmod"/>
<link wikidata="Q1307504" start="439" end="458" title="Bishop of Rochester" label="Bishop of Rochester"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="466" end="470" title="-ing#Other meanings of the suffix" label="-ing"/>
<link wikidata="Q19867" start="614" end="627" title="Domesday Book" label="Domesday Book"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277" start="686" end="691" title="Roman Empire" label="Roman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1258062" start="707" end="726" title="Roman conquest of Britain" label="conquest of Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1434222" start="748" end="760" title="River Medway" label="River Medway"/>
<link wikidata="Q2294985" start="931" end="937" title="Burham" label="Burham"/>
<link wikidata="Q29303" start="996" end="1006" title="Canterbury" label="Canterbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q2095007" start="1017" end="1035" title="Pilgrims&amp;#x27; Way" label="Pilgrims&amp;#x27; Way"/>
<link wikidata="Q3198512" start="1045" end="1053" title="Gundulf of Rochester" label="Gundulph"/>
<link wikidata="Q2227727" start="1105" end="1112" title="Halling, Kent" label="Halling"/>
<link wikidata="Q250423" start="1172" end="1176" title="Lime (material)" label="Lime"/>
<link wikidata="Q6807431" start="1946" end="1959" title="Medway Valley Line" label="Medway Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q596743" start="2267" end="2304" title="Tonbridge and Malling Borough Council" label="Tonbridge and Malling Borough Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q596743" start="2610" end="2647" title="Tonbridge and Malling Borough Council" label="Tonbridge and Malling Borough Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q7820778" start="2656" end="2669" title="2011 Tonbridge and Malling Borough Council election" label="2011 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q6386127" start="2822" end="2841" title="Kent County Council" label="Kent County Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q3239111" start="2871" end="2905" title="Chatham and Aylesford (UK Parliament constituency)" label="Chatham and Aylesford constituency"/>
<link wikidata="Q126848569" start="2948" end="2960" title="Tris Osborne" label="Tris Osborne"/>
<link wikidata="Q2000634" start="3032" end="3043" title="North Downs" label="North Downs"/>
<link wikidata="Q6537976" start="3090" end="3118" title="Leybourne Lakes Country Park" label="Leybourne Lakes Country Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q4998749" start="3267" end="3279" title="Burham Marsh" label="Burham Marsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q620424" start="3304" end="3312" title="reed bed" label="reed bed"/>
<link wikidata="Q7973672" start="3480" end="3516" title="Water privatisation in England and Wales" label="privatisation of the water companies"/>
<link wikidata="Q7567143" start="3699" end="3715" title="South East Water" label="South East Water"/>
<link wikidata="Q184711" start="3937" end="3944" title="Twin towns and sister cities" label="twinned"/>
<link wikidata="Q22020" start="3950" end="3965" title="Moyeuvre-Grande" label="Moyeuvre-Grande"/>
<link wikidata="Q22690" start="4004" end="4008" title="Metz" label="Metz"/>
<link wikidata="Q8034980" start="4201" end="4224" title="working men&amp;#x27;s club" label="working men&amp;#x27;s club"/>
<link wikidata="Q1923257" start="4589" end="4599" title="hall house" label="hall house"/>
<link wikidata="Q4649024" start="4884" end="4893" title="A228 road" label="A228 road"/>
<link wikidata="Q797782" start="4909" end="4921" title="Medway Towns" label="Medway Towns"/>
<link wikidata="Q936183" start="4927" end="4936" title="Tonbridge" label="Tonbridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q608504" start="4942" end="4954" title="M20 motorway" label="M20 motorway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1899707" start="5139" end="5154" title="Snodland railway station" label="railway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q1808441" start="5227" end="5233" title="Strood" label="Strood"/>
<link wikidata="Q213180" start="5237" end="5246" title="Maidstone" label="Maidstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q6807431" start="5263" end="5281" title="Medway Valley Line" label="Medway Valley Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q720102" start="5330" end="5340" title="St Pancras railway station" label="St Pancras"/>
<link wikidata="Q2111455" start="5393" end="5399" title="Strood railway station" label="Strood"/>
<link wikidata="Q2913119" start="5403" end="5421" title="Maidstone Barracks railway station" label="Maidstone Barracks"/>
<link wikidata="Q952299" start="5422" end="5436" title="Maidstone East railway station" label="Maidstone East"/>
<link wikidata="Q4834972" start="5504" end="5518" title="BBC South East" label="BBC South East"/>
<link wikidata="Q5975073" start="5523" end="5535" title="ITV Meridian" label="ITV Meridian"/>
<link wikidata="Q4930205" start="5578" end="5591" title="Bluebell Hill transmitting station" label="Bluebell Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q902373" start="5608" end="5618" title="BBC London" label="BBC London"/>
<link wikidata="Q3146976" start="5623" end="5633" title="ITV London" label="ITV London"/>
<link wikidata="Q2270193" start="5664" end="5678" title="Crystal Palace transmitting station" label="Crystal Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q751391" start="5722" end="5736" title="BBC Radio Kent" label="BBC Radio Kent"/>
<link wikidata="Q65066884" start="5749" end="5760" title="Heart South" label="Heart South"/>
<link wikidata="Q5578576" start="5774" end="5784" title="Gold (British radio network)" label="Gold Radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q16893530" start="5800" end="5814" title="KMFM Maidstone" label="KMFM Maidstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q6391833" start="5873" end="5887" title="Kent Messenger" label="Kent Messenger"/>
<link wikidata="Q16892382" start="5907" end="5928" title="The Holmesdale School" label="The Holmesdale School"/>
<link wikidata="Q5474524" start="5934" end="5951" title="Foundation school" label="Foundation school"/>
<link wikidata="Q16901514" start="6053" end="6071" title="The Malling School" label="The Malling School"/>
<link wikidata="Q17530310" start="6267" end="6284" title="All Saints Church, Snodland" label="All Saints Church"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6349" end="6362" title="Christ Church, Snodland" label="Christ Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q7592638" start="6562" end="6601" title="St Benedict&amp;#x27;s Church, Paddlesworth" label="St Benedict&amp;#x27;s Church, Paddlesworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q2095007" start="6628" end="6646" title="Pilgrim&amp;#x27;s Way" label="Pilgrim&amp;#x27;s Way"/>
<link wikidata="Q166274" start="6801" end="6828" title="Churches Conservation Trust" label="Churches Conservation Trust"/>
<link wikidata="Q743165" start="6842" end="6854" title="Kingdom Hall" label="Kingdom Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q7654539" start="7194" end="7207" title="The New Church" label="Swedenborgian"/>
<link wikidata="Q24912187" start="7684" end="7702" title="Snodland Town F.C." label="Snodland Town F.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q1411299" start="7719" end="7757" title="Southern Counties East Football League" label="Southern Counties East Football League"/>
<link wikidata="Q2423914" start="8204" end="8227" title="Thomas Fletcher Waghorn" label="Thomas Fletcher Waghorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q9794" start="8398" end="8404" title="reggae" label="reggae"/>
<link wikidata="Q1028859" start="8412" end="8423" title="Judge Dread" label="Judge Dread"/>
<link wikidata="Q1028859" start="8526" end="8537" title="Judge Dread" label="Judge Dread"/>
<link wikidata="Q37327" start="8673" end="8687" title="Samuel Beckett" label="Samuel Beckett"/>
<link wikidata="Q1427408" start="8747" end="8751" title="Play (play)" label="Play"/>
<link wikidata="Q729505" start="9064" end="9076" title="Soft Machine" label="Soft Machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2297843" start="9148" end="9153" title="Seven (Soft Machine album)" label="Seven"/>
<link wikidata="Q5287799" start="9177" end="9187" title="Dode, Kent" label="Dode, Kent"/>
<link wikidata="Q42005" start="9263" end="9274" title="Black Death" label="Black Death"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="252569" wikidata="Q192989" url="?curid=252569" title="Acculturation">
<text>Acculturation is a process of social, psychological, and cultural change that stems from the balancing of two cultures while adapting to the prevailing culture of the society. Acculturation is a process in which an individual adopts, acquires and adjusts to a new cultural environment as a result of being placed into a new culture, or when another culture is brought to someone. Individuals of a differing culture try to incorporate themselves into the new more prevalent culture by participating in aspects of the more prevalent culture, such as their traditions, but still hold onto their original cultural values and traditions. The effects of acculturation can be seen at multiple levels in both the devotee of the prevailing culture and those who are assimilating into the culture.

At this group level, acculturation often results in changes to culture, religious practices, health care, and other social institutions. There are also significant ramifications on the food, clothing, and language of those becoming introduced to the overarching culture.

At the individual level, the process of acculturation refers to the socialization process by which foreign-born individuals blend the values, customs, norms, cultural attitudes, and behaviors of the overarching host culture. This process has been linked to changes in daily behaviour, as well as numerous changes in psychological and physical well-being. As enculturation is used to describe the process of first-culture learning, acculturation can be thought of as second-culture learning.

Under normal circumstances that are seen commonly in today&#x27;s society, the process of acculturation normally occurs over a large span of time throughout a few generations. Physical force can be seen in some instances of acculturation, which can cause it to occur more rapidly, but it is not a main component of the process. More commonly, the process occurs through social pressure or constant exposure to the more prevalent host culture.

Scholars in different disciplines have developed more than 100 different theories of acculturation, but the concept of acculturation has only been studied scientifically since 1918. As it has been approached at different times from the fields of psychology, anthropology, and sociology, numerous theories and definitions have emerged to describe elements of the acculturative process. Despite definitions and evidence that acculturation entails a two-way process of change, research and theory have primarily focused on the adjustments and adaptations made by minorities such as immigrants, refugees, and indigenous people in response to their contact with the dominant majority. Contemporary research has primarily focused on different strategies of acculturation, how variations in acculturation affect individuals, and interventions to make this process easier.

==Historical approaches==
The history of Western civilization, and in particular the histories of Europe and the United States, are largely defined by patterns of acculturation.

One of the most notable forms of acculturation is imperialism, the most common progenitor of direct cultural change. Although these cultural changes may seem simple, the combined results are both robust and complex, impacting both groups and individuals from the original culture and the host culture. Anthropologists, historians, and sociologists have studied acculturation with dominance almost exclusively, primarily in the context of colonialism, as a result of the expansion of western European peoples throughout the world during the past five centuries.

The first psychological theory of acculturation was proposed in W.I. Thomas and Florian Znaniecki&#x27;s 1918 study, &quot;The Polish Peasant in Europe and America&quot;. From studying Polish immigrants in Chicago, they illustrated three forms of acculturation corresponding to three personality types: Bohemian (adopting the host culture and abandoning their culture of origin), Philistine (failing to adopt the host culture but preserving their culture of origin), and creative-type (able to adapt to the host culture while preserving their culture of origin). In 1936, Redfield, Linton, and Herskovits provided the first widely used definition of acculturation as:
Long before efforts toward racial and cultural integration in the United States arose, the common process was assimilation. In 1964, Milton Gordon&#x27;s book &quot;Assimilation in American Life&quot; outlined seven stages of the assimilative process, setting the stage for literature on this topic. Later, Young Yun Kim authored a reiteration of Gordon&#x27;s work, but argued cross-cultural adaptation as a multi-staged process. Kim&#x27;s theory focused on the unitary nature of psychological and social processes and the reciprocal functional personal environment interdependence. Although this view was the earliest to fuse micro-psychological and macro-social factors into an integrated theory, it is clearly focused on assimilation rather than racial or ethnic integration. In Kim&#x27;s approach, assimilation is unilinear and the sojourner must conform to the majority group culture in order to be &quot;communicatively competent.&quot; According to Gudykunst and Kim (2003) the &quot;cross-cultural adaptation process involves a continuous interplay of deculturation and acculturation that brings about change in strangers in the direction of assimilation, the highest degree of adaptation theoretically conceivable.&quot; This view has been heavily criticized, since the biological science definition of adaptation refers to the random mutation of new forms of life, not the convergence of a monoculture (Kramer, 2003).

In contradistinction from Gudykunst and Kim&#x27;s version of adaptive evolution, Eric M. Kramer developed his theory of Cultural Fusion (2011, 2010, 2000a, 1997a, 2000a, 2011, 2012) maintaining clear, conceptual distinctions between assimilation, adaptation, and integration. According to Kramer, assimilation involves conformity to a pre-existing form. Kramer&#x27;s (2000a, 2000b, 2000c, 2003, 2009, 2011) theory of Cultural Fusion, which is based on systems theory and hermeneutics, argues that it is impossible for a person to unlearn themselves and that by definition, &quot;growth&quot; is not a zero-sum process that requires the disillusion of one form for another to come into being but rather a process of learning new languages and cultural repertoires (ways of thinking, cooking, playing, working, worshiping, and so forth). In other words, Kramer argues that one need not unlearn a language to learn a new one, nor does one have to unlearn who one is to learn new ways of dancing, cooking, talking, and so forth. Unlike Gudykunst and Kim (2003), Kramer argues that this blending of language and culture results in cognitive complexity, or the ability to switch between cultural repertoires. To put Kramer&#x27;s ideas simply, learning is growth rather than unlearning.

==Conceptual models==

=== Theory of Dimensional Accrual and Dissociation ===

Although numerous models of acculturation exist, the most complete models take into consideration the changes occurring at the group and individual levels of both interacting groups. To understand acculturation at the group level, one must first look at the nature of both cultures before coming into contact with one another. A useful approach is Eric Kramer&#x27;s theory of Dimensional Accrual and Dissociation (DAD). Two fundamental premises in Kramer&#x27;s DAD theory are the concepts of hermeneutics and semiotics, which infer that identity, meaning, communication, and learning all depend on differences or variance. According to this view, total assimilation would result in a monoculture void of personal identity, meaning, and communication. Kramer&#x27;s DAD theory also utilizes concepts from several scholars, most notably Jean Gebser and Lewis Mumford, to synthesize explanations of widely observed cultural expressions and differences.

Kramer&#x27;s theory identifies three communication styles (&quot;idolic&quot;, &quot;symbolic&quot;, or &quot;signalic&quot;) in order to explain cultural differences. It is important to note that in this theory, no single mode of communication is inherently superior, and no final solution to intercultural conflict is suggested. Instead, Kramer puts forth three integrated theories: the theory Dimensional Accrual and Dissociation, the Cultural Fusion Theory and the Cultural Churning Theory.

For instance, according to Kramer&#x27;s DAD theory, a statue of a god in an &quot;idolic&quot; community is god, and stealing it is a highly punishable offense. For example, many people in India believe that statues of the god Ganesh – to take such a statue/god from its temple is more than theft, it is blasphemy. &quot;Idolic&quot; reality involves strong emotional identification, where a holy relic does not simply symbolize the sacred, &quot;it is&quot; sacred. By contrast, a Christian crucifix follows a &quot;symbolic&quot; nature, where it represents a symbol of God. Lastly, the &quot;signalic&quot; modality is far less emotional and increasingly dissociated.

Kramer refers to changes in each culture due to acculturation as &quot;co-evolution&quot;. Kramer also addresses what he calls the &quot;qualities of out vectors&quot; which address the nature in which the former and new cultures make contact. Kramer uses the phrase &quot;interaction potential&quot; to refer to differences in individual or group acculturative processes. For example, the process of acculturation is markedly different if one is entering the host as an immigrant or as a refugee. Moreover, this idea encapsulates the importance of how receptive a host culture is to the newcomer, how easy is it for the newcomer to interact with and get to know the host, and how this interaction affects both the newcomer &quot;and&quot; the host.

===Fourfold models===
The fourfold model is a bilinear model that categorizes acculturation strategies along two dimensions. The first dimension concerns the retention or rejection of an individual&#x27;s minority or native culture (i.e. &quot;Is it considered to be of value to maintain one&#x27;s identity and characteristics?&quot;), whereas the second dimension concerns the adoption or rejection of the dominant group or host culture. (&quot;Is it considered to be of value to maintain relationships with the larger society?&quot;) From this, four acculturation strategies emerge.

*Assimilation occurs when individuals adopt the cultural norms of a dominant or host culture, over their original culture. Sometimes it is forced by governments.
*Separation occurs when individuals reject the dominant or host culture in favor of preserving their culture of origin. Separation is often facilitated by immigration to ethnic enclaves.
*Integration occurs when individuals can adopt the cultural norms of the dominant or host culture while maintaining their culture of origin. Integration leads to, and is often synonymous with biculturalism.
*Marginalization occurs when individuals reject both their culture of origin and the dominant host culture.

Studies suggest that individuals&#x27; respective acculturation strategy can differ between their private and public life spheres. For instance, an individual may reject the values and norms of the dominant culture in their private life (separation), whereas they might adapt to the dominant culture in public parts of their life (i.e., integration or assimilation).

===Predictors of acculturation strategies===
The fourfold models used to describe individual attitudes of immigrants parallel models used to describe group expectations of the larger society and how groups should acculturate. In a melting pot society, in which a harmonious and homogenous culture is promoted, assimilation is the endorsed acculturation strategy. In segregationist societies, in which humans are separated into racial, ethnic and/or religious groups in daily life, a separation acculturation strategy is endorsed. In a multiculturalist society, in which multiple cultures are accepted and appreciated, individuals are encouraged to adopt an integrationist approach to acculturation. In societies where cultural exclusion is promoted, individuals often adopt marginalization strategies of acculturation.

Attitudes towards acculturation, and thus the range of acculturation strategies available, have not been consistent over time. For example, for most of American history, policies and attitudes have been based around established ethnic hierarchies with an expectation of one-way assimilation for predominantly White European immigrants. Although the notion of cultural pluralism has existed since the early 20th century, the recognition and promotion of multiculturalism did not become prominent in America until the 1980s. Separatism can still be seen today in autonomous religious communities such as the Amish and the Hutterites. Immediate environment also impacts the availability, advantage, and selection of different acculturation strategies. As individuals immigrate to unequal segments of society, immigrants to areas lower on economic and ethnic hierarchies may encounter limited social mobility and membership to a disadvantaged community. It can be explained by the theory of Segmented Assimilation, which is used to describe the situation when immigrants individuals or groups assimilate to the culture of different segments of the society of the host country. The outcome of whether entering the upper class, middle class, or lower class is largely determined by the socioeconomic status of the last generation.

On a broad scale study, involving immigrants in 13 immigration-receiving countries, the experience of discrimination was positively related to the maintenance of the immigrants&#x27; ethnic culture. In other words, immigrants that maintain their cultural practices and values are more likely to be discriminated against than those whom abandon their culture. Further research has also identified that the acculturation strategies and experiences of immigrants can be significantly influenced by the acculturation preferences of the members of the host society. The degree of intergroup and interethnic contact has also been shown to influence acculturation preferences between groups, support for multilingual and multicultural maintenance of minority groups, and openness towards multiculturalism. Enhancing understanding of out-groups, nurturing empathy, fostering community, minimizing social distance and prejudice, and shaping positive intentions and behaviors contribute to improved interethnic and intercultural relations through intergroup contact.

Most individuals show variation in both their ideal and chosen acculturation strategies across different domains of their lives. For example, among immigrants, it is often easier and more desired to acculturate to their host society&#x27;s attitudes towards politics and government, than it is to acculturate to new attitudes about religion, principles, values, and customs.

==Acculturative stress==
The large flux of migrants around the world has sparked scholarly interest in acculturation, and how it can specifically affect health by altering levels of stress, access to health resources, and attitudes towards health. The effects of acculturation on physical health is thought to be a major factor in the immigrant paradox, which argues that first generation immigrants tend to have better health outcomes than non-immigrants. Although this term has been popularized, most of the academic literature supports the opposite conclusion, or that immigrants have poorer health outcomes than their host culture counterparts.

One prominent explanation for the negative health behaviors and outcomes (e.g. substance use, low birth weight) associated with the acculturation process is the &quot;acculturative stress theory&quot;. Acculturative stress refers to the stress response of immigrants in response to their experiences of acculturation. Stressors can include but are not limited to the pressures of learning a new language, maintaining one&#x27;s native language, balancing differing cultural values, and brokering between native and host differences in acceptable social behaviors. Acculturative stress can manifest in many ways, including but not limited to anxiety, depression, substance abuse, and other forms of mental and physical maladaptation. Stress caused by acculturation has been heavily documented in phenomenological research on the acculturation of a large variety of immigrants. This research has shown that acculturation is a &quot;fatiguing experience requiring a constant stream of bodily energy,&quot; and is both an &quot;individual and familial endeavor&quot; involving &quot;enduring loneliness caused by seemingly insurmountable language barriers&quot;.

One important distinction when it comes to risk for acculturative stress is degree of willingness, or migration status, which can differ greatly if one enters a country as a voluntary immigrant, refugee, asylum seeker, or sojourner. According to several studies, voluntary migrants experience roughly 50% less acculturative stress than refugees, making this an important distinction. According to Schwartz (2010), there are four main categories of migrants: 
# &quot;Voluntary immigrants:&quot; those that leave their country of origin to find employment, economic opportunity, advanced education, marriage, or to reunite with family members that have already immigrated.
# &quot;Refugees:&quot; those who have been involuntarily displaced by persecution, war, or natural disasters. 
# &quot;Asylum seekers:&quot; those who willingly leave their native country to flee persecution or violence.
# &quot;Sojourners:&quot; those who relocate to a new country on a time-limited basis and for a specific purpose. It is important to note that this group fully intends to return to their native country.
This type of entry distinction is important, but acculturative stress can also vary significantly within and between ethnic groups. Much of the scholarly work on this topic has focused on Asian and Latino/a immigrants, however, more research is needed on the effects of acculturative stress on other ethnic immigrant groups. Among U.S. Latinos, higher levels of adoption of the American host culture has been associated with negative effects on health behaviors and outcomes, such as increased risk for depression and discrimination, and increased risk for low self-esteem. Other studies have found greater levels of acculturation are associated with greater sleep problems. However, some individuals also report &quot;finding relief and protection in relationships&quot; and &quot;feeling worse and then feeling better about oneself with increased competencies&quot; during the acculturative process. Again, these differences can be attributed to the age of the immigrant, the manner in which an immigrant exited their home country, and how the immigrant is received by both the original and host cultures. Recent research has compared the acculturative processes of documented Mexican-American immigrants and undocumented Mexican-American immigrants and found significant differences in their experiences and levels of acculturative stress. Both groups of Mexican-American immigrants faced similar risks for depression and discrimination from the host (Americans), but the undocumented group of Mexican-American immigrants also faced discrimination, hostility, and exclusion by their own ethnic group (Mexicans) because of their unauthorized legal status. These studies highlight the complexities of acculturative stress, the degree of variability in health outcomes, and the need for specificity over generalizations when discussing potential or actual health outcomes.

Researchers recently uncovered another layer of complications in this field, where survey data has either combined several ethnic groups together or has labeled an ethnic group incorrectly. When these generalizations occur, nuances and subtleties about a person or group&#x27;s experience of acculturation or acculturative stress can be diluted or lost. For example, much of the scholarly literature on this topic uses U.S. Census data. The Census incorrectly labels Arab-Americans as Caucasian or &quot;White&quot;. By doing so, this data set omits many factors about the Muslim Arab-American migrant experience, including but not limited to acculturation and acculturative stress. This is of particular importance after the events of September 11, 2001, since Muslim Arab-Americans have faced increased prejudice and discrimination, leaving this religious ethnic community with an increased risk of acculturative stress. Research focusing on the adolescent Muslim Arab American experience of acculturation has also found that youth who experience acculturative stress during the identity formation process are at a higher risk for low self-esteem, anxiety, and depression.

Some researchers argue that education, social support, hopefulness about employment opportunities, financial resources, family cohesion, maintenance of traditional cultural values, and high socioeconomic status (SES) serve as protections or mediators against acculturative stress. Previous work shows that limited education, low SES, and underemployment all increase acculturative stress. Since this field of research is rapidly growing, more research is needed to better understand how certain subgroups are differentially impacted, how stereotypes and biases have influenced former research questions about acculturative stress, and the ways in which acculturative stress can be effectively mediated.

== Other outcomes ==

===Culture===
When individuals of a certain culture are exposed to another culture (host) that is primarily more present in the area that they live, some aspects of the host culture will likely be taken and blended within aspects of the original culture of the individuals. In situations of continuous contact, cultures have exchanged and blended foods, music, dances, clothing, tools, and technologies. This kind of cultural exchange can be related to selective &quot;acculturation&quot; that refers to the process of maintaining cultural content by researching those individuals&#x27; language use, religious belief, and family norms. Cultural exchange can either occur naturally through extended contact, or more quickly though cultural appropriation or cultural imperialism.

Cultural appropriation is the adoption of some specific elements of one culture by members a different cultural group. It can include the introduction of forms of dress or personal adornment, music and art, religion, language, or behavior. These elements are typically imported into the existing culture, and may have wildly different meanings or lack the subtleties of their original cultural context. Because of this, cultural appropriation for monetary gain is typically viewed negatively, and has sometimes been called &quot;cultural theft&quot;.

Cultural imperialism is the practice of promoting the culture or language of one nation in another, usually occurring in situations in which assimilation is the dominant strategy of acculturation. Cultural imperialism can take the form of an active, formal policy or a general attitude regarding cultural superiority.

===Language===

In some instances, acculturation results in the adoption of another country&#x27;s language, which is then modified over time to become a new, distinct, language. For example, Hanzi, the written language of Chinese language, has been adapted and modified by other nearby cultures, including: Japan (as kanji), Korea (as hanja), and Vietnam (as chữ Hán). Jews, often living as ethnic minorities, developed distinct languages derived from the common languages of the countries in which they lived (for example, Yiddish from High German and Ladino from Old Spanish). Another common effect of acculturation on language is the formation of pidgin languages. Pidgin is a mixed language that has developed to help communication between members of different cultures in contact, usually occurring in situations of trade or colonialism. For example, Pidgin English is a simplified form of English mixed with some of the language of another culture. Some pidgin languages can develop into creole languages, which are spoken as a first language.

Language plays a pivotal role in cultural heritage, serving as both a foundation for group identity and a means for transmitting culture in situations of contact between languages. Language acculturation strategies, attitudes and identities can also influence the sociolinguistic development of languages in bi/multilingual contexts.

===Food===
Food habits and food consumption are affected by acculturation on different levels. Research has indicated that food habits are discreet and practiced privately, and change occurs slowly. Consumption of new food items is affected by the availability of native ingredients, convenience, and cost; therefore, an immediate change is likely to occur. Aspects of food acculturation include the preparation, presentation, and consumption of food. Different cultures have different ways in which they prepare, serve, and eat their food. When exposed to another culture for an extended period of time, individuals tend to take aspects of the &quot;host&quot; culture&#x27;s food customs and implement them with their own. In cases such as these, acculturation is heavily influenced by general food knowledge, or knowing the unique kinds of food different cultures traditionally have, the media, and social interaction. It allows for different cultures to be exposed to one another, causing some aspects to intertwine and also become more acceptable to the individuals of each of the respective cultures.

==Controversies and debate==
===Definitions===
Anthropologists have made a semantic distinction between group and individual levels of acculturation. In such instances, the term &quot;transculturation&quot; is used to define individual foreign-origin acculturation, and occurs on a smaller scale with less visible impact. Scholars making this distinction use the term &quot;acculturation&quot; only to address large-scale cultural transactions. Acculturation, then, is the process by which migrants gain new information and insight about the norms and values of their culture and adapt their behaviors to the host culture.

===Recommended models===
Research for long assumed that the integrationist model of acculturation leads to the most favorable psychological outcomes and marginalization to the least favorable, despite some early criticism. Although a correlational meta-analysis of the acculturation literature and a large-scale study led by John W. Berry (2006) found that integration correlated with better psychological and sociocultural adaptation, recent longitudinal meta-analyses find no support for a meaningful causal relationship. Critically, given the high heterogeneity in effect, the association between integration and adaptation can be expected to be negative almost 30% of the time.

===Typological approach===
Several theorists have stated that the fourfold models of acculturation are too simplistic to have predictive validity. Some common criticisms of such models include the fact that individuals don&#x27;t often fall neatly into any of the four categories, and that there is very little evidence for the applied existence of the marginalization acculturation strategy. In addition, the bi-directionality of acculturation means that whenever two groups are engaged in cultural exchange, there are 16 permutations of acculturation strategies possible (e.g. an integrationist individual within an assimilationist host culture). According to the research, another critic of the fourfold of acculturation is that the people are less likely to cultivate a self-perception but either not assimilate other cultures or continuing the heritage cultures.Rethinking the Concept of Acculturation - PMC The interactive acculturation model represents one proposed alternative to the typological approach by attempting to explain the acculturation process within a framework of state policies and the dynamic interplay of host community and immigrant acculturation orientations.

=== Studying a Causal Process With Correlational Data ===
Acculturation, which focuses on the processes of cultural change, is inherently concerned with causal relationships. However, a significant limitation of the field is that nearly all existing research has been correlational in nature, making it impossible to infer causality. Therefore, major notions such as the integration hypothesis studied in hundreds of studies still lack solid empirical support. Calls have been made to address this issue by considering acculturation from a developmental, longitudinal perspective.

== See also ==

* Naturalization
* Acclimatization
* Socialization
* Deculturalization
* Globalization
* Nationalization
* Acculturation gap
* Educational anthropology
* Ethnocentrism
* Cultural relativism
* Cultural conflict
* Inculturation
* Cultural competence
* Language shift
* Westernization
* Cultural identity
* Linguistic imperialism
* Intercultural communication 
* Fusion music
* Fusion cuisine
==Notes==
==References==











*Ward, C. (2001). The A, B, Cs of acculturation. In D. Matsumoto (Ed.) &quot;The handbook of culture and psychology&quot; (pp. 411–445). Oxford, United Kingdom: Oxford University Press.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q192989" start="0" end="13" title="Acculturation" label="Acculturation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5193493" start="57" end="72" title="cultural change" label="cultural change"/>
<link wikidata="Q1571836" start="264" end="284" title="social environment" label="cultural environment"/>
<link wikidata="Q9332" start="1335" end="1344" title="behaviour" label="behaviour"/>
<link wikidata="Q9418" start="1377" end="1390" title="Psychology" label="psychological"/>
<link wikidata="Q1343294" start="1419" end="1432" title="enculturation" label="enculturation"/>
<link wikidata="Q133500" start="1542" end="1550" title="learning" label="learning"/>
<link wikidata="Q784843" start="1923" end="1938" title="social pressure" label="social pressure"/>
<link wikidata="Q9418" start="2243" end="2253" title="psychology" label="psychology"/>
<link wikidata="Q23404" start="2255" end="2267" title="anthropology" label="anthropology"/>
<link wikidata="Q21201" start="2273" end="2282" title="sociology" label="sociology"/>
<link wikidata="Q131288" start="2576" end="2586" title="immigrants" label="immigrants"/>
<link wikidata="Q131572" start="2588" end="2596" title="refugees" label="refugees"/>
<link wikidata="Q103817" start="2602" end="2619" title="indigenous people" label="indigenous people"/>
<link wikidata="Q160381" start="2904" end="2924" title="Western world" label="Western civilization"/>
<link wikidata="Q7260" start="3092" end="3103" title="imperialism" label="imperialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1323100" start="3668" end="3679" title="W.I. Thomas" label="W.I. Thomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q599197" start="3684" end="3701" title="Florian Znaniecki" label="Florian Znaniecki"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3727" end="3767" title="W.I. Thomas#The Polish Peasant in Europe and America" label="The Polish Peasant in Europe and America"/>
<link wikidata="Q193579" start="4382" end="4394" title="Cultural assimilation" label="assimilation"/>
<link wikidata="Q11781320" start="4405" end="4418" title="Milton Gordon" label="Milton Gordon"/>
<link wikidata="Q483921" start="5587" end="5597" title="adaptation" label="adaptation"/>
<link wikidata="Q221284" start="6024" end="6034" title="conformity" label="conformity"/>
<link wikidata="Q102686" start="6177" end="6189" title="hermeneutics" label="hermeneutics"/>
<link wikidata="Q102686" start="7561" end="7573" title="hermeneutics" label="hermeneutics"/>
<link wikidata="Q87292" start="7904" end="7915" title="Jean Gebser" label="Jean Gebser"/>
<link wikidata="Q469888" start="7920" end="7933" title="Lewis Mumford" label="Lewis Mumford"/>
<link wikidata="Q1338878" start="8167" end="8187" title="cultural differences" label="cultural differences"/>
<link wikidata="Q1579" start="8745" end="8751" title="Ganesh" label="Ganesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q20460" start="9000" end="9018" title="crucifix" label="Christian crucifix"/>
<link wikidata="Q193579" start="10529" end="10541" title="Cultural assimilation" label="Assimilation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371354" start="10667" end="10673" title="forced assimilation" label="forced"/>
<link wikidata="Q59816" start="10691" end="10701" title="Racial separation" label="Separation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3610510" start="10860" end="10875" title="ethnic enclaves" label="ethnic enclaves"/>
<link wikidata="Q3772686" start="10878" end="10889" title="Racial integration" label="Integration"/>
<link wikidata="Q3565256" start="11069" end="11082" title="biculturalism" label="biculturalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q5853064" start="11085" end="11100" title="Marginalization" label="Marginalization"/>
<link wikidata="Q2081571" start="11391" end="11407" title="dominant culture" label="dominant culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q2081571" start="11476" end="11492" title="dominant culture" label="dominant culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q862085" start="11792" end="11803" title="melting pot" label="melting pot"/>
<link wikidata="Q59816" start="11927" end="11941" title="Racial segregation" label="segregationist"/>
<link wikidata="Q190656" start="12096" end="12112" title="Multiculturalism" label="multiculturalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q5853064" start="12335" end="12350" title="marginalization" label="marginalization"/>
<link wikidata="Q3819571" start="12696" end="12715" title="European immigrants" label="European immigrants"/>
<link wikidata="Q3273263" start="12740" end="12758" title="cultural pluralism" label="cultural pluralism"/>
<link wikidata="Q190656" start="12834" end="12850" title="multiculturalism" label="multiculturalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q104444" start="12987" end="12992" title="Amish" label="Amish"/>
<link wikidata="Q258344" start="13001" end="13011" title="Hutterites" label="Hutterites"/>
<link wikidata="Q30325454" start="15476" end="15493" title="immigrant paradox" label="immigrant paradox"/>
<link wikidata="Q3184856" start="15870" end="15883" title="substance abuse" label="substance use"/>
<link wikidata="Q6692979" start="15885" end="15901" title="low birth weight" label="low birth weight"/>
<link wikidata="Q192989" start="15993" end="16013" title="Acculturative stress" label="Acculturative stress"/>
<link wikidata="Q58669" start="18379" end="18391" title="Hispanic and Latino Americans" label="U.S. Latinos"/>
<link wikidata="Q185367" start="19259" end="19271" title="undocumented immigrants in the United States" label="undocumented"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345528" start="20341" end="20352" title="United States Census" label="U.S. Census"/>
<link wikidata="Q787519" start="20389" end="20403" title="Arab Americans" label="Arab-Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q10806" start="20658" end="20676" title="September 11 attacks" label="September 11, 2001"/>
<link wikidata="Q1515895" start="21288" end="21308" title="socioeconomic status" label="socioeconomic status"/>
<link wikidata="Q5193258" start="22555" end="22577" title="cultural appropriation" label="cultural appropriation"/>
<link wikidata="Q844890" start="22581" end="22601" title="cultural imperialism" label="cultural imperialism"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="23667" end="23672" title="Hanzi#Reform" label="Hanzi"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="23783" end="23788" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q82772" start="23793" end="23798" title="kanji" label="kanji"/>
<link wikidata="Q18097" start="23801" end="23806" title="Korea" label="Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q485619" start="23811" end="23816" title="hanja" label="hanja"/>
<link wikidata="Q881" start="23823" end="23830" title="Vietnam" label="Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1378119" start="23835" end="23842" title="chữ Hán" label="chữ Hán"/>
<link wikidata="Q7325" start="23845" end="23849" title="Jews" label="Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q8641" start="24000" end="24007" title="Yiddish" label="Yiddish"/>
<link wikidata="Q52040" start="24013" end="24024" title="High German languages" label="High German"/>
<link wikidata="Q36196" start="24029" end="24035" title="Judaeo-Spanish" label="Ladino"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088025" start="24041" end="24052" title="Old Spanish language" label="Old Spanish"/>
<link wikidata="Q33831" start="24144" end="24150" title="Pidgin" label="Pidgin"/>
<link wikidata="Q17093549" start="24332" end="24346" title="Pidgin English" label="Pidgin English"/>
<link wikidata="Q33289" start="24470" end="24485" title="creole language" label="creole language"/>
<link wikidata="Q2097208" start="26154" end="26170" title="transculturation" label="transculturation"/>
<link wikidata="Q815382" start="26842" end="26855" title="meta-analysis" label="meta-analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q6262117" start="26919" end="26932" title="John W. Berry (psychologist)" label="John W. Berry"/>
<link wikidata="Q6045352" start="28194" end="28225" title="Interactive acculturation" label="interactive acculturation model"/>
<link wikidata="Q841440" start="29065" end="29079" title="Naturalization" label="Naturalization"/>
<link wikidata="Q419763" start="29082" end="29097" title="Acclimatization" label="Acclimatization"/>
<link wikidata="Q185467" start="29100" end="29113" title="Socialization" label="Socialization"/>
<link wikidata="Q25048161" start="29116" end="29133" title="Deculturalization" label="Deculturalization"/>
<link wikidata="Q7181" start="29136" end="29149" title="Globalization" label="Globalization"/>
<link wikidata="Q178564" start="29152" end="29167" title="Nationalization" label="Nationalization"/>
<link wikidata="Q60746962" start="29170" end="29187" title="Acculturation gap" label="Acculturation gap"/>
<link wikidata="Q5341272" start="29190" end="29214" title="Educational anthropology" label="Educational anthropology"/>
<link wikidata="Q189049" start="29217" end="29230" title="Ethnocentrism" label="Ethnocentrism"/>
<link wikidata="Q741550" start="29233" end="29252" title="Cultural relativism" label="Cultural relativism"/>
<link wikidata="Q5193269" start="29255" end="29272" title="Cultural conflict" label="Cultural conflict"/>
<link wikidata="Q1663771" start="29275" end="29288" title="Inculturation" label="Inculturation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1666159" start="29291" end="29310" title="Cultural competence" label="Cultural competence"/>
<link wikidata="Q266961" start="29313" end="29327" title="Language shift" label="Language shift"/>
<link wikidata="Q6498273" start="29330" end="29344" title="Westernization" label="Westernization"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368367" start="29347" end="29364" title="Cultural identity" label="Cultural identity"/>
<link wikidata="Q634266" start="29367" end="29389" title="Linguistic imperialism" label="Linguistic imperialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1205196" start="29392" end="29419" title="Intercultural communication" label="Intercultural communication"/>
<link wikidata="Q188451" start="29423" end="29435" title="Fusion music" label="Fusion music"/>
<link wikidata="Q601763" start="29438" end="29452" title="Fusion cuisine" label="Fusion cuisine"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="252572" wikidata="Q1339916" url="?curid=252572" title="Glory (optical phenomenon)">
<text>A glory is an optical phenomenon, resembling an iconic saint&#x27;s halo around the shadow of the observer&#x27;s head, caused by sunlight or (more rarely) moonlight interacting with the tiny water droplets that comprise mist or clouds. The glory consists of one or more concentric, successively dimmer rings, each of which is red on the outside and bluish towards the centre. Due to its appearance, the phenomenon is sometimes mistaken for a circular rainbow, but the latter has a much larger diameter and is caused by different physical processes.

Glories arise due to wave interference of light internally refracted within small droplets.

== Appearance and observation ==
Depending on circumstances (such as the uniformity of droplet size in the clouds), one or more of the glory&#x27;s rings can be visible. The rings are rarely complete, being interrupted by the shadow of the viewer. The angular size of the inner and brightest ring is much smaller than that of a rainbow, about 5° to 20°, depending on the size of the droplets. In the right conditions, a glory and a rainbow can occur simultaneously.

&quot;Glories can be seen on mountains and hillsides, from aircraft and in sea fog and even indoors.&quot;

Like a rainbow, outdoor glories are centred on the antisolar (or, in case of the moon, antilunar) point, which coincides with the shadow of the observer&#x27;s head. Because this point is diametrically opposite to the sun&#x27;s (or moon&#x27;s) position in the sky, it usually lies below the observer&#x27;s horizon except at sun (or moon) rise and set. Outdoor glories are commonly observed from aircraft. In the latter case, if the plane is flying sufficiently low for its shadow to be visible on the clouds, the glory always surrounds it. This is sometimes called &quot;The Glory of the Pilot&quot;.

In 2024 astronomers suggested that the existence of glory might explain certain observations of the exoplanet WASP-76b. If this interpretation could be confirmed, it would become the first extrasolar glory-like phenomenon to be discovered.

=== Brocken spectre ===
When viewed from a mountain or tall building, glories are often seen in association with a &quot;Brocken spectre&quot;: the apparently enormously magnified shadow of an observer, cast (when the sun is low) on clouds below the mountain on which the viewer is standing. The name derives from the Brocken, the tallest peak of the Harz mountain range in Germany. Because the peak is above the cloud level and the area is frequently misty, conditions conducive to casting a shadow on a cloud layer are common. Giant shadows that seemed to move by themselves due to movement of the cloud layer (this movement is another part of the definition of the Brocken spectre), and that were surrounded by glories, may have contributed to the reputation the Harz mountains hold as a refuge for witches and evil spirits. In Goethe&#x27;s &quot;Faust&quot;, the Brocken is called the &quot;Blocksberg&quot; and is the site of the Witches&#x27; Sabbath on Walpurgis Night.

=== Ulloa&#x27;s halo ===
Before the first reports of the phenomenon in Europe, two members of the French Geodesic Mission to the Equator, Antonio de Ulloa and Pierre Bouguer, reported that while walking near the summit of the Pambamarca mountain, in the Ecuadorian Andes, they saw their shadows projected on a lower-lying cloud, with a circular &quot;halo or glory&quot; around the shadow of the observer&#x27;s head. Ulloa noted that

This was then called &quot;Ulloa&#x27;s halo&quot; or &quot;Bouguer&#x27;s halo&quot;. Ulloa reported that the glories were surrounded by a larger ring of white light, which would today be called a fog bow. On other occasions, he observed arches of white light formed by reflected moonlight, whose explanation is unknown but which may have been related to ice-crystal halos.

== Theory ==

Modern theories of light, first described by Henri Poincaré in 1887, are able to explain the phenomenon of glories through the complex angular momentum (rotation) of the electromagnetic field of a light wave, and do not need quantum theories. A summary of rainbowlike phenomena was provided in Scientific American in 1977, and states: 
Most 20th century work on the phenomenon of rainbows and glories has focused on determining the correct &quot;intensity&quot; of light at each point in the phenomenon, which does require quantum theories. In 1947, the Dutch astronomer Hendrik van de Hulst suggested that surface waves are involved. He speculated that the brightness of the coloured rings of the glory are caused by two-ray interference between &quot;short&quot; and &quot;long&quot; path surface waves—which are generated by light rays entering the droplets at diametrically opposite points (both rays suffer one internal reflection). A theory by Brazilian physicist Herch Moysés Nussenzveig suggests that the light energy beamed back by a glory originates mostly from classical wave tunneling (synonymous in the paper to the evanescent wave coupling), which is an interaction between an evanescent light wave traveling along the surface of the drop and the waves inside the drop.

== In culture ==
C. T. R. Wilson saw a glory while working as a temporary observer at the Ben Nevis weather station. Inspired by the impressive sight, he decided to build a device for creating clouds in the laboratory, so that he could make a synthetic, small-scale glory. His work led directly to the cloud chamber, a device for detecting ionizing radiation for which he and Arthur Compton received the Nobel Prize for Physics in 1927.

In China, the phenomenon is called Buddha&#x27;s light (or halo). It is often observed on cloud-shrouded high mountains, such as Huangshan and Mount Emei. Records of the phenomenon at Mount Emei date back to A.D. 63. The colourful halo always surrounds the observer&#x27;s own shadow, and thus was often taken to show the observer&#x27;s personal enlightenment (associated with Buddha or divinity).

Stylized glories appear occasionally in Western heraldry. Two glories appear on the Great Seal of the United States: A glory breaking through clouds surrounding a cluster of 13 stars on the obverse, and a glory surrounding the Eye of Providence surmounting an unfinished pyramid on the reverse.

== Gallery ==
== See also ==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
== References ==
== Additional reading ==
*

== External links ==
* Video of a glory seen from an airplane archived at Ghostarchive.org on 4 May 2022
* Glories – Explanation and image gallery
* How are glories formed?
* First Observation of Glory From Space
* &quot;The Science of the Glory,&quot; Scientific American, Jan. 2012
* Glory and Brocken Spectre panorama</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1339916" start="2" end="7" title="Glory (optical phenomenon)" label="glory"/>
<link wikidata="Q14506045" start="14" end="32" title="optical phenomenon" label="optical phenomenon"/>
<link wikidata="Q132137" start="48" end="52" title="icon" label="icon"/>
<link wikidata="Q43115" start="55" end="60" title="saint" label="saint"/>
<link wikidata="Q3341893" start="68" end="72" title="halo (religious iconography)" label="halo"/>
<link wikidata="Q193788" start="130" end="138" title="sunlight" label="sunlight"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058800" start="156" end="165" title="moonlight" label="moonlight"/>
<link wikidata="Q185789" start="198" end="206" title="drop (liquid)" label="droplets"/>
<link wikidata="Q192196" start="221" end="225" title="mist" label="mist"/>
<link wikidata="Q8074" start="229" end="234" title="cloud" label="cloud"/>
<link wikidata="Q619776" start="271" end="281" title="concentric" label="concentric"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="443" end="459" title="Rainbow#Full-circle rainbow" label="circular rainbow"/>
<link wikidata="Q136980" start="572" end="589" title="interference (wave propagation)" label="wave interference"/>
<link wikidata="Q234943" start="599" end="619" title="total internal reflection" label="internally refracted"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052" start="972" end="979" title="rainbow" label="rainbow"/>
<link wikidata="Q1429633" start="1270" end="1279" title="antisolar point" label="antisolar"/>
<link wikidata="Q43261" start="1528" end="1535" title="horizon" label="horizon"/>
<link wikidata="Q87484723" start="1934" end="1942" title="WASP-76b" label="WASP-76b"/>
<link wikidata="Q776050" start="2186" end="2201" title="Brocken spectre" label="Brocken spectre"/>
<link wikidata="Q155721" start="2383" end="2390" title="Brocken" label="Brocken"/>
<link wikidata="Q4186" start="2416" end="2420" title="Harz" label="Harz"/>
<link wikidata="Q5879" start="2896" end="2902" title="Goethe" label="Goethe"/>
<link wikidata="Q29478" start="2916" end="2921" title="Goethe&amp;#x27;s Faust" label="Faust"/>
<link wikidata="Q155721" start="2961" end="2971" title="Blocksberg" label="Blocksberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q831942" start="3001" end="3022" title="Witches&amp;#x27; Sabbath" label="Witches&amp;#x27; Sabbath"/>
<link wikidata="Q200982" start="3026" end="3041" title="Walpurgis Night" label="Walpurgis Night"/>
<link wikidata="Q3062459" start="3143" end="3181" title="French Geodesic Mission to the Equator" label="French Geodesic Mission to the Equator"/>
<link wikidata="Q470306" start="3183" end="3199" title="Antonio de Ulloa" label="Antonio de Ulloa"/>
<link wikidata="Q11065" start="3204" end="3218" title="Pierre Bouguer" label="Pierre Bouguer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7129059" start="3271" end="3281" title="Pambamarca" label="Pambamarca"/>
<link wikidata="Q736" start="3299" end="3309" title="Ecuador" label="Ecuadorian"/>
<link wikidata="Q5456" start="3310" end="3315" title="Andes" label="Andes"/>
<link wikidata="Q843333" start="3679" end="3686" title="fog bow" label="fog bow"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058800" start="3762" end="3771" title="moonlight" label="moonlight"/>
<link wikidata="Q186310" start="3837" end="3854" title="Halo (optical phenomenon)" label="ice-crystal halos"/>
<link wikidata="Q81082" start="3916" end="3930" title="Henri Poincaré" label="Henri Poincaré"/>
<link wikidata="Q437534" start="4442" end="4462" title="Hendrik van de Hulst" label="Hendrik van de Hulst"/>
<link wikidata="Q889796" start="4478" end="4491" title="surface waves" label="surface waves"/>
<link wikidata="Q1532879" start="4841" end="4865" title="Herch Moysés Nussenzveig" label="Herch Moysés Nussenzveig"/>
<link wikidata="Q1341668" start="4943" end="4967" title="classical wave tunneling" label="classical wave tunneling"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5000" end="5024" title="Evanescent field#Total internal reflection of light" label="evanescent wave coupling"/>
<link wikidata="Q162900" start="5173" end="5188" title="Charles Thomson Rees Wilson" label="C. T. R. Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q104674" start="5246" end="5255" title="Ben Nevis" label="Ben Nevis"/>
<link wikidata="Q214634" start="5458" end="5471" title="cloud chamber" label="cloud chamber"/>
<link wikidata="Q186161" start="5496" end="5514" title="ionizing radiation" label="ionizing radiation"/>
<link wikidata="Q36034" start="5723" end="5732" title="Huangshan" label="Huangshan"/>
<link wikidata="Q134927" start="5737" end="5747" title="Mount Emei" label="Mount Emei"/>
<link wikidata="Q9441" start="5972" end="5978" title="Buddha" label="Buddha"/>
<link wikidata="Q18336" start="6042" end="6050" title="heraldry" label="heraldry"/>
<link wikidata="Q171663" start="6078" end="6109" title="Great Seal of the United States" label="Great Seal of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q285268" start="6221" end="6238" title="Eye of Providence" label="Eye of Providence"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="252574" wikidata="Q6887799" url="?curid=252574" title="Mockbeggar">
<text>Mockbeggar is a geographic name. Places with this name include:

* Mockbeggar, Swale, in Kent, England.
* Mockbeggar, Hampshire, a village in England
* Mockbeggar, a hamlet near Higham, Kent, England
* Mockbeggar Wharf in Moreton, Merseyside, England

==See also==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6887799" start="0" end="10" title="Mockbeggar" label="Mockbeggar"/>
<link wikidata="Q609256" start="67" end="84" title="Mockbeggar, Swale" label="Mockbeggar, Swale"/>
<link wikidata="Q6887801" start="106" end="127" title="Mockbeggar, Hampshire" label="Mockbeggar, Hampshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q2336499" start="178" end="184" title="Higham, Kent" label="Higham"/>
<link wikidata="Q3862955" start="222" end="241" title="Moreton, Merseyside" label="Moreton, Merseyside"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="252576" wikidata="Q24639697" url="?curid=252576" title="Mumbles">
<text>Mumbles () is a headland sited on the western edge of Swansea Bay on the southern coast of Wales.

==Toponym== 
Mumbles has been noted for its unusual place name. The headland is thought by some to have been named by French sailors, after the shape of the two anthropomorphic islands which the headland comprises: the word &quot;Mumbles&quot; may be a corruption of the French &quot;les mamelles,&quot; meaning &quot;the breasts&quot;. Another possible source of the name is the word Mamucium, which is generally thought to represent a Latinisation of an original Brythonic name, either from mamm- (&quot;breast&quot;, in reference to a &quot;breast-like hill&quot;) or from mamma (&quot;mother&quot;, in reference to a local river goddess).

Mumbles Lighthouse was built during the 1790s, and was converted to solar powered operation in 1995.

==Notable features==
Mumbles Pier was opened in 1898 at the terminus of the Swansea and Mumbles Railway, which was the world&#x27;s first horse-drawn public passenger train service. It opened 2 Mar 1807 and used horse power to 1877, then steam power to 1929, when it switched to double deck overhead electric tram power, lasting till the line closed in Jan 1960.

Mumbles Lifeboat Station has operated since 1866. In 1947, the entire lifeboat crew was lost at sea, attempting to rescue the crew of the &quot;SS Samtampa&quot;, in what has become known as the Mumbles lifeboat disaster. The nearest church, All Saints&#x27; Church, Oystermouth, contains memorials to the crew.

==Climate==
==See also==
*Mumbles (district), a district of Swansea
*Mumbles RFC
*Breast-shaped hill

==References==
==External links==

* Mumbles
* www.geograph.co.uk Photos of The Mumbles and surrounding area</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q24639697" start="0" end="7" title="Mumbles" label="Mumbles"/>
<link wikidata="Q3235968" start="54" end="65" title="Swansea Bay" label="Swansea Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q25" start="91" end="96" title="Wales" label="Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q3080368" start="143" end="161" title="place names considered unusual" label="unusual place name"/>
<link wikidata="Q3285089" start="484" end="492" title="Mamucium" label="Mamucium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1248800" start="564" end="573" title="Common Brittonic" label="Brythonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q339434" start="743" end="761" title="Mumbles Lighthouse" label="Mumbles Lighthouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q6935359" start="866" end="878" title="Mumbles Pier" label="Mumbles Pier"/>
<link wikidata="Q2383838" start="921" end="948" title="Swansea and Mumbles Railway" label="Swansea and Mumbles Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q6935356" start="1209" end="1233" title="Mumbles Lifeboat Station" label="Mumbles Lifeboat Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q7394322" start="1353" end="1364" title="SS Samtampa" label="SS Samtampa"/>
<link wikidata="Q28401913" start="1404" end="1429" title="Mumbles lifeboat disaster" label="Mumbles lifeboat disaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q17122662" start="1451" end="1487" title="All Saints&amp;#x27; Church, Oystermouth" label="All Saints&amp;#x27; Church, Oystermouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1952591" start="1548" end="1566" title="Mumbles (district)" label="Mumbles (district)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6935358" start="1591" end="1602" title="Mumbles RFC" label="Mumbles RFC"/>
<link wikidata="Q4959757" start="1604" end="1622" title="Breast-shaped hill" label="Breast-shaped hill"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="252579" wikidata="Q815694" url="?curid=252579" title="Bell Canada">
<text>Bell Canada (commonly referred to as Bell) is a Canadian telecommunications company headquartered at 1 Carrefour Alexander-Graham-Bell in the borough of Verdun, Quebec, in Canada. It is an ILEC (incumbent local exchange carrier) in the provinces of Ontario and Quebec; as such, it was a founding member of the Stentor Alliance. It is also a CLEC (competitive local exchange carrier) for enterprise customers in the western provinces.

Its subsidiary Bell Aliant provides services in the Atlantic provinces. It provides mobile service through its Bell Mobility (including flanker brand Virgin Plus) subsidiary, and television through its Bell Satellite TV (direct broadcast satellite) and Bell Fibe TV (IPTV) subsidiaries.

Bell Canada&#x27;s principal competitors are: Rogers Communications in Ontario and Western Canada, Telus in Quebec and Western Canada, Quebecor (Videotron) in Quebec plus other Global Wireless Infrastructure Providers such as American Tower. The company serves over 13 million phone lines and is headquartered at the Campus Bell complex in the borough of Verdun in Montreal.

Bell Canada is one of the main assets of the holding company BCE Inc., an abbreviation of its full name, Bell Canada Enterprises. In addition to the Bell Canada telecommunications properties, BCE also owns Bell Media (which operates mass media properties including the national CTV Television Network) and holds significant interests in the Montreal Canadiens ice hockey club and Maple Leaf Sports &amp; Entertainment, owner of several Toronto professional sports franchises. BCE ranked number 301 on the 2021 edition of the Forbes Global 2000 list.

==History==
Historically, Bell Canada has been one of Canada&#x27;s most important and most powerful companies and, in 1975, was listed as the fifth largest in the country. The company is named after the inventor of the telephone, Alexander Graham Bell, who also co-founded Bell Telephone Company in Boston, Massachusetts. Bell Canada operated as the Canadian subsidiary of the Bell System from 1880 to 1975. However, unlike the other regional Bell operating companies, Bell Canada had its own research and development labs.

===Inception===
In the mid-1870s Alexander Graham Bell, who was Scottish-born but lived in Canada, invented an analogue electromagnetic telecommunication device that could simultaneously transmit and receive human speech. In March 1876 he successfully patented his invention in the United States under the title of &quot;Improvement In Telegraphy&quot; (). His device later adopted the name now used worldwide, the telephone. Bell also patented it in Canada and transferred 75% of the Canadian patent rights to his father, Alexander Melville Bell, with the remaining 25% being awarded to Boston telephone manufacturer Charles Williams Jr. in exchange for 1,000 telephones to be provided to the Canadian market. This order could not be fulfilled due to surging demand in the United States.

For a few years, the senior Bell and his friend and business associate Reverend Thomas Philip Henderson collected royalties from the lease of telephones to customers in the limited late-1870s Canadian market, who either operated their own private telephone lines or subscribed to a third party telecommunications service provider.

In 1879 Bell&#x27;s father sold his Canadian rights to the National Bell Telephone Company, formed in Boston, Massachusetts earlier that year by the merger of the Bell Telephone Company and the New England Telephone and Telegraph Company, which in 1880 reorganized as the American Bell Telephone Company, initiating the Bell System. That same year the Canadian division was renamed to &quot;The Bell Telephone Company of Canada Ltd.&quot;, eventually to be headed by U.S. executive Charles Fleetford Sise from Chicago who served as its first general manager.

The first supplier of telephones to Bell was a company established by Thomas C. Cowherd and his son James H. Cowherd, in a three-storey brick building in Brantford, Ontario, creating Canada&#x27;s first telephone factory. Thomas and James had been good friends of Alexander Graham Bell, providing stovepipe wire with which Bell conducted his early telephone experiments from his father&#x27;s home in Tutelo Heights, Ontario, and also building some 2,398 telephones to Bell&#x27;s specifications for the Canadian market until James Cowherd&#x27;s untimely death from tuberculosis in 1881. With a government-granted monopoly on Canadian long-distance telephone service, The Bell Telephone Company of Canada was serving 237,000 subscribers by 1914.

Since its early years The Bell Telephone Company of Canada, Ltd. had been known colloquially as &quot;The Bell&quot; or &quot;Bell Telephone&quot;. On March 7, 1968, Canadian federal legislation renamed The Bell Telephone Company of Canada, Ltd. to Bell Canada.

===Competition and territory reduction===
Bell Canada extended lines from Nova Scotia to the foot of the Rocky Mountains in what is now Alberta. However, most of the attention given to meeting demand for service focused on major cities in Ontario, Quebec, and the Maritime Provinces.

====Atlantic Canada====
During the late 19th century, Bell sold its Atlantic operations in the three Maritime provinces, where many small independent companies also operated and eventually came under the ownership of three provincial companies. Newfoundland and Labrador joined Canada with several private companies, and a government operation that was transferred to the control of Canadian National Railways.

Bell acquired interests in all Atlantic companies during the early 1960s, starting with Newfoundland Telephone (which later was organized as NewTel Communications) on July 24, 1962. Bell acquired controlling interest in Maritime Telephone and Telegraph Company, later known as MT&amp;T, which also owned PEI-based Island Telephone, and in Bruncorp, the parent company of NBTel in 1966. The purchase of MT&amp;T was made despite efforts of the Nova Scotia legislature on September 10, 1966, to limit the voting power of any shareholder to 1000 votes. Bell-owned MT&amp;T absorbed some 120 independent companies, most serving fewer than 50 customers each. Bell-owned NewTel purchased the CNR-owned Terra Nova Tel in 1988.

In the late 1990s, Newtel, Bruncorp, MT&amp;T and Island Tel merged into Aliant, now Bell Aliant which owns many services in rural areas of Ontario and Quebec formerly owned by Bell Canada.

On January 1, 2011, Bell acquired xwave from Bell Aliant for $40 million, an information technology company offering sales and services in Atlantic Canada.

====Quebec and Ontario====
Independent companies appeared in many areas of Ontario, Quebec and Maritime provinces without adequate Bell Canada service. During the 20th century Bell acquired most of the independent companies in Ontario and Quebec, most notably the purchase of Nexxlink Technologies, a Montreal-based integrated IT solutions and telecommunications provider founded by Karol Brassard. Alongside the acquisition of Charon Systems, Nexxlink now operates today as Bell Business Solutions—a division of Bell Canada. Quebec, however, still has large swaths of relatively rural areas served by Telus Québec (formerly Québec Telephone, later acquired by Telus) and Télébec (now owned by Bell Canada via Bell Aliant) and by some 20 small independent companies. As of 1980, Ontario still had some 30 independent companies, and Bell has not acquired any; the smaller ones were sold to larger independents with larger capital resources. Cellcom Communications is the largest franchisee of Bell Canada, currently operating 25 Bell stores in both Québec and Ontario regions.

==== Alberta, Manitoba and Saskatchewan ====
At separate times, the three Prairie provinces acquired Bell Canada operations and formed provincial utility services, investing to develop proper telephone services throughout those provinces; Bell Canada&#x27;s investment in the prairies had been scant or insufficient relative to growth, and all three had various local telephone companies. The Alberta government&#x27;s Alberta Government Telephones Commission and Manitoba Government Telephones purchased the Bell operations of their provinces in 1908. Saskatchewan&#x27;s Department of Railways, Telegraphs and Telephones, established in June 1908, purchased the Bell operations on October 1, 1909; all three provinces&#x27; government operations eventually acquired the independent companies.

Having achieved a high level of development, Manitoba moved to privatize its telephone utility and Alberta privatized Alberta Government Telephones to create Telus in the 1990s. Saskatchewan continues to own SaskTel as a crown corporation .Edmonton was served by a city-owned utility, Edmonton Telephones Corporation, that was sold to Telus in 1995. BCE re-gained ownership of the Manitoba system, now known as Bell MTS, on March 17, 2017.

==== British Columbia ====
British Columbia, served today by Telus, was served by numerous small companies that mostly amalgamated to form British Columbia Telephone, later known as BC Tel (the last known acquisition was the Okanagan Telephone Company in the late 1970s), which served the province from the 1960s until its merger with Telus. (The amalgamations produced one anomaly: Atlin is surrounded by the territory of Northwestel, implying that the company that established service there was acquired by a company serving territories further south.)

==== Northern Canada ====
Although Bell Canada entered the Northwest Territories (NWT) with an exchange at Iqaluit (then known as Frobisher Bay, in the territory now known as Nunavut) in 1958, Canadian National Telecommunications, a subsidiary of Canadian National Railways (CNR), provided most of the telephone service in Canada&#x27;s northern territories (specifically, Yukon, northern BC and the western NWT). CNR created Northwestel in 1979, and Bell Canada Enterprises acquired the company in 1988 as a wholly owned subsidiary. Bell Canada sold its 22 exchanges in the eastern region of the NWT to Northwestel in 1992, and BCE transferred ownership of the company to Bell Canada in 1999. Northwestel&#x27;s operating area was in 2001 opened to long-distance competition (which has materialized only in the form of prepaid card business, and service to large national customers with some operating locations in the north) and in 2007 to resale of local telephone service (which has not yet occurred).

Northern British Columbia, northeastern Ontario and the James Bay region of northern Quebec were served by independent companies, though Bell Canada eventually provided service in more far-flung reaches of Ontario and Quebec, acquired ownership interests in companies serving large swaths of northwestern Quebec and northeastern Ontario, and in Northwestel.

===Divestiture and deregulation===
The Bell System had two main companies in the telephone industry in Canada: Bell Canada as a regional operating company (affiliated with AT&amp;T, with an ownership stake of approximately 39%) and Northern Electric as an equipment manufacturer (affiliated with Western Electric, with an ownership stake of approximately 44%). The Bell Telephone Company of Canada and Northern Electric were structured similarly in Canada to the analogous portions of the Bell System in the United States; the regional operating company (Bell Canada) sold telephone services as a local exchange carrier, and Western Electric (Northern Electric) designed and manufactured telephone equipment.

As part of the consent decree signed in 1956 to resolve the antitrust lawsuit filed in 1949 by the United States Department of Justice, AT&amp;T and the Bell System proper divested itself of Northern Electric in 1956.

In October 1973, AT&amp;T and Bell Canada signed an agreement stating that AT&amp;T would no longer furnish Bell System communications and research to Bell Canada. AT&amp;T&#x27;s at-the-time chairman John DeButts explained that the main reason for this was because Bell Canada had developed its own research and development lab (Bell-Northern Research), making Bell Canada ready to serve its Canadian landline customers on its own. As a result, AT&amp;T divested Bell Canada on June 30, 1975.
Even though Bell Canada had been divested, it was allowed to participate in Bell System projects which could be completed shortly after its divestiture date.

Northern Electric renamed itself Northern Telecom in 1976, which in turn became Nortel Networks in 1998 with the acquisition of Bay Networks.

Bell Canada acquired 100 percent of Northern Electric in 1964; starting in 1973, Bell&#x27;s ownership stake in Northern Electric was diminished through public stock offerings, though it retained majority control. In 1983, as a result of deregulation, Bell Canada Enterprises (later shortened to BCE) was formed as the parent company to Bell Canada and Northern Telecom. As a result of the stock transaction used by Northern Telecom to purchase Bay Networks, BCE ceased to be the majority owner of Nortel, and in 2000, BCE spun out its share of Nortel, distributing its holdings to its shareholders.

Between 1980 and 1997, the federal government fully deregulated the telecommunications industry and Bell Canada&#x27;s monopoly largely ended. Bell Canada currently provides local phone service only in major city centres in Ontario and Quebec.

In July 2006, Bell and former subsidiary Aliant completed a restructuring whereby Aliant, renamed Bell Aliant Regional Communications, took over Bell&#x27;s wireline operations in much of Ontario and Quebec (while continuing to use the &quot;Bell&quot; name in those regions), as well as its 63% ownership in rural lines operator Bell Nordiq (a publicly traded income trust that controls NorthernTel and Télébec). These are in addition to Bell Aliant&#x27;s operations in Atlantic Canada. In turn, Bell has assumed responsibility for Bell Aliant&#x27;s wireless and retail operations. Bell Aliant, now an income trust, is 44% owned by Bell.

On April 30, 2007, the Canadian Radio-television and Telecommunications Commission (CRTC) announced its decision to allow pay phone rates for Bell Canada, Telus, Bell Aliant, SaskTel, and MTS Allstream to increase from 25 cents to 50 cents, starting as early as June 1. The CRTC also permitted local rural rates to increase by the lesser of the annual rate of inflation or five percent, and removed price caps on optional rural services, such as call display and voicemail.
On June 2, 2007, Bell Canada increased the cost of a local pay phone call to 50 cents when paid in cash and one dollar when paid by calling card or credit card,
Bell&#x27;s first increase in pay phone rates since 1981.

In 2009, Bell Canada purchased electronics retailer The Source and all other assets of InterTAN Canada Ltd. from bankrupt Circuit City.

Bell has deployed MPLS on their nationwide fibre ring network to support consumer and enterprise-level IP applications, such as IPTV and VoIP.

On March 17, 2017, BCE Inc. completed its acquisition of Manitoba Telecom Services.

== Criticism ==
Bell Canada has faced controversy and scandal. In late 2011, Bell Canada admitted to a policy of bandwidth throttling of BitTorrent traffic across its network when it announced it would stop the practice of &quot;traffic shaping&quot; during periods of high demand beginning in March 2012. In November 2011, only a few weeks before, the CRTC issued a ruling that stopped the controversial practice of usage-based billing of smaller internet service providers who purchase space on Bell Canada networks, providing a fee structure based on total capacity needed. Bell Canada had originally wanted to charge providers by how much data each user downloaded.

In May 2017, the email addresses of 1.9 million Bell customers were stolen, along with the name and phone numbers of 1.7 million customers. Then in January 2018, there was another data breach affecting about 100 thousand Bell customers.

Bell Canada&#x27;s mobile phone services has been criticized for monopolistic practices, including during its acquisition of MTS.

== Services ==

Bell Canada provides many different types of telecommunications services.

===Voice===
Bell Canada provides standard voice service. It used to offer VoIP to customers, branded as &quot;Digital Voice&quot;. Businesses can still obtain VoIP service. It now offers BTC (Bell Total Connect) SIP service as a digital voice package.

===Voicemail===
Bell Home Phone and Bell Mobility provide voicemail service as an optional feature for residences and businesses. Bell Prepaid customers, however, receive a basic voice mail at no additional charge. The complimentary voice mail can store five messages of one minute each, for up to five days.

===Wireless===
Bell Mobility operates a cellular network in all Canadian provinces. It also owns Virgin Mobile Canada . While it created the Solo Mobile brand in 1999, Bell shut down all standalone Solo stores in 2011 while discontinuing third-party sales of all Solo phones in November 2011. The brand continues to be active for its current customers, but there are no incentives to encourage new subscriptions.

=== Television ===
Formerly known as ExpressVu, Bell Satellite TV is a satellite television service provider. There is also a mobile TV service, Bell Mobile TV, and a locked IPTV service known as Bell Fibe TV and Alt TV. The latter is available in most of Alberta, British Columbia, the Greater Toronto Area, Ottawa, Montreal, Québec City and Atlantic Canada.

=== Internet ===
Bell Internet provides high speed DSL and fiber to the home FTTH Internet service in many areas where it offers phone service. DSL is offered in various speeds ranging from 500 kbit/s to 100 Mbit/s download and 256 kbit/s to 10 Mbit/s upload on DSL while up to 8 Gbit/s on fiber optic depending on what the local infrastructure can support.

Bell began offering Fibre-to-the-node Internet access to some subscribers in 2010. Bell markets this service under the name &quot;Fibe&quot;. Many urban Fibe regions can access all speeds up to and including 50+mbps down and 15+mbps up but some rural Fibe regions can only obtain 16 Mbit/s down and 1 Mbit/s up. Non-Fibe regions are limited to legacy DSL technology, supporting speeds of up to 7 Mbit/s down and 1 Mbit/s up. Bell Canada has now rolled out Fibre to the Home services to certain subscribers across Eastern Canada, this service can provide guaranteed download of 3 Gbit/s and upload speeds of 3 Gbit/s. In August 2019, the company announced it would cut roughly 200,000 households from a rural internet expansion program after a federal regulator lowered wholesale broadband prices that major telecom companies can charge smaller internet providers.

In a press release issued February 24, 2022, Bell announced that it has acquired Internet service provider EBOX. Bell wishes to keep the brand and the activities of EBOX and let the company continue to operate independently while remaining based in Longueuil.

=== Legacy ===
Bell previously offered Bell Home Monitoring, also known as Bell Gardium.

Bell Canada also previously offered cable television services in the United Kingdom via Bell Cablemedia plc (a joint venture with Jones Intercable and Cable &amp; Wireless plc) from 1994 until 1997, when Vidéotron first sold its UK operations to Bell Cablemedia, after which Bell Cablemedia and the UK operations of NYNEX Corporation merged with Cable &amp; Wireless plc to form Cable &amp; Wireless Communications.

== Marketing ==
Bell Canada created the Frank and Gordon beavers to advertise its products from 2006 to 2008.

Coinciding with its advertising campaign as part of its sponsorship of the 2008 Beijing Olympics, Bell introduced a new logo and minimalist ad style, with the slogans &quot;Today just got better&quot; (with emphasis on the suffix &quot;er&quot;) in English Canada and &quot;La vie est Bell&quot; (a pun on &quot;La vie est Belle&quot; — ) in French Canada. The font used in Bell&#x27;s marketing is a custom typeface known as &#x27;Bell Slim&#x27;, by Canadian typeface designer Ian Brignell.

== Historical financial performance ==
The financial performance of the company is reported to shareholders on an annual basis. The unit (except where noted) is millions of Canadian dollars.

== See also ==

* American Telephone &amp; Telegraph, AT&amp;T, an earlier parent and successor to American Bell
* Bell Centre, a hockey arena in Montreal
* Bell Mobility, the division of Bell Canada which sells wireless services in Canada
* Bell System, the Bell Telephone / AT&amp;T-led companies which provided phone services
* Bell Telephone Memorial, a large monument honouring the inventor in Brantford, Ontario
* Bell Tower, an office tower in Edmonton
* International Bell Telephone Company, the Bell Telephone&#x27;s early European division
* List of largest companies by revenue
* List of public corporations by market capitalization
* List of telephone operating companies
* List of United States telephone companies
* National Bell Telephone Company, the very earliest parent company
* Place Bell, an office tower in Ottawa
* Telephone Pavilion (Expo 67), also known as the Bell Telephone Pavilion
* Thomas Cowherd, who helped establish Canada&#x27;s first telephone factory

==Notes==
==References==
== External links ==
* Official website
* BCE Inc. website
* Bell Telephone Company of Canada – public historical documents
* CRTC chart of Bell Canada&#x27;s assets
* Bell Canada pixel art ad campaign
* Bell Telephone Company of Canada (from Bell System Memorial)
* Operator. May I help you?: Bell Canada&#x27;s 125 Years – Bell Canada&#x27;s origins (illustrated with many early photographs)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q815694" start="0" end="11" title="Bell Canada" label="Bell Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q815694" start="37" end="41" title="Bell Canada" label="Bell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1266169" start="57" end="83" title="telecommunications company" label="telecommunications company"/>
<link wikidata="Q518076" start="153" end="167" title="Verdun, Quebec" label="Verdun, Quebec"/>
<link wikidata="Q13405549" start="189" end="193" title="ILEC" label="ILEC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1904" start="249" end="256" title="Ontario" label="Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q176" start="261" end="267" title="Quebec" label="Quebec"/>
<link wikidata="Q7607940" start="310" end="326" title="Stentor Alliance" label="Stentor Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q5156358" start="341" end="345" title="Competitive local exchange carrier" label="CLEC"/>
<link wikidata="Q815690" start="450" end="461" title="Bell Aliant" label="Bell Aliant"/>
<link wikidata="Q246972" start="487" end="505" title="Atlantic provinces" label="Atlantic provinces"/>
<link wikidata="Q2894594" start="546" end="559" title="Bell Mobility" label="Bell Mobility"/>
<link wikidata="Q6025287" start="571" end="584" title="Individual branding" label="flanker brand"/>
<link wikidata="Q3560641" start="585" end="596" title="Virgin Plus" label="Virgin Plus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2894596" start="637" end="654" title="Bell Satellite TV" label="Bell Satellite TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q209588" start="656" end="682" title="direct broadcast satellite" label="direct broadcast satellite"/>
<link wikidata="Q923069" start="688" end="700" title="Bell Fibe TV" label="Bell Fibe TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q177518" start="702" end="706" title="IPTV" label="IPTV"/>
<link wikidata="Q165684" start="769" end="790" title="Rogers Communications" label="Rogers Communications"/>
<link wikidata="Q165858" start="822" end="827" title="Telus" label="Telus"/>
<link wikidata="Q912476" start="858" end="866" title="Quebecor" label="Quebecor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2396830" start="868" end="877" title="Videotron" label="Videotron"/>
<link wikidata="Q4745263" start="949" end="963" title="American Tower" label="American Tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q292493" start="1040" end="1051" title="Campus Bell" label="Campus Bell"/>
<link wikidata="Q518076" start="1078" end="1084" title="Verdun, Quebec" label="Verdun"/>
<link wikidata="Q24525746" start="1160" end="1168" title="BCE Inc." label="BCE Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q815713" start="1305" end="1315" title="Bell Media" label="Bell Media"/>
<link wikidata="Q11033" start="1332" end="1342" title="mass media" label="mass media"/>
<link wikidata="Q767221" start="1377" end="1399" title="CTV Television Network" label="CTV Television Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q188143" start="1440" end="1458" title="Montreal Canadiens" label="Montreal Canadiens"/>
<link wikidata="Q41466" start="1459" end="1469" title="ice hockey" label="ice hockey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1185319" start="1479" end="1516" title="Maple Leaf Sports &amp;amp; Entertainment" label="Maple Leaf Sports &amp;amp; Entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134743" start="1624" end="1642" title="Forbes Global 2000" label="Forbes Global 2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q34286" start="1881" end="1902" title="Alexander Graham Bell" label="Alexander Graham Bell"/>
<link wikidata="Q4883277" start="1924" end="1946" title="Bell Telephone Company" label="Bell Telephone Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q4883269" start="2028" end="2039" title="Bell System" label="Bell System"/>
<link wikidata="Q34286" start="2209" end="2230" title="Alexander Graham Bell" label="Alexander Graham Bell"/>
<link wikidata="Q3742408" start="2287" end="2295" title="Analog device" label="analogue"/>
<link wikidata="Q11406" start="2296" end="2311" title="Electromagnetism" label="electromagnetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q418" start="2312" end="2336" title="Telecommunication" label="telecommunication device"/>
<link wikidata="Q253623" start="2428" end="2434" title="patent" label="patent"/>
<link wikidata="Q11035" start="2591" end="2600" title="telephone" label="telephone"/>
<link wikidata="Q436991" start="2699" end="2722" title="Alexander Melville Bell" label="Alexander Melville Bell"/>
<link wikidata="Q14715435" start="2794" end="2814" title="Charles Williams Jr. House" label="Charles Williams Jr."/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3046" end="3069" title="Bell Homestead National Historic Site#Henderson Home" label="Thomas Philip Henderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1266169" start="3260" end="3295" title="telecommunications service provider" label="telecommunications service provider"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3357" end="3388" title="Bell Telephone Company#Earliest division of Bell Company shares and corporate evolution" label="National Bell Telephone Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q100" start="3400" end="3421" title="Boston, Massachusetts" label="Boston, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q7007413" start="3492" end="3535" title="New England Telephone and Telegraph Company" label="New England Telephone and Telegraph Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q4883269" start="3618" end="3629" title="Bell System" label="Bell System"/>
<link wikidata="Q74116" start="3780" end="3802" title="Charles Fleetford Sise" label="Charles Fleetford Sise"/>
<link wikidata="Q1297" start="3808" end="3815" title="Chicago" label="Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q7788665" start="3928" end="3945" title="Thomas C. Cowherd" label="Thomas C. Cowherd"/>
<link wikidata="Q34180" start="4012" end="4030" title="Brantford" label="Brantford, Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4200" end="4227" title="Bell Homestead National Historic Site#Three great tests of the telephone" label="early telephone experiments"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4233" end="4282" title="Bell Homestead National Historic Site#History" label="his father&amp;#x27;s home in Tutelo Heights, Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q5463" start="4974" end="4989" title="Rocky Mountains" label="Rocky Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q731613" start="5133" end="5151" title="Maritimes" label="Maritime Provinces"/>
<link wikidata="Q7005148" start="5707" end="5728" title="NewTel Communications" label="NewTel Communications"/>
<link wikidata="Q3293751" start="5786" end="5826" title="Maritime Telephone and Telegraph Company" label="Maritime Telephone and Telegraph Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q6083410" start="5880" end="5896" title="Island Telecom" label="Island Telephone"/>
<link wikidata="Q6952870" start="5937" end="5942" title="NBTel" label="NBTel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7703135" start="6262" end="6276" title="Terra Nova Tel" label="Terra Nova Tel"/>
<link wikidata="Q815690" start="6372" end="6383" title="Bell Aliant" label="Bell Aliant"/>
<link wikidata="Q165858" start="7296" end="7301" title="Telus" label="Telus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3546573" start="7307" end="7314" title="Télébec" label="Télébec"/>
<link wikidata="Q18636284" start="7575" end="7597" title="Cellcom Communications" label="Cellcom Communications"/>
<link wikidata="Q4711641" start="8626" end="8655" title="Alberta Government Telephones" label="Alberta Government Telephones"/>
<link wikidata="Q165858" start="8666" end="8671" title="Telus" label="Telus"/>
<link wikidata="Q339928" start="8716" end="8723" title="SaskTel" label="SaskTel"/>
<link wikidata="Q5189488" start="8729" end="8746" title="crown corporation" label="crown corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1890462" start="8919" end="8927" title="Bell MTS" label="Bell MTS"/>
<link wikidata="Q165858" start="9010" end="9015" title="Telus" label="Telus"/>
<link wikidata="Q4835333" start="9131" end="9137" title="BC Tel" label="BC Tel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2623078" start="9332" end="9337" title="Atlin, British Columbia" label="Atlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7060284" start="9372" end="9383" title="Northwestel" label="Northwestel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2030" start="9612" end="9619" title="Iqaluit" label="Iqaluit"/>
<link wikidata="Q624798" start="9752" end="9778" title="Canadian National Railways" label="Canadian National Railways"/>
<link wikidata="Q7060284" start="9931" end="9942" title="Northwestel" label="Northwestel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2843047" start="11043" end="11051" title="American Telephone and Telegraph" label="AT&amp;amp;T"/>
<link wikidata="Q464996" start="11103" end="11120" title="Nortel" label="Northern Electric"/>
<link wikidata="Q2031258" start="11167" end="11183" title="Western Electric" label="Western Electric"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11596" end="11625" title="Bell System#1956ConsentDecree" label="consent decree signed in 1956"/>
<link wikidata="Q464996" start="11772" end="11789" title="Nortel" label="Northern Electric"/>
<link wikidata="Q4883081" start="12130" end="12152" title="Bell-Northern Research" label="Bell-Northern Research"/>
<link wikidata="Q464996" start="12533" end="12548" title="Nortel Networks" label="Nortel Networks"/>
<link wikidata="Q24525746" start="12892" end="12895" title="BCE Inc." label="BCE"/>
<link wikidata="Q815690" start="13540" end="13575" title="Bell Aliant Regional Communications" label="Bell Aliant Regional Communications"/>
<link wikidata="Q7058088" start="13830" end="13841" title="NorthernTel" label="NorthernTel"/>
<link wikidata="Q3546573" start="13846" end="13853" title="Télébec" label="Télébec"/>
<link wikidata="Q246972" start="13914" end="13929" title="Atlantic Canada" label="Atlantic Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q2993801" start="14107" end="14166" title="Canadian Radio-television and Telecommunications Commission" label="Canadian Radio-television and Telecommunications Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q3212934" start="14830" end="14840" title="The Source (retailer)" label="The Source"/>
<link wikidata="Q6044992" start="14865" end="14885" title="InterTAN" label="InterTAN Canada Ltd."/>
<link wikidata="Q1140946" start="14900" end="14912" title="Circuit City (1949–2009 company)" label="Circuit City"/>
<link wikidata="Q677023" start="14933" end="14937" title="Multiprotocol Label Switching" label="MPLS"/>
<link wikidata="Q177518" start="15043" end="15047" title="IPTV" label="IPTV"/>
<link wikidata="Q81945" start="15052" end="15056" title="VoIP" label="VoIP"/>
<link wikidata="Q1890462" start="15116" end="15141" title="Manitoba Telecom Services" label="Manitoba Telecom Services"/>
<link wikidata="Q478819" start="15257" end="15277" title="bandwidth throttling" label="bandwidth throttling"/>
<link wikidata="Q133862" start="15281" end="15291" title="BitTorrent (protocol)" label="BitTorrent"/>
<link wikidata="Q1462168" start="16317" end="16330" title="Plain Old Telephone Service" label="voice service"/>
<link wikidata="Q81945" start="16349" end="16353" title="VoIP" label="VoIP"/>
<link wikidata="Q2894594" start="16564" end="16577" title="Bell Mobility" label="Bell Mobility"/>
<link wikidata="Q2734312" start="16586" end="16595" title="voicemail" label="voicemail"/>
<link wikidata="Q2894594" start="16853" end="16866" title="Bell Mobility" label="Bell Mobility"/>
<link wikidata="Q17517" start="16878" end="16886" title="Mobile phone" label="cellular"/>
<link wikidata="Q3560641" start="16935" end="16955" title="Virgin Mobile Canada" label="Virgin Mobile Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q2894596" start="17300" end="17317" title="Bell Satellite TV" label="Bell Satellite TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q209588" start="17323" end="17343" title="satellite television" label="satellite television"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17397" end="17411" title="Bell Mobility#Mobile TV" label="Bell Mobile TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q177518" start="17426" end="17430" title="IPTV" label="IPTV"/>
<link wikidata="Q923069" start="17448" end="17460" title="Bell Fibe TV" label="Bell Fibe TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q4652451" start="17465" end="17471" title="Alt TV" label="Alt TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q1951" start="17508" end="17515" title="Alberta" label="Alberta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1024624" start="17539" end="17559" title="Greater Toronto Area" label="Greater Toronto Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q1930" start="17561" end="17567" title="Ottawa" label="Ottawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q340" start="17569" end="17577" title="Montreal" label="Montreal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2145" start="17579" end="17590" title="Quebec City" label="Québec City"/>
<link wikidata="Q2894586" start="17630" end="17643" title="Bell Internet" label="Bell Internet"/>
<link wikidata="Q104534" start="17664" end="17667" title="Digital subscriber line" label="DSL"/>
<link wikidata="Q586034" start="17690" end="17694" title="FTTH" label="FTTH"/>
<link wikidata="Q586034" start="17992" end="18009" title="Fiber to the x" label="Fibre-to-the-node"/>
<link wikidata="Q184452" start="19224" end="19240" title="cable television" label="cable television"/>
<link wikidata="Q5225895" start="19292" end="19295" title="Public limited company" label="plc"/>
<link wikidata="Q6275218" start="19318" end="19334" title="Jones Intercable" label="Jones Intercable"/>
<link wikidata="Q1024869" start="19339" end="19363" title="Cable &amp;amp; Wireless plc" label="Cable &amp;amp; Wireless plc"/>
<link wikidata="Q2396830" start="19392" end="19401" title="Vidéotron" label="Vidéotron"/>
<link wikidata="Q6956079" start="19504" end="19521" title="NYNEX" label="NYNEX Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5015620" start="19567" end="19602" title="Cable &amp;amp; Wireless Communications" label="Cable &amp;amp; Wireless Communications"/>
<link wikidata="Q3189011" start="19645" end="19661" title="Frank and Gordon" label="Frank and Gordon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2843047" start="20420" end="20454" title="American Telephone &amp;amp; Telegraph" label="American Telephone &amp;amp; Telegraph"/>
<link wikidata="Q522282" start="20517" end="20528" title="Bell Centre" label="Bell Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q2894594" start="20559" end="20572" title="Bell Mobility" label="Bell Mobility"/>
<link wikidata="Q4883269" start="20644" end="20655" title="Bell System" label="Bell System"/>
<link wikidata="Q4883278" start="20733" end="20756" title="Bell Telephone Memorial" label="Bell Telephone Memorial"/>
<link wikidata="Q815729" start="20822" end="20832" title="Bell Tower (Edmonton)" label="Bell Tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q6048732" start="20864" end="20900" title="International Bell Telephone Company" label="International Bell Telephone Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q900297" start="20954" end="20990" title="List of largest companies by revenue" label="List of largest companies by revenue"/>
<link wikidata="Q3679380" start="20993" end="21045" title="List of public corporations by market capitalization" label="List of public corporations by market capitalization"/>
<link wikidata="Q666926" start="21048" end="21085" title="List of telephone operating companies" label="List of telephone operating companies"/>
<link wikidata="Q17083971" start="21088" end="21129" title="List of United States telephone companies" label="List of United States telephone companies"/>
<link wikidata="Q4883277" start="21132" end="21163" title="National Bell Telephone Company" label="National Bell Telephone Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q7200214" start="21200" end="21210" title="Place Bell (Ottawa)" label="Place Bell"/>
<link wikidata="Q7696476" start="21240" end="21268" title="Telephone Pavilion (Expo 67)" label="Telephone Pavilion (Expo 67)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7788665" start="21314" end="21328" title="Thomas Cowherd" label="Thomas Cowherd"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="252580" wikidata="Q2894586" url="?curid=252580" title="Bell Internet">
<text>Bell Internet, originally called Sympatico, is the residential Internet service provider (ISP) division of BCE Inc. As of May 3, 2012, Bell Internet had over 3 million subscribers in Ontario and Quebec, making it the largest ISP in Canada.

== History ==
=== 1990s: Early years ===

Sympatico was launched on November 29, 1995. Originally a national service operated jointly by Canada&#x27;s incumbent local exchange carriers and operational run as a content portal by MediaLinx, the companies other than Bell (including Aliant) have since retreated to their own brands.

=== 2000s: Value-added services and rebranding ===
Starting in Summer 2003, Sympatico tried to differentiate its service from its competitors by adding value-added services. This meant the launch of Radial Point&#x27;s (formerly Zero Knowledge) suite of antivirus, firewall and anti-spyware services. Although a fee was originally required, this is no longer the case, as Bell now provides the service at no extra charge for DSL customers. In 2004, Sympatico added a wireless modem-router hardware upgrade and Microsoft&#x27;s MSN Premium software to its portfolio. In Summer 2007, Sympatico packaged its Security suite and wireless home networking modem together with its high speed offering as Sympatico Total Internet.

Bell Sympatico changed its name to Bell Internet on August 8, 2008, in conjunction with the Today Just Got Better rebranding. Bell subsidiaries NorthernTel, Télébec and Northwestel continue to brand their Internet services as Sympatico, and users receive an @ntl.sympatico.ca, @tlb.sympatico.ca, or @sympatico.ca email address, respectively.

=== 2010s: Lower caps and faster speeds ===
On January 3, 2012, customer advocacy blog Stop The Cap! reported that Bell lowered its bandwidth caps in Ontario and Quebec by 10 GB for all new activations of its Fibe services, except for the Fibe 25 plan in Ontario which was lowered by 25 GB instead and Fibe 6 and 7 which remain unchanged. In May 2012, Bell launched new fiber-to-the-home (FTTH) plans and simplified its slower DSL plans. FTTH regions can now download and upload at symmetric speeds of up to 175 Mbit/s. The previous changes for lower bandwidth caps were reverted for the new Fibe 15/1 and Fibe 25/7 plans. The Fibe 5/1 plan replaced the older Essential, Essential Plus, Fibe 6 and Fibe 7 plans. The bandwidth cap for Fibe 5/1, however, was lowered from 25 GB to 15 GB.

The Fibe 50/50 FTTH plan was removed from Bell&#x27;s website by February 2013. In its place, a Fibe 50/10 FTTN plan was made available for the first time. During that same month, usage caps for the 15/10, 25/10 and 50/10 plans were lowered by 15, 25 and 75 GB respectively. February also saw the addition of an unlimited Internet usage add-on for Bell Internet. It costs $30/month and can be added to any residential plan. Those who subscribe to telephony (Bell Mobility or Bell Home Phone) and residential television (Bell Satellite TV or Bell Fibe TV) from Bell can obtain a $20/month discount on the unlimited Internet usage add-on.

== Hardware ==
When Bell started its DSL Internet service, then known as Sympatico, it simply offered one DSL modem, the Nortel 1-Meg Modem, which connected to only one computer. Later, it added more models with routing and wireless LAN capabilities built-in, eliminating the need to purchase additional hardware. Customers previously had to pay extra for such capabilities. Today, both of these features are standard in both all-in-one devices Bell lends to its customers. Standard DSL customers must rent Bell&#x27;s 2Wire 2701HG-G device, which can create 802.11g wireless access point. VDSL customers consist of any service with more than 1 Mbit/s of upload speed, and they must rent the Cellpipe router 802.11n-capable device instead, which also bundles a superior DSL modem.
# The SpeedStream 5200 is a basic, legacy device, distributed during the early 2000s, providing an RJ45 or a USB port for connectivity.
# The SpeedStream 6520 is a wireless-capable, legacy device, distributed during the mid-2000s,
# The back of the SpeedStream 6520. Four RJ45 ports, one USB port and 802.11g wireless LAN antenna for connectivity can be seen.
# The 2Wire 2701HG-G is Bell&#x27;s current device for standard DSL customers, distributed since 2009. It provides four RJ45 ports and 802.11g wireless LAN for connectivity, but omits the previously available USB port.
# The Cellpipe 7130 has the same ports as the 2Wire, but also adds ports for a wireless antenna, a console or fiber. (No longer being distributed)
# The Sagemcom F@st 2864 (marketed as the ″Bell Connection Hub″) was used for ADSL/VDSL and FTTH customers, distributed 2010 to June 2014. It provides one WAN port for FTTH, an RJ11 jack for VDSL connection, four GigE LAN ports, an HPNA connector, 802.11b/g/n wireless LAN for connectivity and 2 USB ports.
# The Sagemcom F@st 4350 (Marketed as the &quot;Home Hub 1000&quot;) is Bell&#x27;s current device, since June 2014, for internet only customers subscribing to 15/10 or higher and issued on both ADSL/VDSL and FTTH. It provides one WAN port for FTTH, an RJ11 jack for VDSL connection, four GigE LAN ports, 802.11b/g/n (2.4 GHz) wireless LAN for connectivity and 2 USB ports.
# The Sagemcom F@st 5250 (Marketed as the &quot;Home Hub 2000&quot;) is Bell&#x27;s current device, since June 2014, for internet and Fibe TV customers issued on both ADSL/VDSL and FTTH. It provides one WAN port for FTTH, two grey RJ11 jack for VDSL connection (pair bonding capable), two green RJ11 jacks for VoIP (not currently used), four GigE LAN ports, 802.11b/g/n (2.4 GHz) and 802.11a/n/ac (5 GHz) wireless LAN for connectivity and 2 USB ports.
As of November 2021, the Home Hub 4000 is Bell&#x27;s newest modem, for Internet and Fibe TV customers on different types of Plans.

== Service offerings ==

While Bell Internet mostly sells digital subscriber line (DSL) service, they also offer dial-up service to businesses and grandfathered residential customers. This legacy technology uses a telephone modem to provide Internet access.

=== Digital Subscriber Line (DSL) ===
Bell&#x27;s digital subscriber line (DSL) services are based on ADSL, ADSL2+ and VDSL2 technology. The main differences in both equipments vary from the speed of signal, its length and its ability to overcome the noise of a phone line. Except for very few grandfathered customers, Bell has monthly data transfer limits for all of their tiered Internet services. Both downloads and uploads count towards the limit. The following Bell Internet services are only available in Ontario and Quebec, and availability varies by region. Fibe services can only be used where fibre-to-the-neighbourhood (FTTN) technology is deployed. This currently includes urban Hamilton, Montreal, Ottawa and Toronto as well as most major cities around GTA. Non-FTTN regions offer two plans: Bell Internet and Bell Internet Plus.

Bell has simplified its DSL lineup to offer only two traditional plans and five FTTN plans.

==== Dry DSL ====
Naked DSL, commonly known as dry DSL in Canada, consists of a DSL service without a traditional home phone service.
Bell does not charge any additional fees for dry DSL service; previously, there was a charge of $4 per month. Bell charges resellers a monthly fee ranging from $7.25 to $25.10 and a one-time activation fee for dry DSL service. Although Bell still attributes a phone number to a dry DSL line, it cannot be used for phone calls. When one attempts to call a dry DSL phone number, they receive the following message: &quot;The number you are calling cannot receive incoming calls. This is a recording.&quot; The message is then repeated in French.

=== Fibre To The X (FTTX) ===
Bell Fibe Internet (FTTH) services are offered by Bell in select regions of Ontario and Quebec. Bell guarantees that the FTTH download and upload speeds advertised will be delivered to the Bell equipment. Bell Fibe Internet is offered at the following speeds: 25/25 Mbit/s, 50/50 Mbit/s, 150/150 Mbit/s, 500/500 Mbit/s, 1.5/0.94 Gbit/s, 3/3 Gbit/s, and 8/8 Gbit/s.

Bell Aliant offers a similar but different Fibe service under the same branding to certain areas in Atlantic Canada.

=== Internet security ===
Since April 11, 2013, Bell offers McAfee Security on all of its current Internet plans.

=== Add-ons ===
These are services offered by Bell Internet in addition to DSL or FTTH services, either for free or at additional costs:
* &quot;PC Care&quot;, an optional computer technical support service with a monthly fee.
* &quot;Usage Insurance&quot;, which increases the monthly bandwidth cap with one or multiple blocks of 25 GB, or provides unlimited Internet usage for a fee.
* &quot;Unlimited Internet Usage&quot;
* &quot;Wireless Home Networking&quot;

=== Legacy services ===

Bell previously offered Portable Internet and Rural Internet services in select rural regions, similarly to what Rogers Communications offered. These services used the Inukshuk Wireless network. Bell is discontinuing these offerings. Customers are encouraged to use Bell Mobility Internet services instead, which generally offer a much lower bandwidth cap.

Bell Entertainment was a bundle offer which included Bell Fibe TV service and 25 Mbit/s &quot;Fibe&quot; DSL. It was only available in some parts of the GTA (Greater Toronto Area). Customers can now add any DSL Internet plan to their Fibe TV service. Despite being an IPTV service, Bell does not charge usage-based billing for Bell Fibe TV.

&quot;Personal Vault&quot; was a backup service, available nationwide both for customers and non-customers.

While inMusic remains available as a music news portal, both the online music store and subscription service were discontinued.

== See also ==

*Bell Canada
*Cogeco
*Net Neutrality
*Rogers Internet
*TekSavvy
*List of internet service providers in Canada

== References ==
== External links ==
*Bell Internet Support
*Bell Sympatico review by dslreports.com (cited in many sites)
*Provincial protection agency report (Section in French)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2894586" start="0" end="13" title="Bell Internet" label="Bell Internet"/>
<link wikidata="Q2894586" start="33" end="42" title="Bell Internet" label="Sympatico"/>
<link wikidata="Q674950" start="51" end="62" title="residential" label="residential"/>
<link wikidata="Q11371" start="63" end="88" title="Internet service provider" label="Internet service provider"/>
<link wikidata="Q24525746" start="107" end="115" title="BCE Inc." label="BCE Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q1904" start="183" end="190" title="Ontario" label="Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q176" start="195" end="201" title="Quebec" label="Quebec"/>
<link wikidata="Q13405549" start="392" end="424" title="incumbent local exchange carrier" label="incumbent local exchange carrier"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="469" end="478" title="MediaLinx" label="MediaLinx"/>
<link wikidata="Q815690" start="521" end="527" title="Aliant" label="Aliant"/>
<link wikidata="Q349044" start="724" end="743" title="value-added service" label="value-added service"/>
<link wikidata="Q93249" start="826" end="835" title="antivirus" label="antivirus"/>
<link wikidata="Q80998" start="837" end="845" title="Firewall (networking)" label="firewall"/>
<link wikidata="Q14644" start="850" end="862" title="spyware" label="anti-spyware"/>
<link wikidata="Q249" start="1039" end="1047" title="wireless" label="wireless"/>
<link wikidata="Q6717838" start="1099" end="1110" title="MSN Premium" label="MSN Premium"/>
<link wikidata="Q249" start="1196" end="1204" title="wireless" label="wireless"/>
<link wikidata="Q815694" start="1387" end="1408" title="Today Just Got Better" label="Today Just Got Better"/>
<link wikidata="Q776167" start="1409" end="1419" title="rebranding" label="rebranding"/>
<link wikidata="Q7058088" start="1439" end="1450" title="NorthernTel" label="NorthernTel"/>
<link wikidata="Q3546573" start="1452" end="1459" title="Télébec" label="Télébec"/>
<link wikidata="Q7060284" start="1464" end="1475" title="Northwestel" label="Northwestel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1393033" start="1770" end="1783" title="bandwidth cap" label="bandwidth cap"/>
<link wikidata="Q1904" start="1788" end="1795" title="Ontario" label="Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q176" start="1800" end="1806" title="Quebec" label="Quebec"/>
<link wikidata="Q2894594" start="2883" end="2896" title="Bell Mobility" label="Bell Mobility"/>
<link wikidata="Q2894596" start="2945" end="2962" title="Bell Satellite TV" label="Bell Satellite TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q923069" start="2966" end="2978" title="Bell Fibe TV" label="Bell Fibe TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q1155692" start="3169" end="3178" title="DSL modem" label="DSL modem"/>
<link wikidata="Q464996" start="3184" end="3190" title="Nortel" label="Nortel"/>
<link wikidata="Q4545788" start="3191" end="3202" title="1-Meg Modem" label="1-Meg Modem"/>
<link wikidata="Q22725" start="3275" end="3282" title="routing" label="routing"/>
<link wikidata="Q212607" start="3287" end="3299" title="wireless LAN" label="wireless LAN"/>
<link wikidata="Q2746589" start="3622" end="3629" title="IEEE 802.11g-2003" label="802.11g"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193354" start="3771" end="3778" title="IEEE 802.11n-2009" label="802.11n"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3943" end="3947" title="Registered jack#RJ45" label="RJ45"/>
<link wikidata="Q42378" start="3953" end="3956" title="USB" label="USB"/>
<link wikidata="Q2746589" start="4145" end="4152" title="IEEE 802.11g-2003" label="802.11g"/>
<link wikidata="Q212607" start="4153" end="4165" title="wireless LAN" label="wireless LAN"/>
<link wikidata="Q131214" start="4166" end="4173" title="Antenna (radio)" label="antenna"/>
<link wikidata="Q923069" start="5385" end="5392" title="Bell Fibe TV" label="Fibe TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q81945" start="5561" end="5565" title="Voice over IP" label="VoIP"/>
<link wikidata="Q104534" start="5894" end="5917" title="digital subscriber line" label="digital subscriber line"/>
<link wikidata="Q192731" start="5949" end="5956" title="dial-up access" label="dial-up"/>
<link wikidata="Q5607" start="6050" end="6065" title="telephone modem" label="telephone modem"/>
<link wikidata="Q104534" start="6145" end="6168" title="digital subscriber line" label="digital subscriber line"/>
<link wikidata="Q161618" start="6197" end="6201" title="ADSL" label="ADSL"/>
<link wikidata="Q431344" start="6203" end="6209" title="ADSL2+" label="ADSL2+"/>
<link wikidata="Q823923" start="6214" end="6219" title="VDSL2" label="VDSL2"/>
<link wikidata="Q1904" start="6606" end="6613" title="Ontario" label="Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q176" start="6618" end="6624" title="Quebec" label="Quebec"/>
<link wikidata="Q586034" start="6698" end="6724" title="Fiber to the x" label="fibre-to-the-neighbourhood"/>
<link wikidata="Q133116" start="6786" end="6794" title="Hamilton, Ontario" label="Hamilton"/>
<link wikidata="Q340" start="6796" end="6804" title="Montreal" label="Montreal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1930" start="6806" end="6812" title="Ottawa" label="Ottawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q172" start="6817" end="6824" title="Toronto" label="Toronto"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344427" start="7050" end="7059" title="Naked DSL" label="Naked DSL"/>
<link wikidata="Q923069" start="7741" end="7750" title="Bell Fibe TV" label="Bell Fibe"/>
<link wikidata="Q815690" start="8107" end="8118" title="Bell Aliant" label="Bell Aliant"/>
<link wikidata="Q5446411" start="8150" end="8154" title="Fibe (Bell Aliant)" label="Fibe"/>
<link wikidata="Q246972" start="8207" end="8222" title="Atlantic Canada" label="Atlantic Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q267313" start="8285" end="8291" title="McAfee" label="McAfee"/>
<link wikidata="Q366580" start="8521" end="8538" title="technical support" label="technical support"/>
<link wikidata="Q165684" start="8943" end="8964" title="Rogers Communications" label="Rogers Communications"/>
<link wikidata="Q6059287" start="8998" end="9015" title="Inukshuk Wireless" label="Inukshuk Wireless"/>
<link wikidata="Q2894594" start="9096" end="9109" title="Bell Mobility" label="Bell Mobility"/>
<link wikidata="Q923069" start="9241" end="9253" title="Bell Fibe TV" label="Bell Fibe TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q177518" start="9456" end="9460" title="IPTV" label="IPTV"/>
<link wikidata="Q194274" start="9563" end="9569" title="backup" label="backup"/>
<link wikidata="Q6008790" start="9645" end="9652" title="inMusic" label="inMusic"/>
<link wikidata="Q43060" start="9704" end="9722" title="online music store" label="online music store"/>
<link wikidata="Q815694" start="9785" end="9796" title="Bell Canada" label="Bell Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q7887664" start="9798" end="9804" title="Cogeco" label="Cogeco"/>
<link wikidata="Q853467" start="9806" end="9820" title="Net Neutrality" label="Net Neutrality"/>
<link wikidata="Q7359286" start="9822" end="9837" title="Rogers Internet" label="Rogers Internet"/>
<link wikidata="Q7695271" start="9839" end="9847" title="TekSavvy" label="TekSavvy"/>
<link wikidata="Q27676387" start="9849" end="9893" title="List of internet service providers in Canada" label="List of internet service providers in Canada"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="252581" wikidata="Q7058323" url="?curid=252581" title="Northern Electric">
<text>Northern Electric was an electricity supply and distribution company serving north east England.

==History==
It had its origins as the North Eastern Electricity Board, formed as part of the nationalisation of the electricity industry by the Electricity Act 1947.

The assets of the board were transferred to Northern Electric plc in March 1990, and the company was privatised in December of the same year. At the end of 1996 the company was acquired by American corporation, CalEnergy, which formed a subsidiary, CE Electric to manage Northern Electric.

The company was split into supply and distribution arms under the Utilities Act 2000. In 2001, the supply business was disposed in an asset swap with npower, exchanging the North East consumer business for the distribution arm of Yorkshire Electricity.

The North East England distribution arm was retained by CE Electric, renamed Northern Electric Distribution Limited (NEDL) and merged with the newly acquired distribution arm of Yorkshire Electricity, which was renamed Yorkshire Electricity Distribution Ltd (YEDL) to form CE Electric UK. It is licensed as the distribution network operator for the North East England region by the Office of Gas and Electricity Markets.

==See also==
*Companies merged into North Eastern Electricity Board (NEEB)
*Meter Point Administration Number
*Public electricity supplier

==References==
==External links==
*CE ElectricUK</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7058323" start="0" end="17" title="Northern Electric" label="Northern Electric"/>
<link wikidata="Q21" start="88" end="95" title="England" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q18162081" start="136" end="167" title="North Eastern Electricity Board" label="North Eastern Electricity Board"/>
<link wikidata="Q5357782" start="242" end="262" title="Electricity Act 1947" label="Electricity Act 1947"/>
<link wikidata="Q16840677" start="476" end="485" title="MidAmerican Energy Holdings Company" label="CalEnergy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7058871" start="514" end="525" title="CE Electric UK" label="CE Electric"/>
<link wikidata="Q7902820" start="622" end="640" title="Utilities Act 2000" label="Utilities Act 2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q829558" start="706" end="712" title="RWE npower" label="npower"/>
<link wikidata="Q8055707" start="786" end="807" title="Yorkshire Electricity" label="Yorkshire Electricity"/>
<link wikidata="Q47983" start="814" end="832" title="North East England" label="North East England"/>
<link wikidata="Q8055707" start="988" end="1009" title="Yorkshire Electricity" label="Yorkshire Electricity"/>
<link wikidata="Q7058871" start="1083" end="1097" title="CE Electric UK" label="CE Electric UK"/>
<link wikidata="Q472093" start="1121" end="1150" title="distribution network operator" label="distribution network operator"/>
<link wikidata="Q47983" start="1159" end="1177" title="North East England" label="North East England"/>
<link wikidata="Q3349672" start="1192" end="1229" title="Office of Gas and Electricity Markets" label="Office of Gas and Electricity Markets"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1246" end="1306" title="List of pre-nationalisation UK electric power companies#Companies merged into North Eastern Electricity Board (NEEB)" label="Companies merged into North Eastern Electricity Board (NEEB)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6823505" start="1308" end="1341" title="Meter Point Administration Number" label="Meter Point Administration Number"/>
<link wikidata="Q7257732" start="1343" end="1370" title="Public electricity supplier" label="Public electricity supplier"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="252582" wikidata="Q738011" url="?curid=252582" title="Landscape ecology">
<text>Landscape ecology is the science of studying and improving relationships between ecological processes in the environment and particular ecosystems. This is done within a variety of landscape scales, development spatial patterns, and organizational levels of research and policy. Landscape ecology can be described as the science of &quot;landscape diversity&quot; as the synergetic result of biodiversity and geodiversity.

As a highly interdisciplinary field in systems science, landscape ecology integrates biophysical and analytical approaches with humanistic and holistic perspectives across the natural sciences and social sciences. Landscapes are spatially heterogeneous geographic areas characterized by diverse interacting patches or ecosystems, ranging from relatively natural terrestrial and aquatic systems such as forests, grasslands, and lakes to human-dominated environments including agricultural and urban settings.

The most salient characteristics of landscape ecology are its emphasis on the relationship among pattern, process and scales, and its focus on broad-scale ecological and environmental issues. These necessitate the coupling between biophysical and socioeconomic sciences. Key research topics in landscape ecology include ecological flows in landscape mosaics, land use and land cover change, scaling, relating landscape pattern analysis with ecological processes, and landscape conservation and sustainability. Landscape ecology also studies the role of human impacts on landscape diversity in the development and spreading of new human pathogens that could trigger epidemics.

== Terminology ==

The German term – thus &quot;landscape ecology&quot; – was coined by German geographer Carl Troll in 1939. He developed this terminology and many early concepts of landscape ecology as part of his early work, which consisted of applying aerial photograph interpretation to studies of interactions between environment and vegetation.

== Explanation ==
Heterogeneity is the measure of how parts of a landscape differ from one another. Landscape ecology looks at how this spatial structure affects organism abundance at the landscape level, as well as the behavior and functioning of the landscape as a whole. This includes studying the influence of pattern, or the internal order of a landscape, on process, or the continuous operation of functions of organisms. Landscape ecology also includes geomorphology as applied to the design and architecture of landscapes. Geomorphology is the study of how geological formations are responsible for the structure of a landscape.

==History==

=== Evolution of theory ===
One central landscape ecology theory originated from MacArthur &amp; Wilson&#x27;s &quot;The Theory of Island Biogeography&quot;. This work considered the biodiversity on islands as the result of competing forces of colonization from a mainland stock and stochastic extinction. The concepts of island biogeography were generalized from physical islands to abstract patches of habitat by Levins&#x27; metapopulation model (which can be applied e.g. to forest islands in the agricultural landscape). This generalization spurred the growth of landscape ecology by providing conservation biologists a new tool to assess how habitat fragmentation affects population viability. Recent growth of landscape ecology owes much to the development of geographic information systems (GIS) and the availability of large-extent habitat data (e.g. remotely sensed datasets).

=== Development as a discipline ===
Landscape ecology developed in Europe from historical planning on human-dominated landscapes. Concepts from general ecology theory were integrated in North America. While general ecology theory and its sub-disciplines focused on the study of more homogenous, discrete community units organized in a hierarchical structure (typically as ecosystems, populations, species, and communities), landscape ecology built upon heterogeneity in space and time. It frequently included human-caused landscape changes in theory and application of concepts.

By 1980, landscape ecology was a discrete, established discipline. It was marked by the organization of the International Association for Landscape Ecology (IALE) in 1982. Landmark book publications defined the scope and goals of the discipline, including Naveh and Lieberman and Forman and Godron. Forman wrote that although study of &quot;the ecology of spatial configuration at the human scale&quot; was barely a decade old, there was strong potential for theory development and application of the conceptual framework.

Today, theory and application of landscape ecology continues to develop through a need for innovative applications in a changing landscape and environment. Landscape ecology relies on advanced technologies such as remote sensing, GIS, and models. There has been associated development of powerful quantitative methods to examine the interactions of patterns and processes. An example would be determining the amount of carbon present in the soil based on landform over a landscape, derived from GIS maps, vegetation types, and rainfall data for a region. Remote sensing work has been used to extend landscape ecology to the field of predictive vegetation mapping, for instance by Janet Franklin.

=== Definitions/conceptions of landscape ecology ===
Nowadays, at least six different conceptions of landscape ecology can be identified: one group tending toward the more disciplinary concept of ecology (subdiscipline of biology; in conceptions 2, 3, and 4) and another group—characterized by the interdisciplinary study of relations between human societies and their environment—inclined toward the integrated view of geography (in conceptions 1, 5, and 6):
# &quot;Interdisciplinary analysis of subjectively defined landscape units&quot; (e.g. Neef School): Landscapes are defined in terms of uniformity in land use. Landscape ecology explores the landscape&#x27;s natural potential in terms of functional utility for human societies. To analyse this potential, it is necessary to draw on several natural sciences.
# &quot;Topological ecology at the landscape scale&quot; &#x27;Landscape&#x27; is defined as a heterogeneous land area composed of a cluster of interacting ecosystems (woods, meadows, marshes, villages, etc.) that is repeated in similar form throughout. It is explicitly stated that landscapes are areas at a kilometres wide &quot;human scale&quot; of perception, modification, etc. Landscape ecology describes and explains the landscapes&#x27; characteristic patterns of ecosystems and investigates the flux of energy, mineral nutrients, and species among their component ecosystems, providing important knowledge for addressing land-use issues.
# &quot;Organism-centered, multi-scale topological ecology&quot; (e.g. John A. Wiens): Explicitly rejecting views expounded by Troll, Zonneveld, Naveh, Forman &amp; Godron, etc., landscape and landscape ecology are defined independently of human perceptions, interests, and modifications of nature. &#x27;Landscape&#x27; is defined – regardless of scale – as the &#x27;template&#x27; on which spatial patterns influence ecological processes. Not humans, but rather the respective species being studied is the point of reference for what constitutes a landscape.
# &quot;Topological ecology at the landscape level of biological organisation&quot; (e.g. Urban et al.): On the basis of ecological hierarchy theory, it is presupposed that nature is working at multiple scales and has different levels of organisation which are part of a rate-structured, nested hierarchy. Specifically, it is claimed that, above the ecosystem level, a landscape level exists which is generated and identifiable by high interaction intensity between ecosystems, a specific interaction frequency and, typically, a corresponding spatial scale. Landscape ecology is defined as ecology that focuses on the influence exerted by spatial and temporal patterns on the organisation of, and interaction among, functionally integrated multispecies ecosystems.
# &quot;Analysis of social-ecological systems using the natural and social sciences and humanities&quot; (e.g. Leser; Naveh; Zonneveld): Landscape ecology is defined as an interdisciplinary super-science that explores the relationship between human societies and their specific environment, making use of not only various natural sciences, but also social sciences and humanities. This conception is grounded in the assumption that social systems are linked to their specific ambient ecological system in such a way that both systems together form a co-evolutionary, self-organising unity called &#x27;landscape&#x27;. Societies&#x27; cultural, social and economic dimensions are regarded as an integral part of the global ecological hierarchy, and landscapes are claimed to be the manifest systems of the &#x27;total human ecosystem&#x27; (Naveh) which encompasses both the physical (&#x27;geospheric&#x27;) and mental (&#x27;noospheric&#x27;) spheres.
# &quot;Ecology guided by cultural meanings of lifeworldly landscapes&quot; (frequently pursued in practice but not defined, but see, e.g., Hard; Trepl): Landscape ecology is defined as ecology that is guided by an external aim, namely, to maintain and develop lifeworldly landscapes. It provides the ecological knowledge necessary to achieve these goals. It investigates how to sustain and develop those populations and ecosystems which (i) are the material &#x27;vehicles&#x27; of lifeworldly, aesthetic and symbolic landscapes and, at the same time, (ii) meet societies&#x27; functional requirements, including provisioning, regulating, and supporting ecosystem services. Thus landscape ecology is concerned mainly with the populations and ecosystems which have resulted from traditional, regionally specific forms of land use.

== Relationship to ecological theory ==
Some research programmes of landscape ecology theory, namely those standing in the European tradition, may be slightly outside of the &quot;classical and preferred domain of scientific disciplines&quot; because of the large, heterogeneous areas of study. However, general ecology theory is central to landscape ecology theory in many aspects. Landscape ecology consists of four main principles: the development and dynamics of spatial heterogeneity, interactions and exchanges across heterogeneous landscapes, influences of spatial heterogeneity on biotic and abiotic processes, and the management of spatial heterogeneity. The main difference from traditional ecological studies, which frequently assume that systems are spatially homogenous, is the consideration of spatial patterns.

== Important terms ==
Landscape ecology not only created new terms, but also incorporated existing ecological terms in new ways. Many of the terms used in landscape ecology are as interconnected and interrelated as the discipline itself.

=== Landscape ===
Certainly, &#x27;landscape&#x27; is a central concept in landscape ecology. It is, however, defined in quite different ways. For example: Carl Troll conceives of landscape not as a mental construct but as an objectively given &#x27;organic entity&#x27;, a &quot;harmonic individuum of space&quot;. 
Ernst Neef defines landscapes as sections within the uninterrupted earth-wide interconnection of geofactors which are defined as such on the basis of their uniformity in terms of a specific land use, and are thus defined in an anthropocentric and relativistic way.
According to Richard Forman and Michel Godron, a landscape is a heterogeneous land area composed of a cluster of interacting ecosystems that is repeated in similar form throughout, whereby they list woods, meadows, marshes and villages as examples of a landscape&#x27;s ecosystems, and state that a landscape is an area at least a few kilometres wide. 
John A. Wiens opposes the traditional view expounded by Carl Troll, Isaak S. Zonneveld, Zev Naveh, Richard T. T. Forman/Michel Godron and others that landscapes are arenas in which humans interact with their environments on a kilometre-wide scale; instead, he defines &#x27;landscape&#x27;—regardless of scale—as &quot;the template on which spatial patterns influence ecological processes&quot;. Some define &#x27;landscape&#x27; as an area containing two or more ecosystems in close proximity.

=== Scale and heterogeneity (incorporating composition, structure, and function) ===
A main concept in landscape ecology is &quot;scale&quot;. Scale represents the real world as translated onto a map, relating distance on a map image and the corresponding distance on earth. Scale is also the spatial or temporal measure of an object or a process, or amount of spatial resolution. Components of scale include composition, structure, and function, which are all important ecological concepts. Applied to landscape ecology, &quot;composition&quot; refers to the number of patch types (see below) represented on a landscape and their relative abundance. For example, the amount of forest or wetland, the length of forest edge, or the density of roads can be aspects of landscape composition. &quot;Structure&quot; is determined by the composition, the configuration, and the proportion of different patches across the landscape, while &quot;function&quot; refers to how each element in the landscape interacts based on its life cycle events. &quot;Pattern&quot; is the term for the contents and internal order of a heterogeneous area of land.

A landscape with structure and pattern implies that it has spatial &quot;heterogeneity&quot;, or the uneven distribution of objects across the landscape. Heterogeneity is a key element of landscape ecology that separates this discipline from other branches of ecology. Landscape heterogeneity is able to quantify with agent-based methods as well.

===Patch and mosaic===
&quot;Patch&quot;, a term fundamental to landscape ecology, is defined as a relatively homogeneous area that differs from its surroundings. Patches are the basic unit of the landscape that change and fluctuate, a process called &quot;patch dynamics&quot;. Patches have a definite shape and spatial configuration, and can be described compositionally by internal variables such as number of trees, number of tree species, height of trees, or other similar measurements.

&quot;Matrix&quot; is the &quot;background ecological system&quot; of a landscape with a high degree of connectivity. &quot;Connectivity&quot; is the measure of how connected or spatially continuous a corridor, network, or matrix is. For example, a forested landscape (matrix) with fewer gaps in forest cover (open patches) will have higher connectivity. &quot;Corridors&quot; have important functions as strips of a particular type of landscape differing from adjacent land on both sides. A &quot;network&quot; is an interconnected system of corridors while &quot;mosaic&quot; describes the pattern of patches, corridors, and matrix that form a landscape in its entirety.

=== Boundary and edge ===
Landscape patches have a boundary between them which can be defined or fuzzy. The zone composed of the edges of adjacent ecosystems is the &quot;boundary&quot;. &quot;Edge&quot; means the portion of an ecosystem near its perimeter, where influences of the adjacent patches can cause an environmental difference between the interior of the patch and its edge. This edge effect includes a distinctive species composition or abundance. For example, when a landscape is a mosaic of perceptibly different types, such as a forest adjacent to a grassland, the edge is the location where the two types adjoin. In a continuous landscape, such as a forest giving way to open woodland, the exact edge location is fuzzy and is sometimes determined by a local gradient exceeding a threshold, such as the point where the tree cover falls below thirty-five percent.

=== Ecotones, ecoclines, and ecotopes ===
A type of boundary is the &quot;ecotone&quot;, or the transitional zone between two communities. Ecotones can arise naturally, such as a lakeshore, or can be human-created, such as a cleared agricultural field from a forest. The ecotonal community retains characteristics of each bordering community and often contains species not found in the adjacent communities. Classic examples of ecotones include fencerows, forest to marshlands transitions, forest to grassland transitions, or land-water interfaces such as riparian zones in forests. Characteristics of ecotones include vegetational sharpness, physiognomic change, occurrence of a spatial community mosaic, many exotic species, ecotonal species, spatial mass effect, and species richness higher or lower than either side of the ecotone.

An &quot;&quot; is another type of landscape boundary, but it is a gradual and continuous change in environmental conditions of an ecosystem or community. Ecoclines help explain the distribution and diversity of organisms within a landscape because certain organisms survive better under certain conditions, which change along the ecocline. They contain heterogeneous communities which are considered more environmentally stable than those of ecotones. An &quot;ecotope&quot; is a spatial term representing the smallest ecologically distinct unit in mapping and classification of landscapes. Relatively homogeneous, they are spatially explicit landscape units used to stratify landscapes into ecologically distinct features. They are useful for the measurement and mapping of landscape structure, function, and change over time, and to examine the effects of disturbance and fragmentation.

=== Disturbance and fragmentation ===
&quot;Disturbance&quot; is an event that significantly alters the pattern of variation in the structure or function of a system. &quot;Fragmentation&quot; is the breaking up of a habitat, ecosystem, or land-use type into smaller parcels. Disturbance is generally considered a natural process. Fragmentation causes land transformation, an important process in landscapes as development occurs.

An important consequence of repeated, random clearing (whether by natural disturbance or human activity) is that contiguous cover can break down into isolated patches. This happens when the area cleared exceeds a critical level, which means that landscapes exhibit two phases: connected and disconnected.

== Theory ==
Landscape ecology theory stresses the role of human impacts on landscape structures and functions. It also proposes ways for restoring degraded landscapes. Landscape ecology explicitly includes humans as entities that cause functional changes on the landscape. Landscape ecology theory includes the landscape stability principle, which emphasizes the importance of landscape structural heterogeneity in developing resistance to disturbances, recovery from disturbances, and promoting total system stability. This principle is a major contribution to general ecological theories which highlight the importance of relationships among the various components of the landscape.

Integrity of landscape components helps maintain resistance to external threats, including development and land transformation by human activity. Analysis of land use change has included a strongly geographical approach which has led to the acceptance of the idea of multifunctional properties of landscapes. There are still calls for a more unified theory of landscape ecology due to differences in professional opinion among ecologists and its interdisciplinary approach (Bastian 2001).

An important related theory is hierarchy theory, which refers to how systems of discrete functional elements operate when linked at two or more scales. For example, a forested landscape might be hierarchically composed of drainage basins, which in turn are composed of local ecosystems, which are in turn composed of individual trees and gaps. Recent theoretical developments in landscape ecology have emphasized the relationship between pattern and process, as well as the effect that changes in spatial scale has on the potential to extrapolate information across scales. Several studies suggest that the landscape has critical thresholds at which ecological processes will show dramatic changes, such as the complete transformation of a landscape by an invasive species due to small changes in temperature characteristics which favor the invasive&#x27;s habitat requirements.

== Application ==

===Research directions===
Developments in landscape ecology illustrate the important relationships between spatial patterns and ecological processes. These developments incorporate quantitative methods that link spatial patterns and ecological processes at broad spatial and temporal scales. This linkage of time, space, and environmental change can assist managers in applying plans to solve environmental problems. The increased attention in recent years on spatial dynamics has highlighted the need for new quantitative methods that can analyze patterns, determine the importance of spatially explicit processes, and develop reliable models. Multivariate analysis techniques are frequently used to examine landscape level vegetation patterns. Studies use statistical techniques, such as cluster analysis, canonical correspondence analysis (CCA), or detrended correspondence analysis (DCA), for classifying vegetation. Gradient analysis is another way to determine the vegetation structure across a landscape or to help delineate critical wetland habitat for conservation or mitigation purposes (Choesin and Boerner 2002).

Climate change is another major component in structuring current research in landscape ecology. Ecotones, as a basic unit in landscape studies, may have significance for management under climate change scenarios, since change effects are likely to be seen at ecotones first because of the unstable nature of a fringe habitat. Research in northern regions has examined landscape ecological processes, such as the accumulation of snow, melting, freeze-thaw action, percolation, soil moisture variation, and temperature regimes through long-term measurements in Norway. The study analyzes gradients across space and time between ecosystems of the central high mountains to determine relationships between distribution patterns of animals in their environment. Looking at where animals live, and how vegetation shifts over time, may provide insight into changes in snow and ice over long periods of time across the landscape as a whole.

Other landscape-scale studies maintain that human impact is likely the main determinant of landscape pattern over much of the globe. Landscapes may become substitutes for biodiversity measures because plant and animal composition differs between samples taken from sites within different landscape categories. Taxa, or different species, can &quot;leak&quot; from one habitat into another, which has implications for landscape ecology. As human land use practices expand and continue to increase the proportion of edges in landscapes, the effects of this leakage across edges on assemblage integrity may become more significant in conservation. This is because taxa may be conserved across landscape levels, if not at local levels.

=== Land change modeling ===
Land change modeling is an application of landscape ecology designed to predict future changes in land use. Land change models are used in urban planning, geography, GIS, and other disciplines to gain a clear understanding of the course of a landscape. In recent years, much of the Earth&#x27;s land cover has changed rapidly, whether from deforestation or the expansion of urban areas.

===Relationship to other disciplines===
Landscape ecology has been incorporated into a variety of ecological subdisciplines. For example, it is closely linked to land change science, the interdisciplinary of land use and land cover change and their effects on surrounding ecology. Another recent development has been the more explicit consideration of spatial concepts and principles applied to the study of lakes, streams, and wetlands in the field of landscape limnology. Seascape ecology is a marine and coastal application of landscape ecology. In addition, landscape ecology has important links to application-oriented disciplines such as agriculture and forestry. In agriculture, landscape ecology has introduced new options for the management of environmental threats brought about by the intensification of agricultural practices. Agriculture has always been a strong human impact on ecosystems.

In forestry, from structuring stands for fuelwood and timber to ordering stands across landscapes to enhance aesthetics, consumer needs have affected conservation and use of forested landscapes. Landscape forestry provides methods, concepts, and analytic procedures for landscape forestry. Landscape ecology has been cited as a contributor to the development of fisheries biology as a distinct biological science discipline, and is frequently incorporated in study design for wetland delineation in hydrology. It has helped shape integrated landscape management. Lastly, landscape ecology has been very influential for progressing sustainability science and sustainable development planning. For example, a recent study assessed sustainable urbanization across Europe using evaluation indices, country-landscapes, and landscape ecology tools and methods.

Landscape ecology has also been combined with population genetics to form the field of landscape genetics, which addresses how landscape features influence the population structure and gene flow of plant and animal populations across space and time and on how the quality of intervening landscape, known as &quot;matrix&quot;, influences spatial variation. After the term was coined in 2003, the field of landscape genetics had expanded to over 655 studies by 2010, and continues to grow today. As genetic data has become more readily accessible, it is increasingly being used by ecologists to answer novel evolutionary and ecological questions, many with regard to how landscapes effect evolutionary processes, especially in human-modified landscapes, which are experiencing biodiversity loss.

== See also ==
* Agroecology 
* Biogeography
* Conservation communities
* Concepts and Techniques in Modern Geography
* Ecology
* Ecotope
* European Landscape Convention
* Historical ecology
* Integrated landscape management
* Land change modeling
* Landscape epidemiology
* Landscape limnology
* Landscape planning
* Landscape connectivity
* Patch dynamics
* Total human ecosystem
* Sustainable landscaping
* Landscape architecture
* Land development
* Tobler&#x27;s first law of geography
* Tobler&#x27;s second law of geography
* Artificialization

== References ==
== External links ==
* Computer sumulation &quot;Substrate&quot; launch applet creates fractal iterations that resemble urban streetscape. Algorithm written 2004 by Jared Tarbell
* International Association for Landscape Ecology 
* Napolisoundscape Urban Space Research</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q738011" start="0" end="17" title="Landscape ecology" label="Landscape ecology"/>
<link wikidata="Q107425" start="181" end="190" title="landscape" label="landscape"/>
<link wikidata="Q47041" start="392" end="404" title="biodiversity" label="biodiversity"/>
<link wikidata="Q4351849" start="409" end="421" title="geodiversity" label="geodiversity"/>
<link wikidata="Q2167061" start="463" end="478" title="systems science" label="systems science"/>
<link wikidata="Q7100" start="509" end="520" title="biophysical" label="biophysical"/>
<link wikidata="Q4751131" start="525" end="535" title="Analytic induction" label="analytical"/>
<link wikidata="Q46158" start="552" end="562" title="humanistic" label="humanistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q192891" start="567" end="575" title="holistic" label="holistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7991" start="600" end="616" title="natural sciences" label="natural sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q34749" start="621" end="636" title="social sciences" label="social sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q24833355" start="1051" end="1057" title="Scale (geography)" label="scales"/>
<link wikidata="Q8134" start="1180" end="1193" title="Socioeconomics" label="socioeconomic"/>
<link wikidata="Q219416" start="1427" end="1441" title="sustainability" label="sustainability"/>
<link wikidata="Q44512" start="1598" end="1606" title="epidemic" label="epidemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q901402" start="1705" end="1715" title="geographer" label="geographer"/>
<link wikidata="Q65302" start="1716" end="1726" title="Carl Troll" label="Carl Troll"/>
<link wikidata="Q52109" start="2494" end="2507" title="Geomorphology" label="Geomorphology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1339894" start="2695" end="2704" title="Robert MacArthur" label="MacArthur"/>
<link wikidata="Q211029" start="2711" end="2724" title="Edward Osborne Wilson" label="Wilson&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q7768659" start="2731" end="2764" title="The Theory of Island Biogeography" label="The Theory of Island Biogeography"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071239" start="2897" end="2907" title="stochastic" label="stochastic"/>
<link wikidata="Q123509" start="2908" end="2918" title="extinction" label="extinction"/>
<link wikidata="Q1664460" start="2936" end="2955" title="island biogeography" label="island biogeography"/>
<link wikidata="Q52105" start="3018" end="3025" title="habitat (ecology)" label="habitat"/>
<link wikidata="Q954495" start="3042" end="3056" title="metapopulation" label="metapopulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q641498" start="3213" end="3236" title="conservation biology" label="conservation biologists"/>
<link wikidata="Q913302" start="3262" end="3283" title="habitat fragmentation" label="habitat fragmentation"/>
<link wikidata="Q483130" start="3381" end="3410" title="geographic information system" label="geographic information system"/>
<link wikidata="Q199687" start="3474" end="3489" title="remote sensing" label="remotely sensed"/>
<link wikidata="Q46" start="3569" end="3575" title="Europe" label="Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q49" start="3688" end="3701" title="North America" label="North America"/>
<link wikidata="Q37813" start="3874" end="3883" title="ecosystem" label="ecosystem"/>
<link wikidata="Q2625603" start="3886" end="3896" title="population" label="population"/>
<link wikidata="Q7432" start="3899" end="3906" title="species" label="species"/>
<link wikidata="Q925667" start="4845" end="4851" title="computer simulation" label="models"/>
<link wikidata="Q167751" start="5025" end="5031" title="carbon cycle" label="carbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q36133" start="5047" end="5051" title="soil" label="soil"/>
<link wikidata="Q187997" start="5111" end="5121" title="vegetation" label="vegetation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7925" start="5133" end="5141" title="rainfall" label="rainfall"/>
<link wikidata="Q57147860" start="5286" end="5300" title="Janet Franklin" label="Janet Franklin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7150" start="5499" end="5506" title="ecology" label="ecology"/>
<link wikidata="Q420" start="5525" end="5532" title="biology" label="biology"/>
<link wikidata="Q849359" start="5601" end="5618" title="interdisciplinary" label="interdisciplinary"/>
<link wikidata="Q2634092" start="5704" end="5714" title="Integrated geography" label="integrated"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071" start="5723" end="5732" title="geography" label="geography"/>
<link wikidata="Q100611" start="5850" end="5854" title="Ernst Neef" label="Neef"/>
<link wikidata="Q6263955" start="6839" end="6852" title="John A. Wiens" label="John A. Wiens"/>
<link wikidata="Q93340282" start="8907" end="8928" title="total human ecosystem" label="total human ecosystem"/>
<link wikidata="Q1502991" start="9310" end="9319" title="lifeworld" label="lifeworld"/>
<link wikidata="Q107425" start="9322" end="9332" title="landscapes" label="landscapes"/>
<link wikidata="Q295865" start="9704" end="9722" title="ecosystem services" label="ecosystem services"/>
<link wikidata="Q7782365" start="10193" end="10207" title="ecology theory" label="ecology theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q461335" start="10481" end="10488" title="abiotic" label="abiotic"/>
<link wikidata="Q22908968" start="10689" end="10704" title="spatial pattern" label="spatial pattern"/>
<link wikidata="Q65302" start="11103" end="11113" title="Carl Troll" label="Carl Troll"/>
<link wikidata="Q100611" start="11264" end="11274" title="Ernst Neef" label="Ernst Neef"/>
<link wikidata="Q191624" start="11491" end="11506" title="anthropocentrism" label="anthropocentric"/>
<link wikidata="Q17305927" start="11542" end="11556" title="Richard Forman" label="Richard Forman"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11561" end="11574" title="Michel Godron" label="Michel Godron"/>
<link wikidata="Q6263955" start="11882" end="11895" title="John A. Wiens" label="John A. Wiens"/>
<link wikidata="Q65302" start="11938" end="11948" title="Carl Troll" label="Carl Troll"/>
<link wikidata="Q37813" start="12346" end="12355" title="ecosystem" label="ecosystem"/>
<link wikidata="Q24833355" start="12508" end="12513" title="scale (geography)" label="scale"/>
<link wikidata="Q4421" start="13056" end="13062" title="forest" label="forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q170321" start="13066" end="13073" title="wetland" label="wetland"/>
<link wikidata="Q34442" start="13120" end="13124" title="road" label="road"/>
<link wikidata="Q2993449" start="14464" end="14476" title="Landscape connectivity" label="connectivity"/>
<link wikidata="Q3738459" start="15459" end="15478" title="species composition" label="species composition"/>
<link wikidata="Q1006733" start="15598" end="15607" title="grassland" label="grassland"/>
<link wikidata="Q93352" start="16091" end="16100" title="Shore" label="lakeshore"/>
<link wikidata="Q188869" start="16145" end="16163" title="agricultural field" label="agricultural field"/>
<link wikidata="Q4693960" start="16357" end="16365" title="fencerow" label="fencerow"/>
<link wikidata="Q13360049" start="16468" end="16481" title="riparian zone" label="riparian zone"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16531" end="16553" title="vegetational sharpness" label="vegetational sharpness"/>
<link wikidata="Q841933" start="16555" end="16567" title="physiognomic" label="physiognomic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065449" start="16623" end="16637" title="exotic species" label="exotic species"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16639" end="16655" title="ecotonal species" label="ecotonal species"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16657" end="16676" title="spatial mass effect" label="spatial mass effect"/>
<link wikidata="Q47041" start="16682" end="16698" title="Biodiversity" label="species richness"/>
<link wikidata="Q1771018" start="18833" end="18859" title="regeneration (ecology)" label="recovery from disturbances"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165944" start="19223" end="19238" title="land use change" label="land use change"/>
<link wikidata="Q166620" start="19777" end="19791" title="drainage basin" label="drainage basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q183368" start="20311" end="20327" title="invasive species" label="invasive species"/>
<link wikidata="Q52105" start="20412" end="20419" title="Habitat (ecology)" label="habitat"/>
<link wikidata="Q43619" start="20847" end="20860" title="Natural environment" label="environmental"/>
<link wikidata="Q1952580" start="21099" end="21120" title="Multivariate analysis" label="Multivariate analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q622825" start="21244" end="21260" title="cluster analysis" label="cluster analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q16851643" start="21262" end="21295" title="canonical correspondence analysis" label="canonical correspondence analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5265809" start="21306" end="21339" title="detrended correspondence analysis" label="detrended correspondence analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2029312" start="21375" end="21392" title="Gradient analysis" label="Gradient analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q125928" start="21580" end="21594" title="Climate change" label="Climate change"/>
<link wikidata="Q5133509" start="21767" end="21791" title="climate change scenarios" label="climate change scenarios"/>
<link wikidata="Q47041" start="22685" end="22697" title="biodiversity" label="biodiversity"/>
<link wikidata="Q30693224" start="23276" end="23296" title="Land change modeling" label="Land change modeling"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165944" start="23374" end="23382" title="land use" label="land use"/>
<link wikidata="Q69883" start="23415" end="23429" title="urban planning" label="urban planning"/>
<link wikidata="Q3537694" start="23442" end="23445" title="Geographic information science" label="GIS"/>
<link wikidata="Q169940" start="23616" end="23629" title="deforestation" label="deforestation"/>
<link wikidata="Q161078" start="23637" end="23661" title="Urbanization" label="expansion of urban areas"/>
<link wikidata="Q106696937" start="23826" end="23845" title="land change science" label="land change science"/>
<link wikidata="Q6485103" start="24117" end="24136" title="landscape limnology" label="landscape limnology"/>
<link wikidata="Q48791947" start="24138" end="24154" title="Seascape ecology" label="Seascape ecology"/>
<link wikidata="Q11451" start="24308" end="24319" title="agriculture" label="agriculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q38112" start="24324" end="24332" title="forestry" label="forestry"/>
<link wikidata="Q180538" start="24931" end="24940" title="fishery" label="fisheries"/>
<link wikidata="Q42250" start="25068" end="25077" title="hydrology" label="hydrology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1803794" start="25099" end="25130" title="integrated landscape management" label="integrated landscape management"/>
<link wikidata="Q31151" start="25471" end="25490" title="population genetics" label="population genetics"/>
<link wikidata="Q18466271" start="26201" end="26218" title="biodiversity loss" label="biodiversity loss"/>
<link wikidata="Q396338" start="26238" end="26249" title="Agroecology" label="Agroecology"/>
<link wikidata="Q52106" start="26253" end="26265" title="Biogeography" label="Biogeography"/>
<link wikidata="Q5162955" start="26268" end="26292" title="Conservation communities" label="Conservation communities"/>
<link wikidata="Q113642115" start="26295" end="26338" title="Concepts and Techniques in Modern Geography" label="Concepts and Techniques in Modern Geography"/>
<link wikidata="Q7150" start="26341" end="26348" title="Ecology" label="Ecology"/>
<link wikidata="Q296185" start="26351" end="26358" title="Ecotope" label="Ecotope"/>
<link wikidata="Q1378142" start="26361" end="26390" title="European Landscape Convention" label="European Landscape Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053639" start="26393" end="26411" title="Historical ecology" label="Historical ecology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1803794" start="26414" end="26445" title="Integrated landscape management" label="Integrated landscape management"/>
<link wikidata="Q30693224" start="26448" end="26468" title="Land change modeling" label="Land change modeling"/>
<link wikidata="Q6485094" start="26471" end="26493" title="Landscape epidemiology" label="Landscape epidemiology"/>
<link wikidata="Q6485103" start="26496" end="26515" title="Landscape limnology" label="Landscape limnology"/>
<link wikidata="Q246107" start="26518" end="26536" title="Landscape planning" label="Landscape planning"/>
<link wikidata="Q2993449" start="26539" end="26561" title="Landscape connectivity" label="Landscape connectivity"/>
<link wikidata="Q7144330" start="26564" end="26578" title="Patch dynamics" label="Patch dynamics"/>
<link wikidata="Q93340282" start="26581" end="26602" title="Total human ecosystem" label="Total human ecosystem"/>
<link wikidata="Q7649671" start="26605" end="26628" title="Sustainable landscaping" label="Sustainable landscaping"/>
<link wikidata="Q47844" start="26631" end="26653" title="Landscape architecture" label="Landscape architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q6484056" start="26656" end="26672" title="Land development" label="Land development"/>
<link wikidata="Q3436744" start="26675" end="26711" title="Tobler&amp;#x27;s first law of geography" label="Tobler&amp;#x27;s first law of geography"/>
<link wikidata="Q113624403" start="26714" end="26751" title="Tobler&amp;#x27;s second law of geography" label="Tobler&amp;#x27;s second law of geography"/>
<link wikidata="Q2865772" start="26754" end="26771" title="Artificialization" label="Artificialization"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="252586" wikidata="Q301011" url="?curid=252586" title="Modus operandi">
<text>A  (often shortened to M.O. or MO) is an individual&#x27;s habits of working, particularly in the context of business or criminal investigations, but also generally. It is a Latin phrase, approximately translated as .

==Term==
The term is often used in police work when discussing crime and addressing the methods employed by criminals. It is also used in criminal profiling, where it can help in finding clues to the offender&#x27;s psychology. It largely consists of examining the actions used by the individuals to execute the crime, prevent its detection and facilitate escape. A suspect&#x27;s &quot;modus operandi&quot; can assist in their identification, apprehension, or repression, and can also be used to determine links between crimes.

In business, &quot;modus operandi&quot; is used to describe a firm&#x27;s preferred means of executing business and interacting with other firms.

== Plural ==
The plural is . The word is a gerund in the genitive case, &quot;of operating&quot;; gerunds can never be pluralised in Latin, as opposed to gerundives. When a noun with an attribute in the genitive is pluralised, only the head noun normally changes, just as in English with &quot;of&quot;: &quot;a fact of life, two facts of life&quot; (unlike, for instance, in French).

==See also==
* 
* 
* 

==References==
==Further reading==

* Levinson, D. &quot;Encyclopedia of Crime and Punishment&quot; (SAGE, 2002). .
* Carlo, P. &quot;The Night Stalker: The Life and Crimes of Richard Ramirez&quot; (Pinnacle Books 1996). .
== External links ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q301011" start="2" end="2" title="Modus operandi" label=""/>
<link wikidata="Q301011" start="23" end="27" title="Modus operandi" label="M.O."/>
<link wikidata="Q301011" start="31" end="33" title="Modus operandi" label="MO"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136816" start="59" end="65" title="habituation" label="habits"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="174" end="179" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q161733" start="282" end="287" title="criminology" label="crime"/>
<link wikidata="Q83267" start="327" end="336" title="criminals" label="criminals"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191309" start="357" end="375" title="offender profiling" label="criminal profiling"/>
<link wikidata="Q9418" start="435" end="445" title="psychology" label="psychology"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="939" end="945" title="Latin conjugation#Gerund" label="gerund"/>
<link wikidata="Q146233" start="953" end="966" title="genitive case" label="genitive case"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1050" end="1060" title="Latin conjugation#Gerundive" label="gerundives"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="1272" end="1278" title="French language" label="French"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="252589" wikidata="Q5188696" url="?curid=252589" title="Crossings (game)">
<text>Crossings is a two-player abstract strategy board game invented by Robert Abbott. The rules were published in Sid Sackson&#x27;s &quot;A Gamut of Games&quot;. Crossings was the precursor to Epaminondas, which uses a larger board and expanded rules.

==Gameplay==

===Equipment===
* 1 8x8 gameboard
* 32 stones (16 of each color)

===Setup===

This is the starting position of Crossings.

===Object===
* Cross one stone to the opponent&#x27;s end of the gameboard.

===Turns===
* Play alternates with each player making one movement on a turn.
* Red takes the first turn.

===Movement===
A &quot;group&quot; is a series of one or more same-colored stones adjacent to one another in a line (diagonal, horizontal, or vertical). A stone may belong to one or more groups.

* A player may move a single stone, an entire group, or a subgroup.
* A group consisting of a single stone may move one space diagonally or orthogonally into an empty square.
* A group must move along the line which defines it. It may move a number of spaces equal to the number of pieces in that group.
* When part of a group is moved (a subgroup), it must move along the line which defines it. It may move a number of spaces equal to the number of pieces in the subgroup.
* When a subgroup is moved it must involve one of the end stones.
* Pieces may not move onto an occupied square.

===Capturing an enemy stone===
* If the first stone in a moving group encounters a single enemy stone, the group&#x27;s movement stops there, and the enemy stone is captured.
* If the first stone in a moving group encounters an end stone of an opponent&#x27;s group, it can capture that stone if the opponent&#x27;s group is smaller.
* If it cannot capture the end stone because the opponent&#x27;s group is the same size or larger, it is not allowed to move on to that square.

===End of the game===
* A player possibly wins the game if they get a stone on the home row, or row furthest from their side. If the opponent cannot get a stone of their own onto the first player&#x27;s home row in the next move, the first player wins. Otherwise, those stones are &quot;locked&quot;; they cannot be moved or captured. The next attempt at crossing, as this is called, will determine the winner (unless it, too, is immediately followed by a counter-crossing, and so on.)
* The game is a draw if no player can complete the objective. Draws are rare.

==References==
*</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5188696" start="0" end="9" title="Crossings (game)" label="Crossings"/>
<link wikidata="Q573573" start="26" end="43" title="abstract strategy" label="abstract strategy"/>
<link wikidata="Q131436" start="44" end="54" title="board game" label="board game"/>
<link wikidata="Q1395496" start="67" end="80" title="Robert Abbott (game designer)" label="Robert Abbott"/>
<link wikidata="Q323323" start="110" end="121" title="Sid Sackson" label="Sid Sackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2904728" start="135" end="151" title="A Gamut of Games" label="A Gamut of Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q1060669" start="190" end="201" title="Epaminondas (game)" label="Epaminondas"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="252593" wikidata="Q5153650" url="?curid=252593" title="Commoner (disambiguation)">
<text>A [[commoner]] is a person who is not a member of the nobility or priesthood.

Commoner(s) may also refer to:
==Status or membership==
* Commoner (academia), a term used at some universities for a student not receiving a scholarship or exhibition
* Commoner, a person who is not a member of the British nobility
* Commoner, a person who shares rights over common land
* Commoner, a member of the Court of Common Council of the City of London Corporation
* Commoner, one of the estates of the realm
* Commoner, a member of the House of Commons of the United Kingdom

==People with the name==
*Barry Commoner (1917–2012), American biologist and politician

==Arts, entertainment, and media==
* Commoner (&quot;Dungeons &amp; Dragons&quot;), one of the base non-player character categories
*&quot;The Commoner&quot;, a newspaper published in Nebraska from 1901 to 1923, owned and published by William Jennings Bryan

==See also==
*Common (disambiguation)
*Commons (disambiguation)
*Common man (disambiguation)
*Everyman (disambiguation)
*Morganatic marriage
*The Great Commoner (disambiguation), a nickname applied to various people
*The Masses (disambiguation)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5153650" start="2" end="14" title="Commoner (disambiguation)" label="[[commoner]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q5153650" start="79" end="90" title="Commoner (disambiguation)" label="Commoner(s)"/>
<link wikidata="Q15999798" start="137" end="156" title="Commoner (academia)" label="Commoner (academia)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3769470" start="295" end="311" title="British nobility" label="British nobility"/>
<link wikidata="Q2259176" start="356" end="367" title="common land" label="common land"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="396" end="419" title="City of London Corporation#Court of Common Council" label="Court of Common Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q657326" start="477" end="497" title="estates of the realm" label="estates of the realm"/>
<link wikidata="Q11005" start="526" end="564" title="House of Commons of the United Kingdom" label="House of Commons of the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q2306796" start="592" end="606" title="Barry Commoner" label="Barry Commoner"/>
<link wikidata="Q2259998" start="692" end="737" title="Commoner (Dungeons &amp;amp; Dragons)" label="Commoner (&amp;quot;Dungeons &amp;amp; Dragons&amp;quot;)"/>
<link wikidata="Q28126797" start="794" end="806" title="The Commoner" label="The Commoner"/>
<link wikidata="Q1208568" start="928" end="951" title="Common (disambiguation)" label="Common (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1116305" start="953" end="977" title="Commons (disambiguation)" label="Commons (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5153566" start="979" end="1006" title="Common man (disambiguation)" label="Common man (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3735540" start="1008" end="1033" title="Everyman (disambiguation)" label="Everyman (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q210761" start="1035" end="1054" title="Morganatic marriage" label="Morganatic marriage"/>
<link wikidata="Q7737691" start="1056" end="1091" title="The Great Commoner (disambiguation)" label="The Great Commoner (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q16884551" start="1131" end="1158" title="The Masses (disambiguation)" label="The Masses (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="252594" wikidata="Q405415" url="?curid=252594" title="Royalty">
<text>Royalty may refer to:

* the mystique/prestige bestowed upon monarchs
** one or more monarchs, such as kings, queens, emperors, empresses, princes, princesses, etc.
*** royal family, the immediate family of a king or queen-regnant, and sometimes his or her extended family
* royalty payment for use of such things as intellectual property, music, or natural resources
==Music==
* The Royalty (band), a 2005–2013 American rock band
* Royalty Records, a Canadian record label

===Albums===
* &quot;Royalty&quot; (Chris Brown album), 2015
* &quot;Royalty&quot; (EP), by EarthGang, 2018
* &quot;Royalty&quot; (mixtape), by Childish Gambino (Donald Glover), 2012
* &quot;The Royalty&quot; (album), by the Royal Royal, 2012
* &quot;The Royalty: La Realeza&quot;, by R.K.M &amp; Ken-Y, 2008

===Songs===
* &quot;Royalty&quot; (Down with Webster song), 2012
* &quot;Royalty&quot; (XXXTentacion song), 2019
* &quot;Royalty&quot;, by Conor Maynard, 2015
* &quot;Royalty&quot;, by Nas from &quot;The Lost Tapes 2&quot;, 2019

==Theatres==
* Royalty Theatre, a demolished theatre in Soho, London, England
* Royalty Theatre, Glasgow, a demolished theatre in Scotland
* Peacock Theatre, previously the Royalty Theatre, a West End theatre in London

==Other uses==
* Royalty (grape), a variety of grape
* Royalty, Texas, US
* &quot;Royalty Magazine&quot;, a British monthly
* &quot;The Royalty&quot; (TV series), a 1957 British series

==See also==
*Royal (disambiguation)
*Royals (disambiguation)
*Monarchy (disambiguation)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q405415" start="0" end="7" title="Royalty" label="Royalty"/>
<link wikidata="Q116" start="61" end="68" title="monarch" label="monarch"/>
<link wikidata="Q12097" start="103" end="107" title="king" label="king"/>
<link wikidata="Q19643" start="110" end="115" title="Queen regnant" label="queen"/>
<link wikidata="Q39018" start="118" end="125" title="emperor" label="emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q39018" start="128" end="135" title="empress" label="empress"/>
<link wikidata="Q2747456" start="139" end="145" title="prince" label="prince"/>
<link wikidata="Q863048" start="148" end="156" title="princess" label="princess"/>
<link wikidata="Q2006518" start="169" end="181" title="royal family" label="royal family"/>
<link wikidata="Q728265" start="275" end="290" title="royalty payment" label="royalty payment"/>
<link wikidata="Q7761748" start="380" end="398" title="The Royalty (band)" label="The Royalty (band)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7375135" start="433" end="448" title="Royalty Records" label="Royalty Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q21203309" start="490" end="529" title="Royalty (Chris Brown album)" label="&amp;quot;Royalty&amp;quot; (Chris Brown album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q55632061" start="538" end="562" title="Royalty (EP)" label="&amp;quot;Royalty&amp;quot; (EP)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7375128" start="585" end="614" title="Royalty (mixtape)" label="&amp;quot;Royalty&amp;quot; (mixtape)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7761751" start="660" end="691" title="The Royalty (album)" label="&amp;quot;The Royalty&amp;quot; (album)"/>
<link wikidata="" start="726" end="749" title="The Royalty: La Realeza" label="The Royalty: La Realeza"/>
<link wikidata="Q7375133" start="799" end="843" title="Royalty (Down with Webster song)" label="&amp;quot;Royalty&amp;quot; (Down with Webster song)"/>
<link wikidata="Q67185100" start="852" end="891" title="Royalty (XXXTentacion song)" label="&amp;quot;Royalty&amp;quot; (XXXTentacion song)"/>
<link wikidata="Q55337" start="924" end="937" title="Conor Maynard" label="Conor Maynard"/>
<link wikidata="Q65053586" start="985" end="1001" title="The Lost Tapes 2" label="The Lost Tapes 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q185184" start="1030" end="1045" title="Royalty Theatre" label="Royalty Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q7375136" start="1095" end="1119" title="Royalty Theatre, Glasgow" label="Royalty Theatre, Glasgow"/>
<link wikidata="Q748557" start="1156" end="1171" title="Peacock Theatre" label="Peacock Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q2171172" start="1252" end="1267" title="Royalty (grape)" label="Royalty (grape)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7375132" start="1290" end="1304" title="Royalty, Texas" label="Royalty, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q7375131" start="1317" end="1333" title="Royalty Magazine" label="Royalty Magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q48784524" start="1361" end="1396" title="The Royalty (TV series)" label="&amp;quot;The Royalty&amp;quot; (TV series)"/>
<link wikidata="Q240845" start="1435" end="1457" title="Royal (disambiguation)" label="Royal (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q331569" start="1459" end="1482" title="Royals (disambiguation)" label="Royals (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q363625" start="1484" end="1509" title="Monarchy (disambiguation)" label="Monarchy (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="252600" wikidata="Q1140283" url="?curid=252600" title="Arsacid dynasty (disambiguation)">
<text>The [[Parthian Empire|Arsacid dynasty]] was an Iranian royal dynasty that ruled Parthia, in modern-day Iran, from 247 BC to 224 AD.

Arsacid dynasty may also refer to:
*Arsacid dynasty of Armenia (54–428), Armenia
*Arsacid dynasty of Iberia (c. 189–284), Georgian Iberia
*Arsacid dynasty of Caucasian Albania (1st–5th century), Caucasian Albania

==See also==
* List of rulers of Parthian sub-kingdoms</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1140283" start="4" end="39" title="Arsacid dynasty (disambiguation)" label="[[Parthian Empire|Arsacid dynasty]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140283" start="133" end="148" title="Arsacid dynasty (disambiguation)" label="Arsacid dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q704151" start="169" end="195" title="Arsacid dynasty of Armenia" label="Arsacid dynasty of Armenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q704146" start="215" end="240" title="Arsacid dynasty of Iberia" label="Arsacid dynasty of Iberia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2471407" start="272" end="308" title="Arsacid dynasty of Caucasian Albania" label="Arsacid dynasty of Caucasian Albania"/>
<link wikidata="Q6637067" start="362" end="401" title="List of rulers of Parthian sub-kingdoms" label="List of rulers of Parthian sub-kingdoms"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="252609" wikidata="Q953491" url="?curid=252609" title="Battleship (game)">
<text>Battleship (also known as Battleships) is a strategy type guessing game for two players. It is played on ruled grids (paper or board) on which each player&#x27;s fleet of warships are marked. The locations of the fleets are concealed from the other player. Players alternate turns calling &quot;shots&quot; at the other player&#x27;s ships, and the objective of the game is to destroy the opposing player&#x27;s fleet.

&quot;Battleship&quot; is known worldwide as a pencil and paper game which dates from World War I. It was published by various companies as a pad-and-pencil game in the 1930s and was released as a plastic board game by Milton Bradley in 1967. The game has spawned electronic versions, video games, smart device apps and a film.

==History==
The game of &quot;Battleship&quot; is thought to have its origins in the French game &quot;L&#x27;Attaque&quot; played during World War I, although parallels have also been drawn to E. I. Horsman&#x27;s 1890 game Basilinda, and the game is said to have been played by Russian officers before World War I. In 1907 the game playing was mentioned in the diary of Russian poet Ryurik Ivnev. The first commercial version of the game was &quot;Salvo&quot;, published in 1931 in the United States by the Starex company. Other versions of the game were printed in the 1930s and 1940s, including the Strathmore Company&#x27;s &quot;Combat: The Battleship Game&quot;, Milton Bradley&#x27;s &quot;Broadsides: A Game of Naval Strategy&quot; and Maurice L. Freedman&#x27;s &quot;Warfare Naval Combat&quot;. Strategy Games Co. produced a version called &quot;Wings&quot; which pictured planes flying over the Los Angeles Coliseum. All of these early editions of the game consisted of pre-printed pads of paper.
In 1967 Milton Bradley introduced a version of the game that used plastic boards and pegs. Conceived by Ed Hutchins, play was on pegboards using miniature plastic ships. In 1977, Milton Bradley also released a computerized &quot;Electronic Battleship&quot;, a pioneering microprocessor-based toy, capable of generating various sounds. &quot;Electronic Battleship&quot; was designed by Dennis Wyman and Bing McCoy. It was followed in 1989 by &quot;Electronic Talking Battleship&quot;. In 2008, an updated version of &quot;Battleship&quot; was released, using hexagonal tiles. In the updated version, each player&#x27;s board contains several islands on which &quot;captured man&quot; figurines can be placed. Ships may be placed only around the islands, and only in the player&#x27;s half of the board. When the movie &quot;Battleship&quot; was released, the board game reverted to the original 1967 style. The 2008 updated version is still available as &quot;Battleship Islands&quot;.

&quot;Battleship&quot; was one of the earliest games to be produced as a computer game, with a version being released for the Z80 Compucolor in 1979. Many computer editions of the game have been produced since. In &quot;Clubhouse Games&quot; for the Nintendo DS, &quot;Battleship&quot; is known as &quot;Grid Attack&quot;. It is played on a 7×7 grid, and includes slight variations, such as four-player gameplay, and various ship sizes and shapes. Versions of &quot;Battleship&quot; appear as applications on numerous social networking services.

&quot;Battleship&quot; was also part of &quot;Hasbro Family Game Night&quot; for the PlayStation 2 and Wii, as well as the Xbox 360 (Xbox Live Arcade). These alter the rules, including the size of the grid (8×12 in the NES version, 8×8 in the Game Boy version), size of ships (it is common to feature a submarine that takes up a single square) and special shot missiles for each ship. For example, in the NES version, the cruiser has a five-shot missile which strikes five squares in an X pattern on the grid in one turn. Submarine-tracking sonar and aerial reconnaissance to spot ships are also features.

A minigame version of &quot;Battleship&quot; was used in the third season of The Hub&#x27;s &quot;Family Game Night&quot;, which uses a 5×5 grid and the first team to sink three ships wins the game.

In 2012, the military science fiction action movie &quot;Battleship&quot; was released, which was inspired by the Milton Bradley board game, which this adaptation is an alien invasion-theme movie. A version of &quot;Battleship&quot; based on the movie was released in which one side had alien ship playing pieces.

In 1973 a spin-off version was released under the name Sub Search. Employing a three-dimensional play area, battleships drop depth charges on submarines hidden on a multi-level board.

In one episode of the Amazon Prime Video show &quot;The Grand Tour&quot;, presenters Richard Hammond and James May played a game of &quot;Battleship&quot; with two cranes (colored red and green) and 20 REVAi vehicles as missiles. The ships ranged from cars to campervans. May won the game after sinking all of Hammond&#x27;s ships.

==Description==
The game is played on four grids, two for each player. The grids are typically square, usually 10×10, and the individual squares in the grid are identified by letter and number. On one grid the player arranges ships and records the shots by the opponent. On the other grid, the player records their own shots.

Before play begins, each player secretly arranges their ships on their primary grid. Each ship occupies a number of consecutive squares on the grid, arranged either horizontally or vertically. The number of squares for each ship is determined by the type of ship. The ships cannot overlap (i.e., only one ship can occupy any given square in the grid) or be placed diagonally. The types and numbers of ships allowed are the same for each player. These may vary depending on the rules. The ships should be hidden from the opposing player&#x27;s sight and players are not allowed to see each other&#x27;s pieces. The game is a discovery game in which players need to discover their opponent&#x27;s ship positions.

The 1990 Milton Bradley version of the rules specify the following ships:

In 2002, Hasbro renamed the Cruiser to &quot;Destroyer&quot;, taking three squares, and introduced a new two-square ship called the &quot;Patrol Boat&quot;.

After the ships have been positioned, the game proceeds in a series of rounds. In each round, each player takes a turn to announce a target square in the opponent&#x27;s grid which is to be shot at. The opponent announces whether or not the square is occupied by a ship. If it is a &quot;hit&quot;, the player who is hit marks this on their own &quot;ocean&quot; or grid (with a red peg in the pegboard version), and announces what ship was hit. The attacking player marks the hit or miss on their own &quot;tracking&quot; or &quot;target&quot; grid with a pencil marking in the paper version of the game, or the appropriate color peg in the pegboard version (red for &quot;hit&quot;, white for &quot;miss&quot;), in order to build up a picture of the opponent&#x27;s fleet.

When all of the squares of a ship have been hit, the ship&#x27;s owner announces the sinking of the Carrier, Submarine, Cruiser/Destroyer/Patrol Boat, or the titular Battleship. If all of a player&#x27;s ships have been sunk, the game is over and their opponent wins.

==Variations==

In the 1931 &quot;Salvo&quot; edition of the game, players target a specified number of squares at one time, and all of the squares are attacked simultaneously. A player may initially target five (one for each unsunken ship) squares per turn, and the amount of shots decreases when one of the player&#x27;s ships are lost. In other variants of this mechanic, the number of shots allowed to fire each turn may either be fixed at five for the whole game, be equal to the number of unsunken ships belonging to the player, or be equal to the size of the player&#x27;s largest undamaged ship. The opponent may either call the result of each shot in turn or simply announce the hits or misses. E.g.: &quot;two hits and three misses&quot;, leaving their opponent to work out the consequences of the salvo. In the modern Milton Bradley rules for &quot;Battleship&quot;, &quot;Salvo&quot; is listed as a variation &quot;for more experienced players&quot;, with the number of shots being equal to the number of ships that the firing player has remaining.

One variant of &quot;Battleship&quot; allows players to decline to announce that a ship has been sunk, requiring their opponent to take further shots in order to confirm that an area is clear. Another variant of the rule allows a player to move one of their ships to a new, uncalled location every fourth or fifth move.

==Reviews==
*&quot;Family Games: The 100 Best&quot;

==See also==
* &quot;Battleship&quot; (film), 2012 film adaptation
* Battleship (puzzle)
* Video game adaptations:
** &quot;Battleships&quot;, 1987, for ZX Spectrum, Commodore 64, Amstrad CPC, BBC Micro, and Amiga computers
** &quot;Battleship&quot;, 1993, for Nintendo Entertainment System and Game Gear systems
** &quot;Super Battleship&quot;, 1993, for Genesis and Super NES systems
** &quot;Battleship&quot;, 1996, for PCs
** &quot;&quot;, 2000, for PCs
** &quot;Battleship&quot;, a 2012 tie-in to the film above, for PlayStation 3, Xbox 360, Wii, Nintendo DS, and Nintendo 3DS
* Similar games:
** &quot;Minesweeper&quot;, logic puzzle video game genre
** &quot;Mugwump&quot;, 1973 computer game
* Wargame, strategy game genre

==References==
==External links==

* Battleship Official Hasbro Rules – Rulebook insert for &quot;Battleship&quot; (2002 version)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q185451" start="44" end="52" title="strategy" label="strategy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6136054" start="58" end="71" title="guessing game" label="guessing game"/>
<link wikidata="Q2031121" start="171" end="178" title="warship" label="warship"/>
<link wikidata="Q2347716" start="467" end="488" title="pencil and paper game" label="pencil and paper game"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="506" end="517" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q131436" start="625" end="635" title="board game" label="board game"/>
<link wikidata="Q2150493" start="639" end="653" title="Milton Bradley Company" label="Milton Bradley"/>
<link wikidata="Q474033" start="742" end="746" title="Battleship (film)" label="film"/>
<link wikidata="Q11143488" start="852" end="866" title="L&amp;#x27;Attaque" label="L&amp;#x27;Attaque"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="887" end="898" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q4867433" start="974" end="983" title="Basilinda" label="Basilinda"/>
<link wikidata="Q4402281" start="1134" end="1146" title="Ryurik Ivnev" label="Ryurik Ivnev"/>
<link wikidata="Q2150493" start="1419" end="1433" title="Milton Bradley Company" label="Milton Bradley"/>
<link wikidata="Q849784" start="1656" end="1676" title="Los Angeles Coliseum" label="Los Angeles Coliseum"/>
<link wikidata="Q23442" start="2399" end="2405" title="island" label="island"/>
<link wikidata="Q474033" start="2581" end="2591" title="Battleship (film)" label="Battleship"/>
<link wikidata="Q5157215" start="2870" end="2884" title="Compucolor II" label="Z80 Compucolor"/>
<link wikidata="Q233753" start="2964" end="2979" title="Clubhouse Games" label="Clubhouse Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q170323" start="2994" end="3005" title="Nintendo DS" label="Nintendo DS"/>
<link wikidata="Q3783593" start="3337" end="3361" title="Hasbro Family Game Night" label="Hasbro Family Game Night"/>
<link wikidata="Q10680" start="3376" end="3389" title="PlayStation 2" label="PlayStation 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q8079" start="3394" end="3397" title="Wii" label="Wii"/>
<link wikidata="Q48263" start="3414" end="3422" title="Xbox 360" label="Xbox 360"/>
<link wikidata="Q172742" start="3510" end="3513" title="NES" label="NES"/>
<link wikidata="Q186437" start="3534" end="3542" title="Game Boy" label="Game Boy"/>
<link wikidata="Q251741" start="3849" end="3863" title="reconnaissance" label="reconnaissance"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3900" end="3942" title="Family Game Night (TV series)#Battleship" label="minigame version of &amp;quot;Battleship&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q565847" start="3975" end="3982" title="The Hub (TV channel)" label="The Hub"/>
<link wikidata="Q5433132" start="3996" end="4013" title="Family Game Night (TV series)" label="Family Game Night"/>
<link wikidata="Q904447" start="4111" end="4135" title="military science fiction" label="military science fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q474033" start="4155" end="4165" title="Battleship (film)" label="Battleship"/>
<link wikidata="Q2447078" start="4267" end="4281" title="alien invasion" label="alien invasion"/>
<link wikidata="Q4740856" start="4620" end="4638" title="Amazon Prime Video" label="Amazon Prime Video"/>
<link wikidata="Q21980653" start="4650" end="4664" title="The Grand Tour" label="The Grand Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q297265" start="4683" end="4698" title="Richard Hammond" label="Richard Hammond"/>
<link wikidata="Q314504" start="4703" end="4712" title="James May" label="James May"/>
<link wikidata="Q2092926" start="4800" end="4805" title="REVAi" label="REVAi"/>
<link wikidata="Q5357662" start="4858" end="4867" title="campervan" label="campervan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2020720" start="4974" end="4979" title="Grid (spatial index)" label="grids"/>
<link wikidata="Q474033" start="8699" end="8728" title="Battleship (film)" label="&amp;quot;Battleship&amp;quot; (film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q842594" start="8753" end="8772" title="Battleship (puzzle)" label="Battleship (puzzle)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4873242" start="8802" end="8825" title="Battleships (video game)" label="&amp;quot;Battleships&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q2891857" start="8911" end="8933" title="Battleship (1993 video game)" label="&amp;quot;Battleship&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q3504105" start="9006" end="9022" title="Super Battleship" label="Super Battleship"/>
<link wikidata="Q113578362" start="9073" end="9095" title="Battleship (1996 video game)" label="&amp;quot;Battleship&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q3636876" start="9145" end="9167" title="Battleship (2012 video game)" label="&amp;quot;Battleship&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q126194" start="9292" end="9303" title="Minesweeper (video game)" label="Minesweeper"/>
<link wikidata="Q16267549" start="9350" end="9357" title="Mugwump (video game)" label="Mugwump"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501543" start="9386" end="9393" title="Wargame" label="Wargame"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="252610" wikidata="Q4776645" url="?curid=252610" title="Toño Bicicleta">
<text>Francisco Antonio García López (July 19, 1943 – November 29, 1995), also known as Toño Bicicleta (literally, &quot;Tony Bicycle&quot; in English), was a Puerto Rican criminal who gained notoriety for escaping from prison several times. García López managed to become part of Puerto Rican folklore and the object of constant references in popular culture. His escapes became legendary in Puerto Rico.

==Biography==
There are conflicting versions as to García López&#x27;s birthplace. The police file states that he was born in Yauco, Puerto Rico, but journalist and writer Alexis Morales Cales who specialized in the criminal&#x27;s life, believes he was born in Maricao, specifically in the Indiera Alta barrio. Others still believe he was born in Lares.

García&#x27;s parents were Esteban García Medina and Antonia López Vargas. There are conflicting stories regarding how he came to be known as &quot;Toño Bicicleta&quot;: one, because he was said to get around on an old bicycle, and the other, because he stole a bike in his youth.

García&#x27;s first wife was called Antonia Rivera. They had three children together: Francisco Antonio, María Milagros, and Carmen Dolores.

===Criminal history===
According to the police investigation, in 1968 Antonio García murdered his then wife, Gloria Soto, with a machete. For this crime, García was sentenced to 185 years in prison. However, he managed to escape two years later.

In 1974, García was again captured by a civilian in a farm in the Guaraguao barrio of Ponce. He was incarcerated in the prison of Sabana Hoyos in Arecibo, until 1981 when he escaped again. In 1984, he broke in the house of Gilberto Pérez Valentín, mayor of the town of Maricao. According to Pérez, García stole some silver coins, food, a machete, a flashlight, and a Smith &amp; Wesson .45 caliber gun.

García&#x27;s numerous escapes helped him become part of the local lore. Allegedly, during his escapes he would continue committing rapes and kidnappings. Some of the women that were allegedly kidnapped by García during the 1970s were Luz Celenia Caraballo and Aurea Esther Camacho. In 1981, García kidnapped Olga Iris Despiau Cabán from her home in Arecibo. According to Despiau, García threatened to kill her father with a knife if she didn&#x27;t comply. She remained with the fugitive until 1984, when he abandoned her during a raid. Some time later, García kidnapped her a second time until her family managed to rescue her. He also tried to kidnap Luz Delia Soler during the late 1980s. Some people claim that due to his notoriety he was used as some sort of scapegoat both by authorities and civilians to several crimes on the island.

In 1987, García killed his stepfather, Antonio Caraballo Gonzales, and then tried to burn the body. After that, his mother Antonia Garcia was able to flee from the crime scene. Then he killed his uncle, Pablo López Vargas, in Maricao. On January 31, 1988, García killed Luis Rodríguez and kidnapped his 14-year-old girlfriend, Dahiana Pérez Lebrón. The girl stayed with the criminal for eight years during which he raped her and forced her to sleep with her feet chained. Dahiana was with him at the moment of his last showdown with authorities in 1995.

===Death and burial===
In the morning of November 29, 1995, García was allegedly working in a coffee plantation in the Castañer ward of Lares, Puerto Rico. Police arrived at 7:20 am and Officer Luis Rosa Merced of the Puerto Rico Police Department shot the notorious criminal in the genitals. According to the police report, García resisted the arrest and tried to attack Rosa with a machete. As he threw himself to the ground, he shot García, fatally injuring him. According to Dahiana Pérez, García did not die immediately, but was kicked and mocked by the officers while he bled to death.

At the time of his death, García was described as being 5 feet 2 inches and weighing 130 pounds. His funeral was held at Irizarry Funeral Home in Lares, and his body was buried in that town&#x27;s cemetery. Despite the fact that he was a criminal, assassin and rapist, and some welcomed his death, thousands of people attended his funeral. He had become a kind of legend because of his constant appearance, during a 14-year period, in , Puerto Rico&#x27;s popular newspaper, at the time.

==References in popular culture==
* In 1978, French writer Georges Londreix, who had been living in Puerto Rico during the 1970s and was the director of the local chapter of the Alliance Francaise, edited &quot;Tonio Bicicleta&quot;, a novel about García López written in French. It was subsequently translated to Spanish.
* In the early 1970s, Tony Croatto, then paired with his sister Nelly, had a minor pop music hit in Puerto Rico titled &quot;La Bicicleta de Toño&quot; (&quot;Toño&#x27;s Bicycle&quot;).
* In the early 1990s, local rock band La Mancha del Jardín released a song titled &quot;Toño Bicicleta&quot;.
* In the early 1990s, local rock band Puya mentioned Toño Bicicleta in their song &quot;El Chupacabra&quot;.
* A different song named &quot;Toño Bicicleta&quot; was recorded by Spanish-Puerto Rican thrash metal band Juerguistas y Borrachos.
* In the late 1990s, a local film titled &quot;La Noche Que Se Apareció Toño Bicicleta&quot; (&quot;The Night that Toño Bicicleta Appeared&quot;) was released.
* In 2007, the Calle 13 song &quot;La Crema&quot; on the album &quot;Residente o Visitante&quot; makes reference to Toño Bicicleta as part of a laundry list of Puerto Rican culture and lore.
* A diss track towards Tego Calderón called &quot;Wasa Wasa&quot; by Puerto Rican rapper Temperamento, makes reference to Toño Bicicleta on the following verse &quot;Aguanta esa boca tienes los cachetes llenos de coca, tu si que eres feca, eres tan horrible que ni Toño te prestaba la Bicicleta&quot;. Put up with that mouth, your cheeks are full of coke, you really are fake, you are so horrible that not even Toño would lend you the Bicycle.&quot;
* In the song &quot;Dale Pal Piso&quot; of Watussi Ft. Jowell &amp; Randy and Ñengo Flow, It refers to &quot;Toño Bicicleta&quot;.

==See also==

*List of Puerto Ricans

==Notes==
:1.There&#x27;s disagreement among authorities as to the precise town within Puerto Rico where García López was born. Some state he was born in Yauco, others say it was in Maricao. Still others say in Lares. See article for more details.

==References==
==External links==
*Suburban Justice - Bicycle Race 2/16/2009
*Los prófugos más escurridizos de Puerto Rico on &quot;El Nuevo Día&quot;</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q4776645" start="0" end="30" title="Toño Bicicleta" label="Francisco Antonio García López"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860" start="137" end="144" title="English language" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q893594" start="153" end="165" title="Puerto Ricans" label="Puerto Rican"/>
<link wikidata="Q36192" start="288" end="296" title="folklore" label="folklore"/>
<link wikidata="Q1183" start="387" end="398" title="Puerto Rico" label="Puerto Rico"/>
<link wikidata="Q368526" start="527" end="545" title="Yauco, Puerto Rico" label="Yauco, Puerto Rico"/>
<link wikidata="Q2624359" start="663" end="670" title="Maricao, Puerto Rico" label="Maricao"/>
<link wikidata="Q5915313" start="692" end="704" title="Indiera Alta" label="Indiera Alta"/>
<link wikidata="Q3677932" start="705" end="711" title="Barrios of Puerto Rico" label="barrio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026894" start="749" end="754" title="Lares, Puerto Rico" label="Lares"/>
<link wikidata="Q5613893" start="1494" end="1503" title="Guaraguao" label="Guaraguao"/>
<link wikidata="Q864024" start="1514" end="1519" title="Ponce, Puerto Rico" label="Ponce"/>
<link wikidata="Q640728" start="1574" end="1581" title="Arecibo, Puerto Rico" label="Arecibo"/>
<link wikidata="Q5561391" start="1651" end="1674" title="Gilberto Pérez Valentín" label="Gilberto Pérez Valentín"/>
<link wikidata="Q2624359" start="1697" end="1704" title="Maricao, Puerto Rico" label="Maricao"/>
<link wikidata="Q463090" start="1795" end="1813" title="Smith &amp;amp; Wesson" label="Smith &amp;amp; Wesson"/>
<link wikidata="Q3708780" start="3448" end="3477" title="Puerto Rico Police Department" label="Puerto Rico Police Department"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="4357" end="4363" title="France" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q655810" start="4490" end="4508" title="Alliance Francaise" label="Alliance Francaise"/>
<link wikidata="Q8261" start="4548" end="4553" title="novel" label="novel"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="4584" end="4590" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321" start="4626" end="4633" title="Spanish language" label="Spanish"/>
<link wikidata="Q3531734" start="4657" end="4669" title="Tony Croatto" label="Tony Croatto"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052297" start="4970" end="4974" title="Puya (band)" label="Puya"/>
<link wikidata="Q483352" start="5130" end="5142" title="thrash metal" label="thrash metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7843307" start="5148" end="5171" title="Tripijb" label="Juerguistas y Borrachos"/>
<link wikidata="Q1027200" start="5348" end="5356" title="Calle 13 (band)" label="Calle 13"/>
<link wikidata="Q3809510" start="5402" end="5423" title="Residente o Visitante" label="Residente o Visitante"/>
<link wikidata="Q499042" start="5528" end="5538" title="diss track" label="diss track"/>
<link wikidata="Q611466" start="5547" end="5560" title="Tego Calderón" label="Tego Calderón"/>
<link wikidata="Q7698296" start="5613" end="5625" title="Temperamento" label="Temperamento"/>
<link wikidata="Q6595198" start="6121" end="6142" title="List of Puerto Ricans" label="List of Puerto Ricans"/>
<link wikidata="Q368526" start="6298" end="6303" title="Yauco, Puerto Rico" label="Yauco"/>
<link wikidata="Q2624359" start="6326" end="6333" title="Maricao, Puerto Rico" label="Maricao"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026894" start="6355" end="6360" title="Lares, Puerto Rico" label="Lares"/>
<link wikidata="Q3050130" start="6525" end="6537" title="El Nuevo Día" label="El Nuevo Día"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="252613" wikidata="Q3136462" url="?curid=252613" title="His Name Is Alive">
<text>His Name Is Alive is an American experimental rock band/project from Livonia, Michigan. After several self-released cassettes, they debuted on 4AD Records in 1990, starting a long run at the label. Throughout the band&#x27;s long history, leader Warren Defever has been the only constant member, with a variety of musicians and singers contributing over the years.

==Biography==
Defever began recording in his basement in 1985, while still in high school. His initial work consisted primarily of Defever alone recording the music to a 4-track recorder, with friend Angie Carozzo providing vocals. After Defever went off to college and met Karin Oliver, she became the band&#x27;s primary vocalist.

The group&#x27;s work resulted in a self-released cassette. Defever sent the tape to 4AD in hopes of being signed to the label. Despite label president Ivo Watts-Russell&#x27;s rejection of the band, Defever continued to send him tapes, with improved versions of the songs appearing on each new tape. Ivo signed the band in 1989, believing that (along with his This Mortal Coil partner John Fryer) he could re-mix the songs into a proper album 4AD could release. &quot;Livonia&quot; appeared in the summer of 1990, and became one of the label&#x27;s biggest sellers of the year. &quot;He took it apart, and he didn&#x27;t put it back together,&quot; Defever would later comment on Ivo&#x27;s production style.

A second album of songs similarly recorded in Defever&#x27;s home studio (which he later dubbed &quot;Time Stereo&quot;) and remixed in England by Ivo and Fryer, &quot;Home Is In Your Head&quot;, appeared in 1991. Over most of the rest of the 1990s, Defever improved &quot;Time Stereo&quot; to record more professionally, and the band became a favorite of 4AD&#x27;s devoted fanbase.

In 1993, HNIA released &quot;Mouth by Mouth&quot;, their third full length for 4AD, and embarked on their first full North American tour with Defever on guitar, Karin Oliver on vocals, and Trey Many on drums. This album and tour showed a different side of HNIA to their fans, marking the first time Defever had full control of the mixing and assembly of a HNIA release. &quot;Mouth by Mouth&quot; was a more ambitious noisy pop record that lacked some of the earlier sparse gothic sounds people came to expect from the first two releases. Defever&#x27;s wide musical taste became more apparent as &quot;Mouth by Mouth&quot; showcased his love for obscure &#x27;60s pop, reggae, Japanese noise and free jazz.

Defever then took an extended break to work on new projects and write songs for 1996&#x27;s &quot;Stars On ESP&quot;, an ambitious project three years in the making. He continued to collaborate with Karin Oliver and Trey Many on this release but also wrote songs with Matthew Smith of Outrageous Cherry, Mark Kozelek of Red House Painters, Ian Masters of Pale Saints, and Erika Hoffman. &quot;Stars on ESP&quot; was a breakthrough for the band as Defever began to fully realize his potential as a musician able to paste many influences together in one cohesive work &quot;On their fourth album for 4AD, Stars on ESP, the group mixes dub, dream pop, surf, country, and Pet Sounds-era Beach Boys into something altogether unique.&quot;

In 1991 and 1993, 4AD commissioned videos from British animators the Quay Brothers. The brothers Stephen and Timothy were allowed to choose which songs they would like to create videos or short films for. They choose the songs &quot;Are We Still Married?&quot; and &quot;Can&#x27;t Go Wrong Without You&quot;.

1998 was a year of big change for 4AD and HNIA, as Ivo sold the label to Beggars Banquet, resulting in major changes in the label. The band signed a more traditional contract with the label, bringing with it increased commercial expectations. When 1998&#x27;s &quot;Ft. Lake&quot; failed to meet those expectations, most of the band left for full-time jobs or more commercially successful endeavors. Stripped down to Defever and vocalist Lovetta Pippen (an experienced soul and gospel singer before joining HNIA after appearing as part of a gospel choir on &quot;Stars On ESP&quot;), the duo released two soul and R&amp;B-influenced albums in 2001 and 2002, alienating much of the band&#x27;s fanbase. After having sold a respectable (but far from commercially successful) 100,000 albums for 4AD from 1990 through 2002, the band was dropped by the label, leaving the band&#x27;s future in doubt.

Defever kept the band&#x27;s name alive through several notable appearances on compilations like Kill Rock Stars&#x27; &quot;Tracks and Fields&quot;, and &quot;We Could Live in Hope&quot;, the Low tribute album. Several full-length releases on the Time Stereo label were mostly instrumental music, live recordings, and a few new experimental recordings. In 2005, Defever co-founded the Silver Mountain Media label, and secured distribution for HNIA with major label Sony-BMG. 2006&#x27;s &quot;Detrola&quot; was the first full-length release on the label, and was met with much acclaim, winning back many of the old fans from the 4AD days, and earning success on college rock radio and modern rock charts. &quot;Detrola&quot; primarily features newly discovered Andy FM on vocals, although Lovetta Pippen and Erika Hoffmann make guest appearances as well. Andy FM was best known as the keyboardist for Detroit underground favorites the Tranzistors and Sonapanic. In interviews Defever has often described her as &quot;the best singer ever to sing me Elvis songs and Patsy Cline songs at my birthday party. She plays an important role in HNIA, she&#x27;s a great singer and she&#x27;s not afraid when the trombonist takes off his pants and pees in his trombone.&quot;

The follow-up to &quot;Detrola&quot;, titled &quot;Xmmer&quot;, was released on September 18, 2007. &quot;Sweet Earth Flower&quot;, the band&#x27;s tribute to free jazz saxophonist Marion Brown was released by High Two on November 6, 2007.

In May 2010, His Name is Alive released their 11th full-length album &quot;The Eclipse&quot;. The album was one of the ten CDs released in the limited edition box set also entitled &quot;The Eclipse&quot;. It features Warn Defever and vocalist Andy FM. Other contributors include Steve Sparks on drums and Jean Cook playing violin. The album was released for MP3 download, FLAC, and CD through the Silver Mountain Media store.

In May 2011, His Name is Alive embarked on a &quot;20th anniversary&quot; series of shows which included a community bike ride in Detroit. Defever says 2011 marks the 20th anniversary of His Name is Alive even though the group&#x27;s first record was released in 1990. Defever says one undisclosed year has been blacked out of the band&#x27;s chronology for reasons he will not discuss.

==Discography==
===Main albums===
* &quot;Livonia&quot; (1990) (4AD)
* &quot;Home Is in Your Head&quot; (1991) (4AD)
* &quot;Mouth by Mouth&quot; (1993) (4AD)
* &quot;Stars on E.S.P.&quot; (1996) (4AD)
* &quot;Ft. Lake&quot; (1998) (4AD)
* &quot;Someday My Blues Will Cover the Earth&quot; (2001) (4AD)
* &quot;Last Night&quot; (2002) (4AD)
* &quot;Detrola&quot; (2006) (Silver Mountain/ Sony BMG)
* &quot;XMMER&quot; (2007) (Silver Mountain/ Sony BMG)
* &quot;The Eclipse&quot; (2010) (Silver Mountain Media)
* &quot;Silver Family&quot; (2012) (Silver Mountain Media)
* &quot;Silver Dragon&quot; (2012) (Silver Mountain Media)
* &quot;Tecuciztecatl&quot; (2014) (London London)
* &quot;Patterns of Light&quot; (2016) (London London/ Silver Mountain Media)
* &quot;Black Wings&quot; (2017) (Silver Mountain Media/HHBTM Records)
* &quot;All The Mirrors In The House&quot; (2019) (Disciples)
* &quot;Return To Never&quot; (2020) (Disciples)
* &quot;Tanpura and Harmonium&quot; (2020) (no label)

===Singles and EPs===
* &quot;The Dirt Eaters EP&quot; (1992) (4AD)
* &quot;In Every Ford EP&quot; (1993) (4AD) promotional CD
* &quot;Universal Frequencies EP&quot; (1996) (4AD)
* &quot;Nice Day EP&quot; (1997) (4AD)
* &quot;Melody Farm EP&quot; [split with Little Princess] (1997) (Shaolin Temple / timeSTEREO)
* &quot;Pets Farm EP&quot; [split with Little Princess] (1997) (Motorway/ timeSTEREO)
* &quot;Drugs Farm EP&quot; [split with Little Princess] (1998) (Rocket Science / timeSTEREO)
* &quot;Woodstock/Mothers Day&quot; 7&quot; included with LP of Fort Lake(1998) (4AD)
* &quot;Can&#x27;t Always Be Loved&quot; (1998) (4AD)
* &quot;Happy Blues / One Year&quot; (2001) (4AD)
* &quot;Nothing Special&quot; (2001) (4AD)
* &quot;Raindrops Rainbow EP&quot; (2005) (Silver Mountain Media)
* &quot;Silver Makeup EP&quot; (2007) (Silver Mountain Media)
* &quot;Firefly Dragonfly&quot; (2007) (Acuarela Discos)
* &quot;Dream Rememberer&quot; (2010) (Silver Mountain Media)

===Independent projects, compilations and remixes===
* &quot;Sings Man on the Silver Mountain and 8 Other Songs&quot; (1992) (Rykodisc)
* &quot;King of Sweet&quot; (1993) (Perdition Plastics, reissued in 2005 via timeSTEREO as MP3)
* &quot;Sampler&quot; (1993) (4AD)
* &quot;Radio LP&quot; (1998) (timeSTEREO)
* &quot;Always Stay Sweet&quot; (1999) (4AD)
* &quot;Emergency&quot; (2000) (timeSTEREO)
* &quot;When the Stars Refuse to Shine&quot; (2000) (timeSTEREO)
* &quot;Early Music Volume 1 (1985-1989)&quot; (2000) (timeSTEREO)
* &quot;RMX&#x27;s 1995-2000&quot; (2000) (timeSTEREO)
* &quot;Rare Tracks in the Snow&quot; (2000) (timeSTEREO)
* &quot;Spring Can Really Hang You Up The Most&quot; (2001) (timeSTEREO)
* &quot;Heart and Hand&quot; [10-CD box set] (2001) (timeSTEREO)
* &quot;Cloud Box&quot; [10-CD box set] (2004) (timeSTEREO)
* &quot;Brown Rice&quot; (2005) (timeSTEREO)
* &quot;Leaf Club&quot; (2005) (timeSTEREO)
* &quot;Summer Bird LP&quot; (2005) (Ypsilanti)
* &quot;Ufo Catcher&quot; (2005) (En/of)
* &quot;Someday RMX&quot; (2006) (Silver Mountain Media)
* &quot;Detrola Instrumental&quot; (2007) (Silver Mountain Media) (iTunes only purchase)
* &quot;Xmmer Instrumental&quot; (2007) (Silver Mountain Media)
* &quot;Eclipx&quot; (2010) (Silver Mountain Media)
* &quot;Dragons Look Out Your Window&quot; (2013) (Silver Mountain Media)
* &quot;Home Is&quot; (2013) (Silver Mountain Media)

===Live===
* &quot;Sound of Mexico&quot; (1995) (timeSTEREO)
* &quot;Finer Twilights&quot; (1997) (timeSTEREO)
* &quot;Golden City&quot; (1997) (timeSTEREO)
* &quot;Great Lake States Blues&quot; (1997) (timeSTEREO)
* &quot;Ten Years Long Time&quot; (2000) (timeSTEREO)
* &quot;In the West&quot; (2000) (timeSTEREO)
* &quot;In the East&quot; (2000) (timeSTEREO)

===Video===
* &quot;Are We Still Married&quot; (1992)
* &quot;Can&#x27;t Go Wrong Without You&quot; (1993)
* &quot;Peace In Detroit&quot; (2002)
* &quot;Come To Me&quot; (2007)
* &quot;Vanilia&quot; (2010)
* &quot;St. Michael&quot; (2007)
* &quot;Dream Rememberer&quot; (2007)

==References==
==External links==
* Official His Name Is Alive site 
* timeSTEREO
* Silver Mountain Media Group (defunct)
* HNIA at the Eyesore Database
* HNIA Discogs entry
* His Name is Alive at Myspace
* His Name Is Alive at Bandcamp</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3136462" start="0" end="17" title="His Name Is Alive" label="His Name Is Alive"/>
<link wikidata="Q1641839" start="33" end="50" title="experimental rock" label="experimental rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q853552" start="69" end="86" title="Livonia, Michigan" label="Livonia, Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q238095" start="143" end="154" title="4AD Records" label="4AD Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q7970160" start="246" end="260" title="Warren Defever" label="Warren Defever"/>
<link wikidata="Q6370903" start="640" end="652" title="Karin Oliver" label="Karin Oliver"/>
<link wikidata="Q948832" start="852" end="869" title="Ivo Watts-Russell" label="Ivo Watts-Russell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754136" start="1061" end="1077" title="This Mortal Coil" label="This Mortal Coil"/>
<link wikidata="Q120575" start="1086" end="1096" title="John Fryer (music)" label="John Fryer"/>
<link wikidata="Q6659817" start="1169" end="1176" title="Livonia (His Name Is Alive album)" label="Livonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5888480" start="1579" end="1599" title="Home Is In Your Head" label="Home Is In Your Head"/>
<link wikidata="Q6926326" start="1825" end="1839" title="Mouth by Mouth" label="Mouth by Mouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q6370903" start="1957" end="1969" title="Karin Oliver" label="Karin Oliver"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1985" end="1994" title="Trey Many" label="Trey Many"/>
<link wikidata="Q7602373" start="2603" end="2615" title="Stars On ESP" label="Stars On ESP"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2773" end="2786" title="Matthew Smith (musician)" label="Matthew Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q7112886" start="2790" end="2807" title="Outrageous Cherry" label="Outrageous Cherry"/>
<link wikidata="Q719083" start="2809" end="2821" title="Mark Kozelek" label="Mark Kozelek"/>
<link wikidata="Q1329500" start="2825" end="2843" title="Red House Painters" label="Red House Painters"/>
<link wikidata="Q5982225" start="2845" end="2856" title="Ian Masters (songwriter)" label="Ian Masters"/>
<link wikidata="Q2069239" start="2860" end="2871" title="Pale Saints" label="Pale Saints"/>
<link wikidata="Q1625290" start="3309" end="3322" title="Quay Brothers" label="Quay Brothers"/>
<link wikidata="Q126039" start="3624" end="3639" title="Beggars Banquet Records" label="Beggars Banquet"/>
<link wikidata="Q5506809" start="3817" end="3825" title="Ft. Lake" label="Ft. Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q1741329" start="4545" end="4560" title="Kill Rock Stars" label="Kill Rock Stars"/>
<link wikidata="Q941559" start="4641" end="4644" title="Low (band)" label="Low"/>
<link wikidata="Q3001888" start="4914" end="4922" title="Sony-BMG" label="Sony-BMG"/>
<link wikidata="Q5266071" start="4942" end="4949" title="Detrola (album)" label="Detrola"/>
<link wikidata="Q7655296" start="5822" end="5840" title="Sweet Earth Flower" label="Sweet Earth Flower"/>
<link wikidata="Q1367166" start="5897" end="5909" title="Marion Brown" label="Marion Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q6659817" start="6815" end="6822" title="Livonia (His Name Is Alive album)" label="Livonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q238095" start="6837" end="6840" title="4AD Records" label="4AD"/>
<link wikidata="Q5888480" start="6850" end="6870" title="Home Is in Your Head" label="Home Is in Your Head"/>
<link wikidata="Q238095" start="6885" end="6888" title="4AD Records" label="4AD"/>
<link wikidata="Q6926326" start="6898" end="6912" title="Mouth by Mouth" label="Mouth by Mouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q238095" start="6927" end="6930" title="4AD Records" label="4AD"/>
<link wikidata="Q7602373" start="6940" end="6955" title="Stars on E.S.P." label="Stars on E.S.P."/>
<link wikidata="Q238095" start="6970" end="6973" title="4AD Records" label="4AD"/>
<link wikidata="Q5506809" start="6983" end="6991" title="Ft. Lake" label="Ft. Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q238095" start="7006" end="7009" title="4AD Records" label="4AD"/>
<link wikidata="Q7559619" start="7019" end="7056" title="Someday My Blues Will Cover the Earth" label="Someday My Blues Will Cover the Earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q238095" start="7071" end="7074" title="4AD Records" label="4AD"/>
<link wikidata="Q16959912" start="7084" end="7094" title="Last Night (His Name Is Alive album)" label="Last Night"/>
<link wikidata="Q238095" start="7109" end="7112" title="4AD Records" label="4AD"/>
<link wikidata="Q5266071" start="7122" end="7129" title="Detrola (album)" label="Detrola"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7144" end="7159" title="Silver Mountain Media Group" label="Silver Mountain"/>
<link wikidata="Q8042335" start="7179" end="7184" title="XMMER" label="XMMER"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7199" end="7214" title="Silver Mountain Media Group" label="Silver Mountain"/>
<link wikidata="Q7730252" start="7797" end="7815" title="The Dirt Eaters EP" label="The Dirt Eaters EP"/>
<link wikidata="Q7024662" start="7954" end="7965" title="Nice Day EP" label="Nice Day EP"/>
<link wikidata="Q6412303" start="8885" end="8898" title="King of Sweet" label="King of Sweet"/>
<link wikidata="Q4738444" start="9059" end="9076" title="Always Stay Sweet" label="Always Stay Sweet"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="252622" wikidata="Q49809" url="?curid=252622" title="Heterosexism">
<text>Heterosexism is a system of attitudes, bias, and discrimination in favor of heterosexuality and heterosexual relationships. According to Elizabeth Cramer, it can include the belief that all people are or should be heterosexual and that heterosexual relationships are the only norm and therefore superior.

Although heterosexism is defined in the online editions of the &quot;American Heritage Dictionary of the English Language&quot; and the &quot;Merriam-Webster Collegiate Dictionary&quot; as anti-gay discrimination or prejudice &quot;by heterosexual people&quot; and &quot;by heterosexuals&quot;, respectively, people of any sexual orientation can hold such attitudes and bias, and can form a part of internalised hatred of one&#x27;s sexual orientation.

Heterosexism as discrimination ranks gay men, lesbians, bisexuals and other sexual minorities as second-class citizens with regard to various legal and civil rights, economic opportunities, and social equality in many of the world&#x27;s jurisdictions and societies. It is often related to homophobia.

== Background ==
While the &quot;Merriam-Webster Collegiate Dictionary&quot; notes the first use of the term heterosexism as having occurred in 1972, the term was first published in 1971 by gay rights activist, Craig Rodwell.

===Etymology and usage===
Similar terms include &quot;heterocentrism&quot; and &quot;heterosexualism&quot;. Although the well-established term &quot;heterosexism&quot; is often explained as a coinage modeled on &quot;sexism&quot;, the derivation of its meaning points more to (1.) &quot;heterosex(ual)&quot; + &quot;-ism&quot; than (2.) &quot;hetero-&quot; + &quot;sexism&quot;. 

Given this lack of semantic transparency, researchers, outreach workers, critical theorists and LGBTQ activists have proposed and use terms such as &quot;institutionalized homophobia&quot;, &quot;state(-sponsored) homophobia&quot;, &quot;sexual prejudice&quot;, &quot;anti-gay bigotry&quot;, &quot;straight privilege&quot;, &quot;The Straight Mind&quot; (a collection of essays by French writer Monique Wittig), &quot;heterosexual bias&quot;, &quot;compulsory heterosexuality&quot; or the much lesser known terms &quot;heterocentrism&quot;, &quot;homonegativity&quot;, and from gender theory and queer theory, &quot;heteronormativity&quot;. However, not all of these descriptors are synonymous with &quot;heterosexism&quot;.

===Contrast to homophobia===

&quot;Homophobia&quot;, a form of heterosexism, refers both to &quot;unreasoning fear of or antipathy towards homosexuals and homosexuality&quot; and to &quot;behavior based on such a feeling&quot;. &quot;Heterosexism&quot;, however, more broadly denotes the &quot;system of ideological thought that makes heterosexuality the sole norm to follow for sexual practices&quot;. As a bias favoring heterosexuals and heterosexuality, heterosexism has been described as being &quot;encoded into and characteristic of the major social, cultural, and economic institutions of our society&quot; and stems from the essentialist cultural notion that maleness-masculinity and femaleness-femininity are complementary.

Psychology professor Gregory M. Herek states that &quot;[Heterosexism] operates through a dual process of invisibility and attack. Homosexuality usually remains culturally invisible; when people who engage in homosexual behavior or who are identified as homosexual become visible, they are subject to attack by society.&quot; Furthermore, in interviews with perpetrators of anti-gay violence, forensic psychologist Karen Franklin believes that &quot;heterosexism is not just a personal value system, [rather] it is a tool in the maintenance of gender dichotomy.&quot; She continues by saying that &quot;assaults on homosexuals and other individuals who deviate from sex role norms are viewed as a learned form of social control of deviance rather than a defensive response to personal threat.&quot;

===Parallels and intersections===
It has been argued that the concept of heterosexism is similar to the concept of racism in that both ideas promote privilege for dominant groups within a given society. For example, borrowing from the racial concept of white privilege, the concept of heterosexual privilege has been applied to benefits of (presumed) heterosexuality within society that heterosexuals take for granted. The analogy is that just as racism against non-white people places white people as superior to people of color, heterosexism places heterosexual people or relationships as superior to non-heterosexual ones. In trying to rebut this premise, some commentators point to differences between the categories of race and sexual orientation, claiming they are too complex to support any generalizations. For example, &quot;trainer on diversity&quot; and consultant Jamie Washington has commented, although heterosexism and racism are &quot;woven from the same fabric&quot; they are &quot;not the same thing&quot;. Some American Conservative leaders such as Rev. Irene Monroe comment that those who suggest or state &quot;gay is the new black&quot;, as in a cover story of &quot;The Advocate&quot; magazine, exploit black people&#x27;s suffering and experiences to legitimize their own. Nonetheless, a study presented at the British Psychological Society&#x27;s Division of Occupational Psychology 2009 Conference shows that heterosexist prejudice is more pervasive than racism.

Heterosexism can also intersect with racism by further emphasizing differences among arbitrary groups of people. For example, heterosexism can compound the effects of racism by:
* promoting injustices towards a person already facing injustices because of their race
* establishing social hierarchies that allow one group more privilege than other groups.

Likewise, racism can allow LGBT people to be subjected to additional discrimination or violence if they belong to or are considered a part of a socially devalued racial category. Some of the privileges afforded to people falling into the categories of white people and (perceived) heterosexuals include, but are not limited to, social acceptance, prestige, freedom from negative stereotypes, and the comfort of being within the social norm and thereby not being marginalized or viewed as different.

== As a set of beliefs and attitudes ==
=== Individual and group level ===

Heterosexism as a set of beliefs and attitudes relies on a core tenet according to which homosexuality and bisexuality do not normally exist and, as such, constitute mental illnesses or deviant behaviors. Within a heterosexist ideology or mindset, the concept of sexual orientation is rejected or deemed irrelevant. A set of more nuanced heterosexist views, which some may consider faith, dogma, universal truths, natural law, appeals to authority, or popular beliefs, but others consider to be conventional wisdom or sociobiological knowledge can include, among others, the following:

* Non-heterosexual people should keep their sexual orientations private (i.e., they should remain &quot;closeted&quot;). p. 15
* The attitude that gay men are not &quot;real&quot; men or lesbians are not &quot;real&quot; women because of the socially pervasive view that heterosexual attractions or activities are the &quot;norm&quot; and therefore superior.
* &quot;God created Adam and Eve, not Adam and Steve (or Madame and Eve)&quot; and similar essentialist cultural notions that maleness-masculinity and femaleness-femininity are complementary;
* Heterosexuality alone being natural, good and right. p. 18
* The idea that (in the words of Anita Bryant during her Save Our Children campaign): &quot;homosexuals cannot biologically reproduce children; therefore, they must recruit our children.&quot;
* Because of their lifestyle, homosexuals do not have families with children, so they undermine the survival of the human race (natalism).
* Homosexuality is an affectional or mental disorder or simply a social ill, therefore, it can be cured or stamped out. If it is not eradicated, it will lead to social disintegration and societal collapse.
* Homosexuals can be converted to heterosexuality. p. 109

In an attempt to bring awareness to people who exhibit heterosexist views but are possibly not aware of it, Mark Rochlin constructed a set of questions in 1977 which are questions that non-heterosexual people are often exposed to, but not heterosexuals, such as &quot;What do you think caused your sexuality?&quot; This heterosexuality questionnaire is often distributed around college campuses to bring awareness of heterosexist sexual prejudice against LGBT persons.

===Institutional level===
As well as comprising attitudes held by an individual or a social group, heterosexism can also exist as the expression of attitudes within an institution. As a result, schools, hospitals, and correctional facilities can act as a showcase for heterosexist attitudes in various ways. First, schools may implement these attitudes and ideas through unequal and inconsistent disciplinary actions. One such example is meting out harsher punishment to a same-sex couple violating the school ground rules while allowing a heterosexual couple to pass with a more lenient disciplinary action for an equal or identical violation. Also, hospitals may limit patient visiting only to immediate family, i.e., relatives, and exclude same-sex partners.

Heterosexism affects the family in several ways. For example, in many countries around the world, same-sex marriage is not allowed, so non-heterosexual persons must remain unmarried or enter into heterosexual marriage. Many countries also deny rights and benefits to same-sex couples, including custodial and adoption rights for children, Social Security benefits, automatic durable power of attorney, and hospital spousal rights.

== Research and measurements ==

===Measurements===

Psychologists have aimed to measure heterosexism using various methods. One particular method involves the use of a Likert scale. However, since heterosexism is perceived as something that is unseen, it is difficult to determine if someone is heterosexist based on a self-report method. Researchers, thus, have constructed implicit measurements of heterosexism. An example of this would be an Implicit Association Test. A popular implicit association test measuring heterosexism that is open to the public is a virtual laboratory called Project Implicit.

One limitation present in research on heterosexism is that there often is not a distinction between homophobia and heterosexism. Individuals are more likely to be aware of homophobic tendencies rather than heterosexist views; thus, researchers often measure homophobia instead of heterosexism.

===Research===

Research on heterosexism has focused on variables that may affect views of heterosexism. For instance, in a study by psychologist, Gregory M. Herek, it was found that there was a gender difference between heterosexual attitudes toward lesbians and gay men. Specifically, the study reveals that heterosexual individuals all seem to have some heterosexist tendency, however, heterosexual males have a greater tendency than heterosexual females to exhibit negative attitudes towards non-heterosexual individuals (this includes gay men, lesbians, and bisexuals). Another notable finding of Herek&#x27;s study was that heterosexual males showed a greater tendency to demonstrate hostility towards gay men rather than lesbians. Other factors that Herek acknowledges to contribute to heterosexism include individual differences, religiosity, conforming to social norms, right-wing authoritarianism, customs and beliefs regarding cultural tradition, and personal experience with non-heterosexual individuals. Research has also recognized the effects of level of education on views of heterosexism. Wright et al. revealed that higher levels of education, or having more years of education, is related to less homophobic tendencies.

== As discrimination ==

===Explicit or open===

This type of heterosexism includes anti-gay laws, policies, and institutional practices, harassment based on sexual orientation or perceived sexual orientation; stereotyping, discriminatory language and discourse, and other forms of discrimination against LGBT persons such as:
* Hate speech, terms of disparagement, hate mail, death threats, &quot;murder music&quot;
* Scapegoating, mobbing, witch-hunts, moral panic; using gay men and homosexuality as a folk devil for the AIDS pandemic.
* Negative portrayals or stereotypes of gay men, lesbians, and bisexuals solely as villains, suicide or murder victims
* Using the gay panic defense in assault or murder cases.
* Sodomy laws when enforced almost exclusively against consenting, adult, same-sex partners. &quot;See also: Bowers v. Hardwick and Lawrence v. Texas&quot;
* In some countries where homosexuality is criminalized, such as Mauritania, Saudi Arabia, and the Islamic Republic of Iran, offenders may receive the maximum sentence of capital punishment. &quot;See also: Paragraph 175&quot;
* Discrepancies in age of consent laws in which legal sexual activity between members of the same sex is set at a higher age than that for partners in female–male relationships. Most such laws apply explicitly (or have historically applied) only to male homosexual sexual activity. &quot;See also: Morris v. The United Kingdom&quot;, &quot;State v. Limon&quot;
* Prohibiting youths from bringing a same-sex date to high school prom. &quot;See also: Fricke v. Lynch, Marc Hall v. Durham Catholic School Board&quot;
* Adoption bans against either same-sex couples or gay, lesbian, or bisexual individuals. &quot;See also: LGBT adoption, In re: Gill&quot;
* Legislation that prevents legal and social equality, i.e., laws that prohibit protection against discrimination based on sexual orientation or perceived sexual orientation, particularly with regard to health care, housing, and employment.
* The institution of female–male marriage and reserving the right to marry strictly for female–male couples via explicit definitions or through bans on same-sex marriage such as &quot;marriage protection acts&quot; (such as DOMA in the United States); pp. 145–151
* Also, the above restriction even when same-sex couples have access to civil unions that are either analogous to or not on a par with marriage;
* Barring gay men, lesbians, and bisexuals from serving in the armed forces or from working in the education field; this can include policies such as the American military&#x27;s &quot;Don&#x27;t ask, don&#x27;t tell&quot; policy or Lech Kaczyński and other conservative Polish politicians&#x27; stance to exclude gay men and lesbians from entering the teaching profession. &quot;See also: LGBT rights in Poland&quot;
* Organized opposition to gay rights; labeling such rights and privileges as &quot;special rights&quot; or the &quot;Gay Agenda&quot;;
* Referring to a suspected criminal&#x27;s homosexuality or bisexuality when in analogous situations there is no mention of a suspect&#x27;s heterosexuality.

===Implicit or hidden===
This form of heterosexism operates through invisibility, under-representation, and . It includes:
* Lack or under-representation of homosexual or bisexual people in advertising to the general public;
* Censorship of homosexual or bisexual characters, themes, and issues in works of art, literature, entertainment; &quot;see also &quot;Sugar Time&quot; episode of Postcards from Buster&quot;
* Exclusion of historical and political figures&#x27; and celebrities&#x27; homosexuality or bisexuality; their portrayal as heterosexuals;
* Complete avoidance of mentioning these people and their positive contributions particularly in news media;
* In the context of sex education or professional advice, referring only to female–male relationships when discussing female or male sexual attraction and activity;
* Silence on issues affecting homosexual and bisexual people at school or work or absence of their discussion in a positive light;
* Implementation and use of content-control software (censorware) to filter out information and websites that focus on homosexuality or bisexuality;
* Postal censorship and border control or customs seizure of publications deemed obscene solely on the basis of them containing material related to homosexuality even when they contain no erotic or pornographic material; &quot;see also Little Sister&#x27;s Book and Art Emporium&quot;
* Work environments that tacitly require gay men, lesbians, and bisexuals not to reveal their sexual orientation via discussion of their relationship status while heterosexuals can discuss their relationships and marital status freely;
* At public libraries or bookstores: rejection, removal or destruction of books (e.g. &quot;Jenny lives with Eric and Martin&quot;), films, and posters with homosexual themes;
* Refusal to include families headed by same-sex parents at school events or to represent such family diversity in school curricula; &quot;see also anti-bias curriculum&quot;;
* Coercive or forced sex reassignment surgery on gay men, lesbian women, and bisexuals – an issue addressed in Tanaz Eshaghian&#x27;s 2008 documentary, &quot;Be Like Others&quot;. &quot;See also: LGBT rights in Iran&quot;
* Forced disappearance, &quot;damnatio memoriae&quot;, ostracism, shunning, and other forms of social rejection geared towards making homosexual or bisexual people &quot;personae non gratae&quot;.

== Effects ==

Heterosexism causes a range of effects on people of any sexual orientation. However, the main effects of heterosexism are marginalization, and anti-LGBT violence and abuse.

=== Marginalization ===
The main effect of heterosexism is the marginalization of gay men, lesbians, and bisexuals within society. Heterosexism has led to stigmatization and persecution of not only these people but also those of other sexual diversity such as transgender, and transsexual people. Along with homophobia, lesbophobia, and internalized homophobia, heterosexism continues to be a significant social reality that compels people to conceal their homosexual or bisexual orientation, or metaphorically, to remain in the closet in an effort to pass for heterosexual.

Marginalization also occurs when marriage rights are heterosexist. More specifically, when marriage rights are exclusive to female–male couples, all same-sex couples, be they gay, lesbian, straight or mixed, are prevented from enjoying marriage&#x27;s corresponding legal privileges, especially those regarding property rights, health benefits, and child custody. Moreover, such limitation prevents same-sex couples from receiving the inherent social respect of marriage and its cultural symbolism.

=== Anti-LGBT violence and abuse ===

Yolanda Dreyer, professor of practical theology at University of Pretoria, has stated that &quot;Heterosexism leads to prejudice, discrimination, harassment, and violence. It is driven by fear and hatred (Dreyer 5).&quot; Along the same lines, forensic psychologist Karen Franklin explains violence caused by heterosexism toward both men and women, regardless of their sexual orientations:

[T]hrough heterosexism, any male who refuses to accept the dominant culture&#x27;s assignment of appropriate masculine behavior is labeled early on as a &quot;sissy&quot; or &quot;fag&quot; and then subjected to bullying. Similarly, any woman who opposes male dominance and control can be labeled a lesbian and attacked. The potential of being ostracized as homosexual, regardless of actual sexual attractions and behaviors, puts pressure on all people to conform to a narrow standard of appropriate gender behavior, thereby maintaining and reinforcing our society&#x27;s hierarchical gender structure.

Another form of heterosexist violence as social control that most often targets lesbian women is corrective rape: a gang rape of a lesbian to &quot;cure&quot; her of her same-sex attractions. A notorious example from South Africa is the corrective rape and murder of Eudy Simelane, LGBT-rights activist and member of the women&#x27;s national football team.

According to a Frontline article titled &quot;Inside the Mind of People Who Hate Gays&quot;, bias-related violence against homosexuals is believed to be widespread in the United States, with perpetrators typically described by victims as young men in groups who assault targets of convenience. Victims accounts suggest that assailants possess tremendous rage and hatred; indeed, documentation of horrific levels of brutality has led gay activists to characterize the violence as political terrorism aimed at all gay men and lesbians. Other motives for antigay violence suggested in the literature include male bonding, proving heterosexuality, and purging secret homosexual desires.

== Responses ==

According to an article in the &quot;Howard Journal of Communications&quot;, some LGBT individuals have responded to heterosexism through direct confrontation and communication, or through the removal of self from the hostile environment.

==See also==
* Anti-LGBT rhetoric
* Culture war
* Discrimination against non-binary gender people
* Discrimination against people with HIV/AIDS
* Harassment (categories and types)
* Heteropatriarchy
* Identity politics
* Intolerance
* LGBT stereotypes
* Liberal homophobia
* Minority rights
* Transphobia
* Straightwashing
* Straight pride
==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q49809" start="0" end="12" title="Heterosexism" label="Heterosexism"/>
<link wikidata="Q622645" start="28" end="37" title="Attitude (psychology)" label="attitudes"/>
<link wikidata="Q742736" start="39" end="43" title="bias" label="bias"/>
<link wikidata="Q169207" start="49" end="63" title="discrimination" label="discrimination"/>
<link wikidata="Q1035954" start="76" end="91" title="heterosexuality" label="heterosexuality"/>
<link wikidata="Q1035954" start="214" end="226" title="Heterosexuality" label="heterosexual"/>
<link wikidata="Q205665" start="276" end="280" title="Norm (social)" label="norm"/>
<link wikidata="Q464886" start="375" end="427" title="American Heritage Dictionary of the English Language" label="American Heritage Dictionary of the English Language"/>
<link wikidata="Q1858336" start="448" end="485" title="Webster&amp;#x27;s Dictionary" label="Merriam-Webster Collegiate Dictionary"/>
<link wikidata="Q169207" start="504" end="518" title="discrimination" label="discrimination"/>
<link wikidata="Q17888" start="629" end="647" title="sexual orientation" label="sexual orientation"/>
<link wikidata="Q33487" start="705" end="724" title="internalized homophobia" label="internalised hatred"/>
<link wikidata="Q104969456" start="797" end="804" title="gay men" label="gay men"/>
<link wikidata="Q55719239" start="806" end="813" title="lesbian" label="lesbian"/>
<link wikidata="Q43200" start="816" end="824" title="bisexual" label="bisexual"/>
<link wikidata="Q3243712" start="857" end="877" title="second-class citizen" label="second-class citizen"/>
<link wikidata="Q191600" start="912" end="924" title="civil rights" label="civil rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q13416790" start="954" end="969" title="social equality" label="social equality"/>
<link wikidata="Q33487" start="1050" end="1060" title="homophobia" label="homophobia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1858336" start="1096" end="1133" title="Webster&amp;#x27;s Dictionary" label="Merriam-Webster Collegiate Dictionary"/>
<link wikidata="Q4817600" start="1253" end="1272" title="gay rights activist" label="gay rights activist"/>
<link wikidata="Q5181392" start="1274" end="1287" title="Craig Rodwell" label="Craig Rodwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q130989" start="1482" end="1489" title="Neologism" label="coinage"/>
<link wikidata="Q93200" start="1507" end="1513" title="sexism" label="sexism"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1690" end="1711" title="Transparency (linguistic)#Descriptive" label="semantic transparency"/>
<link wikidata="Q301751" start="1744" end="1762" title="critical theorists" label="critical theorists"/>
<link wikidata="Q17884" start="1767" end="1772" title="LGBTQ" label="LGBTQ"/>
<link wikidata="Q179742" start="1948" end="1955" title="bigotry" label="bigotry"/>
<link wikidata="Q605088" start="1969" end="1987" title="straight privilege" label="straight privilege"/>
<link wikidata="Q3211463" start="2001" end="2018" title="La pensée straight" label="The Straight Mind"/>
<link wikidata="Q263201" start="2066" end="2080" title="Monique Wittig" label="Monique Wittig"/>
<link wikidata="Q11794989" start="2120" end="2146" title="compulsory heterosexuality" label="compulsory heterosexuality"/>
<link wikidata="Q33487" start="2218" end="2232" title="homonegativity" label="homonegativity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1662673" start="2249" end="2262" title="gender theory" label="gender theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q658022" start="2267" end="2279" title="queer theory" label="queer theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q605088" start="2287" end="2304" title="heteronormativity" label="heteronormativity"/>
<link wikidata="Q33487" start="2433" end="2443" title="Homophobia" label="Homophobia"/>
<link wikidata="Q581459" start="2519" end="2528" title="antipathy" label="antipathy"/>
<link wikidata="Q391156" start="3031" end="3043" title="essentialist" label="essentialist"/>
<link wikidata="Q44148" start="3065" end="3073" title="maleness" label="maleness"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076509" start="3074" end="3085" title="masculinity" label="masculinity"/>
<link wikidata="Q866081" start="3101" end="3111" title="femininity" label="femininity"/>
<link wikidata="Q583261" start="3506" end="3523" title="anti-gay violence" label="anti-gay violence"/>
<link wikidata="Q932219" start="3525" end="3546" title="forensic psychology" label="forensic psychologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q194112" start="3618" end="3630" title="value system" label="value system"/>
<link wikidata="Q48277" start="3676" end="3682" title="gender" label="gender"/>
<link wikidata="Q2672163" start="3798" end="3806" title="Gender role" label="sex role"/>
<link wikidata="Q623971" start="3845" end="3859" title="social control" label="social control"/>
<link wikidata="Q8461" start="4047" end="4053" title="racism" label="racism"/>
<link wikidata="Q17016489" start="4185" end="4200" title="white privilege" label="white privilege"/>
<link wikidata="Q605088" start="4217" end="4239" title="heterosexual privilege" label="heterosexual privilege"/>
<link wikidata="Q2072081" start="4446" end="4461" title="Person of color" label="people of color"/>
<link wikidata="Q339014" start="4535" end="4551" title="non-heterosexual" label="non-heterosexual"/>
<link wikidata="Q5283969" start="4766" end="4786" title="Diversity training" label="trainer on diversity"/>
<link wikidata="Q752361" start="5121" end="5133" title="The Advocate (LGBT magazine)" label="The Advocate"/>
<link wikidata="Q817393" start="5158" end="5170" title="black people" label="black people"/>
<link wikidata="Q4096602" start="5267" end="5296" title="British Psychological Society" label="British Psychological Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q1516555" start="5444" end="5453" title="Intersectionality" label="intersect"/>
<link wikidata="Q841628" start="5703" end="5721" title="social hierarchies" label="social hierarchies"/>
<link wikidata="Q167172" start="6157" end="6168" title="stereotypes" label="stereotypes"/>
<link wikidata="Q205665" start="6206" end="6217" title="social norm" label="social norm"/>
<link wikidata="Q5853064" start="6240" end="6252" title="marginalized" label="marginalized"/>
<link wikidata="Q605088" start="6443" end="6494" title="heteronormativity" label="homosexuality and bisexuality do not normally exist"/>
<link wikidata="Q12135" start="6520" end="6536" title="mental disorder" label="mental illnesses"/>
<link wikidata="Q623184" start="6540" end="6557" title="deviance (sociology)" label="deviant behaviors"/>
<link wikidata="Q1339824" start="6593" end="6600" title="mindset" label="mindset"/>
<link wikidata="Q17888" start="6617" end="6635" title="sexual orientation" label="sexual orientation"/>
<link wikidata="Q620749" start="6743" end="6748" title="dogma" label="dogma"/>
<link wikidata="Q660877" start="6750" end="6766" title="Moral absolutism" label="universal truths"/>
<link wikidata="Q310669" start="6781" end="6801" title="Appeal to authority" label="appeals to authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q2646525" start="6849" end="6868" title="conventional wisdom" label="conventional wisdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q190553" start="6872" end="6887" title="sociobiology" label="sociobiological"/>
<link wikidata="Q2574320" start="7045" end="7053" title="closeted" label="closeted"/>
<link wikidata="Q842254" start="7104" end="7124" title="machismo" label="&amp;quot;real&amp;quot; men"/>
<link wikidata="Q58701" start="7320" end="7332" title="Adam and Eve" label="Adam and Eve"/>
<link wikidata="Q4774220" start="7338" end="7352" title="Adam and Steve" label="Adam and Steve"/>
<link wikidata="Q240623" start="7586" end="7598" title="Anita Bryant" label="Anita Bryant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1291875" start="7610" end="7627" title="Save Our Children" label="Save Our Children"/>
<link wikidata="Q4774220" start="7718" end="7725" title="Homosexual recruitment" label="recruit"/>
<link wikidata="Q686712" start="7874" end="7882" title="natalism" label="natalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q12135" start="7922" end="7937" title="mental disorder" label="mental disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q815726" start="8046" end="8067" title="Social solidarity" label="social disintegration"/>
<link wikidata="Q3042783" start="8072" end="8089" title="societal collapse" label="societal collapse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1538947" start="8112" end="8121" title="conversion therapy" label="converted"/>
<link wikidata="Q17422" start="9481" end="9498" title="same-sex marriage" label="same-sex marriage"/>
<link wikidata="Q159733" start="9748" end="9783" title="Durable power of attorney" label="automatic durable power of attorney"/>
<link wikidata="Q617473" start="9984" end="9996" title="Likert scale" label="Likert scale"/>
<link wikidata="Q16255102" start="10135" end="10154" title="Self-report study" label="self-report method."/>
<link wikidata="Q774081" start="10261" end="10286" title="Implicit Association Test" label="Implicit Association Test"/>
<link wikidata="Q5607055" start="10866" end="10882" title="Gregory M. Herek" label="Gregory M. Herek"/>
<link wikidata="Q4376276" start="11598" end="11625" title="right-wing authoritarianism" label="right-wing authoritarianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q6458274" start="12043" end="12051" title="LGBT rights opposition" label="anti-gay"/>
<link wikidata="Q167172" start="12169" end="12181" title="stereotyping" label="stereotyping"/>
<link wikidata="Q49809" start="12241" end="12276" title="discrimination against LGBT persons" label="discrimination against LGBT persons"/>
<link wikidata="Q653347" start="12288" end="12299" title="Hate speech" label="Hate speech"/>
<link wikidata="Q545779" start="12301" end="12323" title="terms of disparagement" label="terms of disparagement"/>
<link wikidata="Q2794113" start="12325" end="12334" title="hate mail" label="hate mail"/>
<link wikidata="Q2915360" start="12336" end="12349" title="death threats" label="death threats"/>
<link wikidata="Q289822" start="12351" end="12375" title="Stop Murder Music" label="&amp;quot;murder music&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q2912143" start="12378" end="12390" title="Scapegoating" label="Scapegoating"/>
<link wikidata="Q207469" start="12392" end="12399" title="mobbing" label="mobbing"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12401" end="12412" title="Witch-hunt#Political usage" label="witch-hunts"/>
<link wikidata="Q2914277" start="12414" end="12425" title="moral panic" label="moral panic"/>
<link wikidata="Q5464460" start="12464" end="12474" title="folk devil" label="folk devil"/>
<link wikidata="Q3077789" start="12483" end="12496" title="AIDS pandemic" label="AIDS pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3707361" start="12629" end="12646" title="gay panic defense" label="gay panic defense"/>
<link wikidata="Q1656146" start="12677" end="12687" title="Sodomy law" label="Sodomy law"/>
<link wikidata="Q2907274" start="12784" end="12802" title="Bowers v. Hardwick" label="Bowers v. Hardwick"/>
<link wikidata="Q1157002" start="12807" end="12824" title="Lawrence v. Texas" label="Lawrence v. Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q17898" start="12857" end="12886" title="Homosexuality laws of the world" label="homosexuality is criminalized"/>
<link wikidata="Q8454" start="13002" end="13020" title="capital punishment" label="capital punishment"/>
<link wikidata="Q249348" start="13038" end="13051" title="Paragraph 175" label="Paragraph 175"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13077" end="13091" title="Age of consent#Homosexual and heterosexual age discrepancies in law" label="age of consent"/>
<link wikidata="Q5107507" start="13356" end="13384" title="Chris Morris (activist)" label="Morris v. The United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q7603904" start="13398" end="13412" title="State v. Limon" label="State v. Limon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1150737" start="13473" end="13489" title="Prom" label="high school prom"/>
<link wikidata="Q5503397" start="13507" end="13522" title="Fricke v. Lynch" label="Fricke v. Lynch"/>
<link wikidata="Q16950569" start="13524" end="13565" title="Marc Hall v. Durham Catholic School Board" label="Marc Hall v. Durham Catholic School Board"/>
<link wikidata="Q17900" start="13678" end="13691" title="LGBT adoption" label="LGBT adoption"/>
<link wikidata="" start="13693" end="13704" title="In re: Gill" label="In re: Gill"/>
<link wikidata="Q13416790" start="13749" end="13764" title="social equality" label="social equality"/>
<link wikidata="Q17422" start="14104" end="14121" title="same-sex marriage" label="same-sex marriage"/>
<link wikidata="Q6772849" start="14136" end="14160" title="Marriage Protection Act" label="marriage protection acts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1182626" start="14176" end="14180" title="Defense of Marriage Act" label="DOMA"/>
<link wikidata="Q41075" start="14288" end="14299" title="civil union" label="civil union"/>
<link wikidata="Q11211" start="14515" end="14532" title="Military of the United States" label="American military"/>
<link wikidata="Q135475" start="14546" end="14577" title="Don&amp;#x27;t ask, don&amp;#x27;t tell" label="Don&amp;#x27;t ask, don&amp;#x27;t tell"/>
<link wikidata="Q2757" start="14594" end="14608" title="Lech Kaczyński" label="Lech Kaczyński"/>
<link wikidata="Q1626354" start="14751" end="14772" title="LGBT rights in Poland" label="LGBT rights in Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q17898" start="14805" end="14815" title="gay rights" label="gay rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q40613" start="14817" end="14825" title="Labeling theory" label="labeling"/>
<link wikidata="Q7574861" start="14862" end="14876" title="special rights" label="special rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q14634937" start="14896" end="14906" title="Homosexual agenda" label="Gay Agenda"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15427" end="15482" title="Postcards from Buster#Episodes" label="&amp;quot;Sugar Time&amp;quot; episode of Postcards from Buster"/>
<link wikidata="Q464859" start="15871" end="15888" title="sexual attraction" label="sexual attraction"/>
<link wikidata="Q13515741" start="16062" end="16086" title="content-control software" label="content-control software"/>
<link wikidata="Q915060" start="16185" end="16202" title="Postal censorship" label="Postal censorship"/>
<link wikidata="Q3256725" start="16419" end="16461" title="Little Sister&amp;#x27;s Book and Art Emporium" label="Little Sister&amp;#x27;s Book and Art Emporium"/>
<link wikidata="Q11920938" start="16681" end="16695" title="marital status" label="marital status"/>
<link wikidata="Q1862618" start="16778" end="16783" title="Homosexuality in children&amp;#x27;s literature" label="books"/>
<link wikidata="Q6179381" start="16796" end="16828" title="Jenny lives with Eric and Martin" label="Jenny lives with Eric and Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q30715252" start="16920" end="16936" title="Same-sex parenting" label="same-sex parents"/>
<link wikidata="Q4774324" start="17028" end="17048" title="anti-bias curriculum" label="anti-bias curriculum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053501" start="17077" end="17101" title="sex reassignment surgery" label="sex reassignment surgery"/>
<link wikidata="Q2392136" start="17167" end="17182" title="Tanaz Eshaghian" label="Tanaz Eshaghian"/>
<link wikidata="Q33109" start="17214" end="17228" title="Be Like Others" label="Be Like Others"/>
<link wikidata="Q1275939" start="17252" end="17271" title="LGBT rights in Iran" label="LGBT rights in Iran"/>
<link wikidata="Q1288449" start="17280" end="17300" title="Forced disappearance" label="Forced disappearance"/>
<link wikidata="Q223590" start="17308" end="17325" title="damnatio memoriae" label="damnatio memoriae"/>
<link wikidata="Q186240" start="17333" end="17342" title="ostracism" label="ostracism"/>
<link wikidata="Q204244" start="17344" end="17352" title="shunning" label="shunning"/>
<link wikidata="Q674328" start="17373" end="17389" title="social rejection" label="social rejection"/>
<link wikidata="Q183424" start="17448" end="17467" title="Persona non grata" label="personae non gratae"/>
<link wikidata="Q5853064" start="17728" end="17743" title="marginalization" label="marginalization"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137326" start="17820" end="17834" title="Social stigma" label="stigmatization"/>
<link wikidata="Q5110203" start="17900" end="17916" title="sexual diversity" label="sexual diversity"/>
<link wikidata="Q25495971" start="17942" end="17953" title="transsexual" label="transsexual"/>
<link wikidata="Q33487" start="17973" end="17983" title="homophobia" label="homophobia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1742659" start="17985" end="17996" title="lesbophobia" label="lesbophobia"/>
<link wikidata="Q33487" start="18002" end="18025" title="internalized homophobia" label="internalized homophobia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2574320" start="18190" end="18200" title="Closeted" label="the closet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1784829" start="18217" end="18221" title="Passing (sexual orientation)" label="pass"/>
<link wikidata="Q604444" start="18830" end="18852" title="University of Pretoria" label="University of Pretoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q583261" start="18941" end="18949" title="Violence against LGBT people" label="violence"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19329" end="19334" title="Sissy#Pejorative" label="sissy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1975772" start="19350" end="19353" title="Fag (slang)" label="fag"/>
<link wikidata="Q240126" start="19382" end="19390" title="bullying" label="bullying"/>
<link wikidata="Q623971" start="19815" end="19829" title="social control" label="social control"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135287" start="19871" end="19886" title="corrective rape" label="corrective rape"/>
<link wikidata="Q8192354" start="19890" end="19899" title="gang rape" label="gang rape"/>
<link wikidata="Q262503" start="20041" end="20054" title="Eudy Simelane" label="Eudy Simelane"/>
<link wikidata="Q4612907" start="20056" end="20067" title="LGBT social movements" label="LGBT-rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q1197887" start="20095" end="20130" title="South Africa women&amp;#x27;s national football team" label="women&amp;#x27;s national football team"/>
<link wikidata="Q4774220" start="21089" end="21107" title="Anti-LGBT rhetoric" label="Anti-LGBT rhetoric"/>
<link wikidata="Q3480226" start="21110" end="21121" title="Culture war" label="Culture war"/>
<link wikidata="Q5282086" start="21124" end="21171" title="Discrimination against non-binary gender people" label="Discrimination against non-binary gender people"/>
<link wikidata="Q5282077" start="21174" end="21217" title="Discrimination against people with HIV/AIDS" label="Discrimination against people with HIV/AIDS"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="21220" end="21253" title="Harassment#Categories" label="Harassment (categories and types)"/>
<link wikidata="Q24451508" start="21256" end="21272" title="Heteropatriarchy" label="Heteropatriarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2914650" start="21275" end="21292" title="Identity politics" label="Identity politics"/>
<link wikidata="Q183225" start="21295" end="21306" title="Toleration" label="Intolerance"/>
<link wikidata="Q51424" start="21309" end="21325" title="LGBT stereotypes" label="LGBT stereotypes"/>
<link wikidata="Q5901405" start="21328" end="21346" title="Liberal homophobia" label="Liberal homophobia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1369260" start="21349" end="21364" title="Minority rights" label="Minority rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q59677" start="21367" end="21378" title="Transphobia" label="Transphobia"/>
<link wikidata="Q56064174" start="21381" end="21396" title="Straightwashing" label="Straightwashing"/>
<link wikidata="Q7621087" start="21399" end="21413" title="Straight pride" label="Straight pride"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="252623" wikidata="Q1676844" url="?curid=252623" title="Jabiluka">
<text>Jabiluka is a pair of uranium deposits and mine development in the Northern Territory of Australia that was to have been built on land belonging to the Mirarr clan of Aboriginal people. The mine site is surrounded by, but not part of, the World Heritage–listed Kakadu National Park.

==History==

Exploration on the site began in the late 1960s with Jabiluka 1 being discovered in 1971 and the much larger Jabiluka 2 discovered in 1973. The Jabiluka deposits were included in the group of uranium deposits that were the subject of the Fox Inquiry. As a result of this inquiry, the Jabiluka mining lease and two others were created along with Kakadu National Park. Feasibility works into the development of the mine were well progressed at the time of the 1983 Australian federal election, which saw the Australian Labor Party take government. Under this government, an export licence for the uranium was unlikely to have been granted and the project development was stopped. Energy Resources of Australia Ltd bought the deposit from Pancontinental and proceeded without background work. Upon the election of the Howard Liberal government in 1996, the project was once again placed into development.

The &quot;Jabiluka Long-Term Care and Maintenance Agreement&quot; signed in February 2005 gives the traditional owners veto rights over future development of Jabiluka. However, in 2007, Rio Tinto suggested that the mine could reopen one day.

In 2024, the Northern Territory Government decided not to renew ERA&#x27;s lease for the high-grade uranium deposit.

==Controversy==

In 1998 the issue came to a head when Jacqui Katona and Yvonne Margarula, of the Mirarr people, called on activists to come from around Australia and the world to blockade the construction of the mine by Energy Resources of Australia (ERA). Over 500 people were arrested in the course of the eight-month blockade.

ERA developed the surface infrastructure and the decline down to the ore-body to allow for further definition of the resource. Falling uranium prices prevented the project from proceeding. ERA&#x27;s parent company, North Ltd, was bought by Rio Tinto Group, who announced that the mine will not go ahead – at least until their nearby Ranger uranium mine is mined out.

The Mirarr people agitated for Rio Tinto to clean up the mine site and restore it in keeping with the surrounding National Park. On 12 August 2003 rehabilitation works commenced on the Jabiluka site, 50,000 tonnes of material from the mine were put back down the decline at Jabiluka, filling up 1.2 km of decline.

In 2013, work to remove and remediate the interim water management pond commenced.

According to ERA, between 2005 and 2015 over 16,000 stems of two dozen different species of native plants were planted at the Jabiluka site. Aerial photography shows significant recovery and regeneration.

===Documentary films===

The 1997 documentary film, &quot;Jabiluka&quot;, was produced and directed by David Bradbury. Another film on the subject was made by Cathy Henkel, called &quot;Walking Through a Minefield&quot;. It was released in 1999. In 2006, documentary filmmaker Pip Starr released &quot;Fight for Country: the story of the Jabiluka Blockade&quot;. Starr spent five years working on the film. 
In 1979 Bonita Ely, assisted by Charles Green and William Winford, performed &quot;Jabiluka UO2&quot;, using the binaries spiral and straight line to express conflicting, opposing, cultures. Two men like surveyors draw a straight long white line across the landscape. Ely creates a fringed conical dome adorned with an ochre spiral, referring to the woven mats women in Arnhem Land make for their babies and to rest in. To continue the line the men will destroy the cone. Ely spins in front of them to communicate its importance but they ignore her, she collapses from vertigo, they smash the dome. After they pack up and leave Bonita Ely reasserts the spiral, burning the spiral into the earth with dry grass. 

==See also==
* Uranium in the environment
* Anti-nuclear movement in Australia
* Activist Wisdom
* List of uranium mines
* Unconformity uranium deposits
* Uranium mining

==References==
==Further reading==
*Paasonen, Karl-Erik (2007). &quot;Between Movements of Crisis and Movements of Affluence: An analysis of the campaign against the Jabiluka uranium mine, 1997–2000&quot; PhD Thesis, School of Political Science and International Studies, University of Queensland.

==External links==
* Jabiluka Deposit Summary Report
* Jabiluka</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1676844" start="0" end="8" title="Jabiluka" label="Jabiluka"/>
<link wikidata="Q1098" start="22" end="29" title="uranium" label="uranium"/>
<link wikidata="Q3235" start="67" end="85" title="Northern Territory" label="Northern Territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q28225105" start="152" end="158" title="Mirarr" label="Mirarr"/>
<link wikidata="Q12060728" start="167" end="184" title="Australian Aborigine" label="Aboriginal people"/>
<link wikidata="Q9259" start="239" end="253" title="World Heritage" label="World Heritage"/>
<link wikidata="Q189657" start="261" end="281" title="Kakadu National Park" label="Kakadu National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q7381850" start="535" end="546" title="Russell Walter Fox" label="Fox Inquiry"/>
<link wikidata="Q3586902" start="755" end="787" title="1983 Australian federal election" label="1983 Australian federal election"/>
<link wikidata="Q5919788" start="1112" end="1137" title="Howard government" label="Howard Liberal government"/>
<link wikidata="Q1969638" start="1300" end="1318" title="traditional owners" label="traditional owners"/>
<link wikidata="Q5589402" start="1456" end="1485" title="Northern Territory Government" label="Northern Territory Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q465680" start="1616" end="1629" title="Jacqui Katona" label="Jacqui Katona"/>
<link wikidata="Q540009" start="1634" end="1650" title="Yvonne Margarula" label="Yvonne Margarula"/>
<link wikidata="Q1330701" start="1782" end="1811" title="Energy Resources of Australia" label="Energy Resources of Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q219577" start="2093" end="2107" title="parent company" label="parent company"/>
<link wikidata="Q821293" start="2134" end="2149" title="Rio Tinto Group" label="Rio Tinto Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q1413953" start="2227" end="2246" title="Ranger Uranium Mine" label="Ranger uranium mine"/>
<link wikidata="Q15452427" start="2970" end="2984" title="David Bradbury (film maker)" label="David Bradbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q19958066" start="3026" end="3038" title="Cathy Henkel" label="Cathy Henkel"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3144" end="3153" title="Pip Starr" label="Pip Starr"/>
<link wikidata="Q3287562" start="4003" end="4029" title="Uranium in the environment" label="Uranium in the environment"/>
<link wikidata="Q574854" start="4032" end="4066" title="Anti-nuclear movement in Australia" label="Anti-nuclear movement in Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4677613" start="4069" end="4084" title="Activist Wisdom" label="Activist Wisdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q6644498" start="4087" end="4108" title="List of uranium mines" label="List of uranium mines"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4111" end="4140" title="Uranium ore deposits#Unconformity-related deposits" label="Unconformity uranium deposits"/>
<link wikidata="Q328381" start="4143" end="4157" title="Uranium mining" label="Uranium mining"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="252628" wikidata="Q25634" url="?curid=252628" title="Black-headed gull">
<text>The black-headed gull (Chroicocephalus ridibundus) is a small gull that breeds in much of the Palearctic in Europe and Asia, and also locally in smaller numbers in coastal eastern Canada. Most of the population is migratory and winters further south, but many also remain in the milder areas of northwestern Europe. It was formerly sometimes cited as &quot;common black-headed gull&quot; to distinguish it from &quot;great black-headed gull&quot; (an old name for Pallas&#x27;s gull).

The black-headed gull was previously placed in the genus &quot;Larus&quot; but genetic studies early in the 21st century showed that this genus in a wide sense like this was paraphyletic with respect to other gull genera, and extensive changes to the taxonomy of gulls were made with many species of gull removed from &quot;Larus&quot; and transferred to other genera; the black-headed gull joining nine or ten other species in the resurrected genus &quot;Chroicocephalus&quot;; this was accepted by the IOC World Bird List and other ornithological authorities in 2008.

The genus name &quot;Chroicocephalus&quot; is from the Ancient Greek words &quot;khroizo&quot;, &quot;to colour&quot;, and &quot;kephale&quot;, &quot;head&quot;. The specific name &quot;ridibundus&quot; is Latin for &quot;laughing a lot&quot;.

==Description==
This gull is long with a wingspan and weighs ; males (186–400 g) average heavier than females (166–350 g), but with considerable overlap.

In flight, the white leading edge of the outer wing (the outer primaries) is a good field mark, particularly combined with the dark underside of the inner primaries, which distinguishes it from the white underside of those feathers in its close relative the Bonaparte&#x27;s gull. The summer adult has a chocolate-brown head (not black, although does look black from a distance), white neck, underparts and tail, pale grey wings and back, black tips to the primary wing feathers, and red bill and legs. The hood is lost in winter, leaving just two dark spots above and behind the eye. Summer plumage occurs from March to July (rarely from late January, and into August), winter plumage from late July until March or April. Black-headed gulls take two years to reach maturity. Juvenile birds, for the first month or two after fledging, have a mottled pattern of brown spots over most of the body, and a black band on the tail; in late summer, they moult into first-winter plumage, with a grey back, but retaining a brown carpal bar on the inner wing, blackish secondary feathers, and the black band on the tail. In their first summer (one year old), they develop a partial brown hood, the extent of which is very variable between individuals from almost no brown on the head, to a hood like a full adult&#x27;s. The second winter plumage is like adult plumage, except for occasional brown marks on the wings and tail tip in some individuals. There is no difference in plumage between the sexes.

It breeds in colonies in large reed beds or marshes, or on islands in lakes, nesting on the ground; colonies may range from a few (or even single) pairs up to several thousand pairs, exceptionally over 10,000 pairs. Like most gulls, it is highly gregarious in winter, both when feeding and in evening roosts. It is not a pelagic species and is rarely seen at sea far from coasts.

Like most gulls, black-headed gulls are long-lived birds, with a maximum age of at least 32.9 years recorded in the wild.

===Subspecies===
Some authorities treat it as a monotypic species with no subspecies, while others treat it as having two subspecies, &quot;C. r. ridibundus&quot; in the west and centre of the range, and &quot;C. r. sibiricus&quot; in the far east (eastern Siberia; wintering in Japan and eastern China). The latter is slightly larger and relatively longer-winged. The variation is likely clinal, with intergrades in central Siberia.

==Distribution==
Black-headed gulls breed across the Palearctic over much of Europe and northern Asia, from Iceland and Ireland east to Japan and eastern China. It is abundant, with a global population of 2–3 million pairs; most numerous in Europe, with up to 300,000 pairs in Great Britain and 250,000 pairs in Poland the largest concentrations. The range is slowly expanding westwards, with Iceland first colonised in 1911, Greenland in 1969, and Newfoundland in Canada in 1977, with around 20 pairs breeding in northeastern Canada in the late 20th century. They migrate south and west away from regions which freeze hard in winter, reaching northern Africa and southern Asia (with small numbers south to the Equator). Areas within the breeding range with milder winters such as Great Britain receive large influxes of migrants from colder areas like Scandinavia, Poland, the Baltic States, and Russia; the British winter population is around 3 million. Small numbers occur in winter in northeast North America as far south as Virginia, often in flocks of the similar-looking Bonaparte&#x27;s gull.

===Vagrancy===
South of its regular range in eastern North America, it is recorded as a very rare transient south to the Carolina coast, and also in some Caribbean islands and Mexico. There are a few records from Australia, the first on 19 October 1991, at Broome, Western Australia, and others at Darwin, Northern Territory in 1998, 2005, and 2006. It is also a vagrant south in Africa as far as the Pretoria area in South Africa.

==Disease==
Black-headed gulls were among the birds most heavily hit by the 2023 avian influenza outbreak, with over 4,000 birds killed in Great Britain by early May; similarly high mortality rates were also reported from France, the Netherlands, Italy and Germany.

== Behaviour ==
The black-headed gull is a bold and opportunistic feeder. It eats insects, fish, seeds, worms, scraps, and carrion in towns, or invertebrates in ploughed fields with equal facility. It is a noisy species, especially in colonies, with a familiar &quot;kree-ar&quot; call.

It displays a variety of behaviour and adaptations. Some of these include removing eggshells from the nest after hatching, begging co-ordination between siblings, differences between sexes, conspecific brood parasitism, and extra-pair paternity. They are found in a variety of different habitats.

=== Breeding ===
==== Eggshell removal ====
Eggshell removal is a behaviour seen in birds once the chicks have hatched, observed mostly to reduce risk of predation. Removing the eggshell acts as a way of camouflage to avoid predators seeing the nest. The further away egg shells are from the nest, the lower the predation risk. Black-headed gull eggs experience predation from different species of birds, foxes, stoats, and even other black-headed gulls. Although mothers show some form of aggressiveness when a predator is near, in the first 30 minutes, wet chicks can be easily taken by other black-headed gulls after hatching when the parents of the wet chick are distracted.

Black headed gulls also carry away other objects that do not belong in the nest. The removal of eggshells and other objects is important not only in the incubation period but also during the first few days after the eggs hatch. However, the removal process seems to increase as time goes on. The removal is done by both the male and female parents, normally lasts a few seconds and is done three times a year.

A black-headed gull is able to differentiate an egg shell from an egg by acknowledging its thin, serrated, white, edge; the weight of the egg or eggshell does not play a role when determining its value.

Earlier hypotheses have attempted to explain the survival value of black-headed gulls removing their eggshells from the nest, including:

# The sharp edges of the shells after hatching could harm the chicks
# The eggshell could somehow intrude during the brooding
# The eggshell could slip over the unhatched egg, creating a double shell
# Some of the moist organic material left from the shell could lead to a production of bacteria and mould

==== Begging coordination between siblings ====
Black-headed gulls feed their young by regurgitating onto the ground, rather than into each chick one at a time. The parents tend to accommodate their regurgitation amounts for how intense the nest begging is, from both an individual chick or a group of chicks begging together. Chicks who are siblings, have learned this behaviour and begin synchronising their begging signals to decrease the costs as an individual and increase the benefits as a whole. The rate of parental food regurgitation to chicks increases with begging intensity.

The amount and response of begging signals differs throughout the nestling period. Usually, there are 3–5 begging events/hour, each lasting around one minute. High intensity begging behaviour appears at the end of the first week in the nest, but the coordination between multiple chicks emerge during the last week of the nestling period. The more siblings present, the more they coordinate their begging while decreasing the number of begging.

==== Sex differences ====
Male chicks have less of a chance of survival when compared to female chicks. Black-headed gulls are a sexually size-dimorphic species, so the larger sex is at a disadvantage when the amount of food sources are low.

Male birds are more likely to be born in the first egg and female birds are more likely to be born in the third. The position of a female black-headed gull in response to the food available when laying the eggs can predict the offspring&#x27;s characteristics.

==== Conspecific brood parasitism ====
Conspecific brood parasitism is a behaviour that occurs when females lay their eggs in another female&#x27;s nest, of the same species. It can reduce the cost of incubation and nestling young by passing it on to another bird. Black-headed gulls usually lay three egg clutches, and the first two are normally larger than the third. The third egg normally has the lowest survival rate, while the first or second are usually the parasitic eggs.

Most of the egg dumping occurs within the beginning of the egg laying period. The parasitic eggs being laid in another conspecific&#x27;s nest increases the chance of hatching and may occur because of nest desertion or a nest being taken over by another bird.

Multiple eggs in a nest from different mothers may also result from intra-specific nest parasitism, joint female nesting, and nest takeover. Intra-specific nest parasitism is a disadvantage to the hosts because the female could end up taking care of the parasitic chicks over her own and therefore neglecting them and reducing their fitness. Another disadvantage for the host is that incubating more chicks than their own takes up more energy.

==== Extra-pair paternity ====
The rate of extra-pair paternity (EPP) has a large variation between populations of black-headed gulls. It is primarily a context-dependent strategy, meaning not all black headed gulls experience this behaviour. The variation between populations of extra-pair paternity can be explained by the variation it has on the advantages and disadvantages it has on a female, as well, as the variation in pressure on a females choice.

The differences in the rate of EPP may be determined by multiple different factors: life history traits, ecological factors or different behavioural strategies of males.

==== Central–periphery gradient within colonies ====
Egg-laying can be earlier in Black-headed Gulls nesting in the centre of the colony, with central pairs tending to lay larger eggs, which have a higher hatching success, than pairs nesting at the periphery of the colony. Centrally nesting individuals have also been found to be in better condition and have higher genetic quality.

=== Walking displays ===
Black-headed gulls display both head-bobbing walking (HBW) and non-bobbing walking (NBW). Head-bobbing walking is expressed by a hold phase and a thrust phase. The hold phase in black-headed gulls occurs mainly during the single support phase and is when the bird balances its head to equal the environment. Head-bobbing walking occurs during a seeking type foraging by walking through water and includes benefits such as enhancing motion and pattern detection and gathering depth information from motion parallax during the thrust phase. Non-bobbing walking occurs when black-headed gulls are displaying a waiting behaviour while foraging on flat surfaces.

===Synchronisation===
Observations on the behaviour of black-headed gulls show that individuals synchronise their vigilance activity with other neighbouring black-headed gulls. Synchronisation in black-headed gulls groups is dependent on the distance between the individuals.

==Uses==

The eggs of the black-headed gull were considered a delicacy by some in the UK and eaten hard boiled. The collection of black-headed gull eggs is heavily regulated by the UK government. Eggs may only be taken by a small number of licensed individuals at six sites between 1 April and 15 May each year and only a single egg may be taken from each nest. No eggs are permitted to be sold after 30 June. As the gulls tend to lay in late April and early May, the eggs are only available to purchase for 3 or 4 weeks per year.

==In popular culture==
The black-headed gull is the official bird of Tokyo, Japan, and the &quot;Yurikamome&quot; automated guideway transit in Tokyo Bay is named after it.

In Richard Adams&#x27; 1972 novel &quot;Watership Down&quot;, a black-headed gull named Kehaar (who claims his name is the onomatopoeia of waves breaking against the shore) plays a major part in the story. Injured by a farm cat and left behind during the seasonal migration, Kehaar finds himself stranded on the Downs and is taken in by a warren of rabbits. He later becomes their friend and ally, and helps to save the rabbits from danger many times; instincts eventually force him to return to his colony, but he promises to visit the rabbits each winter. True to Adams&#x27; stated intentions of trying to keep their behaviour close to reality, Kehaar is characterised as intelligent, gregarious, noisy, messy, and impatient, and with a guttural accent. Kehaar appears in all three screen adaptations of the novel; the character was voiced by Zero Mostel in the 1978 film, Rik Mayall in the 1999 TV series, and Peter Capaldi in the 2018 miniseries.

==Gallery==
==References==
==External links==
* at 
* Ageing and sexing (PDF; 2.0 MB) by Javier Blasco-Zumeta &amp; Gerd-Michael Heinze
* Feathers of Black-headed Gull (Larus ridibundus) at Ornithos.de 
* 
* 
* Article with video about Black-headed Gull at avibirds.com</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q25634" start="4" end="21" title="Black-headed gull" label="black-headed gull"/>
<link wikidata="Q2699803" start="62" end="66" title="gull" label="gull"/>
<link wikidata="Q106447" start="94" end="104" title="Palearctic" label="Palearctic"/>
<link wikidata="Q46" start="108" end="114" title="Europe" label="Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q48" start="119" end="123" title="Asia" label="Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q16" start="180" end="186" title="Canada" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q216507" start="214" end="223" title="bird migration" label="migratory"/>
<link wikidata="Q476356" start="464" end="482" title="Pallas&amp;#x27;s gull" label="Pallas&amp;#x27;s gull"/>
<link wikidata="Q1887740" start="549" end="554" title="Larus" label="Larus"/>
<link wikidata="Q208755" start="660" end="672" title="paraphyly" label="paraphyletic"/>
<link wikidata="Q135851" start="942" end="957" title="Chroicocephalus" label="Chroicocephalus"/>
<link wikidata="Q35497" start="1112" end="1125" title="Ancient Greek" label="Ancient Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="1263" end="1268" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q629525" start="1715" end="1736" title="Bonaparte&amp;#x27;s gull" label="Bonaparte&amp;#x27;s gull"/>
<link wikidata="Q310890" start="3504" end="3513" title="Monotypic taxon" label="monotypic"/>
<link wikidata="Q106447" start="3944" end="3954" title="Palearctic" label="Palearctic"/>
<link wikidata="Q189" start="3999" end="4006" title="Iceland" label="Iceland"/>
<link wikidata="Q22890" start="4011" end="4018" title="Ireland" label="Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="4027" end="4032" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="4045" end="4050" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q23666" start="4168" end="4181" title="Great Britain" label="Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q36" start="4203" end="4209" title="Poland" label="Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q223" start="4317" end="4326" title="Greenland" label="Greenland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2003" start="4340" end="4352" title="Newfoundland" label="Newfoundland"/>
<link wikidata="Q16" start="4356" end="4362" title="Canada" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q216507" start="4456" end="4463" title="bird migration" label="migrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q23538" start="4602" end="4609" title="Equator" label="Equator"/>
<link wikidata="Q23666" start="4672" end="4685" title="Great Britain" label="Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q21195" start="4744" end="4755" title="Scandinavia" label="Scandinavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q36" start="4757" end="4763" title="Poland" label="Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q39731" start="4769" end="4782" title="Baltic States" label="Baltic States"/>
<link wikidata="Q159" start="4788" end="4794" title="Russia" label="Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370" start="4920" end="4928" title="Virginia" label="Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q629525" start="4969" end="4990" title="Bonaparte&amp;#x27;s gull" label="Bonaparte&amp;#x27;s gull"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="5206" end="5215" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q606294" start="5250" end="5275" title="Broome, Western Australia" label="Broome, Western Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q11568" start="5291" end="5317" title="Darwin, Northern Territory" label="Darwin, Northern Territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q3926" start="5394" end="5402" title="Pretoria" label="Pretoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q258" start="5411" end="5423" title="South Africa" label="South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q43987" start="5507" end="5522" title="avian influenza" label="avian influenza"/>
<link wikidata="Q23666" start="5565" end="5578" title="Great Britain" label="Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="5648" end="5654" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q55" start="5660" end="5671" title="Netherlands" label="Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="5673" end="5678" title="Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="5683" end="5690" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q2312129" start="12783" end="12791" title="delicacy" label="delicacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1490" start="13322" end="13327" title="Tokyo" label="Tokyo"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="13329" end="13334" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191079" start="13350" end="13360" title="Yurikamome" label="Yurikamome"/>
<link wikidata="Q313289" start="13430" end="13443" title="Richard Adams" label="Richard Adams"/>
<link wikidata="Q936801" start="13467" end="13481" title="Watership Down" label="Watership Down"/>
<link wikidata="Q170239" start="13550" end="13562" title="onomatopoeia" label="onomatopoeia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4892257" start="13739" end="13744" title="Berkshire Downs" label="Downs"/>
<link wikidata="Q25851" start="13776" end="13783" title="European rabbit" label="rabbits"/>
<link wikidata="Q191952" start="14273" end="14284" title="Zero Mostel" label="Zero Mostel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2165639" start="14292" end="14301" title="Watership Down (film)" label="1978 film"/>
<link wikidata="Q439095" start="14303" end="14313" title="Rik Mayall" label="Rik Mayall"/>
<link wikidata="Q477516" start="14321" end="14335" title="Watership Down (1999 TV series)" label="1999 TV series"/>
<link wikidata="Q732661" start="14341" end="14354" title="Peter Capaldi" label="Peter Capaldi"/>
<link wikidata="Q25184087" start="14362" end="14377" title="Watership Down (2018 TV series)" label="2018 miniseries"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="252629" wikidata="Q7994" url="?curid=252629" title="European Grand Prix">
<text>The European Grand Prix (also known as the Grand Prix of Europe) was a Formula One event that was introduced during the mid-1980s and was held every year from to , except in . During these years, the European Grand Prix was held in a country that hosted its own national Grand Prix at a different point in the same season, at a different circuit (except in ). The race returned as a one-off in , being held on a street circuit in Baku, Azerbaijan.

In earlier years, the European Grand Prix was not a race in its own right, but an honorific title given to one of the national Grands Prix in Europe. The first race to be so named was the 1923 Italian Grand Prix, held at Monza, and the last was the 1977 British Grand Prix at Silverstone.

==As an honorific title==
The European Grand Prix was created as an honorific title by the AIACR, the FIA&#x27;s predecessor in the organisation of motor racing events. The first race to receive the title was the Italian Grand Prix, in 1923; the French Grand Prix followed in 1924 and the Belgian Grand Prix in 1925. After a hiatus in 1929, the Belgian race received the title in 1930, becoming the last race to do so before World War II.

The title was revived by the FIA after the war, when it was given to the 1947 Belgian Grand Prix. For the next thirty years (except 1953 and 1969–1971), the title was distributed across several countries, including at the prestigious Monaco Grand Prix in 1963. The last race to receive the title was the 1977 British Grand Prix. All post-war honorific European Grands Prix were Formula One races except for the 1952 event, the Belgian Grand Prix, which was run to Formula Two regulations.

The Italian and Belgian Grands Prix both received the title seven times, more than any other race.

==As a standalone round of the World Championship==

===Brands Hatch (1983, 1985)===
The event was initially created as a stop-gap. In 1983, the Formula One schedule originally featured a race near Flushing Meadows in New York City. When the race was cancelled three months before the event, track organizers at Brands Hatch were able to create a European Grand Prix at the track in its place. The success of the event, buoyed by a spirited battle for the World Championship, led to the event returning on the schedule the following year.

Brands Hatch was unable to host the European Grand Prix in 1984, as it was hosting the British Grand Prix in even numbered years (alternating with Silverstone) so the European GP went to a redesigned and shorter Nürburgring circuit in 1984.

Brands Hatch returned to host the European Grand Prix in 1985, Originally the 1985 European Grand Prix was going to be held in Rome on a street circuit around the EUR but was moved to Brands Hatch.
===Cancelled race Jarama (1986)===
There was an attempt to stage the European Grand Prix in 1986 with an early version of the calendar publishing Jarama as the host track but these plans fell through.

===Donington Park (1993) ===
In 1990, a wealthy Japanese businessman, Tomonori Tsurumaki, built the Nippon Autopolis with the idea of hosting a Formula One race. In 1992, plans were made to have an Asian Grand Prix in 1993 to replace the Mexican Grand Prix on the schedule. However, these plans failed to materialise. Instead, Bernie Ecclestone added a race at Donington Park to the schedule, which brought back the European Grand Prix moniker. The race was the brainchild of Tom Wheatcroft, who had been trying to bring F1 to the track since an abortive attempt to host the British Grand Prix in 1988. The first and so far only Formula One Grand Prix at Donington Park resulted in Ayrton Senna&#x27;s victory in mixed wet and dry conditions.

===Jerez (Cancelled 1992 race, 1994, 1997) ===
The Circuito de Jerez in Jerez de la Frontera in Spain was intended to be host of the European Grand Prix in 1992 but this was cancelled. However, Jerez would eventually host the event two years later as round 14 of 16 in 1994 and the season finale in 1997, and it was the site of the controversial collision between Michael Schumacher and Jacques Villeneuve which saw Schumacher get disqualified from the championship and it was also the scene of Mika Häkkinen&#x27;s first Formula One victory.

===Nürburgring GP-Strecke (1984, 1995-1996, 1999-2007)===
Brands Hatch was unable to host the European Grand Prix in 1984, so the European GP went to a redesigned and shorter Nürburgring circuit in 1984. It was a far cry from the 23 kilometre Nürburgring that most were used to seeing, and was initially unpopular during Formula One&#x27;s return.

The race returned to Nürburgring in 1995, which was now popular again with drivers. But after complaints that no other countries were to get the race, the Nürburgring race was renamed the Luxembourg Grand Prix. Jerez got the race back in 1997 as a replacement for the Portuguese Grand Prix.

In 1998, the European Grand Prix was dropped from the schedule with Jerez dropping off the schedule and the Nürburgring race retaining the Luxembourg Grand Prix moniker for that year, but returned in 1999 when the race at Nürburgring re-adopted the European Grand Prix name.

The 1999 race saw torrential rain conditions which caused numerous retirements, presenting Johnny Herbert with the opportunity to take Stewart Grand Prix&#x27;s first and only victory in its final season before being sold to Ford.

The race continued to be held at the Nürburgring until 2007. On 29 August 2006 it was announced that it had been removed from the F1 calendar for the 2007 season. From then there would only be one GP hosted in Germany each year, alternating between Hockenheimring and Nürburgring. However, what the name of this Grand Prix would be was uncertain for a time; while originally intended to be the German Grand Prix from 2007, the Nürburgring race of 2007 was renamed &quot;Großer Preis von Europa&quot; (European Grand Prix) due to a dispute over the ownership of the title &quot;German Grand Prix&quot;.

===Valencia Street Circuit (2008–2012)===
From to the European Grand Prix took place in Valencia, Spain. During the 2009 event, Valencia signed a deal for a further 5 races, which put Valencia on the calendar until 2014. Despite this, in March 2012, it was announced that the European Grand Prix was to be discontinued in 2013, with the Spanish Grand Prix planned to alternate between Barcelona and Valencia. However, Barcelona has retained the race since 2013, and the Valencia circuit was removed from the calendar.

===Baku City Circuit (2016)===

The European Grand Prix returned to the Formula One World Championship in , being held on the Baku City Circuit in Azerbaijan. The race was renamed the Azerbaijan Grand Prix for the season. This means that the European Grand Prix was again discontinued after a one-off in 2016.

==Winners of the European Grand Prix==

===Repeat winners (drivers)===
Only includes standalone events.

&quot;Drivers in bold are competing in the Formula One championship in the current season.&quot;

===Repeat winners (constructors)===
Only includes standalone events.

&quot;Teams in bold are competing in the Formula One championship in the current season.&quot;

===Repeat winners (engine manufacturers)===
Only includes standalone events.

&quot;Manufacturers in bold are competing in the Formula One championship in the current season.&quot;
* Built by Ilmor in 1997

** Built by Cosworth

===By year: the European Grand Prix as a standalone event===



===By year: the European Grand Prix as an honorary designation===
&quot;A pink background indicates an event which was not part of the Formula One World Championship.&quot;
==References==
==External links==

* Formula 1 European Grand Prix in Valencia Official website.
* Nürburgring F1 statistics</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7994" start="4" end="23" title="European Grand Prix" label="European Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q7994" start="43" end="63" title="European Grand Prix" label="Grand Prix of Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1968" start="71" end="82" title="Formula One" label="Formula One"/>
<link wikidata="Q23045146" start="383" end="390" title="2016 European Grand Prix" label="one-off"/>
<link wikidata="Q17004958" start="412" end="426" title="Baku City Circuit" label="street circuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q9248" start="430" end="434" title="Baku" label="Baku"/>
<link wikidata="Q227" start="436" end="446" title="Azerbaijan" label="Azerbaijan"/>
<link wikidata="Q173753" start="637" end="660" title="1923 Italian Grand Prix" label="1923 Italian Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q171417" start="670" end="675" title="Autodromo Nazionale Monza" label="Monza"/>
<link wikidata="Q172150" start="698" end="721" title="1977 British Grand Prix" label="1977 British Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q171402" start="725" end="736" title="Silverstone Circuit" label="Silverstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q179412" start="841" end="844" title="Fédération Internationale de l&amp;#x27;Automobile" label="FIA"/>
<link wikidata="Q8036" start="952" end="970" title="Italian Grand Prix" label="Italian Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q7997" start="985" end="1002" title="French Grand Prix" label="French Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q7954" start="1028" end="1046" title="Belgian Grand Prix" label="Belgian Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="1164" end="1176" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q3113843" start="1252" end="1275" title="1947 Belgian Grand Prix" label="1947 Belgian Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q252727" start="1413" end="1438" title="1963 Monaco Grand Prix" label="Monaco Grand Prix in 1963"/>
<link wikidata="Q172150" start="1483" end="1506" title="1977 British Grand Prix" label="1977 British Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q20856" start="1606" end="1624" title="1952 Belgian Grand Prix" label="Belgian Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q687214" start="1643" end="1654" title="Formula Two" label="Formula Two"/>
<link wikidata="Q745296" start="1967" end="1983" title="Flushing Meadows–Corona Park" label="Flushing Meadows"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="1987" end="2000" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q172880" start="2081" end="2093" title="Brands Hatch" label="Brands Hatch"/>
<link wikidata="Q8019" start="2396" end="2414" title="British Grand Prix" label="British Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q171402" start="2456" end="2467" title="Silverstone Circuit" label="Silverstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q152207" start="2521" end="2532" title="Nürburgring" label="Nürburgring"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368377" start="2714" end="2717" title="EUR, Rome" label="EUR"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="2999" end="3004" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3021" end="3039" title="Tomonori Tsurumaki" label="Tomonori Tsurumaki"/>
<link wikidata="Q1748785" start="3051" end="3067" title="Autopolis" label="Nippon Autopolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q48" start="3149" end="3153" title="Asia" label="Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q8109" start="3189" end="3207" title="Mexican Grand Prix" label="Mexican Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q172724" start="3278" end="3295" title="Bernie Ecclestone" label="Bernie Ecclestone"/>
<link wikidata="Q173202" start="3312" end="3326" title="Donington Park" label="Donington Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q171576" start="3396" end="3404" title="1993 European Grand Prix" label="The race"/>
<link wikidata="Q599140" start="3427" end="3441" title="Tom Wheatcroft" label="Tom Wheatcroft"/>
<link wikidata="Q10490" start="3633" end="3645" title="Ayrton Senna" label="Ayrton Senna"/>
<link wikidata="Q172884" start="3746" end="3763" title="Circuito de Jerez" label="Circuito de Jerez"/>
<link wikidata="Q12303" start="3767" end="3787" title="Jerez de la Frontera" label="Jerez de la Frontera"/>
<link wikidata="Q29" start="3791" end="3796" title="Spain" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q69686" start="3851" end="3855" title="1992 Formula One World Championship" label="1992"/>
<link wikidata="Q69713" start="3964" end="3968" title="1994 Formula One World Championship" label="1994"/>
<link wikidata="Q220996" start="3994" end="3998" title="1997 European Grand Prix" label="1997"/>
<link wikidata="Q9671" start="4059" end="4077" title="Michael Schumacher" label="Michael Schumacher"/>
<link wikidata="Q172843" start="4082" end="4100" title="Jacques Villeneuve" label="Jacques Villeneuve"/>
<link wikidata="Q172842" start="4190" end="4203" title="Mika Häkkinen" label="Mika Häkkinen"/>
<link wikidata="Q152207" start="4414" end="4425" title="Nürburgring" label="Nürburgring"/>
<link wikidata="Q8069" start="4776" end="4797" title="Luxembourg Grand Prix" label="Luxembourg Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q9117" start="4856" end="4877" title="Portuguese Grand Prix" label="Portuguese Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q172751" start="5247" end="5261" title="Johnny Herbert" label="Johnny Herbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q173066" start="5291" end="5309" title="Stewart Grand Prix" label="Stewart Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q44294" start="5381" end="5385" title="Ford Motor Company" label="Ford"/>
<link wikidata="Q152207" start="5425" end="5436" title="Nürburgring" label="Nürburgring"/>
<link wikidata="Q7998" start="5782" end="5799" title="German Grand Prix" label="German Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q171406" start="6079" end="6087" title="Valencia Street Circuit" label="Valencia"/>
<link wikidata="Q29" start="6089" end="6094" title="Spain" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q69356" start="6313" end="6317" title="2013 Formula One season" label="2013"/>
<link wikidata="Q9208" start="6328" end="6346" title="Spanish Grand Prix" label="Spanish Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q171404" start="6376" end="6385" title="Circuit de Catalunya" label="Barcelona"/>
<link wikidata="Q171406" start="6390" end="6398" title="Valencia Street Circuit" label="Valencia"/>
<link wikidata="Q17004958" start="6636" end="6653" title="Baku City Circuit" label="Baku City Circuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q27940843" start="6694" end="6715" title="Azerbaijan Grand Prix" label="Azerbaijan Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q173259" start="7382" end="7387" title="Ilmor" label="Ilmor"/>
<link wikidata="Q172740" start="7409" end="7417" title="Cosworth" label="Cosworth"/>
</links>
</doc>
