<doc id="246490" wikidata="Q1241936" url="?curid=246490" title="Battle of Pákozd">
<text>The Battle of Pákozd (or Battle of Sukoró) was a battle in the Hungarian war of Independence of 1848–1849, fought on the 29 September 1848 in the Pákozd – Sukoró – Pátka triangle. It was the first and one of the most important major battles of the war of independence, in which the Hungarian revolutionary army led by Lieutenant-General János Móga stopped the troops of the Croatian Ban Josip Jelačić, who, in accordance with the Habsburg plans, was marching towards Pest to occupy it and chase out the Hungarian national government. After the battle Lieutenant General Josip Jelačić concluded an armistice with the Hungarians, but then retreated towards Vienna. Thanks to this victory Hungary repulsed the first attempt of the Habsburg empire to put down the autonomous Hungarian government, and to restore its full control over the country. The Battle of Pákozd is one of the most remembered battles in Hungarian history,
which was undoubtedly due to the fact that between 1951 and 1991 the anniversary of this battle was the day of the Hungarian Army.

==Background==
After the Ottoman–Hungarian wars ended and the whole territory of the Kingdom of Hungary in personal union with Croatia was liberated from the Ottoman rule, between 1683 and 1699 by the coalition led by the Habsburgs Croatian (later Croatian-Slavonian) Ban represented the Habsburg monarch in this area ruling over Croat and Slavonian feudal counties. The Ban, who belonged to the highest ranking barons of the county, possessed his own jurisdiction and the institution of the Croat feudal Sabor. 
developed from his judicial meetings. After the anti-Ottoman wars, the Military Border was established on most of the parts of Croat and Slavonian territories under military administration. However, not only did the Ban hold political supremacy over Croatian counties, but as head of the Zagreb (Hung. Zágráb) Generalkommando, he was also the commander-in-chief of the Military Border of the Ban, and that of Varaždin (Hung. Varasd), and Karlovac (Hung. Károlyváros).

Serious political, religious, and ethnic tensions had strained Hungarian-Croatian relationships even before 1848. The idea of Illyrism influenced an important part of the Croatian public. These ideas, the Croat version of Pan-Slavism, justly alarmed the Hungarian public which had been struggling with a vision of national death by drowning within a Slavic sea. Croatian public opinion, on the other hand, was irritated by Hungarian ambitions which included extending the use of the Hungarian language over all the major areas of legislation and of public administration. The purely catholic Croatia also protested against the equality of other Christian churches, propagated by the Hungarian liberals, who were in the head of the reform, and revolutionary movements of 1848, which aggravated all the above issues. Finally, Croatia&#x27;s representatives at most of the reform parliamentary sessions supported the conservative government.

After March 1848 the Croat liberals had two essential demands: to unite Croatia, Slavonia, Dalmatia, the &quot;Hungarian Littoral&quot; (Rijeka and Bakar), and the Hungarian and Slavonian Military Frontier into the Triune Kingdom and to establish the right to communicate in Croatian with the Hungarian authorities. The office of the Ban had been empty since 1845, but the Hungarian revolution of 15 March 1848 and the appointment as Hungarian prime minister of the liberal Lajos Batthyány forced the Austrian authorities to appoint a Croatian Ban loyal to them. Baron Franz (Franjo) Kulmer proposed to the newly appointed Austrian Prime Minister that Baron Josip Jelačić, colonel of the 1st Border Guard Regiment of the Ban, be commissioned to this post. Austrian Prime Minister Kollowrat himself considered it important that a forceful, popular person loyal to the Empire should be appointed to this post before the independent Hungarian government, responsible to the parliament, would be appointed. The Emperor appointed Jelačić as Croatian Ban on March 23. The following day the new Ban was promoted to major-general and head of Zágráb Generalkommando. On April 8 he was promoted to lieutenant general. Because of his paternal nature, Jelačić enjoyed great popularity among his subordinates. His excellent organizing ability and charisma soon won over a major part of the Croat public to his cause.

On April 19 the Hungarian government called Jelačić to Pest to discuss the details of his inauguration and questions about the Croatian provincial assembly; Jelačić declined. What is more, after arriving in Zágráb he severed all the connections between Hungary and Croatia. On April 25 he declared martial law and announced that civilian administration in Croatia, Slavonia, and on the Hungarian Littoral were under his jurisdiction. He tried to turn Croatian public opinion against the ongoing Hungarian socio-political transformation by referring to Croatian national injustices and by using national slogans. He announced the abolition of serfdom under his jurisdiction as if the April Laws of 1848 were not valid in Croatia. The Ban did not respond to Hungarian initiatives to negotiate. When, on the 10th of June the Emperor, at Hungarian demands, suspended him as Ban, Jelačić threw aside the monarch&#x27;s decree 
saying that it could not have been His Majesty&#x27;s act or the Emperor must have done it under duress. The Hungarian government offered Croatia the option of a personal union with Hungary and then even secession, but all in vain since Jelačić and the Croatian Sabor demanded the same thing as Vienna—the surrender of independent Hungarian finances, defense, and trade to the imperial government. So the Ban expressed what the Habsburg &quot;Camarilla&quot; wanted to do with Hungary, plans which were kept in secret by Vienna until the open break up with the revolutionary government in September–October, which aimed the returning of the country to the pre-revolution situation, unacceptable for the Batthyány Government and for Hungary. This showed that Jelačić did not want any compromise with Hungary and that his primary objective was not the status of Croatia, but the reinstallation in Hungary of the pre-1848 Habsburg oppression. This The only positive outcome of the meeting was that Batthyány and Jelačić agreed that he would withdraw his troops from the Dráva River. László Csány, government commissioner of Vas, Zala, Veszprém, and Sopron counties, sent numerous reports about Illyrist agent provocateurs on territories bordering Croatia who incited former serfs against the noblemen and they also fomented propaganda for annexing the Muraköz to Croatia. In return Minister of the Interior Bertalan Szemere appointed Csány as royal commissioner of Zala, Somogy, Baranya, and Tolna counties and instructed him to keep an eye on the other side of the river with the help of the deployed regular army of 4,000 soldiers and the county national guardsmen of 14,000 men. During mobilization
in July a 29,000 strong army, was sent to the Dráva area. The regular army on the defensive line contained four infantry battalions, a battalion, a regiment of cuirassiers, two companies of light cavalry (Chevau-légers), and six companies of hussars. The artillery contained four batteries (24 guns altogether). The actual number probably was beyond 35,000. This army remained significant in size until the end of July when two regular battalions and thousands of national guardsmen were detached and sent to the Bácska operational theatre. Later on new hussar companies, a honvéd battalion, and two companies of volunteers arrived to strengthen the line. Altogether the numbers were reduced by 10,000 from the mid-July figures. A bigger problem, however, came to light concerning recruits of non-Hungarian origin—they proved to be unreliable. Early in August Commander of the Dráva guarding line, Major-General Ferenc Ottinger, instructed his soldiers not to resist but rather to retreat without fighting in case the Croats occupied Muraköz. Royal commissioner Csányi had not been informed about the order and, consequently, resigned from his post in protest, although he had not even dispatched his letter of resignation when Ottinger
himself resigned.

Until early August Jelačić did not seriously consider launching an attack against Hungary. He deployed only a few battalions at the border and occupied Varasd early June. Most of the 1st and 2nd battalions of the border guard regiments were in Italy and serious officer and armament shortages appeared in the rest of the battalions. In July Jelačić went on a tour of Slavonia and the Szerémség and won over the border guard regiments one after the other. Between August 8 and 10, after his return to Croatia, his troops occupied Virovitica County (Verőce) and then Szerém county in mid-August. According to the recollections of one of his generals, by then, Jelačić had decided to be the first to attack, before the Hungarians would. On August 9 Jelačić sent to Major-General Roth, commander of the Bród Border Guard Regiment, orders relating both to Roth&#x27;s border guard regiments and to details of preparations for a general attack. Between August 17 and 20 the Ban visited all the borderlands under his command and prompted 28,576 people to rise against the Hungarians. General Neustadter was sent to Slavonia to make preparations there. In the second half of August the Slavonian– Szerémség border guard regiments formally declared that they intended to follow Jelačić&#x27;s commands.9 On August 21 Jelačić instructed Roth and his troops to push forward to the Dráva River and to occupy Eszék.

After Ottinger&#x27;s departure the Hungarian side of the Dráva line was left without a commander for a while. In his appeal of August 25 Batthyány informed the Transdanubian authorities that “we ought to expect a factual violation of our country’s borders any minute.” On August 31 the Eszék garrison announced that in case the expected Hungarian-Croatian conflict occurred they would remain neutral and keep the fortress for His Majesty, Ferdinand V. This dealt a disadvantage to both the Hungarians and the Croats since, according to the Eszék declaration, the Croats were forbidden from using the crossing over the Dráva River at Eszék. Because of troop deployments to other areas, only the following Hungarian units were stationed along the Dráva line: two regular infantry battalions, one honvéd battalion, ten hussar companies, two companies of light cavalry, and a regiment of cuirassiers. One more honvéd battalion was expected to arrive soon. The majority of county national guard battalions—except for Vas county&#x27;s national guard regiment of three battalions—were waiting for relief in order to return home. However, due to the organization of the Volunteer Mobile National Guard it was doubtful whether the relevant counties would send new battalions to protect the Dráva line. Although at the end of August Adám Teleki moved his army closer to the Dráva River and occupied Muraköz, he did not expect to be able to mount a successful defense once the Croats attacked.

War preparations on all sides accelerated after Radetzky’s victory at Custozza. The Serbian Metropolitan of Karlovci Josif Rajačić, the spiritual leader of the Serbian insurgents against Hungary, prodded Jelačić, fearing that Hungarian troops concentrated in Bácska would quash the Serbian uprising. On August 23 he reprimanded Jelačić for abandoning the Serbs.

On August 26 Jelačić was notified from Vienna that the Imperial Court endorsed the justice of the Croatian and Serbian issues saying that “very soon the Court will declare it.” He was also promised that, as soon as he set out for the battlefield the June 10th “disparaging manifesto (the suspension of him as Ban of Croatia) would be withdrawn.” Jelačić, in turn, notified Rajačić about all the above and about the impending attack on August 28. But before this attack, his troops occupied Fiume, considered by Hungary as its own port to the Adriatic Sea on August 31. This meant that the Croatian troops entered in Hungarian territory, thus the war had begun.

On September 4, with reference to Jelačić&#x27;s loyalty and devotion the Emperor revoked his June 10 suspension and declared that Jelačić “is expected to operate for the benefit of the whole Monarchy, for the maintenance of the Hungarian Crown’s integrity, and for the beneficial development of the relationships of the Hungarian associated countries.”

On August 27, 28, and 29 Jelačić sent out orders from Zagreb to his troops to move forward to the Hungarian border. The attack was to take place on the 10th and 11 September. He speculated that his troops crossing the Dráva River at several points would force the Hungarians to give up the left bank of the river without any fight. Therefore, he instructed his commanders that if they encountered resistance, they should wait for the crossing of other columns and their appearance at the side of the enemy. His plan was to advance on to Muraköz and from there to advance on along the southeastern side of Lake Balaton towards Székesfehérvár and Pest-Buda. The Slavonian army corps of Major General Franz Karl von Roth would join the main forces at Nagykanizsa. All the above would be complemented by a general attack by the Serbs in the Bánság and Bácska regions. Jelačić could hardly believe that this plan would lead to serious results. Yet he did hope that in this way the best Hungarian troops would not disturb his march to Pest. Allegedly, Imperial-Royal Minister of Defense Feldzeugmeister Theodor Franz, Count Baillet von Latour
suggested that the Ban should not march directly towards Buda, but instead march towards Komárom from where he could march against either Buda or Vienna. The Ban supposedly also contemplated marching towards Pozsony and instigating an uprising among the Slovak population.

On September 9 the Croats closed off the Dráva bridge at Varasd. It was obvious that an attack was only a matter of hours away. Teleki reported it to the Buda Generalkommando. The report arrived in Pest on September 11, the day the government resigned. Teleki also asked Palatine Stephen what he should do in case Jelačić&#x27;s army launched an attack. The Palatine responded that as a Habsburg duke he was unable to give any advice. However, as a Hungarian palatine he would say that if Jelačić could not produce a direct order from the Monarch ordering an attack on Hungary and if Teleki commanded a substantial force, then Teleki should encounter the invading army with his own forces.

Initially Teleki&#x27;s plan was to defend Muraköz. But when he received the September 4 manifesto, he abandoned his original idea. This was the correct thing to do from a military point of view. With the armed force at hand, Teleki would have been unable to stop the flood of Jelačić&#x27;s soldiers and would have needlessly risked his valuable forces at Muraköz. (He had 3,100 regular soldiers and volunteers, 1,000 hussars, and 12 guns). On September 9 
Teleki approached the Ban and asked him not to start hostilities as long as he was not officially informed about the September 4 manifesto. In his response the Ban declared that the Batthyány government now no longer existed. Consequently, Teleki ought to join him
since 90 percent of the Imperial-Royal Army identified with Jelačić&#x27;s cause. Teleki asked for Jelačić&#x27;s patience until the messenger arrived the following morning. At the same time Teleki ordered a general retreat, because in case the Croatians advanced on at Légrád, they could cut off the retreat of his forces towards Nagykanizsa.

==Prelude==
On September 11 Jelačić&#x27;s troops (51,117 soldiers, 1,902 horses, and 48 guns) crossed the Dráva River at several points and advanced on to Muraköz. Teleki received the Palatine&#x27;s letter of encouragement to offer resistance and Royal Commissioner László Csány also implored him to resist. It did not occur to Teleki that Jelačić had crossed the Hungarian–Croat border without the consent of the Emperor. In the meantime he learned that the Batthyány government had resigned and that the Hungarian Parliament had delegated Lajos Kossuth and Bertalan Szemere, two deputies accused by the pro-Habsburg loyalists of being radicals, to hold executive authority. This induced the loyalist Teleki to inform Csány that he could not recognize Kossuth and Szemere as his legitimate superiors and he would rather retreat with his forces. Then he sent a message of his neutrality to Jelačić who ordered Teleki to march out of Hungary to Styria for the sake of complete neutrality. In the meantime Csány wanted Teleki to hand over the guns in his possession since he was unwilling to defend the Hungarian homeland. Teleki declined the request saying that they 
were the possessions of the Emperor. When Csány warned him that it would be impossible to feed the troops in the area (Keszthely and its surroundings) where Teleki had planned to withdraw to in a neutral position. Teleki threatened Csány that he would march his troops to Jelačić&#x27;s camp unless Csány provided them with supplies. At the same time he turned down the Jelačić&#x27;s order as well. However, his decision might have been influenced by the fact that by September 14 he had learned that the Palatine had again delegated Batthyány to form a government. Therefore, a legal legislative and executive power existed in the country.

Meanwhile, Jelačić&#x27;s troops crossed the Mura River on September 14–15, and advanced towards Nagykanizsa, almost unhindered. Before crossing the river he called on all foreign cavalry regiments stationed in Hungary to join his army. On September 16 a squadron of the Wrbna light cavalry, on September 19 a squadron of the Kress light cavalry, and all of the Hardegg regiment of cuirassiers joined the Ban&#x27;s army. Jelačić was in dire need of these units since he had very few cavalry units. However, the quality of the hussar regiment that the Ban consequently established did not match Hungarian&#x27;s and this discrepancy in quality caused several problems for Jelačić. The four companies of light cavalry were unsuitable to counterbalance the Hungarian hussars in reconnaissance. A regiment of cuirassiers could be used in an open battle but not in scouting nor in shock-actions. More than half of the artillery consisted of three-pounder cannons and Congreve rockets, altogether there were 18 six-pounder cannons. Compared to this, the Hungarian party had exclusively six-pounders. A significant portion of the Croat infantry was formed by younger and older age groups of border guard regiments, mobilized reserve or militia battalions, without an adequate number of officers. There were between 5,400 and 9,300 soldiers in these battalions, making them unmanageable since the effectives of a regimental battalion amounted to 1,200 only.

On September 14 the Hungarian officers’ corps decided to send a delegation to Jelačić to request to see the imperial decree that authorized him to attack Hungary. If Jelačić had one, the regular regiments would remain neutral. If he did not, the regiments would engage the Ban&#x27;s army as soon as they had the chance. A Hungarian delegation went in the Croatian camp, and demanded Jelačić to show them the imperial decree, but he was unable to show them anything. He delivered instead some high-flown speeches about brotherhood in arms and the glorious Imperial-Royal Army while trying to impress upon the envoys, but without success.

On September 15 the Hungarian decision to resist against the Croatian army was reinforced by Palatine Stephen&#x27;s appointment as commander in chief of the army—through Battyhány&#x27;s efforts and pressure—in hopes that the Palatine would be able to hold the loyalty of the officers’ corps.

The Palatine intended to meet Jelačić on deck of a steamer on the Lake Balaton, but the latter declined to appear. The Palatine noted that Jelačić was so confident that he could afford to humiliate even an imperial and royal archduke. Therefore, Palatine Stephen transferred his command to Lieutenant General János Móga, left the camp, returned to Pest, and then left for Vienna.

After crossing the Mura River Jelačić modified his earlier war plans. Overestimating the success of his advances he declined to wait for Roth&#x27;s army corps, which were scheduled to move on September 17. Therefore, Roth was unable to make contact with the main forces of the Ban before September 20–21. Supply difficulties also affected his decision. Roth was instructed that his troops should not go towards Légrád, but rather take a direct northern route from Verőce across Baranya and Tolna counties towards Székesfehérvár. Jelačić hoped that the 1st (John) Dragoon Regiment would join Roth&#x27;s troops since they did not have any kind of a cavalry. Jelačić also hoped that the Schwarzenberg lancer (uhlan) regiment, withdrawn from the Banat (Bánság), would join him as well. He himself launched two of his army corps along the southern side of the Lake Balaton and the third one towards Székesfehérvár via the Iharosberény–Böhönye–Tard–Kaposvár–Simontornya route. This way he hoped to overtake the Hungarian forces at Székesfehérvár or to contact Roth&#x27;s forces in the Tolna county area. He gave up on the latter idea when he learned that the Hungarian troops were ready to evacuate Székesfehérvár.

After the Croat invasion Csány had declared a levée en masse within the threatened counties and Batthyány expanded it onto the whole of Transdanubia on September 19. The levy became more active because a substantial part of the Croat army started looting immediately after crossing the Hungarian borders. Although their destructiveness could not be compared with the atrocities committed by the Serbian rebels, their looting was a deep source of bitterness for the people of Transdanubia. This is why it was evident that Batthyány&#x27;s call for levy in mass met with such a good response. Jelačić himself had not counted on that either. Ten days after the Croat troops crossed the Dráva River,
communications between the army and the hinterland practically ceased to exist. The Zala and Somogy county national guardsmen, militiamen, and volunteers intercepted several hundred carriages transporting
food and equipment, thus preventing the Croatian troops left behind from venturing beyond Nagykanizsa. During a surprise attack a major part of Jelačić&#x27;s mail came into Hungarian hands. It turned out from the intercepted letters, some of which were published in the official journal, that Jelačić was tightly connected with the Austrian government and that Minister of Defense Latour was among the Ban&#x27;s most active supporters.

In the meantime the Hungarian army, numbering 5,000 soldiers on September 18, was growing. Batthyány continued to send new volunteers, regular regimental and honvéd infantry, and hussar units, as well as artillery batteries to the camps at Veszprém, and later at Székesfehérvár. The number of soldiers was over 11,000 on September 21, 13,000 on the 23rd, reached 16,000 on the 25th, and 17,500 on the 28th. The Hungarian command wanted to hold up the Ban&#x27;s army in the Székesfehérvár area. However, on September 26 after a short rear guard action, they gave up the city and retreated towards the northern shore of the Lake Velence.

Seeing that the Hungarians would not surrender to Jelačić without a fight, the political circles from Vienna attempted to put the genie, unleashed by themselves, back in the bottle. On September 25 the Emperor appointed Lieutenant General Count Franz Philipp von Lamberg as royal commissioner and commander-in-chief of the armed forces, and Senechal György Mailáth as royal governor of Hungary. Battyány hoped that Lamberg would be able to restrain Jelačić and, since he had been informed that Lamberg would visit the camp, Batthyány himself rushed there to reinforce Lamberg&#x27;s appointment. The news about Lamberg&#x27;s appointment created uncertainty and conflict among the officers from the Hungarian army because it stated, with the signature of the king, to whom they had sworn, that they should not fight against Jelačić. On 27 September Jelačić was informed by an envoy of Batthyány about Lamberg&#x27;s appointment, and withdrew the attack order which he had planned for the next day, agreeing with the Hungarians for 24 hours ceasefire, waiting for Lamberg to arrive at his headquarters from Székesfehérvár. But the next day Lamberg din not come, because he went to Pest, so Jelačić gave the order to attack the Hungarians on the next day. On 28 September Jelačić sent order to Roth, who was advancing through Tolna county, to enter and remain in Székesfehérvár, because he, with the main Croatian forces, will take Buda easily. In the meantime and in Batthyány&#x27;s absence, by Kossuth&#x27;s motion, the Parliament declared Lamberg a traitor and appointment as unlawful. The Parliament&#x27;s mistrust in the authenticity of the royal manifesto with Lamberg&#x27;s appointment was reinforced by the fact that the ministerial countersignature was missing from it. Lamberg, consequently, fell victim to an enraged mob on the pontoon bridge between Pest and Buda on September 28. The news of this did not reach the Hungarian camp until the evening of 28 September, and the Croatian army learned about this only on 29 September, when they were marching, according to Jelačić&#x27;s order, towards the hills of Sukoró to clash with the Hungarian army.

On 27 September the Hungarian House of Representatives ordered the army of Transdanubia to take up the fight. At the military council of Sukoró on 28 September, the commissioners sent by Parliament demanded the army to resist Jelačić&#x27;s army. Such a passionate debate erupted that it was almost feared that the army would break up without a fight. Commander of the Zrínyi Volunteer Unit, Mór Perczel called the officers with Habsburg military background &quot;black and yellow fluke&quot;, on which both Móga and the loyalist officers unsheathed their swords. The situation was saved by Batthyány, who convinced Móga to resist if on the next day Jelačić would have attacked. Right when the war council ended, the news about Lamberg&#x27;s assassination reached the Hungarian camp. The leadership of the army was afraid that this news will make the former imperial officers to resign, but only one of them decided to do so.

On September 28, the Ban&#x27;s army was concentrated southwest of Pákozd, between this place and Székesfehérvár, and on the same day Major Fligelli was sent out to spy on the Hungarian camp and as far as possible, to learn if in Pest the Hungarians are preparing to defend themselves in case of his troops&#x27; advancement against the capital. At the same time as Fligelli was sent out, Jelačić ordered a reconnaissance-in-force against the Hungarian camp.

But Major Fligelly was captured at Martonvásár by the Hungarian national guards and was interrogated by Batthyány, who took from him the letter written by Jelačić to Lamberg, in which the Ban informed the Lieutenant General that he had been informed of the royal open order, but that he could not comply with the supreme wish at the present time. Batthyány took the letter and asked his entourage to keep what they had heard and the contents of the letter secret.

On the night of 28 to 29 September Batthyány went to Jelačić&#x27;s camp trying to convince him to wait until Lamberg&#x27;s arrival. On 29 in the morning, the Ban refused, and ordered his troops to advance towards the Hungarian army installed on the hills from Pátka and Sukoró. One of the reasons for this was that in the region of Székesfehérvár he could not feed his troops continuously, because the Hungarian army had previously thoroughly exploited the area.

On the next day by 6 a.m., Jelačić ordered an offensive advance of his troops, with the following groupings:
- the right column under Major-General Kempen on the road to Pest;
– in the center a division led by Jelačić himself, advanced across the Pákozd heights towards the Sukoró plateau.
– the left column to carry out the decisive attack under Lieutenant-General Hartlieb on the road to Alcsút.

===The battlefield and the positioning of the two armies===
The Hungarian right flank was positioned on the northern shore of Lake Velence, on the hills between Pátka and Pákozd, south of the Lovasberény road, to cut the enemy&#x27;s road towards Buda. Móga placed more than a third of his infantry here, including two battalions of line infantry. Móga gave the overall command over this wing to Lieutenant colonel József Milpökh. The multifaceted, accidented topography which dominated the region where the Hungarian right wing was placed, including the region of Pátka, made any enemy cavalry and artillery attacks very difficult. The Hungarian commanders were expecting a massive infantry attack on this direction. Only two companies of hussars and 8 guns supported the Hungarian right flank. The Hungarian troops on this flank were positioned along the road to Bicske, with their right wing leaning on the marshes from Pátka, to secure the extreme right flank, and as protection against encircling, two hussar companies were assigned to the northern exit of Pátka. The Hungarian right flank was formed as follows: in the first line of battle the two (1st and 2nd) Pest battalions of the Cisdanubia Volunteer Mobile National Guards were deployed, the vanguard was made of the 6th (Kecskemét) company of the 2nd Pest battalion. Ivánka deployed the companies of the two battalions in an echelon formation, taking advantage of the terrain, while two companies were positioned as support behind the heights, which lay 60 paces behind the battalions. 250–300 paces behind them the 3rd (Hont–Esztergom) and the 4th (Nógrád) battalions were deployed. To the north of these two battalions, in line with them, was the 1st Battalion of the 60th (Wasa) Infantry Regiment, in front of it the 3rd Six Pounder half Honvéd battery and the Half Battery of Major Imre Ivánka. At the northern end of the position stood the Tolna Volunteer Mobile National Guard Battalion and two companies of the 9th (Nicholas) Hussar Regiment. Two Hussar companies were on outpost at Pátka. The 3rd Battalion of the 48th (Ernest) Infantry Regiment probably formed the reserve.

The Hungarian center was located on the vine-growing hills between Pákozd and Sukoró. It was commanded by Major General Franz Holtsche. The postal road from Székesfehérvár to Buda passed through this section, and on both sides of this road, an infantry attack was hampered by the wet, marshy terrain. According to the Hungarian war diary, written after the battle: &quot;this terrain gave the Hungarian army the advantage of being able to use its batteries in all directions without any change of position, completely dominating the area, and in the case of an &quot;[enemy]&quot; deployment between the hills which lie in front and those which were held &quot;[by the Hungarians]&quot;, the stream running through the valley made a decisive advance of the enemy possible only by the main road.&quot; The enemy could deploy his cavalry only here.
Móga placed more than half of his artillery here: 28 guns. A Honvéd battalion, a volunteer battalion and 2 line infantry battalions made here the infantry, and 4 companies of hussars made the cavalry. Historian József Bánlaky (Breit) the 12,000 paces of overstretch, and the huge gap between the completely isolated right flank and the center almost invited the enemy to attempt a breakthrough there.

The left wing was deployed on the southern shore of Lake Velence, near Gárdony and Agárd, on both sides of the road to Pest in front of Sukoró. This wing, leaning on the lake Velence, was commanded by Colonel Mihály Répásy. In and around Agárd was stationing a unit of almost 4000 soldiers under the lead of Colonel Mór Perczel, in order to prevent an eventual encircling movement by the enemy. This section was also crossed by a road, and the terrain was similar to that on the northern shore. As both sides of the road leading to there were wet and swampy, the enemy attack could hardly have expected success from this direction: no wonder the Croatian army did not attack from this direction. Móga here meant active defense in case of need, as indicated by the fact that in addition to the 6 cannons and one battalion each of soldiers and volunteers, he deployed here nearly 600 hussars. If necessary, the latter could be moved relatively quickly around the lake to its northern shore.

The reserve at Velence, was made up of a battalion of the line infantry, a battalion of Honvéd&#x27;s and 3 battalions of volunteers, and 400 hussars, led by Major General Ádám Teleki. Relatively close to the left wing on the southern shore of Lake Velence was another Hungarian grouping. The commander of this detachment was Major Artúr Görgei. Since 27 August, Görgei had been the commander of the Danube–Tisza Interfluve Volunteer Mobile National Guard&#x27;s Szolnok camp, and from 24 September he was the commander of Csepel Island. As the commander of the latter, his task was to prevent a possible crossing of the Roth division to the right bank of the Danube. On 26 September Görgei&#x27;s troops were composed of 600 mobile national guards and 8 cannons, but on the same day, prime minister Batthyányi put under his command 1520 Hunyadi militias, and also around 800 volunteer mobile national guards with 4 cannons. Görgei divided these units, sending parts of them to Dunaföldvár and Adony. On 27 September Móga ordered Görgei to attack the right wing of the enemy with all forces at his disposition because he believed that the main battle with Jelačić will be the next day. On 28 September, one company of the Jászkun battalion was stationed in Tököl, one in Szigetújfalu, one in Ercsi, and one at Lórév; each company, except the one from Ercsi, had four guns. Between 5–6 o&#x27;clock that evening, Görgei with 140–150 men of the Hunyadi militia went on a reconnaissance from Adony, but later he split this unit, sending 20 men towards Velence, 60–70 towards Seregélyes, while himself rode with 80 men towards Sárosd, arriving there on 29 at midnight. He reinforced the detachment from Seregélyes with 40 men and in order to secure their position, he sent 60 militias to Szolgaegyháza. Görgei and the squad he led, went all the way to Aba, HungaryAba, and from there he announced a mass popular uprising against the Croatians. He placed 30 men of the Hunyadi militias in Aba, Sárkeresztúr, and in other smaller localities in order to organize the uprisings, and the remaining 50 were sent to Soponya to observe the road to Székesfehérvár. After Görgei departed from Adony, on 28 at 9 p.m. arrived there from Dunaföldvár the 3. company of the Hunyadi militia, the 2. Major division of the 9. (Nicholas) Hussar regiment and 4 cannons, and on 29 arrived here also the remaining three companies of the Hunyadi militia. The Szabolcs county battalion arrived from Dunaföldvár to Adony on 29 September. As a result of these, on 29 September at night Görgei had at his disposition 600 men from the Jászkun, 800 from the Szabolcs mobile national guards, 1500 men from the Hunyadi militia 202 riders from the 2. Major division of the 9. (Nicholas) Hussar regiment (in total 3100 men at arms) and 16 cannons. Görgei knew that he had not enough men to cause serious problems to the Croatian right wing, but he wanted to establish a web of sentries to prevent the communication between the army of Jelačić and the approaching corps of Roth, capturing the correspondence between them, thus gathering important information which could be decisive in the upcoming confrontation of the two armies.

At the same time, other Hungarian units were rushing towards Pákozd to reinforce the army. The 1. battalion of the 15. (2. Székely) Border Guard Regiment came from Bácska Theater (Serbian front), but they could join the army after the battle, on the 30. September or 1 October. A small force approached the Hungarian main forces from the north: from Zala County, two companies of the Tapolca district battalion, led by Captain József Meszlényi, joined the main force at Nadap around 27 September, however, the three companies led by Major Ferenc Vigyázó on September 28 only reached Magyaralmás, and from there they departed on 29 September through Zámoly towards Pátka.

===Opposing forces===

Commander Lieutenant General János Móga,
Chief of staff: Major Josef Kollmann

&quot;102 infantry companies, 15 cavalry companies, 46 cannons&quot;.
Total: 17,516 soldiers

The Hungarian army numbered about 17,500 men, 2,060 horses, and 42 guns; four unequipped guns were in reserve. Because the Hungarian left wing and the reserves did not participate in the battle, Móga used only 10,444 soldiers and 36 cannons.
Commander Lieutenant General Josip Jelačić,
Chief of staff: Major General Karl Zeisberg

50,458 soldiers, 2339 horses, 60 cannons.

A statement about the Croatian army from 27 September shows 51,557 soldiers, of which 48,234 were combat-ready. It is uncertain if this number also includes the soldiers of the division of Major General Franz Karl von Roth. If we count the possible absence of Roth&#x27;s division, then we have 43,189 personnel and 39,098 combat-ready soldiers. The army had 48 three- and six-pounder guns and 12 Congreve rocket launchers. Even taking to account the absence of the 14,000 soldiers and 12 cannons of the division of Lieutenant General Karl Vinzenz Hartlieb, which departed too late towards the battlefield and arrived there after the end of the battle, the troops under the command of Lieutenant General Josip Jelačić were in numerical superiority, but the superior firepower of the Hungarian army evened the balance of power. As a result, at the battle of Pákozd, Jelačić had at his disposition about 36,000 soldiers and 48 cannons.

==Battle==
===Fights between the Hungarian right wing and the Croatian left wing===
Jelačić, with an army outnumbering the Hungarians by two and a half times, issued a simple marching order for 28 September, anticipating the possibility of a Hungarian resistance. Johann Major General Kempen von Fichtenstamm, the leader of the Croatian left wing, sent his division on the road towards Lovasberény, with the order to reach Vál and Kajászószentpéter on the same day, and with his advance guard Tordas. The other two, the Schmidl and Hartlieb divisions and the united cavalry under Colonel Sedelmayer, had to advance on the Székesfehérvár-Pákozd-Velence mail route. No units were sent to the southern shore of the lake. Jelačić seems to have thought that he could crush the Hungarian right flank with an encircling attack and then push the Hungarian army into Lake Velence, or at least drive it back towards the capital. That day, with the Schmidl&#x27;s division and cavalry, he intended to advance to Martonvásár, and with Hartlieb&#x27;s division to Velence. Kempen&#x27;s and Schmidl&#x27;s divisions and the cavalry brigade had to leave at 6 a.m., while Hartlieb&#x27;s division at 7 a.m.

Kempen&#x27;s troops set off at 6 a.m. on the road to Lovasberény. The division was led by Major General Josef Neustaedter&#x27;s brigade, followed by Colonel Daniel Rastić&#x27;s brigade. Kempen&#x27;s primary objective was to break, with a frontal attack, through the Hungarian right wing, and isolate from each other the units fighting there. The Hungarian hussar outposts which the Neustaedter brigade first met, retreated, and the brigade slowly pushed forward across the Pátka meadow towards the Hungarian front line. The vanguard was a detachment, led by Captain Resniczek, made of the 3. battalion of the Ogulin, and the 3. battalion of the Slunj borderguard regiments. This was followed by a battalion of Ogulin Militia led by Major Terbuhović. The third unit was the 2nd Battalion of the Bród Borderguard Regiment, led by Captain Bogunović. The brigade&#x27;s artillery consisted of 6 guns of the 1st six-pounder infantry battery, and the brigade&#x27;s cavalry was a company of Jelačić hussars. At the same time, the company of the Ogulin Seressaners led by Lieutenant Roknić, and the company of Ogulin militias led by Captain Leypold advanced on the high ground along the main road against the forest, which was in front of the Hungarian position. 

According to the war diary of the Dráva Corps (written down later), at 5 a.m. a patrol of Hussars on outpost at Pátka reported that the enemy had departed from Székesfehérvár, and their commander (Major Imre Szegedy) immediately gave the order to retreat towards Ságvár&quot;. Ivánka, however, sent back the hussars towards Pátka, sending a section of them to reconnoiter beyond Csala, which was halfway between Pátka and Pákozd.

The actual clash between the two armies took place between 9:30 and 10:30 in the morning. According to the Kempen Division&#x27;s staff log, two squads of about 110 skirmishers made of Seressaners, led by Captain Roknić, engaged the Hungarian outposts on the heights to the right of the road. According to two members of the 2nd Pest Volunteer Battalion, the first Croatian scouts appeared at dawn in front of the Hungarian lines but were driven back by a few rifle shots of the Hungarian outposts. Soon the Croatian battalion was ordered back on a lower hill &quot;about two cannon shots away&quot; (like one and a half to two km). Roknić reported this to Major General Neustaedter, saying that he was facing at least 9 divisions (i.e. 18 companies=3 battalions) of infantry and a few batteries. Roknić was mistaken, as the Hungarian right flank had only two battalions of infantry, the rest of the infantry being volunteer mobile National Guard battalions. The Kecskemét company of the 2nd Pest Battalion, divided into two half companies, positioned on a rocky hill, clashed with the Seressaners led by Captain Roknić, and drove them back with their fire, so that they retreated to the left, towards the right edge of the Hungarian right flank, and there they engaged with them in an intense firefight. Roknić soon told Neustaedter that if he did not get reinforcements, he would not be able to hold his position. Kempen then ordered Neustaedter to send reinforcements to Roknić. According to Kempen&#x27;s division&#x27;s staff log, two companies of Leypold&#x27;s battalion, formed from the militias of the Ogulin borderguard regiment, were sent to support the Seressaners.

Another company of the 2nd Pest Battalion was fighting in the valley–probably with two companies of the Leypold Battalion of the Ogulin Militias, and two (or four) companies of cavalry. The latter company retreated, and the 2nd Pest Battalion itself withdrew. According to the Hungarian war diary (written down later), the engagement lasted for more than an hour and caused a shortage of ammunition for the fighting Hungarian infantry. Ivánka, who had arrived on the scene in the meantime, stopped the company&#x27;s retreat, sent them ammunition, and the firing of Ivánka&#x27;s half-battery halted the advancing Croats. Due to the strong Hungarian counterattack, the Croats did not attempt another face-to-face attack here but continued their attempts to encircle the Hungarians. Meanwhile, Ivánka sent the battalion—to help with the ammunition shortage—under the command of Major Richard Guyon on a bayonet charge against the enemy-occupied scrubland. Although it was hit by heavy rifle fire, the battalion captured the thicket but then it was forced to retreat because of the Croatian counterattack that had meanwhile developed (probably by the second Ogulin Militia battalion led by Major Terbuhović). According to Major General Josef Neustaedter&#x27;s memoirs, after receiving Roknić&#x27;s report that he could not hold, Neustadter, on the orders of Kempen, who was present, sent the Ogulin Militia Battalion, led by Major Terbuhović, on the heights to the right. From there, Major Terbuhović had to send four companies of infantry organized in a skirmish-line, into the valley and from there to the opposite heights. However, shortly after that, Terbuhovic himself, asked for support saying that without the brigade&#x27;s support he could not hold his position. Neustaedter then took the lead of the 2nd Battalion of the 7th (Bród) Frontierguard Regiment and moved up the above-mentioned hill from the right, ordering the Ogulin Battalion under Captain Leypold to follow. However, as Leypold had no horse, he ordered the mounted border guard captain Bermann, from the Bród border guard regiment, to lead the Ogulin Battalion. Then Neustaedter led the Bród battalion to the top of the hill.

Meanwhile, the 3rd Battalion of the 3rd (Ogulin) and 4th (Slunj) Borderguard Regiments, led by Major Rezniczek, the 2nd Battalion of the 7th (Bród) Borderguard Regiment, led by Captain Bogunović, and the 3rd Three Pound Infantry Battery, led by Lieutenant Lončar, were climbing the heights to encircle the Hungarians from the right. To ensure the success of the encirclement, Kempen, with a battalion formed from the 3rd Battalions of the 3rd (Ogulin) and 4th (Slunj) Borderguard Regiments, launched further and further attacks in the forest, in order to weaken the Hungarian right wing&#x27;s furthermost section, and divert their attention.

Kempen reported in his war report from Pátka at 2 p.m. that the Hungarian aide-de-camp Major Count Antal Szapáry appeared shortly after the beginning of the battle and asked Kempen &quot;to avoid any bloodshed, assuring that hostilities would be stopped for sure, if here too they were to be stopped&quot;. Kempen was not against this offer and promised to stop fighting until Jelačić&#x27;s response to the ceasefire offer will arrive. But in the midst of the &quot;negotiations&quot;, both he and nearby units came under heavy artillery fire, so he ordered his artillery to deploy and start shooting back. However, Kempen&#x27;s positive attitude to Szapáry&#x27;s offer was probably enforced on him by the confusion caused among the Croats by the Hungarian artillery&#x27;s grapeshot.

The 1st Battalion of the Hungarian 60th (Wasa) Infantry attacked from flank the Croatians in the woods, and the 1st Six-Pounder Infantry Battery, which was assigned to them, their cannons firing grapeshot at the Bród battalion. Neustaedter ordered the unit to withdraw down the valley. However, the Hungarian battery&#x27;s first volley of cartridges still wounded and killed some 50 of the troops. Captain Bogunović, the commander of the unit, and his aide, Petričević, were also wounded in the fire. According to Kempen, &quot;We had to retreat from our unfavorable position to a sideways position in the continuous fire.&quot; After the battalion had retreated from the height, the Hungarian battery started firing cannonballs at the Croatian baggage wagons on the highway from the valley, which retreated in haste towards Pátka. The situation was saved by the 3rd Three-Pounder Infantry Battery, led by Lieutenant Lončar, which took up a firing position not far from the Hungarian battery, caught it in the crossfire and thus deterred it from further firing against Croatian troops and baggage. The Hungarian unit suffered heavy losses from the enemy fire, being forced to retreat, and even abandoning its original position due to the lack of ammunition, according to Miklós Perczel&#x27;s diary. The Croatian battery of Lieutenant Lončar was secured by the Ogulin Militia Battalion led by Captain Bermann and the 3rd Combined Ogulin-Slunj Border Guard Battalion led by Captain Rezniczek.

In the meantime, the two Croatian battalions that had been trying to encircle the Hungarians, advanced unhindered to the plateau. The situation was saved by the Tolna Volunteer National Guards led by Major Miklós Perczel. Miklós Perczel divided his battalion into three divisions: two companies led by Sándor Perczel, two by Miklós Perczel himself, and two were left as reserves at the head of the hill. With his four companies, he attacked the two battalions of Croats that had ascended the mountain. After a volley, they attacked the enemy with a bayonet charge, who, after a short fight, began to flee. The fleeing Croats were also fired upon by a Hungarian battery, causing them heavy losses. The Tolna Volunteer National Guards did not pursue the enemy, but took position on their original positions.

The enemy was fired upon by a six-pounder half battery on the extreme right flank, and a squadron of hussars also attacked, whereupon they retreated through the ravines on the main road without halting to the mill on the side, and at last, they halted in the cover of some mounds further back. The aforementioned half (or whole) battery, and the Nicholas Hussars were brought from the center by Gyula Andrássy, who arrived just in time to stop the Croatian advance.

Sometime after 4 p.m., the commander of the Hungarian right wing Lieutenant colonel József Milpökh ordered a general attack, which drove the back Croats at every point. It was perhaps at this time that the Otočac Seressaners, who had been drawn into this section of the front line, were confronted by one of the Hungarian volunteer battalions. According to the story of the Otočac border guards regiment&#x27;s staff log, the Seressaners led by Lieutenant Vlaisavljević thought the Hungarians want to surrender, and the Hungarians thought the Seressaners want to do that. They approached each other, and at one moment the Hungarians called on the Seressaners to lay down their weapons. But the Croatians seized their rifles and attacked the Hungarians, killing 35 of them and taking 1 lieutenant and 12 privates prisoner. According to a Hungarian source, this was not an accident, but the Croats lured the Hungarian battalion into a trap with the promise to surrender, and then carried out a massacre among them. According to one of Jelačić&#x27;s aides, Hermann Dahlen von Orlaburg, 31 mutilated Hungarians were lying on the ground.

In any case, according to the sources, the Hungarian advance was so fierce that the Croats fled everywhere, and the Hungarian battalions drove the attackers as far as Pátka, almost forcing them into the lake from there. But then the fighting suddenly broke off.

According to a work about the history of the 71st Battalion, Major Imre Ivánka wanted to stop the battle and the advance of the Hungarians, but it took a great effort to stop the advancing 2nd Pest Battalion. According to the memories of a soldier of that battalion, Ivánka himself grabbed a white handkerchief and stopped the advance. The Hungarian battery here was silenced, although the Croats were within firing range. According to Ivánka&#x27;s memoirs, Kempen sent an officer waving a white handkerchief to the Hungarian side. The officer said that Kempen &quot;wishes the firing to be stopped. on the whole line; he does not want to fight the Hungarians; he has been told that the demagogues are terrorizing the [Hungarian] Diet and the government and that he came to the country to liberate it; but now he sees that the whole [Hungarian] nation is in arms against them [the Croatian army], that the regular troops of the Imperial Army are standing and fighting in our [the Hungarian] ranks, [and] he does not want to cause a split in the army, etc.&quot; Ivánka replied that he was not the commander-in-chief, that it was difficult for him too to fight against his comrades from the Habsburg imperial army, but it was not the Hungarians who had invaded Croatia; otherwise, he would report the willingness of Kempen to stop the fight, to the commander-in-chief. He then reported to Milpökh what had happened, sent his aide-de-camp Pál Rainer to Móga, and rode to the Croatian border guard officer. The soldiers engaged in conversation with the Seressaners who accompanied the Croatian officers. According to Ivánka, it was then that the half-battery brought to the right flank by Gyula Andrássy started firing at Kempen&#x27;s troops from the valley, whereupon the Seressaners disarmed Ivánka and took him with them. The fighting here ended shortly after dusk.

===The incident at Pátka===
Towards the end of the battle, an important event also occurred in the rear of the Croatian left flank at Pátka. On 28 September, the half-battalion of the Zala National Guard led by Major Ferenc Vigyázó, of about 600 men, which had departed from the district of Tapolca, but because of the Croatian advance could not unite with the Hungarian main army, remained near Magyaralmás. (The other half-battalion, led by Captain József Meszlényi, manage to join the main army around 27 September.) Captain Móric Kisfaludy arrived in Zámoly with his company on 29 September at 11 am. Here he heard that the Croatians are plundering Pátka. He rode there with one of his officers and saw that about 120–150 Croatian wagons were moving towards the bridge from Pátka. Kisfaludy sent an officer for his troops, and he himself, with the villagers, who started to gather to help him, and a resident of Zámoly on horseback, hurried to the wagons. Here, the Croats received them with rifle shots, but they missed. Kisfaludy cut down an enemy rider, to whereof the wagons turned back, but one of them overturned. The column, which was retreating through the village, was attacked by the locals and beaten to death 30 Croats. Kisfaludy then hurried back to Zámoly, from where he with Vigyázó and three of his companies, and the villagers of Zámoly, who rose up to help him against the Croatians, set off again for Pátka, and tried to surround the Croats there, but they had already left the village. Kisfaludy and Vigyázó then reversed the overturned ammunition wagon, left behind by the Croats, and took it with them. Among the loot captured by Kisfaludy and the villagers were also weapons and military maps. Because of the proximity of the Croats, they left the village at 9 p.m. and returned to Zámoly and on the 30th then to Csákvár. The enemy did not return to Pátka until 10 p.m. on the 29th. Thus, only the population of the village took part in the fightings from Pátka. The returning Croatians took revenge on the villagers of Pátka by plundering the inhabitants, and taking 28 of them as hostages, releasing them only on 30 September, when the armistice was signed. From the Kempen division&#x27;s staff log, it seems that the local action took place only after Kempen had decided to call off the battle at Pákozd, i.e. there were no fighting Croatian troops in the village, only the escorts of the ammunition and baggage train. Some sources say that except these, there were many Croatians from Kempen&#x27;s troops, who were retreating after the Hungarian artillery put them to flight.

===Battle in the Center===
The Schmidl division departing from Székesfehérvár via Kisfalud to Pákozd on the mail route according to the unanimous testimony of the sources, broke out from Pákozd at about 12 noon and started to attack the Hungarian center. The 1st Battalion of the 8th (Gradiška) Borderguard Regiment from Major General Kuzman Todorović&#x27;s brigade led the assault column, followed by the 1st (Lika) and 2nd (Otočac) Borderguard Regiments. Also here were assigned the Seressaners of the 1st (Lika) and 2nd (Otočac) Borderguard Regiments. Three companies from the 3rd Battalion of the 2nd (Otočac) Frontierguard Regiment took part in the battle, but we do not know where they were positioned. The same can be said of the 4th Battalion of the 3rd (Ogulin) Borderguard Regiment. Perhaps these two units were sent to occupy the vineyards, which lay left (north) to the post road. The artillery of the brigade was the 2nd Three Pounder Infantry Battery. Also deployed here were the 3rd Six Pounder Battery, attached to the Cavalry Brigade, and one of the Congreve rocket batteries. Of the four battalions of the brigade under the command of Colonel Baron Franz Gramont, the 4th Battalion of the 4th (Slunj) Borderguard Regiment and the 3rd Battalion of the 11th (2nd Ban) Borderguard Regiment came under fire. These troops were probably also sent to occupy the vineyards. To this brigade, as artillery, the 4th three-pounder battery was attached. South of the post road, the 1st Major&#x27;s Division of the 7th (Kress) Light Cavalry (chevau léger) Regiment and three (or two) divisions of the 7th (Hardegg) Cuirassier Regiment were deployed, which belonged to the cavalry brigade of Colonel Franz Sedelmayer von Seefeld. Also assigned to this brigade were the 3rd six-pounder battery, the 5th mixed battery, and the 1st and 2nd Congreve rocket batteries.

At the center, the Hungarian outposts reported at 11:30 that the Croats were already in Pákozd. According to the war diary (written down later) of the Dráva Corps, the Croatian army &quot;with strong infantry columns from the ravine near Pákozd, advanced on the main road, parallel to it, and simultaneously along the length of the vineyards between the main road and the road to Lovasberény, advancing to the edge of the vineyards, occupied all the fences of the vineyards and opened fire on our skirmishers (probably the soldiers of the 1st Honvéd battalion) deployed along the tree-lined stream&quot;. They shot on the soldiers also with Congreve rockets. At the same time, Móga&#x27;s war report highlights the intense rocket fire of the enemy on the center of the Hungarian army; and Hermann Dahlen also mentions in his diary that he saw a (probably the 1st) Honvéd battalion retreating in haste, after being hit by two rockets. &quot;This advance,&quot; writes the staff log, &quot;would have had adverse consequences for the Hungarian center, if the enemy had pushed forward with additional infantry columns on the vineyard, behind his first front line forming an acute angle with the Hungarian position, as far as its final outcrop, and had advanced from the vineyards on the road connecting the Hungarian right wing and the center, and had thus separated them both.&quot;

Móga was aware of this danger and placed a battery (probably the 4th k.u.k. Six-Pounder Infantry Battery led by Lieutenant Karl Jungwirth) at a point where it could fire on the Croatian troops from the vineyards.
At the beginning of the battle, the 4th (Alexander) Hussars Regiment&#x27;s Lieutenant-Colonel class, two companies of the 9th (Nicholas) Hussar regiment, two companies of the Cordier grenadier battalion, and the 1st six-pound infantry half battery led by Lieutenant Philip Gruber were stationed on the left (southern) side of the highway. Just before the battle, the 2nd six-pounder Honvéd cavalry battery led by First Lieutenant József Makk was directed here. Makk also took over the command of the other half battery from here. At the beginning of the battle, two companies of the Cordier Grenadier Battalion were redirected to the forces on the right side of the road, while from the reserve from Velence, Móga moved forward the 1st battalion of the 34. (Prince of Prussia) Infantry Regiment, led by Captain Vince Győzey. Furthermore - a little later–Móga did the same with the three battalions of the Transdanubian Volunteer Mobile National Guard led by Major Mór Kosztolányi, and probably with the 14th Honvéd Battalion.

Móga, having seen the enemy&#x27;s marching, sent the Lieutenant-Colonel Division of the 4th (Alexander) Hussars forward to the area between the highway and the lake. According to the staff log, the purpose of the advance was to force the enemy to deploy his troops and show his strength; in his memoirs, Lajos Zámbelly, however, believes that the aim was to draw the enemy forces to this point. Their commander Major József Schweidel, reported that they had penetrated within firing range of the enemy and, despite the enemy&#x27;s fire, they managed to gather precious pieces of information that they were facing a large number of enemy troops and had also gained valuable information about the troop deployment.

In the meantime, however, the enemy had also brought forward some cavalry, a six-pounder infantry and a six-pounder half Congreve rocket battery (however according to Zámbelly, only the latter), with which he fired vigorously at the Hussars 800 paces away. According to a memory, the Croatian guns were deployed behind the cavalry&#x27;s cover, and that is why the Hungarian hussars were caught by surprise by their fire. However, the rockets did not do much harm to the Hungarians: Jelačić later reported to the Imperial Minister of War Baillet von Latour that he had been forced to withdraw one of the rocket batteries from the firing line because it was unable to reach the enemy with its shells, while at the same time, it was very exposed to enemy fire.

Meanwhile, Móga sent Major József Békeffy with two companies of the 9th (Nicholas) Hussar Regiment, to gather information about the enemy as Schweidel&#x27;s 4th (Alexander) Hussars did earlier, but they were forced to turn back without finishing their work. According to Lajos Zámbelly, the enemy battery and rockets were silenced by the shots of the 2nd Six-Pounder Honvéd cavalry battery led by Lieutenant József Makk. After that Móga wanted to send Schweidel&#x27;s two companies forward again, but Major General Holtsche, the commander of the center, dissuaded him.

Shortly afterward, a duel between Hungarian and Croatian batteries began. In this duel on the Hungarian side participated József Makk&#x27;s 2nd six-pounder Hungarian cavalry battery and Fülöp Gruber&#x27;s 1st half six-pounder Hungarian infantry battery, and perhaps even the 4th six-pounder k.u.k. infantry battery under the command of Lieutenant Karl Jungwirth. At first, the Hungarian artillerymen did not respond to the Croatian artillery&#x27;s fire, but when the Croatian batteries came within range, the Hungarian cannons shot with so a great skill, that after only a few shots the enemy artillery retreated in haste.

This was followed, with some delay, by a Croatian attack from the vineyards. Most of the Hungarian infantry probably was deployed here. To the right (north) of the road was the 1st Honvéd Battalion, and to the right of it the Borsod Volunteer Mobile National Guard Battalion. The 2nd Battalion of the 34th (Prince of Prussia) Infantry Regiment stood behind them. The two companies of the Cordier Grenadier Battalion were deployed behind the 1st Honvéd Battalion. At the start of the battle, two companies of the grenadier battalion, which were south of the road near the 1st Six-Pounder Half Infantry Battery, were also sent to the right side of the road to reinforce the Hungarian infantry. The 4th k.u.k. Six-Pounder Infantry Battery, commanded by First Lieutenant Karl Jungwirth, took up position between the 1st Honvéd Battalion and the Borsod Battalion, while a Honvéd battery was positioned to the right (north) of the Borsod Battalion. The latter was probably not a full but only a half-battery, namely the 3rd six-pounder Honvéd half battery. The position of the 1st six-pounder Honvéd cavalry battery is not known in the order of battle; later, during the battle, this (or half of it) was transferred to the right flank by Móga.

The 1st Battalion led by Major György Lázár was approached to 1000 paces by a Seressaner company, marching in battle line. Lázár sent one company forward in a line of battle to a field ditch, with orders to fire only when the enemy was in range. About the Borsod Volunteer Mobile National Guard we only know that one of their companies also advanced in a battle line, and the rest of the battalion took up position behind the trench mentioned by Lazar, and from there they fired at the Seressaners and the border guards.

In the meantime, half an hour from Pákozd, Jelačić and his entourage met a lieutenant of the 9th (Miklós) Hussars regiment, accompanied by a hussar trumpeter, who was sent out by Móga as an envoy to find out whether Jelačić had met Batthyány and to call on him to stop the battle. Jelačić received the parley in a nearby farm, and was still there when news came that on the previous day, Lamberg had been murdered in Pest. Jelačić and his entourage were terribly outraged at this, and their anger increased even more when a remark clumsily slipped out by the Hussar trumpeter revealed to them that the news of Lamberg&#x27;s murder had been known in the Hungarian camp the night before. Jelačić soon wrote a few angry words to Móga, expressing the hope that after this devastating event, he would realize, that the cause he was defending was wrong and traitorous, and, as an Austrian general, would return to the path of honor and duty, and not the &quot;rebellion&quot;. According to Hermann Dahlen&#x27;s diary, a quarter of an hour later they heard cannon fire from the left wing and rushed forward. Jelačić sent out orders through Dahlen, and by the time the latter returned, the guns were already rattling and the rockets were hissing also in the center.

In the meantime, Jelačić and his escort arrived on the battlefield and rushed to the Croatian vanguards, which they estimated to be 900 paces from the Hungarian lines. They watched as the shots of the Croatian six-pounder infantry battery struck in the ranks of the 4th (Alexander) Hussars&#x27; regiment&#x27;s lieutenant-colonel class, and as one of the Congreve rocket batteries drove the Hungarian infantry back. Jelačić and his escort advanced as far as the Croatian artillery line, before the Hungarian artillery opened fire on the conspicuous group of riders. Cannonball after cannonball struck close to them, and Jelačić, after a while, no longer wanting to risk his life, decided to ride to the rear. Jelačić rode in front, Wilhelm Hompesch on one side, Oldershausen on the other, and Hermann Dahlen behind him. Suddenly they came under more cannon fire, and one bullet shot off the leg of a commanding officer&#x27;s horse, and another struck Oldershausen&#x27;s right hip.

Meanwhile, the Hungarian artillery started to fire on the two companies of the 7th (Kress) Light Cavalry Regiment which was advancing along the post road, forcing them to turn back. But Jelačić got in front of them and turned them back. No sooner had this been done than a Croatian militia battalion advancing up the road was routing back while screaming. The cause of this was that the Hungarian artillery fired on them, and the cannonballs tore several of them apart. Behind the battalion made of &quot;professional&quot; soldiers, the untrained militia battalions were supposed to serve as a pressure group, but their indiscipline caused them to advance so much in front of the regular troops, that they were caught in the Hungarian cannon fire. Thus, while the Gradiska battalion had only one killed and two wounded, the Lika battalion lost 11 killed and 25 wounded, and the Otočac battalion lost 4 killed and 7 wounded men. Jelačić tried to give them courage, gave them a speech, drew his sword, and wanted to personally lead them, but he could not stop them. With great difficulty, the officers managed to pull them out of the fire line and set them up as reserves. But again they could not be convinced to attack. Captain Rodić even took the unit&#x27;s flag in his hand and tried to turn them back to the battlefield, but with no success. Soon all Croatian guns, except the six-pounder battery, were withdrawn because &quot;they were no match for the enemy guns with larger calibers&quot;. The Hungarian artillery also drove back the Austrian Cuirassiers sent to attack.

According to the memoirs of Lajos Zámbelly, the Croatian militia assault battalions could be persuaded to advance for the third time, after the second attack had been repulsed, only through the severe coercive intervention of some cavalry units and border guard soldiers. Finally, after the militias were forced to participate in the attack, in the third charge, five battalions pushed straight forward, together with the whole Croatian cavalry, but after a few cannon shots of the Hungarians, they militias panicked, and ran back in disorder. According to Móga, the enemy was forced to retreat by the artillery and the shots of György Lázár&#x27;s soldiers. The one-and-a-half Hungarian batteries on the left side of the road also participated in repulsing the attack, thus the Croatian columns were caught in a crossfire. No hand-to-hand fighting took place, as the attacking columns did not even reach the Hungarian infantry line. Although most sources write about three attacks, according to the Hungarian staff log, the Croats attacked four times from the vineyards, and even brought forward two guns, but were finally forced to retreat.

The clash had been going on for about two hours, and Jelačić and his entourage still knew nothing about what had happened on the left flank under Kempen or about where was the Hartlieb division. &quot;In this way,&quot; Hermann Dahlen wrote in his diary, &quot;we were outmatched by the enemy, our disorganized border guard [units] were almost completely disintegrated, and even the Seressaner did not live up to expectations.&quot;

This prompted Jelacic to switch from attack to defence. At about 1 p.m., Jelačić dismounted and sat down, and his escort did the same. At about half past two, a courier arrived from Kempen, saying that he was about the same level with the center and that his troops had been driven back by a bayonet charge. Hearing this, Jelačić&#x27;s escort lay down on the lawn and waited.

Suddenly they heard gunshots from behind, then bullets were flying around them, one of which even wounded an officer. Jelačić&#x27;s escort jumped up and rushed to the scene. Some members of one of the militia battalions opened a huge sheepfold nearby and began hunting the outrunning animals. The chaotic episode left several soldiers injured and even one death. The officers were unable to bring order to the militias. The life-threatening sheep hunt, which even endangered the lives of officers, lasted until 6 p.m., as the militias fired shots at random. Jelačić himself was forced to leave Pákozd and seek refuge west of the village. The firing was also heard on the Hungarian side, but they believed that Jelačić had fired into his retreating troops to force them to advance again.

At around 3 pm, the battle was essentially over.

The first battalions of the Hartlieb Division arrived late in the afternoon, between 4 and 5 o&#x27;clock, the 1st Battalion of the 3rd (Otočac) Borderguard Regiment being the first to arrive, and the rest of the division itself only after dark. It was only after 6 p.m., after a dangerous sheep hunt ended, that Jelačić and his escort ventured out to inspect the Hungarian positions. However, the alert Hungarian artillerymen spotted him and &quot;greeted him&quot; with cannon shots.

Once the whole of Hartlieb&#x27;s division had arrived, Jelacic did not think of resuming the battle. It was only the Seressaners in the center who raided the cellars in the vineyards, and after driving off the Hungarian outposts there, they quenched there their thirst by drinking a lot of vines. Jelačić and his entourage spent the evening in a rather depressed mood.

One of the ironic peculiarities of the battle of Pákozd, which made enemies from each other not only the regiments with different sentiments under the same ruler, whom they both continued to recognize as such, but even the parts of the same military units that had fought side by side in good understanding for decades were put now to fight against each other, as happened, for example, with the 5th Artillery Regiment, half of which fought with the Hungarians and the other half with Jelačić.

==Aftermath==
Altogether, the two parties deployed 46,000 soldiers and 76 guns to the battlefield. Considering these numbers, the number of 
losses were relatively low. The Hungarian toll was 7 dead, 37 injured, and 5 horses. Lieutenant General Móga estimated Jelačić&#x27;s losses at 100. However, it appears that the Croats had altogether 49 dead and injured. While Jelačić, for his part, estimated multiple losses for the Hungarians. During the retreat the Hungarians lost some more dead and injured soldiers when the two units shot at one another. The exact number of the fallen is not known but the Hungarian losses possibly matched the Croatian losses.

On the 30th of September Jelačić&#x27;s message, proposing a three-day cease-fire was delivered to the Hungarian commander-in-chief. The Hungarian side was happy but worried about the battle. In spite of their success, the Hungarian army feared that Josip Jelačić would encircle them and cut them off from Pest-Buda. In the evening hours the Hungarian command ordered a general retreat. However, this retreat happened under the most unfortunate circumstances. In the darkness, several units got mixed up and fired at one another. The troops arriving at Martonvásár did not even resemble a triumphant army. Consequently, both the commander-in-chief and the government commissioners accepted Jelačić&#x27;s offer of a cease-fire. The agreement concluded on September 30 set the battlefield positions occupied on September 29 as the demarcation line beyond which no troop movement was allowed.

The points of this armistice were:
1. The armistice may last 72 hours from the hour of confirmation.
2. The borderline of the Hungarian troops is: Csákvár, Sukoró, Dinnyés, Seregélyes és Szolgaegyháza, and of the Croatian k.u.k. troops is: Csákberény, Zámoly, Puszta-Kála, Pákozd és Sár-Keresztur. 
3. No operations may be carried out beyond this line during the armistice and the troops which overcrossed it must withdraw to within cannon shot of it.
4. If during this armistice a conciliation from a higher position would commence, this armistice may be extended as circumstances permit.
5. In the provisioning of troops, all violence shall be avoided as far as possible, and the civil authorities of the country shall be called upon to act.

According to the armistice treaty, the Hungarian army had to retreat immediately, which he did, no doubt to a very favorable position in the vicinity of Martonvásár. It is quite clear from the terms of the treaty that the Hungarian officers were not very good at exploiting the advantages of the victory. Perhaps Móga did not yet have much confidence in the resilience of his army, despite the brilliant first test of fire, and therefore thought it was wiser to rely on a more advantageous terrain in case of a renewed attack.

But Jelačić had no plan to attack, furthermore, he used this time to prepare a retreat. Despite expecting Roth&#x27;s corps to arrive from the south, he was afraid that the Hungarian troops and the anti-Croatian popular uprising which spread in those territories, will force the latter to retreat, and he also was terrified of the taught that a Hungarian attack against his army left without provisions, will cause a catastrophic defeat unless he left the Székesfehérvár area quickly, abandoning Roth&#x27;s corps to his fate. Since he could not go towards Pest, nor towards the south, the only alternative route was towards Győr. He intended to incorporate the non-Hungarian imperial-royal units stationed in Transdanubia and Northern Hungary into his army and to restore communication with Vienna. These were the reasons why he decided to leave his earlier battlefield positions and move his army in a northwestern direction. He hoped for a future successful attack with his reinforcements. 

Jelačić began his withdrawal as early as 1 October, violating the armistice treaty&#x27;s clause forbidding any military operations during the 72 hours of the ceasefire. The Croatian army reached Mór on October 1 and Kisbér on October 2, from where he tried to take Komárom, the most powerful fortress of the country at that time, and finally appealed to the commander of the castle, Lieutenant-Colonel Majthényi, who had replaced the pro-Habsburg Lieutenant-General Mertz, to open the gates of the fortress, otherwise, he would destroy it together with the city. But Majthényi&#x27;s denied this, so Jelačić continued his retreat to Győr, and on the 5th he arrived at Magyaróvár, then on the 7th of October he crossed the Hungarian-Austrian border, concluding in this way his unsuccessful campaign against Hungary.

Móga heard of Jelačić&#x27;s retreat from his camp in Martonvásár on 2 October, and as a result, he was late in setting out, according to the orders from Pest, the more mobile part of his army in pursuit of the fleeing enemy, while its rest, consisting mainly of militias, was placed under the command of Mór Perczel and Artúr Görgei and sent against the Croatian Ban&#x27;s reserve column under the command of General Roth, which was approaching Székesfehérvár.

In conclusion, about the result of this battle can be said that the Hungarian army wanted to stop the Croatian advance and this goal was essentially achieved. This fact was not altered by the Hungarian retreat to Martonvásár since the Croat army deferred from another attack when the cease-fire was concluded. Jelačić&#x27;s goals had been to defeat the Hungarian army and occupy the capital. After Pákozd, Jelačić had to abandon this goal and acknowledge his failure by seeking a cease-fire. Considering the small number of casualties on both sides, and the fact that the Croatian army retained its striking capability, it can be said that the Hungarians achieved more of a moral victory than a military one. Just as the self-confidence, courage and moral strength of the Hungarian army, which had stood so brilliantly the first trial by fire, had been increased by their success against the 2,5 times bigger enemy, so the defeat suffered had a crushing, shattering, and disintegrating effect on the overconfident Croatian army, which had initially looked down arrogantly upon the Hungarian army.

The glory of the day belongs first and foremost to the Wasa battalion, the Tolna National Guard, the volunteers led by Imre Ivánka, the 1st Battalion of Pest, the volunteers of Borsod, and above all to the young artillery, whose perseverance, commendable calm and preciseness had a decisive influence on the outcome of the battle. Among the officers, Major General Franz Holtsche, Colonel Ernő Kiss, Major Ignaz Anaker, and artillery lieutenant József Makk (Mack) were particularly outstanding. In addition to all of these, the House of Representatives voted 500 gold pieces, and patriotic gratitude to the army, its commander, and to the chief of staff Major Josef Kollmann, who made the battle plan.

In Hungary its anniversary (29 September) later became &quot;National Defence Day&quot; (). In 1991 that day was changed to 21 May (the date of the recapture of Buda at the Battle of Buda (1849)).

==References==
==Sources==
* 
* 
* 
*
* Nobili, Johann. &quot;Hungary 1848: The Winter Campaign&quot;. Edited and translated Christopher Pringle. Warwick, UK: Helion &amp; Company Ltd., 2021.

==External links==
* 
* Video animation about the Battle of Pákozd</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1241936" start="4" end="20" title="Battle of Pákozd" label="Battle of Pákozd"/>
<link wikidata="Q1241936" start="25" end="41" title="Battle of Pákozd" label="Battle of Sukoró"/>
<link wikidata="Q473716" start="63" end="105" title="Hungarian Revolution of 1848" label="Hungarian war of Independence of 1848–1849"/>
<link wikidata="Q1084400" start="146" end="152" title="Pákozd" label="Pákozd"/>
<link wikidata="Q587109" start="155" end="161" title="Sukoró" label="Sukoró"/>
<link wikidata="Q1094990" start="164" end="169" title="Pátka" label="Pátka"/>
<link wikidata="Q133032" start="282" end="291" title="Hungarian people" label="Hungarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q167420" start="374" end="382" title="Croats" label="Croatian"/>
<link wikidata="Q577017" start="383" end="386" title="Ban (title)" label="Ban"/>
<link wikidata="Q154418" start="387" end="400" title="Josip Jelačić" label="Josip Jelačić"/>
<link wikidata="Q153136" start="430" end="438" title="Habsburg monarchy" label="Habsburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q210205" start="467" end="471" title="Pest, Hungary" label="Pest"/>
<link wikidata="Q1080711" start="1081" end="1103" title="Ottoman–Hungarian wars" label="Ottoman–Hungarian wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q171150" start="1141" end="1159" title="Kingdom of Hungary" label="Kingdom of Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q188800" start="1163" end="1177" title="personal union" label="personal union"/>
<link wikidata="Q224" start="1183" end="1190" title="Croatia" label="Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q74623" start="1195" end="1226" title="Great Turkish War" label="liberated from the Ottoman rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q153136" start="1278" end="1287" title="Habsburg monarchy" label="Habsburgs"/>
<link wikidata="Q253779" start="1324" end="1327" title="Ban of Croatia" label="Ban"/>
<link wikidata="Q533558" start="1386" end="1421" title="Kingdom of Croatia-Slavonia" label="Croat and Slavonian feudal counties"/>
<link wikidata="Q371576" start="1561" end="1566" title="Croatian Parliament" label="Sabor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1435" start="1857" end="1863" title="Zagreb" label="Zagreb"/>
<link wikidata="Q5420" start="1978" end="1986" title="Varaždin" label="Varaždin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3617" start="2007" end="2015" title="Karlovac" label="Karlovac"/>
<link wikidata="Q680821" start="2164" end="2172" title="Illyrian movement" label="Illyrism"/>
<link wikidata="Q528042" start="3069" end="3077" title="Dalmatia" label="Dalmatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1789654" start="3089" end="3107" title="Hungarian Littoral" label="Hungarian Littoral"/>
<link wikidata="Q1647" start="3115" end="3121" title="Rijeka" label="Rijeka"/>
<link wikidata="Q740324" start="3126" end="3131" title="Bakar, Croatia" label="Bakar"/>
<link wikidata="Q877234" start="3156" end="3183" title="Slavonian Military Frontier" label="Slavonian Military Frontier"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057076" start="3193" end="3207" title="Triune Kingdom" label="Triune Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q702016" start="3452" end="3467" title="Lajos Batthyány" label="Lajos Batthyány"/>
<link wikidata="Q28659814" start="5012" end="5032" title="abolition of serfdom" label="abolition of serfdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q875323" start="6385" end="6397" title="László Csány" label="László Csány"/>
<link wikidata="Q187677" start="6426" end="6429" title="Vas county" label="Vas"/>
<link wikidata="Q185374" start="6431" end="6435" title="Zala county" label="Zala"/>
<link wikidata="Q188890" start="6437" end="6445" title="Veszprém county" label="Veszprém"/>
<link wikidata="Q58330" start="6654" end="6661" title="Muraköz" label="Muraköz"/>
<link wikidata="Q687135" start="6709" end="6725" title="Bertalan Szemere" label="Bertalan Szemere"/>
<link wikidata="Q190522" start="6773" end="6779" title="Somogy county" label="Somogy"/>
<link wikidata="Q186195" start="6781" end="6788" title="Baranya county" label="Baranya"/>
<link wikidata="Q191625" start="6794" end="6799" title="Tolna county" label="Tolna"/>
<link wikidata="Q171009" start="7050" end="7055" title="Dráva" label="Dráva"/>
<link wikidata="Q6382533" start="7125" end="7134" title="battalion" label="battalion"/>
<link wikidata="Q52371" start="7152" end="7160" title="regiment" label="regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q44865" start="7164" end="7174" title="cuirassier" label="cuirassier"/>
<link wikidata="Q1936719" start="7209" end="7221" title="Chevau-léger" label="Chevau-léger"/>
<link wikidata="Q191713" start="7246" end="7252" title="hussar" label="hussar"/>
<link wikidata="Q240313" start="7284" end="7293" title="Artillery battery" label="batteries"/>
<link wikidata="Q210300" start="7517" end="7523" title="Bácska" label="Bácska"/>
<link wikidata="Q770962" start="7916" end="7931" title="Ferenc Ottinger" label="Ferenc Ottinger"/>
<link wikidata="Q1309492" start="8644" end="8653" title="Szerémség" label="Szerémség"/>
<link wikidata="Q928745" start="8789" end="8806" title="Virovitica County" label="Virovitica County"/>
<link wikidata="Q1640" start="9656" end="9661" title="Eszék" label="Eszék"/>
<link wikidata="Q840562" start="9825" end="9837" title="Transdanubia" label="Transdanubia"/>
<link wikidata="Q183579" start="10104" end="10115" title="Ferdinand I of Austria" label="Ferdinand V"/>
<link wikidata="Q242218" start="10640" end="10654" title="national guard" label="national guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q153500" start="11198" end="11206" title="Joseph Radetzky von Radetz" label="Radetzky"/>
<link wikidata="Q48202" start="11209" end="11228" title="Battle of Custoza (1848)" label="victory at Custozza"/>
<link wikidata="Q423257" start="11242" end="11266" title="Metropolitan of Karlovci" label="Metropolitan of Karlovci"/>
<link wikidata="Q902075" start="11267" end="11280" title="Josif Rajačić" label="Josif Rajačić"/>
<link wikidata="Q1647" start="12003" end="12008" title="Fiume" label="Fiume"/>
<link wikidata="Q13924" start="12055" end="12067" title="Adriatic Sea" label="Adriatic Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q6383" start="13135" end="13147" title="Lake Balaton" label="Lake Balaton"/>
<link wikidata="Q130212" start="13156" end="13170" title="Székesfehérvár" label="Székesfehérvár"/>
<link wikidata="Q193478" start="13180" end="13184" title="Buda" label="Buda"/>
<link wikidata="Q14424" start="13278" end="13289" title="Nagykanizsa" label="Nagykanizsa"/>
<link wikidata="Q170143" start="13367" end="13373" title="Bánság" label="Bánság"/>
<link wikidata="Q267789" start="13611" end="13626" title="Feldzeugmeister" label="Feldzeugmeister"/>
<link wikidata="Q78807" start="13627" end="13666" title="Theodor Franz, Count Baillet von Latour" label="Theodor Franz, Count Baillet von Latour"/>
<link wikidata="Q625154" start="13756" end="13763" title="Komárom" label="Komárom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1741" start="13813" end="13819" title="Vienna" label="Vienna"/>
<link wikidata="Q1780" start="13875" end="13882" title="Pozsony" label="Pozsony"/>
<link wikidata="Q171336" start="13921" end="13927" title="Slovaks" label="Slovak"/>
<link wikidata="Q5420" start="13998" end="14004" title="Varasd" label="Varasd"/>
<link wikidata="Q701103" start="14212" end="14228" title="Archduke Stephen of Austria (Palatine of Hungary)" label="Palatine Stephen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1014822" start="15625" end="15631" title="Legrad" label="Légrád"/>
<link wikidata="Q648716" start="16208" end="16228" title="Hungarian Parliament" label="Hungarian Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q157040" start="16243" end="16256" title="Lajos Kossuth" label="Lajos Kossuth"/>
<link wikidata="Q41358" start="16646" end="16652" title="Styria" label="Styria"/>
<link wikidata="Q526335" start="16988" end="16997" title="Keszthely" label="Keszthely"/>
<link wikidata="Q204040" start="17557" end="17567" title="Mur (river)" label="Mura River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344031" start="18475" end="18490" title="Congreve rocket" label="Congreve rocket"/>
<link wikidata="Q153936" start="18742" end="18749" title="militia" label="militia"/>
<link wikidata="Q194199" start="20843" end="20850" title="Dragoon" label="Dragoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1045848" start="20979" end="20985" title="lancer" label="lancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1096214" start="21198" end="21210" title="Iharosberény" label="Iharosberény"/>
<link wikidata="Q855069" start="21211" end="21218" title="Böhönye" label="Böhönye"/>
<link wikidata="Q1089479" start="21219" end="21223" title="Tard, Hungary" label="Tard"/>
<link wikidata="Q184998" start="21224" end="21232" title="Kaposvár" label="Kaposvár"/>
<link wikidata="Q911674" start="21233" end="21244" title="Simontornya" label="Simontornya"/>
<link wikidata="Q1821974" start="21538" end="21552" title="levée en masse" label="levée en masse"/>
<link wikidata="Q847072" start="23455" end="23467" title="Lake Velence" label="Lake Velence"/>
<link wikidata="Q79083" start="23709" end="23740" title="Count Franz Philipp von Lamberg" label="Count Franz Philipp von Lamberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q208383" start="24510" end="24519" title="ceasefire" label="ceasefire"/>
<link wikidata="Q7540126" start="24558" end="24570" title="headquarters" label="headquarters"/>
<link wikidata="Q680723" start="26028" end="26039" title="Mór Perczel" label="Mór Perczel"/>
<link wikidata="Q251741" start="26971" end="26994" title="reconnaissance-in-force" label="reconnaissance-in-force"/>
<link wikidata="Q593211" start="28345" end="28351" title="Alcsút" label="Alcsút"/>
<link wikidata="Q951765" start="28546" end="28557" title="Lovasberény" label="Lovasberény"/>
<link wikidata="Q595732" start="28687" end="28700" title="line infantry" label="line infantry"/>
<link wikidata="Q3599" start="29219" end="29225" title="Bicske" label="Bicske"/>
<link wikidata="Q171357" start="29638" end="29647" title="Kecskemét" label="Kecskemét"/>
<link wikidata="Q2448421" start="29742" end="29759" title="echelon formation" label="echelon formation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054981" start="29938" end="29942" title="Hont county" label="Hont"/>
<link wikidata="Q171353" start="29943" end="29952" title="Esztergom" label="Esztergom"/>
<link wikidata="Q194273" start="29967" end="29973" title="Nógrád county" label="Nógrád"/>
<link wikidata="Q1788866" start="30829" end="30838" title="war diary" label="war diary"/>
<link wikidata="Q642031" start="31821" end="31828" title="Gárdony" label="Gárdony"/>
<link wikidata="Q4694816" start="31833" end="31838" title="Agárd" label="Agárd"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065977" start="32755" end="32762" title="Velence" label="Velence"/>
<link wikidata="Q716001" start="33072" end="33084" title="Artúr Görgei" label="Artúr Görgei"/>
<link wikidata="Q911538" start="33140" end="33163" title="Danube–Tisza Interfluve" label="Danube–Tisza Interfluve"/>
<link wikidata="Q181276" start="33203" end="33210" title="Szolnok" label="Szolnok"/>
<link wikidata="Q539391" start="33263" end="33276" title="Csepel Island" label="Csepel Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q911301" start="33718" end="33729" title="Dunaföldvár" label="Dunaföldvár"/>
<link wikidata="Q366220" start="33734" end="33739" title="Adony" label="Adony"/>
<link wikidata="Q2390906" start="33962" end="33969" title="Kunság" label="Jászkun"/>
<link wikidata="Q916987" start="33997" end="34002" title="Tököl" label="Tököl"/>
<link wikidata="Q531717" start="34011" end="34023" title="Szigetújfalu" label="Szigetújfalu"/>
<link wikidata="Q855040" start="34032" end="34037" title="Ercsi" label="Ercsi"/>
<link wikidata="Q932778" start="34050" end="34055" title="Lórév" label="Lórév"/>
<link wikidata="Q920824" start="34312" end="34322" title="Seregélyes" label="Seregélyes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1084388" start="34363" end="34369" title="Sárosd" label="Sárosd"/>
<link wikidata="Q303130" start="34524" end="34537" title="Szabadegyháza" label="Szolgaegyháza"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073406" start="34729" end="34741" title="Sárkeresztúr" label="Sárkeresztúr"/>
<link wikidata="Q1084395" start="34845" end="34852" title="Soponya" label="Soponya"/>
<link wikidata="Q226024" start="35172" end="35187" title="Szabolcs county" label="Szabolcs county"/>
<link wikidata="Q849295" start="36058" end="36065" title="Székely Land" label="Székely"/>
<link wikidata="Q288413" start="36319" end="36326" title="Tapolca" label="Tapolca"/>
<link wikidata="Q1090143" start="36405" end="36410" title="Nadap" label="Nadap"/>
<link wikidata="Q1084371" start="36584" end="36590" title="Zámoly" label="Zámoly"/>
<link wikidata="Q431919" start="38535" end="38538" title="Vál" label="Vál"/>
<link wikidata="Q239495" start="38543" end="38550" title="Kajászó" label="Kajászó"/>
<link wikidata="Q972594" start="38605" end="38611" title="Tordas" label="Tordas"/>
<link wikidata="Q933641" start="39113" end="39124" title="Martonvásár" label="Martonvásár"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186005" start="40830" end="40836" title="Ságvár" label="Ságvár"/>
<link wikidata="Q1481555" start="41163" end="41173" title="skirmisher" label="skirmisher"/>
<link wikidata="Q369894" start="45596" end="45608" title="aide-de-camp" label="aide-de-camp"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075009" start="46299" end="46308" title="grapeshot" label="grapeshot"/>
<link wikidata="Q1232566" start="47583" end="47597" title="Miklós Perczel" label="Miklós Perczel"/>
<link wikidata="Q173366" start="48354" end="48361" title="bayonet" label="bayonet"/>
<link wikidata="Q313557" start="49007" end="49021" title="Gyula Andrássy" label="Gyula Andrássy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3785231" start="50134" end="50161" title="Hermann, Freiherr Dahlen von Orlaburg" label="Hermann Dahlen von Orlaburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1095233" start="52742" end="52753" title="Magyaralmás" label="Magyaralmás"/>
<link wikidata="Q875122" start="54186" end="54193" title="Csákvár" label="Csákvár"/>
<link wikidata="Q12814911" start="55038" end="55046" title="Kisfalud" label="Kisfalud"/>
<link wikidata="Q1122488" start="55291" end="55307" title="Kuzman Todorović" label="Kuzman Todorović"/>
<link wikidata="Q1431696" start="55839" end="55848" title="post road" label="post road"/>
<link wikidata="Q265411" start="58277" end="58283" title="k.u.k." label="k.u.k."/>
<link wikidata="Q715075" start="59867" end="59883" title="József Schweidel" label="József Schweidel"/>
<link wikidata="Q222994" start="73651" end="73661" title="Csákberény" label="Csákberény"/>
<link wikidata="Q680963" start="75875" end="75878" title="Mór" label="Mór"/>
<link wikidata="Q427769" start="75896" end="75902" title="Kisbér" label="Kisbér"/>
<link wikidata="Q134494" start="76313" end="76317" title="Győr" label="Győr"/>
<link wikidata="Q207406" start="76348" end="76358" title="Magyaróvár" label="Magyaróvár"/>
<link wikidata="Q193478" start="78923" end="78927" title="Buda" label="Buda"/>
<link wikidata="Q850778" start="78935" end="78956" title="Battle of Buda (1849)" label="Battle of Buda (1849)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="246497" wikidata="Q1541229" url="?curid=246497" title="American folk music">
<text>The term American folk music encompasses numerous music genres, variously known as &quot;traditional music&quot;, &quot;traditional folk music&quot;, &quot;contemporary folk music&quot;, &quot;vernacular music,&quot; or &quot;roots music&quot;. Many traditional songs have been sung within the same family or folk group for generations, and sometimes trace back to such origins as the British Isles, Mainland Europe, or Africa. Musician Mike Seeger once famously commented that the definition of American folk music is &quot;...all the music that fits between the cracks.&quot;

American folk music is a broad category of music including bluegrass, gospel, old time music, jug bands, Appalachian folk, blues, Cajun and Native American music. The music is considered American either because it is native to the United States or because it developed there, out of foreign origins, to such a degree that it struck musicologists as something distinctly new. It is considered &quot;roots music&quot; because it served as the basis of music later developed in the United States, including rock and roll, rhythm and blues, and jazz.

==Early American folk music==
Most songs of the Colonial and Revolutionary periods originated in England, Scotland and Ireland and were brought over by early settlers. According to ethnomusicologist Bruno Nettl, American folk music is notable because it &quot;At its roots is an English folk song tradition that has been modified to suit the specific requirements of America.&quot; Therefore, many American folk songs, such as those documented by the American folklorist Francis James Child in his catalogue of ballads known as the Child Ballads, can be traced back to their pre-colonial origins in the British Isles. For example, &quot;Barbara Allen&quot; remains a popular traditional ballad originating in England and Scotland, which immigrants introduced to the United States. The murder ballad &quot;Pretty Polly&quot;, indexed by another scholar of American folk music, George Malcolm Laws, is an American version of an earlier British song, &quot;The Gosport Tragedy&quot;. The oldest surviving folk song of local Anglo-American origin is the ballad &quot;Springfield Mountain&quot; dating back to 1761 in Connecticut.

The typical instruments played in early American folk music were the fiddle, the guitar, the mandolin, the mouth organ, the fife, and the dulcimer, although guitars went through a significant change as the previously popular English guitar was replaced around the 1830s by the Spanish guitar.

In addition to ballads, American colonials also imported numerous English country dance tunes, mainly jigs, reels, and hornpipes, which were played during community dances or contra dances. Some dance tunes as well as dances themselves were also adapted from Irish and Scottish sources. The musical collections &quot;Howe&#x27;s 1000 Jigs and Reels&quot;, &quot;Ryan&#x27;s Mammoth Collection&quot;, and &quot;1000 Fiddle Tunes&quot; contain many of the dance tunes Americans and their colonial predecessors danced to for nearly two centuries. Popular dances that rose to prominence in America in the nineteenth century, which could be set to traditional dance tunes, were quadrilles, mazurkas, barn dances, redowas, marches, and polkas. &quot;Soldier&#x27;s Joy&quot; is an example of a typical British fiddle tune.

In New England, one of the areas with the earliest history of colonization as well as the highest percentage of settlement by ethnic English people, numerous English ballads survived within American folk music into the twentieth century. These include older popular ballads such as &quot;Lord Randall&quot;, &quot;The Golden Vanity&quot;, The Elfin Knight, The Gypsy Davy, &quot;Lady Isabel and the Elf-Knight&quot;, &quot;Barbara Allen&quot;, Lord Bateman, The House Carpenter, The Farmer&#x27;s Curst Wife, Lord Lovel, and Henry Martin. Later broadside ballads imported into New England from the British Isles include &quot;The Yorkshire Bite&quot;, &quot;The Bold Soldier&quot;, &quot;Butcher Boy&quot;, &quot;Katie Morey&quot;, &quot;The Half Hitch&quot;, and &quot;The Boston Burglar&quot;. Locally composed, traditional New England folk songs include &quot;Springfield Mountain&quot;, &quot;The Jam on Gerry&#x27;s Rock&quot;, &quot;Young Charlotte&quot;, &quot;Peter Amberly&quot;, &quot;Jack Haggarty, and &quot;The Jealous Lover&quot;. The folk music of the rest of Northeastern United States, including Pennsylvania, New York, and New Jersey, was similar to that of New England, aside from a marked influence from the high numbers of non-British immigrants, such as the Germans, Dutch, and Swiss.

In the Southeastern United States, popular local folk songs included &quot;Sourwood Mountain&quot;, &quot;Charming Betsy&quot;, &quot;Fly Around My Pretty Little Miss&quot;, &quot;Buffalo Gals&quot;, &quot;Arkansas Traveler&quot;, &quot;Turkey in the Straw&quot;, &quot;Old Joe Clark&quot;, &quot;Going Down the Road Feeling Bad&quot;, &quot;Shady Grove&quot;, &quot;Katy Cline&quot;, &quot;Ida Red&quot;, and &quot;Cindy&quot;. The southern murder ballad &quot;Poor Ellen Smith&quot;, which recorded a murder so inflammatory its public performance had to be outlawed, was most likely written in Winston, North Carolina by one of the murderer&#x27;s cellmates. Unlike the Northeast and New England, the Southeast had significant influence from African-American music and as a result instruments such as the banjo were widely adopted. However, English traditional music was still present in the Southeast with older Child ballads such as &quot;Lord Thomas and Fair Eleanor&quot;, &quot;The Maid Freed from the Gallows&quot;, &quot;Fair Margaret and Sweet William&quot;, &quot;The Wife of Usher&#x27;s Well&quot;, &quot;The Two Sisters&quot;, and &quot;Matty Groves&quot; surviving alongside some English ballads also played in the Northeast like &quot;Barbara Allen&quot;. Popular broadside ballads in the Southeast were &quot;Pretty Polly&quot;, &quot;Pretty Little Miss in the Garden&quot;, &quot;Knoxville Girl&quot;, &quot;Jack Monroe&quot;, &quot;The Sailor Boy&quot;, &quot;Awake, Awake You Drowsy Sleeper&quot;, &quot;Rich Irish Lady&quot;, &quot;The Nightingale&quot;, &quot;The Girl I Left Behind&quot;, and &quot;The Miller&#x27;s Will&quot;. Notable songs written in Appalachia include &quot;Little Mohea&quot;, &quot;John Hardy&quot;, and &quot;Omie Wise&quot;. Unlike in the Northeast, Southeastern ballads of English origins tend to be appreciably altered with their lyrics shortened and smoothed out, reducing the number of stresses per stanza.

Folk songs in the Midwest largely reflected the tastes of New England and the Mid-Atlantic states. However, there were some ballads uniquely popular to the Midwest such as the broadside ballad &quot;Mary of the Wild Moor&quot; and the locally produced ballads namely &quot;The Little Brown Bulls&quot;, &quot;Fuller and Warren&quot;, &quot;Charles Guiteau&quot;, &quot;Canady-I-O&quot;, and &quot;Paul Jones&quot;. Many folk songs were also produced that were unique specifically to the Great Lakes region, evoking the area&#x27;s nautical culture. These include &quot;It&#x27;s me for the Inland Lakes&quot;, &quot;Loss of the &quot;Persian&quot;&quot;, and &quot;The Buffalo Whore&quot;. Farther west in states like Iowa, Kansas, the Dakotas, and Nebraska regional songs included &quot;The Little Old Sod Shanty on the Claim&quot;, &quot;The Lane County Bachelor&quot;, &quot;Comin&#x27; Back to Kansas&quot;, &quot;The Dreary Black Hills&quot;, and &quot;Dakota Land&quot;. The famous &quot;Ballad of Jesse James&quot;, which celebrated the titular bankrobber&#x27;s life, first appeared in Springfield, Missouri.

Few Child or broadside ballads have been found in the Northwestern United States as the documented folk songs in the area are usually work songs connected to relatively recent folk experiences within the mining, lumber, and other industries of the nineteenth and twentieth century.

Similar to the Northwest, older traditional ballads were far less common in the Southwest, with only &quot;Barbara Allen&quot; and &quot;Lord Randal&quot; being regional favorites. Popular local songs and ballads were, among others, &quot;Texas Rangers&quot;, &quot;The Yellow Rose of Texas&quot;, &quot;Joe Bowers&quot;, &quot;Sweet Betsy from Pike&quot;, &quot;Ho for California!&quot;, and &quot;Buffalo Skinners&quot;. 

Some songs entered the folk tradition through the flourishing American popular music industry. One such popular song that became a folk tune was &quot;Old Dan Tucker&quot; written by Dan Emmett.

===Spirituals===

Spirituals have their origins in white American ministers appropriating European folk melodies and setting them to religious lyrics, creating uniquely American folk hymns. African Americans adopted this religious folk music, adding their own style and themes such as slavery and emancipation. &quot;Sacred music, both a Capella and instrumentally accompanied, is at the heart of the tradition. Early spirituals framed Christian beliefs within native practices and were heavily influenced by the music and rhythms of Africa.&quot; Spirituals are prominent, and often use a call and response pattern. &quot;Gospel developed after the Civil War (1861-65). It relied on biblical text for much of its direction, and the use of metaphors and imagery was common. Gospel is a &quot;joyful noise,&quot; sometimes accompanied by instrumentation and almost always punctuated by hand clapping, toe tapping, and body movement.&quot;

===African-American folk music===
:::See also: Blues

When African slaves were brought to the Americas husbands were separated from wives and parents from their children. Also the many tribes that the slaves were from were broken up and the ensuing slave communities that were set up were constituted by every possible mixture. What the slaves had in common was the desire to dance, sing and play what musical instruments could be assembled. Eileen Southern in &quot;The Music of Black Americans: A History&quot; lists about a dozen and a half African-American &quot;folksong types&quot;. These are &quot;boat songs, corn songs, cowboy songs, dance songs, freedom songs, harvest songs, parodies of spirituals, pattyroller songs, prison songs, railroad songs, satirical songs, shout songs, spirituals, stevedore songs, story songs, war songs, woodcutter songs, and work songs.&quot; 

Because slaves were forbidden to perform African ceremonies or use African languages, &quot;the slaves filled this cultural vacuum by acquiring the rudiments of Anglo-American folk song, British country dancing and European harmony, and adapting them to West African patterns.&quot;
Alan Lomax in &quot;The Folk Songs of North America&quot; states, &quot;The slaves, brought to the United States from many parts of Africa, continued to dance and make music as their ancestors had done…. In the United States tribes were mixed and African languages and ceremonies were forbidden, and the slaves filled the cultural vacuum by acquiring the rudiments of Anglo-American folk song, British country dancing, and European harmony, and adapting them to West African patterns. Lomax, after maintaining that &quot;whatever they sang was intensely functional,&quot; catalogs these songs as &quot;spirituals, reels, work songs, ballads and blues.&quot;

===Work songs===

====Sea shanties====

Sea shanties functioned to lighten the burden of routine tasks and provide a rhythm that helped workers perform as a team. One of the oldest sea shanties sung in America may have been &quot;Haul in the Bowline&quot; which could date back as far as the rule of Henry VIII in the sixteenth century. Other popular shanties include &quot;Blow the Man Down&quot;, &quot;Blow, Boys, Blow&quot;, &quot;Reuben Ranzo&quot;, &quot;Shenandoah&quot; and &quot;The Greenland Whale&quot; as well as African-American shanties such as &quot;Mobile Bay&quot; and &quot;I&#x27;m Goin&#x27; up the River&quot;.

====Cowboy songs====
Cowboys songs are typically ballads that cowboys sang in the West and Southwest. The familiar &quot;Streets of Laredo&quot; (or &quot;Cowboys Lament&quot;) derives from an Irish folk song of the late 18th century called &quot;The Unfortunate Rake&quot;, which in turn appears to have descended from the even earlier &quot;The Bard of Armagh&quot;. While &quot;Streets of Laredo&quot; uses the same melody as &quot;The Unfortunate Rake&quot;, &quot;St. James Infirmary Blues&quot; adapts the story to a different tune. This illustrates how folk songs can change in the retelling and appear in a variety of versions. Similarly the popular cowboy song &quot;Bury Me Not on the Lone Prairie, about a dying cowboy begging not to be buried alone in the wilderness, is based on an earlier poem, &quot;The Ocean Burial&quot;. Similarly, the popular song &quot;Buffalo Skinners&quot; is based on the earlier lumberjack tune &quot;Canaday-I-O&quot;.

Other songs originated wholly on the frontier such as the famous &quot;Home on the Range&quot; written in Kansas in 1873 by Brewster Higley and Dan Kelly. &quot;The Old Chisholm Trail&quot; too was a distinctly American ballad tied to the experiences of cowboys on the long treks on the Chisholm Trail.

Following the Civil War, cowboys became popular as characters in novels and in Wild West shows. The first movie western was &quot;The Great Train Robbery&quot;, filmed in 1903. At the height of this romanticizing of the American cowboy, John Lomax published his preeminent work, &quot;Cowboy Songs and Other Frontier Ballads.&quot; This work was acclaimed in both academic and popular readership and helped to expand the scope of what constituted folk music, as previous scholarship focused on songs with European ballad ancestry, such as with the Child Ballads. While &quot;Cowboy Songs&quot; may have opened the door to legitimizing a wider range of vernacular music in the field of American folk music scholarship, in later years it has been criticized for not being a strictly scientific historical endeavor. Lomax himself admitted, &quot;I have violated the ethics of ballad-gatherers, in a few instances, by selecting and putting together what seems to be the best lines from different versions, all telling the same story...Frankly the volume is meant to be popular.&quot;

====Railroad songs====
One of the most popular railroad folk songs in American history was The Ballad of Casey Jones, a song about a train conductor who sacrificed himself to prevent a collision. The &quot;Ballad of John Henry&quot; is about an African-American folk hero said to have worked as a &quot;steel-driving man&quot;.

==== Coal mining ====
The earliest known coal mine was in Richmond Virginia in 1750. Coal became the primary source of fuel in the United States by the 1880s, beating out wood, with usage peaking in 1910. Coal camps were made up of a largely Irish and Welsh demographic, which is evident in the structure of coal mining songs. Coal mining was fraught with danger that was unmitigated by morally indifferent mining companies. Explosions and cave-ins were a constant fear, as were black lung disease and pneumoconiosis. Songs such as &quot;Don&#x27;t Go Down in the Mine&quot;, &quot;The Dying Mine Brakeman&quot;, and &quot;A Miner&#x27;s Prayer&quot; gave voice to these fears. Efforts to unionize began in the 1930s, creating tunes such as &quot;We Shall Not Be Moved&quot;, which was a rewriting of the gospel hymn &quot;I Shall Not Be Moved&quot;. The use of familiar hymns made the songs easy for organizers to sing along with, and also imbued the cause with an air of righteousness.

&quot;Sixteen Tons&quot; was written in 1946 by Merle Travis about the plight of coal miners and life in company towns. Travis also penned &quot;Dark as a Dungeon&quot;, which was most notably performed by Johnny Cash.

==== Textile workers ====
While American colonists had long spun and wove homemade textiles, a burgeoning industry began to appear at the end of the eighteenth century in New England and later in the southern states. Working conditions in textile mills were bleak, with extremely long hours and meager pay for the men, women, and children employed within. Strikes began in the 1830s and 1840s, led by the young women who made up three-quarters of the work force, and earned about half of their male coworkers. The song &quot;A Factory Girl&quot; tells of a young woman, dissatisfied with her occupation, leaving the mill to become a wife. Dave McCarn wrote songs in protest of the textile mill such as &quot;Cotton Mill Colic&quot;, which lamented the insufficient and inequitable pay scale and poverty that ensued.

==== Logging ====
The logging industry began in New England to satisfy the needs of ship building. Later, the advent of the transcontinental railroad made it possible to harvest the forests of the Pacific Northwest, with the industry reaching a peak from 1870 to 1900. The hardships for loggers included a struggle with natural forces, unpredictable outdoor working conditions, and the danger of precarious stacks of logs stories high that could topple. &quot;The Jam on Gerry&#x27;s Rocks&quot; was one such song that described this terrifying phenomenon. &quot;The Lumberjack&#x27;s Alphabet&quot; was a high spirited song and favorite of these workers.

==== Linemen songs ====
&quot;The Lineman&#x27;s Hymn&quot; is told from the perspective of a dying lineman who fell from a pole, and warns the listener to be careful lest he suffer the same fate.

==Roots music==
Many roots musicians do not consider themselves folk musicians. The main difference between the American folk music revival and American &quot;roots music&quot; is that roots music seems to cover a broader range, including blues and country.

Roots music developed its most expressive and varied forms in the first three decades of the 20th century. The Great Depression and the Dust Bowl were extremely important in disseminating these musical styles to the rest of the country, as Delta blues masters, itinerant honky tonk singers, and Cajun musicians spread to cities like Chicago, Los Angeles, and New York. The growth of the recording industry in the same period was also important; higher potential profits from music placed pressure on artists, songwriters, and label executives to replicate previous hit songs. This meant that musical fads, such as Hawaiian slack-key guitar, never died out completely, since a broad range of rhythms, instruments, and vocal stylings were incorporated into disparate popular genres.

By the 1950s, forms of roots music had led to pop-oriented forms. Folk musicians like the Kingston Trio, blues-derived rock and roll and rockabilly, pop-gospel, doo wop and R&amp;B (later secularized further as soul music) and the Nashville sound in country music all modernized and expanded the musical palette of the country.

The roots approach to music emphasizes the diversity of American musical traditions, the genealogy of creative lineages and communities, and the innovative contributions of musicians working in these traditions today. In recent years roots music has been the focus of popular media programs such as Garrison Keillor&#x27;s public radio program, &quot;A Prairie Home Companion&quot; and the feature film by the same name.

==Regional forms==
American traditional music is also called roots music. Roots music is a broad category of music including bluegrass, country music, gospel, old time music, jug bands, Appalachian folk, blues, Cajun and Native American music. The music is considered American either because it is native to the United States or because it developed there, out of foreign origins, to such a degree that it struck musicologists as something distinctly new. It is considered &quot;roots music&quot; because it served as the basis of music later developed in the United States, including rock and roll, contemporary folk music, rhythm and blues, and jazz.

===Appalachian music===

Appalachian music is the traditional music of the region of Appalachia in the Eastern United States. It derives from various European and African influences—including English ballads, Irish and Scottish traditional music (especially fiddle music), hymns, and African-American blues. First recorded in the 1920s, Appalachian musicians were a key influence on the early development of Old-time music, country music, and bluegrass, and were an important part of the American folk music revival.

Instruments typically used to perform Appalachian music include the banjo, American fiddle, fretted dulcimer, and guitar.

Early recorded Appalachian musicians include Fiddlin&#x27; John Carson, Henry Whitter, Bascom Lamar Lunsford, the Carter Family, Clarence Ashley, Frank Proffitt, and Dock Boggs, all of whom were initially recorded in the 1920s and 1930s. Several Appalachian musicians obtained renown during the folk revival of the 1950s and 1960s, including Jean Ritchie, Roscoe Holcomb, Ola Belle Reed, Lily May Ledford, and Doc Watson.

The Carter Family was a traditional American folk music group that recorded between 1927 and 1956. Their music had a profound impact on bluegrass, country, Southern Gospel, pop and rock musicians. They were the first vocal group to become country music stars; a beginning of the divergence of country music from traditional folk music. Their recordings of such songs as &quot;Wabash Cannonball&quot; (1932), &quot;Will the Circle Be Unbroken&quot; (1935), &quot;Wildwood Flower&quot; (1928), and &quot;Keep on the Sunny Side&quot; (1928) made them country standards.

Country and bluegrass artists such as Loretta Lynn, Roy Acuff, Dolly Parton, Earl Scruggs, Chet Atkins, and Don Reno were heavily influenced by traditional Appalachian music. Artists such as Bob Dylan, Jerry Garcia, and Bruce Springsteen have performed Appalachian songs or rewritten versions of Appalachian songs.

===Cajun music===
Cajun music, an emblematic music of Louisiana, is rooted in the ballads of the French-speaking Acadians of Canada. Cajun music is often mentioned in tandem with the Creole-based, Cajun-influenced zydeco form, both of Acadiana origin. These French Louisiana sounds have influenced American popular music for many decades, especially country music, and have influenced pop culture through mass media, such as television commercials.

===Oklahoma and southern US plains===

Before recorded history American Indians in this area used songs and instrumentation; music and dance remain the core of ceremonial and social activities. &quot;Stomp dance&quot; remains at its core, a &quot;call and response&quot; form; instrumentation is provided by rattles or shackles worn on the legs of women. &quot;Other southeastern nations have their own complexes of sacred and social songs, including those for animal dances and friendship dances, and songs that accompany stickball games.

Central to the music of the southern Plains Indians is the drum, which has been called the heartbeat of Plains Indian music. Most of that genre traces back to the hunting and warfare that was a strong part of plains culture. During the reservation period, they frequently used music to relieve boredom and despair. Neighbors gathered, exchanged and created songs and dances. This is a part of the roots of the modern intertribal powwow. Another common instrument is the courting flute.

Shape-note or sacred harp singing developed in the early nineteenth century as a way for itinerant singing instructors to teach church songs in rural communities. They taught using song books that represented musical notation of tones by geometric shapes that associated a shape with a pitch. Sacred harp singing became popular in many Oklahoma rural communities, regardless of ethnicity.

Later, the blues tradition developed, with roots in and parallels to sacred music. By the early 20th century, jazz developed, born from a &quot;blend of ragtime, gospel, and blues&quot; &quot;Anglo-Scots-Irish music traditions gained a place in Oklahoma after the Land Run of 1889. Because of its size and portability, the fiddle was the core of early Oklahoma Anglo music, but other instruments such as the guitar, mandolin, banjo, and steel guitar were added later. Various Oklahoma music traditions trace their roots to the British Isles, including cowboy ballads, western swing, and contemporary country and western.&quot; &quot;Mexican immigrants began to reach Oklahoma in the 1870s, bringing beautiful canciones and corridos love songs, waltzes, and ballads along with them. Like American Indian communities, each rite of passage in Hispanic communities is accompanied by traditional music.

The acoustic guitar, string bass, and violin provide the basic instrumentation for Mexican music, with maracas, flute, horns, or sometimes accordion filling out the sound.&quot; Other Europeans (such as Bohemians and Germans) settled in the late nineteenth century. Their social activities centered on community halls, &quot;where local musicians played polkas and waltzes on the accordion, piano, and brass instruments.&quot;

Later Asians contributed to the musical mix. &quot;Ancient music and dance traditions from the temples and courts of China, India, and Indonesia are preserved in Asian communities throughout the state, and popular song genres are continually layered on to these classical music forms&quot;

===The American Southwest and South Texas===
Tejano and New Mexico music, heard throughout the American Southwest and South Texas, is rooted in the musics of the Native American and Hispanic/Latino communities of the regions. Tejano music is also heavily influenced by Regional Mexican and Country music, while New Mexico music is much more influenced by Hispano folk and Western music. Both styles have influenced one another over the years, and incorporated American popular music styles.

===Other forms===
Folk composer and musician Robert Schmertz composed and wrote pieces related to historical events in Western Pennsylvania.

==20th century folk revival music==

Starting in the mid-20th century a phenomenon termed the folk music revival began, forming a new contemporary type of folk music. It was somewhat centered on but not limited to the United States. While sometimes termed the American Folk Music Revival, it was somewhat international and does not fit some narrower definitions of American folk music even when the artists were American. Prominent artists from this movement include Pete Seeger, Woody Guthrie, The Weavers, Burl Ives, and others. A more commercially oriented version of folk music emerged in the 1960s, including performers such as The Kingston Trio, The Limeliters, The Brothers Four, Peter, Paul and Mary, Joan Baez, The Highwaymen, Judy Collins, The New Christy Minstrels, and Gordon Lightfoot, as well as counterculture and folk rock performers including Bob Dylan, The Byrds, Arlo Guthrie, and Buffy Sainte-Marie.

==Books==
*Series: &quot;Greenwood Guides to American Roots Music,&quot; edited by Norm Cohen. Titles include, Folk Music, Country, Blues, Jazz, and Ethnic and Border Music.
* Norm Cohen, &quot;Long Steel Rail: The Railroad in American Folksong&quot; (Urbana, IL: University of Illinois Press, 2nd ed., 2000)
*Fiona Ritchie and Doug Orr, &quot;Wayfaring Strangers: The Musical Voyage from Scotland and Ulster to Appalachia&quot; (University of North Carolina Press, 2014). Includes a foreword by Dolly Parton and 20 track CD.
*Benjamin Filene, &quot;Romancing the Folk: Public Memory and American Roots Music&quot; (Chapel Hill and London: University of North Carolina Press, 2000)
*Rachel Clare Donaldson, &quot;&quot;I Hear American Singing&quot;: Folk Music and National Identity&quot; (Philadelphia: Temple University Press, 2014)
*Kip Lornell, &quot;Exploring American Folk Music: Ethnic, Grassroots, and Regional Traditions in the United States&quot; (Jackson: University Press of Mississippi, 2012)
*Robert Santelli, &quot;American Roots Music--Based on the PBS Television Series&quot; (Abrams, 2001), foreword by Bonnie Raitt
*In 2004, NPR published the book titled &quot;The NPR Curious Listener&#x27;s Guide to American Folk Music&quot;, Linda Ronstadt wrote the foreword.
*The Never-Ending Revival: Rounder Records and the Folk Alliance by Michael F. Scully (University of Illinois Press, 2008)
*Nettl, Bruno. &quot;An Introduction to Folk Music in the United States&quot;. Rev. ed. Detroit, Mich.: Wayne State University Press, 1962.
*In 2007, James P. Leary published &quot;Polkabilly: How the Goose Island Ramblers Redefined American Folk Music&quot;, which proposes a redefinition of traditional American folk music and identifies a new genre of music from the Upper Midwest known as &quot;Polkabilly&quot;, which blends ethnic music, old-time country music, and polka. The book was awarded the American Folklore Society&#x27;s Chicago Folklore Prize for the best book in the field of folklore scholarship.

==Film, TV, and radio==
&quot;Hootenanny&quot;, a weekly musical variety show broadcast on the ABC network in the U.S. in 1963–1964, primarily featured folk musicians.

The soundtrack of the 2000 film &quot;O Brother, Where Art Thou?&quot; is exclusively roots music, performed by Alison Krauss, The Fairfield Four, Emmylou Harris, Norman Blake and others.

In 2001, PBS broadcast a 4-part documentary series, &quot;American Roots Music,&quot; that explored the historical roots of American roots music through footage and performances by the creators of the movement.

The 2003 film &quot;A Mighty Wind&quot; is a tribute to (and parody of) the folk-pop musicians of the early 1960s.

A six-hour public television series, &quot;The Music of America: History Through Musical Traditions,&quot; appeared in 2010.

PBS series &quot;Country Music&quot; by Ken Burns, 8 episodes. &quot;Explore the remarkable stories of the people and places behind a true American art form.&quot; Gives insight into the folk heritage of what would become country music.

BBC radio program &quot;Black Roots,&quot; Grammy Award-winning musician Rhiannon Giddens explores the history of African American roots music through the stories of forgotten black pioneers.

==See also==
*American folk music revival
*&quot;Anthology of American Folk Music&quot;
*List of North American folk music traditions
*Protest songs in the United States

==References==
==External links==
*The Historyscoper
*The Folk File: A Folkie&#x27;s Dictionary by Bill Markwick (1945-2017) - musical definitions and short biographies for American and U.K. Folk musicians and groups. Retrieved September 21, 2017.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1541229" start="9" end="28" title="American folk music" label="American folk music"/>
<link wikidata="Q43343" start="132" end="142" title="folk music" label="folk music"/>
<link wikidata="Q38272" start="385" end="398" title="British Isles" label="British Isles"/>
<link wikidata="Q466039" start="400" end="415" title="Mainland Europe" label="Mainland Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q15" start="420" end="426" title="Africa" label="Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q4992201" start="437" end="448" title="Mike Seeger" label="Mike Seeger"/>
<link wikidata="Q213714" start="638" end="647" title="bluegrass music" label="bluegrass"/>
<link wikidata="Q180268" start="649" end="655" title="gospel music" label="gospel"/>
<link wikidata="Q972424" start="657" end="671" title="old time music" label="old time music"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075338" start="673" end="681" title="jug band" label="jug band"/>
<link wikidata="Q4780884" start="684" end="700" title="Appalachian folk music" label="Appalachian folk"/>
<link wikidata="Q9759" start="702" end="707" title="blues" label="blues"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026089" start="709" end="714" title="Cajun music" label="Cajun"/>
<link wikidata="Q2662072" start="719" end="740" title="Native American music" label="Native American music"/>
<link wikidata="Q164204" start="911" end="923" title="musicologist" label="musicologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q2267955" start="1029" end="1071" title="music of the United States" label="music later developed in the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q7749" start="1083" end="1096" title="rock and roll" label="rock and roll"/>
<link wikidata="Q45981" start="1098" end="1114" title="rhythm and blues" label="rhythm and blues"/>
<link wikidata="Q8341" start="1120" end="1124" title="jazz" label="jazz"/>
<link wikidata="Q208365" start="1308" end="1325" title="ethnomusicologist" label="ethnomusicologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q31976" start="1326" end="1337" title="Bruno Nettl" label="Bruno Nettl"/>
<link wikidata="Q1771297" start="1406" end="1418" title="English folk music" label="English folk"/>
<link wikidata="Q132116" start="1587" end="1597" title="folklorist" label="folklorist"/>
<link wikidata="Q2344992" start="1598" end="1617" title="Francis James Child" label="Francis James Child"/>
<link wikidata="Q182659" start="1638" end="1645" title="ballads" label="ballads"/>
<link wikidata="Q2517093" start="1659" end="1672" title="Child Ballads" label="Child Ballads"/>
<link wikidata="Q38272" start="1730" end="1743" title="British Isles" label="British Isles"/>
<link wikidata="Q3634587" start="1764" end="1783" title="Barbara Allen (song)" label="Barbara Allen&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1947846" start="1912" end="1925" title="murder ballad" label="murder ballad"/>
<link wikidata="Q7242269" start="1932" end="1944" title="Pretty Polly (ballad)" label="Pretty Polly"/>
<link wikidata="Q5542081" start="2003" end="2022" title="George Malcolm Laws" label="George Malcolm Laws"/>
<link wikidata="Q4065202" start="2148" end="2162" title="Anglo-American music" label="Anglo-American"/>
<link wikidata="Q7091138" start="2190" end="2210" title="Springfield Mountain" label="Springfield Mountain"/>
<link wikidata="Q951500" start="2240" end="2251" title="Connecticut Colony" label="Connecticut"/>
<link wikidata="Q510487" start="2323" end="2329" title="fiddle" label="fiddle"/>
<link wikidata="Q6607" start="2335" end="2341" title="guitar" label="guitar"/>
<link wikidata="Q302497" start="2347" end="2355" title="mandolin" label="mandolin"/>
<link wikidata="Q6926344" start="2361" end="2372" title="mouth organ" label="mouth organ"/>
<link wikidata="Q2255516" start="2378" end="2382" title="fife (instrument)" label="fife"/>
<link wikidata="Q341663" start="2392" end="2400" title="dulcimer" label="dulcimer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1812862" start="2479" end="2493" title="English guitar" label="English guitar"/>
<link wikidata="Q719120" start="2531" end="2545" title="Classical guitar" label="Spanish guitar"/>
<link wikidata="Q4763331" start="2614" end="2641" title="Country dance" label="English country dance tunes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1079270" start="2650" end="2654" title="jigs" label="jigs"/>
<link wikidata="Q118120" start="2656" end="2661" title="reel (dance)" label="reels"/>
<link wikidata="Q1547484" start="2667" end="2675" title="hornpipe" label="hornpipe"/>
<link wikidata="Q747339" start="2723" end="2736" title="contra dances" label="contra dances"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146185" start="2807" end="2812" title="Irish dance" label="Irish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1430164" start="2817" end="2825" title="Scottish country dance" label="Scottish"/>
<link wikidata="Q394084" start="3221" end="3231" title="quadrilles" label="quadrilles"/>
<link wikidata="Q151942" start="3233" end="3241" title="mazurkas" label="mazurkas"/>
<link wikidata="Q808399" start="3243" end="3253" title="barn dance" label="barn dance"/>
<link wikidata="Q3422966" start="3256" end="3262" title="redowa" label="redowa"/>
<link wikidata="Q16820420" start="3265" end="3272" title="American march music" label="marches"/>
<link wikidata="Q153071" start="3278" end="3284" title="polkas" label="polkas"/>
<link wikidata="Q12069565" start="3292" end="3310" title="Soldier&amp;#x27;s Joy (fiddle tune)" label="Soldier&amp;#x27;s Joy"/>
<link wikidata="Q18389" start="3369" end="3380" title="New England" label="New England"/>
<link wikidata="Q42406" start="3499" end="3513" title="English people" label="English people"/>
<link wikidata="Q3836782" start="3654" end="3666" title="Lord Randall" label="Lord Randall"/>
<link wikidata="Q7767634" start="3680" end="3697" title="The Sweet Trinity" label="The Golden Vanity"/>
<link wikidata="Q2963020" start="3705" end="3721" title="The Elfin Knight" label="The Elfin Knight"/>
<link wikidata="Q7759277" start="3723" end="3737" title="The Raggle Taggle Gypsy" label="The Gypsy Davy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1619555" start="3745" end="3775" title="Lady Isabel and the Elf-Knight" label="Lady Isabel and the Elf-Knight"/>
<link wikidata="Q8057961" start="3810" end="3822" title="Young Beichan" label="Lord Bateman"/>
<link wikidata="Q7728605" start="3824" end="3843" title="The House Carpenter" label="The House Carpenter"/>
<link wikidata="Q7733451" start="3845" end="3873" title="The Farmer&amp;#x27;s Curst Wife" label="The Farmer&amp;#x27;s Curst Wife"/>
<link wikidata="Q6679737" start="3875" end="3885" title="Lord Lovel" label="Lord Lovel"/>
<link wikidata="Q5725516" start="3891" end="3903" title="Henry Martin (song)" label="Henry Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q849965" start="3911" end="3927" title="broadside ballad" label="broadside ballad"/>
<link wikidata="Q7720770" start="4054" end="4065" title="The Butcher&amp;#x27;s Boy (folk song)" label="Butcher Boy"/>
<link wikidata="Q107143794" start="4136" end="4154" title="The Boston Burglar" label="The Boston Burglar"/>
<link wikidata="Q85770563" start="4263" end="4291" title="Jam on Gerry&amp;#x27;s Rock" label="The Jam on Gerry&amp;#x27;s Rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q24460" start="4441" end="4467" title="Northeastern United States" label="Northeastern United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q1400" start="4479" end="4491" title="Pennsylvania" label="Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384" start="4493" end="4501" title="New York State" label="New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q1408" start="4507" end="4517" title="New Jersey" label="New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q141817" start="4646" end="4653" title="German-Americans" label="Germans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058496" start="4655" end="4660" title="Dutch-Americans" label="Dutch"/>
<link wikidata="Q637979" start="4666" end="4671" title="Swiss-Americans" label="Swiss"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139046" start="4681" end="4707" title="Southeastern United States" label="Southeastern United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q7565220" start="4749" end="4766" title="Sourwood Mountain" label="Sourwood Mountain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1952483" start="4854" end="4866" title="Buffalo Gals" label="Buffalo Gals"/>
<link wikidata="Q7714258" start="4880" end="4897" title="The Arkansas Traveler (song)" label="Arkansas Traveler"/>
<link wikidata="Q3177219" start="4911" end="4930" title="Turkey in the Straw" label="Turkey in the Straw"/>
<link wikidata="Q7084302" start="4944" end="4957" title="Old Joe Clark" label="Old Joe Clark"/>
<link wikidata="Q96379655" start="4971" end="5002" title="Going Down the Road Feeling Bad" label="Going Down the Road Feeling Bad"/>
<link wikidata="Q7460925" start="5016" end="5027" title="Shady Grove (song)" label="Shady Grove"/>
<link wikidata="Q131553423" start="5065" end="5072" title="Ida Red (song)" label="Ida Red"/>
<link wikidata="Q5120470" start="5090" end="5095" title="Cindy (folk song)" label="Cindy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7228770" start="5136" end="5152" title="Poor Ellen Smith" label="Poor Ellen Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q49227" start="5270" end="5293" title="Winston, North Carolina" label="Winston, North Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q6679994" start="5617" end="5645" title="Lord Thomas and Fair Annet" label="Lord Thomas and Fair Eleanor"/>
<link wikidata="Q7749620" start="5659" end="5690" title="The Maid Freed from the Gallows" label="The Maid Freed from the Gallows"/>
<link wikidata="Q5429854" start="5704" end="5735" title="Fair Margaret and Sweet William" label="Fair Margaret and Sweet William"/>
<link wikidata="Q7774804" start="5749" end="5778" title="The Wife of Usher&amp;#x27;s Well" label="The Wife of Usher&amp;#x27;s Well"/>
<link wikidata="Q2545476" start="5792" end="5807" title="The Twa Sisters" label="The Two Sisters"/>
<link wikidata="Q3835046" start="5825" end="5837" title="Matty Groves" label="Matty Groves"/>
<link wikidata="Q7744896" start="6072" end="6086" title="Knoxville Girl" label="Knoxville Girl"/>
<link wikidata="Q6114171" start="6100" end="6111" title="Jack Monroe (song)" label="Jack Monroe"/>
<link wikidata="Q7093000" start="6227" end="6242" title="One Morning in May (folk song)" label="The Nightingale"/>
<link wikidata="Q12005789" start="6256" end="6278" title="The Girl I Left Behind" label="The Girl I Left Behind"/>
<link wikidata="Q28868535" start="6296" end="6318" title="The Miller&amp;#x27;s Three Sons" label="The Miller&amp;#x27;s Will"/>
<link wikidata="Q3433659" start="6376" end="6388" title="On Top of Old Smokey" label="Little Mohea"/>
<link wikidata="Q17015891" start="6402" end="6412" title="John Hardy (song)" label="John Hardy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7090183" start="6430" end="6439" title="Omie Wise" label="Omie Wise"/>
<link wikidata="Q186545" start="6652" end="6659" title="Midwestern United States" label="Midwest"/>
<link wikidata="Q632014" start="6712" end="6724" title="Mid-Atlantic (United States)" label="Mid-Atlantic"/>
<link wikidata="Q5078482" start="6974" end="6989" title="Charles Guiteau (song)" label="Charles Guiteau"/>
<link wikidata="Q1548416" start="7121" end="7139" title="Great Lakes region" label="Great Lakes region"/>
<link wikidata="Q1546" start="7352" end="7356" title="Iowa" label="Iowa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1558" start="7358" end="7364" title="Kansas" label="Kansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q3304424" start="7366" end="7377" title="the Dakotas" label="the Dakotas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1553" start="7383" end="7391" title="Nebraska" label="Nebraska"/>
<link wikidata="Q7747680" start="7422" end="7460" title="The Little Old Sod Shanty on the Claim" label="The Little Old Sod Shanty on the Claim"/>
<link wikidata="Q16850048" start="7628" end="7649" title="Jesse James (folk song)" label="Ballad of Jesse James"/>
<link wikidata="Q135615" start="7728" end="7749" title="Springfield, Missouri" label="Springfield, Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q502658" start="7886" end="7895" title="work song" label="work song"/>
<link wikidata="Q44497" start="7956" end="7962" title="mining" label="mining"/>
<link wikidata="Q995609" start="7964" end="7970" title="wood industry" label="lumber"/>
<link wikidata="Q858847" start="8115" end="8124" title="Southwestern United States" label="Southwest"/>
<link wikidata="Q1934656" start="8301" end="8325" title="The Yellow Rose of Texas (song)" label="The Yellow Rose of Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q7655223" start="8363" end="8384" title="Sweet Betsy from Pike" label="Sweet Betsy from Pike"/>
<link wikidata="Q7091570" start="8434" end="8450" title="On the Trail of the Buffalo" label="Buffalo Skinners"/>
<link wikidata="Q4745518" start="8522" end="8544" title="American popular music" label="American popular music"/>
<link wikidata="Q7083830" start="8611" end="8625" title="Old Dan Tucker" label="Old Dan Tucker"/>
<link wikidata="Q3602423" start="8643" end="8653" title="Dan Emmett" label="Dan Emmett"/>
<link wikidata="Q9759" start="9642" end="9647" title="Blues" label="Blues"/>
<link wikidata="Q5349457" start="10037" end="10052" title="Eileen Southern" label="Eileen Southern"/>
<link wikidata="Q558104" start="10762" end="10772" title="Alan Lomax" label="Alan Lomax"/>
<link wikidata="Q38370" start="11721" end="11731" title="Henry VIII" label="Henry VIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q4928551" start="11795" end="11812" title="Blow the Man Down" label="Blow the Man Down"/>
<link wikidata="Q7080541" start="11882" end="11892" title="Oh Shenandoah" label="Shenandoah"/>
<link wikidata="Q178521" start="12116" end="12122" title="cowboy" label="cowboy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2355373" start="12175" end="12192" title="Streets of Laredo (song)" label="Streets of Laredo"/>
<link wikidata="Q7771474" start="12301" end="12321" title="The Unfortunate Rake" label="The Unfortunate Rake"/>
<link wikidata="Q7715628" start="12397" end="12415" title="The Bard of Armagh" label="The Bard of Armagh"/>
<link wikidata="Q780869" start="12523" end="12548" title="St. James Infirmary Blues" label="St. James Infirmary Blues"/>
<link wikidata="Q2928658" start="12730" end="12761" title="Bury Me Not on the Lone Prairie" label="Bury Me Not on the Lone Prairie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1625958" start="13087" end="13104" title="Home on the Range" label="Home on the Range"/>
<link wikidata="Q1558" start="13122" end="13128" title="Kansas" label="Kansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q4962759" start="13140" end="13155" title="Brewster Higley" label="Brewster Higley"/>
<link wikidata="Q477217" start="13303" end="13317" title="Chisholm Trail" label="Chisholm Trail"/>
<link wikidata="Q1349618" start="13557" end="13567" title="John Lomax" label="John Lomax"/>
<link wikidata="Q2517093" start="13868" end="13881" title="Child Ballads" label="Child Ballads"/>
<link wikidata="Q7715409" start="14492" end="14517" title="The Ballad of Casey Jones" label="The Ballad of Casey Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q2596171" start="14617" end="14627" title="John Henry (folklore)" label="John Henry"/>
<link wikidata="Q5137839" start="14935" end="14945" title="Coal town" label="Coal camps"/>
<link wikidata="Q5978931" start="15553" end="15573" title="I Shall Not Be Moved" label="I Shall Not Be Moved"/>
<link wikidata="Q1469232" start="15725" end="15737" title="Sixteen Tons" label="Sixteen Tons"/>
<link wikidata="Q1276598" start="15767" end="15779" title="Merle Travis" label="Merle Travis"/>
<link wikidata="Q627236" start="15824" end="15836" title="company town" label="company town"/>
<link wikidata="Q3016297" start="15864" end="15881" title="Dark as a Dungeon" label="Dark as a Dungeon"/>
<link wikidata="Q42775" start="15925" end="15936" title="Johnny Cash" label="Johnny Cash"/>
<link wikidata="Q4745458" start="17723" end="17750" title="American folk music revival" label="American folk music revival"/>
<link wikidata="Q8698" start="17981" end="17997" title="Great Depression" label="Great Depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q726501" start="18006" end="18015" title="Dust Bowl" label="Dust Bowl"/>
<link wikidata="Q1127539" start="18110" end="18121" title="Delta blues" label="Delta blues"/>
<link wikidata="Q1627155" start="18141" end="18151" title="honky tonk" label="honky tonk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026089" start="18165" end="18176" title="Cajun music" label="Cajun music"/>
<link wikidata="Q1297" start="18203" end="18210" title="Chicago" label="Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q65" start="18212" end="18223" title="Los Angeles, California" label="Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="18229" end="18237" title="New York City" label="New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q746359" start="18257" end="18275" title="record industry" label="recording industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q782" start="18484" end="18490" title="Hawaii" label="Hawaii"/>
<link wikidata="Q6507082" start="18493" end="18509" title="slack-key guitar" label="slack-key guitar"/>
<link wikidata="Q59965" start="18742" end="18755" title="Kingston Trio" label="Kingston Trio"/>
<link wikidata="Q7749" start="18771" end="18784" title="rock and roll" label="rock and roll"/>
<link wikidata="Q203720" start="18789" end="18799" title="rockabilly" label="rockabilly"/>
<link wikidata="Q546359" start="18813" end="18820" title="doo wop" label="doo wop"/>
<link wikidata="Q45981" start="18825" end="18832" title="Rhythm and blues" label="R&amp;amp;B"/>
<link wikidata="Q131272" start="18863" end="18873" title="soul music" label="soul music"/>
<link wikidata="Q1751782" start="18883" end="18898" title="Nashville sound" label="Nashville sound"/>
<link wikidata="Q183031" start="19280" end="19296" title="Garrison Keillor" label="Garrison Keillor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2890517" start="19332" end="19356" title="A Prairie Home Companion" label="A Prairie Home Companion"/>
<link wikidata="Q213714" start="19528" end="19537" title="bluegrass music" label="bluegrass"/>
<link wikidata="Q83440" start="19539" end="19552" title="country music" label="country music"/>
<link wikidata="Q180268" start="19554" end="19560" title="gospel music" label="gospel"/>
<link wikidata="Q972424" start="19562" end="19576" title="old time music" label="old time music"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075338" start="19578" end="19586" title="jug band" label="jug band"/>
<link wikidata="Q4780884" start="19589" end="19605" title="Appalachian folk music" label="Appalachian folk"/>
<link wikidata="Q9759" start="19607" end="19612" title="blues" label="blues"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026089" start="19614" end="19619" title="Cajun music" label="Cajun"/>
<link wikidata="Q2662072" start="19624" end="19645" title="Native American music" label="Native American music"/>
<link wikidata="Q164204" start="19816" end="19828" title="musicologist" label="musicologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q7749" start="19988" end="20001" title="rock and roll" label="rock and roll"/>
<link wikidata="Q45981" start="20028" end="20044" title="rhythm and blues" label="rhythm and blues"/>
<link wikidata="Q8341" start="20050" end="20054" title="jazz" label="jazz"/>
<link wikidata="Q4780884" start="20082" end="20099" title="Appalachian music" label="Appalachian music"/>
<link wikidata="Q2673740" start="20142" end="20152" title="Appalachia" label="Appalachia"/>
<link wikidata="Q510487" start="20315" end="20321" title="fiddle" label="fiddle"/>
<link wikidata="Q972424" start="20465" end="20479" title="Old-time music" label="Old-time music"/>
<link wikidata="Q83440" start="20481" end="20494" title="country music" label="country music"/>
<link wikidata="Q213714" start="20500" end="20509" title="bluegrass music" label="bluegrass"/>
<link wikidata="Q4745458" start="20545" end="20572" title="American folk music revival" label="American folk music revival"/>
<link wikidata="Q258896" start="20643" end="20648" title="banjo" label="banjo"/>
<link wikidata="Q4745455" start="20650" end="20665" title="American fiddle" label="American fiddle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2145031" start="20667" end="20683" title="Appalachian dulcimer" label="fretted dulcimer"/>
<link wikidata="Q6607" start="20689" end="20695" title="guitar" label="guitar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1411165" start="20743" end="20768" title="Fiddlin&amp;#x27; John Carson" label="Fiddlin&amp;#x27; John Carson"/>
<link wikidata="Q606120" start="20770" end="20783" title="Henry Whitter" label="Henry Whitter"/>
<link wikidata="Q4866335" start="20785" end="20806" title="Bascom Lamar Lunsford" label="Bascom Lamar Lunsford"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412029" start="20812" end="20825" title="Carter Family" label="Carter Family"/>
<link wikidata="Q1095358" start="20827" end="20842" title="Clarence Ashley" label="Clarence Ashley"/>
<link wikidata="Q5489086" start="20844" end="20858" title="Frank Proffitt" label="Frank Proffitt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1233734" start="20864" end="20874" title="Dock Boggs" label="Dock Boggs"/>
<link wikidata="Q2661396" start="21040" end="21052" title="Jean Ritchie" label="Jean Ritchie"/>
<link wikidata="Q3817217" start="21054" end="21068" title="Roscoe Holcomb" label="Roscoe Holcomb"/>
<link wikidata="Q7082838" start="21070" end="21084" title="Ola Belle Reed" label="Ola Belle Reed"/>
<link wikidata="Q6548534" start="21086" end="21102" title="Lily May Ledford" label="Lily May Ledford"/>
<link wikidata="Q465636" start="21108" end="21118" title="Doc Watson" label="Doc Watson"/>
<link wikidata="Q213714" start="21257" end="21266" title="bluegrass music" label="bluegrass"/>
<link wikidata="Q83440" start="21268" end="21275" title="country music" label="country"/>
<link wikidata="Q2022163" start="21277" end="21292" title="Southern Gospel" label="Southern Gospel"/>
<link wikidata="Q373342" start="21294" end="21297" title="popular music" label="pop"/>
<link wikidata="Q11399" start="21302" end="21312" title="rock music" label="rock music"/>
<link wikidata="Q774433" start="21497" end="21514" title="Wabash Cannonball" label="Wabash Cannonball"/>
<link wikidata="Q5029143" start="21535" end="21562" title="Can the Circle Be Unbroken (By and By)" label="Will the Circle Be Unbroken"/>
<link wikidata="Q2570979" start="21583" end="21598" title="Wildwood Flower" label="Wildwood Flower"/>
<link wikidata="Q6383066" start="21623" end="21645" title="Keep on the Sunny Side" label="Keep on the Sunny Side"/>
<link wikidata="Q272931" start="21727" end="21739" title="Loretta Lynn" label="Loretta Lynn"/>
<link wikidata="Q455773" start="21741" end="21750" title="Roy Acuff" label="Roy Acuff"/>
<link wikidata="Q180453" start="21752" end="21764" title="Dolly Parton" label="Dolly Parton"/>
<link wikidata="Q74032" start="21766" end="21778" title="Earl Scruggs" label="Earl Scruggs"/>
<link wikidata="Q72096" start="21780" end="21791" title="Chet Atkins" label="Chet Atkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q1239468" start="21797" end="21805" title="Don Reno" label="Don Reno"/>
<link wikidata="Q392" start="21880" end="21889" title="Bob Dylan" label="Bob Dylan"/>
<link wikidata="Q312870" start="21891" end="21903" title="Jerry Garcia" label="Jerry Garcia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1225" start="21909" end="21926" title="Bruce Springsteen" label="Bruce Springsteen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026089" start="22023" end="22034" title="Cajun music" label="Cajun music"/>
<link wikidata="Q6942158" start="22050" end="22068" title="music of Louisiana" label="music of Louisiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q182659" start="22087" end="22094" title="ballads" label="ballads"/>
<link wikidata="Q415054" start="22118" end="22125" title="Acadian" label="Acadian"/>
<link wikidata="Q16" start="22130" end="22136" title="Canada" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q4386404" start="22188" end="22194" title="Louisiana Creole people" label="Creole"/>
<link wikidata="Q686949" start="22202" end="22207" title="Cajun" label="Cajun"/>
<link wikidata="Q245296" start="22219" end="22225" title="zydeco" label="zydeco"/>
<link wikidata="Q337417" start="22240" end="22248" title="Acadiana" label="Acadiana"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="22263" end="22279" title="French Louisiana#Modern French Louisiana" label="French Louisiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q4745518" start="22303" end="22325" title="American popular music" label="American popular music"/>
<link wikidata="Q254279" start="23425" end="23431" title="powwow" label="powwow"/>
<link wikidata="Q7489233" start="23483" end="23493" title="Shape-note" label="Shape-note"/>
<link wikidata="Q7397088" start="23497" end="23508" title="sacred harp" label="sacred harp"/>
<link wikidata="Q431415" start="25536" end="25542" title="Tejano music" label="Tejano"/>
<link wikidata="Q18217098" start="25547" end="25563" title="New Mexico music" label="New Mexico music"/>
<link wikidata="Q858847" start="25586" end="25604" title="American Southwest" label="American Southwest"/>
<link wikidata="Q2393494" start="25609" end="25620" title="South Texas" label="South Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q36747" start="25653" end="25668" title="Indigenous peoples of the Americas" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q58669" start="25673" end="25688" title="Hispanic and Latino Americans" label="Hispanic/Latino"/>
<link wikidata="Q7309240" start="25760" end="25776" title="Regional Mexican music" label="Regional Mexican"/>
<link wikidata="Q16191886" start="25846" end="25853" title="Hispanos of New Mexico" label="Hispano"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425111" start="25863" end="25876" title="Western music (North America)" label="Western music"/>
<link wikidata="Q21560689" start="26028" end="26043" title="Robert Schmertz (artist)" label="Robert Schmertz"/>
<link wikidata="Q30125176" start="26063" end="26069" title="List of songs by Robert Schmertz" label="pieces"/>
<link wikidata="Q106298881" start="26259" end="26290" title="Contemporary folk music" label="contemporary type of folk music"/>
<link wikidata="Q4745458" start="26385" end="26412" title="American Folk Music Revival" label="American Folk Music Revival"/>
<link wikidata="Q244441" start="26592" end="26603" title="Pete Seeger" label="Pete Seeger"/>
<link wikidata="Q4061" start="26605" end="26618" title="Woody Guthrie" label="Woody Guthrie"/>
<link wikidata="Q664062" start="26620" end="26631" title="The Weavers" label="The Weavers"/>
<link wikidata="Q315723" start="26633" end="26642" title="Burl Ives" label="Burl Ives"/>
<link wikidata="Q59965" start="26758" end="26775" title="The Kingston Trio" label="The Kingston Trio"/>
<link wikidata="Q7747368" start="26777" end="26791" title="The Limeliters" label="The Limeliters"/>
<link wikidata="Q1749961" start="26793" end="26810" title="The Brothers Four" label="The Brothers Four"/>
<link wikidata="Q654716" start="26812" end="26832" title="Peter, Paul and Mary" label="Peter, Paul and Mary"/>
<link wikidata="Q131725" start="26834" end="26843" title="Joan Baez" label="Joan Baez"/>
<link wikidata="Q2411961" start="26845" end="26859" title="The Highwaymen (folk band)" label="The Highwaymen"/>
<link wikidata="Q254576" start="26861" end="26873" title="Judy Collins" label="Judy Collins"/>
<link wikidata="Q1569364" start="26875" end="26900" title="The New Christy Minstrels" label="The New Christy Minstrels"/>
<link wikidata="Q359552" start="26906" end="26922" title="Gordon Lightfoot" label="Gordon Lightfoot"/>
<link wikidata="Q392" start="26985" end="26994" title="Bob Dylan" label="Bob Dylan"/>
<link wikidata="Q211526" start="26996" end="27005" title="The Byrds" label="The Byrds"/>
<link wikidata="Q552925" start="27007" end="27019" title="Arlo Guthrie" label="Arlo Guthrie"/>
<link wikidata="Q467027" start="27025" end="27043" title="Buffy Sainte-Marie" label="Buffy Sainte-Marie"/>
<link wikidata="Q83440" start="27169" end="27176" title="Country music" label="Country"/>
<link wikidata="Q9759" start="27178" end="27183" title="Blues" label="Blues"/>
<link wikidata="Q8341" start="27185" end="27189" title="Jazz" label="Jazz"/>
<link wikidata="Q180453" start="27542" end="27554" title="Dolly Parton" label="Dolly Parton"/>
<link wikidata="Q215616" start="28111" end="28114" title="PBS" label="PBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q234693" start="28167" end="28179" title="Bonnie Raitt" label="Bonnie Raitt"/>
<link wikidata="Q671510" start="28190" end="28193" title="NPR" label="NPR"/>
<link wikidata="Q229375" start="28294" end="28308" title="Linda Ronstadt" label="Linda Ronstadt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1358138" start="28319" end="28327" title="foreword" label="foreword"/>
<link wikidata="Q16731327" start="28602" end="28616" title="James P. Leary" label="James P. Leary"/>
<link wikidata="Q2984465" start="28822" end="28835" title="Upper Midwest" label="Upper Midwest"/>
<link wikidata="Q4743796" start="28956" end="28981" title="American Folklore Society" label="American Folklore Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q5898677" start="29099" end="29109" title="Hootenanny (U.S. TV series)" label="Hootenanny"/>
<link wikidata="Q11424" start="29265" end="29269" title="film" label="film"/>
<link wikidata="Q501874" start="29276" end="29302" title="O Brother, Where Art Thou?" label="O Brother, Where Art Thou?"/>
<link wikidata="Q371782" start="29350" end="29363" title="Alison Krauss" label="Alison Krauss"/>
<link wikidata="Q2411241" start="29365" end="29383" title="The Fairfield Four" label="The Fairfield Four"/>
<link wikidata="Q231286" start="29385" end="29399" title="Emmylou Harris" label="Emmylou Harris"/>
<link wikidata="Q1514469" start="29401" end="29413" title="Norman Blake (American musician)" label="Norman Blake"/>
<link wikidata="Q215616" start="29436" end="29439" title="Public Broadcasting Service" label="PBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q93204" start="29459" end="29470" title="documentary film" label="documentary"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754773" start="29659" end="29672" title="A Mighty Wind" label="A Mighty Wind"/>
<link wikidata="Q616886" start="29921" end="29930" title="Ken Burns" label="Ken Burns"/>
<link wikidata="Q7320514" start="30192" end="30208" title="Rhiannon Giddens" label="Rhiannon Giddens"/>
<link wikidata="Q4745458" start="30326" end="30353" title="American folk music revival" label="American folk music revival"/>
<link wikidata="Q4771901" start="30361" end="30393" title="Anthology of American Folk Music" label="Anthology of American Folk Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q6592393" start="30401" end="30445" title="List of North American folk music traditions" label="List of North American folk music traditions"/>
<link wikidata="Q7251593" start="30447" end="30481" title="Protest songs in the United States" label="Protest songs in the United States"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="246503" wikidata="Q354418" url="?curid=246503" title="Adele Goldberg (linguist)">
<text>Adele Eva Goldberg (born 1963) is an American linguist known for her development of construction grammar and the constructionist approach in the tradition of cognitive linguistics.

==Early life==
Goldberg grew up in Bethlehem, Pennsylvania, where her mother was a reading teacher and her father was an engineer. Her brother, Ken Y. Goldberg is chair of the industrial engineering and operations research department at the University of California, Berkeley, and her sister, Elena is a pediatrician and child psychologist in Brooklyn.

== Academic career ==
Goldberg received a B.A. in Mathematics and Philosophy from University of Pennsylvania in 1985 before spending two years in the Logic and Methodology of Science program at University of California at Berkeley. She then transferred to linguistics to work with George Lakoff and earned her PhD in linguistics in 1992, studying with Lakoff, Eve Sweetser, Charles Fillmore, and Dan Slobin. Her thesis argues that basic grammatical patterns in English are directly associated with meaning, offering one of the earliest arguments that constructions as well as words contribute to propositional content.

After receiving her PhD, Goldberg joined the University of California, San Diego as an assistant professor of linguistics (1992-1997), and Associate Professor (1997-1998). From 1997 to 2004, she was associate professor of linguistics at the Beckman Institute, University of Illinois at Urbana–Champaign before moving to Princeton University in 2004 as Professor of Psychology and Linguistics.

She has continued to work on the relationship between form and function in language in language processing, and language learning by children and adults.

==Awards and honors==
* Chair of the Cognitive Science Society (2022-2024)
* Fellow, Association for Psychological Science (2020) 
* Fillmore Professorship, Linguistic Society of America Institute (2019)
* Labex International Chair, Paris, France. (2016)
* Humboldt Research Award (2016)
* Fellow of the Linguistic Society of America (2014)
* Visiting Fellow, Einstein Foundation. Freie Universitat, Berlin. (2010–2014)
* Fellow at Center for Advanced Study in the Behavioral Sciences. Stanford, California. (2003–2004)
* Fellow of the Center for Advanced Study, UIUC. (2000)
* Gustave O. Arlt Book Award. North American Graduate Council for Constructions (1995).

==Personal life==
Goldberg married Ali Yazdani, currently a professor of physics at Princeton, in 1994 and they have two children.

==Selected publications==
* 
* 
* 

==References==
==External links==
* Official homepage at Princeton University</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q354418" start="0" end="18" title="Adele Goldberg (linguist)" label="Adele Eva Goldberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q8162" start="46" end="54" title="linguist" label="linguist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1188797" start="84" end="104" title="construction grammar" label="construction grammar"/>
<link wikidata="Q508969" start="158" end="179" title="cognitive linguistics" label="cognitive linguistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q164380" start="217" end="240" title="Bethlehem, Pennsylvania" label="Bethlehem, Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q6387683" start="326" end="341" title="Ken Goldberg" label="Ken Y. Goldberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q4489420" start="358" end="404" title="industrial engineering and operations research" label="industrial engineering and operations research"/>
<link wikidata="Q168756" start="423" end="457" title="University of California, Berkeley" label="University of California, Berkeley"/>
<link wikidata="Q49117" start="618" end="644" title="University of Pennsylvania" label="University of Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q168756" start="730" end="766" title="University of California at Berkeley" label="University of California at Berkeley"/>
<link wikidata="Q313772" start="817" end="830" title="George Lakoff" label="George Lakoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q16798678" start="888" end="894" title="Lakoff" label="Lakoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065000" start="910" end="926" title="Charles J. Fillmore" label="Charles Fillmore"/>
<link wikidata="Q1159164" start="932" end="942" title="Dan Slobin" label="Dan Slobin"/>
<link wikidata="Q622664" start="1201" end="1236" title="University of California, San Diego" label="University of California, San Diego"/>
<link wikidata="Q4878755" start="1397" end="1414" title="Beckman Institute for Advanced Science and Technology" label="Beckman Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q457281" start="1416" end="1458" title="University of Illinois at Urbana–Champaign" label="University of Illinois at Urbana–Champaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q21578" start="1476" end="1496" title="Princeton University" label="Princeton University"/>
<link wikidata="Q743631" start="1790" end="1827" title="Association for Psychological Science" label="Association for Psychological Science"/>
<link wikidata="Q6554021" start="1862" end="1891" title="Linguistic Society of America" label="Linguistic Society of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q873412" start="1962" end="1985" title="Humboldt Research Award" label="Humboldt Research Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q6554021" start="2009" end="2038" title="Linguistic Society of America" label="Linguistic Society of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q1309260" start="2065" end="2084" title="Einstein Foundation" label="Einstein Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q153006" start="2086" end="2111" title="Free University of Berlin" label="Freie Universitat, Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5059479" start="2137" end="2189" title="Center for Advanced Study in the Behavioral Sciences" label="Center for Advanced Study in the Behavioral Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q5859128" start="2405" end="2416" title="Ali Yazdani" label="Ali Yazdani"/>
<link wikidata="Q21578" start="2595" end="2615" title="Princeton University" label="Princeton University"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="246507" wikidata="Q660071" url="?curid=246507" title="Silage">
<text>Silage is fodder made from green foliage crops which have been preserved by fermentation to the point of souring. It is fed to cattle, sheep and other ruminants. The fermentation and storage process is called &quot;ensilage&quot;, &quot;ensiling&quot;, or &quot;silaging&quot;. The exact methods vary, depending on available technology, local tradition and prevailing climate.

Silage is usually made from grass crops including maize, sorghum or other cereals, using the entire green plant (not just the grain). Specific terms may be used for silage made from particular crops: &quot;oatlage&quot; for oats, &quot;haylage&quot; for alfalfa (&quot;haylage&quot; may also refer to high dry matter silage made from hay).

==History==
Using the same technique as the process for making sauerkraut, green fodder was preserved for animals in parts of Germany since the start of the 19th century. This gained the attention of French agriculturist Auguste Goffart of Sologne, near Orléans. He published a book in 1877 which described the experiences of preserving green crops in silos. Goffart&#x27;s experience attracted considerable attention. The conditions of dairy farming in the United States suited the ensiling of green corn fodder, and was soon adopted by New England farmers. Francis Morris of Maryland prepared the first silage produced in America in 1876. The favourable results obtained in the US led to the introduction of the system in the United Kingdom, where Thomas Kirby first introduced the process for British dairy herds.

The modern silage preserved with acid and by preventing contact with air was invented by Finnish academic and professor of chemistry Artturi Ilmari Virtanen. Virtanen was awarded the 1945 Nobel prize in chemistry &quot;for his research and inventions in agricultural and nutrition chemistry, especially for his fodder preservation method&quot;, practically inventing modern silage.

Early silos were made of stone or concrete either above or below ground, but it is recognized that air may be sufficiently excluded in a tightly pressed stack, though in this case a few inches of the fodder around the sides is generally useless owing to mildew. In the US, structures were typically constructed of wooden cylinders to 35 or 40 ft. in depth.

In the early days of mechanized agriculture (late 1800s), stalks were cut and collected manually using a knife and horsedrawn wagon, and fed into a stationary machine called a &quot;silo filler&quot; that chopped the stalks and blew them up a narrow tube to the top of a tower silo.

==Production==
The crops most often used for ensilage are the ordinary grasses, clovers, alfalfa, vetches, oats, rye and maize. Many crops have ensilaging potential, including potatoes and various weeds, notably spurrey such as &quot;Spergula arvensis&quot;. Silage must be made from plant material with a suitable moisture content: about 50% to 60% depending on the means of storage, the degree of compression, and the amount of water that will be lost in storage, but not exceeding 75%. Weather during harvest need not be as fair and dry as when harvesting for drying. For corn, harvest begins when the whole-plant moisture is at a suitable level, ideally a few days before it is ripe. For pasture-type crops, the grass is mown and allowed to wilt for a day or so until the moisture content drops to a suitable level. Ideally the crop is mowed when in full flower, and deposited in the silo on the day of its cutting.

After harvesting, crops are shredded to pieces about long. The material is spread in uniform layers over the floor of the silo, and closely packed. When the silo is filled or the stack built, a layer of straw or some other dry porous substance may be spread over the surface. In the silo, the pressure of the material, when chaffed, excludes air from all but the top layer; in the case of the stack, extra pressure is applied by weights to prevent excessive heating.

===Equipment===
Forage harvesters collect and chop the plant material, and deposit it in trucks or wagons. These forage harvesters can be either tractor-drawn or self-propelled. Harvesters blow the chaff into the wagon through a chute at the rear or side of the machine. Chaff may also be emptied into a bagger, which puts the silage into a large plastic bag that is laid out on the ground.

In North America, Australia, northwestern Europe, and New Zealand it is common for silage to be placed in large heaps on the ground, rolled by tractor to push out the air, then covered with plastic sheets that are held down by used tires or tire ring walls. In New Zealand and Northern Europe, &#x27;clamps&#x27; made of concrete or old wooden railway ties (sleepers) and built into the side of a bank are sometimes used. The chopped grass can then be dumped in at the top, to be drawn from the bottom in winter. This requires considerable effort to compress the stack in the silo to cure it properly. Again, the pit is covered with plastic sheet and weighed down with tires.

In an alternative method, the cut vegetation is formed into bales using a baler, making &quot;balage&quot; (North America) or &quot;silage bales&quot; (UK, Australia, New Zealand). The grass or other forage is cut and partly dried until it contains 30–40% moisture (much drier than bulk silage, but too damp to be stored as dry hay). It is then made into large bales which are wrapped tightly in plastic to exclude air. The plastic may wrap the whole of each cylindrical or cuboid bale, or be wrapped around only the curved sides of a cylindrical bale, leaving the ends uncovered. In this case, the bales are placed tightly end to end on the ground, making a long continuous &quot;sausage&quot; of silage, often at the side of a field. The wrapping may be performed by a bale wrapper, while the baled silage is handled using a bale handler or a front-loader, either impaling the bale on a flap, or by using a special grab. The flaps do not hole the bales.

In the UK, baled silage is most often made in round bales about , individually wrapped with four to six layers of &quot;bale wrap plastic&quot; (black, white or green 25-micrometre stretch film). The percentage of dry matter can vary from about 20% dry matter upwards. The continuous &quot;sausage&quot; referred to above is made with a special machine which wraps the bales as they are pushed through a rotating hoop which applies the bale wrap to the outside of the bales (round or square) in a continuous wrap. The machine places the bales on the ground after wrapping by moving forward slowly during the wrapping process.

==Haylage==

&quot;Haylage&quot; sometimes refers to high dry matter silage of around 40% to 60%, typically made from hay. Horse haylage is usually 60% to 70% dry matter, made in small bales or larger bales.

Handling of wrapped bales is most often with some type of gripper that squeezes the plastic-covered bale between two metal parts to avoid puncturing the plastic. Simple fixed versions are available for round bales which are made of two shaped pipes or tubes spaced apart to slide under the sides of the bale, but when lifted will not let it slip through. Often used on the tractor&#x27;s loader as an attachment called a bale grabber, they incorporate a trip tipping mechanism which can flip the bales over on to the flat side or end for storage on the thickest plastic layers.

==Fermentation==
Silage undergoes anaerobic fermentation, which starts about 48 hours after the silo is filled, and converts sugars to acids. Fermentation is essentially complete after about two weeks.

Before anaerobic fermentation starts, there is an aerobic phase in which the trapped oxygen is consumed. How closely the fodder is packed determines the nature of the resulting silage by regulating the chemical reactions that occur in the stack. When closely packed, the supply of oxygen is limited, and the attendant acid fermentation brings about decomposition of the carbohydrates present into acetic, butyric and lactic acids. This product is named sour silage. If the fodder is unchaffed and loosely packed, or the silo is built gradually, oxidation proceeds more rapidly and the temperature rises; if the mass is compressed when the temperature is , the action ceases and sweet silage results. The nitrogenous ingredients of the fodder also change: in making sour silage, as much as one-third of the albuminoids may be converted into amino and ammonium compounds; in making sweet silage, a smaller proportion is changed, but they become less digestible. If the fermentation process is poorly managed, sour silage acquires an unpleasant odour due to excess production of ammonia or butyric acid (the latter is responsible for the smell of rancid butter).

In the past, the fermentation was conducted by indigenous microorganisms, but, today, some bulk silage is inoculated with specific microorganisms to speed fermentation or improve the resulting silage. Silage inoculants contain one or more strains of lactic acid bacteria, and the most common is &quot;Lactobacillus plantarum&quot;. Other bacteria used include &quot;Lactobacillus buchneri&quot;, &quot;Enterococcus faecium&quot; and &quot;Pediococcus&quot; species.

Ryegrasses have high sugars and respond to nitrogen fertiliser better than any other grass species. These two qualities have made ryegrass the most popular grass for silage-making for the last sixty years. There are three ryegrasses in seed form and commonly used: Italian, Perennial and Hybrid.

==Pollution and waste==
The fermentation process of silo or pit silage releases liquid. Silo effluent is corrosive. It can also contaminate water sources unless collected and treated. The high nutrient content can lead to eutrophication (hypertrophication), the growth of bacterial or algal blooms.

Plastic sheeting used for sealing pit or baled silage needs proper disposal, and some areas have recycling schemes for it. Traditionally, farms have burned silage plastics; however odor and smoke concerns have led certain communities to restrict that practice.

==Storing silage==
Silage must be firmly packed to minimize the oxygen content, lest it spoil.

Silage goes through four major stages in a silo:
*Presealing, which, after the first few days after filling a silo, enables some respiration and some dry matter (DM) loss, but stops.
*Fermentation, which occurs over a few weeks. pH drops, and there is more DM loss, but hemicellulose is broken down; aerobic respiration stops.
*Infiltration, which enables some oxygen infiltration, allowing for limited microbial respiration. Available carbohydrates (CHOs) are lost as heat and gas.
*Emptying, which exposes surface, causing additional loss; rate of loss increases.

==Safety==
Silos are potentially hazardous: deaths may occur in the process of filling and maintaining them, and several safety precautions are necessary. There is a risk of injury by machinery or from falls. When a silo is filled, fine dust particles in the air can become explosive because of their large aggregate surface area. Also, fermentation presents respiratory hazards. The ensiling process produces &quot;silo gas&quot; during the early stages of the fermentation process. Silage gas contains nitric oxide (NO), which will react with oxygen (O2) in the air to form nitrogen dioxide (NO2), which is toxic. Lack of oxygen inside the silo can cause asphyxiation. Molds that grow when air reaches cured silage can cause organic dust toxic syndrome. Collapsing silage from large bunker silos has caused deaths.

Silage itself poses no special danger however the improvement in legislation to regulate the animal food industry has reduced the problems concerning food-related human diseases by improvement of the hygienic quality of silage. Milk from cows fed with silage containing clostridial spores could represent a risk in hard cheese production. A special focus has to be directed to zoonotic pathogens like listeria, mycotoxins, clostridia, and E. coli bacteria as a result of deficient hygiene in silage production and could end up in dairy products.

==Nutrition==
Ensilage can be substituted for root crops. Bulk silage is commonly fed to dairy cattle, while baled silage tends to be used for beef cattle, sheep and horses. The advantages of silage as animal feed are several: 
*During fermentation, the silage bacteria act on the cellulose and carbohydrates in the forage to produce volatile fatty acids (VFAs), such as acetic, propionic, lactic, and butyric acids. By lowering pH, these produce a hostile environment for competing bacteria that might cause spoilage. The VFAs thus act as natural preservatives, in the same way that the lactic acid in yogurt and cheese increases the preservability of what began as milk, or how vinegar (dilute acetic acid) preserves pickled vegetables. This preservative action is particularly important during winter in temperate regions, when green forage is unavailable.
*When silage is prepared under optimal conditions, the modest acidity also has the effect of improving palatability, and provides a dietary contrast for the animal. (However, excessive production of acetic and butyric acids can reduce palatability: the mix of bacteria is ideally chosen so as to maximize lactic acid production.)
*Several of the fermenting organisms produce vitamins: for example, lactobacillus species produce folic acid and vitamin B12.
*The fermentation process that produces VFA also yields energy that the bacteria use: some of the energy is released as heat. Silage is thus modestly lower in caloric content than the original forage, in the same way that yogurt has modestly fewer calories than milk. However, this loss of energy is offset by the preservation characteristics and improved digestibility of silage.

==Anaerobic digestion==
Silage may be used for anaerobic digestion.

== Fish silage ==
Fish silage is a method used for conserving by-products from fishing for later use as feed in fish farming. This way, the parts of the fish that are not used as human food such as fish guts (entrails), fish heads and trimmings are utilized as ingredients in feed pellets. The silage is performed by first grinding the remains and mixing it with formic acid, and then storing it in a tank. The acid helps with preservation as well as further dissolving the residues. Process tanks for fish silage can be aboard ships or on land.

== See also ==
* Grain crimping
* Grain bin

== References ==
=== Sources ===
*&quot;Making and Feeding Silage&quot;, John Murdoch, B.Sc., Ph.D. Published by Dairy Farmer (Books) Limited, Lloyd&#x27;s Chambers, Ipswich, UK 1961)
*Feeding baleage to horses – the ultimate guide – Horsetalk.co.nz 
* &quot;The Owner-Built Homestead&quot; by Barbara and Ken Kern, New York: Scribner, 1977. 

==Further reading==
* Zhou, Yiqin. &quot;Compar[ison of] Fresh or Ensiled Fodders (e.g., Grass, Legume, Corn) on the Production of Greenhouse Gases Following Enteric Fermentation in Beef Cattle&quot;. Rouyn-Noranda, Qué.: Université du Québec en Abitibi-Témiscamingue, 2011. &quot;N.B&quot;.: Research report.
* Transformation: Lord Armstrong&#x27;s Cragend Farm by Lou Renwick 2024 The story of the worlds first Silage making facility using water powered hydraulics built by Lord Armstrong of Cragside using Goffart&#x27;s ideas on preserving grass . Amazon. Feedaread. .</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q660071" start="0" end="6" title="Silage" label="Silage"/>
<link wikidata="Q211439" start="10" end="16" title="fodder" label="fodder"/>
<link wikidata="Q33971" start="33" end="40" title="leaf" label="foliage"/>
<link wikidata="Q235352" start="41" end="45" title="crop" label="crop"/>
<link wikidata="Q6950796" start="76" end="88" title="fermentation (food)" label="fermentation"/>
<link wikidata="Q4993312" start="105" end="112" title="souring" label="souring"/>
<link wikidata="Q830" start="127" end="133" title="cattle" label="cattle"/>
<link wikidata="Q7368" start="135" end="140" title="sheep" label="sheep"/>
<link wikidata="Q192164" start="151" end="159" title="ruminant" label="ruminant"/>
<link wikidata="Q43238" start="406" end="417" title="grass crops" label="grass crops"/>
<link wikidata="Q11575" start="428" end="433" title="maize" label="maize"/>
<link wikidata="Q332062" start="435" end="442" title="sorghum" label="sorghum"/>
<link wikidata="Q12117" start="452" end="458" title="cereal" label="cereal"/>
<link wikidata="Q156106" start="632" end="639" title="alfalfa" label="alfalfa"/>
<link wikidata="Q336989" start="712" end="715" title="hay" label="hay"/>
<link wikidata="Q154166" start="782" end="792" title="sauerkraut" label="sauerkraut"/>
<link wikidata="Q1784690" start="959" end="966" title="Sologne" label="Sologne"/>
<link wikidata="Q6548" start="973" end="980" title="Orléans" label="Orléans"/>
<link wikidata="Q14096331" start="1156" end="1166" title="dairy farm" label="dairy farm"/>
<link wikidata="Q11575" start="1220" end="1224" title="maize" label="corn"/>
<link wikidata="Q18389" start="1257" end="1268" title="New England" label="New England"/>
<link wikidata="Q157239" start="1670" end="1693" title="Artturi Ilmari Virtanen" label="Artturi Ilmari Virtanen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1220207" start="2174" end="2180" title="mildew" label="mildew"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2549" end="2559" title="Silo#Tower silo" label="tower silo"/>
<link wikidata="Q101538" start="2642" end="2648" title="clover" label="clover"/>
<link wikidata="Q156106" start="2651" end="2658" title="alfalfa" label="alfalfa"/>
<link wikidata="Q147337" start="2660" end="2665" title="vetch" label="vetch"/>
<link wikidata="Q12104" start="2669" end="2672" title="oat" label="oat"/>
<link wikidata="Q12099" start="2675" end="2678" title="rye" label="rye"/>
<link wikidata="Q11575" start="2683" end="2688" title="maize" label="maize"/>
<link wikidata="Q10998" start="2738" end="2744" title="potato" label="potato"/>
<link wikidata="Q101879" start="2759" end="2763" title="weed" label="weed"/>
<link wikidata="Q162766" start="2774" end="2781" title="spurrey" label="spurrey"/>
<link wikidata="Q162826" start="2796" end="2813" title="Spergula arvensis" label="Spergula arvensis"/>
<link wikidata="Q506" start="3421" end="3427" title="flower" label="flower"/>
<link wikidata="Q213643" start="3450" end="3454" title="silo" label="silo"/>
<link wikidata="Q160066" start="3686" end="3691" title="straw" label="straw"/>
<link wikidata="Q30470787" start="3807" end="3812" title="chaff" label="chaff"/>
<link wikidata="Q39552" start="3889" end="3897" title="pressure" label="pressure"/>
<link wikidata="Q1900188" start="3967" end="3983" title="Forage harvester" label="Forage harvester"/>
<link wikidata="Q39495" start="4096" end="4103" title="tractor" label="tractor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1552846" start="5094" end="5099" title="baler" label="baler"/>
<link wikidata="Q805203" start="5791" end="5803" title="bale wrapper" label="bale wrapper"/>
<link wikidata="Q217416" start="5865" end="5877" title="Loader (equipment)" label="front-loader"/>
<link wikidata="Q336989" start="6722" end="6725" title="hay" label="hay"/>
<link wikidata="Q41760" start="7426" end="7448" title="anaerobic fermentation" label="anaerobic fermentation"/>
<link wikidata="Q629" start="7680" end="7686" title="oxygen" label="oxygen"/>
<link wikidata="Q36534" start="7797" end="7814" title="chemical reaction" label="chemical reaction"/>
<link wikidata="Q41760" start="7918" end="7930" title="Fermentation (biochemistry)" label="fermentation"/>
<link wikidata="Q11358" start="7965" end="7977" title="carbohydrate" label="carbohydrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q47512" start="7992" end="7998" title="acetic acid" label="acetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q193213" start="8000" end="8007" title="butyric acid" label="butyric"/>
<link wikidata="Q161249" start="8012" end="8018" title="lactic acid" label="lactic"/>
<link wikidata="Q82682" start="8140" end="8149" title="oxidation" label="oxidation"/>
<link wikidata="Q627" start="8299" end="8307" title="nitrogen" label="nitrogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q169219" start="8401" end="8411" title="albuminoid" label="albuminoid"/>
<link wikidata="Q167198" start="8435" end="8440" title="amino" label="amino"/>
<link wikidata="Q190901" start="8445" end="8453" title="ammonium" label="ammonium"/>
<link wikidata="Q11978" start="8543" end="8553" title="digestion" label="digestible"/>
<link wikidata="Q13360072" start="9006" end="9026" title="lactic acid bacteria" label="lactic acid bacteria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1756682" start="9057" end="9080" title="Lactobacillus plantarum" label="Lactobacillus plantarum"/>
<link wikidata="Q3074777" start="9122" end="9144" title="Lactobacillus buchneri" label="Lactobacillus buchneri"/>
<link wikidata="Q140010" start="9158" end="9178" title="Enterococcus faecium" label="Enterococcus faecium"/>
<link wikidata="Q3243659" start="9195" end="9206" title="Pediococcus" label="Pediococcus"/>
<link wikidata="Q156698" start="9742" end="9756" title="eutrophication" label="eutrophication"/>
<link wikidata="Q10876" start="9792" end="9800" title="bacteria" label="bacteria"/>
<link wikidata="Q37868" start="9805" end="9809" title="alga" label="alga"/>
<link wikidata="Q213643" start="10221" end="10225" title="silo" label="silo"/>
<link wikidata="Q40936" start="10407" end="10409" title="pH" label="pH"/>
<link wikidata="Q207843" start="11249" end="11261" title="nitric oxide" label="nitric oxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q207895" start="11321" end="11337" title="nitrogen dioxide" label="nitrogen dioxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q7101839" start="11472" end="11499" title="organic dust toxic syndrome" label="organic dust toxic syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q12136" start="11726" end="11740" title="human diseases" label="human diseases"/>
<link wikidata="Q132809" start="11833" end="11843" title="clostridia" label="clostridia"/>
<link wikidata="Q182672" start="11940" end="11948" title="Zoonosis" label="zoonotic"/>
<link wikidata="Q746209" start="11964" end="11972" title="listeria" label="listeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q17070363" start="11974" end="11984" title="Mycotoxins in animal feed" label="mycotoxins"/>
<link wikidata="Q132809" start="11986" end="11996" title="clostridia" label="clostridia"/>
<link wikidata="Q25419" start="12002" end="12009" title="Escherichia coli" label="E. coli"/>
<link wikidata="Q20136" start="12156" end="12165" title="root crop" label="root crop"/>
<link wikidata="Q2915" start="12199" end="12211" title="dairy cattle" label="dairy cattle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1208989" start="12253" end="12264" title="beef cattle" label="beef cattle"/>
<link wikidata="Q7368" start="12266" end="12271" title="sheep" label="sheep"/>
<link wikidata="Q726" start="12276" end="12281" title="horse" label="horse"/>
<link wikidata="Q2698455" start="12444" end="12464" title="volatile fatty acids" label="volatile fatty acids"/>
<link wikidata="Q47512" start="12481" end="12487" title="acetic acid" label="acetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q422956" start="12489" end="12498" title="propionic acid" label="propionic"/>
<link wikidata="Q161249" start="12500" end="12506" title="lactic acid" label="lactic"/>
<link wikidata="Q193213" start="12512" end="12519" title="butyric acid" label="butyric"/>
<link wikidata="Q40936" start="12539" end="12541" title="pH" label="pH"/>
<link wikidata="Q127060" start="13398" end="13408" title="folic acid" label="folic acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q187706" start="13413" end="13424" title="vitamin B12" label="vitamin B12"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128255" start="13939" end="13949" title="by-product" label="by-product"/>
<link wikidata="Q209894" start="13989" end="14001" title="fish farming" label="fish farming"/>
<link wikidata="Q600396" start="14056" end="14066" title="Fish as food" label="human food"/>
<link wikidata="Q161233" start="14240" end="14251" title="formic acid" label="formic acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q173514" start="14304" end="14316" title="Food preservation" label="preservation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5593504" start="14441" end="14455" title="Grain crimping" label="Grain crimping"/>
<link wikidata="Q123367228" start="14458" end="14467" title="Grain bin" label="Grain bin"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="246513" wikidata="Q11605" url="?curid=246513" title="Adele Goldberg (computer scientist)">
<text>Adele Goldberg (born July 22, 1945) is an American computer scientist. She was one of the co-developers of the programming language Smalltalk-80, which is a computer software that simplifies the programming language, and has been the basis of knowledge and structure for many other programming languages such as Python, C, and Java. She also developed many concepts related to object-oriented programming while a researcher at the Xerox Palo Alto Research Center (PARC), in the 1970s.

==Early life and education==
Goldberg was born in Cleveland, Ohio, on July 22, 1945. Her family relocated to Chicago, Illinois, when she was 11, where she spent the rest of her childhood. She enjoyed problem solving and mathematics from a young age. In High School, she was in Student Council, but then realized this wasn&#x27;t her area of interest. She was encouraged by her teachers to pursue mathematics. In 1963, Goldberg decided to attend the University of Michigan. She considered Ann Arbor a big change from her Chicago lifestyle, mentioning her hardships in adapting to life separated for the first time from her twin sister. Mathematics as a degree shielded her for the social instability of the country– as President John F. Kennedy had been murdered that same year. Math and science were an opportunity for her to dedicate time into her studies and avoid social situations. She spent three years at the university, took a semester off to travel in Europe, and later returned to complete her degree. In 1967, she completed her studies and earned a bachelor&#x27;s degree in mathematics at the University of Michigan.

Interested in the subject of computing, Goldberg worked as an intern with IBM during the summer of her junior year of college, where she learned how to program unit record machines. After graduating, she attended the University of Chicago, where she received her master&#x27;s degree (in 1969) and a PhD (in 1973) in information science. She completed her dissertation, &quot;Computer-Assisted Instruction: The Application of Theorem-proving to Adaptive Response Analysis,&quot; while working as a research associate at Stanford University. She also served as a visiting researcher at Stanford. After completing her PhD, Goldberg briefly worked as a professor in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, before joining Xerox PARC in 1973 as a research scientist. In California, during a meeting of the Association for Computing Machinery Special Interest Group on Computer Users in Education (ACM SIGCSE), Adele met John Stoch, a XEROX employee, where they talked about a potential computer designed for children&#x27;s education, called Dynabook. 

==Career==

===1973===
Goldberg began working at PARC in 1973 as a laboratory and research assistant, and eventually became manager of the System Concepts Laboratory where she, Alan Kay, and other researchers developed the programming language Smalltalk-80. At the time, it was not common for female computer scientists, nonetheless, Alan Kay, the leader of the design and development of first modern computer interface, hired a pregnant Adele Goldberg. This language developed the object-oriented approach of Simula 67 and introduced a programming environment of overlapping windows on graphic display screens. This new “personal computer,” with its key features including portability, network connection, communication with others, build models, and content sharing capabilities was the objective of Smalltalk at the time. 

Smalltalk&#x27;s innovative format was simple to use and customizable. Objects could be transferred among applications with minimal effort. Goldberg and Kay were involved in the development of &quot;design templates&quot;, forerunners of the design patterns later used in software design. Adele says that Smalltalk took inspiration from another language, which was created in the Sixties, Simula. Smalltalk 72, one of the iterations, was the first to feature low-level animations, and music. Adele and her team paired up with Doug Engelbart, the original inventor of the mouse, to see the possibilities of its incorporation to Smalltalk with the goal of better access, avoiding command lines with funny syntax. Smalltalk 72 was Adele&#x27;s first opportunity to “teach” and explain this model to anyone. 

===1976===
Along with Kay, she wrote the influential article &quot;Personal Dynamic Media&quot;, which predicted a world in which ordinary individuals would use notebook computers to exchange, modify, and redistribute personal media. This paper outlined the vision for the Dynabook. She emphasized the vision of a small device, being able to be carried anywhere, that could give out information in quantities approaching that of human sensory systems, where the output had to be higher quality than newspapers. This paper outlined the vision for Dynabook.

===1981===
Adele was very passionate about Smalltalk, spending lots of time promoting her creation. In 1981, BYTE magazine featured Smalltalk, where she personally helped write and edit an article, with the goal of introducing and normalizing object-oriented programming as a necessity in today&#x27;s developing and technologically dependent society.

===1984===
Many of the concepts developed by Goldberg and her team at PARC became the basis for graphical user interfaces. According to Goldberg, Steve Jobs demanded a demonstration of the Smalltalk System, which she at first refused to give him, although her superiors eventually compelled her to comply. Apple eventually took many of the ideas used in the Xerox Alto and their implementations and used them as the basis for their Apple Macintosh desktop environment. Afterwards, Steve Jobs was shown an early version of Goldberg&#x27;s Smalltalk (Model 76 at the time), where he immediately incorporated it into Apple&#x27;s new Computer, the Macintosh. It led to a commercial which aired in 1984, during the Super Bowl XVIII. The commercial emphasized on Smalltalk&#x27;s key features, including the importance of GUI, as it facilitated the interaction through simplicity.

===1986===
Between 1984 through 1986, Adele was President of the Association for Computing Machinery. Her previous roles included National Secretary and Editor-in-Chief of ACM&#x27;s Computing Surveys, being awarded the 1987 ACM Software Systems Award along with her colleagues Ingalls and Kay for the development of Smalltalk.

===1988===
In 1988, Goldberg left PARC to cofound ParcPlace Systems, a company that created development tools for Smalltalk-based applications. Most of her work at PARC is the foundation for today&#x27;s graphically based user interfaces, which replace earlier command line base systems. There, she served as chairwoman and CEO until its 1995 merger with Digitalk. She also cofounded Neometron, Inc. an Internet support provider in 1999. She works at Bullitics. She continues to pursue her interest in education, formulating computer science courses at community colleges in the United States and abroad. She is a board member and adviser at Cognito Learning Media, a provider of multimedia software for science education.

==Achievements and accolades==

“The Dynabook mission remains to create the medium, both the creative modeling environment and the curriculum, to upend how kids can share their understanding of how things work, and be challenged as to whether that understanding reflects an approximation to reality.” – Adele Goldberg

Goldberg has been awarded a number of awards and honors for her contributions to the development of computer systems. She was president of the Association for Computing Machinery (ACM) from 1984 to 1986, and, with Alan Kay and Dan Ingalls, received the ACM Software Systems Award in 1987. She was included in Forbes&#x27;s &quot;Twenty Who Matter&quot;. In 1994, she was inducted as a Fellow of the ACM. She received PC Magazine&#x27;s Lifetime Achievement Award in 1996. She was co-awarded the Dr. Dobb&#x27;s Excellence in Programming Award with Dan Ingalls in 2002. In 2010, she was admitted into the Women in Technology International (WITI) Hall of Fame. She was awarded an honorary doctorate by the Open University. In 2021, she received the University of Chicago Alumni Professional Achievement Award. Furthermore, she was given honorary degrees from the University of Michigan in 2014.

The Computer History Museum (CHM) houses a collection of Goldberg&#x27;s working documents, reports, publications and videotapes related to her work on the development of Smalltalk. In 2022, with Dan Ingalls, she was made a Fellow of the CHM for promoting and codeveloping the Smalltalk programming environment and contributions advancing use of computers in education.

== Selected publications ==
*Kay, A., Goldberg, A., &amp; Learning Research Group at Xerox Palo Alto Research Center. (1977b). Personal Dynamic media. In Computer (Vol. 10, Issue 3, pp. 31–41). https://augmentingcognition.com/assets/Kay1977.pdf
* (out of print; the &quot;blue book&quot; as known by Smalltalk people)
* (the &quot;orange book&quot;)
* (the &quot;purple book&quot;, a revision of the &quot;blue book&quot;)

== References ==
== External links ==

* hosted by the Computer History Museum
* Some of Goldberg&#x27;s publications at ResearchGate</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q11605" start="0" end="14" title="Adele Goldberg (computer scientist)" label="Adele Goldberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q82594" start="51" end="69" title="computer scientist" label="computer scientist"/>
<link wikidata="Q9143" start="111" end="131" title="programming language" label="programming language"/>
<link wikidata="Q235086" start="132" end="141" title="Smalltalk" label="Smalltalk"/>
<link wikidata="Q79872" start="377" end="404" title="object-oriented programming" label="object-oriented programming"/>
<link wikidata="Q152433" start="431" end="436" title="Xerox" label="Xerox"/>
<link wikidata="Q750428" start="437" end="462" title="PARC (company)" label="Palo Alto Research Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q37320" start="536" end="545" title="Cleveland" label="Cleveland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1397" start="547" end="551" title="Ohio" label="Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1297" start="595" end="602" title="Chicago" label="Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q1204" start="604" end="612" title="Illinois" label="Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q730920" start="686" end="701" title="problem solving" label="problem solving"/>
<link wikidata="Q230492" start="1590" end="1612" title="University of Michigan" label="University of Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q37156" start="1689" end="1692" title="IBM" label="IBM"/>
<link wikidata="Q16927915" start="1775" end="1795" title="Unit record equipment" label="unit record machines"/>
<link wikidata="Q131252" start="1832" end="1853" title="University of Chicago" label="University of Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q16387" start="1932" end="1951" title="information science" label="information science"/>
<link wikidata="Q41506" start="2135" end="2154" title="Stanford University" label="Stanford University"/>
<link wikidata="Q8678" start="2278" end="2292" title="Rio de Janeiro" label="Rio de Janeiro"/>
<link wikidata="Q7390318" start="2400" end="2489" title="SIGCSE" label="Association for Computing Machinery Special Interest Group on Computer Users in Education"/>
<link wikidata="Q1268858" start="2636" end="2644" title="Dynabook" label="Dynabook"/>
<link wikidata="Q750428" start="2697" end="2701" title="PARC (company)" label="PARC"/>
<link wikidata="Q92742" start="2825" end="2833" title="Alan Kay" label="Alan Kay"/>
<link wikidata="Q235086" start="2892" end="2901" title="Smalltalk" label="Smalltalk"/>
<link wikidata="Q92742" start="2982" end="2990" title="Alan Kay" label="Alan Kay"/>
<link wikidata="Q212569" start="3158" end="3167" title="Simula 67" label="Simula 67"/>
<link wikidata="Q5253831" start="3717" end="3731" title="design pattern" label="design pattern"/>
<link wikidata="Q212569" start="3864" end="3870" title="Simula" label="Simula"/>
<link wikidata="Q92614" start="4001" end="4015" title="Douglas Engelbart" label="Doug Engelbart"/>
<link wikidata="Q1268858" start="4554" end="4562" title="Dynabook" label="Dynabook"/>
<link wikidata="Q1268858" start="4827" end="4835" title="Dynabook" label="Dynabook"/>
<link wikidata="Q782543" start="5287" end="5311" title="graphical user interface" label="graphical user interface"/>
<link wikidata="Q19837" start="5337" end="5347" title="Steve Jobs" label="Steve Jobs"/>
<link wikidata="Q235086" start="5380" end="5389" title="Smalltalk" label="Smalltalk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140061" start="5549" end="5559" title="Xerox Alto" label="Xerox Alto"/>
<link wikidata="Q75687" start="5629" end="5638" title="Mac (computer)" label="Macintosh"/>
<link wikidata="Q205020" start="5639" end="5658" title="desktop environment" label="desktop environment"/>
<link wikidata="Q19837" start="5672" end="5682" title="Steve Jobs" label="Steve Jobs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137478" start="5836" end="5845" title="Macintosh 128K" label="Macintosh"/>
<link wikidata="Q782543" start="6008" end="6011" title="Graphical user interface" label="GUI"/>
<link wikidata="Q127992" start="7583" end="7618" title="Association for Computing Machinery" label="Association for Computing Machinery"/>
<link wikidata="Q92772" start="7667" end="7678" title="Dan Ingalls" label="Dan Ingalls"/>
<link wikidata="Q1404101" start="7825" end="7831" title="Fellow" label="Fellow"/>
<link wikidata="Q631830" start="7857" end="7868" title="PC Magazine" label="PC Magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q17162443" start="7935" end="7982" title="Dr. Dobb&amp;#x27;s Excellence in Programming Award" label="Dr. Dobb&amp;#x27;s Excellence in Programming Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q2413375" start="8144" end="8159" title="Open University" label="Open University"/>
<link wikidata="Q964035" start="8338" end="8361" title="Computer History Museum" label="Computer History Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1404101" start="8558" end="8564" title="Fellow" label="Fellow"/>
<link wikidata="Q964035" start="9184" end="9207" title="Computer History Museum" label="Computer History Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q754454" start="9250" end="9262" title="ResearchGate" label="ResearchGate"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="246514" wikidata="Q13603535" url="?curid=246514" title="UCI Road World Championships – Men's road race">
<text>The UCI Road World Championships Elite Men&#x27;s Road Race is a one-day event for professional cyclists that takes place annually. The winner is considered the World Cycling Champion (or &quot;World Road Cycling Champion&quot;) and earns the right to wear the &quot;Rainbow Jersey&quot; for a full year in road race or stage events. The event is a single &#x27;mass start&#x27; road race with the winner being the first across the line at the completion of the full race distance. The road race is contested by riders organized by national cycling teams as opposed to commercially sponsored or &quot;trade teams&quot;, which is the standard in professional cycling.

== History ==
The first professional World Cycling Championship took place in 1927 at the Nürburgring in Germany and was won by Alfredo Binda, of Italy. In recent years, the race is held towards the end of the European season, usually following the Vuelta a España.

The elite men&#x27;s race is usually won by riders on the UCI World Tour or its predecessors. However, in the past there were separate events for amateur riders, mainly from Eastern bloc countries.

For men at the elite professional level, the World Cycling Championship, along with the Tour de France, and the Giro d&#x27;Italia, forms the Triple Crown of Cycling.

=== Course ===
The event can be held over either a relatively flat course which favors cycling sprinters or over a hilly course which favors more of a climbing specialist or all-round type of cyclist. It usually involves laps of a circuit with a total race distance over in length.

== Medalists ==



Seven cyclists have successfully defended their title (three Belgians, two Italians, a Slovakian and a French): Georges Ronsse (Belgium, 1928–29); Rik Van Steenbergen (Belgium, 1956–57); Rik Van Looy (Belgium, 1960–61); Gianni Bugno (Italy, 1991–92); Paolo Bettini (Italy, 2006–07), Peter Sagan (Slovakia, 2015–17) and Julian Alaphilippe (France, 2020–21). Sagan is the only rider with three straight titles (2015–17). Spaniard Alejandro Valverde has the most total medals by any individual rider with seven (1 gold in 2018; 2 silver in 2003, 2005; 4 bronze in 2006, 2012–14).

===Most successful riders===
===Medals per country===

;Notes
*

==See also==
* UCI Road World Championships
* GP Wolber

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q13603535" start="4" end="59" title="UCI Road World Championships – Men&amp;#x27;s road race" label="UCI Road World Championships Elite Men&amp;#x27;s Road Race"/>
<link wikidata="Q13603535" start="130" end="131" title="UCI Road World Championships – Men&amp;#x27;s road race" label="."/>
<link wikidata="Q1461236" start="267" end="281" title="Rainbow Jersey" label="Rainbow Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1785271" start="541" end="553" title="cycling team" label="cycling team"/>
<link wikidata="Q152207" start="758" end="769" title="Nürburgring" label="Nürburgring"/>
<link wikidata="Q318051" start="796" end="809" title="Alfredo Binda" label="Alfredo Binda"/>
<link wikidata="Q33937" start="917" end="932" title="Vuelta a España" label="Vuelta a España"/>
<link wikidata="Q635366" start="993" end="1007" title="UCI World Tour" label="UCI World Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q170541" start="1109" end="1121" title="Eastern bloc" label="Eastern bloc"/>
<link wikidata="Q33881" start="1222" end="1236" title="Tour de France" label="Tour de France"/>
<link wikidata="Q33861" start="1246" end="1264" title="Giro d&amp;#x27;Italia" label="Giro d&amp;#x27;Italia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062632" start="1276" end="1299" title="Triple Crown of Cycling" label="Triple Crown of Cycling"/>
<link wikidata="Q533097" start="1389" end="1405" title="cycling sprinter" label="cycling sprinter"/>
<link wikidata="Q2380088" start="1453" end="1472" title="climbing specialist" label="climbing specialist"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1476" end="1485" title="Bicycling terminology#all-rounder" label="all-round"/>
<link wikidata="Q1332267" start="1716" end="1730" title="Georges Ronsse" label="Georges Ronsse"/>
<link wikidata="Q454963" start="1751" end="1770" title="Rik Van Steenbergen" label="Rik Van Steenbergen"/>
<link wikidata="Q445151" start="1791" end="1803" title="Rik Van Looy" label="Rik Van Looy"/>
<link wikidata="Q454923" start="1824" end="1836" title="Gianni Bugno" label="Gianni Bugno"/>
<link wikidata="Q298886" start="1855" end="1868" title="Paolo Bettini" label="Paolo Bettini"/>
<link wikidata="Q309911" start="1887" end="1898" title="Peter Sagan" label="Peter Sagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3189071" start="1923" end="1941" title="Julian Alaphilippe" label="Julian Alaphilippe"/>
<link wikidata="Q286183" start="2032" end="2050" title="Alejandro Valverde" label="Alejandro Valverde"/>
<link wikidata="Q506424" start="2262" end="2290" title="UCI Road World Championships" label="UCI Road World Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q739879" start="2293" end="2302" title="GP Wolber" label="GP Wolber"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="246515" wikidata="Q227369" url="?curid=246515" title="Silo (disambiguation)">
<text>A [[silo]] is a structure for storing bulk materials.

Silo or SILO may refer to:
==Arts and entertainment==
* &quot;Silo&quot; (film), a 2019 American thriller drama film
* &quot;Silo&quot; (series), a series of science fiction novellas by Hugh Howey
** &quot;Silo&quot; (TV series), a television series adapted from the novellas
* A title character of &quot;Sam and Silo&quot;, an American comic strip that ran from 1977 to 2017

==Computing==
* Data silo, a type of information silo
* SILO (boot loader), used in Linux
* Silo (library), a data file format and library for scientific model data
* Silo (software), a 3D modeling software

==People==
* Abronius Silo, 1st century BC Latin poet
* Quintus Poppaedius Silo (died 88 BC), leader of the Italian tribe of the Marsi 
* Silo of Asturias, king of Asturias (in Spain) from 774 to 783
* Mario Rodríguez Cobos (1938–2010), Argentine writer and founder of the Humanist Movement also known as Silo
* Adam Silo (1674–1760), Dutch painter
* Susan Silo (born 1942), American actress
* Talal Silo (born 1965), Syrian Turkmen defector

==Places==
* Silo, Oklahoma, a town in the United States
* Šilo, a village in Croatia
* Silo Canal, Brandenburg, Germany
* The Silo (Copenhagen), Denmark

==Businesses and companies==
* Silo (store), an American chain of retail electronics stores
* Silo Theatre, a New Zealand theatre production company
* &quot;The Silo&quot;, a Lesotho agricultural newspaper

==Zoology==
* Silo (insect), a genus of insects in the order Trichoptera
* Roy and Silo, a chinstrap penguin pair

==Other uses==
* Silo High School, Durant, Oklahoma, United States
* School Infrastructure Local Option, a sales tax in Iowa, United States
* Missile silo, an underground missile launching facility
* Information silo, a management system incapable of reciprocal operation with other, related management systems
* Silastic silo, used to treat abdominal wall defects

==See also==
* Shilo (disambiguation)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q227369" start="2" end="10" title="Silo (disambiguation)" label="[[silo]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q227369" start="55" end="59" title="Silo (disambiguation)" label="Silo"/>
<link wikidata="Q227369" start="63" end="67" title="Silo (disambiguation)" label="SILO"/>
<link wikidata="Q110263583" start="111" end="134" title="Silo (film)" label="&amp;quot;Silo&amp;quot; (film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q19319226" start="174" end="199" title="Silo (series)" label="&amp;quot;Silo&amp;quot; (series)"/>
<link wikidata="Q108456738" start="255" end="283" title="Silo (TV series)" label="&amp;quot;Silo&amp;quot; (TV series)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6977389" start="360" end="372" title="Sam and Silo" label="Sam and Silo"/>
<link wikidata="Q6031230" start="469" end="485" title="information silo" label="information silo"/>
<link wikidata="Q7390377" start="488" end="506" title="SILO (boot loader)" label="SILO (boot loader)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7515486" start="524" end="538" title="Silo (library)" label="Silo (library)"/>
<link wikidata="Q602342" start="599" end="614" title="Silo (software)" label="Silo (software)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2758562" start="653" end="666" title="Abronius Silo" label="Abronius Silo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1756583" start="696" end="719" title="Quintus Poppaedius Silo" label="Quintus Poppaedius Silo"/>
<link wikidata="Q351719" start="778" end="794" title="Silo of Asturias" label="Silo of Asturias"/>
<link wikidata="Q724681" start="842" end="863" title="Mario Rodríguez Cobos" label="Mario Rodríguez Cobos"/>
<link wikidata="Q2652800" start="952" end="961" title="Adam Silo" label="Adam Silo"/>
<link wikidata="Q546208" start="991" end="1001" title="Susan Silo" label="Susan Silo"/>
<link wikidata="Q44810791" start="1034" end="1044" title="Talal Silo" label="Talal Silo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2718830" start="1096" end="1110" title="Silo, Oklahoma" label="Silo, Oklahoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q391592" start="1142" end="1146" title="Šilo" label="Šilo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2286344" start="1171" end="1181" title="Silo Canal" label="Silo Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q93437375" start="1206" end="1227" title="The Silo (Copenhagen)" label="The Silo (Copenhagen)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7515489" start="1269" end="1281" title="Silo (store)" label="Silo (store)"/>
<link wikidata="Q107105743" start="1332" end="1344" title="Silo Theatre" label="Silo Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q7764264" start="1395" end="1403" title="The Silo" label="The Silo"/>
<link wikidata="Q10667837" start="1459" end="1472" title="Silo (insect)" label="Silo (insect)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1980472" start="1520" end="1532" title="Roy and Silo" label="Roy and Silo"/>
<link wikidata="Q7515492" start="1577" end="1593" title="Silo High School" label="Silo High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q7432274" start="1629" end="1663" title="School Infrastructure Local Option" label="School Infrastructure Local Option"/>
<link wikidata="Q853409" start="1702" end="1714" title="Missile silo" label="Missile silo"/>
<link wikidata="Q6031230" start="1760" end="1776" title="Information silo" label="Information silo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2852251" start="1873" end="1886" title="Silastic silo" label="Silastic silo"/>
<link wikidata="Q231852" start="1941" end="1963" title="Shilo (disambiguation)" label="Shilo (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="246532" wikidata="Q5890580" url="?curid=246532" title="Homesteading">
<text>Homesteading is a lifestyle of self-sufficiency. It is characterized by subsistence agriculture, home preservation of food, and may also involve the small scale production of textiles, clothing, and craft work for household use or sale. Homesteading has been pursued in various ways around the world and throughout different historical eras. It is typically distinguished from rural village or commune living by the isolation of the homestead (socially, physically, or both). Use of the term in the United States dates back to the Homestead Act (1862) and before. In sub-Saharan Africa, particularly in nations formerly controlled by the British Empire, a homestead is the household compound for a single extended family. In the UK the terms &quot;smallholder&quot; and &quot;croft&quot; are rough synonyms of &quot;homesteader&quot;.

Modern homesteaders often use renewable energy options including solar and wind power. Many also choose to plant and grow heirloom vegetables and to raise heritage livestock. Homesteading is not defined by where someone lives, such as the city or the country, but by the lifestyle choices they make.

==As historical governmental policy==

Historically, homesteading has been used by governmental entities (engaged in national expansion) to help settle what were termed unsettled areas, especially in the United States, Canada, and Australia. This resulted in the violent relocation of many Indigenous people. Guided by legal &quot;homestead principles&quot;, many of these &quot;homestead acts&quot; were instituted in the 19th and 20th centuries and targeted specific areas, with most being discontinued after a set time-frame or goal.

Renewed interest in homesteading was brought about by U.S. President Franklin D. Roosevelt&#x27;s program of Subsistence Homesteading in the 1930s and 1940s.

==As a social movement==

The attractiveness of back-to-the-land movements dates from the Roman era, and has been noted in Asian poetry and philosophy tracts as well (Agriculturalism). In the 1700s, the philosophy of physiocracy developed in France and by the 1800s and early 1900s the philosophy of Agrarianism had taken hold in many places around the world. The ideas of modern homesteading proponents, such as Ralph Borsodi, gained in popularity in the 1960s in the United States. Self-sufficiency movements in the 1990s and 2000s began to apply the concept to urban and suburban settings, known as urban homesteading. According to author John Seymour, &quot;urban homesteading&quot; incorporates small-scale sustainable agriculture and homemaking.

==As an economic choice==

In homesteading, social and government support systems are frequently eschewed in favor of self-reliance and relative deprivation in order to maximize independence and self-determination. The degree of independence occurs along a spectrum, with many homesteaders creating foodstuffs or crafts to appeal to high-end niche markets in order to meet financial needs. Other homesteaders come to the lifestyle following successful careers which provide the funding for land, housing, taxes, and specialized equipment such as solar panels, farm equipment, and electric generators.

Modern government regulation—in the form of property taxes, building codes, food safety codes, zoning regulations, minimum wage and social security for occasional labor, and town council restrictions on landscaping and animal keeping—can increase the marginal cost of home production of food in areas affected by these restrictions. Careful choice of homesteading location is essential for economic success.

Potential benefits of homesteading include a satisfying standard of living and a healthier, more rewarding lifestyle than more conventional patterns of living.

==See also==

* Permaculture
* Seasteading
* Urban homesteading

==Notes==
==Further reading==
* Cannon, Brian Q., “Homesteading Remembered: A Sesquicentennial Perspective,” &quot;Agricultural History,&quot; 87 (Winter 2013), 1–29.

==External links==

* Mid-America Homesteading Conference
* Life on a Modern Homestead
* State of Alaska Land Offerings and Remote Recreation Cabins Staking Program
* Encyclopedia of Oklahoma History and Culture – Homesteading </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5890580" start="0" end="12" title="Homesteading" label="Homesteading"/>
<link wikidata="Q1341794" start="31" end="47" title="self-sufficiency" label="self-sufficiency"/>
<link wikidata="Q2787508" start="72" end="95" title="subsistence agriculture" label="subsistence agriculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q877729" start="199" end="209" title="handicraft" label="craft work"/>
<link wikidata="Q2373919" start="394" end="401" title="Intentional community" label="commune"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="499" end="512" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q974556" start="531" end="544" title="Homestead Act" label="Homestead Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q132959" start="567" end="585" title="sub-Saharan Africa" label="sub-Saharan Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q8680" start="638" end="652" title="British Empire" label="British Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q2827199" start="748" end="759" title="smallholding" label="smallholder"/>
<link wikidata="Q1402801" start="776" end="781" title="croft (land)" label="croft"/>
<link wikidata="Q12705" start="866" end="882" title="renewable energy" label="renewable energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1483757" start="901" end="906" title="solar power" label="solar"/>
<link wikidata="Q43302" start="911" end="921" title="wind power" label="wind power"/>
<link wikidata="Q5700975" start="958" end="977" title="Heirloom plant" label="heirloom vegetables"/>
<link wikidata="Q16" start="1356" end="1362" title="Canada" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="1368" end="1377" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q28129898" start="1468" end="1487" title="homestead principle" label="homestead principle"/>
<link wikidata="Q8007" start="1744" end="1765" title="Franklin D. Roosevelt" label="Franklin D. Roosevelt"/>
<link wikidata="Q7632012" start="1784" end="1808" title="Subsistence Homesteads Division" label="Subsistence Homesteading"/>
<link wikidata="Q4839019" start="1882" end="1898" title="back-to-the-land" label="back-to-the-land"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277" start="1924" end="1933" title="Roman Empire" label="Roman era"/>
<link wikidata="Q48" start="1957" end="1961" title="Asia" label="Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196535" start="2001" end="2016" title="Agriculturalism" label="Agriculturalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q183244" start="2051" end="2062" title="physiocracy" label="physiocracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q492050" start="2134" end="2145" title="Agrarianism" label="Agrarianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7287257" start="2247" end="2260" title="Ralph Borsodi" label="Ralph Borsodi"/>
<link wikidata="Q48768366" start="2436" end="2454" title="urban homesteading" label="urban homesteading"/>
<link wikidata="Q323710" start="2476" end="2488" title="John Seymour (author)" label="John Seymour"/>
<link wikidata="Q2751054" start="2546" end="2569" title="sustainable agriculture" label="sustainable agriculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q3406668" start="2574" end="2584" title="homemaking" label="homemaking"/>
<link wikidata="Q1341794" start="2705" end="2718" title="Self-sufficiency" label="self-reliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q156595" start="2782" end="2800" title="self-determination" label="self-determination"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247867" start="3083" end="3090" title="housing" label="housing"/>
<link wikidata="Q8161" start="3092" end="3097" title="taxes" label="taxes"/>
<link wikidata="Q774583" start="3133" end="3144" title="solar panel" label="solar panel"/>
<link wikidata="Q16000047" start="3147" end="3161" title="Agricultural machinery" label="farm equipment"/>
<link wikidata="Q131502" start="3167" end="3186" title="electric generators" label="electric generators"/>
<link wikidata="Q2333573" start="3249" end="3263" title="building codes" label="building codes"/>
<link wikidata="Q5465447" start="3265" end="3282" title="Food code" label="food safety codes"/>
<link wikidata="Q702232" start="3284" end="3290" title="zoning" label="zoning"/>
<link wikidata="Q186228" start="3304" end="3316" title="minimum wage" label="minimum wage"/>
<link wikidata="Q12002092" start="3321" end="3336" title="social security" label="social security"/>
<link wikidata="Q8070591" start="3392" end="3403" title="landscaping" label="landscaping"/>
<link wikidata="Q175850" start="3654" end="3672" title="standard of living" label="standard of living"/>
<link wikidata="Q4572" start="3775" end="3787" title="Permaculture" label="Permaculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q910203" start="3790" end="3801" title="Seasteading" label="Seasteading"/>
<link wikidata="Q48768366" start="3804" end="3822" title="Urban homesteading" label="Urban homesteading"/>
<link wikidata="Q2403870" start="3939" end="3959" title="Agricultural History (journal)" label="Agricultural History"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="246533" wikidata="Q1067107" url="?curid=246533" title="Small hydro">
<text>Small hydro is the development of hydroelectric power on a scale suitable for local community and industry, or to contribute to distributed generation in a regional electricity grid. Exact definitions vary, but a &quot;small hydro&quot; project is less than 50 megawatts (MW), and can be further subdivide by scale into &quot;mini&quot; (&lt;1MW), &quot;micro&quot; (&lt;100 kW), &quot;pico&quot; (&lt;10 kW). In contrast many hydroelectric projects are of enormous size, such as the generating plant at the Three Gorges Dam at 22,500 megawatts or the vast multiple projects of the Tennessee Valley Authority.

Small hydro projects may be built in isolated areas that would be uneconomic to serve from a national electricity grid, or in areas where a national grid does not exist. By not requiring large dams or large water storage capabilities small hydro projects are relatively benign on the environment. This makes small hydro projects an attractive compromise for renewable energy activists, environmentalists, and investors.

==Description==
The use of the term &quot;small hydro&quot; varies considerably around the world, the maximum limit is usually somewhere between 10 and 30 MW. While a minimum limit is not usually set, the US National Hydropower Association specifies a minimum limit of 5 MW. In California, hydroelectric generating stations with a maximum capacity of less than 30 MW are classified as small, and are eligible for inclusion in the state&#x27;s renewable portfolio standard, while hydroelectric generating stations with a higher capacity are classified as large and are not considered renewable. The &quot;small hydro&quot; description may be stretched up to in the United States, Canada and China. In India, hydro projects up to 25 MW station capacities have been categorized as Small Hydro Power (SHP) projects.

Small hydro can be further subdivided into mini hydro, usually defined as 100 to 1,000 kilowatts (kW), and micro hydro which is 5 to 100 kW. Micro hydro is usually the application of hydroelectric power sized for smaller communities, single families or small enterprise. The smallest installations are pico hydro, below 5 kW.

Since small hydro projects usually have correspondingly small civil construction work and little or no reservoir, they are seen as having a relatively low environmental impact compared to large hydro.

An additional defining feature of small hydro is known as run-of-river, or that the physical impact of the project is relatively minuscule compared to major hydroelectric dams which require a water storage lake. Little water is stored behind the project, if at all, and the river is usually able to continue flowing. 

==Growth==
According to a report by REN21, during 2008 small hydro installations grew by 28% over year 2005 to raise the total world small hydro capacity to 85 gigawatts (GW). Over 70% of this was in China (with 65 GW), followed by Japan (3.5 GW), the United States (3 GW) and India (2 GW). Global growth is expected to be 2.8% annually until the mid-2020s when capacity will be about 150 gigawatts.

China planned to electrify a further 10,000 villages between 2005 and 2010 under their China Village Electrification Program, including further investments in small hydro and photovoltaics. By 2010, China had 45,000 small hydro installations, especially in rural areas, producing 160 Twh annually. Over 50% of the world&#x27;s potential small hydro power was found in Asia; however, the report noted, &quot;It is possible in the future that more small hydropower potential might be identified both on the African and American continents&quot;.

In the mountains and rain forests of British Columbia, Canada there are a great many sites suitable for hydro development. However environmental concerns towards large reservoirs after the 1980s halted new dam construction. The solution to coping with increased demand was to offer contracts to independent power producers, who have built 100 run of the river projects under 50 MW. Power production without reservoirs varies dramatically, but older conventional dams retain or release water to average out production though the year. In 2014 these independent producers generated 18,000 GWh from 4,500 MW of capacity.

== History ==
Wood water wheels along riversides may be considered the first examples of &quot;small hydro&quot;. Up to the 17th century the efficiency of water wheels neared 70%. However, as the need for power generation increased small hydropower projects were phased out in favor of the large scale dams using newly designed turbines. 

Post 20th century environmental doctrine is moving away from large-scale hydropower construction due to the increased awareness of ecological problems associated with dams. For instance, the large artificial lakes often flood habitats and communities and disrupt species reliant on consistent river flow. Examples of previous projects which sought to remove dams include the Restoration of the Elwha River and Un-Dam the Klamath river movement.

Since the 1960&#x27;s the number of new small hydro projects have declined despite the capacity far exceeding current usage. Despite this trend, some countries, including China, India, and Brazil, are significantly expanding their small hydro capacity in the 21st century. 

==Generation==


Hydroelectric power is the generation of electric power from the movement of water. A hydroelectric facility requires a dependable flow of water and a reasonable height for the water to fall, called the head. In a typical installation, water is fed from a reservoir through a pipe into a turbine. The water flowing through the turbine causes an electrical generator to rotate, converting the motion into electrical energy.

Small hydro may be developed by constructing new facilities or through re-development of existing dams whose primary purpose is flood control, or irrigation. Old hydro sites may be re-developed, sometimes salvaging substantial investment in the installation such as penstock pipe and turbines, or just re-using the water rights associated with an abandoned site. Either of these cost saving advantages can make the return on investment for a small hydro site well worth the use of existing sites.

Brazil is another country which is investing heavily in small hydro. Brazil itself is a leader in hydroelectric generation, the world&#x27;s third most hydropower installed capacity country at 79 GW, behind the United States at 100 GW, and China in first place with 171 GW. 51 new small hydro projects are, as of 2024, being constructed in Brazil.

==Project design==
Many companies offer standardized turbine generator packages in the approximate size range of 200 kW to 10 MW. These &quot;water to wire&quot; packages simplify the planning and development of the site since one vendor looks after most of the equipment supply. Because non-recurring engineering costs are minimized and development cost is spread over multiple units, the cost of such package systems is reduced. While synchronous generators capable of isolated plant operation are often used, small hydro plants connected to an electrical grid system can use economical induction generators to further reduce installation cost and simplify control and operation.

Small &quot;run of the river&quot; projects do not have a conventional dam with a reservoir, only a weir to form a headpond for diversion of inlet water to the turbine. Unused water simply flows over the weir and the headpond may only be capable of a single day&#x27;s storage, not enough for dry summers or frozen winters when generation may come to a halt. A preferred scenario is to have the inlet in an existing lake.

Modular “micro hydrokinetic” systems have been developed for irrigation canals. &quot;Irrigation districts across the U.S. have installed power plants at diversion points and in-canal drops, which are traditionally used for flow measurement, to stabilize upstream heads and to dissipate energy where there is significant elevation change throughout the canal system.&quot;

Countries like India and China have policies in favor of small hydro, and the regulatory process allows for building dams and reservoirs. In North America and Europe the regulatory process is too long and expensive to consider having a dam and a reservoir for a small project.

Small hydro projects usually have faster environmental and licensing procedures, and since the equipment is usually in serial production, standardized and simplified, and the civil works construction is also reduced, the projects may be developed very rapidly. The physically smaller size of equipment makes it easier to transport to remote areas without good road or rail access.

One measure of decreased environmental impact with lakes and reservoirs depends on the balance between stream flow and power production. Reducing water diversions helps the river&#x27;s ecosystem, but reduces the hydro system&#x27;s return on Investment (ROI). The hydro system design must strike a balance to maintain both the health of the stream and the economics.

Part of the balance between a small hydro project&#x27;s return on investment and environmental concern is the proximity of the project to the national power grid. The more isolated a small hydro project is the more cost effective its construction will be. 

== Advantages and disadvantages ==
The primary advantages of small hydro development include low cost to build, environmental justice, and ability to remain disconnected from centralized power grids.

Rural or isolated areas that are expensive to connect to national power grids are where most small hydro developments are made. For instance, rural areas in India or other countries that have flowing water regimes utilize small hydro to provide a renewable source of energy without connection to the national grid. Additionally, in communities which are geographically isolated from national power grids small hydro projects provide the greatest reduction in green house gas emissions. 

For investors, environmentalists, and policy makers small hydro projects are considered most viable when there is little ecological impact and projected profit after construction. It is shown to be relatively easy for stakeholders to greenlight small hydro developments if these conditions are met, even to a slight degree. 

A final noted advantage of small hydro over larger hydropower developments or fossil fuel plants is an element of environmental justice. In a number of communities which lack essential electricity access small hydro offers a reliable and clean source of electricity. Small hydro projects do not normally require significant government assistance. Gaps in governance allow small hydro projects to be built and which provide local power to local communities. 

Disadvantages of small hydro do exist primarily in habitat alteration and potential cost increase.

Some of the disadvantages of small hydro come in the form of how the running water system is disturbed. Within run-of-river design projects, the greatest harm for water systems are flow regime alteration, loss of river cohesion and connectivity, and habitat degradation effecting fish and macroinvertebrates primarily. 

Although the cost of small hydro projects are generally far lower than large-scale hydroelectric systems, there is a cost to construction. Considering this, if a small hydro project proves to be uneconomical it will have an outsized budget expenditure relative to large projects which run over-budget. 

==Sample list of small installations worldwide==
Africa
*Zengamina, a 700 kW plant in Kalene Hill, Mwinilunga District in northwestern Zambia. 2008
Asia
*Meenvallam Small Hydroelectric Project, Palakkad district, Kerala, India.
*Bario Asal &amp; Arur Layun Micro-Hydro Community Project, Kelabit Highlands, Sarawak, Malaysia. 2009
*Ambangal Mini Hydro Electric Power Plant, Kiangan, Ifugao, Philippines (2010)
*Asiga River Mini Hydro Electric Power Plant, Santiago, Agusan del Norte, Philippines (2019)
*Balongbong Mini Hydro Electric Power Plant, Bato, Catanduanes, Philippines (1983)
*Cantingas Mini Hydro Electric Power Plant, San Fernando, Romblon, Philippines (2009)
*Likud Mini Hydro Electric Power Plant, Asipulo and Kiangan, Ifugao, Philippines (2015)
*New Bataan Hydro Electric Power Plant, New Bataan, Davao de Oro, Philippines (2018)
*San Luis Mini Hydro Electric Power Plant, San Luis, Aurora, Philippines (2011)
*Villasiga Mini Hydro Electric Power Plant, Bugasong, Antique, Philippines (2016)
*Pakpattan Hydro Power Project, a 2.82 MW plant on Pakpattan Canal in Pakpattan District, Pakistan 2015
Europe
*Green Valleys Project, Brecon Beacons National Park, Wales. Joint winner of £300K in Big Green Challenge 2009.
*St Catherine&#x27;s, a National Trust site near Windermere, Westmorland, United Kingdom.
North America
*Ames Hydroelectric Generating Plant, Colorado, United States. On the List of IEEE Milestones
*Childs-Irving Hydroelectric Facilities, Arizona, United States. 1916 Now decommissioned 
*Snoqualmie Falls, Washington, United States. 1957
*Malibu Hydro, British Columbia, Canada. 2005
*Menihek Hydroelectric Generating Station, Newfoundland and Labrador, Canada. 1954
*Cloudworks Energy is one of many Independent power producers that have built projects in British Columbia, Canada

==See also==

*Electricity generation
*Hydro power
*Low head hydro power
*Micro hydro up to 100 kW
*Pico hydro up to 5 kW
*Conduit hydroelectricity
*International Center on Small Hydro Power

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1067107" start="0" end="11" title="Small hydro" label="Small hydro"/>
<link wikidata="Q80638" start="34" end="53" title="hydroelectric power" label="hydroelectric power"/>
<link wikidata="Q861135" start="128" end="150" title="distributed generation" label="distributed generation"/>
<link wikidata="Q25236" start="261" end="269" title="megawatt" label="megawatt"/>
<link wikidata="Q3917224" start="354" end="359" title="Micro hydro" label="micro"/>
<link wikidata="Q3920230" start="386" end="390" title="Pico hydro" label="pico"/>
<link wikidata="Q12514" start="508" end="524" title="Three Gorges Dam" label="Three Gorges Dam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1367577" start="582" end="608" title="Tennessee Valley Authority" label="Tennessee Valley Authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q170196" start="1249" end="1259" title="Hydropower" label="Hydropower"/>
<link wikidata="Q99" start="1310" end="1320" title="California" label="California"/>
<link wikidata="Q25210845" start="1475" end="1503" title="Renewable portfolio standard (United States)" label="renewable portfolio standard"/>
<link wikidata="Q25236" start="1932" end="1940" title="kilowatt" label="kilowatt"/>
<link wikidata="Q3917224" start="1952" end="1963" title="micro hydro" label="micro hydro"/>
<link wikidata="Q3920230" start="2147" end="2157" title="pico hydro" label="pico hydro"/>
<link wikidata="Q1411996" start="2432" end="2444" title="Run-of-the-river hydroelectricity" label="run-of-river"/>
<link wikidata="Q25236" start="2853" end="2861" title="gigawatt" label="gigawatt"/>
<link wikidata="Q5099951" start="3181" end="3218" title="China Village Electrification Program" label="China Village Electrification Program"/>
<link wikidata="Q192127" start="3269" end="3282" title="photovoltaics" label="photovoltaics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1973" start="3676" end="3692" title="British Columbia" label="British Columbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q24190972" start="3934" end="3961" title="Independent power producers in British Columbia" label="independent power producers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1411996" start="3982" end="3998" title="Run-of-the-river hydroelectricity" label="run of the river"/>
<link wikidata="Q146728" start="4277" end="4289" title="Water wheel" label="water wheels"/>
<link wikidata="Q5368286" start="4973" end="5003" title="Restoration of the Elwha River" label="Restoration of the Elwha River"/>
<link wikidata="Q104865642" start="5008" end="5026" title="Un-Dam the Klamath" label="Un-Dam the Klamath"/>
<link wikidata="Q369743" start="5539" end="5543" title="Hydraulic head" label="head"/>
<link wikidata="Q644997" start="5624" end="5631" title="hydro turbine" label="turbine"/>
<link wikidata="Q131502" start="5681" end="5701" title="electrical generator" label="electrical generator"/>
<link wikidata="Q155" start="6258" end="6264" title="Brazil" label="Brazil"/>
<link wikidata="Q752750" start="7196" end="7215" title="induction generator" label="induction generator"/>
<link wikidata="Q1411996" start="7296" end="7324" title="Run-of-the-river hydroelectricity" label="&amp;quot;run of the river&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066997" start="7390" end="7394" title="weir" label="weir"/>
<link wikidata="Q1385463" start="7774" end="7791" title="Acequia" label="irrigation canals"/>
<link wikidata="Q6073798" start="7799" end="7818" title="Irrigation district" label="Irrigation district"/>
<link wikidata="Q939134" start="8980" end="9000" title="return on Investment" label="return on Investment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1479527" start="9487" end="9508" title="environmental justice" label="environmental justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q1411996" start="11060" end="11072" title="Run-of-the-river hydroelectricity" label="run-of-river"/>
<link wikidata="Q8069072" start="11631" end="11640" title="Zengamina" label="Zengamina"/>
<link wikidata="Q6352115" start="11660" end="11671" title="Kalene Hill" label="Kalene Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q953" start="11709" end="11715" title="Zambia" label="Zambia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1006240" start="11768" end="11776" title="Palakkad" label="Palakkad"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186" start="11787" end="11793" title="Kerala" label="Kerala"/>
<link wikidata="Q6385444" start="11862" end="11879" title="Kelabit Highlands" label="Kelabit Highlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q170462" start="11881" end="11888" title="Sarawak" label="Sarawak"/>
<link wikidata="Q833" start="11890" end="11898" title="Malaysia" label="Malaysia"/>
<link wikidata="Q30416" start="11948" end="11955" title="Kiangan, Ifugao" label="Kiangan"/>
<link wikidata="Q13812" start="11957" end="11963" title="Ifugao" label="Ifugao"/>
<link wikidata="Q928" start="11965" end="11976" title="Philippines" label="Philippines"/>
<link wikidata="Q588955" start="12030" end="12038" title="Santiago, Agusan del Norte" label="Santiago"/>
<link wikidata="Q13714" start="12040" end="12056" title="Agusan del Norte" label="Agusan del Norte"/>
<link wikidata="Q192085" start="12122" end="12126" title="Bato, Catanduanes" label="Bato"/>
<link wikidata="Q13778" start="12128" end="12139" title="Catanduanes" label="Catanduanes"/>
<link wikidata="Q174676" start="12204" end="12216" title="San Fernando, Romblon" label="San Fernando"/>
<link wikidata="Q13875" start="12218" end="12225" title="Romblon" label="Romblon"/>
<link wikidata="Q30394" start="12286" end="12293" title="Asipulo, Ifugao" label="Asipulo"/>
<link wikidata="Q315582" start="12374" end="12384" title="New Bataan, Davao de Oro" label="New Bataan"/>
<link wikidata="Q13789" start="12386" end="12398" title="Davao de Oro" label="Davao de Oro"/>
<link wikidata="Q53092" start="12462" end="12470" title="San Luis, Aurora" label="San Luis"/>
<link wikidata="Q13730" start="12472" end="12478" title="Aurora (province)" label="Aurora"/>
<link wikidata="Q492325" start="12543" end="12551" title="Bugasong, Antique" label="Bugasong"/>
<link wikidata="Q472760" start="12553" end="12560" title="Antique" label="Antique"/>
<link wikidata="Q1249801" start="12651" end="12660" title="Pakpattan" label="Pakpattan"/>
<link wikidata="Q843" start="12671" end="12679" title="Pakistan" label="Pakistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q15052206" start="12716" end="12744" title="Brecon Beacons National Park" label="Brecon Beacons National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q333515" start="12828" end="12842" title="National Trust for Places of Historic Interest or Natural Beauty" label="National Trust"/>
<link wikidata="Q119936" start="12853" end="12863" title="Windermere, Cumbria (town)" label="Windermere"/>
<link wikidata="Q23326" start="12865" end="12876" title="Westmorland" label="Westmorland"/>
<link wikidata="Q4745874" start="12909" end="12944" title="Ames Hydroelectric Generating Plant" label="Ames Hydroelectric Generating Plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1261" start="12946" end="12954" title="Colorado" label="Colorado"/>
<link wikidata="Q130851148" start="12978" end="13001" title="List of IEEE Milestones" label="List of IEEE Milestones"/>
<link wikidata="Q5098609" start="13003" end="13041" title="Childs-Irving Hydroelectric Facilities" label="Childs-Irving Hydroelectric Facilities"/>
<link wikidata="Q816" start="13043" end="13050" title="Arizona" label="Arizona"/>
<link wikidata="Q7548048" start="13093" end="13109" title="Snoqualmie Falls" label="Snoqualmie Falls"/>
<link wikidata="Q1223" start="13111" end="13121" title="Washington (state)" label="Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q6743405" start="13144" end="13156" title="Malibu Hydro" label="Malibu Hydro"/>
<link wikidata="Q1973" start="13158" end="13174" title="British Columbia" label="British Columbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6817052" start="13190" end="13230" title="Menihek Hydroelectric Generating Station" label="Menihek Hydroelectric Generating Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q2003" start="13232" end="13257" title="Newfoundland and Labrador" label="Newfoundland and Labrador"/>
<link wikidata="Q5135783" start="13273" end="13290" title="Cloudworks Energy" label="Cloudworks Energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q24190972" start="13306" end="13333" title="Independent power producers in British Columbia" label="Independent power producers"/>
<link wikidata="Q383973" start="13403" end="13425" title="Electricity generation" label="Electricity generation"/>
<link wikidata="Q170196" start="13427" end="13438" title="Hydro power" label="Hydro power"/>
<link wikidata="Q6693018" start="13440" end="13460" title="Low head hydro power" label="Low head hydro power"/>
<link wikidata="Q3917224" start="13462" end="13473" title="Micro hydro" label="Micro hydro"/>
<link wikidata="Q3920230" start="13488" end="13498" title="Pico hydro" label="Pico hydro"/>
<link wikidata="Q16950874" start="13511" end="13535" title="Conduit hydroelectricity" label="Conduit hydroelectricity"/>
<link wikidata="Q23581169" start="13537" end="13578" title="International Center on Small Hydro Power" label="International Center on Small Hydro Power"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="246535" wikidata="Q1331248" url="?curid=246535" title="Five College Consortium">
<text>The Five College Consortium (often referred to as simply the Five Colleges) comprises four liberal arts colleges and one university in the Connecticut River Pioneer Valley of Western Massachusetts: Amherst College, Hampshire College, Mount Holyoke College, Smith College, and the University of Massachusetts Amherst, totaling approximately 38,000 students. They are geographically close to one another and are linked by frequent bus service that operates between the campuses during the school year.

The consortium was formally established in 1965, but its roots lay in cooperative efforts between the oldest four members of the consortium dating back to 1914.

==History==
In 1914, Massachusetts Agricultural College (now UMass), Amherst, Mount Holyoke, and Smith joined International YMCA College (now Springfield College) to form the Committee on University Extension of the Connecticut Valley Colleges, a joint continuing education program for the Pioneer Valley. In later years, Amherst, Mount Holyoke, Smith, and MAC—later known as Massachusetts State and UMass—increased their collaboration, culminating in the formation of an inter-library loaning program in 1951, and a joint astronomy department in 1959. Finally, Amherst, Mount Holyoke, Smith and UMass incorporated the Four College Consortium, which became the Five College Consortium when Hampshire College was founded in 1965, and, in 1970, admitted its inaugural class.

The five colleges operate both as independent entities as well as mutually dependent institutions. The mission of the consortium is to support long-term forms of cooperation that benefit the faculty, staff and students of the five colleges. Shared academic and cultural resources are the primary initiative of the consortium. This means that students at each of these schools are permitted and encouraged to take classes at the other colleges (through &quot;cross-registration&quot;) at no additional cost to the student. Student groups and organizations often draw participants from all five campuses and several academic programs are run by the Five Colleges (for example: astronomy, dance, some foreign languages, and women&#x27;s studies). The colleges also participate in an interlibrary loan program, allowing students, staff, and faculty to take advantage of all five campuses&#x27; collections.

The Five College Radio Astronomy Observatory was founded in 1969 by the Five College Astronomy Department. Together, the Five Colleges operate WFCR (Five College Radio), an NPR member station operating at 88.5 MHz in the FM band.

In 2019, Hampshire College and UMass briefly considered a merger due to the formers financial difficulties but this never went through.
==Bus transportation==
The Pioneer Valley Transit Authority (PVTA) provides free daily intra-campus bus service to students, staff, and faculty during the school year. The buses, some of them run by University of Massachusetts Transportation Services and operated by student workers, run on a frequent schedule, allowing car-free travel to classes, social events, and local shopping areas. This service is funded primarily through a contract with the member institutions.

==See also==

* Cooperating Colleges of Greater Springfield, a local association of colleges which often collaborate with Five College institutions
* Museums10, a collaboration of several local museums run by the Five Colleges
* UMassFive College Federal Credit Union

== References ==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1331248" start="4" end="27" title="Five College Consortium" label="Five College Consortium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1331248" start="61" end="74" title="Five College Consortium" label="Five Colleges"/>
<link wikidata="Q6540832" start="91" end="111" title="Liberal arts colleges in the United States" label="liberal arts college"/>
<link wikidata="Q3918" start="121" end="131" title="university" label="university"/>
<link wikidata="Q379648" start="139" end="156" title="Connecticut River" label="Connecticut River"/>
<link wikidata="Q7196817" start="157" end="171" title="Pioneer Valley" label="Pioneer Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q65122136" start="175" end="196" title="Western Massachusetts" label="Western Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q49165" start="198" end="213" title="Amherst College" label="Amherst College"/>
<link wikidata="Q1706859" start="215" end="232" title="Hampshire College" label="Hampshire College"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140542" start="234" end="255" title="Mount Holyoke College" label="Mount Holyoke College"/>
<link wikidata="Q49204" start="257" end="270" title="Smith College" label="Smith College"/>
<link wikidata="Q15142" start="280" end="315" title="University of Massachusetts Amherst" label="University of Massachusetts Amherst"/>
<link wikidata="Q2809940" start="805" end="824" title="Springfield College (Massachusetts)" label="Springfield College"/>
<link wikidata="Q828748" start="916" end="936" title="continuing education" label="continuing education"/>
<link wikidata="Q333" start="2112" end="2121" title="astronomy" label="astronomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q11639" start="2123" end="2128" title="dance" label="dance"/>
<link wikidata="Q35069" start="2158" end="2178" title="women&amp;#x27;s studies" label="women&amp;#x27;s studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1078266" start="2217" end="2234" title="interlibrary loan" label="interlibrary loan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5455865" start="2345" end="2385" title="Five College Radio Astronomy Observatory" label="Five College Radio Astronomy Observatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q7949221" start="2484" end="2488" title="WFCR" label="WFCR"/>
<link wikidata="Q671510" start="2514" end="2517" title="National Public Radio" label="NPR"/>
<link wikidata="Q39369" start="2551" end="2554" title="Hertz" label="MHz"/>
<link wikidata="Q181417" start="2562" end="2564" title="Frequency modulation" label="FM"/>
<link wikidata="Q1706859" start="2581" end="2598" title="Hampshire College" label="Hampshire College"/>
<link wikidata="Q15142" start="2603" end="2608" title="University of Massachusetts Amherst" label="UMass"/>
<link wikidata="Q7196828" start="2735" end="2767" title="Pioneer Valley Transit Authority" label="Pioneer Valley Transit Authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q16982609" start="2907" end="2958" title="University of Massachusetts Transportation Services" label="University of Massachusetts Transportation Services"/>
<link wikidata="Q16988696" start="3197" end="3240" title="Cooperating Colleges of Greater Springfield" label="Cooperating Colleges of Greater Springfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q16974397" start="3331" end="3340" title="Museums10" label="Museums10"/>
<link wikidata="Q25004617" start="3410" end="3448" title="UMassFive College Federal Credit Union" label="UMassFive College Federal Credit Union"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="246538" wikidata="Q3130733" url="?curid=246538" title="Henri Bourassa">
<text>Joseph-Napoléon-Henri Bourassa (; September 1, 1868 – August 31, 1952) was a French Canadian political leader and publisher. In 1899, Bourassa was outspoken against the British government&#x27;s request for Canada to send a militia to fight for Britain in the Second Boer War. Prime Minister Sir Wilfrid Laurier&#x27;s compromise was to send a volunteer force, but the seeds were sown for future conscription protests during the World Wars of the next half-century. Bourassa unsuccessfully challenged the proposal to build warships to help protect the empire. He led the opposition to conscription during World War I and argued that Canada&#x27;s interests were not at stake. He opposed Catholic bishops who defended military support of Britain and its allies. Bourassa was an ideological father of French-Canadian nationalism. Bourassa was also a defining force in forging French Canada&#x27;s attitude to the Canadian Confederation of 1867.

==Early life and education==
Born in Montreal, Quebec, to Napoléon Bourassa and Azélie Papineau (Bourassa), Henri Bourassa was a grandson of the pro-democracy reformist politician Louis-Joseph Papineau. He was educated at École Polytechnique de Montréal and at the College of the Holy Cross in Worcester, Massachusetts. In 1890, he became mayor of the town of Montebello, Quebec, at the age of 22.

==Political career==
In 1896, he was elected to the House of Commons as an independent Liberal for Labelle but resigned in 1899 to protest the sending of Canadian troops to the Second Boer War. He was re-elected soon after his resignation. He argued that Prime Minister Wilfrid Laurier was &quot;un vendu&quot; (&quot;a sell-out&quot;) to British Empire and its supporters in Canada.

To counter what he perceived to be the evils of imperialism, he created in 1903 the &quot;Ligue nationaliste canadienne&quot; (Canadian Nationalist League) to instill a pan-Canadian nationalist spirit in the francophone population. It opposed political dependence on either Britain or the United States and supported instead Canadian autonomy within the British Empire.

Bourassa left the federal parliament on May 11, 1907, but he remained active in Quebec politics by being elected to the Legislative Assembly of Quebec in the 1908 provincial election in Montréal division no. 2. He led the Ligue until he retired from the assembly on September 5, 1912. He continued to criticize Laurier, whose compromises mostly helped the British Empire. Bourassa opposed Laurier&#x27;s attempts to build a Canadian Navy in 1910, which he believed would draw Canada into future wars between Britain and Germany. He supported the eventual creation of an independent navy but did not want it to be under British command, as Laurier had planned. Bourassa&#x27;s attacks depleted Laurier&#x27;s strength in Quebec and contributed to the Liberal Party&#x27;s loss in the 1911 election. Bourassa&#x27;s moves ironically aided the election of the Conservative Party, which held more staunchly pro-imperialist policies than the Liberals.

In 1910, while he was serving in the Provincial Assembly as the member for Saint-Hyacinthe, he founded the newspaper &quot;Le Devoir&quot; to promote the Nationalist League and served as its editor until 1932. Bourassa&#x27;s main objective was to position &quot;Le Devoir&quot; outside the control of the established parties in Quebec and in Ottawa, which had authority over press organs devoted to their electoral interests and attempted to control public opinion by their partisan actions. Bourassa chose the name &quot;Le Devoir&quot; for his newspaper because of its emphasis of his commitment to integrity and justice and his desire to serve the public good.

In 1913, Bourassa denounced the government of Ontario as &quot;more Prussian than Prussia&quot; during the Ontario Schools Question crisis (see Regulation 17) after Ontario had almost banned the use of French in its schools and made English its official language of instruction. He charged his compatriots to see their enemies inside Canada, in 1915:
&quot;The enemies of the French language, of French civilization in Canada, are not the Boches on the shores of the Spree; but the English-Canadian anglicizers, the Orange intriguers, or Irish priests. Above all they are French Canadians weakened and degraded by the conquest and three centuries of colonial servitude. Let no mistake be made: if we let the Ontario minority be crushed, it will soon be the turn of other French groups in English Canada.&quot; [in Wade, v 2 p. 671] 

==World Wars==

Bourassa led French-Canadian opposition to the participation in World War I, especially Robert Borden&#x27;s plans to implement conscription in 1917. He agreed that the war was necessary for the survival of France and Britain but felt that only Canadians who volunteered for service should be sent to the battlefields of Europe. His opposition to conscription brought him the anglophone public&#x27;s disfavour, as was expressed by the hostile crowd amassed in Ottawa that threw vegetables and eggs during his oration.

Three months after stating that he had nothing more to do with politics, he returned to the House of Commons in the 1925 election with his election as an Independent MP, and he remained until his defeat in the 1935 election. In the 1930s, Bourassa demanded that Canada keep its gates shut to Jewish immigrants, like other politicians of the time.

Bourassa also opposed the draft during the conscription crisis of 1944 in World War II though less effectively, and he was a member of the &quot;Bloc populaire&quot;. His influence on Quebec&#x27;s politics can still be seen in all major provincial parties.

==Death and legacy==
Upon his death in Outremont, Quebec in 1952 (one day shy of his 84th birthday), Henri Bourassa was interred in Montreal&#x27;s Cimetière Notre-Dame-des-Neiges.

Henri Bourassa Boulevard, Henri-Bourassa metro station, and the federal riding of Bourassa, all in Montreal, are named for him. It is also the case for Henri-Bourassa Street, Henri-Bourassa park and the Regional County Municipality (RCM) of Papineau building, all of which are located in Papineauville, Québec. He is not related to Robert Bourassa, the former premier of Quebec.

Bourassa&#x27;s political thought, according to Michael C. Macmillan, was largely a combination of Whig liberalism, Catholic social thought, and traditional Quebec political thought. He was distinctly liberal in his anti-imperialism and general support for civil liberties for French Canadians, and his approach to economic questions was essentially Catholic. While Bourassa embraced the ultramontane idea that the Church was responsible for faith, morals, discipline, and administration, he resisted Church involvement in the political sphere and rejected the corporatism espoused by the Church. Bourassa opposed state intervention wherever possible and increasingly throughout his career emphasized the need for moral reform.

According Levitt has shown, attitudes of historians, both Anglophone and Francophone, toward Bourassa consistently have been coloured by the position of each historian on the major issues Bourassa addressed. Goldwin Smith, a fellow anti-imperialist, introduced him into historical literature in 1902. The isolationism of the 1930s and the biculturalism of the 1960s (Bourassa, while a champion of Francophone rights, always opposed separatism) occasioned favourable treatment among Anglophones, while Lionel Groulx, his onetime foe, described him as &quot;l&#x27;incomparable Éveilleur&quot;. Bourassa&#x27;s position on social issues (Catholic, moderately reformist, emphasizing the family and agricultural values) likewise has called forth praise and blame.

==In popular culture==

Bourassa appears in &quot;The Trial of Terrence Meyers&quot; (February 10, 2020), episode 15 of season 13 of the Canadian television period drama Murdoch Mysteries. Bourassa is played by Canadian actor Christian Martel.

== Works ==
(This list is incomplete)

* Le projet de Loi Navale. Sa nature ses conséquences. (Speech given at the Monument National on January 20, 1910).
* Pour la justice. La législation scolaire au Nord Ouest. Les discours de MM. Monk et Pelletier. Quelques objections. L&#x27;esprit de la Confédération.
* L&#x27;Emprunt de la Victoire la surenchère du bluff.
* Que Devons-Nous À L&#x27;Angleterre? La Défense Nationale. La Révolution Impérialiste. Le Tribut À L&#x27;Empire.
* L&#x27;intervention américaine ses motifs son objet ses conséquences.
* Le pape arbitre de la paix (1918)
* La Langue Gardienne de la Foi.
* La Propriété, Ses Bornes, Ses Abus. (Conference at the Semaine Sociale De Sherbrooke, August 11, 1924)
* Henri Bourassa; Biographie, Index Des Écrits, Index de la Correspondance Publique 1895–1924.

== Bibliography ==
* Samuel Leduc-Frenette, &quot;Les pèlerinages du&quot; Devoir &quot;en Acadie (1924 et 1927): un voyage intéressé et curieux pour les Canadiens français&quot;, Thesis, Concordia University, 2016, 78 p.
* Réal Bélanger, &quot;Henri Bourassa. Le fascinant destin d&#x27;un homme libre. (1868–1914)&quot;, Québec, Presses de l&#x27;Université Laval, 2013, 570 p.
* Mario Cardinal, &quot;Pourquoi j&#x27;ai fondé&quot; Le Devoir&quot;. Henri Bourassa et son temps&quot;, Libre Expression, Montréal, 2010, 396 p. ()
* Pierre Anctil, &quot;Fais ce que dois. 60 éditoriaux pour comprendre Le Devoir sous Henri Bourassa (1910–1932)&quot;, Québec, Éditions du Septentrion, 2010, 383 p. ()
* Yvan Lamonde, &quot;Histoire sociale des idées au Québec&quot; (1896–1929), Montréal, Éditions Fides, 2000, 895p.
* Yvan Lamonde, &quot;Histoire sociale des idées au Québec&quot;, vol. II (1896–1929), Montréal, Éditions Fides, 2004, 328 p.
* Robert Comeau et Luc Desrochers (dir.), &quot;Le Devoir. Un journal indépendant (1910–1995)&quot;, Sainte-Foy, Presses de l&#x27;Université du Québec, 1996, 368 p.
* Robert Lahaise (dir.), &quot;Le Devoir. Reflet du Québec au 20e siècle&quot;, Montréal, Hurtubise, 1994, 504 p.
* Pierre Anctil, &quot;Le Devoir, les Juifs et l&#x27;immigration. De Bourassa à Laurendeau&quot;, Québec, Institut québécois de recherche sur la culture, 1988, 172 p.
* David Rome, &quot;The Jewish Biography of Henri Bourassa&quot;, Montréal, National Archives, Canadian Jewish Congress, 1988, 2 volumes.
* François-Albert Angers et Aurélien Boisvert, &quot;L’égarement du «Devoir»&quot;, Montréal, Éditions du Franc-Canada, 1986, 105 p.
* Auldham Roy Petrie, &quot;Henri Bourassa&quot;, Don Mills, Ont., Fitzhenry &amp; Whiteside, cop., 1980, 63 p.
* Joseph Levitt, &quot;Henri Bourassa, Catholic Critic&quot;, Ottawa, [Canadian Historical Association], 1976, 24 p.
* Joseph Levitt (ed.), &quot;Henri Bourassa on Imperialism and Biculturalism, 1900–1918&quot;, Toronto, Copp. Clark Pub Co., 1970, 183 p.
* Joseph Levitt, &quot;Henri Bourassa and the Golden Calf. The Social Program of the Nationalists of Quebec, 1900–1914&quot;, Ottawa, Éditions de l&#x27;Université d&#x27;Ottawa, 1969, 178 p.
* Casey Murrow, &quot;Henri Bourassa and French-Canadian Nationalism. Opposition to Empire&quot;, Montréal, Harvest House, 1968, 143 p.
* André Bergevin, Cameron Nish, Anne Bourassa, &quot;Henri Bourassa. Biographie, index des écrits, index de la correspondance publique, 1895–1924&quot;, Montréal, Éditions de l&#x27;Action nationale, 1966, 150 p. 
* Martin Patrick O&#x27;Connell, &quot;Henri Bourassa and Canadian Nationalism&quot;, thesis, University of Toronto, 1954, 304 p.
* Rumilly, Robert. &quot;Henri Bourassa – La Vie Publique D&#x27;un Grand Canadien&quot; (1944), also published as &quot;Histoire De La Province De Quebec: XIII: Henri Bourassa.&quot;
* &quot;Hommage à Henri Bourassa. Reproduit du numéro souvenir paru dans&quot; Le Devoir &quot;du 25 octobre 1952&quot;, Montréal, Le Devoir, 1952, 216 p.; 2nd edition, 1953, 305 p.

== Articles and chapters ==
* Lucien Bouchard: &quot;Henri Bourassa&quot;, en &quot;Bâtisseurs d&#x27;Amérique: Des canadiens français qui ont faite de l&#x27;histoire.&quot; Dir. André Pratte, Jonathan Kay. La Presse, Montréal 2016
* &quot;Legacy. How french Canadians shaped North America.&quot; McClelland &amp; Stewart, Toronto 2016; 2019 ()
* Geoff Keelan, « Catholic Neutrality: The Peace of Henri Bourassa », &quot;Journal of the Canadian Historical Association&quot;, vol. 22, no. 1, 2011, p. 99-132
* Réal Bélanger, « BOURASSA, HENRI », in &quot;Dictionnaire biographique du Canada&quot;, vol. 18, Université Laval/University of Toronto, 2009.
* Rolando Gomes, « Henri Bourassa et l’impérialisme britannique (1899–1918), in &quot;Bulletin d’histoire politique&quot;, volume 16, numéro 3, printemps 2008, p. 161-182.
* Joseph Levitt, « Henri Bourassa », in &quot;L&#x27;Encyclopédie canadienne&quot;, 2008.
* Béatrice Richard, « Henri Bourassa et la conscription : traitre ou sauveur ? », in &quot;Revue militaire canadienne/Canadian Military Journal&quot;, volume 7, no. 4 (hiver), 2006–2007, p. 75-83.
* Gilles Gallichan, « La carrière parlementaire d&#x27;Henri Bourassa à Québec », in &quot;Revue parlementaire canadienne&quot;, automne 1996.
* « Bourassa, Henri », in &quot;Dictionnaire des auteurs de langue française en Amérique du Nord&quot;, 1989.
* René Durocher, « Henri Bourassa, les évêques et la guerre de 1914–1918 », &quot;Historical Papers / Communications historiques&quot;, vol. 6, no 1, 1971, p. 248-275.
* Susan Mann Robertson, « Variations on a Nationalist Theme: Henri Bourassa and Abbé Groulx in the 1920s », &quot;Historical Papers / Communications historiques&quot;, vol. 5, no 1, 1970, p. 109-119.
* Joseph Levitt, « La perspective nationaliste d&#x27;Henri Bourassa, 1896–1914 », &quot;Revue d&#x27;histoire de l&#x27;Amérique française&quot;, vol. 22, no 4, 1969, p. 567-582.
* Richard Jones « La perspective nationaliste d&#x27;Henri Bourassa, 1896–1914 : commentaire », &quot;Revue d&#x27;histoire de l&#x27;Amérique française&quot;, vol. 22, no 4, 1969, p. 582-586.
* Pierre-R. Desrosiers, «Le Castor rouge. La genèse et le développement de la pensée politique et sociale d&#x27;Henri Bourassa», in &quot;Parti pris&quot;, vol. 4, nos. 9–12 (mai-août), 1967, p. 146-164.
* James I. W. Corcoran, « Henri Bourassa et la guerre sud-africaine (part 4) », &quot;Revue d&#x27;histoire de l&#x27;Amérique française&quot;, vol. 19, no 3, 1965, p. 414-442.
* James I. W. Corcoran, « Henri Bourassa et la guerre sud-africaine (part 3) », &quot;Revue d&#x27;histoire de l&#x27;Amérique française&quot;, vol. 19, no 2, 1965, p. 229-237
* James I. W. Corcoran, « Henri Bourassa et la guerre sud-africaine (part 2) », &quot;Revue d&#x27;histoire de l&#x27;Amérique française&quot;, vol. 19, no 1, 1965, p. 84-105.
* James I. W. Corcoran, « Henri Bourassa et la guerre sud-africaine (part 1) », &quot;Revue d&#x27;histoire de l&#x27;Amérique française&quot;, vol. 18, no 3, 1964, p. 343-356.
* « Un document historique: toute la pensée de Bourassa sur le séparatisme », in &quot;L&#x27;Action nationale&quot;, vol. 53, no. 9, mai 1964.
* André Laurendeau (dir.), «Henri Bourassa», in &quot;L&#x27;Action nationale&quot;, vol. 43, no.1, janvier 1954
* Marine Leland, « Quelques observations sur le nationalisme de Henri Bourassa », &quot;Report of the Annual Meeting of the Canadian Historical Association / Rapports annuels de la Société historique du Canada&quot;, vol. 30, no 1, 1951, p. 60-63.
* « Henri Bourassa » in &quot;Biographies canadiennes-françaises. 3e édition&quot;, Ottawa, 1923, p. 140.
* « Henri Bourassa » in &quot;Biographies canadiennes-françaises. 2e édition&quot;, Ottawa, 1922, p. 227.

== Other works ==
* « Avant le combat, Henri Bourassa », &quot;Résonances&quot;, Savoir média
* Christian Blais and al., &quot;Le Devoir, témoin de la vie politique québécoise. Une exposition sur les 100 ans du Devoir à découvrir à la Bibliothèque de l&#x27;Assemblée nationale, du 17 février au 1er octobre 2010&quot;, Québec, Bibliothèque de l&#x27;Assemblée nationale, 2010, 36 p. 
* « La conscription, Henri Bourassa », &quot;Résonances&quot;, Savoir média
* Paul Racine, &quot;Henri Bourassa à Notre-Dame&quot;, Montréal, Éditions de l&#x27;Entr&#x27;aide, 1941?, 52 p.
* « Le péril de l&#x27;immigration, Henri Bourassa », &quot;Résonances&quot;, Savoir média
* Pierre Colmet, &quot;M. Bourassa et la Judéo-Maçonnerie&quot;, Paris, Revue internationale des Sociétés secrètes, 1924, p. 909-915.
* E. Roux, &quot;M. Henri Bourassa au service de l&#x27;Allemagne&quot;, Montréal, Imprimerie Perrault, 1917?, 58 p.
* Joseph-Arthur D&#x27;Amours, &quot;Où allons-nous? Le nationalisme canadien. Lettres de «Un Patriote» publiées dans le journal La Presse, augmentées d&#x27;une introduction, d&#x27;additions et d&#x27;appendices documentaires&quot;, Montréal, Société d&#x27;éditions patriotiques, 1916, 73 p.
* &quot;Canadian Nationalism and the War&quot;, Montréal, [s.n.], 1916, 31 p.
* LaChapelle, Guy and Comeau, Robert, ed. &quot;Robert Bourasa: Un Bâtisseur Tranquille&quot; Pr. de l&#x27;U. Laval, 2003. 406 p.
* Levitt, Joseph. &quot;Images of Bourassa&quot; &quot;Journal of Canadian Studies&quot; 1978 13(1): 100–113. 
* MacMillan, C. Michael. &quot;Henri Bourassa on the Defence of Language Rights&quot; &quot;Dalhousie Review&quot; 1982a 62(3): 413–430. 
* MacMillan, C. Michael. &quot;The Character of Henri Bourassa&#x27;s Political Philosophy&quot; &quot;American Review of Canadian Studies&quot; 1982b 12(1): 10–29. 
* Mason Wade, &quot;The French Canadians, 1760–1945&quot; (1955).
* Alfred George Gardiner, &quot;Henri Bourassa and the Future of Canada&quot;, Montréal, &quot;Le Devoir&quot; Printing, 1914, 7 p.

==See also==

* Politics of Quebec
* Conscription Crisis of 1917
* Conscription Crisis of 1944
* National Assembly of Quebec
* List of third party leaders (Quebec)
* History of Quebec

==References==
==Primary sources==
* Henri Bourassa fonds at Library and Archives Canada. Archival reference number is R8069.
* Patrick Allen et al., eds. &quot;La pensée de Henri Bourassa&quot; (1954)
* Levitt, Joseph, ed. &quot;Henri Bourassa on Imperialism and Biculturalism, 1900–1918&quot; (1970)

==External links==
* 
* &quot;Henri Bourassa’s Career in the Quebec National Assembly&quot;, &quot;Canadian Parliamentary Review&quot;

Link to Dictionary of Canadian Biography — </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3130733" start="0" end="30" title="Henri Bourassa" label="Joseph-Napoléon-Henri Bourassa"/>
<link wikidata="Q857880" start="77" end="92" title="French Canadian" label="French Canadian"/>
<link wikidata="Q6063" start="169" end="187" title="Government of the United Kingdom" label="British government"/>
<link wikidata="Q215112" start="260" end="275" title="Second Boer War" label="Second Boer War"/>
<link wikidata="Q128664" start="296" end="311" title="Wilfrid Laurier" label="Wilfrid Laurier"/>
<link wikidata="Q1735502" start="571" end="616" title="Conscription Crisis of 1917" label="opposition to conscription during World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q3141508" start="799" end="826" title="French-Canadian nationalism" label="French-Canadian nationalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1520743" start="911" end="933" title="Canadian Confederation" label="Canadian Confederation"/>
<link wikidata="Q340" start="981" end="989" title="Montreal" label="Montreal"/>
<link wikidata="Q176" start="991" end="997" title="Quebec" label="Quebec"/>
<link wikidata="Q3335933" start="1002" end="1019" title="Napoléon Bourassa" label="Napoléon Bourassa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2271150" start="1124" end="1145" title="Louis-Joseph Papineau" label="Louis-Joseph Papineau"/>
<link wikidata="Q273619" start="1166" end="1197" title="École Polytechnique de Montréal" label="École Polytechnique de Montréal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2620177" start="1209" end="1234" title="College of the Holy Cross" label="College of the Holy Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q49179" start="1238" end="1262" title="Worcester, Massachusetts" label="Worcester, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1945995" start="1304" end="1314" title="Montebello, Quebec" label="Montebello"/>
<link wikidata="Q383590" start="1395" end="1411" title="House of Commons of Canada" label="House of Commons"/>
<link wikidata="Q138345" start="1430" end="1437" title="Liberal Party of Canada" label="Liberal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3214317" start="1442" end="1449" title="Labelle (federal electoral district)" label="Labelle"/>
<link wikidata="Q215112" start="1520" end="1535" title="Second Boer War" label="Second Boer War"/>
<link wikidata="Q839078" start="1598" end="1612" title="Prime Minister of Canada" label="Prime Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q128664" start="1613" end="1628" title="Wilfrid Laurier" label="Wilfrid Laurier"/>
<link wikidata="Q8680" start="1682" end="1696" title="British Empire" label="British Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q7260" start="1776" end="1787" title="imperialism" label="imperialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q6546867" start="1818" end="1847" title="Ligue nationaliste canadienne" label="Ligue nationaliste canadienne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1003588" start="1936" end="1947" title="francophone" label="francophone"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="2017" end="2030" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q788176" start="2062" end="2070" title="Autonomous entity" label="autonomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q8680" start="2082" end="2096" title="British Empire" label="British Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1492249" start="2219" end="2249" title="Legislative Assembly of Quebec" label="Legislative Assembly of Quebec"/>
<link wikidata="Q3586403" start="2257" end="2281" title="1908 Quebec general election" label="1908 provincial election"/>
<link wikidata="Q3323005" start="2285" end="2308" title="Montréal division no. 2" label="Montréal division no. 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q25387" start="2523" end="2536" title="Royal Canadian Navy" label="Canadian Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q43287" start="2619" end="2626" title="German Empire" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q787147" start="2882" end="2895" title="1911 Canadian federal election" label="1911 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q909827" start="2956" end="2974" title="Conservative Party of Canada (historical)" label="Conservative Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q3462431" start="3122" end="3137" title="Saint-Hyacinthe (provincial electoral district)" label="Saint-Hyacinthe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1504424" start="3170" end="3179" title="Le Devoir" label="Le Devoir"/>
<link wikidata="Q1904" start="3759" end="3766" title="Ontario" label="Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q38872" start="3795" end="3802" title="Prussia" label="Prussia"/>
<link wikidata="Q949389" start="3857" end="3870" title="Regulation 17" label="Regulation 17"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="3915" end="3921" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860" start="3946" end="3953" title="English language" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q42884" start="4148" end="4158" title="Germans" label="the Boches"/>
<link wikidata="Q1684" start="4176" end="4185" title="Spree (river)" label="the Spree"/>
<link wikidata="Q2867853" start="4225" end="4246" title="Orange Order in Canada" label="the Orange intriguers"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4251" end="4264" title="Catholic Church in Canada#French versus Irish" label="Irish priests"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="4627" end="4638" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q128655" start="4651" end="4664" title="Robert Borden" label="Robert Borden"/>
<link wikidata="Q580750" start="4691" end="4703" title="conscription" label="conscription"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="4770" end="4776" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q46" start="4884" end="4890" title="Europe" label="Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1723528" start="5199" end="5212" title="1925 Canadian federal election" label="1925 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q1493320" start="5293" end="5306" title="1935 Canadian federal election" label="1935 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q7325" start="5375" end="5381" title="Jewish" label="Jewish"/>
<link wikidata="Q910177" start="5474" end="5501" title="conscription crisis of 1944" label="conscription crisis of 1944"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="5505" end="5517" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q2906769" start="5576" end="5590" title="Bloc populaire canadien" label="Bloc populaire"/>
<link wikidata="Q2042095" start="5729" end="5746" title="Outremont, Quebec" label="Outremont, Quebec"/>
<link wikidata="Q507432" start="5838" end="5869" title="Cimetière Notre-Dame-des-Neiges" label="Cimetière Notre-Dame-des-Neiges"/>
<link wikidata="Q1605659" start="5898" end="5912" title="Henri-Bourassa (Montreal Metro)" label="Henri-Bourassa"/>
<link wikidata="Q392377" start="5913" end="5926" title="Montreal Metro" label="metro station"/>
<link wikidata="Q2922232" start="5954" end="5962" title="Bourassa (electoral district)" label="Bourassa"/>
<link wikidata="Q650980" start="6204" end="6219" title="Robert Bourassa" label="Robert Bourassa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144178" start="6468" end="6484" title="anti-imperialism" label="anti-imperialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q857880" start="6529" end="6545" title="French Canada" label="French Canadians"/>
<link wikidata="Q274053" start="6640" end="6652" title="ultramontane" label="ultramontane"/>
<link wikidata="Q3110133" start="7189" end="7202" title="Goldwin Smith" label="Goldwin Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q982757" start="7482" end="7495" title="Lionel Groulx" label="Lionel Groulx"/>
<link wikidata="Q1022955" start="7879" end="7898" title="CBC Television" label="Canadian television"/>
<link wikidata="Q1326701" start="7912" end="7929" title="Murdoch Mysteries" label="Murdoch Mysteries"/>
<link wikidata="Q986069" start="17662" end="17680" title="Politics of Quebec" label="Politics of Quebec"/>
<link wikidata="Q1735502" start="17683" end="17710" title="Conscription Crisis of 1917" label="Conscription Crisis of 1917"/>
<link wikidata="Q910177" start="17713" end="17740" title="Conscription Crisis of 1944" label="Conscription Crisis of 1944"/>
<link wikidata="Q1492249" start="17743" end="17770" title="National Assembly of Quebec" label="National Assembly of Quebec"/>
<link wikidata="Q6643321" start="17773" end="17809" title="List of third party leaders (Quebec)" label="List of third party leaders (Quebec)"/>
<link wikidata="Q375513" start="17812" end="17829" title="History of Quebec" label="History of Quebec"/>
<link wikidata="Q913250" start="17892" end="17919" title="Library and Archives Canada" label="Library and Archives Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q838302" start="18278" end="18310" title="Dictionary of Canadian Biography" label="Dictionary of Canadian Biography"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="246542" wikidata="Q399503" url="?curid=246542" title="Barataria">
<text>Barataria may refer to:

==Places==
;Trinidad and Tobago
*Barataria, Trinidad and Tobago

;United States
*Barataria, Louisiana, a census-designated place (CDP) in Jefferson Parish
*Barataria Bay (sometimes &quot;Barrataria Bay&quot;), Louisiana
*Barataria Preserve, part of Jean Lafitte National Historical Park and Preserve, Louisiana
*Bayou Barataria, which drains into Barataria Bay

==In fiction==
*&quot;Barataria&quot;, a fictional &quot;ínsula&quot; (&quot;isle&quot;) awarded by some noblemen to Sancho Panza as a prank in Part II of Cervantes&#x27; &quot;Don Quixote&quot; (from the Spanish word &quot;barato&quot;, meaning cheap)
*Barataria, a fictional republican kingdom in Gilbert and Sullivan&#x27;s comic opera &quot;The Gondoliers&quot;
*Castle Barataria, a castle on Planet X in the CRPG &quot;Ultima II: The Revenge of the Enchantress&quot;

==Ships==
*USC&amp;GS &quot;Barataria&quot; (1867), a survey ship in service with the United States Coast Survey from 1867 to 1878 and with the United States Coast and Geodetic Survey from 1878 to 1885
*USCGC &quot;Barataria&quot; (WAVP-381), later WHEC-381, a United States Coast Guard cutter in service from 1949 to 1969
*USS &quot;Barataria&quot;, the name of more than one United States Navy ship</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q399503" start="0" end="9" title="Barataria" label="Barataria"/>
<link wikidata="Q4858482" start="58" end="88" title="Barataria, Trinidad and Tobago" label="Barataria, Trinidad and Tobago"/>
<link wikidata="Q2883860" start="106" end="126" title="Barataria, Louisiana" label="Barataria, Louisiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q2879591" start="181" end="194" title="Barataria Bay" label="Barataria Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q3364383" start="274" end="324" title="Jean Lafitte National Historical Park and Preserve" label="Jean Lafitte National Historical Park and Preserve"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="337" end="352" title="Bayou Barataria" label="Bayou Barataria"/>
<link wikidata="Q2879591" start="372" end="385" title="Barataria Bay" label="Barataria Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q480" start="564" end="575" title="Don Quixote" label="Don Quixote"/>
<link wikidata="Q3987314" start="732" end="746" title="The Gondoliers" label="The Gondoliers"/>
<link wikidata="" start="811" end="852" title="Ultima II: The Revenge of the Enchantress" label="Ultima II: The Revenge of the Enchantress"/>
<link wikidata="Q7865921" start="871" end="910" title="USC&amp;amp;GS Barataria (1867)" label="USC&amp;amp;GS &amp;quot;Barataria&amp;quot; (1867)"/>
<link wikidata="Q11705989" start="1063" end="1101" title="USCGC Barataria (WAVP-381)" label="USCGC &amp;quot;Barataria&amp;quot; (WAVP-381)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7867569" start="1184" end="1209" title="USS Barataria" label="USS &amp;quot;Barataria&amp;quot;"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="246544" wikidata="Q262568" url="?curid=246544" title="Ataraxia">
<text>In Ancient Greek philosophy,  (Greek: , from indicating negation or absence and with the abstract noun suffix ), generally translated as , , , or , is a lucid state of robust equanimity characterized by ongoing freedom from distress and worry. In non-philosophical usage, was the ideal mental state for soldiers entering battle. Achieving is a common goal for Pyrrhonism, Epicureanism, and Stoicism, but the role and value of within each philosophy varies in accordance with their philosophical theories. The mental disturbances that prevent one from achieving also vary among the philosophies, and each philosophy has a different understanding as to how to achieve .

== Pyrrhonism ==

In Pyrrhonism, is the intended result of (i.e., suspension of judgment) regarding all matters of dogma (i.e., non-evident belief), which represents the central aim of Pyrrhonist practice, that is necessary to bring about .

== Epicureanism ==
 is a key component of the Epicurean conception of pleasure (), which they consider the highest good. Epicureans break pleasure down into two categories: the physical and the mental. They consider mental, not physical, pleasures to be of high importance because physical pleasures exist only in the present; while mental pleasures exist in the past, the present, and the future. Epicureans further separate pleasure into what they call pleasure, those that come about through action or change, and pleasures, those that come about through an absence of distress. Those who achieved freedom from physical disturbance were said to be in a state of , while those who achieved freedom from mental disturbances were said to be in a state of . , as both a mental and pleasure, is key to a person&#x27;s happiness.

== Stoicism ==
In Stoicism, unlike Pyrrhonism or Epicureanism, , or tranquillity of the mind, is not the ultimate goal of life. Instead, the goal is a life of virtue according to nature, which is intended to bring about , the absence of unhealthy passions. However, since Stoics in a state of do not care about matters outside of themselves and are not susceptible to emotion, they would be unable to be disturbed by anything at all, meaning that they were also in a stage of mental tranquillity and thus in a state of .

== See also ==
* Upekṣā

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q999259" start="3" end="27" title="Ancient Greek philosophy" label="Ancient Greek philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q262568" start="29" end="29" title="Ataraxia" label=""/>
<link wikidata="Q35497" start="31" end="36" title="Ancient Greek" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q1933398" start="56" end="75" title="Alpha privative" label="negation or absence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1126340" start="360" end="370" title="Pyrrhonism" label="Pyrrhonism"/>
<link wikidata="Q179541" start="372" end="384" title="Epicureanism" label="Epicureanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q48235" start="390" end="398" title="Stoicism" label="Stoicism"/>
<link wikidata="Q3965155" start="735" end="757" title="suspension of judgment" label="suspension of judgment"/>
<link wikidata="Q620749" start="784" end="789" title="dogma" label="dogma"/>
<link wikidata="Q179541" start="957" end="966" title="Epicureanism" label="Epicurean"/>
<link wikidata="Q2165710" start="2278" end="2284" title="Upekṣā" label="Upekṣā"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="246545" wikidata="Q2713107" url="?curid=246545" title="Hedone">
<text>Hedone (, &quot;hēdonē&quot;) is the Greek word meaning &quot;pleasure.&quot; It was an important concept in Ancient Greek philosophy, especially in the Epicurean school. It is also the root of the English word &quot;&quot;.

In Greek mythology, Hedone is personified as a goddess of pleasure, enjoyment, and delight, as the daughter born from the union of Eros (personification of love) and Psyche (personification of the soul). She was associated more specifically with sensual pleasure. Her opposites were the Algea, personifications of pain. Her equivalent in Roman mythology is Voluptas. There is no evidence that she was ever the object of cult worship.

== Aristotle&#x27;s Hēdonē==
Aristotle identified it as one of the two elements or components of &quot;pathe&quot;, with the other being &quot;lype&quot; or pain. Aristotle described &quot;pathe&quot; in these words: &quot;Let the emotions be all those things on account of which people change their minds and differ in regard to their judgments, and upon which attend pain and pleasure.&quot;

&quot;Hēdonē,&quot; is part of Aristotle&#x27;s account of virtue, such that &#x27;pleasure&#x27; (along with pain) is said to reveal a person&#x27;s character. It is good if it is a consequence of a virtuous life -- as opposed to the position Aristippus, who holds that hēdonē is &quot;wholly good&quot;. An example is the concept of proper pleasure or &quot;oikeia hedone&quot;, which Aristotle discusses in /Poetics/ and considers a process of restoration. Martin Heidegger interprets Aristotelian hēdonē : that pleasure is a movement of the soul and that tranquility arises from it.

== In Epicureanism ==
In the philosophy of Epicurus, &quot;hēdonē&quot; is described as a pleasure that may or may not derive from actions that are virtuous, whereas another form of pleasure, &quot;terpsis&quot;, is always virtuous. Another Epicurean reading, which distinguished &quot;hēdonē&quot; from &quot;terpsis,&quot; referred to it as a feeling of pleasure that is episodic and might or might not be beneficial. According to the Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy, Epicurus uses &quot;hēdonē&quot; in reference to only physical pleasures.

== Stoicism ==
The Stoics held a negative view of &quot;hēdonē,&quot; arguing that it is not in accordance with nature and reason. This can be understood within the philosophy&#x27;s position that emotions are by definition excessive or are excessive impulses that exceed the measure of natural reason and – as in other forms of excess – leads to other evils of irrationality.

== See also ==
* Hedonism

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2713107" start="0" end="6" title="Hedone" label="Hedone"/>
<link wikidata="Q35497" start="37" end="42" title="Ancient Greek" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q208195" start="62" end="70" title="pleasure" label="pleasure"/>
<link wikidata="Q999259" start="109" end="133" title="Ancient Greek philosophy" label="Ancient Greek philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q179541" start="153" end="169" title="Epicureanism" label="Epicurean school"/>
<link wikidata="Q34726" start="229" end="244" title="Greek mythology" label="Greek mythology"/>
<link wikidata="Q121973" start="357" end="361" title="Eros" label="Eros"/>
<link wikidata="Q843382" start="392" end="398" title="Psyche (mythology)" label="Psyche"/>
<link wikidata="Q140001" start="513" end="518" title="Algos" label="Algea"/>
<link wikidata="Q122173" start="564" end="579" title="Roman mythology" label="Roman mythology"/>
<link wikidata="Q651660" start="583" end="591" title="Voluptas" label="Voluptas"/>
<link wikidata="Q189506" start="1300" end="1310" title="Aristippus" label="Aristippus"/>
<link wikidata="Q48301" start="1516" end="1532" title="Martin Heidegger" label="Martin Heidegger"/>
<link wikidata="Q43216" start="1687" end="1695" title="Epicurus" label="Epicurus"/>
<link wikidata="Q48235" start="2212" end="2218" title="Stoicism" label="Stoics"/>
<link wikidata="Q7064" start="2588" end="2596" title="Hedonism" label="Hedonism"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="246550" wikidata="Q7196817" url="?curid=246550" title="Pioneer Valley">
<text>The Pioneer Valley is the colloquial and promotional name for the portion of the Connecticut River Valley that is in Massachusetts in the United States. It is generally taken to comprise the three counties of Hampden, Hampshire, and Franklin. The lower Pioneer Valley corresponds to the Springfield, Massachusetts metropolitan area, the region&#x27;s urban center, and the seat of Hampden County. The upper Pioneer Valley region includes the smaller cities of Northampton and Greenfield, the county seats of Hampshire and Franklin counties, respectively.

Historically the northern part of the Valley was an agricultural region, known for growing Connecticut shade tobacco and other specialty crops like Hadley asparagus; however, since the late nineteenth century its economy has become increasingly a knowledge economy, due to the prominence of the Five Colleges in Hampshire County. Similarly the Springfield–Chicopee–Holyoke economies transformed from volume producers of goods such as paper and armaments, into a combination of specialized manufacturing and distribution services for Boston and New York City.

Many of the cities and towns include areas of forests, and Springfield itself, which in the early twentieth century was nicknamed &quot;The City in a Forest,&quot; features nature within its city limits and over 12% parkland. The Pioneer Valley is known for its scenery and as a vacation destination. The Holyoke Range, Mount Tom Range, and numerous rolling hills, bluffs, and meadows feature extravagant homes from the Gilded Age, many of which surround New England&#x27;s longest and largest river, the Connecticut River, which flows through the region.

The name &quot;Pioneer Valley&quot; originates in the twentieth century with travel writers using it in the 1920s and 1930s to designate the region. In 1939 the Pioneer Valley Association was formed to promote the region using that name.

==Tourist destination==
The Pioneer Valley is a popular, year-round tourist destination—a role that it has played historically, prior to its deindustrialization (from approximately 1970–2000). Travelers are drawn to the Pioneer Valley by its lively college towns, such as Northampton and Amherst; the resurgent city of Springfield; its unspoiled nature, numerous parks, and recreational facilities, including New England&#x27;s largest and most popular amusement park, Six Flags New England in Agawam; its cultural and historical sites, such as the Emily Dickinson House in Amherst, the Springfield Armory National Historical Site, and the Basketball Hall of Fame on Springfield&#x27;s riverfront. The region features alpine skiing at resorts such as Berkshire East and seasonal festivals that draw millions of visitors, such as The Big E—all six New England states&#x27; collective, annual state fair in West Springfield—and Bright Nights at Springfield&#x27;s Forest Park—an elaborate, high-tech lighting display during the holiday season.

==Geology==
The Pioneer Valley includes approximately half of the southern Connecticut River Valley—an ancient rift valley created by the breakup of the supercontinent Pangea along the Mid-Atlantic Ridge during the Triassic and Jurassic periods of the Mesozoic Era. The Connecticut River has been flowing through the valley for millions of years and was naturally dammed to form glacial lake Hitchcock during the last ice age.

According to &quot;King&#x27;s Handbook of Springfield&quot;, by Moses King, the Pioneer Valley &quot;is not an ordinary river channel; it is, in fact, a trough between two systems of mountains. To the west lie the worn-down remnants of the once lofty Berkshire Mountains; on the east, the yet more degraded ridges which constitute what we may call the Eastern Massachusetts set of mountain ridges. These rocks now form many sharp hills and mountains in the Valley. During the Triassic time, Massachusetts&#x27;s portion of the Connecticut River Valley formed a shallow arm of the sea,&quot; leaving deposits that enriched the Pioneer Valley&#x27;s inordinately fertile soil.

Geologically interesting parts of the Valley are the basalt flows and dinosaur tracks in South Hadley and Holyoke, Massachusetts, a chain of basaltic traprock ridges known as Metacomet Ridge along the ancient tectonic rift including the Mount Holyoke and Mount Tom ranges, layers of rock deposit laid down by the river, and varves and deltas
deposited by Lake Hitchcock during the Pleistocene.

==Political geography==
The region known as the Pioneer Valley constitutes Massachusetts&#x27;s portion of the fertile Connecticut River Valley and the hill and mountain towns to its east and west. The following three counties—from north to south, and each with a different character—encompass the Pioneer Valley:

===Franklin County===
Franklin County is the most rural county in Massachusetts and thus reminiscent of southern Vermont, which it borders. Greenfield is its largest municipality, a small city frequently used as a gateway to the region&#x27;s many outdoor pursuits. The county offers downhill skiing at resorts such as Berkshire East, white-water rafting, zip-lining, hiking, kayaking, and other outdoor pursuits. In addition, Franklin County contains many rustic, former mill towns. Many of these have become quaint and scenic since the decline of the mills (e.g., Turners Falls). Massachusetts&#x27;s Routes 2 and 2A, which run through Franklin County, feature many antique stores.

===Hampshire County===
Hampshire County is the home to five prominent colleges and universities that cooperate with each other and are known collectively as the Five Colleges. They are UMass Amherst, Amherst, Mount Holyoke, Smith, and Hampshire. Each of these highly regarded liberal arts colleges and universities contribute to Hampshire County&#x27;s college town atmosphere, particularly in the significant college towns of Northampton and Amherst. Much of Hampshire County&#x27;s cultural activity, vibrant nightlife, and musical venues are concentrated in these two small but lively municipalities that are separated by a mere seven miles. While the college towns in Hampshire County are known for their liberal political values and their embrace of alternative cultures and lifestyles, many of the county&#x27;s outlying towns preserve their traditional, bucolic characters. In terms of political demographics, Hampshire County is one of the most liberal areas in the United States in both voter registration and election returns.

===Hampden County===
Hampden County is the most highly urbanized county in Western Massachusetts; however, its environs have long been described as &quot;rus in urbe&quot;—cities amidst forests. Springfield, Massachusetts—the &quot;shire town&quot; for which Hampden County was initially carved out of Hampshire County in 1814—is located in southern Hampden County, at a natural crossroads where three significant rivers flow into Connecticut River (the Westfield, the Chicopee, and the Mill). Springfield&#x27;s history is long, illustrious, and well-chronicled. It was one of the United States&#x27; most important precision manufacturing and defense centers until its relatively recent deindustrialization, which was catalyzed by the government&#x27;s controversial closure of the Springfield Armory during the Vietnam War. (In 1777, General George Washington and Henry Knox personally selected that site for the United States&#x27; Federal Arsenal.) After nearly 30 years of decline, Springfield has since about 2006 experienced a cultural and economic resurgence, catalyzed by billions of dollars in private and public investment, including the funded construction of the United States&#x27; first high-speed bullet-train, known as the Knowledge Corridor intercity rail line as well as a sharp decreases in crime and new festivals that have renewed the city&#x27;s traditionally robust civic pride. Springfield itself features international tourist attractions like the Basketball Hall of Fame and the Springfield Armory National Historic Site; it also features the Dr. Seuss Memorial, Augustus Saint Gaudens&#x27;s outdoor masterpiece, &quot;The Puritan&quot;, and five world-class art, science, and history museums at the Quadrangle. Forest Park, a city park of designed following the principles of Frederick Law Olmsted, who is most famous for designing New York City&#x27;s Central Park, is comparably diverse and ornate. The city&#x27;s economic base is also diverse, featuring Massachusetts&#x27;s wealthiest Fortune 100 company, MassMutual Insurance, as well as numerous universities and hospitals. Springfield features thousands of Victorian era Painted Lady mansions (like San Francisco&#x27;s), e.g., in the McKnight Historic District. In addition to the Connecticut River, Springfield features Watershops Pond, Porter Lake, and the Mill River.

Less than two miles south of Springfield, Six Flags New England amusement park is located in suburban Agawam; and one mile west of Springfield, The Big E—the collective state fairgrounds of all six New England States—is located in West Springfield. North of Springfield, the U.S. Westover Air Force Base is located in the resurgent, former industrial city of Chicopee. The City of Chicopee features the confluence of the fast-moving Chicopee River and the meandering Connecticut River. The Chicopee River, although only 18.0 miles long, has the largest water basin in Massachusetts—and along the Connecticut River—at 741 square miles. Across from Chicopee, on the west side of the Connecticut River, the Holyoke Mall at Ingleside is one of the largest malls in New England. In addition to the mall, Holyoke is home to the Mount Tom Range of mountains, the Holyoke Canal System, and the Volleyball Hall of Fame. (The sport of volleyball was invented in Holyoke in 1895.)

The city of Westfield features Westfield State University, founded by renowned education reformer Horace Mann. Near to Westfield—approximately 15 miles west of Springfield—numerous outdoor opportunities are available, such as alpine skiing at Blandford Ski Area and the United States&#x27;s oldest white-water rafting races on the 78.1 mile Westfield River, the longest Connecticut River tributary in Massachusetts.

The international airport that serves Hampden County, and the Pioneer Valley in general, is Bradley International Airport, which is located 12 miles south of Springfield in the town of Windsor Locks, Connecticut, land that formerly belonged to Springfield.

==Demographics==

===Ethnicity===
Springfield is majority black, Latino and people of color. Currently, the Pioneer Valley&#x27;s ethnic and racial diversity varies greatly from city to town. Predominantly British until the nineteenth century, and then European-American in the late nineteenth and twentieth centuries, as of the 2010 census, the region features a rapidly growing Hispanic population in nearly all urban areas. This influx includes large numbers of Puerto Ricans. Among the European-American community, the Pioneer Valley&#x27;s population reflects the British Isles background of its original settlers and the immigrant populations that settled it during the late-nineteenth century, including large numbers of residents with Irish, Italian, Polish, Portuguese, French Canadian, and Greek backgrounds. As of 2011, Springfield is home to a particularly large number of Vietnamese immigrants. Also, as of 2011, Russian and Ukrainian immigrants are increasing in Springfield, West Springfield, Westfield, and other communities.

===LGBT population===
According to the 2010 census, the Pioneer Valley features one of the highest per capita lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender (LGBT) populations in the United States. Indeed, according to the U.S. Census Bureau&#x27;s 2010 census statistics, Springfield was ranked one of the Top 10 gay cities in the United States. The 2010 census figures indicate the number of same-sex households per thousand. Springfield ranked No. 10, with 5.69 same-sex couples per thousand. In January 2010, the national LGBT magazine &quot;The Advocate&quot; rated Springfield No. 13 among its new &quot;15 Gayest Secondary Cities in America,&quot; ahead of San Diego, California and Albuquerque, New Mexico. Springfield was the only Massachusetts city included on &quot;The Advocate&quot;″s list.

The cities of Northampton and Springfield, in particular, feature vibrant LGBT communities. Unlike in other communities across the United States, LGBT residents have largely integrated into Northampton and Springfield, i.e. neither city features a gay ghetto. Generally, in the Pioneer Valley, LGBT people and straight people co-mingle in various bars, nightclubs, and cultural institutions. Still, both cities feature a robust and active LGBT nightlife – especially Northampton for lesbians, and Springfield for gay men. The college towns of Amherst and South Hadley also feature significant LGBT populations.

==Higher education institutions==

===Five College Consortium===

* Amherst College: Amherst
* Hampshire College: Amherst
* Mount Holyoke College: South Hadley
* Smith College: Northampton
* University of Massachusetts Amherst: Amherst

===Metro Springfield Universities===
* American International College: Springfield
* Bay Path University: Longmeadow
* Cambridge College: Springfield
* Elms College: Chicopee
* Springfield College: Springfield
* Western New England University: Springfield
* Westfield State University: Westfield

===Graduate schools===
* Conway School of Landscape Design: Conway and Easthampton
* Mount Holyoke College, Professional and Graduate Education: South Hadley
* Smith College School for Social Work: Northampton

===Community colleges===
* Greenfield Community College: Greenfield
* Holyoke Community College: Holyoke
* Springfield Technical Community College: Springfield

==History==
Native American history in the Pioneer Valley stretches back thousands of years; its recorded history begins in 1635, when Roxbury magistrate William Pynchon commissioned land scouts John Cable and John Woodcock to look for the Connecticut River Valley&#x27;s best site for both conducting trade and farming. The first 16 years of the history of the European settlement of the Pioneer Valley, before 1652, when Northampton, Massachusetts, was established, are coterminous with the history of Springfield, Massachusetts, as it was Pioneer Valley&#x27;s only settlement. From 1633 to 1635, there had been three English settlements in the Connecticut River Valley: Wethersfield, Connecticut; Windsor, Connecticut; and the best situated of the three (because of its two rivers), Hartford, Connecticut. Cable and Woodcock continued northward until they came upon a spot that they agreed was the best situated of them all: modern-day Springfield, Massachusetts.

Springfield sits at a natural crossroads, at the confluence of four rivers: to the west, the 78.1 mile Westfield River, (the Connecticut River&#x27;s longest tributary river in Massachusetts); in the middle, the 418.0 mile Connecticut River, then known as &quot;The Great River&quot;; and to the east two smaller rivers: the 18.0 mile Chicopee River, which featured the fast moving and the Connecticut River&#x27;s largest water basin; and also, the Mill River, which would become very important approximately 150 years later after George Washington&#x27;s foundation of the U.S. Armory at Springfield.

===First settlement===

At that time, on the western bank of the Connecticut River, the explorers found the Pocomtuc (or perhaps Nipmuck) Indian village of Agawam. Just south of the Westfield River, the colonists constructed a pre-fabricated house in what is present-day Agawam, Massachusetts.

In 1636, Pynchon led a settlement expedition with a larger group, including Henry Smith (Pynchon&#x27;s son-in-law), Jehu Burr, William Blake, Matthew Mitchell, Edmund Wood, Thomas Ufford, and John Cable. Springfield was Massachusetts&#x27; first settlement for non-religious reasons, although many of its settlers were very religious, as indicated by their first article of incorporation, &quot;Wee intend by God&#x27;s grace, as soon as we can, with all convenient speede to procure some Godly and faithfull minister we purpose to joyne in church covenant, to walk in all the ways of Christ&quot; In scouting Springfield, Cable, Woodcock, and Pynchon selected a spot just north of Enfield Falls, the first spot on the Connecticut River where all travelers must stop to negotiate a waterfall, in height, and then transship their cargoes from ocean-going vessels to smaller shallops. Pynchon&#x27;s party purchased land on both sides of Connecticut River from 18 tribesman who lived at a palisade fort at the current site of Springfield&#x27;s Longhill Street. The price paid was 18 hoes, 18 fathoms of wampum, 18 coats, 18 hatchets and 18 knives. Originally, in 1636, the English settlement was named Agawam Plantation. By founding &quot;Agawam&quot; in its particular location, Pynchon essentially forced all northerly river trade to move through his town.

After warnings from the Natives about the Connecticut River&#x27;s west side being prone to flooding, most Springfield settlers moved to the east side of the river, which was slightly less advantageous for farming because of its prominent bluffs and hills. The initial land grants to English families were made there in what is today Springfield&#x27;s Metro Center, along what is today Main Street.&lt;name=&quot;King 1885&quot;/&gt; Long, narrow plots of farmland were created, extending outward from the river. In addition, more distant forested &quot;wood lots&quot; were offered. The original, main profit-generating industry for Springfield was trade with the Indians for beaver skins, which were then exported around the colonial world.

====Choosing Massachusetts====
In 1640 and 1641, two events took place that forever changed the political boundaries of the Connecticut River Valley. From its founding until that time, Springfield had been administered by Connecticut, along with Connecticut&#x27;s three other settlements—at Wethersfield, Hartford, and Windsor. In the spring of 1640, grain was very scarce; cattle were dying of starvation. The nearby Connecticut Colony settlements gave power to William Pynchon to buy corn for all four English settlements, (Springfield&#x27;s natives were, by far, the most congenial to the English.) If the Natives would not sell their corn at market prices, then Pynchon was authorized to offer more money. The Natives refused to sell their corn at market prices, and then later refused to sell it at &quot;reasonable&quot; prices. Pynchon refused to buy it, believing it best not to broadcast the English colonists&#x27; weaknesses, and also wanting to keep market values steady.

Leading citizens of (what would become) Hartford were furious with Pynchon for not purchasing any grain. With Windsor&#x27;s and Wethersfield&#x27;s consent, the three southerly settlements commissioned the famed Native American-conqueror Captain John Mason to travel to Springfield with &quot;money in one hand and a sword in the other.&quot; On reaching (what would become) Springfield, Mason intimidated the local Natives with war if they did not sell their corn at a &quot;reasonable price.&quot; The Natives capitulated and ultimately sold the colonists corn. Pynchon, an avowed &quot;man of peace,&quot; believed in negotiation with the Natives (and thus, quickly made a fortune), whereas Mason—a hero of the Pequot Wars and conqueror of Connecticut—believed in subduing Natives by force if necessary. This philosophical difference led to Mason using &quot;hard words&quot; against Pynchon. Pynchon&#x27;s settlement, however, agreed with him, and his philosophy, and that same year, voted to separate from the Connecticut Colony and be annexed by the Massachusetts Bay Colony. When the dust finally settled, William Pynchon was named magistrate of Agawam by the Massachusetts Bay Colony and, in honor of him, the settlement was renamed Springfield after the village of Springfield near Chelmsford, Essex in England, where Pynchon was born and raised. For decades, Springfield—which, at the time, included modern-day Westfield—was the westernmost settlement in Massachusetts.

====Witchcraft and the New World&#x27;s first banned book====
In 1645, 46 years before the Salem witch trials, Springfield experienced America&#x27;s first accusations of witchcraft when Mary Parsons accused a widow named Marshfield, who had moved from Windsor to Springfield, with witchcraft—an offense then punishable by death. For this, Mary Parsons was found guilty of slander. In 1651, Mary Parsons was accused of witchcraft—specifically &quot;divers devilish practices by witchcraft, to the hurt of Martha and Rebeckah Moxon,&quot; two daughters of Springfield&#x27;s first minister—and also of murdering her own child. In turn, Mary Parsons then accused her own husband, Hugh Parsons, of witchcraft. At America&#x27;s first witch trial, both Mary and Hugh Parsons were found not guilty of witchcraft for want of satisfactory evidence; however, Mary was found guilty of murdering her own child. For this, she was sentenced to death, but died in prison in 1651, before receiving her death sentence.

In 1650, William Pynchon became infamous for writing the New World&#x27;s first banned book. In 1649, Pynchon found time to write a book, &quot;The Meritous Price of Our Redemption&quot;, a theological study that was published in London in 1650. Several copies made it back to the Massachusetts Bay Colony and its capital, Boston, which, this time reacted with rage to Pynchon rather than with support. For his critical attitude toward Massachusetts&#x27; Calvinist Puritanism, Pynchon was accused of heresy, and his book was burned on the Boston Common. Only four copies survived. By declaration of the Massachusetts General Court, in 1650, &quot;The Meritous Price of Our Redemption&quot; became the first-ever banned book in the New World. In 1651, Pynchon was accused of heresy by the Massachusetts General Court (at the same meeting of the Court where Springfielder Mary Parsons was sentenced to death in America&#x27;s first witch trial). Thus he is the first author to have his work &quot;banned in Boston&quot;. Standing to lose all of his land-holdings—the largest in the Connecticut River Valley—William Pynchon transferred ownership to his son, John, and then, in 1652, moved back to England with his friend, the Reverend Moxon.

William&#x27;s son, John Pynchon, and his brother-in-law, Elizur Holyoke, quickly took on the settlement&#x27;s leadership roles. They began moving Springfield away from the diminishing fur trade into agricultural pursuits, and also founded several new towns, including Northampton, Massachusetts.

==Northampton==

=== Early settlement ===
The area now called Northampton was once known as Norwottuck, or Nonotuck, meaning &quot;the midst of the river&quot; by its original Pocumtuc inhabitants. According to various accounts, Northampton was named by John King (1629–1703), one of its original settlers, or possibly in his honor, since it is supposed that he came to Massachusetts from Northampton, England.

The Pocumtuc confederacy occupied the Connecticut River Valley, from what is now southern Vermont and New Hampshire into northern Connecticut. The Pocumtuc tribes were Algonquian, and traditionally allied with the Mahican confederacy to the west. By 1606, an ongoing struggle between the Mahican and Iroquois confederacies led to direct attacks on the Pocumtuc by the Iroquoian Mohawk nation. The Mahican confederacy had been defeated by 1628, limiting Pocumtuc access to trade routes to the west. The area suffered a major smallpox epidemic in the 1630s, following the arrival of Dutch traders in the Hudson Valley and English settlers in the Massachusetts Bay Colony during the previous two decades. It was in this context that the land making up the bulk of modern Northampton was sold to settlers from Springfield, Massachusetts, in 1653, and settled the following year. The situation in the region further deteriorated when the Mohawk escalated hostilities against the Pocumtuc confederacy and other Algonquian tribes after 1655, forcing many of the plague-devastated Algonquian groups into defensive mergers. This coincided with a souring of relations between the Wampanoag and the Massachusetts Bay colonists, eventually leading to the expanded Algonquian alliance which took part in King Philip&#x27;s War.

=== The partition of Northampton ===
Northampton&#x27;s territory would be enlarged beyond the original settlement, but later portions would be carved up into separate cities, towns, and municipalities. Southampton, for example, was incorporated in 1775, and included parts of the territories of modern Montgomery (which was itself incorporated in 1780) and Easthampton. Westhampton was incorporated in 1778, and Easthampton in 1809. Formerly, a section of Northampton called Smith&#x27;s Ferry was separated from the rest of the town by the boundaries of Easthampton. The shortest path to downtown was on a road near the Connecticut River oxbow, which was subject to frequent flooding. Smith&#x27;s Ferry was ceded to Holyoke, Massachusetts, in 1909.

==Deerfield==
Deerfield was the northwesternmost outpost of New England settlement for several decades during the late seventeenth and early eighteenth centuries. It occupies a fertile portion of the Connecticut River Valley and was vulnerable to attack because of its position near the Berkshire Mountains. For these reasons it became the site of several Anglo-French and Indian skirmishes during its early history, as well as intertribal warfare.

At the time of the English colonists&#x27; arrival, the Deerfield area was inhabited by the Algonquian-speaking Pocumtuck nation, with a major village by the same name. First settled by English colonists in 1673, Deerfield was incorporated in 1677. Settlement was the result of a court case in which the government in Boston agreed to return some of the land of the town of Dedham to Native American control, and allowed some of Dedham&#x27;s residents to acquire land in the new township of Pocumtuck. To obtain this land, their agent John Plympton signed a treaty with some Pocumtuck men, including one named Chaulk. He had no authority to deed the land to the colonists, and appeared to have only a rough idea of what he was signing. Native Americans and English had quite differing ideas about property and land use, which contributed to their conflicts, along with competition for resources.

The settlers expelled the Pocumtuck tribe by force, who in turn sought French protection from colonists in Canada. At the Battle of Bloody Brook on September 18, 1675, the dispossessed Indians destroyed a small force under the command of Captain Thomas Lathrop before being driven off by reinforcements. Colonial casualties numbered about sixty. In retaliation, at dawn on May 19, 1676, Captain William Turner led an army of settlers in a surprise attack on Peskeompskut, in present-day Montague, then a traditional native gathering place. They killed 200 natives, mostly women and children. When the men of the tribe returned, they routed Turner, who died of a mortal wound at Green River.

On February 29, 1704, during Queen Anne&#x27;s War, joint French and Indian forces attacked the town in what has become known as the 1704 Raid on Deerfield. Under the command of Jean-Baptiste Hertel de Rouville were 47 Canadiens and 200 Abenaki, Kanienkehaka and Wyandot, as well as a few Pocumtuck. They struck at dawn, razing Deerfield and killing 56 colonists, including 22 men, 9 women, and 25 children. They took as captives 109 survivors, including women and children, and &quot;carried&quot; them away on a months-long trek to Quebec. Many died along the way or were killed when they could not keep up.

Deerfield and other communities collected funds to ransom the captives, and negotiations were conducted between colonial governments. When New England released the French pirate, Canada arranged redemption of numerous Deerfield people, among them the minister John Williams. He wrote a captivity narrative about his experience, which was published in 1707 and became well known. Because of losses to war and disease, the Mohawk and other tribes often adopted younger captives into their tribes. Such was the case with Williams&#x27; daughter Eunice, eight years old when captured. She became thoroughly assimilated, at age 16 marrying a Mohawk man. Most of the Deerfield captives eventually returned to New England. During this period, other captives remained by choice in French and Native communities such as Kahnawake for the rest of their lives.

As the frontier moved north, Deerfield became another colonial town with an unquiet early history. In 1753 Greenfield was set off and incorporated. During the early nineteenth century, Deerfield&#x27;s role in agricultural production of the Northeast declined. It was overtaken by the rapid development of the Midwestern United States into the nation&#x27;s breadbasket, with transportation to eastern markets and New York City enhanced by construction of the Erie Canal.

During the Colonial Revival Movement of the late nineteenth century, Deerfield citizens rediscovered the town&#x27;s past. Residents founded the Pocumtuck Valley Memorial Association in 1870, and erected monuments to commemorate various events, including the Bloody Brook and 1704 attacks. In 1890, Charlotte Alice Baker returned to Deerfield to restore her family home, the Frary House. Assisted by the Boston architectural firm of Shepley, Rutan &amp; Coolidge, her project was one of the first in historic preservation in western Massachusetts. Today, tourism is the town&#x27;s principal industry. Historic Deerfield, a National Historic Landmark district with eleven house museums and a regional museum and visitors&#x27; center, and the Yankee Candle Company are major attractions.

An account of the town&#x27;s early history was written by local historian George Sheldon and published in the late nineteenth century. By this time, South Deerfield and other New England villages were already absorbing a new wave of Eastern European immigration, particularly from Poland. The new people influenced Deerfield&#x27;s demographics and culture. They were mostly Catholic peasants, who built their own churches and first worked as laborers, forming a community later known as Old Polonia. Later twentieth-century immigrants from Poland tended to be more educated, but settled in the larger cities. Immigrants in smaller communities followed different paths, and their descendants often moved to cities for more opportunities.

==Greenfield==
Pocumtuck Indians first settled and originally inhabited the Greenfield area. Native American artifacts found in the area have been dated as originating between 7,000 and 9,000 years BC. The Pocumtucks planted field crops and fished the rivers, but were wiped out as a tribe by the Mohawks in 1664. Thereafter, the newly unoccupied area - being the eastern terminus of the Mohawk Trail, a principal route for Native American trade traveling west into New York - was colonized by the English in 1686 as part of Deerfield. In 1753, Greenfield was set off from Deerfield and incorporated as a separate town, named for the Green River.

In 1795, the South Hadley Canal opened, allowing boats to bypass the South Hadley falls and reach Greenfield via the Connecticut River. Located at the confluence of the Deerfield and Green rivers, and not far from where they merge into the Connecticut River, Greenfield developed into a trade center. It was designated county seat when Franklin County was created from Hampshire County in 1811. Falls provided water power for industry, and Greenfield grew into a prosperous mill town.

==Culture==

===Hampshire County===
Residents benefit from a rich cultural array of fine arts, performances and notable architecture in college towns and in Springfield. According to the 2010 census, per capita, Northampton has the highest concentration of lesbians in the United States, and perhaps the world. Hampshire County is certainly the &quot;Valley full o&#x27; Pioneer ... in the sleepy west of the woody east&quot;, of which the Pixies sang in the song &quot;U-Mass&quot;.

===Springfield===
Springfield&#x27;s cultural contributions to the United States and world at large have been so numerous that here, only brief descriptions of very important national and international cultural milestones will be mentioned.

As of 2011, Springfield&#x27;s most famous cultural contribution worldwide is basketball, currently the world&#x27;s 2nd most popular sport. That said, the &quot;City of Progress&quot; produced three other innovations, not nearly as well publicized, but which have proven to have proven to be just as significant, if not more so, to the world at large. In 1892–93, the first, functional, American gasoline-powered car was produced at the Stacy Building in Springfield by the Duryea Brothers. The Duryea&#x27;s car also won the world&#x27;s first automobile race in 1895 in Chicago. In 1901, the first motorcycle company in the world was &quot;Indian&quot;, produced in Springfield; in 1905, the first modern fire engines in the world were produced by Knox Automobile (which made Springfield&#x27;s fire department the first modern fire department in the world;), and the first commercial radio station in the U.S., WBZ, was broadcast from Springfield in 1921.

Of national importance, Springfield featured the United States&#x27; first witch trial in 1646—decades before the Salem Witch Trials; and a few years later in 1650, a Springfielder wrote the New World&#x27;s first banned book, &quot;The Meritorious Price of Our Redemption&quot; by William Pynchon. Pynchon was the founder of the city of Springfield. His book, expressing views contrary to Puritan Calvinist doctrine, caused him to be brought before the high court in Boston and accused of heresy. He later to return to England.

In Springfield, in 1860, Milton Bradley invented and produced his popular parlor games, including the still popular &quot;The Game of Life&quot;. Also in Springfield, Dr. Seuss grew up, and wrote several of the works for which he is now best known, (e.g. And to Think That I Saw It on Mulberry Street.) Psychiatrist and LSD activist Timothy Leary—the man who influenced a generations to &quot;turn on, tune in, drop out&quot;—was born and educated in Springfield. Earlier, from 1846 to 1850, John Brown, the famed abolitionist, lived in Springfield, where he met, for the first time the national leaders of the abolition movement like Frederick Douglass and Sojourner Truth. In Springfield, in response to the Fugitive Slave Act, John Brown founded his first militant anti-slavery organization, &quot;The League of Gileadites&quot;. Brown&#x27;s years in Springfield have often been called his &quot;transformative years.&quot;

To the extent that military history adds to a place&#x27;s culture, Springfield&#x27;s history is notably rich, beginning with the 1675 Attack on Springfield during King Philip&#x27;s War. Later, events such as George Washington&#x27;s and Henry Knox&#x27;s founding of the Springfield Armory atop a bluff in the town made Springfield one of the U.S. military&#x27;s most important sites for centuries. Shays&#x27;s Rebellion, which led directly to the U.S. Constitution, occurred at the Armory ten years after Washington&#x27;s founding of it—and also forced him to come out of retirement.

As regards literary works, the world&#x27;s first American-English dictionary was published in Springfield in 1806, and is still published in the city by Merriam Webster. Also, the first comprehensive, major United States history book was written by Springfielder George Bancroft in 1830.

To the extent that cultural contributions comprise invention, innovation, and progress, Springfield has been, historically, one of the nation&#x27;s most innovative cities. In 1819, inventor Thomas Blanchard invented the lathe in Springfield, which would catalyze manufacturing developments now known the world over as interchangeable parts and the assembly line. In 1825, Blanchard also built the first American car, a &quot;horseless carriage,&quot; which was powered by steam. In 1844, inventor Charles Goodyear perfected and patented his process for making vulcanized rubber in Springfield—as of 2011, as it has been for many years previous, Goodyear&#x27;s name is known the world over for rubber production. In 1868, inventor Margaret E. Knight invented a machine for folding and gluing flat-bottomed paper bags.

Other major cultural contributions from Springfield include the first U.S. postcard in 1873; the first American, national horse show in 1853; the first American dog show—and even the first American friction match in 1834.

===Art and museums===
Valley residents also have a love of arts, both visual and performing, as demonstrated by numerous art galleries, countless theaters and performances, the residencies of children&#x27;s authors Dr. Seuss, Eric Carle in the valley, and the Eric Carle Museum of Picture Book Art in Amherst.

Springfield&#x27;s Quadrangle features an extraordinary grouping of five museums, including two art museums, two history museums, and one science museum. Springfield&#x27;s Science Museum features the United States&#x27; first planetarium. Interspersed among the five museums is the sculptural Dr. Seuss Memorial garden, which recreates the Springfield author&#x27;s whimsical characters in bronze.

In Springfield, Springfield Symphony Hall serves as the major focal point for classical music, Broadway tours, concerts and stand-up comedy shows in the Valley. Symphony Hall was built in 1911–13, and its ornamentation is a spectacle in itself. The major playhouse in Springfield is CityStage, which features an eclectic mix of entertainment. Both venues are managed by Springfield Performing Arts Development Corporation.

===Local media===
* &quot;The Valley Post&quot;
* &quot;The Republican&quot; (major Springfield newspaper)
* &quot;The Valley Advocate&quot;, local arts &amp; entertainment newspaper
* &quot;Predvestnik&quot;, the Russian language newspaper of Pioneer Valley (ceased publication April 2008)
* &quot;The Rainbow Times&quot;, the Pioneer Valley&#x27;s LGBT magazine. (Springfield and Northampton have sizable LGBT communities.)
* &quot;The Valley Art Newsletter&quot;

===Independent bookstores===


With an independent bookstore in almost every town, several small publishers, and countless local authors, the Valley could well be counted as a reader&#x27;s paradise. Amherst has at least four bookstores (including Amherst Books and Food for Thought Bookstore), South Hadley has at least one notable bookstore (&quot;The Odyssey Bookshop&quot;). Since the late 1980s, Montague has had The Bookmill, and the World Eye Bookshop is in its 40th year in Greenfield. John Doe, Jr. used books and records opened in Greenfield the summer of 2009. Federal Street Books is another used bookstore in Greenfield. Northampton has least four independent bookstores (including Broadside Bookshop). One of the more popular, Raven Used Books, features a wide variety of titles and subjects. South Deerfield has New England Auctions, specializing in rare and antiquarian books.

===Sports===
The Pioneer Valley is home to a multitude of professional, amateur, and collegiate sports teams, as well as a rich athletic history.

The Springfield Thunderbirds are the region&#x27;s only professional sports team, competing in the American Hockey League. Historically, the city has had professional hockey dating back to the 1930s with the seven-time Calder Cup champion Springfield Indians. The area has also had several minor-league baseball teams and the Springfield Armor of the NBA Development League.

On the collegiate level, the only school in the region to be a full member of the NCAA&#x27;s Division I is the University of Massachusetts, although the ice hockey team at American International College competes in the Atlantic Hockey Association, a hockey-only DI conference. There are a multitude of well-known Division III schools as well, including Amherst College.

The most notable amateur team in the region is the Holyoke Blue Sox, members of the New England Collegiate Baseball League.

The region has had many notable professional athletes see significant portions of their careers in the region. Eddie Shore played for and later became the owner of the very successful Springfield Indians franchise; his number 2 remains retired by the Thunderbirds. Julius Erving, one of the top basketball players of all time, played at UMass Amherst. Wrestler John Cena graduated from Springfield College prior to joining the WWE. The most notable athlete to be born in the region is hockey player Bill Guerin, a Stanley Cup champion and Olympic Silver Medalist, who is from Wilbraham.

The region features a lot of independent professional wrestling shows, most notably Pioneer Valley Pro Wrestling, the former New Age Old Tyme Wrestling and The Way Wrestling Was Promotions. Aside from monthly shows, PVP Wrestling also runs charity shows for different benefits.

The region is also credited as being the home of both basketball (invented at Springfield College) and volleyball (invented in Holyoke), as created in the late 1890s; the Naismith Memorial Basketball Hall of Fame and the Volleyball Hall of Fame are located in those cities.

==Economy==
Historically a region known for growing Connecticut shade tobacco, today the Pioneer Valley has a broad and varied economic base, featuring more than 16 universities and liberal arts colleges (many of which are considered among the United States&#x27; best, e.g. Amherst College); numerous hospitals and healthcare organizations (e.g. Baystate Health, Massachusetts&#x27; third largest employer), and numerous financial service organizations (e.g. the Fortune 100 MassMutual). Manufacturing remains a part of the Pioneer Valley&#x27;s economy (e.g. Smith &amp; Wesson), although its manufacturing base has dwindled since 1968, when the Springfield Armory was controversially shut-down. The Pioneer Valley is considered to have a &quot;mature economy&quot;, which means that its economic base is sufficiently varied so as not to be completely dependent on market fluctuations, like many places in the United States. This was illustrated during the Great Recession, when Springfield, Massachusetts, and the Pioneer Valley performed within the Top 10 of all U.S. regional economies.

===Franklin County===
Franklin County in the north serves as a significant agricultural region despite its size, due to the rich topsoil found in the area. The valley&#x27;s sweet corn and asparagus are cash crops. Cow corn, potatoes, and shade-grown tobacco are also major crops. Fields of all sort, particularly corn and tobacco fields, as well as numerous farmhouses and tobacco barns, dot the landscape. Light industry is concentrated in the town of South Deerfield and the city of Greenfield, while service industries exist throughout the county. Increasingly Franklin County is becoming a place of bedroom communities, with the major transportation routes of Interstate 91, Route 2, and U.S. Route 5 facilitating a boom in residential building that has not kept pace with commercial development in many of the county&#x27;s towns.

The Hallmark Institute of Photography is located in Turners Falls.

Two major corporations, Channing Bete and Yankee Candle, are headquartered in South Deerfield and Greenfield. Both communities have been had controversial zoning issues surrounding permitting variances to build big box stores such as Wal-Mart. Greenfield received national attention when its decision prevented Wal-Mart from building a store in town.

The county also garners tourism due to such attractions as Historic Deerfield (which hosts a craft fair in the summer and an even larger and more popular fall craft fair), and a Butterfly Garden located in South Deerfield. The annual arrival of thousands of American and foreign tourists to observe the area&#x27;s spectacular autumn foliage is a welcome boost to revenue.

===Hampshire County===
With the Five Colleges, Hampshire County has a significant part of its economy devoted to serving university and liberal arts college students, including numerous independent bookstores and stationery shops. Hampshire County is also one of the most politically liberal counties in the United States, due in large part to Northampton, Amherst, and a large LGBT community centered on the Five College area.

The area is also home to many restaurants, ranging in character from sports bars to steakhouses. Northampton (also known to some as &quot;Hamp&quot; and others as &quot;Noho&quot;) is—along with Springfield—the culinary capital of Western Massachusetts as well as a lesbian mecca, featuring the highest number of lesbians per capita according to the United States&#x27; 2000 census.

===Hampden County===
Hampden County is centered on the region&#x27;s major economic and cultural center, Springfield, Massachusetts. Springfield is a major transportation hub, lying equidistant to the Ports of Boston and Albany, New York, and also near to New York City and Montreal. Many of the projects that have catalyzed Springfield&#x27;s recent economic resurgence have been related to transportation, e.g. the $1 billion-plus Knowledge Corridor intercity rail line and the Springfield-Northampton-Brattleboro intercity commuter line. Springfield is also a medical, government, and higher education center. Baystate Health&#x27;s $300 million &quot;Hospital of the Future&quot; is scheduled for completion in 2012. Massachusetts $110 million high-tech data center—an adaptive re-use of the city&#x27;s original Technical High School—will also be completed in 2012. Regarding higher education: in 2011, Western New England University and Springfield College each added $45 million-plus additions to their respective campuses in Springfield. Remnants of a manufacturing economy remain in Springfield despite a dramatic de-industrialization in last quarter of the twentieth century; for example, in 2011, Smith &amp; Wesson relocated 225 new jobs to its Springfield headquarters, bringing its total manufacturing workforce in Springfield to over 1150.

Chicopee&#x27;s growth continues to be catalyzed by the growth of Westover Air Force Base, especially around Memorial Avenue. As of 2011, Holyoke continues to see rapid growth in its high-tech sector, featuring new enterprises that capitalize on Holyoke&#x27;s abundance of green energy, e.g. water power from the Holyoke Canal System, the nearby Falls, and a proposed wind farm. All three formerly industrialized cities—Springfield, Chicopee, and Holyoke—continue to face typical urban problems, such as gang activity and the drug trade in increasingly isolated parts of each city; however, these activities have lessened significantly during the past 20 years and a spirit of revitalization now pervades each city. Westfield&#x27;s formerly moribund town center is in the midst of receiving a dramatic makeover, replete with 60-foot clock tower—scheduled to be completed in 2012.

Nearly all other towns and villages in Hampden County are either wealthy suburbs (e.g. Longmeadow, Massachusetts, Wilbraham, Massachusetts), or rural exurbs, (e.g. Palmer, Massachusetts, and Brimfield, Massachusetts). Hampden County also features numerous natural retreats like the Mount Tom and Mount Holyoke Ranges.

In this Hampden County, tourism is very popular. Six Flags New England features the No. 1 roller-coaster in the world (&quot;Bizarro&quot;) and draws tourists from all over. Similarly, the Basketball Hall of Fame, a shrine to the world&#x27;s 2nd most popular sport, invented in Springfield, draws hundreds of thousands of visitors per year. Other major tourist attractions include Western Massachusetts&#x27; only national park, the Springfield Armory National Historic Site. The Quadrangle in Springfield features five museums of varying themes, including the United States&#x27; first planetarium, gathered around the whimsical Dr. Seuss National Memorial Sculpture Garden. Forest Park (Springfield) designed by Frederick Law Olmsted (of NYC&#x27;s Central Park fame) is one of the largest urban parks in the United States at . During the holiday season it features a nationally renowned light display called &quot;Bright Nights&quot;. The New England States&#x27; collective state fair, The Big E, is held each September–October and generally draws millions of visitors. Springfield&#x27;s &quot;Parade of Big Balloons&quot; takes place on November 1 each year, borrowing many of the balloons from Macy&#x27;s Thanksgiving Day Parade and attracting 100,000 spectators. Each July, the &quot;Hoops City Jazz Festival&quot; draws tens of thousands to Metro Center to hear famous jazz musicians. In 2011, the Vintage Sports Car Club of America moved its famous, annual Grand Prix from Pittsburgh to Springfield—the &quot;Springfield Grand Prix&quot; took place in 2012, on a 1.6-mile track through the center of the city. Outlying Hampden County towns such as Tolland are sparsely populated and close to the Berkshires—outdoor activities such as camping make up a large part of their economy.

Politically, Hampden County leans liberal; however, it features several notably conservative cities and towns, such as Holyoke, Westfield, Agawam, Monson, and Palmer. Hampden County&#x27;s largest city, Springfield, while historically moderate, politically, has become nearly as liberal as Hampshire County in recent years, according to voter registration and election results.

==Conservation==
Appreciation of the natural environs has, historically, been a large part of the Pioneer Valley life. It features numerous non-profit nature sanctuaries, such as Friends of Wissatinnewag, Inc. a sacred Native American burial grounds where the Turners Falls massacre occurred in 1676, as well as historic parks like &quot;King Phillip&#x27;s Stockade&quot; in Springfield, the Forest Park, designed by Frederick Law Olmsted, and Western Massachusetts&#x27; only national park, the Springfield Armory National Historic Site. The Great Falls Discovery Center, the flagship visitor center of the multi-state, Silvio O. Conte National Fish and Wildlife Refuge is located in Turners Falls. In addition to these, there are hundreds of state and municipal parks and forests. Due to the considerable natural and cultural resources in the Pioneer Valley, environmental agencies have made a substantial investments in protecting unspoiled nature in the region, particularly along the Connecticut River, and in many of the Pioneer Valley&#x27;s rural &quot;hilltowns.&quot; Government conservation efforts have targeted wildlife and rare plant habitats, recreational sites and corridors including the Metacomet-Monadnock Trail, and the rich agricultural soils in farming towns such as Hadley, Massachusetts. Efforts have been augmented and assisted by local and regional conservation land trusts and statewide and national conservation organizations. Many of these organizations protect additional land through direct ownership of conservation areas and land held under conservation easement. Many municipalities in the area also have conservation holdings, usually under the aegis of the community&#x27;s &#x27;conservation commission&#x27;, the appointed body which also applies local and state environmental regulations.

One notable area consists of Mount Tom State Reservation, Mount Holyoke Range State Park, and Skinner State Park, which, joined with the Arcadia Wildlife Sanctuary held by the Massachusetts Audubon Society, form a long wildlife corridor stretching across the Connecticut River.

Recently, there has been a notable grassroots effort to reclaim Springfield&#x27;s once easily accessible and pedestrian-friendly waterfront, which is now separated from the city by the eight-lane, elevated highway Interstate 91. In 2010, the Urban Land Institute presented a plan that suggested how Springfield could reunite with its greatest natural resource, the Connecticut River.

==See also==
* Knowledge Corridor
* Massachusetts geography
* Metropolitan Springfield
* Pioneer Valley Transit Authority
* Western Massachusetts

==References==
==External links==

* Greater Springfield Convention &amp; Visitors Bureau
* Pioneer Valley Planning Commission</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7196817" start="4" end="18" title="Pioneer Valley" label="Pioneer Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q379648" start="81" end="105" title="Connecticut River Valley" label="Connecticut River Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q771" start="117" end="130" title="Massachusetts" label="Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q54160" start="209" end="216" title="Hampden County, Massachusetts" label="Hampden"/>
<link wikidata="Q54161" start="218" end="227" title="Hampshire County, Massachusetts" label="Hampshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q54163" start="233" end="241" title="Franklin County, Massachusetts" label="Franklin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7580900" start="287" end="331" title="Springfield, Massachusetts metropolitan area" label="Springfield, Massachusetts metropolitan area"/>
<link wikidata="Q54160" start="381" end="395" title="Hampden County, Massachusetts" label="Hampden County"/>
<link wikidata="Q49186" start="460" end="471" title="Northampton, Massachusetts" label="Northampton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1530924" start="476" end="486" title="Greenfield, Massachusetts" label="Greenfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q54161" start="508" end="517" title="Hampshire County, Massachusetts" label="Hampshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q54163" start="522" end="530" title="Franklin County, Massachusetts" label="Franklin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5161667" start="647" end="672" title="Connecticut shade tobacco" label="Connecticut shade tobacco"/>
<link wikidata="Q2302147" start="704" end="710" title="Hadley, Massachusetts" label="Hadley"/>
<link wikidata="Q28367" start="711" end="720" title="asparagus" label="asparagus"/>
<link wikidata="Q830170" start="803" end="820" title="knowledge economy" label="knowledge economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1331248" start="851" end="864" title="Five College Consortium" label="Five Colleges"/>
<link wikidata="Q49158" start="900" end="911" title="Springfield, Massachusetts" label="Springfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q1650454" start="912" end="920" title="Chicopee, Massachusetts" label="Chicopee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1637790" start="921" end="928" title="Holyoke, Massachusetts" label="Holyoke"/>
<link wikidata="Q5868334" start="990" end="995" title="History of papermaking in Massachusetts" label="paper"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193204" start="1000" end="1009" title="Springfield Armory" label="armaments"/>
<link wikidata="Q100" start="1089" end="1095" title="Boston" label="Boston"/>
<link wikidata="Q2961776" start="1421" end="1434" title="Holyoke Range" label="Holyoke Range"/>
<link wikidata="Q593487" start="1436" end="1451" title="Mount Tom Range" label="Mount Tom Range"/>
<link wikidata="Q1753636" start="1536" end="1546" title="Gilded Age" label="Gilded Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q379648" start="1621" end="1638" title="Connecticut River" label="Connecticut River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1187811" start="2161" end="2173" title="college town" label="college town"/>
<link wikidata="Q49186" start="2184" end="2195" title="Northampton, Massachusetts" label="Northampton"/>
<link wikidata="Q49164" start="2200" end="2207" title="Amherst, Massachusetts" label="Amherst"/>
<link wikidata="Q49158" start="2231" end="2242" title="Springfield, Massachusetts" label="Springfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q846548" start="2381" end="2402" title="Six Flags New England" label="Six Flags New England"/>
<link wikidata="Q577215" start="2406" end="2412" title="Agawam, Massachusetts" label="Agawam"/>
<link wikidata="Q5372143" start="2461" end="2482" title="Emily Dickinson House" label="Emily Dickinson House"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193204" start="2499" end="2517" title="Springfield Armory" label="Springfield Armory"/>
<link wikidata="Q290922" start="2552" end="2575" title="Basketball Hall of Fame" label="Basketball Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q4892259" start="2663" end="2677" title="Berkshire East Ski Area" label="Berkshire East"/>
<link wikidata="Q7717606" start="2741" end="2750" title="The Big E" label="The Big E"/>
<link wikidata="Q2003303" start="2817" end="2833" title="West Springfield, Massachusetts" label="West Springfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q5469048" start="2855" end="2885" title="Forest Park (Springfield)" label="Springfield&amp;#x27;s Forest Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q379648" start="3030" end="3054" title="Connecticut River Valley" label="Connecticut River Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q2366717" start="3066" end="3077" title="rift valley" label="rift valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q55833" start="3108" end="3122" title="supercontinent" label="supercontinent"/>
<link wikidata="Q4398" start="3123" end="3129" title="Pangea" label="Pangea"/>
<link wikidata="Q207313" start="3140" end="3158" title="Mid-Atlantic Ridge" label="Mid-Atlantic Ridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q47158" start="3170" end="3178" title="Triassic" label="Triassic"/>
<link wikidata="Q45805" start="3183" end="3191" title="Jurassic" label="Jurassic"/>
<link wikidata="Q83222" start="3207" end="3215" title="Mesozoic" label="Mesozoic"/>
<link wikidata="Q379648" start="3225" end="3242" title="Connecticut River" label="Connecticut River"/>
<link wikidata="Q211302" start="3334" end="3346" title="glacial lake" label="glacial lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q3214929" start="3347" end="3356" title="Lake Hitchcock" label="Hitchcock"/>
<link wikidata="Q6915839" start="3448" end="3458" title="Moses King" label="Moses King"/>
<link wikidata="Q47158" start="3860" end="3868" title="Triassic" label="Triassic"/>
<link wikidata="Q43338" start="4113" end="4119" title="basalt" label="basalt"/>
<link wikidata="Q5161595" start="4130" end="4145" title="Connecticut River Valley trackways" label="dinosaur tracks"/>
<link wikidata="Q2423149" start="4149" end="4161" title="South Hadley, Massachusetts" label="South Hadley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1637790" start="4166" end="4188" title="Holyoke, Massachusetts" label="Holyoke, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q3307200" start="4235" end="4250" title="Metacomet Ridge" label="Metacomet Ridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q3321866" start="4297" end="4310" title="Mount Holyoke" label="Mount Holyoke"/>
<link wikidata="Q3322152" start="4315" end="4324" title="Mount Tom (Massachusetts)" label="Mount Tom"/>
<link wikidata="Q835591" start="4384" end="4389" title="varve" label="varve"/>
<link wikidata="Q43197" start="4395" end="4401" title="river delta" label="deltas"/>
<link wikidata="Q3214929" start="4415" end="4429" title="Lake Hitchcock" label="Lake Hitchcock"/>
<link wikidata="Q25546" start="4441" end="4452" title="Pleistocene" label="Pleistocene"/>
<link wikidata="Q379648" start="4574" end="4598" title="Connecticut River Valley" label="Connecticut River Valley"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4607" end="4630" title="Western Massachusetts#The Hill Towns" label="hill and mountain towns"/>
<link wikidata="Q54163" start="4792" end="4807" title="Franklin County, Massachusetts" label="Franklin County"/>
<link wikidata="Q16551" start="4883" end="4890" title="Vermont" label="Vermont"/>
<link wikidata="Q1530924" start="4910" end="4920" title="Greenfield, Massachusetts" label="Greenfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q4892259" start="5089" end="5103" title="Berkshire East Ski Area" label="Berkshire East"/>
<link wikidata="Q7855984" start="5336" end="5349" title="Turners Falls, Massachusetts" label="Turners Falls"/>
<link wikidata="Q54161" start="5478" end="5494" title="Hampshire County, Massachusetts" label="Hampshire County"/>
<link wikidata="Q1331248" start="5616" end="5629" title="Five Colleges (Massachusetts)" label="Five Colleges"/>
<link wikidata="Q15142" start="5640" end="5653" title="University of Massachusetts Amherst" label="UMass Amherst"/>
<link wikidata="Q49165" start="5655" end="5662" title="Amherst College" label="Amherst"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140542" start="5664" end="5677" title="Mount Holyoke College" label="Mount Holyoke"/>
<link wikidata="Q49204" start="5679" end="5684" title="Smith College" label="Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q1706859" start="5690" end="5699" title="Hampshire College" label="Hampshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377182" start="5731" end="5752" title="liberal arts colleges" label="liberal arts colleges"/>
<link wikidata="Q1187811" start="5808" end="5820" title="college town" label="college town"/>
<link wikidata="Q49186" start="5882" end="5893" title="Northampton, Massachusetts" label="Northampton"/>
<link wikidata="Q49164" start="5898" end="5905" title="Amherst, Massachusetts" label="Amherst"/>
<link wikidata="Q54160" start="6514" end="6528" title="Hampden County, Massachusetts" label="Hampden County"/>
<link wikidata="Q65122136" start="6568" end="6589" title="Western Massachusetts" label="Western Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q49158" start="6688" end="6714" title="Springfield, Massachusetts" label="Springfield, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q379648" start="6924" end="6941" title="Connecticut River" label="Connecticut River"/>
<link wikidata="Q3567514" start="6947" end="6956" title="Westfield River" label="Westfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q5096490" start="6962" end="6970" title="Chicopee River" label="Chicopee"/>
<link wikidata="Q14715710" start="6980" end="6984" title="Mill River (Springfield, Massachusetts)" label="Mill"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193204" start="7277" end="7295" title="Springfield Armory" label="Springfield Armory"/>
<link wikidata="Q23" start="7338" end="7355" title="George Washington" label="George Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q355680" start="7360" end="7370" title="Henry Knox" label="Henry Knox"/>
<link wikidata="Q7008596" start="7734" end="7772" title="Knowledge Corridor intercity rail line" label="Knowledge Corridor intercity rail line"/>
<link wikidata="Q290922" start="7968" end="7991" title="Basketball Hall of Fame" label="Basketball Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193204" start="8000" end="8018" title="Springfield Armory" label="Springfield Armory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1258086" start="8019" end="8041" title="National Historic Sites (United States)" label="National Historic Site"/>
<link wikidata="Q5304382" start="8064" end="8082" title="Dr. Seuss Memorial" label="Dr. Seuss Memorial"/>
<link wikidata="Q7758791" start="8141" end="8152" title="The Puritan (Springfield, Massachusetts)" label="The Puritan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7758868" start="8222" end="8232" title="Quadrangle (Springfield, Massachusetts)" label="Quadrangle"/>
<link wikidata="Q5469048" start="8234" end="8245" title="Forest Park (Springfield)" label="Forest Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q364187" start="8299" end="8320" title="Frederick Law Olmsted" label="Frederick Law Olmsted"/>
<link wikidata="Q76615" start="8513" end="8524" title="Fortune 100" label="Fortune 100"/>
<link wikidata="Q4385833" start="8534" end="8544" title="MassMutual" label="MassMutual"/>
<link wikidata="Q182688" start="8638" end="8651" title="Victorian era" label="Victorian era"/>
<link wikidata="Q1418042" start="8652" end="8664" title="Painted ladies" label="Painted Lady"/>
<link wikidata="Q6802025" start="8716" end="8742" title="McKnight District" label="McKnight Historic District"/>
<link wikidata="Q7974435" start="8803" end="8818" title="Watershops Pond" label="Watershops Pond"/>
<link wikidata="Q14715710" start="8841" end="8851" title="Mill River (Springfield, Massachusetts)" label="Mill River"/>
<link wikidata="Q846548" start="8896" end="8917" title="Six Flags New England" label="Six Flags New England"/>
<link wikidata="Q577215" start="8956" end="8962" title="Agawam, Massachusetts" label="Agawam"/>
<link wikidata="Q7717606" start="8998" end="9007" title="The Big E" label="The Big E"/>
<link wikidata="Q2003303" start="9085" end="9101" title="West Springfield, Massachusetts" label="West Springfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q1636887" start="9134" end="9157" title="Westover Air Force Base" label="Westover Air Force Base"/>
<link wikidata="Q1650454" start="9213" end="9221" title="Chicopee, Massachusetts" label="Chicopee"/>
<link wikidata="Q5096490" start="9287" end="9301" title="Chicopee River" label="Chicopee River"/>
<link wikidata="Q379648" start="9321" end="9338" title="Connecticut River" label="Connecticut River"/>
<link wikidata="Q5887090" start="9558" end="9583" title="Holyoke Mall at Ingleside" label="Holyoke Mall at Ingleside"/>
<link wikidata="Q593487" start="9676" end="9691" title="Mount Tom Range" label="Mount Tom Range"/>
<link wikidata="Q14715551" start="9710" end="9730" title="Holyoke Canal System" label="Holyoke Canal System"/>
<link wikidata="Q195754" start="9740" end="9763" title="Volleyball Hall of Fame" label="Volleyball Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055854" start="9837" end="9846" title="Westfield, Massachusetts" label="Westfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q14438080" start="9856" end="9882" title="Westfield State University" label="Westfield State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151173" start="9923" end="9934" title="Horace Mann" label="Horace Mann"/>
<link wikidata="Q4925015" start="10068" end="10086" title="Blandford Ski Area" label="Blandford Ski Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q3567514" start="10166" end="10181" title="Westfield River" label="Westfield River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1420233" start="10334" end="10363" title="Bradley International Airport" label="Bradley International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q755206" start="10427" end="10453" title="Windsor Locks, Connecticut" label="Windsor Locks, Connecticut"/>
<link wikidata="Q523716" start="10829" end="10840" title="2010 United States census" label="2010 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q1211934" start="10880" end="10888" title="Hispanic" label="Hispanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1183" start="10965" end="10978" title="Puerto Rico" label="Puerto Ricans"/>
<link wikidata="Q523716" start="11785" end="11796" title="2010 United States census" label="2010 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q17884" start="12062" end="12066" title="LGBT" label="LGBT"/>
<link wikidata="Q752361" start="12082" end="12094" title="The Advocate (LGBT magazine)" label="The Advocate"/>
<link wikidata="Q34804" start="12226" end="12249" title="Albuquerque, New Mexico" label="Albuquerque, New Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q17884" start="12415" end="12419" title="LGBT" label="LGBT"/>
<link wikidata="Q748198" start="12589" end="12599" title="gay ghetto" label="gay ghetto"/>
<link wikidata="Q49165" start="13021" end="13036" title="Amherst College" label="Amherst College"/>
<link wikidata="Q1706859" start="13048" end="13065" title="Hampshire College" label="Hampshire College"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140542" start="13077" end="13098" title="Mount Holyoke College" label="Mount Holyoke College"/>
<link wikidata="Q49204" start="13115" end="13128" title="Smith College" label="Smith College"/>
<link wikidata="Q15142" start="13144" end="13179" title="University of Massachusetts Amherst" label="University of Massachusetts Amherst"/>
<link wikidata="Q3695722" start="13229" end="13259" title="American International College" label="American International College"/>
<link wikidata="Q3695687" start="13275" end="13294" title="Bay Path University" label="Bay Path University"/>
<link wikidata="Q3695713" start="13309" end="13326" title="Cambridge College" label="Cambridge College"/>
<link wikidata="Q5366900" start="13342" end="13354" title="Elms College" label="Elms College"/>
<link wikidata="Q2809940" start="13367" end="13386" title="Springfield College" label="Springfield College"/>
<link wikidata="Q7988102" start="13402" end="13432" title="Western New England University" label="Western New England University"/>
<link wikidata="Q14438080" start="13448" end="13474" title="Westfield State University" label="Westfield State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q5166726" start="13512" end="13545" title="Conway School of Landscape Design" label="Conway School of Landscape Design"/>
<link wikidata="Q7545098" start="13647" end="13683" title="Smith College School for Social Work" label="Smith College School for Social Work"/>
<link wikidata="Q16784109" start="13725" end="13753" title="Greenfield Community College (Massachusetts)" label="Greenfield Community College"/>
<link wikidata="Q5887074" start="13768" end="13793" title="Holyoke Community College" label="Holyoke Community College"/>
<link wikidata="Q7581060" start="13805" end="13844" title="Springfield Technical Community College" label="Springfield Technical Community College"/>
<link wikidata="Q20138" start="13994" end="14001" title="Roxbury, Massachusetts" label="Roxbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q762279" start="14013" end="14028" title="William Pynchon" label="William Pynchon"/>
<link wikidata="Q379648" start="14099" end="14123" title="Connecticut River Valley" label="Connecticut River Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q49186" start="14282" end="14308" title="Northampton, Massachusetts" label="Northampton, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q755202" start="14533" end="14558" title="Wethersfield, Connecticut" label="Wethersfield, Connecticut"/>
<link wikidata="Q1787206" start="14560" end="14580" title="Windsor, Connecticut" label="Windsor, Connecticut"/>
<link wikidata="Q33486" start="14646" end="14667" title="Hartford, Connecticut" label="Hartford, Connecticut"/>
<link wikidata="Q49158" start="14799" end="14825" title="Springfield, Massachusetts" label="Springfield, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q3567514" start="14931" end="14946" title="Westfield River" label="Westfield River"/>
<link wikidata="Q379648" start="15051" end="15068" title="Connecticut River" label="Connecticut River"/>
<link wikidata="Q5096490" start="15163" end="15177" title="Chicopee River" label="Chicopee River"/>
<link wikidata="Q14715710" start="15278" end="15288" title="Mill River (Springfield, Massachusetts)" label="Mill River"/>
<link wikidata="Q23" start="15360" end="15377" title="George Washington" label="George Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193204" start="15408" end="15429" title="Armory at Springfield" label="Armory at Springfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q1789087" start="15540" end="15548" title="Pocomtuc" label="Pocomtuc"/>
<link wikidata="Q541788" start="15561" end="15568" title="Nipmuck" label="Nipmuck"/>
<link wikidata="Q3567514" start="15614" end="15629" title="Westfield River" label="Westfield River"/>
<link wikidata="Q577215" start="15703" end="15724" title="Agawam, Massachusetts" label="Agawam, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q5377301" start="16410" end="16423" title="Enfield Falls" label="Enfield Falls"/>
<link wikidata="Q6824519" start="17440" end="17452" title="Metro Center, Springfield, Massachusetts" label="Metro Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q755202" start="18124" end="18136" title="Wethersfield, Connecticut" label="Wethersfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q33486" start="18138" end="18146" title="Hartford, Connecticut" label="Hartford"/>
<link wikidata="Q1787206" start="18152" end="18159" title="Windsor, Connecticut" label="Windsor"/>
<link wikidata="Q957542" start="19066" end="19076" title="John Mason (c. 1600–1672)" label="John Mason"/>
<link wikidata="Q2369961" start="20080" end="20106" title="Springfield, Essex" label="the village of Springfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q210985" start="20112" end="20122" title="Chelmsford" label="Chelmsford"/>
<link wikidata="Q219698" start="20393" end="20411" title="Salem witch trials" label="Salem witch trials"/>
<link wikidata="Q259745" start="20473" end="20483" title="witchcraft" label="witchcraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q188494" start="21033" end="21044" title="witch trial" label="witch trial"/>
<link wikidata="Q137073" start="21773" end="21783" title="Puritanism" label="Puritanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q160598" start="21808" end="21814" title="heresy" label="heresy"/>
<link wikidata="Q49132" start="21847" end="21860" title="Boston Common" label="Boston Common"/>
<link wikidata="Q1453540" start="21911" end="21938" title="Massachusetts General Court" label="Massachusetts General Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q6646900" start="22020" end="22031" title="banned book" label="banned book"/>
<link wikidata="Q160598" start="22082" end="22088" title="heresy" label="heresy"/>
<link wikidata="Q806863" start="22303" end="22319" title="banned in Boston" label="banned in Boston"/>
<link wikidata="Q5363927" start="22606" end="22620" title="Elizur Holyoke" label="Elizur Holyoke"/>
<link wikidata="Q49186" start="22818" end="22844" title="Northampton, Massachusetts" label="Northampton, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1789087" start="23023" end="23031" title="Pocumtuc" label="Pocumtuc"/>
<link wikidata="Q379648" start="23297" end="23314" title="Connecticut River" label="Connecticut River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1621197" start="23427" end="23437" title="Algonquian peoples" label="Algonquian"/>
<link wikidata="Q776280" start="23473" end="23480" title="Mahican" label="Mahican"/>
<link wikidata="Q68518" start="23559" end="23567" title="Iroquois" label="Iroquois"/>
<link wikidata="Q116971" start="23637" end="23650" title="Mohawk nation" label="Mohawk nation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140235" start="23861" end="23874" title="Hudson Valley" label="Hudson Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191350" start="23903" end="23927" title="Massachusetts Bay Colony" label="Massachusetts Bay Colony"/>
<link wikidata="Q49158" start="24065" end="24091" title="Springfield, Massachusetts" label="Springfield, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047264" start="24429" end="24438" title="Wampanoag people" label="Wampanoag"/>
<link wikidata="Q862257" start="24550" end="24572" title="King Philip&amp;#x27;s War" label="King Philip&amp;#x27;s War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1720696" start="24778" end="24789" title="Southampton, Massachusetts" label="Southampton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2415866" start="24878" end="24888" title="Montgomery, Massachusetts" label="Montgomery"/>
<link wikidata="Q2536890" start="24946" end="24957" title="Westhampton, Massachusetts" label="Westhampton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1988974" start="24988" end="24999" title="Easthampton, Massachusetts" label="Easthampton"/>
<link wikidata="Q379648" start="25197" end="25214" title="Connecticut River" label="Connecticut River"/>
<link wikidata="Q7755777" start="25215" end="25220" title="The Oxbow (Connecticut river)" label="oxbow"/>
<link wikidata="Q1637790" start="25294" end="25316" title="Holyoke, Massachusetts" label="Holyoke, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q379648" start="25528" end="25552" title="Connecticut River Valley" label="Connecticut River Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q820961" start="25615" end="25634" title="Berkshire Mountains" label="Berkshire Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q33392" start="25870" end="25880" title="Algonquian languages" label="Algonquian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1789087" start="25890" end="25899" title="Pocomtuc" label="Pocumtuck"/>
<link wikidata="Q100" start="26096" end="26102" title="Boston" label="Boston"/>
<link wikidata="Q1758615" start="26152" end="26158" title="Dedham, Massachusetts" label="Dedham"/>
<link wikidata="Q885253" start="26798" end="26820" title="Battle of Bloody Brook" label="Battle of Bloody Brook"/>
<link wikidata="Q36747" start="26861" end="26868" title="Indigenous peoples of the Americas" label="Indians"/>
<link wikidata="Q33180" start="27163" end="27171" title="Montague, Massachusetts" label="Montague"/>
<link wikidata="Q869045" start="27397" end="27418" title="Queen Anne&amp;#x27;s War" label="Queen Anne&amp;#x27;s War"/>
<link wikidata="Q3046548" start="27501" end="27523" title="1704 Raid on Deerfield" label="1704 Raid on Deerfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q857880" start="27587" end="27596" title="Canadiens" label="Canadiens"/>
<link wikidata="Q318806" start="27605" end="27612" title="Abenaki people" label="Abenaki"/>
<link wikidata="Q116971" start="27614" end="27626" title="Mohawk nation" label="Kanienkehaka"/>
<link wikidata="Q213396" start="27631" end="27638" title="Wyandot people" label="Wyandot"/>
<link wikidata="Q176" start="27902" end="27908" title="Quebec" label="Quebec"/>
<link wikidata="Q6264361" start="28239" end="28252" title="John Williams (New England minister)" label="John Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q1035168" start="28265" end="28284" title="captivity narrative" label="captivity narrative"/>
<link wikidata="Q5409757" start="28521" end="28527" title="Eunice Williams" label="Eunice"/>
<link wikidata="Q18389" start="28682" end="28693" title="New England" label="New England"/>
<link wikidata="Q1014394" start="28790" end="28799" title="Kahnawake" label="Kahnawake"/>
<link wikidata="Q1530924" start="28937" end="28947" title="Greenfield, Massachusetts" label="Greenfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q186545" start="29140" end="29164" title="Midwestern United States" label="Midwestern United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q4959201" start="29188" end="29199" title="breadbasket" label="breadbasket"/>
<link wikidata="Q459578" start="29290" end="29300" title="Erie Canal" label="Erie Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q5148364" start="29314" end="29339" title="Colonial Revival Movement" label="Colonial Revival Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q7494520" start="29736" end="29765" title="Shepley, Rutan and Coolidge" label="Shepley, Rutan &amp;amp; Coolidge"/>
<link wikidata="Q914856" start="29803" end="29824" title="historic preservation" label="historic preservation"/>
<link wikidata="Q624232" start="29927" end="29953" title="National Historic Landmark" label="National Historic Landmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q8048733" start="30046" end="30067" title="Yankee Candle Company" label="Yankee Candle Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q36" start="30374" end="30380" title="Poland" label="Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="30468" end="30476" title="Catholic" label="Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q838811" start="30477" end="30485" title="peasants" label="peasants"/>
<link wikidata="Q1789087" start="30847" end="30856" title="Pocumtuck" label="Pocumtuck"/>
<link wikidata="Q36747" start="30857" end="30864" title="Indigenous peoples of the Americas" label="Indians"/>
<link wikidata="Q116971" start="31129" end="31136" title="Mohawks" label="Mohawks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1033241" start="31220" end="31232" title="Mohawk Trail" label="Mohawk Trail"/>
<link wikidata="Q375905" start="31357" end="31366" title="Deerfield, Massachusetts" label="Deerfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q5603115" start="31466" end="31477" title="Green River (Deerfield River)" label="Green River"/>
<link wikidata="Q7567402" start="31493" end="31511" title="South Hadley Canal" label="South Hadley Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q379648" start="31597" end="31614" title="Connecticut River" label="Connecticut River"/>
<link wikidata="Q723748" start="31631" end="31641" title="confluence (geography)" label="confluence"/>
<link wikidata="Q5250907" start="31649" end="31658" title="Deerfield River" label="Deerfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q170196" start="31890" end="31901" title="water power" label="water power"/>
<link wikidata="Q4012861" start="31954" end="31963" title="mill town" label="mill town"/>
<link wikidata="Q523716" start="32153" end="32164" title="2010 United States census" label="2010 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q188464" start="32406" end="32412" title="Pixies (band)" label="Pixies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061122" start="32436" end="32442" title="U-Mass" label="U-Mass"/>
<link wikidata="Q7596013" start="33131" end="33145" title="Stacy Building" label="Stacy Building"/>
<link wikidata="Q5316826" start="33168" end="33183" title="Duryea Brothers" label="Duryea Brothers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1091034" start="33330" end="33348" title="Indian (motorcycle)" label="&amp;quot;Indian&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1674979" start="33444" end="33459" title="Knox Automobile" label="Knox Automobile"/>
<link wikidata="Q7947580" start="33608" end="33611" title="WBZ (AM)" label="WBZ"/>
<link wikidata="Q188494" start="33729" end="33740" title="witch trial" label="witch trial"/>
<link wikidata="Q219698" start="33768" end="33786" title="Salem Witch Trials" label="Salem Witch Trials"/>
<link wikidata="Q6646900" start="33868" end="33879" title="banned book" label="banned book"/>
<link wikidata="Q762279" start="33936" end="33951" title="William Pynchon" label="William Pynchon"/>
<link wikidata="Q160598" start="34144" end="34150" title="heresy" label="heresy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1651497" start="34209" end="34223" title="Milton Bradley" label="Milton Bradley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1319521" start="34306" end="34322" title="The Game of Life" label="The Game of Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q298685" start="34351" end="34360" title="Dr. Seuss" label="Dr. Seuss"/>
<link wikidata="Q23118" start="34504" end="34507" title="LSD" label="LSD"/>
<link wikidata="Q211731" start="34517" end="34530" title="Timothy Leary" label="Timothy Leary"/>
<link wikidata="Q189366" start="34676" end="34686" title="John Brown (abolitionist)" label="John Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q215562" start="34819" end="34837" title="Frederick Douglass" label="Frederick Douglass"/>
<link wikidata="Q105180" start="34842" end="34857" title="Sojourner Truth" label="Sojourner Truth"/>
<link wikidata="Q4921545" start="34894" end="34912" title="Fugitive Slave Act" label="Fugitive Slave Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q4818005" start="35249" end="35270" title="Attack on Springfield" label="Attack on Springfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q862257" start="35278" end="35300" title="King Philip&amp;#x27;s War" label="King Philip&amp;#x27;s War"/>
<link wikidata="Q23" start="35324" end="35341" title="George Washington" label="George Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q355680" start="35353" end="35363" title="Henry Knox" label="Henry Knox"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193204" start="35387" end="35405" title="Springfield Armory" label="Springfield Armory"/>
<link wikidata="Q392601" start="35516" end="35538" title="Shays&amp;#x27;s Rebellion" label="Shays&amp;#x27;s Rebellion"/>
<link wikidata="Q11698" start="35566" end="35583" title="U.S. Constitution" label="U.S. Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q585329" start="35859" end="35874" title="Merriam Webster" label="Merriam Webster"/>
<link wikidata="Q741482" start="35969" end="35984" title="George Bancroft" label="George Bancroft"/>
<link wikidata="Q7787689" start="36186" end="36202" title="Thomas Blanchard (inventor)" label="Thomas Blanchard"/>
<link wikidata="Q187833" start="36216" end="36221" title="lathe" label="lathe"/>
<link wikidata="Q871913" start="36314" end="36335" title="interchangeable parts" label="interchangeable parts"/>
<link wikidata="Q455037" start="36344" end="36357" title="assembly line" label="assembly line"/>
<link wikidata="Q207667" start="36493" end="36509" title="Charles Goodyear" label="Charles Goodyear"/>
<link wikidata="Q188631" start="36556" end="36573" title="vulcanized rubber" label="vulcanized rubber"/>
<link wikidata="Q431518" start="36727" end="36745" title="Margaret E. Knight" label="Margaret E. Knight"/>
<link wikidata="Q192425" start="36890" end="36898" title="postcard" label="postcard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1752292" start="36937" end="36947" title="horse show" label="horse show"/>
<link wikidata="Q627933" start="36976" end="36984" title="Conformation show" label="dog show"/>
<link wikidata="Q37507" start="37013" end="37027" title="friction match" label="friction match"/>
<link wikidata="Q298685" start="37254" end="37263" title="Dr. Seuss" label="Dr. Seuss"/>
<link wikidata="Q606557" start="37265" end="37275" title="Eric Carle" label="Eric Carle"/>
<link wikidata="Q5386237" start="37299" end="37336" title="Eric Carle Museum of Picture Book Art" label="Eric Carle Museum of Picture Book Art"/>
<link wikidata="Q7758868" start="37369" end="37379" title="Quadrangle (Springfield, Massachusetts)" label="Quadrangle"/>
<link wikidata="Q5304382" start="37644" end="37662" title="Dr. Seuss Memorial" label="Dr. Seuss Memorial"/>
<link wikidata="Q7581010" start="37766" end="37791" title="Springfield Symphony Hall" label="Springfield Symphony Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q2276678" start="38230" end="38244" title="The Republican (Springfield, Massachusetts)" label="The Republican"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="38365" end="38376" title="Predvestnik" label="Predvestnik"/>
<link wikidata="Q17884" start="38524" end="38528" title="LGBT" label="LGBT"/>
<link wikidata="Q7754708" start="38991" end="39011" title="The Odyssey Bookshop" label="The Odyssey Bookshop"/>
<link wikidata="Q4943259" start="39059" end="39071" title="The Bookmill" label="The Bookmill"/>
<link wikidata="Q20338131" start="39686" end="39710" title="Springfield Thunderbirds" label="Springfield Thunderbirds"/>
<link wikidata="Q464995" start="39781" end="39803" title="American Hockey League" label="American Hockey League"/>
<link wikidata="Q577288" start="39901" end="39911" title="Calder Cup" label="Calder Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q1240798" start="39921" end="39940" title="Springfield Indians" label="Springfield Indians"/>
<link wikidata="Q16982503" start="40008" end="40025" title="Springfield Armor" label="Springfield Armor"/>
<link wikidata="Q842793" start="40033" end="40055" title="NBA Development League" label="NBA Development League"/>
<link wikidata="Q271805" start="40140" end="40144" title="NCAA" label="NCAA"/>
<link wikidata="Q2842604" start="40152" end="40162" title="Division I (NCAA)" label="Division I"/>
<link wikidata="Q2590997" start="40170" end="40197" title="UMass Minutemen" label="University of Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q3695722" start="40231" end="40261" title="American International College" label="American International College"/>
<link wikidata="Q756414" start="40278" end="40305" title="Atlantic Hockey Association" label="Atlantic Hockey Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q5284440" start="40372" end="40384" title="Division III (NCAA)" label="Division III"/>
<link wikidata="Q49165" start="40412" end="40427" title="Amherst College" label="Amherst College"/>
<link wikidata="Q5887063" start="40481" end="40497" title="Holyoke Blue Sox" label="Holyoke Blue Sox"/>
<link wikidata="Q7007209" start="40514" end="40552" title="New England Collegiate Baseball League" label="New England Collegiate Baseball League"/>
<link wikidata="Q282174" start="40666" end="40677" title="Eddie Shore" label="Eddie Shore"/>
<link wikidata="Q209921" start="40820" end="40833" title="Julius Erving" label="Julius Erving"/>
<link wikidata="Q44437" start="40916" end="40925" title="John Cena" label="John Cena"/>
<link wikidata="Q2809940" start="40941" end="40960" title="Springfield College" label="Springfield College"/>
<link wikidata="Q35339" start="40982" end="40985" title="World Wrestling Entertainment" label="WWE"/>
<link wikidata="Q795013" start="41054" end="41065" title="Bill Guerin" label="Bill Guerin"/>
<link wikidata="Q211872" start="41069" end="41080" title="Stanley Cup" label="Stanley Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q912750" start="41131" end="41140" title="Wilbraham, Massachusetts" label="Wilbraham"/>
<link wikidata="Q290922" start="41593" end="41634" title="Naismith Memorial Basketball Hall of Fame" label="Naismith Memorial Basketball Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q195754" start="41643" end="41666" title="Volleyball Hall of Fame" label="Volleyball Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q5161667" start="41749" end="41774" title="Connecticut shade tobacco" label="Connecticut shade tobacco"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377182" start="41879" end="41900" title="liberal arts colleges" label="liberal arts colleges"/>
<link wikidata="Q49165" start="41972" end="41987" title="Amherst College" label="Amherst College"/>
<link wikidata="Q4874850" start="42044" end="42059" title="Baystate Health" label="Baystate Health"/>
<link wikidata="Q76615" start="42161" end="42172" title="Fortune 100" label="Fortune 100"/>
<link wikidata="Q4385833" start="42173" end="42183" title="MassMutual" label="MassMutual"/>
<link wikidata="Q463090" start="42258" end="42276" title="Smith &amp;amp; Wesson" label="Smith &amp;amp; Wesson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193204" start="42345" end="42363" title="Springfield Armory" label="Springfield Armory"/>
<link wikidata="Q154510" start="42656" end="42671" title="Great Recession" label="Great Recession"/>
<link wikidata="Q49158" start="42678" end="42704" title="Springfield, Massachusetts" label="Springfield, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q54163" start="42812" end="42827" title="Franklin County, Massachusetts" label="Franklin County"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247456" start="42919" end="42926" title="topsoil" label="topsoil"/>
<link wikidata="Q18966" start="42964" end="42974" title="sweet corn" label="sweet corn"/>
<link wikidata="Q28367" start="42979" end="42988" title="asparagus" label="asparagus"/>
<link wikidata="Q11575" start="43005" end="43013" title="Maize" label="Cow corn"/>
<link wikidata="Q5643027" start="43632" end="43665" title="Hallmark Institute of Photography" label="Hallmark Institute of Photography"/>
<link wikidata="Q7855984" start="43680" end="43693" title="Turners Falls, Massachusetts" label="Turners Falls"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="43720" end="43733" title="Channing Bete" label="Channing Bete"/>
<link wikidata="Q8048733" start="43738" end="43751" title="Yankee Candle" label="Yankee Candle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2680543" start="43774" end="43789" title="South Deerfield, Massachusetts" label="South Deerfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q1530924" start="43794" end="43804" title="Greenfield, Massachusetts" label="Greenfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q16766413" start="43907" end="43920" title="big box store" label="big box store"/>
<link wikidata="Q483551" start="43930" end="43938" title="Wal-Mart" label="Wal-Mart"/>
<link wikidata="Q14715541" start="44107" end="44125" title="Historic Deerfield" label="Historic Deerfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q11946202" start="44226" end="44235" title="Butterfly" label="Butterfly"/>
<link wikidata="Q1331248" start="44454" end="44467" title="Five Colleges (Massachusetts)" label="Five Colleges"/>
<link wikidata="Q187456" start="44920" end="44930" title="sports bar" label="sports bar"/>
<link wikidata="Q3109696" start="44935" end="44945" title="steakhouse" label="steakhouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q49186" start="44948" end="44959" title="Northampton, Massachusetts" label="Northampton"/>
<link wikidata="Q523716" start="45221" end="45232" title="2010 United States census" label="2000 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q49158" start="45340" end="45366" title="Springfield, Massachusetts" label="Springfield, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q7008596" start="45668" end="45706" title="Knowledge Corridor intercity rail line" label="Knowledge Corridor intercity rail line"/>
<link wikidata="Q4874850" start="45848" end="45863" title="Baystate Health" label="Baystate Health"/>
<link wikidata="Q7988102" start="46143" end="46173" title="Western New England University" label="Western New England University"/>
<link wikidata="Q2809940" start="46178" end="46197" title="Springfield College" label="Springfield College"/>
<link wikidata="Q463090" start="46443" end="46461" title="Smith &amp;amp; Wesson" label="Smith &amp;amp; Wesson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1650454" start="46591" end="46599" title="Chicopee, Massachusetts" label="Chicopee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1636887" start="46657" end="46680" title="Westover Air Force Base" label="Westover Air Force Base"/>
<link wikidata="Q1637790" start="46729" end="46736" title="Holyoke, Massachusetts" label="Holyoke"/>
<link wikidata="Q14715551" start="46905" end="46925" title="Holyoke Canal System" label="Holyoke Canal System"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055854" start="47308" end="47317" title="Westfield, Massachusetts" label="Westfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q2302488" start="47561" end="47586" title="Longmeadow, Massachusetts" label="Longmeadow, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q912750" start="47588" end="47612" title="Wilbraham, Massachusetts" label="Wilbraham, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q2076150" start="47638" end="47659" title="Palmer, Massachusetts" label="Palmer, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q2273666" start="47665" end="47689" title="Brimfield, Massachusetts" label="Brimfield, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q593487" start="47756" end="47765" title="Mount Tom Range" label="Mount Tom"/>
<link wikidata="Q2961776" start="47770" end="47789" title="Mount Holyoke Range" label="Mount Holyoke Range"/>
<link wikidata="Q846548" start="47842" end="47863" title="Six Flags New England" label="Six Flags New England"/>
<link wikidata="Q290922" start="47982" end="48005" title="Basketball Hall of Fame" label="Basketball Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193204" start="48227" end="48245" title="Springfield Armory" label="Springfield Armory"/>
<link wikidata="Q7758868" start="48274" end="48284" title="Quadrangle (Springfield, Massachusetts)" label="Quadrangle"/>
<link wikidata="Q148319" start="48381" end="48392" title="planetarium" label="planetarium"/>
<link wikidata="Q5469048" start="48470" end="48495" title="Forest Park (Springfield)" label="Forest Park (Springfield)"/>
<link wikidata="Q364187" start="48508" end="48529" title="Frederick Law Olmsted" label="Frederick Law Olmsted"/>
<link wikidata="Q7717606" start="48784" end="48793" title="The Big E" label="The Big E"/>
<link wikidata="Q6824519" start="49145" end="49157" title="Metro Center, Springfield, Massachusetts" label="Metro Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q2415977" start="49453" end="49460" title="Tolland, Massachusetts" label="Tolland"/>
<link wikidata="Q820961" start="49501" end="49511" title="Berkshires" label="Berkshires"/>
<link wikidata="Q455550" start="49539" end="49546" title="camping" label="camping"/>
<link wikidata="Q5469048" start="50359" end="50370" title="Forest Park (Springfield)" label="Forest Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q364187" start="50384" end="50405" title="Frederick Law Olmsted" label="Frederick Law Olmsted"/>
<link wikidata="Q46169" start="50444" end="50457" title="national park" label="national park"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193204" start="50463" end="50481" title="Springfield Armory" label="Springfield Armory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1258086" start="50482" end="50504" title="National Historic Sites (United States)" label="National Historic Site"/>
<link wikidata="Q7517138" start="50588" end="50637" title="Silvio O. Conte National Fish and Wildlife Refuge" label="Silvio O. Conte National Fish and Wildlife Refuge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1924738" start="51172" end="51197" title="Metacomet-Monadnock Trail" label="Metacomet-Monadnock Trail"/>
<link wikidata="Q2302147" start="51256" end="51277" title="Hadley, Massachusetts" label="Hadley, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q6484284" start="51355" end="51365" title="land trust" label="land trust"/>
<link wikidata="Q3480552" start="51541" end="51562" title="conservation easement" label="conservation easement"/>
<link wikidata="Q3322152" start="51825" end="51852" title="Mount Tom (Massachusetts)" label="Mount Tom State Reservation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2961776" start="51854" end="51884" title="Holyoke Range" label="Mount Holyoke Range State Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q6784185" start="51972" end="52001" title="Massachusetts Audubon Society" label="Massachusetts Audubon Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q864912" start="52015" end="52032" title="wildlife corridor" label="wildlife corridor"/>
<link wikidata="Q94961" start="52290" end="52303" title="Interstate 91" label="Interstate 91"/>
<link wikidata="Q3552188" start="52318" end="52338" title="Urban Land Institute" label="Urban Land Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q379648" start="52441" end="52458" title="Connecticut River" label="Connecticut River"/>
<link wikidata="Q6423286" start="52476" end="52494" title="Knowledge Corridor" label="Knowledge Corridor"/>
<link wikidata="Q5535184" start="52497" end="52520" title="Massachusetts geography" label="Massachusetts geography"/>
<link wikidata="Q7580900" start="52523" end="52547" title="Greater Springfield" label="Metropolitan Springfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q7196828" start="52550" end="52582" title="Pioneer Valley Transit Authority" label="Pioneer Valley Transit Authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q65122136" start="52585" end="52606" title="Western Massachusetts" label="Western Massachusetts"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="246551" wikidata="Q2342652" url="?curid=246551" title="Kathleen Winsor">
<text>Kathleen Winsor (October 16, 1919 – May 26, 2003) was an American author. She is best known for her first work, the 1944 historical novel &quot;Forever Amber&quot;. The novel, racy for its time, became a runaway bestseller even as it drew criticism from some authorities for its depictions of sexuality. She wrote seven other novels, none of which matched the success of her debut.

==Early life==
Winsor was born October 16, 1919, in Olivia, Minnesota, but raised in Berkeley, California. Her father was a real-estate dealer.

At the age of 18, Winsor made a list of her goals for life. Among those was her hope to write a best-selling novel.

Winsor graduated in 1938 from the University of California, Berkeley. During her school years, she married a fellow student, All-American college football player Robert Herwig. In 1937, she began writing a thrice-weekly sports column for the &quot;Oakland Tribune&quot;. Although that job only lasted a year, Winsor remained at the newspaper, working as a receptionist. She was fired in 1938 when the newspaper chose to trim its workforce.

==Career==

===&quot;Forever Amber&quot;===
Winsor became interested in the Restoration period through her husband. Herwig was writing a paper for school on Charles II, and, out of boredom, Winsor read one of his research books.

Her husband joined the military at the outbreak of World War II and spent five years with the United States Marines fighting in the Pacific theatre. During that time, Winsor studied the Restoration period, claiming to have read 356 books on the subject. She began writing a novel based on her research. Her fifth draft of the novel was accepted for publication. The publishers promptly edited the book down to one-fifth of its original size. The resulting novel, &quot;Forever Amber&quot;, was 972 pages long. The novel took readers on a frolic through Restoration England and offered vivid images of fashion, politics, affairs and public disasters of the time, including the plague and the Great Fire of London.

The book appeared in 1944. It attracted criticism for its blatant sexual references. Fourteen U.S. states banned it as pornography and the Hays Office also condemned it, but within a month the movie rights had been purchased by Twentieth Century Fox. The film, directed by Otto Preminger and starring Linda Darnell and Cornel Wilde, was released in 1947.

Despite being banned, &quot;Forever Amber&quot; became one of the bestselling American novels of the 1940s. It sold over 100,000 copies in its first week of release, and went on to sell over three million copies.

===Later career===
Made a celebrity by the success of her novel, Winsor found it unthinkable to return to the married life she had known with Herwig and, in 1946, they divorced. Ten days later, she became the sixth wife of the big-band leader and clarinetist Artie Shaw, despite the fact that two years previously Shaw had castigated his then-wife, Ava Gardner, for reading such a &quot;trashy novel&quot; as &quot;Forever Amber.&quot; The marriage to Shaw ended in 1948, and Winsor soon married her divorce attorney, Arnold Krakower. That marriage likewise ended in divorce, in 1953. In 1956 Winsor married for the fourth time, to Paul A. Porter, a former head of the Federal Communications Commission. They remained married until Porter&#x27;s death in 1975.

Winsor&#x27;s next commercially successful novel, &quot;Star Money&quot;, appeared in 1950, and was a portrait closely drawn from her experience of becoming a bestselling author. But in five subsequent novels, the last appearing in 1986 – &quot;The Lovers&quot;, &quot;Calais&quot;, &quot;Robert and Arabella&quot;, &quot;Jacintha&quot;, and &quot;Wanderers Eastward, Wanderers West&quot; – she failed to make as much of an impact. In 2000 a new edition of &quot;Forever Amber&quot; was published with a foreword by Barbara Taylor Bradford.

==Death==
Winsor died May 26, 2003, in New York City.

==Works==

*&quot;Forever Amber&quot; (1944) 
*&quot;Star Money&quot; (1950) 
*&quot;The Lovers&quot; (1952) 
*&quot;America, With Love&quot; (1954) 
*&quot;Wanderers Eastward, Wanderers West&quot; (1965) 
*&quot;Calais&quot; (1979) 
*&quot;Jacintha&quot; (1984) 
*&quot;Robert and Arabella&quot; (1986) 

== Papers ==
Winsor&#x27;s manuscripts and research from 1940-1949 are at The Harry Ransom Humanities Research Center at the University of Texas at Austin.

==Notes==
==References==
*Guardian Unlimited obituary on Kathleen Winsor

==External links==
*Lise Jaillant, &quot;Subversive Middlebrow: The Campaigns to Ban Kathleen Winsor’s Forever Amber in the United States and in Canada.&quot; International Journal of Canadian Studies (Special issue on Print Culture and the Middlebrow, ed. Michelle Smith &amp; Faye Hammill) 48 (2014): 33-52.
*Guardian Unlimited book review of &quot;Forever Amber&quot; by Elaine Showalter, August 2002.
*Time magazine book review, October 1957, of &quot;America, With Love&quot;.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2342652" start="0" end="15" title="Kathleen Winsor" label="Kathleen Winsor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196408" start="121" end="137" title="Historical fiction" label="historical novel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1646002" start="144" end="157" title="Forever Amber (novel)" label="Forever Amber"/>
<link wikidata="Q273610" start="212" end="222" title="bestseller" label="bestseller"/>
<link wikidata="Q1928578" start="435" end="452" title="Olivia, Minnesota" label="Olivia, Minnesota"/>
<link wikidata="Q484678" start="468" end="488" title="Berkeley, California" label="Berkeley, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q168756" start="679" end="713" title="University of California, Berkeley" label="University of California, Berkeley"/>
<link wikidata="Q762853" start="770" end="782" title="All-American" label="All-American"/>
<link wikidata="Q1109032" start="783" end="799" title="college football" label="college football"/>
<link wikidata="Q4932776" start="807" end="820" title="Bob Herwig" label="Robert Herwig"/>
<link wikidata="Q3234627" start="893" end="908" title="Oakland Tribune" label="Oakland Tribune"/>
<link wikidata="Q846848" start="1162" end="1173" title="English Restoration" label="Restoration"/>
<link wikidata="Q122553" start="1243" end="1253" title="Charles II of England" label="Charles II"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="1367" end="1379" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q11218" start="1410" end="1431" title="United States Marines" label="United States Marines"/>
<link wikidata="Q184425" start="1448" end="1463" title="Pacific War" label="Pacific theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1646002" start="1785" end="1798" title="Forever Amber (novel)" label="Forever Amber"/>
<link wikidata="Q164679" start="2007" end="2027" title="Great Fire of London" label="Great Fire of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q35657" start="2124" end="2135" title="U.S. states" label="U.S. states"/>
<link wikidata="Q291" start="2149" end="2160" title="pornography" label="pornography"/>
<link wikidata="Q610292" start="2169" end="2180" title="Production Code" label="Hays Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q434841" start="2258" end="2279" title="Twentieth Century Fox" label="Twentieth Century Fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q456822" start="2281" end="2289" title="Forever Amber (film)" label="The film"/>
<link wikidata="Q52997" start="2303" end="2317" title="Otto Preminger" label="Otto Preminger"/>
<link wikidata="Q234900" start="2331" end="2344" title="Linda Darnell" label="Linda Darnell"/>
<link wikidata="Q727740" start="2349" end="2361" title="Cornel Wilde" label="Cornel Wilde"/>
<link wikidata="Q320065" start="2859" end="2869" title="Artie Shaw" label="Artie Shaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q164487" start="2949" end="2960" title="Ava Gardner" label="Ava Gardner"/>
<link wikidata="Q7148974" start="3232" end="3246" title="Paul A. Porter" label="Paul A. Porter"/>
<link wikidata="Q128831" start="3269" end="3302" title="Federal Communications Commission" label="Federal Communications Commission"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3631" end="3637" title="Calais (novel)" label="Calais"/>
<link wikidata="Q437224" start="3878" end="3901" title="Barbara Taylor Bradford" label="Barbara Taylor Bradford"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="3943" end="3956" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q1646002" start="3977" end="3990" title="Forever Amber (novel)" label="Forever Amber"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4172" end="4178" title="Calais (novel)" label="Calais"/>
<link wikidata="Q49213" start="4390" end="4419" title="University of Texas at Austin" label="University of Texas at Austin"/>
<link wikidata="Q82685630" start="4774" end="4786" title="Faye Hammill" label="Faye Hammill"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="246552" wikidata="Q470812" url="?curid=246552" title="John McCrae">
<text>Lieutenant-Colonel John McCrae (November 30, 1872 – January 28, 1918) was a Canadian poet, physician, author, artist and soldier during World War I and a surgeon during the Second Battle of Ypres, in Belgium. He is best known for writing the famous war memorial poem &quot;In Flanders Fields&quot;. McCrae died of pneumonia near the end of the war. His famous poem is a threnody, a genre of lament.

==Biography==

McCrae was born in McCrae House in Guelph, Ontario to Lieutenant-Colonel David McCrae and Janet Simpson Eckford; he was the grandson of Scottish immigrants from Balmaghie, Kirkcudbrightshire. His father had served with the Guelph Home Guard during the Fenian raids, and was a member of the Guelph city council and a director of The North American Life Assurance Company. His brother, Dr. Thomas McCrae, became a professor of medicine at Johns Hopkins Medical School in Baltimore and close associate of Sir William Osler. His sister Geills married James Kilgour, a justice of the Court of King&#x27;s Bench of Manitoba, and moved to Winnipeg.

McCrae attended the Guelph Collegiate Vocational Institute and graduated from the Institute at 16. He was the first Guelph student to win a scholarship to the University of Toronto. After attending university for three years, however, he was forced to take a year off due to severe asthma. This illness recurred throughout his life.

Among his papers in the John McCrae House in Guelph is a letter he wrote on July 18, 1893, to Laura Kains while he trained as an artilleryman at Tête-de-Pont barracks, today&#x27;s Fort Frontenac, in Kingston, Ontario. &quot;I have a manservant ... Quite a nobby place it is, in fact ... My windows look right out across the bay, and are just near the water&#x27;s edge; there is a good deal of shipping at present in the port; and the river looks very pretty.&quot;

He was a resident master in English and Mathematics in 1894 at the Ontario Agricultural College in Guelph. McCrae returned to the University of Toronto and completed his B.A., then returned again to study medicine on a scholarship.

At medical school, McCrae had tutored other students to help pay his tuition. Two of his students were among the first female doctors in Ontario.
McCrae graduated in 1898. He was first a resident house-officer at Toronto General Hospital, then in 1899 at Johns Hopkins Hospital in Baltimore, Maryland. 

In 1901, he was appointed professor of pathology at the University of Vermont, where he taught until 1911; he also taught at McGill University in Montreal, Quebec. In 1902, he was appointed resident pathologist at Montreal General Hospital and later became assistant pathologist to the Royal Victoria Hospital in Montreal. In 1904, he was appointed an associate in medicine at the Royal Victoria Hospital. Later that year, he went to England where he studied for several months and became a member of the Royal College of Physicians.

In 1905, McCrae set up his own practice although he continued to work and lecture at several hospitals. The same year, he was appointed pathologist to the Montreal Foundling and Baby Hospital. In 1908, he was appointed physician to the Alexandra Hospital for Contagious Diseases.

In 1910, he accompanied Lord Grey, the Governor General of Canada, on a canoe trip to Hudson Bay to serve as expedition physician. Lord Grey marvelled that &quot;You were able to beat the record of the Arabian Nights, for I believe the 3000 miles of our travels were illumined by as many stories.&quot; 

McCrae was the co-author, with J. G. Adami, of a medical textbook, &quot;A Text-Book of Pathology for College Students of Medicine&quot; (1912; 2nd ed., 1914).

McCrae was the founding member of the University Club of Montreal.

McCrae proposed to his sister-in-law Nona Gwyn but was refused. Apart from weekly letters to his mother the poet was very private about any romantic relationships, and &quot;from time to time&quot; his sexuality has been questioned. However, according to McCrae biographer John F. Prescott and McCrae House curator Bev Dietrich, there is no evidence that McCrae was gay.

==Early military service== 
McCrae&#x27;s father, Lt-Col. David McCrae, a Fenian Raid veteran, organized and commanded the Guelph Field Artillery from the 1870s-1890s, and in 1887, John McCrae joined his father&#x27;s unit as a Bugler and then as a Gunner. He had previously joined the &quot;Guelph Highland Cadet Corps&quot; in 1886 at age 14, being awarded a prize as the best cadet in Ontario in 1887. 

McCrae continued to serve in the militia in the 1890s, being appointed Quarter-Master Sergeant of the Guelph Artillery in 1891, and then Lieutenant in 1896. 

In December 1899, McCrae volunteered for active service in South Africa as a Lieutenant in &#x27;D&#x27; Battery, Canadian Field Artillery during the Second Boer War. McCrae was placed in charge of No. 2 (right) section, &#x27;D&#x27; Battery, while his friend E.W.B. Morrison commanded No. 1 Section. They arrived in Cape Town in February 1900, and fought in skirmishes in the Orange Free State and the Transvaal, including the Carnarvon Expedition and at the Battle of Belfast in August 1900. McCrae returned home in late 1900. For his service in the war, he was awarded the Queen&#x27;s South Africa Medal with three clasps. 

In 1901, he was promoted to Captain in the 16th Battery, Canadian Field Artillery, and then to Major of the 1st Artillery Brigade in 1902. In 1904 he resigned his active militia position and was placed on the reserve of officers as a Major.

==First World War==

When Britain declared war on Germany because of the latter&#x27;s invasion of neutral Belgium at the beginning of the First World War (1914), Canada, as a Dominion within the British Empire, was at war as well. McCrae volunteered for service at age 41. He wrote a friend, &quot;I am really rather afraid, but more afraid to stay at home with my conscience.&quot; He was appointed as Medical Officer and Major of the 1st Brigade, Canadian Field Artillery. He treated the wounded during the Second Battle of Ypres in 1915, from a hastily dug bunker in the back of the dyke along the Yser Canal about 2 miles north of Ypres. McCrae&#x27;s friend and former militia member, Lt. Alexis Helmer, was killed in the battle, and his burial inspired the poem, &quot;In Flanders Fields&quot;, which was written on May 3, 1915.

From June 1, 1915, McCrae was ordered away from the artillery to set up No. 3 Canadian General Hospital at Dannes-Camiers near Boulogne-sur-Mer, northern France. For eight months the hospital operated in Durbar tents (donated by the Begum of Bhopal and shipped from India), but after suffering from storms, floods, and frosts it was moved in February 1916 into the old Jesuit College in Boulogne-sur-Mer. C. L. C. Allinson reported that McCrae &quot;most unmilitarily told [me] what he thought of being transferred to the medicals and being pulled away from his beloved guns. His last words to me were: &#x27;Allinson, all the goddamn doctors in the world will not win this bloody war: what we need is more and more fighting men.&#x27;&quot;

&quot;In Flanders Fields&quot; first appeared anonymously in &quot;Punch&quot; on December 8, 1915, but in the index to that year, McCrae was named as the author (misspelt as McCree). The verses swiftly became one of the most popular poems of the war, used in countless fund-raising campaigns and frequently translated (a Latin version begins &quot;In agro belgico...&quot;). &quot;In Flanders Fields&quot; was also extensively printed in the United States, whose government was contemplating joining the war, alongside a &#x27;reply&#x27; by R. W. Lillard (&quot;... Fear not that you have died for naught, / The torch ye threw to us we caught ...&quot;).

McCrae, now &quot;a household name, albeit a frequently misspelt one&quot;, regarded his sudden fame with some amusement, wishing that &quot;they would get to printing &#x27;In F.F.&#x27; correctly: it never is nowadays&quot;; but (writes his biographer) &quot;he was satisfied if the poem enabled men to see where their duty lay.&quot;On January 28, 1918, while still commanding No. 3 Canadian General Hospital (McGill) at Boulogne, McCrae died of pneumonia with &quot;extensive pneumococcus meningitis&quot; at the British General Hospital in Wimereux, France. He was buried the following day in the Commonwealth War Graves Commission section of Wimereux Cemetery, just a couple of kilometres up the coast from Boulogne, with full military honours. His flag-draped coffin was borne on a gun carriage and the mourners – who included general Sir Arthur Currie and many of McCrae&#x27;s friends and staff – were preceded by McCrae&#x27;s charger, &quot;Bonfire&quot;, with McCrae&#x27;s boots reversed in the stirrups. Bonfire was with McCrae from Valcartier, Quebec until his death and was much loved. McCrae&#x27;s gravestone is placed flat, as are all the others in the section, because of the unstable sandy soil.

==&quot;In Flanders Fields&quot;==

A collection of his poetry, &quot;In Flanders Fields and Other Poems&quot; (1918), was published after his death.

&lt;poem&gt;
 In Flanders Fields
 In Flanders Fields, the poppies blow
 Between the crosses, row on row, 
 That mark our place; and in the sky
 The larks, still bravely singing, fly
 Scarce heard amid the guns below.

 We are the dead, short days ago 
 We lived, felt dawn, saw sunset glow,
 Loved and were loved, and now we lie
 In Flanders fields.

 Take up our quarrel with the foe:
 To you from failing hands we throw
 The torch; be yours to hold it high.
 If ye break faith with us who die
 We shall not sleep, though poppies grow
 In Flanders fields.
&lt;/poem&gt; –John McCrae
Though various legends have developed as to the inspiration for the poem, the most commonly held belief is that McCrae wrote &quot;In Flanders Fields&quot; on May 3, 1915, the day after presiding over the funeral and burial of his friend Lieutenant Alexis Helmer, who had been killed during the Second Battle of Ypres. The poem was written as he sat upon the back of a medical field ambulance near an advance dressing post at Essex Farm, just north of Ypres. The poppy, which was a central feature of the poem, grew in great numbers in the spoiled earth of the battlefields and cemeteries of Flanders. An article by Veteran&#x27;s Administration Canada provides this account:The day before he wrote his famous poem, one of McCrae&#x27;s closest friends was killed in the fighting and buried in a makeshift grave with a simple wooden cross. Wild poppies were already beginning to bloom between the crosses marking the many graves.

The Canadian government has placed a memorial to John McCrae that features &quot;In Flanders Fields&quot; at the site of the dressing station which sits beside the Commonwealth War Graves Commission&#x27;s Essex Farm Cemetery. The Belgian government has named this site the &quot;John McCrae Memorial Site&quot;.

==Legacy==

The Canadian Medical Association awards the John McCrae Memorial Medal to a health services member of the Canadian Armed Forces for exemplary service.

McCrae was designated a Person of National Historic Significance in 1946.

McCrae was the great-uncle of former Alberta Member of Parliament (MP) David Kilgour and of Kilgour&#x27;s sister Geills Turner, who married former Canadian Prime Minister John Turner. Marie Christie Geills Kilgour (née McCrae) was the sister of John McCrae.

In 1918, Lieut. John Philip Sousa wrote the music to &quot;In Flanders Fields, the poppies grow&quot; words by Lieut.-Col John McCrae.

The Cloth Hall of the city of Ypres in Belgium has a permanent war museum called the &quot;In Flanders Fields Museum&quot;, named after the poem. There are also a photograph and a short biographical memorial to McCrae in the St George Memorial Church in Ypres. In May 2007, to commemorate the 90th anniversary of the writing of his best-known poem, a two-day literary conference was held.

Institutions that have been named in McCrae&#x27;s honour include John McCrae Public School in Guelph, John McCrae Public School in Markham, John McCrae Senior Public School in Toronto, and John McCrae Secondary School in Ottawa.

A bronze plaque memorial dedicated to Lt. Col. John McCrae was erected by the Guelph Collegiate Vocational Institute.

McCrae House was converted into a museum. The current Canadian War Museum has a gallery for special exhibits, called &quot;The Lieutenant-Colonel John McCrae Gallery&quot;.

In May 2015, a statue of McCrae by Ruth Abernathy was erected on Green Island (Rideau River) in Ottawa, Ontario. McCrae is dressed as an artillery officer and his medical bag nearby, as he writes. The statue shows the destruction of the battlefield and, at his feet, the poppies which are a symbol of Remembrance of World War I and all armed conflict since. A copy of that statue was erected at Guelph Civic Museum in Guelph in 2015.

The street next to the cemetery where he is buried is named in his honour, although the street is called &quot;Rue Mac Crae&quot;.

Mount McCrae in British Columbia, is named for him.

==Notes and references==
* Busch, Briton Cooper (2003). &quot;Canada and the Great War: Western Front Association papers&quot;. McGill-Queen&#x27;s University Press. 
* Holt, Tonie and Valmai (1996). &quot;Poets of the Great War&quot;, &quot;Lieutenant-Colonel John McCrae&quot;. Barnsley: Leo Cooper (Reprinted 1999). 
* Peddie, John. The Story of John McCrae Guelph Museums, Guelph, Ontario. Accessed: 2010-02-25
* Prescott, J F (1985). &quot;In Flanders fields: the story of John McCrae&quot;. Boston Mills Press. 
==Further reading==

==External links==

* Guelph Civic Museum McCrae House
* Biography at the &quot;Dictionary of Canadian Biography Online&quot;
* 
* 
* John McCrae: Profile and Poems at Poets.org
* John McCrae in Flanders Fields – Historical Essay, illustrated with many photographs of McCrae
* For occurrences of &quot;In Flanders Fields&quot; in film, see 
* &quot;In Flanders Fields&quot; museum, Ypres.
* Lost Poets of the Great War, a hypertext document on the poetry of World War I by Harry Rusche, of the English Department, Emory University. It contains a bibliography of related materials
* John McCrae Veteran&#x27;s Affairs
* John McCrae&#x27;s page at Poeticous.com
* Archival photographs related to John McCrae held at the University of Toronto Archives and Records Management Services
* Poems by John McCrae at English Poetry</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q16932763" start="0" end="18" title="Lieutenant-colonel (Canada)" label="Lieutenant-Colonel"/>
<link wikidata="Q470812" start="19" end="30" title="John McCrae" label="John McCrae"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196645" start="76" end="84" title="Canadians" label="Canadian"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="136" end="147" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q233219" start="173" end="195" title="Second Battle of Ypres" label="Second Battle of Ypres"/>
<link wikidata="Q31" start="200" end="207" title="Belgium" label="Belgium"/>
<link wikidata="Q25772" start="273" end="291" title="In Flanders Fields" label="In Flanders Fields"/>
<link wikidata="Q12192" start="314" end="323" title="pneumonia" label="pneumonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q177771" start="370" end="378" title="threnody" label="threnody"/>
<link wikidata="Q4025972" start="434" end="446" title="McCrae House" label="McCrae House"/>
<link wikidata="Q504114" start="450" end="456" title="Guelph" label="Guelph"/>
<link wikidata="Q1904" start="458" end="465" title="Ontario" label="Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q16932763" start="469" end="487" title="Lieutenant-colonel (Canada)" label="Lieutenant-Colonel"/>
<link wikidata="Q181634" start="551" end="570" title="Scottish people" label="Scottish immigrants"/>
<link wikidata="Q4852332" start="576" end="585" title="Balmaghie" label="Balmaghie"/>
<link wikidata="Q17582096" start="587" end="605" title="Kirkcudbrightshire" label="Kirkcudbrightshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q2996302" start="667" end="679" title="Fenian raids" label="Fenian raids"/>
<link wikidata="Q111167978" start="743" end="784" title="The North American Life Assurance Company" label="The North American Life Assurance Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q7792284" start="803" end="816" title="Thomas McCrae (physician)" label="Thomas McCrae"/>
<link wikidata="Q858729" start="852" end="880" title="Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine" label="Johns Hopkins Medical School"/>
<link wikidata="Q5092" start="884" end="893" title="Baltimore" label="Baltimore"/>
<link wikidata="Q369668" start="921" end="934" title="William Osler" label="William Osler"/>
<link wikidata="Q5178404" start="994" end="1032" title="Court of Queen&amp;#x27;s Bench of Manitoba" label="Court of King&amp;#x27;s Bench of Manitoba"/>
<link wikidata="Q2135" start="1047" end="1055" title="Winnipeg" label="Winnipeg"/>
<link wikidata="Q5614777" start="1078" end="1116" title="Guelph Collegiate Vocational Institute" label="Guelph Collegiate Vocational Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q180865" start="1217" end="1238" title="University of Toronto" label="University of Toronto"/>
<link wikidata="Q35869" start="1340" end="1346" title="asthma" label="asthma"/>
<link wikidata="Q515965" start="1573" end="1587" title="Fort Frontenac" label="Fort Frontenac"/>
<link wikidata="Q202973" start="1592" end="1609" title="Kingston, Ontario" label="Kingston, Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q27968" start="1888" end="1895" title="English studies" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q395" start="1900" end="1911" title="Mathematics" label="Mathematics"/>
<link wikidata="Q3205188" start="1927" end="1955" title="Ontario Agricultural College" label="Ontario Agricultural College"/>
<link wikidata="Q180865" start="1990" end="2011" title="University of Toronto" label="University of Toronto"/>
<link wikidata="Q1765120" start="2030" end="2034" title="Bachelor of Arts" label="B.A."/>
<link wikidata="Q1472068" start="2348" end="2370" title="Johns Hopkins Hospital" label="Johns Hopkins Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048898" start="2453" end="2474" title="University of Vermont" label="University of Vermont"/>
<link wikidata="Q201492" start="2522" end="2539" title="McGill University" label="McGill University"/>
<link wikidata="Q340" start="2543" end="2551" title="Montreal" label="Montreal"/>
<link wikidata="Q176" start="2553" end="2559" title="Quebec" label="Quebec"/>
<link wikidata="Q7208" start="2596" end="2607" title="pathologist" label="pathologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q3145340" start="2611" end="2636" title="Montreal General Hospital" label="Montreal General Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q3145206" start="2683" end="2706" title="Royal Victoria Hospital (Montreal)" label="Royal Victoria Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q3145206" start="2778" end="2801" title="Royal Victoria Hospital, Montreal" label="Royal Victoria Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q21" start="2831" end="2838" title="England" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q16003969" start="2902" end="2929" title="Royal College of Physicians" label="Royal College of Physicians"/>
<link wikidata="Q333336" start="3237" end="3246" title="Albert Henry George Grey, 4th Earl Grey" label="Lord Grey"/>
<link wikidata="Q390776" start="3252" end="3278" title="Governor General of Canada" label="Governor General of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q171529" start="3285" end="3290" title="canoe" label="canoe"/>
<link wikidata="Q3040" start="3299" end="3309" title="Hudson Bay" label="Hudson Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q216445" start="3397" end="3429" title="Scheherazade" label="the record of the Arabian Nights"/>
<link wikidata="Q2996302" start="4193" end="4204" title="Fenian Raid" label="Fenian Raid"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4242" end="4264" title="Royal_Regiment_of_Canadian_Artillery#Regiments" label="Guelph Field Artillery"/>
<link wikidata="Q7269321" start="4597" end="4620" title="Quartermaster sergeant" label="Quarter-Master Sergeant"/>
<link wikidata="Q186024" start="4663" end="4673" title="Lieutenant" label="Lieutenant"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4776" end="4823" title="Royal_Regiment_of_Canadian_Artillery#Boer_War" label="&amp;#x27;D&amp;#x27; Battery, Canadian Field Artillery"/>
<link wikidata="Q215112" start="4835" end="4850" title="Second Boer War" label="Second Boer War"/>
<link wikidata="Q5345859" start="4946" end="4961" title="Edward Whipple Bancroft Morrison" label="E.W.B. Morrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q1767196" start="5146" end="5163" title="Battle of Bergendal" label="Battle of Belfast"/>
<link wikidata="Q2469664" start="5262" end="5293" title="Queen&amp;#x27;s South Africa Medal" label="Queen&amp;#x27;s South Africa Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q25114211" start="5343" end="5350" title="Captain (military rank)" label="Captain"/>
<link wikidata="Q983927" start="5549" end="5554" title="Major (rank)" label="Major"/>
<link wikidata="Q43287" start="5607" end="5614" title="German Empire" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q31" start="5664" end="5671" title="Belgium" label="Belgium"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="5696" end="5711" title="First World War" label="First World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q16" start="5720" end="5726" title="Canada" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q223832" start="5733" end="5741" title="Dominion" label="Dominion"/>
<link wikidata="Q8680" start="5753" end="5767" title="British Empire" label="British Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q233219" start="6067" end="6089" title="Second Battle of Ypres" label="Second Battle of Ypres"/>
<link wikidata="Q55685135" start="6252" end="6265" title="Alexis Helmer" label="Alexis Helmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q25772" start="6333" end="6351" title="In Flanders Fields" label="In Flanders Fields"/>
<link wikidata="Q390379" start="6501" end="6515" title="Dannes-Camiers" label="Dannes-Camiers"/>
<link wikidata="Q81997" start="6521" end="6537" title="Boulogne-sur-Mer" label="Boulogne-sur-Mer"/>
<link wikidata="Q70802" start="6548" end="6554" title="French Third Republic" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q127807" start="6598" end="6604" title="Durbar (court)" label="Durbar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2364774" start="6627" end="6642" title="Kaikhusrau Jahan, Begum of Bhopal" label="Begum of Bhopal"/>
<link wikidata="Q129286" start="6660" end="6665" title="British Raj" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q81997" start="6781" end="6797" title="Boulogne-sur-Mer" label="Boulogne-sur-Mer"/>
<link wikidata="Q849759" start="7204" end="7209" title="Punch (magazine)" label="Punch"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="7459" end="7464" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q12192" start="8244" end="8253" title="pneumonia" label="pneumonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q48143" start="8288" end="8298" title="meningitis" label="meningitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q383369" start="8340" end="8348" title="Wimereux" label="Wimereux"/>
<link wikidata="Q1117074" start="8397" end="8431" title="Commonwealth War Graves Commission" label="Commonwealth War Graves Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q366656" start="8584" end="8596" title="Limbers and caissons" label="gun carriage"/>
<link wikidata="Q517904" start="8637" end="8654" title="Arthur Currie" label="Sir Arthur Currie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1023457" start="8842" end="8860" title="Camp Valcartier" label="Valcartier, Quebec"/>
<link wikidata="Q55685135" start="9997" end="10010" title="Alexis Helmer" label="Alexis Helmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q233219" start="10043" end="10065" title="Second Battle of Ypres" label="Second Battle of Ypres"/>
<link wikidata="Q130201" start="10211" end="10216" title="Papaver rhoeas" label="poppy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1117074" start="10843" end="10877" title="Commonwealth War Graves Commission" label="Commonwealth War Graves Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q2226435" start="10885" end="10904" title="Essex Farm Cemetery" label="Essex Farm Cemetery"/>
<link wikidata="Q2056706" start="10959" end="10984" title="Site John McCrae" label="John McCrae Memorial Site"/>
<link wikidata="Q2867874" start="11009" end="11037" title="Canadian Medical Association" label="Canadian Medical Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q644943" start="11111" end="11132" title="Canadian Armed Forces" label="Canadian Armed Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q3253120" start="11181" end="11221" title="Person of National Historic Significance" label="Person of National Historic Significance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1951" start="11269" end="11276" title="Alberta" label="Alberta"/>
<link wikidata="Q15964890" start="11277" end="11297" title="Member of Parliament (Canada)" label="Member of Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q872073" start="11303" end="11316" title="David Kilgour" label="David Kilgour"/>
<link wikidata="Q5530135" start="11346" end="11359" title="Geills Turner" label="Geills Turner"/>
<link wikidata="Q128568" start="11404" end="11415" title="John Turner" label="John Turner"/>
<link wikidata="Q295935" start="11508" end="11525" title="John Philip Sousa" label="John Philip Sousa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1923610" start="11632" end="11642" title="Ypres Cloth Hall" label="Cloth Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q102728" start="11658" end="11663" title="Ypres" label="Ypres"/>
<link wikidata="Q2708415" start="11719" end="11744" title="In Flanders Fields Museum" label="In Flanders Fields Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q44016" start="12150" end="12157" title="Markham, Ontario" label="Markham"/>
<link wikidata="Q172" start="12195" end="12202" title="Toronto" label="Toronto"/>
<link wikidata="Q6247564" start="12208" end="12236" title="John McCrae Secondary School" label="John McCrae Secondary School"/>
<link wikidata="Q1930" start="12240" end="12246" title="Ottawa" label="Ottawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q5614777" start="12327" end="12365" title="Guelph Collegiate Vocational Institute" label="Guelph Collegiate Vocational Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q4025972" start="12368" end="12380" title="McCrae House" label="McCrae House"/>
<link wikidata="Q1032442" start="12422" end="12441" title="Canadian War Museum" label="Canadian War Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q6114509" start="12577" end="12591" title="Ruth Abernethy" label="Ruth Abernathy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5602709" start="12607" end="12634" title="Green Island (Rideau River)" label="Green Island (Rideau River)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1930" start="12638" end="12644" title="Ottawa" label="Ottawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1904" start="12646" end="12653" title="Ontario" label="Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q15960703" start="12937" end="12956" title="Guelph Civic Museum" label="Guelph Civic Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q25772" start="14003" end="14021" title="In Flanders Fields" label="In Flanders Fields"/>
<link wikidata="Q102728" start="14083" end="14088" title="Ypres" label="Ypres"/>
<link wikidata="Q621043" start="14215" end="14231" title="Emory University" label="Emory University"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="246554" wikidata="Q1646002" url="?curid=246554" title="Forever Amber (novel)">
<text>Forever Amber (1944) is an historical romance novel by Kathleen Winsor set in 17th-century England. It was made into a film in 1947 by 20th Century Fox.

&quot;Forever Amber&quot; tells the story of an orphaned Amber St. Clare, who makes her way up through the ranks of 17th-century English society by sleeping with or marrying successively richer and more important men while keeping her love for the one man she can never have. The subplot of the novel follows Charles II of England as he returns from exile and adjusts to ruling England. The novel includes portrayals of Restoration fashion, including the introduction and popularization of tea in English coffeehouses and the homes of the fashionably rich; politics; and public disasters, including the plague and the Great Fire of London. Many notable historical figures appear in the book, including Charles II of England, members of his court, and several of his mistresses including Nell Gwyn.

Winsor&#x27;s inspiration for the book came from her first husband, who had written his undergraduate thesis on Charles II, completed while he was serving in the army. She read books on the period and wrote numerous drafts of what would become &quot;Forever Amber&quot;.

==Plot==
Judith Marsh has been engaged since birth to her neighbor, John Mainwaring, heir to the Earl of Rosswood. In 1644, she has her engagement broken off when her family and the Mainwarings find themselves on opposing sides of the English Civil War. During a break in the fighting, John visits Judith and the two consummate their relationship. Pregnant, Judith abandons her family and goes to Parliamentarian territory on John&#x27;s instructions, introducing herself as Judith St. Clare. There, she ends up staying with farmer Matthew Goodegroome and his wife Sarah. Judith dies in childbirth after naming her daughter Amber (after the color of John&#x27;s eyes).

In 1660, Amber, now a flirtatious teenager, is being raised by the Goodegroomes in ignorance of her origins. She meets a band of Royalists who inform her that Charles II of England is returning. Amber is particularly attracted to Lord Bruce Carlton. During a fair, she lures him into the woods and loses her virginity to him. After she persuades him, Carlton reluctantly takes her to London, but tells Amber he will not marry her and she will come to regret her choice.

In London, Carlton makes Amber his mistress. She quickly grows accustomed to their luxurious lifestyle. She longs to marry Carlton and believes becoming pregnant will make him marry her. However, when she does become pregnant, Carlton announces plans to become a privateer. He leaves Amber a significant amount of money and tells her if she is clever she can legitimize herself and her child by marrying well. Left alone, Amber is befriended by a woman named Sally Goodman and passes herself off as a rich country heiress. Sally introduces Amber to her nephew Luke Channell, who Amber quickly marries out of fear that her pregnancy will soon be visible. She soon discovers Sally and Luke are not who they appear. When they realize she is not as wealthy as she claimed they abandon her, leaving her penniless. Amber is pursued by creditors and taken to a debtors&#x27; prison. Salvation comes when she catches the eye of Black Jack Mallard, a highwayman who takes Amber with him when he escapes. Black Jack takes Amber to Whitefriars, where she is introduced to the ways of criminals and gives birth to a son who she gives to a countrywoman to raise properly. Black Jack hires a student of noble birth, Michael Godfrey, to educate Amber, and begins to use her as bait in schemes where she lures handsome, rich men to quiet corners before Black Jack robs them.

Amber attracts the attention of Bess, Black Jack&#x27;s former lover, whose jealous behavior towards Amber results in Bess being kicked out. Bess avenges herself by turning in Black Jack and his conspirators. Amber manages to escape and happens upon Michael, who offers her his protection. She becomes his mistress.

Terrified that her debts will one day catch up with her, Amber learns that actors are protected from arrest (through being servants of the King) and uses her connections to find a position with the King&#x27;s Company. Though she is not a great actress, Amber uses her beauty to earn larger parts, hoping to attract the attention of a man who can afford to keep her as his mistress. She catches the eye of Captain Rex Morgan, the paramour of fellow actress Beck Marshall, and succeeds in persuading him to pay to keep her. Morgan falls in love with Amber and offers to marry her, but she resists, wanting a wealthier husband. Amber eventually attracts the attention of the King and sleeps with him twice before his mistress, Barbara Palmer, intervenes. Depressed, Amber decides to marry Rex, but Bruce returns from his travels, and Amber realizes she is still in love with him. This leads to a duel between Bruce and Rex, resulting in Rex dying and Bruce leaving once more.

Now bereft, Amber falls deeper into prostitution. Shunned and unwell following an abortion, she flees to Tunbridge Wells where she meets a rich elderly widower, Samuel Dangerfield, and seduces him into marriage by pretending to be a modest young widow. Dangerfield&#x27;s puritanical family is horrified, though she becomes friends with his daughter Jemima, who is only a few years younger than herself. Amber discovers her new husband is financing Bruce, and re-starts her affair with him, hoping to conceive a child she can pass off as her husband&#x27;s. Amber becomes pregnant then discovers her stepdaughter is also pregnant by Bruce, who abandons both of them. Amber finds a suitable husband for Jemima and is left extremely wealthy after Samuel dies. Shortly after their child is born Bruce returns, and both he and Amber contract plague. They both survive but Bruce abandons her again, and Amber decides to marry for a third time, to the avaricious but influential Earl of Radclyffe.

Now a countess, Amber intends to go to court and become the King&#x27;s favored mistress, replacing Barbara Palmer. Her husband interferes in these plans and forces her to move to the country. As revenge, Amber seduces her new husband&#x27;s son and is discovered. Her husband attempts to poison the pair, succeeding in killing his son. The Earl then flees to London, where Amber has him killed (using the Great Fire of London to cover up the crime).

Finally free, she becomes the King&#x27;s mistress and becomes pregnant by him. The King arranges a marriage – Amber&#x27;s fourth – to Gerald Stanhope. Bruce returns, and Amber continues cheating on her husband with both the King and Bruce. Bruce reveals that he is married and intends to make their son his lawful heir, to which Amber reluctantly consents, knowing it will secure his future. Amber becomes the King&#x27;s primary and official mistress, and he makes her Duchess of Ravenspur. As Amber is at the height of her power and influence, Bruce returns once again and resumes his affair with Amber. Bruce&#x27;s wife Corinna discovers the affair and Bruce finally leaves Amber for good. Amber confronts Corinna, revealing that she is the mother of Bruce&#x27;s son. While the two are quarreling, Bruce returns and he and Amber get into a violent fight, broken up by Corinna.
Unbeknownst to Amber, the Duke of Buckingham (one of the influential men to which Amber prostituted herself) decides Amber is a threat and makes a plan with a former enemy, Lord Arlington, to get rid of her. The two men write Amber a note claiming Corinna has died. A hopeful Amber leaves England in pursuit of Bruce, hoping he will finally marry her, unaware that Corinna is alive and well.

==Characters==
===Original characters===
*Amber St. Clare – The illegitimate daughter of two nobles who is raised by well-off farmers ignorant of her origins. She is extremely beautiful and ambitious but also selfish and naive.
* Lord Bruce Carlton – A free-spirited Royalist, thirteen years older than Amber, who spent his formative years in exile following Charles II of England&#x27;s wandering court. 
*Lord Almsbury – a friend of Bruce Carlton&#x27;s who is also taken with Amber. He tries repeatedly over the years to make Amber his mistress. He is more willing to stay at home and play politics to secure his fortune, unlike his free-spirited friend. 
*Nan Britton – Amber&#x27;s loyal maid and an only female friend.
*Black Jack Mallard – an extremely tall, clever, and lustful highwayman who uses his savvy to escape from debtors&#x27; prison.
*Michael Godfrey – a bon vivant law student who falls in love with Amber and introduces her to a life of hedonism.
*Captain Rex Morgan – a swashbuckling lothario who keeps many mistresses but is most interested and loyal to Amber, wanting to marry her despite knowing that she is married and has a child by another man.
*Samuel Dangerfield – a 60-year-old widower and one of the richest men in England, this self-made man becomes Amber&#x27;s second husband.
*Earl of Radclyffe – Amber&#x27;s ugly and indebted third husband is both impotent and abusive. Unbeknownst to Amber he was once engaged to marry her mother, Judith, before she ran away, leading him to pine after her for the rest of his life.
*Gerald Stanhope – Amber&#x27;s fourth husband who is the foppish first son of a family that went bankrupt during the civil war. He allows Amber to dominate him, and eventually allows her to pay him off so that she may live freely while he consorts with his mistress.
* Bruce – Amber and Bruce Carlton&#x27;s oldest son, born of the first period of their long affair. 
*Susanna Dangerfield – Amber and Bruce&#x27;s youngest child, born during their affair during Amber&#x27;s marriage to Samuel Dangerfield and passed off as a Dangerfield child. She is very much like her mother in both looks and temperament. 
*Charles Stanhope – Amber&#x27;s third child born of her affair with Charles II, King of England. He looks very much like his biological father, though Amber names him after Gerald Stanhope, her husband at the time of his birth. Amber uses his birth to manipulate the king into making her a countess and, eventually, a duchess.

===Historical figures===
* Charles II of England – The newly returned King of England who is well known for his voracious sexual appetite, good-temper, and political savvy. 
* Barbara Palmer, 1st Duchess of Cleveland – The king&#x27;s favorite mistress who is an ill-tempered but extremely beautiful woman who is ambitious and enjoys scheming.
*George Villiers, 2nd Duke of Buckingham – A perverse man who enjoys scheming and making enemies of his friends. He is Barbara Palmer&#x27;s cousin.
*Frances Stewart, Duchess of Richmond – a beautiful young noblewoman who attracts the King&#x27;s attention but refuses to become his mistress.
*Catherine of Braganza – Charles&#x27; Portuguese wife. Small of stature and very modest due to her Catholic upbringing, she is devoted to her husband and puts up with his affairs. He remains loyal to her as well, despite her inability to produce an heir.

==Publication==
After five drafts, &quot;Forever Amber&quot; was accepted for publication. After editing, the two and a half million-word manuscript was reduced to a fifth of its original size. The published novel was 972 pages long. A condensed version was published as an Armed Services Edition during WWII.

==Critical reception==
While many reviewers &quot;praised the story for its relevance, comparing Amber&#x27;s fortitude during the plague and fire to that of the women who held hearth and home together through the blitzes of World War II&quot;, others condemned it for its blatant sexual references. Fourteen US states banned the book as pornography. The first was Massachusetts, whose attorney general cited 70 references to sexual intercourse, 39 illegitimate pregnancies, 7 abortions, and &quot;10 descriptions of women undressing in front of men&quot; as reasons for banning the novel. Winsor denied that her book was particularly daring and said that she had no interest in explicit scenes. &quot;I wrote only two sexy passages,&quot; she remarked, &quot;and my publishers took both of them out. They put in ellipses instead. In those days, you know, you could solve everything with an ellipsis.&quot;

Despite its banning, &quot;Forever Amber&quot; was the best-selling US novel of the 1940s. It sold over 100,000 copies in its first week of release, and went on to sell over three million copies. &quot;Forever Amber&quot; was also responsible for popularizing &quot;Amber&quot; as a given name for girls in the 20th century.

The novel was quite popular with the personnel of the USS &quot;Astoria&quot; in the Second World War, with a copy circulating through the crew.

The book was condemned by the Catholic Church for indecency, which helped its popularity. One critic went so far as to number each of the passages to which he objected. A film adaptation by 20th Century Fox was finally completed after substantial changes to the script were made, toning down some of the book&#x27;s most objectionable passages in order to appease Catholic media critics.

The book was banned in August 1945 in Australia. The Minister for Customs, Senator Richard Keane, said &quot;The Almighty did not give people eyes to read that rubbish.&quot;
==Cultural references==
* Amber St. Clair appears as a historical character in &quot;The League of Extraordinary Gentlemen&quot; as a member of the first incarnation of the League in the 17th century, Prospero&#x27;s Men.
*Captain Beefheart references &quot;Forever Amber&quot; in the lyrics of the song &quot;Pachuco Cadaver&quot; on the album &quot;Trout Mask Replica&quot;.
*Ernest Ambler, Director of the United States&#x27; National Bureau of Standards (1975–89), was commemorated by a sandwich, &quot;Forever Ambler, or the Importance of Being Ernest,&quot; that was served at Roy&#x27;s Place, a popular sandwich shop in Gaithersburg, Maryland.

==References==
==External links==
*Guardian Unlimited book review of &quot;Forever Amber&quot; by Elaine Showalter, August 2002.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q858330" start="38" end="51" title="romance novel" label="romance novel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2342652" start="55" end="70" title="Kathleen Winsor" label="Kathleen Winsor"/>
<link wikidata="Q456822" start="112" end="123" title="Forever Amber (film)" label="into a film"/>
<link wikidata="Q434841" start="135" end="151" title="20th Century Fox" label="20th Century Fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q122553" start="463" end="484" title="Charles II of England" label="Charles II of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q164679" start="772" end="792" title="Great Fire of London" label="Great Fire of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q234163" start="941" end="950" title="Nell Gwyn" label="Nell Gwyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1923231" start="1256" end="1275" title="arranged marriage" label="engaged since birth"/>
<link wikidata="Q80330" start="1460" end="1477" title="English Civil War" label="English Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130553" start="1622" end="1637" title="Roundhead" label="Parliamentarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2284765" start="2024" end="2033" title="Cavalier" label="Royalists"/>
<link wikidata="Q122553" start="2054" end="2075" title="Charles II of England" label="Charles II of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="2279" end="2285" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q201559" start="2629" end="2638" title="privateer" label="privateer"/>
<link wikidata="Q427276" start="3220" end="3240" title="debtors&amp;#x27; prison" label="debtors&amp;#x27; prison"/>
<link wikidata="Q11242506" start="3308" end="3318" title="highwayman" label="highwayman"/>
<link wikidata="Q7995931" start="3387" end="3398" title="Whitefriars, London" label="Whitefriars"/>
<link wikidata="Q2197437" start="4241" end="4260" title="King&amp;#x27;s Company" label="King&amp;#x27;s Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q7301828" start="4500" end="4513" title="Rebecca Marshall" label="Beck Marshall"/>
<link wikidata="Q665489" start="5123" end="5138" title="Royal Tunbridge Wells" label="Tunbridge Wells"/>
<link wikidata="Q917048" start="5856" end="5862" title="Great Plague of London" label="plague"/>
<link wikidata="Q164679" start="6417" end="6437" title="Great Fire of London" label="Great Fire of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q953718" start="7520" end="7534" title="Henry Bennet, 1st Earl of Arlington" label="Lord Arlington"/>
<link wikidata="Q122553" start="8099" end="8120" title="Charles II of England" label="Charles II of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q11242506" start="8526" end="8536" title="highwayman" label="highwayman"/>
<link wikidata="Q7448143" start="9001" end="9014" title="self-made man" label="self-made man"/>
<link wikidata="Q122553" start="10262" end="10283" title="Charles II of England" label="Charles II of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q235092" start="10411" end="10451" title="Barbara Palmer, 1st Duchess of Cleveland" label="Barbara Palmer, 1st Duchess of Cleveland"/>
<link wikidata="Q336101" start="10580" end="10619" title="George Villiers, 2nd Duke of Buckingham" label="George Villiers, 2nd Duke of Buckingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q271155" start="10729" end="10765" title="Frances Stewart, Duchess of Richmond" label="Frances Stewart, Duchess of Richmond"/>
<link wikidata="Q176253" start="10873" end="10894" title="Catherine of Braganza" label="Catherine of Braganza"/>
<link wikidata="Q4793043" start="11403" end="11425" title="Armed Services Edition" label="Armed Services Edition"/>
<link wikidata="Q771" start="11805" end="11818" title="Massachusetts" label="Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q3406492" start="11826" end="11842" title="Massachusetts Attorney General" label="attorney general"/>
<link wikidata="Q32518" start="12253" end="12261" title="ellipsis" label="ellipses"/>
<link wikidata="Q7867468" start="12728" end="12751" title="USS Astoria (CL-90)" label="USS &amp;quot;Astoria&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q456822" start="12989" end="13006" title="Forever Amber (film)" label="A film adaptation"/>
<link wikidata="Q434841" start="13010" end="13026" title="20th Century Fox" label="20th Century Fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q7327011" start="13292" end="13305" title="Richard Keane" label="Richard Keane"/>
<link wikidata="Q95029" start="13469" end="13506" title="The League of Extraordinary Gentlemen" label="The League of Extraordinary Gentlemen"/>
<link wikidata="Q978952" start="13585" end="13605" title="Prospero" label="Prospero&amp;#x27;s Men."/>
<link wikidata="Q312264" start="13607" end="13624" title="Captain Beefheart" label="Captain Beefheart"/>
<link wikidata="Q194790" start="13735" end="13753" title="Trout Mask Replica" label="Trout Mask Replica"/>
<link wikidata="Q28047771" start="13762" end="13775" title="Ernest Ambler" label="Ernest Ambler"/>
<link wikidata="Q176691" start="13813" end="13841" title="National Bureau of Standards" label="National Bureau of Standards"/>
<link wikidata="Q752719" start="14012" end="14034" title="Gaithersburg, Maryland" label="Gaithersburg, Maryland"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="246556" wikidata="Q1195881" url="?curid=246556" title="The Morning After (1986 film)">
<text>The Morning After is a 1986 American psychological thriller film directed by Sidney Lumet and starring Jane Fonda, Jeff Bridges, and Raul Julia. It follows a washed-up, alcoholic actress who awakens on Thanksgiving morning beside the dead body of a photographer in his loft, with no memory of the events from the night before. She attempts to uncover the truth of what occurred with the help of a former police officer she encounters while on the run.

Released by 20th Century Fox on Christmas Day 1986, the film received generally favorable reviews. Fonda received a nomination for the Academy Award for Best Actress for her performance in the film.

==Plot==
Alexandra &quot;Alex&quot; Sternbergen, a washed-up, alcoholic actress who performs under the stage name &quot;Viveca Van Loren&quot;, wakes up on Thanksgiving 1986 next to the bloodied corpse of a sleazy photographer named Bobby Korshack in his Los Angeles loft. Suffering a hangover, Alex does not recall any events from the night before. She phones her husband Joaquin &quot;Jacky&quot; Manero, a salon owner from whom she is separated, and he insists that Alex call the police. Instead, she attempts to flee the city but is unable to get a flight amidst the crush of holiday travelers. In a parking garage, she manages to hitch a ride back downtown from Turner Kendall, a former police officer who was discharged.

Alex returns to Bobby&#x27;s apartment to clean the evidence and obtain the murder weapon. While leaving, she is met by Turner, returning the pocketbook she left in his car; he claims to have tracked her to the area using a matchbook with Bobby&#x27;s studio address on it. Alex reluctantly agrees to invite Turner into her apartment, where the two have a makeshift Thanksgiving dinner. The evening ends with Alex drunkenly stumbling into bed, after which Turner leaves.

In the morning, Alex awakens to find Bobby&#x27;s dead body in her shower, causing her to flee her apartment. She is met by Turner, who is returning to check on her. Suffering withdrawals, Turner brings Alex to a convenience store to purchase beer, and she confesses to him the events that occurred the day before. Believing Alex killed Bobby, Turner urges her to contact the authorities, but she fears she will not be believed based on a domestic assault conviction in which she stabbed her ex-husband with a paring knife while intoxicated.

Alex visits her friend Frankie, a drag queen, to obtain clothing to disguise herself. Turner subsequently confronts Alex, informing her that he searched her apartment but found no sign of Bobby&#x27;s body, and believes that she may have been framed. Meanwhile, police investigating Bobby&#x27;s murder visit Jacky&#x27;s salon to question him about Alex&#x27;s whereabouts. Alex spends the night at Turner&#x27;s home, and the two have sex. In the morning, Alex is dismayed to find newspaper articles detailing her disappearance and suspicion in Bobby&#x27;s murder. She visits her lawyer, Mr. Hurley, who is overseeing her divorce case from Jacky. Meanwhile, Turner interviews Bobby&#x27;s neighbor, who tells him she witnessed Alex raving in a drunken state the night of Bobby&#x27;s murder. Alex arrives at Jacky&#x27;s salon, and he agrees to style her hair in attempt to further conceal her identity.

Alex stays at Jacky&#x27;s salon while he attends a dinner with his new lover, socialite Isabel Harding, and is startled when Turner appears there. Jacky returns with Isabel and renders Turner unconscious by bludgeoning him with a vase. It is revealed that Isabel murdered Bobby, who had been blackmailing her with lascivious photographs, and Jacky framed Alex for the crime to protect her. Jacky attempts to drown Alex in a bathtub to silence her, while a remorseful Isabel looks on. However, Turner comes to and he shoots and wounds Jacky before losing consciousness again, thereby saving Alex. Police arrive and Isabel turns on Jacky, telling police he is the one who murdered Bobby. Later, Alex visits Turner while he recovers in the hospital, and tells him she has not had a drink in two days. Turner reveals to Alex that he too is a recovering alcoholic. When Turner asks Alex to leave, she initially complies, before returning to his bedside and declaring that he makes her happy.

==Cast==
==Reception==
===Critical response===
On the review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes, the film holds an approval rating of 63% based on 19 reviews, with an average rating of 5.7/10. Linda Rasmussen of AllMovie described it as an &quot;excellent thriller, crisply directed by Sidney Lumet&quot; that &quot;creates a good deal of suspense&quot;, and singled out Fonda for praise: &quot;The highlight of the film is the performance by Jane Fonda reminiscent of her magnificent performance as Bree Daniels in &quot;Klute&quot;.&quot;

Critic Roger Ebert remarked the film&#x27;s strong opening sequence, but added: &quot;Unfortunately, &quot;The Morning After&quot; never lives up to its early promise – not as a thriller, anyway. The plot has some yawning gaps in it, and thriller plots should be watertight. But [it] is worth seeing anyway, because of the characters that it develops, and the performances of Fonda and Jeff Bridges in the two leads.&quot; Vincent Canby of &quot;The New York Times&quot; praised the film&#x27;s dark humor, writing that it &quot;becomes the kind of enjoyable, sophisticated comedy-mystery that requires much more talent to pull off successfully than is usually acknowledged. It may be instantly disposable, but heaven save us from a season of commercial movies that, like sensible shoes, are designed to last forever.&quot;

===Accolades===
Fonda was nominated for the Academy Award for Best Actress.

==Home media==
Warner Bros. Home Entertainment released the film on DVD in 2005, followed by a Warner Archive Collection made-on-demand DVD-R release on June 28, 2016.

The film was released on Blu-ray for the first time by Shout! Factory on May 30, 2023. The release features a new 2K restoration of the film from an interpositive, along with two brand new featurettes.

==References==
==External links==
* 
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q590103" start="37" end="59" title="psychological thriller" label="psychological thriller"/>
<link wikidata="Q51559" start="77" end="89" title="Sidney Lumet" label="Sidney Lumet"/>
<link wikidata="Q41142" start="103" end="113" title="Jane Fonda" label="Jane Fonda"/>
<link wikidata="Q174843" start="115" end="127" title="Jeff Bridges" label="Jeff Bridges"/>
<link wikidata="Q317654" start="133" end="143" title="Raul Julia" label="Raul Julia"/>
<link wikidata="Q13959" start="202" end="214" title="Thanksgiving" label="Thanksgiving"/>
<link wikidata="Q434841" start="465" end="481" title="20th Century Fox" label="20th Century Fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q19809" start="485" end="498" title="Christmas Day" label="Christmas Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q103618" start="588" end="618" title="Academy Award for Best Actress" label="Academy Award for Best Actress"/>
<link wikidata="Q13959" start="809" end="821" title="Thanksgiving" label="Thanksgiving"/>
<link wikidata="Q498902" start="2029" end="2040" title="drug withdrawal" label="withdrawals"/>
<link wikidata="Q337084" start="2430" end="2440" title="drag queen" label="drag queen"/>
<link wikidata="Q3491832" start="4347" end="4364" title="review aggregator" label="review aggregator"/>
<link wikidata="Q105584" start="4373" end="4388" title="Rotten Tomatoes" label="Rotten Tomatoes"/>
<link wikidata="Q477809" start="4505" end="4513" title="AllMovie" label="AllMovie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348177" start="4815" end="4820" title="Klute" label="Klute"/>
<link wikidata="Q212173" start="4842" end="4853" title="Roger Ebert" label="Roger Ebert"/>
<link wikidata="Q716442" start="5258" end="5271" title="Vincent Canby" label="Vincent Canby"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="5281" end="5299" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q103618" start="5704" end="5734" title="Academy Award for Best Actress" label="Academy Award for Best Actress"/>
<link wikidata="Q1188361" start="5752" end="5783" title="Warner Bros. Home Entertainment" label="Warner Bros. Home Entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q5294" start="5805" end="5808" title="DVD" label="DVD"/>
<link wikidata="Q7969697" start="5832" end="5857" title="Warner Archive Collection" label="Warner Archive Collection"/>
<link wikidata="Q5206377" start="5873" end="5878" title="DVD-R" label="DVD-R"/>
<link wikidata="Q47770" start="5931" end="5938" title="Blu-ray" label="Blu-ray"/>
<link wikidata="Q7502767" start="5961" end="5975" title="Shout! Factory" label="Shout! Factory"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="246557" wikidata="Q1633629" url="?curid=246557" title="Crimes of the Heart">
<text>Crimes of the Heart is a play by American playwright Beth Henley. It is set in Hazlehurst, Mississippi in the mid-20th century. The play won the 1981 Pulitzer Prize for Drama and was nominated for the Tony Award for Best Play. In 1986, the play was novelized and released as a book, written by Claudia Reilly.

==Synopsis==
The tragicomedy relates the story of the three Magrath sisters, Meg, Babe, and Lenny, who reunite at Old Granddaddy&#x27;s home in Hazlehurst, Mississippi, after Babe shoots her abusive husband. The sisters were raised in a dysfunctional family with a penchant for ugly predicaments. Each has endured her share of hardship and misery. Past resentments bubble to the surface as the sisters are forced to deal with assorted relatives and past relationships while coping with Babe&#x27;s latest incident. Each sister is forced to face the consequences of the &quot;crimes of the heart&quot; she has committed.

==Summary==
In Act One, Lenny and Chick walk into the scene talking about the news that is in the paper. They start talking about what is happening with the sisters. Chick mentions that Doc is crippled with a limp due to Meg&#x27;s actions and does not want her to come home. Chick then gives Lenny a birthday present; a box of chocolates. Doc enters with a bag of pecans for Lenny, and Chick leaves. Doc gave her the pecans because it is her birthday and her horse has died. Doc leaves shortly after to go pick up his son from the dentist. Meg then arrives home and hears the news about what Babe has done; she has shot her husband. Meg tells Lenny about her failed singing career. They then talk about Doc and his family. Babe then arrives and excited to see her sister, but promptly leaves after being scolded by Chick. The scene continues with more exposition about the case and what is happening with the sisters. 

In Act Two, Babe&#x27;s lawyer is going over her case with her as she tells him what happened. They receive a phone call telling Barnette that there is new evidence he needs to pick up at the hospital. He leaves to go pick up the evidence. Lenny arrives home and tells Babe that she is frustrated with Meg because she lied to their grandfather about her success. Meg arrives home with alcohol and a newspaper for Babe. Meg apologizes for lying to her grandfather and it starts an argument. This leads Meg to make Lenny cry, and Babe follows her to comfort her. Doc arrives and shares a drink with Meg. Meg and Doc reconnect about the hurricane and why they separated due to Meg leaving town. Meg explains that she went to the psych ward and her life had gone downhill. After a pause, Doc offers to go for a ride and look at the Moon, and they leave. Babe comes to look for her sister but finds her lawyer, Barnette with photos of her and her lover, Willie Jay. She starts to panic, but Lenny comes downstairs to tell them that Old Granddaddy had another stroke. 

In Act Three, Chick asks how Old Granddaddy is. Lenny tells her that he will more than likely die soon. Chick goes home to make some phone calls. Lenny tells Babe that she wished that Old Granddaddy would pass and that they didn&#x27;t all fight so much. Meg comes home happy and tells her sisters that she realized she had empathy for others. The sisters told Meg that their grandfather will more than likely die soon, and they start laughing. Lenny tells them that she doesn&#x27;t want to be alone, and Meg tells her that she should call an old lover. Lenny goes upstairs, and Babe shows Meg the photos. Barnette shows up to collect the photos and tells Babe that he had a plan for her case. Meg leaves with Barnette to go buy Lenny a birthday cake. Lenny comes back downstairs and Chick arrives to tell the sisters that it is awful Meg is their sister. Lenny stands up for Meg, chasing Chick out of the house. She then calls her old lover and they make a date. She goes outside to find Meg, and while she is gone Babe tries to kill herself. Meg comes home to find Babe, and Babe reveals she knows why their mother killed the cat when she killed herself. When Lenny arrives back, they sing Happy Birthday to her and she wishes that they were happy and smiling. Once they cut the cake, they are all laughing and smiling, finally happy.

==Production history==
Henley completed her play in 1978 and submitted it to several regional theatres without success. Unknown to her, a friend entered it in the Great American Play Contest at the Actors Theatre of Louisville.
The play was first performed in February 1979 at the Actors Theatre Louisville and it was named co-winner of the contest. The play continued to be developed, with productions in Los Gatos, California, St. Louis, and Baltimore at the Centre Stage Theatre.

The Manhattan Theatre Club produced the play Off-Broadway at Stage 73, from December 9, 1980, to January 11, 1981, for 35 sold-out performances. Directed by Melvin Bernhardt, the set design was by John Lee Beatty, costumes by Patricia McGourty, and lighting by Dennis Parichy. The cast featured Mia Dillon (Babe McGrath), Mary Beth Hurt (Meg McGrath), Lizbeth MacKay (Lenny McGrath), Julie Nesbit (Chick Boyle), Stephen Burleigh (Doc Porter), and Peter MacNicol (Barnette Lloyd). 

The play opened on Broadway at the John Golden Theatre on November 4, 1981, and closed on February 13, 1983, after 535 performances and 13 previews with cast replacements Raymond Baker (Doc Porter) and Sharon Ullrick (Chick Boyle). Holly Hunter made her Broadway debut later in the run as a replacement in the role of Meg. J. Smith-Cameron also made her debut later in the run as Babe. The Broadway cast also performed in a production at the Ahmanson Theatre in 1983.

The first London production was in 1983 at the Bush Theatre. The first Chicago production was at the Blackstone Theatre in 1983.

An Off-Broadway revival at Second Stage Theatre ran from April 16, 2001 to May 13, 2001. It was directed by Garry Hynes, and featured Julia Murney (Chick), Enid Graham (Lenny), Mary Catherine Garrison (Babe), and Amy Ryan (Meg). The play was nominated for the Lucille Lortel Award for Best Revival.

The play was presented at the Williamstown Theatre Festival in August 2007, directed by Kathleen Turner and featuring Jennifer Dundas, Sarah Paulson, Lily Rabe, and Kali Rocha. This production was moved to the Roundabout Theatre Company for an Off-Broadway run. It ran February 14 to April 20, 2008 with Jessica Stone replacing Rocha as Chick.

==Historical casting==
==Film adaptation==

The 1986 film adaptation was directed by Bruce Beresford; and starred Sissy Spacek as Babe, Jessica Lange as Meg, Diane Keaton as Lenny, Tess Harper as Chick, Sam Shepard as Doc, and Hurd Hatfield as Old Granddaddy. It garnered three Academy Award nominations: Best Adapted Screenplay (Beth Henley), Best Actress (Spacek), and Best Supporting Actress (Harper).

==Critical response==
Charles Isherwood, in his review of the 2008 revival for &quot;The New York Times&quot; called the production &quot;a touching revival&quot;, and wrote: &quot;Was another romp through Ms. Henley’s playfully Gothic imagination entirely necessary? Perhaps not. Might regular theatergoers eventually tire of these adorable eccentrics, laughing through their tears and crying themselves back to laughter again? Possibly... Interesting roles for women, on screen or behind it, are hard to come by. The quick return of &#x27;Crimes of the Heart,&#x27;... gives another handful of talented women a chance to exercise—and, in the case of Ms. Turner, deepen—their gifts onstage.&quot;

==Awards and nominations==
;Awards
* 1981 New York Drama Critics&#x27; Circle Award for Best American Play
* 1981 Pulitzer Prize for Drama
* 1982 Theatre World Award
:Lizbeth MacKay
:Peter MacNicol

;Nominations
* 1982 Tony Award for Best Play
* 1982 Tony Award, Best Featured Actress in a Play
:Mia Dillon
:Mary Beth Hurt
* 1982 Tony Award, Best Direction of a Play (Melvin Bernhardt)
* 1981 Drama Desk Award for Outstanding New Play
* 1981 Drama Desk Award Outstanding Actress in a Play (Mary Beth Hurt)
* 1981 Drama Desk Award Outstanding Director of a Play
* 2002 Lucille Lortel Award, Outstanding Revival

==References==
==External links==
* 
* Curtain Up review, February 13, 2008</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q25379" start="25" end="29" title="Play (theatre)" label="play"/>
<link wikidata="Q846570" start="33" end="41" title="Americans" label="American"/>
<link wikidata="Q438676" start="53" end="64" title="Beth Henley" label="Beth Henley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1012303" start="79" end="102" title="Hazlehurst, Mississippi" label="Hazlehurst, Mississippi"/>
<link wikidata="Q289214" start="150" end="174" title="Pulitzer Prize for Drama" label="Pulitzer Prize for Drama"/>
<link wikidata="Q1799442" start="201" end="225" title="Tony Award for Best Play" label="Tony Award for Best Play"/>
<link wikidata="Q192881" start="328" end="339" title="tragicomedy" label="tragicomedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1012303" start="455" end="478" title="Hazlehurst, Mississippi" label="Hazlehurst, Mississippi"/>
<link wikidata="Q906343" start="548" end="568" title="dysfunctional family" label="dysfunctional family"/>
<link wikidata="Q7309244" start="4341" end="4357" title="Regional theatre in the United States" label="regional theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q2823763" start="4454" end="4482" title="Actors Theatre of Louisville" label="Actors Theatre of Louisville"/>
<link wikidata="Q6749316" start="4744" end="4766" title="Manhattan Theatre Club" label="Manhattan Theatre Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058828" start="4785" end="4797" title="Off-Broadway" label="Off-Broadway"/>
<link wikidata="Q6813938" start="4897" end="4913" title="Melvin Bernhardt" label="Melvin Bernhardt"/>
<link wikidata="Q16200306" start="4937" end="4952" title="John Lee Beatty" label="John Lee Beatty"/>
<link wikidata="Q5258841" start="5001" end="5015" title="Dennis Parichy" label="Dennis Parichy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1947385" start="5035" end="5045" title="Mia Dillon" label="Mia Dillon"/>
<link wikidata="Q271460" start="5062" end="5076" title="Mary Beth Hurt" label="Mary Beth Hurt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1887358" start="5092" end="5106" title="Lizbeth MacKay" label="Lizbeth MacKay"/>
<link wikidata="Q299309" start="5187" end="5201" title="Peter MacNicol" label="Peter MacNicol"/>
<link wikidata="Q235065" start="5241" end="5249" title="Broadway theatre" label="Broadway"/>
<link wikidata="Q6235625" start="5257" end="5276" title="John Golden Theatre" label="John Golden Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q7297161" start="5393" end="5406" title="Ray Baker (actor)" label="Raymond Baker"/>
<link wikidata="Q105660" start="5454" end="5466" title="Holly Hunter" label="Holly Hunter"/>
<link wikidata="Q452979" start="5545" end="5561" title="J. Smith-Cameron" label="J. Smith-Cameron"/>
<link wikidata="Q401052" start="5664" end="5680" title="Ahmanson Theatre" label="Ahmanson Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q5001421" start="5738" end="5750" title="Bush Theatre" label="Bush Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q6819718" start="5792" end="5810" title="Blackstone Theatre" label="Blackstone Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058828" start="5824" end="5836" title="Off-Broadway" label="Off-Broadway"/>
<link wikidata="Q7443561" start="5848" end="5868" title="Second Stage Theatre" label="Second Stage Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q5524154" start="5929" end="5940" title="Garry Hynes" label="Garry Hynes"/>
<link wikidata="Q6306604" start="5955" end="5967" title="Julia Murney" label="Julia Murney"/>
<link wikidata="Q231203" start="6034" end="6042" title="Amy Ryan" label="Amy Ryan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6697293" start="6081" end="6095" title="Lucille Lortel" label="Lucille Lortel"/>
<link wikidata="Q8021310" start="6151" end="6180" title="Williamstown Theatre Festival" label="Williamstown Theatre Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q222008" start="6209" end="6224" title="Kathleen Turner" label="Kathleen Turner"/>
<link wikidata="Q531532" start="6239" end="6254" title="Jennifer Dundas" label="Jennifer Dundas"/>
<link wikidata="Q257442" start="6256" end="6269" title="Sarah Paulson" label="Sarah Paulson"/>
<link wikidata="Q349312" start="6271" end="6280" title="Lily Rabe" label="Lily Rabe"/>
<link wikidata="Q437449" start="6286" end="6296" title="Kali Rocha" label="Kali Rocha"/>
<link wikidata="Q7371225" start="6331" end="6357" title="Roundabout Theatre Company" label="Roundabout Theatre Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q449220" start="6551" end="6566" title="Bruce Beresford" label="Bruce Beresford"/>
<link wikidata="Q190994" start="6580" end="6592" title="Sissy Spacek" label="Sissy Spacek"/>
<link wikidata="Q173585" start="6602" end="6615" title="Jessica Lange" label="Jessica Lange"/>
<link wikidata="Q102642" start="6624" end="6636" title="Diane Keaton" label="Diane Keaton"/>
<link wikidata="Q443044" start="6647" end="6658" title="Tess Harper" label="Tess Harper"/>
<link wikidata="Q294583" start="6669" end="6680" title="Sam Shepard" label="Sam Shepard"/>
<link wikidata="Q330353" start="6693" end="6706" title="Hurd Hatfield" label="Hurd Hatfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q19020" start="6744" end="6757" title="Academy Award" label="Academy Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q107258" start="6771" end="6794" title="Academy Award for Writing Adapted Screenplay" label="Best Adapted Screenplay"/>
<link wikidata="Q438676" start="6796" end="6807" title="Beth Henley" label="Beth Henley"/>
<link wikidata="Q103618" start="6810" end="6822" title="Academy Award for Best Actress" label="Best Actress"/>
<link wikidata="Q106301" start="6837" end="6860" title="Academy Award for Best Supporting Actress" label="Best Supporting Actress"/>
<link wikidata="Q5079309" start="6894" end="6911" title="Charles Isherwood" label="Charles Isherwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="6957" end="6975" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q2711507" start="7613" end="7654" title="New York Drama Critics&amp;#x27; Circle Award" label="New York Drama Critics&amp;#x27; Circle Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q289214" start="7685" end="7709" title="Pulitzer Prize for Drama" label="Pulitzer Prize for Drama"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131356" start="7717" end="7736" title="Theatre World Award" label="Theatre World Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q191874" start="7790" end="7800" title="Tony Award" label="Tony Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q682154" start="7964" end="7980" title="Drama Desk Award" label="Drama Desk Award"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="246559" wikidata="Q903257" url="?curid=246559" title="Peggy Sue Got Married">
<text>Peggy Sue Got Married is a 1986 American fantasy comedy-drama film directed by Francis Ford Coppola starring Kathleen Turner as a woman on the verge of a divorce, who finds herself transported back to the days of her senior year in high school in 1960. The film was written by husband-and-wife team Jerry Leichtling and Arlene Sarner.

The film was a box office success and received positive reviews from critics. It was nominated for three Academy Awards: Best Actress (Turner), Best Cinematography, and Best Costume Design. It was also nominated for two Golden Globe Awards: Best Actress – Musical or Comedy (Turner) and Best Picture – Musical or Comedy.

The title of the movie and the name of the main character refer to the 1959 Buddy Holly song of the same name, which is played over the film&#x27;s opening credits.

==Plot==
In 1985, Peggy Sue Bodell attends her 25-year high school reunion, accompanied by her daughter, Beth, rather than her husband, Charlie, who was her high-school sweetheart. She and Charlie married right after graduation when Peggy Sue became pregnant, but have recently separated due to Charlie&#x27;s infidelity.

At the reunion, Peggy reconnects with her old high school girlfriends, Maddy and Carol. She ignores Charlie when he unexpectedly arrives. The emcee then announces the reunion&#x27;s “king and queen&quot;: Richard Norvik, the former class geek who is now a billionaire inventor, and Peggy Sue. Overwhelmed, she faints onstage while being crowned.

Peggy Sue awakens, only it is now 1960, her senior year of high school. Confused and disoriented, she decides to go home to her parents and act like everything is normal. Hoping that Richard Norvik can shed light on her situation, she befriends him and relates what happened. He disbelieves her story until Peggy Sue begins giving details about the future. She later decides to break up with Charlie. However, she wants to sleep with him after a party, but he panics and reminds her that she rebuffed him the weekend before. He takes her home, but instead of going inside, she goes to an all-night café where she sees fellow student Michael Fitzsimmons, an artsy loner whom she always wished she had slept with. As they sit and talk about Hemingway and Kerouac, Peggy Sue learns they have much in common. They leave on his motorcycle and later have sex under the stars.

The next night at a music bar, Michael wants Peggy to go to Utah with him and another woman for a polygamous relationship where the two women support him while he writes. She declines, telling him to use their night together as inspiration for his writing. Charlie happens to be singing at the bar, and she sees there is more to him than she realized. Charlie comes off the stage and speaks to a music agent who is there to evaluate him, but the agent is unimpressed.

The next day, Peggy Sue tries to talk to Charlie, but he lashes out, upset over failing to secure a record deal. She leaves to say goodbye to Richard, stating that she wants to stop ruining her life and everyone&#x27;s around her, especially Charlie&#x27;s, since the reason he stopped singing is because she got pregnant. Richard proposes, but she turns him down, not wanting to marry so young or derail his future. Peggy Sue visits her grandparents on her 18th birthday. Upon learning that her grandmother is psychic, she tells them her story. Her grandfather takes her to his Masonic lodge, where the members perform a ritual to return her to 1985. Charlie enters the lodge and—when lights go out—picks up and runs out with Peggy Sue, leaving everyone inside believing the ritual worked.

Charlie tells her that he has given up singing and has been given 10% of the family business. He then proposes and gives her the locket she was wearing at the beginning of the film. She looks inside and sees baby pictures of herself and Charlie, which resemble their children. Peggy Sue realizes they love each other. They have sex, proving that she would make the same choices again.

Peggy Sue awakens in a hospital back in 1985, with Charlie at her side. Charlie shows Peggy Sue the book Michael has written with the dedication, &quot;To Peggy Sue and a Starry Night&quot; (indicating that Peggy possibly did travel back in time). Charlie deeply regrets his infidelity and wants her back. Peggy Sue recalls her grandfather saying, &quot;It&#x27;s your grandma&#x27;s strudel that&#x27;s kept this family together,&quot; so she invites Charlie to dinner and says, &quot;I&#x27;ll bake a strudel.&quot;

==Cast==
==Production==
===Development===
The film was originally going to star Debra Winger and be directed by Jonathan Demme. They had creative differences and Demme left the project, to be replaced by Penny Marshall, who would be making her feature directorial debut. Then Marshall had creative differences with the writers and left the project. Winger then quit out of loyalty to Marshall. (Marshall then made her directing debut with &quot;Jumpin&#x27; Jack Flash&quot; after the original director dropped out.)

Rastar, the production company, offered the film to Francis Ford Coppola, hoping to entice Winger back to the project. In the end, Kathleen Turner became the star. Two of Coppola&#x27;s relatives were also cast in the film: his daughter Sofia Coppola as Peggy Sue&#x27;s sister, Nancy; and his nephew Nicolas Cage as Peggy&#x27;s boyfriend and then estranged husband, Charlie. (Cage has later said he never wanted to play the role, but was asked multiple times by Coppola; he only agreed to take the part if he could play it in an over-the-top manner.)

===Filming===
Kathleen Turner stated that Francis Ford Coppola was contractually obligated to finish the film on time or lose final cut privilege. Accordingly, the cast and crew worked twenty hours a day, six days a week, to deliver the movie to the studio on time.

Turner has spoken numerous times about the difficulty of working with co-star Nicolas Cage (Coppola&#x27;s nephew). In her 2008 memoir, she wrote that: 

Turner also criticized Cage for his decision to wear false teeth and to adopt a nasal fry for his character (Cage said he based it on Pokey from &quot;The Gumby Show&quot;). During an interview in 2018, Turner commented on Cage&#x27;s nasal voice that: 

In 2008, in response to Turner&#x27;s claims that he had driven drunk and stolen a chihuahua, Cage sued her for defamation and won. In exchange he received a public apology from Turner, admission from her publisher that the claims were false and defamatory, and a pledge that Turner and the publisher would make a substantial donation to charity.

==Release and reception==
&quot;Peggy Sue Got Married&quot; gained a positive reaction from critics. It currently holds an 87% rating on Rotten Tomatoes based on 31 reviews, with an average rating of 6.9/10. The site&#x27;s consensus reads, &quot;&quot;Peggy Sue Got Married&quot; may seem just another in the line of 80&#x27;s boomer nostalgia films, but none of the others have Kathleen Turner&#x27;s keen lead performance.&quot; 

Rita Kempley of &quot;The Washington Post&quot; gave the film a positive review, but wrote of Cage&#x27;s performance: &quot;What mars the movie, aside from the pokey opening and overused theme, is an icky performance by Nicolas Cage as Charlie. He calls it surreal, &#x27;a type of cartoon acting.&#x27; Well, he does kind of remind you of Jughead.&quot; Roger Ebert of the &quot;Chicago Sun-Times&quot; gave the film four-out-of-four-stars, calling it &quot;one of the best movies of the year&quot; and stated Turner&#x27;s performance &quot;must be seen to be believed.&quot;

The film grossed $41,382,841 in the U.S. It was the first box-office success for Coppola since &quot;The Outsiders&quot; (1983).

In addition to the film&#x27;s three Academy Award nominations and Turner&#x27;s nomination at the Sant Jordi Awards, Turner won the 1986 National Board of Review Award for Best Actress. 
The film appeared on Siskel and Ebert&#x27;s best of 1986 lists.

&quot;Peggy Sue Got Married&quot; ranks No. 34 on &quot;Entertainment Weekly&quot;″s list of &quot;50 Best High School Movies&quot;.

;American Film Institute lists
* AFI&#x27;s 100 Years ... 100 Laughs – Nominated
* AFI&#x27;s 10 Top 10 – Nominated Fantasy Film

==Musical adaptation==

The film was adapted by Leichtling and Sarner into a full-length musical theater production which opened in London&#x27;s West End theatre district in 2001. Despite receiving solid reviews and a several million pound advance, 9/11 forced the show to close early.

==References==
==External links==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q157394" start="41" end="48" title="Fantasy film" label="fantasy"/>
<link wikidata="Q859369" start="49" end="66" title="comedy drama" label="comedy-drama film"/>
<link wikidata="Q56094" start="79" end="99" title="Francis Ford Coppola" label="Francis Ford Coppola"/>
<link wikidata="Q222008" start="109" end="124" title="Kathleen Turner" label="Kathleen Turner"/>
<link wikidata="Q19020" start="441" end="455" title="Academy Awards" label="Academy Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q103618" start="457" end="469" title="Academy Award for Best Actress" label="Best Actress"/>
<link wikidata="Q131520" start="480" end="499" title="Academy Award for Best Cinematography" label="Best Cinematography"/>
<link wikidata="Q277536" start="505" end="524" title="Academy Award for Best Costume Design" label="Best Costume Design"/>
<link wikidata="Q1011547" start="556" end="575" title="Golden Globe Awards" label="Golden Globe Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q1011564" start="577" end="609" title="Golden Globe Award for Best Actress in a Motion Picture – Musical or Comedy" label="Best Actress – Musical or Comedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q670282" start="623" end="655" title="Golden Globe Award for Best Motion Picture – Musical or Comedy" label="Best Picture – Musical or Comedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5977" start="734" end="745" title="Buddy Holly" label="Buddy Holly"/>
<link wikidata="Q7160749" start="746" end="767" title="Peggy Sue Got Married (song)" label="song of the same name"/>
<link wikidata="Q23434" start="2233" end="2242" title="Hemingway" label="Hemingway"/>
<link wikidata="Q160534" start="2247" end="2254" title="Kerouac" label="Kerouac"/>
<link wikidata="Q41726" start="3413" end="3420" title="Freemasonry" label="Masonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q229009" start="4611" end="4623" title="Debra Winger" label="Debra Winger"/>
<link wikidata="Q48987" start="4643" end="4657" title="Jonathan Demme" label="Jonathan Demme"/>
<link wikidata="Q237659" start="4735" end="4749" title="Penny Marshall" label="Penny Marshall"/>
<link wikidata="Q492604" start="4976" end="4999" title="Jumpin&amp;#x27; Jack Flash (film)" label="Jumpin&amp;#x27; Jack Flash"/>
<link wikidata="Q466254" start="5049" end="5055" title="Rastar" label="Rastar"/>
<link wikidata="Q56094" start="5101" end="5121" title="Francis Ford Coppola" label="Francis Ford Coppola"/>
<link wikidata="Q193628" start="5286" end="5299" title="Sofia Coppola" label="Sofia Coppola"/>
<link wikidata="Q42869" start="5350" end="5362" title="Nicolas Cage" label="Nicolas Cage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1042860" start="5729" end="5748" title="final cut privilege" label="final cut privilege"/>
<link wikidata="Q1616186" start="6110" end="6113" title="Vocal fry" label="fry"/>
<link wikidata="Q43998029" start="6158" end="6163" title="Pokey (Gumby character)" label="Pokey"/>
<link wikidata="Q43998029" start="6175" end="6189" title="The Gumby Show" label="The Gumby Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q105584" start="6764" end="6779" title="Rotten Tomatoes" label="Rotten Tomatoes"/>
<link wikidata="Q166032" start="7083" end="7102" title="The Washington Post" label="The Washington Post"/>
<link wikidata="Q3188107" start="7402" end="7409" title="Jughead Jones" label="Jughead"/>
<link wikidata="Q212173" start="7417" end="7428" title="Roger Ebert" label="Roger Ebert"/>
<link wikidata="Q577417" start="7442" end="7459" title="Chicago Sun-Times" label="Chicago Sun-Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055332" start="7742" end="7755" title="The Outsiders (film)" label="The Outsiders"/>
<link wikidata="Q19020" start="7808" end="7821" title="Academy Award" label="Academy Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q2372386" start="7870" end="7887" title="Sant Jordi Awards" label="Sant Jordi Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q1419495" start="7909" end="7956" title="National Board of Review Award for Best Actress" label="National Board of Review Award for Best Actress"/>
<link wikidata="Q106946713" start="7980" end="7996" title="Siskel and Ebert" label="Siskel and Ebert"/>
<link wikidata="Q275033" start="8081" end="8101" title="Entertainment Weekly" label="Entertainment Weekly"/>
<link wikidata="Q207460" start="8160" end="8183" title="American Film Institute" label="American Film Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q1767226" start="8192" end="8227" title="AFI&amp;#x27;s 100 Years ... 100 Laughs" label="AFI&amp;#x27;s 100 Years ... 100 Laughs"/>
<link wikidata="Q599107" start="8242" end="8262" title="AFI&amp;#x27;s 10 Top 10" label="AFI&amp;#x27;s 10 Top 10"/>
<link wikidata="Q10806" start="8539" end="8543" title="September 11 attacks" label="9/11"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="246562" wikidata="Q450226" url="?curid=246562" title="Fan Chung">
<text>Fan-Rong King Chung Graham (; born October 9, 1949), known professionally as Fan Chung, is a Taiwanese-born American mathematician who works mainly in the areas of spectral graph theory, extremal graph theory and random graphs, in particular in generalizing the Erdős–Rényi model for graphs with general degree distribution (including power-law graphs in the study of large information networks).

Since 1998, Chung has been the Paul Erdős Professor in Combinatorics at the University of California, San Diego (UCSD). She received her doctorate from the University of Pennsylvania in 1974, under the direction of Herbert Wilf. After working at Bell Laboratories and Bellcore for nineteen years, she joined the faculty of the University of Pennsylvania as the first female tenured professor in mathematics. She serves on the editorial boards of more than a dozen international journals. Since 2003 she has been the editor-in-chief of &quot;Internet Mathematics&quot;. She has been invited to give lectures at many conferences, including the International Congress of Mathematicians in 1994 and a plenary lecture on the mathematics of PageRank at the 2008 Annual meeting of the American Mathematical Society. She was selected to be a Noether Lecturer in 2009. In 2024, she was elected to the United States National Academy of Sciences.

==Biography==
Fan Chung was born on October 9, 1949, in Kaohsiung, Taiwan. Under the influence of her father, an engineer, she became interested in mathematics, especially in the area of combinatorics in high school in Kaohsiung. After high school, Chung entered the National Taiwan University (NTU) to start her career in mathematics formally. While Chung was an undergraduate, she was surrounded by many female mathematicians, and this helped encourage her to pursue and study mathematics.

After graduating from NTU with a B.S. in mathematics, Chung went on to the University of Pennsylvania to pursue a career in mathematics. There she obtained the highest score in the qualifying exam by a wide margin, catching the attention of Herbert Wilf, who would eventually become her doctoral advisor. Wilf suggested Ramsey theory as a subject Chung could work on. During a single week studying material Chung had come up with new proofs for established results in the field. Wilf said: &quot;My eyes were bulging. I was very excited. I asked her to go to the blackboard and show me. What she wrote was incredible! In just one week, from a cold start, she had a major result in Ramsey theory. I told her she had just done two-thirds of a doctoral dissertation.&quot;

Chung was awarded a M.S. in 1972 and a Ph.D. two years later. By this time, she was married and had already given birth to her first child. The same year she received her Ph.D. and started working for the Mathematical Foundations of Computing Department at Bell Laboratories in Murray Hill, New Jersey. The position at Bell Laboratories was an opportunity to work with other excellent mathematicians, but also it contributed to her mathematical world powerfully. She has published many impressive mathematical papers, and published many joint papers with Ronald Graham.

===Bell Laboratories===
In 1974, Fan Chung graduated from the University of Pennsylvania and became a member of Technical Staff working for the Mathematical Foundations of Computing Department at Bell Laboratories in Murray Hill, New Jersey. She worked under Henry Pollak. During this time, Chung collaborated with many leading mathematicians who worked for Bell Laboratories.

In 1975, Chung published her first joint paper with Graham, &quot;On multicolor Ramsey numbers for complete bipartite graphs&quot;, which was published in the &quot;Journal of Combinatorial Theory (Series B)&quot;.

In 1983 the Bell Telephone Company was split up. Since Pollak joined and became head of a research unit within a new company, he asked Chung to become Research Manager. She supervised many mathematicians in the unit.

In 1990, she was one of the first to receive a Bellcore university fellowship, a sabbatical she spent at Harvard university.

===Later career===
After twenty years of work at Bell Laboratories and Bellcore, Chung decided to go back to the University of Pennsylvania to become a professor of mathematics. In 1998, she was named Distinguished Professor of Mathematics at the University of California, San Diego.

Beyond her contributions to graph theory, Chung has used her knowledge to connect different fields of science. As she wrote in &quot;Graph Theory in the Information Age&quot;,

: “In the past decade, graph theory has gone through a remarkable shift and a profound transformation. The change is in large part due to the humongous amount of information that we are confronted with. A main way to sort through massive data sets is to build and examine the network formed by interrelations. For example, Google’s successful Web search algorithms are based on the WWW graph, which contains all Web pages as vertices and hyperlinks as edges. There are all sorts of information networks, such as biological networks built from biological databases and social networks formed by email, phone calls, instant messaging, etc., as well as various types of physical networks. Of particular interest to mathematicians is the collaboration graph, which is based on the data from Mathematical Reviews. In the collaboration graph, every mathematician is a vertex, and two mathematicians who wrote a joint paper are connected.”

Chung&#x27;s life was profiled in the 2017 documentary film &quot;Girls who fell in love with Math&quot;.

In 2012, she became a fellow of the American Mathematical Society.

Chung was an American Mathematical Society (AMS) Council member at large.

===Personal life===
Chung has two children; the first child was born during her graduate studies from her first marriage.

Fan Chung&#x27;s first marriage ended in divorce in 1982. However, when she worked at Bell Laboratories, she met Ronald Graham. During that time, they became close friends and published many joint papers in graph theory, eventually marrying in 1983. She was married to him until his death in 2020.

In Paul Hoffman&#x27;s book &quot;The Man Who Loved Only Numbers&quot;, regarding her marriage with Graham, Chung said:

:Many mathematicians would hate to marry someone in the profession. They fear their relationship would be too competitive. In our case, not only are we both mathematicians, we both do work in the same areas. So we can understand and appreciate what the other is working on, and we can work on things together and sometimes make good progress.

Both Chung and Graham were close friends of the mathematician Paul Erdős, and have both published papers with him – 13 in her case; thus, both have Erdős numbers of one. In 1998, Graham and Chung co-wrote the book &quot;Erdős on Graphs.&quot;

==Research==
Chung has published more than 200 research papers and three books:
* &quot;Erdős on Graphs: His Legacy of Unsolved Problems&quot; (with Ron Graham), A K Peters, Ltd., 1998, 
* &quot;Spectral Graph Theory (CBMS Regional Conference Series in Mathematics, No. 92)&quot;, American Mathematical Society, 1997, 
* &quot;Complex Graphs and Networks (CBMS Regional Conference Series in Mathematics, No. 107 &quot; (with Linyuan Lu), American Mathematical Society, 2006, 

===Spectral graph theory===
Among Fan Chung&#x27;s publications, her contributions to spectral graph theory are important to this area of graph theory. From the first publications about undirected graphs to recent publications about directed graphs, Fan Chung creates the solid base in the spectral graph theory to the future graph theorist.

Spectral graph theory, as one of the most important theories in graph theory, combines the algebra and graph perfectly. Historically, algebraic methods treat many types of graphs efficiently. Her work initiated a geometric approach to spectral graph theory with connections to differential geometry. According to the biography &quot;Fan Rong K Chung Graham&quot;, &quot;Spectral graph theory studies how the spectrum of the Laplacian of a graph is related to its combinatorial properties.&quot;.

In 1997, the American Mathematical Society published Chung&#x27;s book &quot;Spectral graph theory&quot;. This book became a standard textbook at many universities and is the key to study spectral graph theory for many mathematics students who are interested in this area. Fan Chung&#x27;s study in the spectral graph theory brings this “algebraic connectivity” of graphs into a new and higher level.

===Network science===
Chung&#x27;s work in random graph models shed new light on the field of network science. Many real-world large information networks (such as Internet Graphs, Call Graphs, and collaboration graphs) have been observed to be well approximated by a power law distribution. Chung&#x27;s work in the Chung-Lu model, pioneered the theory of treating random graphs with arbitrary degree distributions, including the power law graphs. Her work provides a solid framework for quantitative and rigorous analysis for modeling and analyzing large complex networks. It also often serves as a popular benchmark for comparing new graph models in network science.

In 2006, the American Mathematical Society and the Conference Board of the Mathematical Sciences co-published Fan Chung and Linyuan Lu&#x27;s book &quot;Complex Graphs and Networks&quot;. The book gave a well-structured exposition for using combinatorial, probabilistic, spectral methods as well as other new and improved tools to analyze real-world large information networks.

===Quasi-random graphs===

Fan Chung, together with Ronald Graham and Richard Wilson, introduced a strong notion of equivalence among graph properties through the control of error bounds and developed the theory of quasi-random graphs. In a series of research papers (with several coauthors), she showed that a large family of graph properties is equivalent in the sense that if a graph satisfies any one of the properties, it must satisfy all of them. The set of equivalent quasi-random properties includes a surprisingly diverse collection of properties, and therefore provides efficient methods for validating graph properties. Many (but not all) random graph properties are quasi-random. The notion of quasi-randomness has been extended to many other combinatorial structures, such as sequences, tournaments, hypergraphs and graph limits. In general, the theory of quasi-randomness gives a rigorous approach to &#x27;random-like&#x27; or &#x27;pseudorandom&#x27; alternatives.

===Extremal graph theory===
A basic question in extremal graph theory is to find unavoidable patterns and structures in graphs with given density or distribution. A complementary problem is to find a smallest graph which contains every member of a given family of graphs as subgraphs. In a series of works with Paul Erdős, Chung determined the sizes and structures of unavoidable graphs and hypergraphs. With several coauthors, she also derived many elegant and surprising results on universal graphs. Her fundamental contributions in these areas of extremal graph theory have many applications in parallel computations.

==Awards and honors==

* Allendoerfer Award of Mathematical Association of America (1990)
* Invited address, International Congress of Mathematicians (1994)
* Noether Lecturer, Association for Women in Mathematics (2009)
* Fellow, American Academy of Arts and Sciences (1998)
* Fellow, American Mathematics Society (2013)
* Fellow, Society for Industrial and Applied Mathematics (2015)
* Academician, Academia Sinica (2016)
* Euler Medal of Institute of Combinatorics and its Applications (2017)
* Honorary Doctorate, University of Waterloo (2017)
* She is included in a deck of playing cards featuring notable women mathematicians published by the Association of Women in Mathematics.
* Elected to the United States National Academy of Sciences (2024)
* Revelle Medal for &quot;sustained, distinguished and extraordinary service to [UCSD&#x27;s] campus&quot; (2024)

== References ==
==Sources==
*&quot;Notable Women in Mathematics, a Biographical Dictionary&quot;, edited by Charlene Morrow and Teri Perl, Greenwood Press, 1998, pp. 29–34.

== External links ==

* Fan Chung&#x27;s UCSD homepage
* &quot;Fan Chung&quot;, Biographies of Women Mathematicians, Agnes Scott College
* 
* Interview with Fan Chung created by Girls Talk Math</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q450226" start="0" end="26" title="Fan Chung" label="Fan-Rong King Chung Graham"/>
<link wikidata="Q450226" start="77" end="86" title="Fan Chung" label="Fan Chung"/>
<link wikidata="Q170790" start="117" end="130" title="mathematician" label="mathematician"/>
<link wikidata="Q3180727" start="164" end="185" title="spectral graph theory" label="spectral graph theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q739245" start="187" end="208" title="extremal graph theory" label="extremal graph theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q910404" start="213" end="226" title="random graphs" label="random graphs"/>
<link wikidata="Q605807" start="262" end="279" title="Erdős–Rényi model" label="Erdős–Rényi model"/>
<link wikidata="Q428971" start="335" end="344" title="power law" label="power-law"/>
<link wikidata="Q622664" start="474" end="509" title="University of California, San Diego" label="University of California, San Diego"/>
<link wikidata="Q49117" start="554" end="580" title="University of Pennsylvania" label="University of Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q1035425" start="613" end="625" title="Herbert Wilf" label="Herbert Wilf"/>
<link wikidata="Q217365" start="644" end="661" title="Bell Laboratories" label="Bell Laboratories"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154390" start="772" end="778" title="tenure" label="tenure"/>
<link wikidata="Q860611" start="1040" end="1080" title="International Congress of Mathematicians" label="International Congress of Mathematicians"/>
<link wikidata="Q465654" start="1176" end="1205" title="American Mathematical Society" label="American Mathematical Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q839260" start="1232" end="1248" title="Noether Lecturer" label="Noether Lecturer"/>
<link wikidata="Q270794" start="1304" end="1332" title="National Academy of Sciences" label="National Academy of Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q181557" start="1391" end="1400" title="Kaohsiung" label="Kaohsiung"/>
<link wikidata="Q76592" start="1522" end="1535" title="combinatorics" label="combinatorics"/>
<link wikidata="Q32746" start="1602" end="1628" title="National Taiwan University" label="National Taiwan University"/>
<link wikidata="Q49117" start="1903" end="1929" title="University of Pennsylvania" label="University of Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q1035425" start="2069" end="2081" title="Herbert Wilf" label="Herbert Wilf"/>
<link wikidata="Q1336170" start="2148" end="2161" title="Ramsey theory" label="Ramsey theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q217365" start="2856" end="2873" title="Bell Laboratories" label="Bell Laboratories"/>
<link wikidata="Q217365" start="2918" end="2935" title="Bell Laboratories" label="Bell Laboratories"/>
<link wikidata="Q712620" start="3154" end="3167" title="Ronald Graham" label="Ronald Graham"/>
<link wikidata="Q49117" start="3232" end="3258" title="University of Pennsylvania" label="University of Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q217365" start="3366" end="3383" title="Bell Laboratories" label="Bell Laboratories"/>
<link wikidata="Q11103884" start="3429" end="3441" title="Henry Otto Pollak" label="Henry Pollak"/>
<link wikidata="Q217365" start="4157" end="4174" title="Bell Laboratories" label="Bell Laboratories"/>
<link wikidata="Q7695688" start="4179" end="4187" title="Bellcore" label="Bellcore"/>
<link wikidata="Q49117" start="4221" end="4247" title="University of Pennsylvania" label="University of Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q622664" start="4355" end="4390" title="University of California, San Diego" label="University of California, San Diego"/>
<link wikidata="Q465654" start="5647" end="5676" title="American Mathematical Society" label="American Mathematical Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q217365" start="5963" end="5980" title="Bell Laboratories" label="Bell Laboratories"/>
<link wikidata="Q712620" start="5990" end="6003" title="Ronald Graham" label="Ronald Graham"/>
<link wikidata="Q7942848" start="6179" end="6191" title="Paul Hoffman (science writer)" label="Paul Hoffman"/>
<link wikidata="Q173746" start="6703" end="6713" title="Paul Erdős" label="Paul Erdős"/>
<link wikidata="Q243972" start="6789" end="6801" title="Erdős number" label="Erdős number"/>
<link wikidata="Q96377354" start="6973" end="7021" title="Erdős on Graphs" label="Erdős on Graphs: His Legacy of Unsolved Problems"/>
<link wikidata="Q3180727" start="7448" end="7469" title="spectral graph theory" label="spectral graph theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q203484" start="8129" end="8138" title="Laplacian" label="Laplacian"/>
<link wikidata="Q465654" start="8215" end="8244" title="American Mathematical Society" label="American Mathematical Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q2434424" start="8698" end="8713" title="network science" label="network science"/>
<link wikidata="Q5145801" start="8801" end="8820" title="collaboration graph" label="collaboration graph"/>
<link wikidata="Q428971" start="8871" end="8893" title="Power law" label="power law distribution"/>
<link wikidata="Q465654" start="9287" end="9316" title="American Mathematical Society" label="American Mathematical Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q5159868" start="9325" end="9370" title="Conference Board of the Mathematical Sciences" label="Conference Board of the Mathematical Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q767570" start="9723" end="9737" title="R. M. Wilson" label="Richard Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q16852192" start="11282" end="11300" title="Carl B. Allendoerfer Award" label="Allendoerfer Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q1813899" start="11304" end="11339" title="Mathematical Association of America" label="Mathematical Association of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q860611" start="11366" end="11406" title="International Congress of Mathematicians" label="International Congress of Mathematicians"/>
<link wikidata="Q839260" start="11416" end="11432" title="Noether Lecturer" label="Noether Lecturer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2867685" start="11434" end="11470" title="Association for Women in Mathematics" label="Association for Women in Mathematics"/>
<link wikidata="Q463303" start="11488" end="11525" title="American Academy of Arts and Sciences" label="American Academy of Arts and Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q465654" start="11543" end="11571" title="American Mathematical Society" label="American Mathematics Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q782100" start="11589" end="11635" title="Society for Industrial and Applied Mathematics" label="Society for Industrial and Applied Mathematics"/>
<link wikidata="Q337266" start="11658" end="11673" title="Academia Sinica" label="Academia Sinica"/>
<link wikidata="Q1109009" start="11683" end="11694" title="Euler Medal" label="Euler Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1109009" start="11698" end="11745" title="Institute of Combinatorics and its Applications" label="Institute of Combinatorics and its Applications"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049470" start="11775" end="11797" title="University of Waterloo" label="University of Waterloo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2867685" start="11906" end="11941" title="Association of Women in Mathematics" label="Association of Women in Mathematics"/>
<link wikidata="Q270794" start="11974" end="12002" title="National Academy of Sciences" label="National Academy of Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q2826926" start="12417" end="12436" title="Agnes Scott College" label="Agnes Scott College"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="246565" wikidata="Q313058" url="?curid=246565" title="Eugenius">
<text>Eugenius (died 6 September 394) was a Western Roman emperor from 392 to 394, unrecognized by the Eastern Roman emperor Theodosius I. While Christian himself, Eugenius capitalized on the discontent in the West caused by Theodosius&#x27; religious policies targeting pagans. He renovated the pagan Temple of Venus and Roma and restored the Altar of Victory after continued petitions from the Roman Senate. Eugenius replaced Theodosius&#x27; administrators with men loyal to him. This included pagans, reviving the pagan cause. His army fought the army of Theodosius at the Battle of the Frigidus, where he was captured and executed.

==Life==
A Christian and former teacher of grammar and rhetoric, as well as &quot;magister scriniorum&quot;, Eugenius had become an acquaintance of Arbogast, the &quot;magister militum&quot;, after being introduced to him by Arbogast&#x27;s uncle Richomeres. Arbogast was of Frankish origin and &quot;de facto&quot; ruler of the western portion of the Empire.

===Rise to power===
Three months after the death of Valentinian II, Eugenius was elevated to &quot;augustus&quot; on 22 August 392 at Lyons, by Arbogast. Deferring to Eugenius offered Arbogast two strong advantages: first, Eugenius, a Roman and Christian, was more suitable than Arbogast, a Frank and pagan, as an &quot;Augustus&quot;; furthermore, the Roman Senate would be more likely to support Eugenius.

===Civil, religious, and military policies===
After being installed as Emperor, Eugenius changed the imperial administrators. When Theodosius had left the western half of the empire to Valentinian II, he had put his own men in the highest civil offices, to keep a strong grasp on the whole empire. Eugenius replaced these administrators with others loyal to himself, coming from the senatorial class. Virius Nicomachus Flavianus the Elder became praetorian prefect, his son Nicomachus Flavianus the Younger received the title of &quot;praefectus urbi&quot;, while the new &quot;praefectus annonae&quot; was Numerius Proiectus.

Though his actual beliefs are a matter of controversy among ancient and modern historians, Eugenius was at least publicly a Christian. Pagan senators convinced Eugenius to use public money to fund pagan projects, such as the rededication of the Temple of Venus and Roma and the restoration of the Altar of Victory within the Curia. Eugenius&#x27; appointment of Nicomachus Flavianus, a pagan, as Praetorian Prefect of Italy, revived the pagan cause. These religious policies created tension with pro-Christian figures, such as Emperor Theodosius and the powerful and influential Bishop Ambrose, who left his see in Milan when the imperial court of Eugenius arrived.

Eugenius was also successful in the military field, notably in the renovation of old alliances with Alamanni and Franks, even marching to the Rhine frontier, where he impressed and pacified the Germanic tribes by parading his army in front of them. After this display, he recruited Alamannic and Frankish units for his army.

===Fall===
After his election as emperor, Eugenius sent two embassies to Theodosius&#x27;s court, asking for recognition of his election. Theodosius received them, but both embassies were given vague responses and returned without completing their missions. In January 393, Theodosius promoted his eight-year-old son Honorius to the rank of &quot;Augustus&quot; of the West, indicating he considered Eugenius&#x27; elevation illegitimate.

Following the news of Honorius&#x27; elevation to &quot;Augustus&quot;, Eugenius and Arbogast marched their army, stripped from the Rhine frontier, into Italy in the spring of 393. Theodosius then moved from Constantinople with his army, and met Eugenius and Arbogast at the Battle of the Frigidus in the Vipava Valley, on 6 September 394. The bloody battle lasted two days, and was marked by unusually strong winds, and ended with a victory for Theodosius&#x27; forces. Eugenius was captured and executed, and his head was displayed in Theodosius&#x27; camp. Arbogast committed suicide the next day.

==References==
==Sources==
*
* 
* 

== External links ==
* Roberts, Walter, &quot;Flavius Eugenius (392–394)&quot;, &quot;De Imperatoribus Romanis&quot;</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q313058" start="0" end="8" title="Eugenius" label="Eugenius"/>
<link wikidata="Q842606" start="38" end="59" title="Western Roman emperor" label="Western Roman emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q128866" start="97" end="118" title="Eastern Roman emperor" label="Eastern Roman emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q46696" start="119" end="131" title="Theodosius I" label="Theodosius I"/>
<link wikidata="Q11690378" start="139" end="148" title="Christianity in late antiquity" label="Christian"/>
<link wikidata="Q5110359" start="236" end="271" title="Persecution of pagans under Theodosius I" label="religious policies targeting pagans"/>
<link wikidata="Q430792" start="296" end="320" title="Temple of Venus and Roma" label="Temple of Venus and Roma"/>
<link wikidata="Q737919" start="338" end="354" title="Altar of Victory" label="Altar of Victory"/>
<link wikidata="Q130614" start="390" end="402" title="Roman Senate" label="Roman Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q836944" start="571" end="593" title="Battle of the Frigidus" label="Battle of the Frigidus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1258027" start="708" end="739" title="magister officiorum" label="&amp;quot;magister scriniorum&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q380065" start="780" end="788" title="Arbogast (magister militum)" label="Arbogast"/>
<link wikidata="Q209122" start="800" end="816" title="magister militum" label="magister militum"/>
<link wikidata="Q741377" start="879" end="889" title="Richomeres" label="Richomeres"/>
<link wikidata="Q43482" start="907" end="915" title="Franks" label="Frankish"/>
<link wikidata="Q46846" start="1045" end="1059" title="Valentinian II" label="Valentinian II"/>
<link wikidata="Q211804" start="1092" end="1100" title="Augustus (title)" label="augustus"/>
<link wikidata="Q380065" start="1137" end="1145" title="Arbogast (magister militum)" label="Arbogast"/>
<link wikidata="Q966315" start="1803" end="1830" title="Virius Nicomachus Flavianus" label="Virius Nicomachus Flavianus"/>
<link wikidata="Q692343" start="1848" end="1866" title="praetorian prefect" label="praetorian prefect"/>
<link wikidata="Q3655740" start="1876" end="1896" title="Nicomachus Flavianus (son)" label="Nicomachus Flavianus"/>
<link wikidata="Q544015" start="1937" end="1952" title="praefectus urbi" label="praefectus urbi"/>
<link wikidata="Q581899" start="1980" end="1998" title="praefectus annonae" label="praefectus annonae"/>
<link wikidata="Q430792" start="2275" end="2299" title="Temple of Venus and Roma" label="Temple of Venus and Roma"/>
<link wikidata="Q737919" start="2327" end="2343" title="Altar of Victory" label="Altar of Victory"/>
<link wikidata="Q835567" start="2355" end="2360" title="Curia" label="Curia"/>
<link wikidata="Q43689" start="2616" end="2623" title="Ambrose" label="Ambrose"/>
<link wikidata="Q490" start="2645" end="2650" title="Milan" label="Milan"/>
<link wikidata="Q132990" start="2797" end="2805" title="Alamanni" label="Alamanni"/>
<link wikidata="Q4147903" start="2839" end="2853" title="Borders of the Roman Empire" label="Rhine frontier"/>
<link wikidata="Q159798" start="3340" end="3348" title="Honorius (emperor)" label="Honorius"/>
<link wikidata="Q211804" start="3370" end="3378" title="Augustus (honorific)" label="Augustus"/>
<link wikidata="Q836944" start="3738" end="3760" title="Battle of the Frigidus" label="Battle of the Frigidus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2625492" start="3768" end="3781" title="Vipava Valley" label="Vipava Valley"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="246567" wikidata="Q2876741" url="?curid=246567" title="BBC Northern Ireland">
<text>BBC Northern Ireland is a division of the BBC and the main public broadcaster in Northern Ireland. It is widely available across both Northern Ireland and the Republic of Ireland.

BBC Northern Ireland is one of the four BBC national regions, together with the BBC English Regions, BBC Scotland and BBC Cymru Wales. Based at Broadcasting House, Belfast, it provides television, radio, online and interactive television content. BBC Northern Ireland currently employs 700 people, largely in Belfast.

BBC Northern Ireland has two TV channels – BBC One Northern Ireland, BBC Two Northern Ireland; and two radio stations – BBC Radio Ulster and BBC Radio Foyle.

== Television ==
BBC Northern Ireland operates two television stations: BBC One Northern Ireland and BBC Two Northern Ireland. BBC Northern Ireland funds an opt-out service with the majority of this output made in the independent sector. Some output that originates in London (so-called &#x27;network&#x27; programmes) are time-shifted to create appropriate slots for programming that is more appealing to the BBC audience in NI.

Prior to 27 October 2006, BBC Two NI was a digital only service while BBC Two Northern Ireland was available on analogue transmission. Since 28 October 2006, &quot;BBC Two Northern Ireland&quot; has been the on-air name for both services which have been merged.

BBC Northern Ireland has its own team of continuity announcers which introduce the vast majority of programmes on BBC One and BBC Two in Northern Ireland.

=== Regional television ===
* &quot;BBC Newsline&quot; is the regional news service. The main bulletin is from 18.30 to 19.00 with shorter bulletins at 13.30 and 22.30 and during the weekend, with summaries on &quot;BBC Breakfast&quot;. BBC NI produces some regional political programmes, notably &quot;Spotlight&quot;, &quot;The View&quot; and &quot;Nolan Live&quot;.

=== Network output===
As well as programmes intended purely for an audience in NI, BBC Northern Ireland also funds or often co-funds output for pan-UK consumption on both the player and other BBC channels. in 2021 network output is principally in drama.

It was announced in June 2019 that the BBC quiz show &quot;Mastermind&quot; would now be produced from BBC NI.

BBC Northern Ireland is also involved more occasionally in co-productions with other broadcasting networks, including with the Irish broadcasters RTÉ and TG4.

=== Republic of Ireland ===
*BBC One Northern Ireland and BBC Two Northern Ireland are widely available across the border in the Republic of Ireland. These channels are carried on pay-TV platforms in the Republic including Sky Ireland, Virgin Media Ireland, Magnet Networks, SCTV and Crossan Cable. BBC One NI and BBC Two NI are also available in the Republic via signal overspill by Freeview in counties near the Northern Ireland border. Similarly, prior to the digital switchover in 2012, they were available in these areas via analogue television.
*Additional BBC channels such as BBC Three, BBC Four, BBC News, BBC World News and children&#x27;s television channels CBBC and CBeebies, are also available within the Republic of Ireland via a free-to-air satellite receiver or, in some areas near the border, via overspill from the Freeview service. Leading subscription TV providers also carry these channels.

== Radio ==
BBC Northern Ireland operates two radio stations:
* BBC Radio Ulster, on 92–95 FM, (and previously on 1341 kHz Medium Wave, that is now discontinued), which broadcasts throughout Northern Ireland, and
* BBC Radio Foyle, on 93.1 FM, (and previously on 792 Medium Wave), which broadcasts to the North West of Northern Ireland

BBC Northern Ireland takes part in the &#x27;Regionalisation&#x27; of some of the BBC&#x27;s national radio output. From the late 1990s until 2012, for example, Radio 1 split the home nations on Thursday morning from midnight to 2 a.m., with Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland broadcasting their own shows to showcase regional talent. The Radio 1 session from Northern Ireland was last presented by Phil Taggart from Omagh.

== Online ==
BBC Northern Ireland&#x27;s online service provides News, Sport, Schools, Learning and Programme information for television and radio programmes. It provides a streaming audio service for Radio Ulster and Radio Foyle as well as every programme on demand for up to a week after transmission. bbc.co.uk/northernireland/ is part of BBC Online and operated from the Belfast base. It also provides multi platform interactivity for TV programmes including the annual Schools&#x27; Cup Rugby union and Gaelic Athletic Association finals.

== Programmes ==

=== Radio ===
* &quot;Good Morning Ulster&quot;
* &quot;The Nolan Show&quot;
* &quot;Gardeners&#x27; Corner&quot;
* &quot;Talkback&quot;
* &quot;Evening Extra&quot;
* &quot;Sunday Sequence&quot;

=== Television ===
* &quot;BBC Newsline&quot;
* &quot;Spotlight&quot;
* &quot;The View&quot;
* &quot;The Blame Game&quot;
* &quot;Beauty Queen &amp; Single&quot;
* &quot;The Paddy Raff Show&quot;
* &quot;Give My Head Peace&quot;
* &quot;Chancers&quot;
* &quot;Soft Border Patrol&quot;
* &quot;Belfast FM&quot;
* Funboys

=== Television news bulletins ===
* &quot;Ulster Mirror&quot; (1950s)
* &quot;Scene Around Six&quot; (1969 – September 1984)
* &quot;Inside Ulster&quot; (September 1984 – 12 February 1996)
* &quot;Newsline 6.30/Newsline/BBC Newsline&quot; (12 February 1996 to date)

=== Selection of network programmes ===
* &quot;Ballykissangel&quot; (late 1990s)
* &quot;Sesame Tree&quot; (Children&#x27;s Series, late 2000s)
* &quot;Murphy&#x27;s Law&quot;
* &quot;Patrick Kielty Almost Live&quot;

===Sports===

BBC NI has, at various times, over the last decades of the 20th century and the early decades of the 21st, provided live and pre-recorded coverage of all three major male sports in Northern Ireland – Irish League soccer, Ulster Rugby and GAA. In the increasingly expensive world of sports rights and contracts the regional output has never covered all three concurrently but covers the sports extensively in radio news bulletins.

=== Languages ===
BBC Northern Ireland broadcasts almost exclusively in English, but there is some output in Irish and Ulster Scots.
Radio Ulster carries a daily programme in Irish and there is an Irish language section on BBC Northern Ireland&#x27;s website. Northern Ireland Screen helps co-fund television output in both Irish and Ulster Scots.

=== Technical ===

The BBC television and radio stations are broadcast primarily from the Divis (500 kW), Limavady and Brougher Mountain transmitters. Both transmitters receive the BBC stations via a satellite feeds and each transmitter has a wealth of relay transmitters to provide analogue service to areas not served by their respective main transmitter.

=== TV Studios ===

BBC Northern Ireland has three main television studios located in Belfast. There are two small studios located in the BBC Broadcasting House in Belfast. These are home to BBC Northern Ireland&#x27;s regional news and current affairs programmes. They are around each and are called Studio B and Studio 1.

The largest of the studios is called Studio A which is located in the BBC Blackstaff House on Great Victoria Street in Belfast. The studio measures . Studio A has been home to the award-winning local sitcom &quot;Give My Head Peace&quot;. &quot;Nolan Live&quot; for BBC One Northern Ireland airs live from Studio A.

== BBC NI broadcasters ==

=== Current BBC NI broadcasters ===
*Sarah Brett – Good Morning Ulster
*Chris Buckler – Good Morning Ulster
* Stephen Nolan – presenter of &quot;The Nolan Show&quot; on BBC Radio Ulster, &quot;Nolan Live&quot; on BBC One NI and a weekend phone-in programme on BBC Radio 5 Live 
* Tara Mills – presenter of BBC Newsline and Evening Extra
* Declan Harvey – presenter of BBC Newsline and Evening Extra
* Mark Carruthers – presenter &quot;Sunday Politics NI&quot; and &quot;The View&quot;
* Richard Morgan – presenter Evening Extra
* Connor Phillips
* Hugo Duncan – presenter of &quot;Country Afternoon&quot; on BBC Radio Ulster

=== Former BBC NI broadcasters ===
* Gerry Anderson – presented &quot;The Gerry Anderson Show&quot; on BBC Radio Ulster/Foyle and famed for broadcasting without a script.
* Lynette Fay
* Stephen Grimason – editor of BBC Northern Ireland
* Gloria Hunniford – BBC Northern Ireland presenter who had her own daily show on Radio Ulster before a move to BBC Radio 2 
* Patrick Kielty – comedian
* Colin Murray – Talksport presenter and former BBC Radio 1 DJ started with BBC Radio Ulster as a presenter on the &quot;Across the Line&quot; programme
* Sean Rafferty – former presenter of &quot;Scene Around Six&quot; and &quot;Inside Ulster&quot;, evening news programmes broadcast until the mid-1990s, as well as BBC Radio Ulster news programmes, now a BBC Radio 3 music presenter
* Noel Thompson
* Donna Traynor

== References ==

== External links ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2876741" start="0" end="20" title="BBC Northern Ireland" label="BBC Northern Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="42" end="45" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q26398" start="59" end="77" title="public broadcasting" label="public broadcaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q26" start="81" end="97" title="Northern Ireland" label="Northern Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q27" start="159" end="178" title="Republic of Ireland" label="Republic of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q4834815" start="261" end="280" title="BBC English Regions" label="BBC English Regions"/>
<link wikidata="Q681822" start="282" end="294" title="BBC Scotland" label="BBC Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2000845" start="299" end="314" title="BBC Cymru Wales" label="BBC Cymru Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q4972140" start="325" end="343" title="Broadcasting House (Belfast)" label="Broadcasting House"/>
<link wikidata="Q10686" start="345" end="352" title="Belfast" label="Belfast"/>
<link wikidata="Q874342" start="396" end="418" title="interactive television" label="interactive television"/>
<link wikidata="Q4834885" start="543" end="567" title="BBC One Northern Ireland" label="BBC One Northern Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q4835000" start="569" end="593" title="BBC Two Northern Ireland" label="BBC Two Northern Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q3545486" start="620" end="636" title="BBC Radio Ulster" label="BBC Radio Ulster"/>
<link wikidata="Q4834915" start="641" end="656" title="BBC Radio Foyle" label="BBC Radio Foyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q4834885" start="731" end="755" title="BBC One Northern Ireland" label="BBC One Northern Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q4835000" start="760" end="784" title="BBC Two Northern Ireland" label="BBC Two Northern Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q4835000" start="1116" end="1126" title="BBC Two Northern Ireland" label="BBC Two NI"/>
<link wikidata="Q16206641" start="1394" end="1415" title="continuity announcers" label="continuity announcers"/>
<link wikidata="Q191472" start="1467" end="1474" title="BBC One" label="BBC One"/>
<link wikidata="Q216108" start="1479" end="1486" title="BBC Two" label="BBC Two"/>
<link wikidata="Q4834871" start="1545" end="1557" title="BBC Newsline" label="BBC Newsline"/>
<link wikidata="Q2876720" start="1725" end="1738" title="BBC Breakfast" label="BBC Breakfast"/>
<link wikidata="Q7580061" start="1812" end="1821" title="Spotlight (BBC Northern Ireland TV programme)" label="Spotlight"/>
<link wikidata="Q7610104" start="1860" end="1865" title="Stephen Nolan" label="Nolan"/>
<link wikidata="Q370193" start="2187" end="2209" title="Mastermind (British game show)" label="&amp;quot;Mastermind&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q329494" start="2392" end="2395" title="RTÉ" label="RTÉ"/>
<link wikidata="Q2252456" start="2400" end="2403" title="TG4" label="TG4"/>
<link wikidata="Q27" start="2535" end="2554" title="Republic of Ireland" label="Republic of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q7537355" start="2629" end="2640" title="Sky Ireland" label="Sky Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q4002039" start="2642" end="2662" title="Virgin Media Ireland" label="Virgin Media Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q16975984" start="2664" end="2679" title="Magnet Networks" label="Magnet Networks"/>
<link wikidata="Q24963195" start="2770" end="2786" title="signal overspill" label="signal overspill"/>
<link wikidata="Q2156823" start="2790" end="2798" title="Freeview (UK)" label="Freeview"/>
<link wikidata="Q258137" start="2936" end="2955" title="analogue television" label="analogue television"/>
<link wikidata="Q107011665" start="2990" end="2999" title="BBC Three" label="BBC Three"/>
<link wikidata="Q787211" start="3001" end="3009" title="BBC Four" label="BBC Four"/>
<link wikidata="Q787216" start="3011" end="3019" title="BBC News (TV channel)" label="BBC News"/>
<link wikidata="Q208491" start="3021" end="3035" title="BBC World News" label="BBC World News"/>
<link wikidata="Q1273568" start="3040" end="3066" title="children&amp;#x27;s television" label="children&amp;#x27;s television"/>
<link wikidata="Q935802" start="3076" end="3080" title="CBBC (TV channel)" label="CBBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q936111" start="3085" end="3093" title="CBeebies" label="CBeebies"/>
<link wikidata="Q366516" start="3151" end="3172" title="FTA receiver" label="free-to-air satellite"/>
<link wikidata="Q3545486" start="3384" end="3400" title="BBC Radio Ulster" label="BBC Radio Ulster"/>
<link wikidata="Q4834915" start="3535" end="3550" title="BBC Radio Foyle" label="BBC Radio Foyle"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3696" end="3723" title="BBC Radio 1#Regionalisation" label="&amp;#x27;Regionalisation&amp;#x27;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1040745" start="3836" end="3848" title="home nations" label="home nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q26" start="3919" end="3935" title="Northern Ireland" label="Northern Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q16226655" start="4058" end="4070" title="Phil Taggart" label="Phil Taggart"/>
<link wikidata="Q220499" start="4257" end="4272" title="streaming audio" label="streaming audio"/>
<link wikidata="Q747860" start="4426" end="4436" title="BBC Online" label="BBC Online"/>
<link wikidata="Q10686" start="4459" end="4466" title="Belfast" label="Belfast"/>
<link wikidata="Q5849" start="4576" end="4587" title="Rugby union" label="Rugby union"/>
<link wikidata="Q548520" start="4592" end="4619" title="Gaelic Athletic Association" label="Gaelic Athletic Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q5582800" start="4669" end="4688" title="Good Morning Ulster" label="Good Morning Ulster"/>
<link wikidata="Q7754282" start="4703" end="4717" title="The Nolan Show" label="The Nolan Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q7679642" start="4769" end="4777" title="Talk Back (BBC Radio Ulster)" label="Talkback"/>
<link wikidata="Q5416604" start="4792" end="4805" title="Evening Extra" label="Evening Extra"/>
<link wikidata="Q2434002" start="4820" end="4835" title="Sunday Sequence (BBC Radio Ulster)" label="Sunday Sequence"/>
<link wikidata="Q4834871" start="4870" end="4882" title="BBC Newsline" label="BBC Newsline"/>
<link wikidata="Q7580061" start="4897" end="4906" title="Spotlight (BBC Northern Ireland TV programme)" label="Spotlight"/>
<link wikidata="Q7718541" start="4944" end="4958" title="The Blame Game (British TV programme)" label="The Blame Game"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4973" end="4998" title="Stellify Media#Beauty Queen &amp;amp; Single (2017–2018)" label="Beauty Queen &amp;amp; Single"/>
<link wikidata="Q109927863" start="5013" end="5032" title="The Paddy Raff Show" label="The Paddy Raff Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q5565744" start="5047" end="5065" title="Give My Head Peace" label="Give My Head Peace"/>
<link wikidata="Q54870039" start="5103" end="5121" title="Soft Border Patrol" label="Soft Border Patrol"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5136" end="5146" title="Belfast FM" label="Belfast FM"/>
<link wikidata="Q132798103" start="5155" end="5162" title="Funboys" label="Funboys"/>
<link wikidata="Q4834871" start="5384" end="5396" title="BBC Newsline" label="BBC Newsline"/>
<link wikidata="Q2575053" start="5479" end="5493" title="Ballykissangel" label="Ballykissangel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7456010" start="5521" end="5532" title="Sesame Tree" label="Sesame Tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q3210094" start="5584" end="5601" title="Murphy&amp;#x27;s Law (UK TV series)" label="Murphy&amp;#x27;s Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q7146947" start="5616" end="5642" title="Patrick Kielty Almost Live" label="Patrick Kielty Almost Live"/>
<link wikidata="Q277945" start="5864" end="5876" title="IFA Premiership" label="Irish League"/>
<link wikidata="Q1548720" start="5885" end="5897" title="Ulster Rugby" label="Ulster Rugby"/>
<link wikidata="Q548520" start="5902" end="5905" title="Gaelic Athletic Association" label="GAA"/>
<link wikidata="Q9142" start="6204" end="6209" title="Irish language" label="Irish"/>
<link wikidata="Q201966" start="6214" end="6226" title="Ulster Scots dialects" label="Ulster Scots"/>
<link wikidata="Q7058525" start="6355" end="6378" title="Northern Ireland Screen" label="Northern Ireland Screen"/>
<link wikidata="Q3777361" start="6534" end="6539" title="Divis" label="Divis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1002115" start="6550" end="6558" title="Limavady" label="Limavady"/>
<link wikidata="Q4975781" start="6563" end="6580" title="Brougher Mountain" label="Brougher Mountain"/>
<link wikidata="Q5600121" start="7222" end="7243" title="Great Victoria Street, Belfast" label="Great Victoria Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q5565744" start="7341" end="7359" title="Give My Head Peace" label="Give My Head Peace"/>
<link wikidata="Q28086004" start="7509" end="7520" title="Sarah Brett" label="Sarah Brett"/>
<link wikidata="Q5582800" start="7523" end="7542" title="Good Morning Ulster" label="Good Morning Ulster"/>
<link wikidata="Q5582800" start="7560" end="7579" title="Good Morning Ulster" label="Good Morning Ulster"/>
<link wikidata="Q7610104" start="7582" end="7595" title="Stephen Nolan" label="Stephen Nolan"/>
<link wikidata="Q795588" start="7732" end="7748" title="BBC Radio 5 Live" label="BBC Radio 5 Live"/>
<link wikidata="Q4834871" start="7778" end="7790" title="BBC Newsline" label="BBC Newsline"/>
<link wikidata="Q5416604" start="7795" end="7808" title="Evening Extra" label="Evening Extra"/>
<link wikidata="Q112184742" start="7811" end="7824" title="Declan Harvey" label="Declan Harvey"/>
<link wikidata="Q4834871" start="7840" end="7852" title="BBC Newsline" label="BBC Newsline"/>
<link wikidata="Q5416604" start="7857" end="7870" title="Evening Extra" label="Evening Extra"/>
<link wikidata="Q14949145" start="7873" end="7888" title="Mark Carruthers" label="Mark Carruthers"/>
<link wikidata="Q5416604" start="7986" end="7999" title="Evening Extra" label="Evening Extra"/>
<link wikidata="Q5933915" start="8020" end="8031" title="Hugo Duncan" label="Hugo Duncan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5552638" start="8135" end="8149" title="Gerry Anderson (broadcaster)" label="Gerry Anderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q125806442" start="8285" end="8301" title="Stephen Grimason" label="Stephen Grimason"/>
<link wikidata="Q5571392" start="8337" end="8353" title="Gloria Hunniford" label="Gloria Hunniford"/>
<link wikidata="Q795578" start="8447" end="8458" title="BBC Radio 2" label="BBC Radio 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q7146946" start="8462" end="8476" title="Patrick Kielty" label="Patrick Kielty"/>
<link wikidata="Q5145446" start="8490" end="8502" title="Colin Murray" label="Colin Murray"/>
<link wikidata="Q795585" start="8536" end="8547" title="BBC Radio 1" label="BBC Radio 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q4676487" start="8609" end="8624" title="Across the Line (BBC Radio Ulster)" label="Across the Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q7441377" start="8643" end="8656" title="Sean Rafferty" label="Sean Rafferty"/>
<link wikidata="Q3545486" start="8805" end="8821" title="BBC Radio Ulster" label="BBC Radio Ulster"/>
<link wikidata="Q749608" start="8845" end="8856" title="BBC Radio 3" label="BBC Radio 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q10967535" start="8875" end="8888" title="Noel Thompson" label="Noel Thompson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5296484" start="8891" end="8904" title="Donna Traynor" label="Donna Traynor"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="246568" wikidata="Q235221" url="?curid=246568" title="Sally Kirkland">
<text>Sally Kirkland Jr. (born October 31, 1941) is an American actress and producer. A former member of Andy Warhol&#x27;s The Factory and an active member in 1960s New York avant-garde theater, she has appeared in more than 250 film and television productions during her 60-year career. Kirkland is the daughter of fashion editor of &quot;Life&quot; magazine and &quot;Vogue&quot;, Sally Kirkland.

Kirkland garnered widespread critical acclaim for her eponymous performance as a former popular actress in the independent comedy-drama &quot;Anna&quot; (1987), which earned her the Golden Globe Award for Best Actress in a Motion Picture – Drama and a nomination for the Academy Award for Best Actress. She also won the Independent Spirit Award for Best Female Lead and the Los Angeles Film Critics Association Award for Best Actress for her performance in the film.

She also earned a nomination for the Golden Globe Award for Best Actress – Miniseries or Television Film for her performance in the horror film &quot;The Haunted&quot; (1991). She is also known for her roles in &quot;Cold Feet&quot; (1989), &quot;Best of the Best&quot; (1989), &quot;JFK&quot; (1991) and &quot;Bruce Almighty&quot; (2003).

==Early life==
Kirkland was born on October 31, 1941, in New York City. She was named after her mother, Sally Kirkland (born Sarah Phinney), who was a fashion editor at &quot;Vogue&quot; and &quot;LIFE&quot; magazines, and was raised in Oklahoma. Her father, Frederic McMichael Kirkland, worked in the scrap metal business. Kirkland started out as a &quot;Vogue&quot; model and then studied at the Actors Studio with Lee Strasberg and Uta Hagen. Kirkland graduated from the American Academy of Dramatic Arts in 1961.

==Career==
=== 1962–86: Initial work ===
Kirkland began acting Off-Broadway in 1963. She joined Andy Warhol&#x27;s The Factory and appeared nude and tied to a chair for 45 minutes in the 1964 drama film &quot;The 13 Most Beautiful Women&quot;. By 1964, Kirkland was deeply involved in the New York&#x27;s avant-garde movement and was also an active drug user until an attempted suicide frightened her into cleaning up her life through yoga and painting. Four years later, she returned to film, appearing in the western &quot;Blue&quot;, and the following year starred in the underground film &quot;Coming Apart&quot; (1969).
Kirkland spent the 1970s and most of the 1980s playing secondary roles in film include &quot;Going Home&quot; (1971), &quot;The Young Nurses&quot; (1973), &quot;The Way We Were&quot; (1973), &quot;The Sting&quot; (1973), &quot;Big Bad Mama&quot; (1974), &quot;Crazy Mama&quot; (1975), &quot;A Star Is Born&quot; (1976) and &quot;Private Benjamin&quot; (1980). She played a leading role in the 1984 horror film &quot;Fatal Games&quot;. Her television credits include guest-starring roles on &quot;Hawaii Five-O&quot;, &quot;Police Story&quot;, &quot;The Rookies&quot;, &quot;Three&#x27;s Company&quot;, &quot;Kojak&quot;, &quot;Starsky &amp; Hutch&quot;, &quot;Charlie&#x27;s Angels&quot; and &quot;Falcon Crest&quot;.

=== 1987–1999: Critical acclaim and awards success ===
In 1987, Kirkland received widespread critical acclaim for her eponymous performance as a former popular actress in the independent comedy-drama &quot;Anna&quot;. &quot;The Washington Post&quot; deemed her performance as &quot;superb&quot; and the &quot;Los Angeles Times&quot; rated her as one of the best actresses of the decade. She won the Golden Globe Award for Best Actress in a Motion Picture – Drama and the Independent Spirit Award for Best Female Lead, in addition to a nomination for the Academy Award for Best Actress. She next acted in second-grade films include &quot;Cold Feet&quot; (1989), &quot;Paint It Black&quot; (1989) and &quot;Two Evil Eyes&quot; (1990).

In 1990s, Kirkland starred in action comedy &quot;Bullseye!&quot; (1990) opposite Michael Caine, and played supporting roles in films &quot;Revenge&quot; (1990), &quot;JFK&quot; (1991), &quot;The Player&quot; (1992), &quot;Gunmen&quot; (1994), &quot;Excess Baggage&quot; (1997) and &quot;EDtv&quot; (1999). She starred in the erotic thrillers &quot;In the Heat of Passion&quot; and &quot;Double Threat&quot; in 1992, which found success in home video releases. She found better success on television, playing leading roles in a number of made-for-television movies, and starring in the syndicated soap opera &quot;Valley of the Dolls&quot; in 1994. In 1990, she also played Truvy Jones in the television adaptation of &quot;Steel Magnolias&quot;. For her performance in the television film &quot;The Haunted&quot; (1991), Kirkland received a nomination for the Golden Globe Award for Best Actress – Miniseries or Television Film. She guest-starred in &quot;Roseanne&quot;, &quot;Murder, She Wrote&quot; and &quot;The Nanny&quot;. In 1999, she had a recurring roles in &quot;Felicity&quot; and &quot;Days of Our Lives&quot;.

=== 2000–present: Later career ===
In 2000s, she played supporting roles in films include &quot;Bruce Almighty&quot; (2003), &quot;Adam &amp; Steve&quot; (2005) and &quot;Big Stan&quot; (2007).

Kirkland hosted a weekly program on the syndicated HealthyLife Radio Network. In 2019, she starred in the film &quot;Cuck&quot;. In 2020, she starred in the Amazon release film &quot;Hope For The Holidays&quot; with Robert Lasardo, Doug Hutchison, Alex Cubis and George Stults.

== Other work and activism ==
Kirkland is also a health activist including advocating for women harmed by breast implants. She founded the Kirkland Institute for Implant Survival Syndrome in August 1998.

Kirkland is an ordained minister in the church of Movement of Spiritual Inner Awareness.

She is a gallery-shown painter and a noted acting teacher whose students have included Sandra Bullock, Barbra Streisand, Liza Minnelli, Dwight Yoakam, and Roseanne Barr, among others.

==Filmography==
===Film===
===Television===
== Awards and nominations ==
==References==
==External links==
* 
* 
* Sally Kirkland at the University of Wisconsin&#x27;s Actors Studio audio collection</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q235221" start="0" end="18" title="Sally Kirkland" label="Sally Kirkland Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q5603" start="99" end="110" title="Andy Warhol" label="Andy Warhol"/>
<link wikidata="Q767700" start="118" end="129" title="The Factory" label="The Factory"/>
<link wikidata="Q463198" start="335" end="339" title="Life (magazine)" label="Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q154008" start="365" end="370" title="Vogue (magazine)" label="Vogue"/>
<link wikidata="Q7405191" start="378" end="392" title="Sally Kirkland (editor)" label="Sally Kirkland"/>
<link wikidata="Q564681" start="537" end="541" title="Anna (1987 film)" label="Anna"/>
<link wikidata="Q463085" start="577" end="640" title="Golden Globe Award for Best Actress in a Motion Picture – Drama" label="Golden Globe Award for Best Actress in a Motion Picture – Drama"/>
<link wikidata="Q103618" start="666" end="696" title="Academy Award for Best Actress" label="Academy Award for Best Actress"/>
<link wikidata="Q2544851" start="715" end="760" title="Independent Spirit Award for Best Female Lead" label="Independent Spirit Award for Best Female Lead"/>
<link wikidata="Q501273" start="769" end="828" title="Los Angeles Film Critics Association Award for Best Actress" label="Los Angeles Film Critics Association Award for Best Actress"/>
<link wikidata="Q673229" start="900" end="967" title="Golden Globe Award for Best Actress – Miniseries or Television Film" label="Golden Globe Award for Best Actress – Miniseries or Television Film"/>
<link wikidata="Q14537326" start="1013" end="1024" title="The Haunted (1991 film)" label="The Haunted"/>
<link wikidata="Q5142251" start="1080" end="1089" title="Cold Feet (1989 film)" label="Cold Feet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1467897" start="1110" end="1126" title="Best of the Best (1989 film)" label="Best of the Best"/>
<link wikidata="Q741823" start="1147" end="1150" title="JFK (film)" label="JFK"/>
<link wikidata="Q207816" start="1174" end="1188" title="Bruce Almighty" label="Bruce Almighty"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="1261" end="1274" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q7405191" start="1308" end="1322" title="Sally Kirkland (editor)" label="Sally Kirkland"/>
<link wikidata="Q154008" start="1379" end="1384" title="Vogue (magazine)" label="Vogue"/>
<link wikidata="Q463198" start="1401" end="1405" title="Life magazine" label="LIFE"/>
<link wikidata="Q1649" start="1441" end="1449" title="Oklahoma" label="Oklahoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q1378670" start="1506" end="1517" title="scrap metal" label="scrap metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q216458" start="1602" end="1615" title="Actors Studio" label="Actors Studio"/>
<link wikidata="Q297945" start="1621" end="1634" title="Lee Strasberg" label="Lee Strasberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q64260" start="1639" end="1648" title="Uta Hagen" label="Uta Hagen"/>
<link wikidata="Q389336" start="1678" end="1711" title="American Academy of Dramatic Arts" label="American Academy of Dramatic Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058828" start="1785" end="1797" title="Off-Broadway" label="Off-Broadway"/>
<link wikidata="Q5603" start="1818" end="1829" title="Andy Warhol" label="Andy Warhol"/>
<link wikidata="Q767700" start="1837" end="1848" title="The Factory" label="The Factory"/>
<link wikidata="Q2907133" start="2247" end="2251" title="Blue (1968 film)" label="Blue"/>
<link wikidata="Q16950461" start="2320" end="2332" title="Coming Apart (film)" label="Coming Apart"/>
<link wikidata="Q1258928" start="2440" end="2450" title="Going Home (1971 film)" label="Going Home"/>
<link wikidata="Q7776792" start="2471" end="2487" title="The Young Nurses" label="The Young Nurses"/>
<link wikidata="Q910900" start="2508" end="2523" title="The Way We Were" label="The Way We Were"/>
<link wikidata="Q62665" start="2544" end="2553" title="The Sting" label="The Sting"/>
<link wikidata="Q4904980" start="2574" end="2586" title="Big Bad Mama" label="Big Bad Mama"/>
<link wikidata="Q3002394" start="2607" end="2617" title="Crazy Mama" label="Crazy Mama"/>
<link wikidata="Q300568" start="2638" end="2652" title="A Star Is Born (1976 film)" label="A Star Is Born"/>
<link wikidata="Q83649" start="2676" end="2692" title="Private Benjamin (1980 film)" label="Private Benjamin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5437295" start="2763" end="2774" title="Fatal Games" label="Fatal Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q697407" start="2843" end="2856" title="Hawaii Five-O (1968 TV series)" label="Hawaii Five-O"/>
<link wikidata="Q1249629" start="2870" end="2882" title="Police Story (1973 TV series)" label="Police Story"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076434" start="2896" end="2907" title="The Rookies" label="The Rookies"/>
<link wikidata="Q245996" start="2921" end="2941" title="Three&amp;#x27;s Company" label="Three&amp;#x27;s Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q510554" start="2955" end="2960" title="Kojak" label="Kojak"/>
<link wikidata="Q196226" start="2974" end="2993" title="Starsky &amp;amp; Hutch" label="Starsky &amp;amp; Hutch"/>
<link wikidata="Q617274" start="3007" end="3028" title="Charlie&amp;#x27;s Angels" label="Charlie&amp;#x27;s Angels"/>
<link wikidata="Q662341" start="3045" end="3057" title="Falcon Crest" label="Falcon Crest"/>
<link wikidata="Q564681" start="3272" end="3276" title="Anna (1987 film)" label="Anna"/>
<link wikidata="Q166032" start="3290" end="3309" title="The Washington Post" label="The Washington Post"/>
<link wikidata="Q188515" start="3375" end="3392" title="Los Angeles Times" label="Los Angeles Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q463085" start="3465" end="3528" title="Golden Globe Award for Best Actress in a Motion Picture – Drama" label="Golden Globe Award for Best Actress in a Motion Picture – Drama"/>
<link wikidata="Q2544851" start="3537" end="3582" title="Independent Spirit Award for Best Female Lead" label="Independent Spirit Award for Best Female Lead"/>
<link wikidata="Q103618" start="3620" end="3650" title="Academy Award for Best Actress" label="Academy Award for Best Actress"/>
<link wikidata="Q5142251" start="3703" end="3712" title="Cold Feet (1989 film)" label="Cold Feet"/>
<link wikidata="Q7124937" start="3733" end="3747" title="Paint It Black (1989 film)" label="Paint It Black"/>
<link wikidata="Q2118787" start="3771" end="3784" title="Two Evil Eyes" label="Two Evil Eyes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1004567" start="3850" end="3859" title="Bullseye! (1990 film)" label="Bullseye!"/>
<link wikidata="Q123351" start="3882" end="3895" title="Michael Caine" label="Michael Caine"/>
<link wikidata="Q919624" start="3940" end="3947" title="Revenge (1990 film)" label="Revenge"/>
<link wikidata="Q741823" start="3968" end="3971" title="JFK (film)" label="JFK"/>
<link wikidata="Q1551573" start="3992" end="4002" title="The Player (1992 film)" label="The Player"/>
<link wikidata="Q4443718" start="4023" end="4029" title="Gunmen (1994 film)" label="Gunmen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2665942" start="4050" end="4064" title="Excess Baggage (1997 film)" label="Excess Baggage"/>
<link wikidata="Q386291" start="4088" end="4092" title="EDtv" label="EDtv"/>
<link wikidata="Q29836945" start="4149" end="4171" title="In the Heat of Passion" label="In the Heat of Passion"/>
<link wikidata="Q19605800" start="4414" end="4433" title="Valley of the Dolls (TV series)" label="Valley of the Dolls"/>
<link wikidata="Q762140" start="4524" end="4539" title="Steel Magnolias" label="Steel Magnolias"/>
<link wikidata="Q14537326" start="4596" end="4607" title="The Haunted (1991 film)" label="The Haunted"/>
<link wikidata="Q673229" start="4661" end="4728" title="Golden Globe Award for Best Actress – Miniseries or Television Film" label="Golden Globe Award for Best Actress – Miniseries or Television Film"/>
<link wikidata="Q575373" start="4757" end="4765" title="Roseanne" label="Roseanne"/>
<link wikidata="Q833322" start="4779" end="4796" title="Murder, She Wrote" label="Murder, She Wrote"/>
<link wikidata="Q464865" start="4813" end="4822" title="The Nanny" label="The Nanny"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141890" start="4874" end="4882" title="Felicity (TV series)" label="Felicity"/>
<link wikidata="Q185059" start="4899" end="4916" title="Days of Our Lives" label="Days of Our Lives"/>
<link wikidata="Q207816" start="5021" end="5035" title="Bruce Almighty" label="Bruce Almighty"/>
<link wikidata="Q348508" start="5056" end="5072" title="Adam &amp;amp; Steve" label="Adam &amp;amp; Steve"/>
<link wikidata="Q939728" start="5096" end="5104" title="Big Stan" label="Big Stan"/>
<link wikidata="Q73897931" start="5237" end="5241" title="Cuck (film)" label="Cuck"/>
<link wikidata="Q720233" start="5336" end="5350" title="Robert LaSardo" label="Robert Lasardo"/>
<link wikidata="Q506778" start="5352" end="5366" title="Doug Hutchison" label="Doug Hutchison"/>
<link wikidata="Q16977207" start="5368" end="5378" title="Alex Cubis" label="Alex Cubis"/>
<link wikidata="Q589942" start="5383" end="5396" title="George Stults" label="George Stults"/>
<link wikidata="Q749053" start="5505" end="5519" title="breast implant" label="breast implant"/>
<link wikidata="Q17090965" start="5654" end="5691" title="Movement of Spiritual Inner Awareness" label="Movement of Spiritual Inner Awareness"/>
<link wikidata="Q40791" start="5781" end="5795" title="Sandra Bullock" label="Sandra Bullock"/>
<link wikidata="Q4636" start="5797" end="5813" title="Barbra Streisand" label="Barbra Streisand"/>
<link wikidata="Q14441" start="5815" end="5828" title="Liza Minnelli" label="Liza Minnelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q713099" start="5830" end="5843" title="Dwight Yoakam" label="Dwight Yoakam"/>
<link wikidata="Q232301" start="5849" end="5862" title="Roseanne Barr" label="Roseanne Barr"/>
<link wikidata="Q838330" start="6016" end="6039" title="University of Wisconsin" label="University of Wisconsin"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="246576" wikidata="Q1026089" url="?curid=246576" title="Cajun music">
<text>Cajun music (), an emblematic music of Louisiana played by the Cajuns, is rooted in the ballads of the French-speaking Acadians of Canada. Although they are two separate genres, Cajun music is often mentioned in tandem with the Creole-based zydeco music. Both are from southwest Louisiana and share French and African origins. These French Louisiana sounds have influenced American popular music for many decades, especially country music, and have influenced pop culture through mass media, such as television commercials.

==Musical theory==
Cajun music is relatively catchy with an infectious beat and a lot of forward drive, placing the accordion at the center. The accordionist gives the vocal melody greater energy by repeating most notes. Besides the voices, only two melodic instruments are heard, the accordion and fiddle, but usually in the background can also be heard the high, clear tones of a metal triangle. The harmonies of Cajun music are simple and the melodic range is just one octave, rising a fifth above the tonic and descending a fourth below. Because the Cajun accordion is a diatonic instrument (do-re-mi or natural major scale) it can only play tunes in a few keys. For example, a &quot;C&quot; accordion is tuned such that the entire C scale is available on the ten buttons (over two octaves) and it can play a tune in the key of C with all the notes of the C scale available (C-D-E-F-G-A-B). A &quot;C&quot; accordion can also play a few Cajun songs in the key of F however the Bb note will be missing. Also it can play in the key of D with a &quot;bluesy&quot; sound since the F natural note becomes a flat third or minor third in the key of D. However a skilled accordion player can play in these other keys and still make good music whereby the notes missing (because of the limitations of the diatonic tuning) are not needed by the melody. Since an instrument must match the singer&#x27;s range, much Cajun singing is sung in the singer&#x27;s upper range.

==History of Cajun music==
=== Origins ===
It is unlikely that musical instruments were introduced to colonial Louisiana before around 1780. Although originally there were no instruments, there were songs. Families sang traditional French songs called &quot;complaintes&quot; which the Cajuns adapted to their new ways of life. The first known record was of a violin in 1780 and a fiddle and clarinet player in 1785. The diatonic accordion was introduced to Cajun music in the mid- to late-1800s. It became popular because of its volume which, along with the fiddle, created sufficient accompaniment for dancing. Originally, musicians and singers performed at house dance parties known as &quot;bals de maison&quot;. However Cajun music, born from ballads, later transformed to dance music—played with or without words. The music was essential for small get-togethers on the front porch, &quot;bals de maison,&quot; and public dances in dance halls called &quot;fais do-dos&quot;.

=== Traditional Cajun (before 1930) ===
This style comprises the roots of Cajun dance music, involving only a few instruments such as the Cajun accordion, fiddle, and triangle. This form holds firm to a basic rhythm with staccato style notes, including many fiddle double stops. Each fiddle solo is composed of a major scale riff, repeated between verses. This form has existed since the early 1900s and the waltz and two-step are the most common dances of this Cajun music genre. Many songs that became standards in the Cajun music repertoire were first recorded in this period of the 1920s and 1930s. The first commercial recording of Cajun music, &quot;Lafayette (Allon au Laufette),&quot; was made by Joe Falcon and his future wife Cléoma Breaux for Columbia Records on April 27, 1928. A number of the most prominent traditional Cajun musicians are featured in the 1989 documentary &quot;J&#x27;ai Été Au Bal&quot;. Amédé Ardoin, Canray Fontenot, Wade Frugé, Dewey Segura, Joe Falcon and Cléoma Falcon, and the Breaux Brothers are examples of this genre.

===Country and Texas swing Cajun (pre-war/1934–1941)===

This style draws from Texas country music and moves away from the traditional accordion sound. It has more of a swing style popularized by Bob Wills and the Texas Playboys. Instead of being dominated by the accordion, Cajun swing relies significantly on the fiddle and piano with a swinging tempo. Bands in the 1940s began using the steel guitar, an instrument also found in Cajun dancehall music. Dances such as &quot;the jig&quot; are common in this genre of Cajun music. Leo Soileau, J. B. Fuselier, Leroy &quot;Happy Fats&quot; Leblanc, Harry Choates and the Hackberry Ramblers are early examples of this style. The Red Stick Ramblers and The Lost Bayou Ramblers are Cajun swing bands from the 1990s.

=== &quot;Fais do-dos&quot; (Cajun dance halls - 1946-1960) ===

In Cajun Louisiana, public dancehalls are known as &quot;fais do-dos&quot;. This expression may have evolved from a practice of bringing children to dance halls to lull them to sleep. In French, &quot;fais do-do&quot; means &quot;go to sleep&quot;. This style originated in the post-war era of the late 1940s and continues to the present-day in small town dancehalls. During this early period, bands changed from performing at house dances to large halls.

&quot;Fais do-do&quot; music is similar to the traditional Cajun music of house dances, with added accompaniment such as the bass guitar, drum kit, steel guitar, and rhythm guitar, electric or acoustic. The same abrupt, staccato feel can also be felt. The implementation of electrical amplification allowed instruments to cut through the noise of the crowd and be heard throughout the dance hall. Electrification of the dance venues also allowed the fiddle to be played in a smoother style and alternate leads with the accordion. The steel guitar also adds remarks. Typically in dancehall Cajun performances the melody is played by the accordion followed by a bridge, a vocal verse, leading lines by the steel guitar, fiddle, and accordion followed finally by a bridge. This is followed by the next vocal verse, and so on. Lawrence Walker, Aldus Roger, Nathan Abshire, Iry LeJeune, Al Berard, and Sidney Brown are examples of this musical period. The characteristics of dancehall Cajun can be seen in current artists such as Jesse Légé and The Basin Brothers Band.

===Cajun &quot;renaissance&quot;(1970s - )===
Drawing on elements of the earlier traditional, Texas swing, and dancehall periods, the Cajun &quot;renaissance&quot; also incorporates more modern elements of folk, blues, jazz and swamp pop, and bluegrass styles. The fiddle players relax, involving a more legato feel to the solos. The quick fiddle action and double stops are missing, replaced by dominant blues chords and jazz slides.

Pioneers such as BeauSoleil with Michael Doucet, Zachary Richard, Jambalaya Cajun Band, Bruce Daigrepont, and others broke new ground, while other musicians such as Eddie LeJeune, Irvin LeJeune, Homer LeJeune, the Pine Leaf Boys, and others brought energy to older, more traditional forms.

In 1964, Gladius Thibodeaux, Louis &quot;Vinesse&quot; Lejeune, and Dewey Balfa represented Louisiana at the Newport Folk Festival in Rhode Island. Their concert was a success and this was a turning point in the awareness of Cajun music at a national level.

===Contemporary Cajun music (1980s - )===

Contemporary Cajun music is influenced by rock, R&amp;B, blues, soul, and zydeco music. Although led by the accordion, the electric guitar, washboard, and keyboard are all present in this form. Musicians such as Wayne Toups, Roddie Romero and the Hub City Allstars, Lee Benoit, Damon Troy, Kevin Naquin, Trent LeJeune, and Steve Riley and the Mamou Playboys have popularized this modern form of Cajun music. The band Atchafalaya, active from 1982 to 1986, is another example of this style. More recently, the Lost Bayou Ramblers have experimented with mixing traditional instruments and cutting-edge technology, as showcased on their last two records, Mammoth Waltz (2012) and Kalenda (2017). This sound has been dubbed “Heavy Cajun Psych”.

Doug Kershaw recorded &quot;Louisiana Man&quot;, an autobiographical song that he wrote while in the army. The song sold millions of copies and, over the years, it has come to be considered a standard of modern Cajun music. &quot;Louisiana Man&quot; has been covered by more than 800 artists.

==Lyrics and instruments==
The unaccompanied ballad was the earliest form of Cajun music. These narrative songs often had passionate themes of death, solitude or ill-fated love — a reaction to their harsh exile and rough frontier experience, as well as celebrations of love and humorous tales. Ballads were ritually sung at weddings and funerals, and sung informally for small groups of people at house parties as the food cooked and young children played.

The early songs were mixtures of la la, contra dances, reels and jigs and other folk influences from Black, white and Native American traditions. Early song lyrics were entirely in Cajun French. Though songwriting in French is still common, today some Cajun music is sung in English with younger singers and audiences.

In earlier years, the fiddle was the predominant instrument. Usually two fiddles were common, one playing the melody while the other provided the séconde, or back-up part. Twin fiddling traditions represent the music in its purest form, as it was brought to Louisiana with the early immigrants and before popular American tunes mingled with it. Gradually, the Cajun accordion emerged to share the limelight.

In the early 1930s, the accordion was pushed into the background by the popular string sounds of the time. Piano and other string instruments joined fiddle to create a jazzy swing beat strongly influenced by Western Swing of neighboring Texas. The Cajun fiddle was a well established instrument which had been somewhat eclipsed by the German accordion fad, which had similar effect in French Canada. But in the Depression era the tide turned, and, according to Stricklin &quot;et al.&quot;, it had never been eclipsed.

After World War II, the accordion regained its popularity in Cajun music. Also, in the late 1930s and 1940s, country music became the dominant influence on Cajun music, and steel guitar and bass were introduced.

Modern Cajun music began taking on the influence of jazz and modern country music, resulting in a more polished sound. The acoustic guitar was added, mostly as a rhythm instrument, and the triangle provided a traditional percussion. Modern groups sometimes include drums, electric bass, electric guitars and amplified accordion and fiddles.

==Dance and festivals==

There are several variations of Cajun dance: a Cajun one-step, also called a Cajun jig, a Cajun two-step, also called a Cajun Jitterbug, and a Cajun Waltz. In mild contrast, zydeco dancing is a syncopated two-step or jitterbug. A Cajun dancer will cover the dance floor while the zydeco dancer will primarily dance in a smaller area. Cajun music can be found predominantly at Louisiana festivals and dance halls, in addition to weddings in Acadiana.

In 1968, CODOFIL (the Council for the Development of French in Louisiana) was created. The goal of this agency, which still exists, was to promote Cajun culture and combat negative stereotypes. In 1974, CODOFIL created the three-hour Tribute to Cajun Music festival, later renamed the Festival de Musique Acadienne, in order to revive an interest in Cajun music and culture among the younger generation.

==See also==
*List of people related to Cajun music
*Cajun French Music Association

==References==
== Further reading ==
* Brasseaux, Ryan André, &quot;Cajun Breakdown: The Emergence of an American Made Music&quot;, Oxford, 2009 
*Broven, John, &quot;South to Louisiana: The Music of the Cajun Bayous&quot;, Pelican, 1987.
* Savoy, Ann Allen, &quot;Cajun Music: A Reflection of a People&quot;, Volume One, Bluebird, 1988.
*Tomko, Gene, &quot;Encyclopedia of Louisiana Musicians: Jazz, Blues, Cajun, Creole, Zydeco, Swamp Pop, and Gospel&quot;, Louisiana State University, 2020.

==External links==
*Cajun and Creole Music Collection at Edith Garland Dupré Library, University of Louisiana at Lafayette
*Contemporary Louisiana Cajun, Creole and Zydeco Musicians</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1026089" start="0" end="11" title="Cajun music" label="Cajun music"/>
<link wikidata="Q6942158" start="30" end="48" title="music of Louisiana" label="music of Louisiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q686949" start="63" end="69" title="Cajuns" label="Cajuns"/>
<link wikidata="Q182659" start="88" end="95" title="ballads" label="ballads"/>
<link wikidata="Q415054" start="119" end="126" title="Acadian" label="Acadian"/>
<link wikidata="Q16" start="131" end="137" title="Canada" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q4386404" start="228" end="234" title="Louisiana Creole people" label="Creole"/>
<link wikidata="Q245296" start="241" end="247" title="zydeco" label="zydeco"/>
<link wikidata="Q5501836" start="333" end="349" title="French Louisiana" label="French Louisiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q4745518" start="373" end="395" title="American popular music" label="American popular music"/>
<link wikidata="Q83440" start="425" end="438" title="country music" label="country music"/>
<link wikidata="Q131265" start="460" end="471" title="popular culture" label="pop culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q11033" start="480" end="490" title="mass media" label="mass media"/>
<link wikidata="Q854995" start="500" end="522" title="television commercials" label="television commercials"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026087" start="1079" end="1094" title="Cajun accordion" label="Cajun accordion"/>
<link wikidata="Q316930" start="2768" end="2779" title="dance music" label="dance music"/>
<link wikidata="Q816741" start="2871" end="2876" title="porch" label="porch"/>
<link wikidata="Q3064593" start="2952" end="2962" title="fais do-do" label="fais do-do"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026087" start="3110" end="3125" title="Cajun accordion" label="Cajun accordion"/>
<link wikidata="Q5018019" start="3127" end="3133" title="Cajun fiddle" label="fiddle"/>
<link wikidata="Q201735" start="3139" end="3147" title="Triangle (musical instrument)" label="triangle"/>
<link wikidata="Q170406" start="3181" end="3187" title="rhythm" label="rhythm"/>
<link wikidata="Q466944" start="3193" end="3201" title="staccato" label="staccato"/>
<link wikidata="Q1242951" start="3237" end="3249" title="double stops" label="double stops"/>
<link wikidata="Q190812" start="3285" end="3296" title="major scale" label="major scale"/>
<link wikidata="Q193434" start="3380" end="3385" title="waltz" label="waltz"/>
<link wikidata="Q627497" start="3390" end="3398" title="two-step (dance move)" label="two-step"/>
<link wikidata="Q2324713" start="3677" end="3687" title="Joe Falcon" label="Joe Falcon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2967575" start="3708" end="3721" title="Cléoma Falcon" label="Cléoma Breaux"/>
<link wikidata="Q183387" start="3726" end="3742" title="Columbia Records" label="Columbia Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q482149" start="3892" end="3904" title="Amédé Ardoin" label="Amédé Ardoin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1033625" start="3906" end="3921" title="Canray Fontenot" label="Canray Fontenot"/>
<link wikidata="Q7959048" start="3923" end="3933" title="Wade Frugé" label="Wade Frugé"/>
<link wikidata="Q17018195" start="3935" end="3947" title="Dewey Segura" label="Dewey Segura"/>
<link wikidata="Q2324713" start="3949" end="3959" title="Joe Falcon" label="Joe Falcon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2967575" start="3964" end="3977" title="Cléoma Falcon" label="Cléoma Falcon"/>
<link wikidata="Q4959939" start="3987" end="4002" title="Breaux Brothers" label="Breaux Brothers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439" start="4111" end="4116" title="Texas" label="Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q83440" start="4117" end="4130" title="country music" label="country music"/>
<link wikidata="Q888326" start="4228" end="4237" title="Bob Wills" label="Bob Wills"/>
<link wikidata="Q888326" start="4246" end="4260" title="Texas Playboys" label="Texas Playboys"/>
<link wikidata="Q510487" start="4347" end="4353" title="fiddle" label="fiddle"/>
<link wikidata="Q5994" start="4358" end="4363" title="piano" label="piano"/>
<link wikidata="Q608413" start="4508" end="4515" title="Cajun Jig" label="the jig"/>
<link wikidata="Q6524247" start="4563" end="4574" title="Leo Soileau" label="Leo Soileau"/>
<link wikidata="Q6104685" start="4576" end="4590" title="J. B. Fuselier" label="J. B. Fuselier"/>
<link wikidata="Q17150443" start="4592" end="4628" title="Leroy &amp;quot;Happy Fats&amp;quot; Leblanc" label="Leroy &amp;quot;Happy Fats&amp;quot; Leblanc"/>
<link wikidata="Q5667909" start="4630" end="4643" title="Harry Choates" label="Harry Choates"/>
<link wikidata="Q3521179" start="4652" end="4670" title="Hackberry Ramblers" label="Hackberry Ramblers"/>
<link wikidata="Q7759942" start="4705" end="4727" title="The Red Stick Ramblers" label="The Red Stick Ramblers"/>
<link wikidata="Q7748538" start="4732" end="4755" title="The Lost Bayou Ramblers" label="The Lost Bayou Ramblers"/>
<link wikidata="Q504514" start="5416" end="5429" title="accompaniment" label="accompaniment"/>
<link wikidata="Q46185" start="5442" end="5453" title="bass guitar" label="bass guitar"/>
<link wikidata="Q128309" start="5455" end="5463" title="drum kit" label="drum kit"/>
<link wikidata="Q2617520" start="5465" end="5477" title="steel guitar" label="steel guitar"/>
<link wikidata="Q670969" start="5483" end="5496" title="rhythm guitar" label="rhythm guitar"/>
<link wikidata="Q466944" start="5537" end="5545" title="staccato" label="staccato"/>
<link wikidata="Q6504711" start="6140" end="6155" title="Lawrence Walker" label="Lawrence Walker"/>
<link wikidata="Q4714018" start="6157" end="6168" title="Aldus Roger" label="Aldus Roger"/>
<link wikidata="Q532475" start="6170" end="6184" title="Nathan Abshire" label="Nathan Abshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q3154632" start="6186" end="6197" title="Iry LeJeune" label="Iry LeJeune"/>
<link wikidata="Q4703583" start="6199" end="6208" title="Al Berard" label="Al Berard"/>
<link wikidata="Q17626522" start="6214" end="6226" title="Sidney Brown (accordion maker)" label="Sidney Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q43343" start="6589" end="6593" title="traditional folk music" label="folk"/>
<link wikidata="Q8341" start="6602" end="6606" title="jazz" label="jazz"/>
<link wikidata="Q106522115" start="6611" end="6620" title="swamp pop" label="swamp pop"/>
<link wikidata="Q213714" start="6626" end="6635" title="Bluegrass music" label="bluegrass"/>
<link wikidata="Q649116" start="6687" end="6693" title="legato" label="legato"/>
<link wikidata="Q2893053" start="6836" end="6846" title="BeauSoleil" label="BeauSoleil"/>
<link wikidata="Q3308157" start="6852" end="6866" title="Michael Doucet" label="Michael Doucet"/>
<link wikidata="Q3574532" start="6868" end="6883" title="Zachary Richard" label="Zachary Richard"/>
<link wikidata="Q3388659" start="7033" end="7047" title="Pine Leaf Boys" label="Pine Leaf Boys"/>
<link wikidata="Q3025569" start="7178" end="7189" title="Dewey Balfa" label="Dewey Balfa"/>
<link wikidata="Q654566" start="7219" end="7240" title="Newport Folk Festival" label="Newport Folk Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q11399" start="7454" end="7458" title="Rock music" label="rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q45981" start="7460" end="7467" title="Rhythm and blues" label="R&amp;amp;B"/>
<link wikidata="Q9759" start="7469" end="7474" title="blues" label="blues"/>
<link wikidata="Q131272" start="7476" end="7480" title="Soul music" label="soul"/>
<link wikidata="Q245296" start="7486" end="7492" title="zydeco" label="zydeco"/>
<link wikidata="Q78987" start="7535" end="7550" title="electric guitar" label="electric guitar"/>
<link wikidata="Q21607265" start="7552" end="7561" title="Washboard (musical instrument)" label="washboard"/>
<link wikidata="Q52954" start="7567" end="7575" title="Keyboard instrument" label="keyboard"/>
<link wikidata="Q3566868" start="7624" end="7635" title="Wayne Toups" label="Wayne Toups"/>
<link wikidata="Q16193012" start="7678" end="7688" title="Lee Benoit" label="Lee Benoit"/>
<link wikidata="Q6397073" start="7702" end="7714" title="Kevin Naquin" label="Kevin Naquin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3499085" start="7735" end="7769" title="Steve Riley and the Mamou Playboys" label="Steve Riley and the Mamou Playboys"/>
<link wikidata="Q7748538" start="7921" end="7940" title="Lost Bayou Ramblers" label="Lost Bayou Ramblers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1251780" start="8154" end="8166" title="Doug Kershaw" label="Doug Kershaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q155171" start="8413" end="8420" title="Cover version" label="covered"/>
<link wikidata="Q747339" start="8946" end="8958" title="contra dance" label="contra dance"/>
<link wikidata="Q118120" start="8961" end="8966" title="reel (dance)" label="reels"/>
<link wikidata="Q1079270" start="8971" end="8974" title="jig" label="jig"/>
<link wikidata="Q3083213" start="9087" end="9099" title="Cajun French" label="Cajun French"/>
<link wikidata="Q7976" start="9181" end="9188" title="American English" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q5018019" start="9248" end="9254" title="Cajun fiddle" label="fiddle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026087" start="9586" end="9601" title="Cajun accordion" label="Cajun accordion"/>
<link wikidata="Q5018019" start="9883" end="9895" title="Cajun fiddle" label="Cajun fiddle"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="10161" end="10173" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q83440" start="10264" end="10277" title="country music" label="country music"/>
<link wikidata="Q2617520" start="10328" end="10340" title="steel guitar" label="steel guitar"/>
<link wikidata="Q80019" start="10345" end="10349" title="double bass" label="bass"/>
<link wikidata="Q2563510" start="10491" end="10506" title="Steel-string acoustic guitar" label="acoustic guitar"/>
<link wikidata="Q201735" start="10557" end="10565" title="triangle (musical instrument)" label="triangle"/>
<link wikidata="Q128309" start="10633" end="10638" title="Drum kit" label="drums"/>
<link wikidata="Q46185" start="10640" end="10653" title="bass guitar" label="electric bass"/>
<link wikidata="Q78987" start="10655" end="10670" title="electric guitar" label="electric guitar"/>
<link wikidata="Q608413" start="10812" end="10821" title="Cajun jig" label="Cajun jig"/>
<link wikidata="Q5018008" start="10855" end="10870" title="Cajun Jitterbug" label="Cajun Jitterbug"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10878" end="10889" title="Cajun Waltz" label="Cajun Waltz"/>
<link wikidata="Q8075739" start="10909" end="10923" title="Zydeco (dance)" label="zydeco dancing"/>
<link wikidata="Q319526" start="10929" end="10939" title="syncopation" label="syncopated"/>
<link wikidata="Q950354" start="10952" end="10961" title="jitterbug" label="jitterbug"/>
<link wikidata="Q132241" start="11121" end="11130" title="festivals" label="festivals"/>
<link wikidata="Q2994219" start="11195" end="11202" title="Council for the Development of French in Louisiana" label="CODOFIL"/>
<link wikidata="Q3244274" start="11605" end="11642" title="List of people related to Cajun music" label="List of people related to Cajun music"/>
<link wikidata="Q2931356" start="11644" end="11674" title="Cajun French Music Association" label="Cajun French Music Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q2850420" start="11917" end="11933" title="Ann Savoy" label="Savoy, Ann Allen"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="246577" wikidata="Q2674199" url="?curid=246577" title="War Crimes Law (Belgium)">
<text>Belgium&#x27;s War Crimes Law invokes the concept of universal jurisdiction to allow anyone to bring war crime charges in Belgian courts, regardless of where the alleged crimes have taken place.

Note that this is a Belgian law and is different from the International Criminal Court, which is a treaty body to try war crimes, and also different from the International Court of Justice, which is a U.N. body to settle disputes between countries. Both of these bodies reside in nearby The Hague, Netherlands, although some have said that American Servicemen&#x27;s Protection Act passed by the United States was also directed against the War Crimes Law.

== Background ==

The law took effect in 1993 and was expanded the following year after 10 Belgian soldiers were killed in Rwanda.

The law reached prominence after the Rwandan genocide. According to the Washington Post, the process of prosecution of Rwandans in Belgium for crimes committed in the violence were set in motion by Martine Beckers, a Brussels resident, whose sister Claire called her to tell her of being attacked by soldiers, who soon after killed her, her family, and 10 other villagers who were unable to reach a United Nations peacekeepers&#x27; compound.

== Universal jurisdiction ==

Countries have long claimed jurisdiction over nationals of other countries or suits against countries themselves in matters Civil or criminal where those foreign nationals are alleged to have committed crimes against the complaining country&#x27;s nationals, or have committed crimes in the complaining country.

What made this Belgian law controversial was that it afforded the right to anyone to submit a war crime for prosecution in Belgian courts that occurred anywhere in the world, whether on Belgian territory, and whether a Belgian national was involved as either criminal or victim. This concept called &quot;universal jurisdiction&quot;, or &quot;universal competence&quot;, was recently used in Germany to indict high-ranking US officials for their involvement in prisoner abuse in the war on terror under the command responsibility.

== Problems with implementation of the law ==

The law soon ran into trouble when a number of parties worldwide filed cases criticized as politically motivated against leaders of various nations.

* Prime Minister Ariel Sharon was accused of involvement in the 1982 Sabra and Shatila massacre in Lebanon, conducted by a Christian militia;
* Israelis filed a case against Yasser Arafat on grounds of responsibility for terrorist activity;
* In 2003, Iraqi victims of a 1991 Baghdad bombing pressed charges against George H. W. Bush, Colin Powell, and Dick Cheney.

American officials Norman Schwarzkopf and Tommy Franks were also accused. Cases had also been filed against the leaders of many other countries, such as Iraq and Cuba&#x27;s Fidel Castro. The paperwork backing several of these filings was very limited, consisting out of a single fax or several pages.

Critics assailed the law as an attempt to circumvent the sovereignty of other states and become a venue for partisan show trials of propaganda value but no legal consequence. Proponents respond by arguing that universal jurisdiction is often the only recourse victims of war crimes have, and that under the UN Charter countries are already obliged to prosecute those involved in war crimes.

In an effort by the United States to pressure Belgium, United States Secretary of Defense Donald Rumsfeld threatened to remove the NATO Headquarters from Brussels unless the Law was changed.

== Most cases dropped ==

On 12 July 2003, the incoming government of Prime Minister Guy Verhofstadt announced that scrapping this law would be among the first acts carried out.

In September of that year, the Belgian Court of Cassation threw out the cases against the former President Bush and other US officials, as well as Israelis.

== Modified law and criticism ==

Six human rights groups (Amnesty International Belgium, both the Dutch-speaking Human Rights League and the French-speaking Human Rights League of Belgium, the International Federation for Human Rights, Avocats Sans Frontières (&quot;Lawyers Without Borders&quot;) and Human Rights Watch) called that loss of the universal jurisdiction component &quot;a step backwards in the global fight against the worst atrocities.&quot;

Human Rights Watch outlined the reduced scope of the law:

:&quot;Belgian courts will only have jurisdiction over international crimes if the accused is Belgian or has his primary residence in Belgium; if the victim is Belgian or has lived in Belgium for at least three years at the time the crimes were committed; or if Belgium is required by treaty to exercise jurisdiction over the case. The new law also considerably reduces victims&#x27; ability to obtain direct access to the courts – unless the accused is Belgian or has his primary residence in Belgium, the decision whether to proceed with any complaint rests entirely with the state prosecutor.&quot;

==Court of Arbitration==
On 21 June 2006, the Constitutional Court of Belgium (called the Court of Arbitration at the time) annulled parts of the modified law which came in place of the Belgian War Crimes Law.

==References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q31" start="0" end="7" title="Belgium" label="Belgium"/>
<link wikidata="Q2674199" start="15" end="29" title="War Crimes Law (Belgium)" label="War Crimes Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q928801" start="53" end="75" title="universal jurisdiction" label="universal jurisdiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q135010" start="101" end="110" title="war crime" label="war crime"/>
<link wikidata="Q47488" start="254" end="282" title="International Criminal Court" label="International Criminal Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q7801" start="354" end="384" title="International Court of Justice" label="International Court of Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="397" end="401" title="United Nations" label="U.N."/>
<link wikidata="Q36600" start="483" end="492" title="The Hague" label="The Hague"/>
<link wikidata="Q55" start="494" end="505" title="Netherlands" label="Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q466730" start="536" end="577" title="American Servicemen&amp;#x27;s Protection Act" label="American Servicemen&amp;#x27;s Protection Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="592" end="605" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q1037" start="776" end="782" title="Rwanda" label="Rwanda"/>
<link wikidata="Q131297" start="822" end="838" title="Rwandan genocide" label="Rwandan genocide"/>
<link wikidata="Q166032" start="857" end="872" title="Washington Post" label="Washington Post"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="983" end="998" title="Martine Beckers" label="Martine Beckers"/>
<link wikidata="Q240" start="1002" end="1010" title="Brussels" label="Brussels"/>
<link wikidata="Q3354958" start="1199" end="1211" title="peacekeeping" label="peacekeepers"/>
<link wikidata="Q222249" start="1383" end="1388" title="Civil law (common law)" label="Civil"/>
<link wikidata="Q146491" start="1392" end="1400" title="Criminal law" label="criminal"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1421" end="1430" title="national (person)" label="nationals"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="1965" end="1972" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q7245805" start="2034" end="2048" title="prisoner abuse" label="prisoner abuse"/>
<link wikidata="Q185729" start="2056" end="2069" title="war on terror" label="war on terror"/>
<link wikidata="Q931567" start="2080" end="2102" title="command responsibility" label="command responsibility"/>
<link wikidata="Q60206" start="2319" end="2331" title="Ariel Sharon" label="Ariel Sharon"/>
<link wikidata="Q208199" start="2371" end="2397" title="Sabra and Shatila massacre" label="Sabra and Shatila massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q34211" start="2476" end="2489" title="Yasser Arafat" label="Yasser Arafat"/>
<link wikidata="Q37643" start="2573" end="2593" title="Gulf War" label="1991 Baghdad bombing"/>
<link wikidata="Q23505" start="2618" end="2635" title="George H. W. Bush" label="George H. W. Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q150851" start="2637" end="2649" title="Colin Powell" label="Colin Powell"/>
<link wikidata="Q48259" start="2655" end="2666" title="Dick Cheney" label="Dick Cheney"/>
<link wikidata="Q310188" start="2688" end="2706" title="Norman Schwarzkopf" label="Norman Schwarzkopf"/>
<link wikidata="Q461823" start="2711" end="2723" title="Tommy Franks" label="Tommy Franks"/>
<link wikidata="Q796" start="2822" end="2826" title="Iraq" label="Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q241" start="2831" end="2835" title="Cuba" label="Cuba"/>
<link wikidata="Q11256" start="2843" end="2855" title="Fidel Castro" label="Fidel Castro"/>
<link wikidata="Q42008" start="3029" end="3040" title="sovereignty" label="sovereignty"/>
<link wikidata="Q3624078" start="3050" end="3056" title="Sovereign state" label="states"/>
<link wikidata="Q7140620" start="3080" end="3088" title="partisan (political)" label="partisan"/>
<link wikidata="Q177253" start="3089" end="3099" title="show trial" label="show trial"/>
<link wikidata="Q7281" start="3104" end="3114" title="propaganda" label="propaganda"/>
<link wikidata="Q7748" start="3128" end="3133" title="legal" label="legal"/>
<link wikidata="Q171328" start="3279" end="3289" title="UN Charter" label="UN Charter"/>
<link wikidata="Q735015" start="3419" end="3453" title="United States Secretary of Defense" label="United States Secretary of Defense"/>
<link wikidata="Q184650" start="3454" end="3469" title="Donald Rumsfeld" label="Donald Rumsfeld"/>
<link wikidata="Q7184" start="3495" end="3499" title="NATO" label="NATO"/>
<link wikidata="Q12978" start="3641" end="3656" title="Guy Verhofstadt" label="Guy Verhofstadt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1230309" start="3766" end="3792" title="Court of Cassation (Belgium)" label="Belgian Court of Cassation"/>
<link wikidata="Q42970" start="3952" end="3973" title="Amnesty International" label="Amnesty International"/>
<link wikidata="Q2515347" start="3992" end="4026" title="Human Rights League (Dutch-speaking Belgium)" label="Dutch-speaking Human Rights League"/>
<link wikidata="Q2515347" start="4035" end="4070" title="Human Rights League (French-speaking Belgium)" label="French-speaking Human Rights League"/>
<link wikidata="Q730498" start="4087" end="4128" title="International Federation for Human Rights" label="International Federation for Human Rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q2478166" start="4130" end="4153" title="Avocats Sans Frontières" label="Avocats Sans Frontières"/>
<link wikidata="Q187052" start="4196" end="4214" title="Human Rights Watch" label="Human Rights Watch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1755321" start="5061" end="5092" title="Constitutional Court of Belgium" label="Constitutional Court of Belgium"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="246579" wikidata="Q55250" url="?curid=246579" title="Pierre Le Moyne d'Iberville">
<text>Pierre Le Moyne d&#x27;Iberville (16 July 1661 – 9 July 1706) or Sieur d&#x27;Iberville was a French soldier, explorer, colonial administrator, and trader. He is noted for founding the colony of Louisiana in New France. He was born in Montreal to French colonist parents.

==Early life==
Pierre Le Moyne was born in July 1661 at Fort Ville-Marie (now Montreal), in the French colony of Canada, the third son of Charles le Moyne de Longueuil et de Châteauguay, a native of Dieppe or of Longueuil near Dieppe, Normandy in France and lord of Longueuil in Canada, and of (called Catherine Primot in some sources) from Rouen. He is also known as &quot;Sieur d&#x27;Iberville&quot; (&quot;et d&#x27;Ardillières&quot;).

He had eleven brothers, most of whom became soldiers. One, Jacques Le Moyne de Sainte-Hélène, led French and Indian forces in the Schenectady massacre in present-day New York&#x27;s Mohawk Valley. Charles le Moyne de Longueuil, Baron de Longueuil, was governor of Montreal. Another, Jean-Baptiste Le Moyne Bienville, founded New Orleans. Jacques and Paul LeMoyne were with him on James Bay, and Joseph LeMoyne was with him in Louisiana.

Le Moyne d&#x27;Iberville was raised Catholic under the Jesuit order. Parish records indicate that he made his First Communion at the age of 12. Like most young men of his background, who received a classical and religious education, d&#x27;Iberville was educated in a Sulpician seminary.

Destined for the priesthood, he chose the military vocation. At the age of 12, he became a cabin boy on his uncle&#x27;s ship trading to Port Royal, Acadia. A few years later he was in the fur trade at Sault Ste. Marie in Canada, where he would have learned something of canoe travel in the wilderness. He later became quartermaster on one of his father&#x27;s ships.

==Hudson Bay expeditions==


The Hudson&#x27;s Bay Company was founded in 1670. This company diverted furs away from Quebec and threatened further expansion into French territory. In 1682, the &quot;Compagnie du Nord&quot; was founded to compete with the English on the Bay. In 1686, the aggressive Governor General Denonville decided to drive out the English even though the two countries were at peace. 

Under the command of Pierre de Troyes, Chevalier de Troyes, d&#x27;Iberville his brothers Paul and Jacques led the Canadian woodsmen on a 1686 expedition to Hudson Bay. He played a heroic part in the capture of the fort at Moose Factory. At Fort-Rupert, he captured the sloop &quot;Craven&quot; and killed at least one unarmed sailor. As a result, the French seized all three English posts on James Bay, leaving the English only York Factory which was far to the northwest and inaccessible by land. 

De Troyes left in August 1686, leaving d&#x27;Iberville in charge with 40 men. The following summer, when no supplies arrived, d&#x27;Iberville left 12 men at the forts and went first south to Quebec and then to France. In France, he lobbied for the &quot;Compagnie&quot; and obtained command of &quot;Soleil D&#x27;Afrique&quot; and returned to James Bay in the summer of 1688. There he captured three HBC ships that were trying to re-establish their position on James Bay.

Returning to Quebec, he was caught up in King William&#x27;s War and sent south to attack the British colonies (see below). In July 1690, he left Quebec with three ships in the hope of capturing York Factory. Finding himself outgunned by a larger English ship, he fled south and captured the new HBC base at Fort Severn. In 1692 and 1693, he again planned to attack York Factory, but both times the needed ships were diverted. 

It was 1694 before he could effect the capture of York Factory. His work was undone when the English recaptured Fort Albany in 1693 and York Factory in 1695. 1695 and 1696 were spent in coastal raiding. In 1697 he captured York Factory a second time after winning his most heroic battle. It was too late in the season to capture Fort Albany, so he left Hudson Bay, never to return. York Factory remained French until 1713.

==King William&#x27;s War==

In 1690, he was second in command to his brother Jacques in a raid south to New York that culminated in the Schenectady Massacre. In 1692, he convoyed supply ships from France and harassed English coastal settlements, taking three prizes. In 1694, he returned to Hudson Bay and captured York Factory for the first time. 

In the spring of 1696, he sailed from France with three ships. Sending one to Quebec, he led the other two to the aid of the governor of Acadia, Joseph Robineau de Villebon, whom the English were blockading at the mouth of the Saint John River. He captured one enemy ship and drove the other two away. He then went 200 miles west and captured the most northerly settlement in New England, Pemaquid, Siege of Pemaquid (1696), 14 August. 

He then sailed east to Placentia, the French capital of Newfoundland, and began the Avalon Peninsula Campaign on 1 November. On this expedition he captured St. John&#x27;s and ruined most of the English fishing villages. During four months of raids, Iberville was responsible for the destruction of 36 settlements. 

The Newfoundland campaign was one of the cruelest and most destructive of Iberville&#x27;s career. Before he could consolidate his hold on Newfoundland, he was diverted north to capture York Factory for a second time during the summer of 1697. Soon after his departure, the English arrived in Newfoundland with 2,000 troops and restored their position. Hostilities ended with the Treaty of Ryswick in September 1697.

==Exploring Louisiana==
In 1682, René-Robert Cavelier, Sieur de La Salle was the first European to travel from the Great Lakes down the Mississippi River to the Gulf of Mexico. The French began dreaming of building a great empire by linking the Saint Lawrence and Mississippi basins, thereby bottling up the English on the Atlantic coast. This presented diplomatic problems; the Gulf coast was claimed, though not occupied, by Spain.

Pontchartrain, the minister for naval affairs and colonies, gave d&#x27;Iberville the task of locating the mouth of the Mississippi River, which La Salle had failed to find on his last expedition, and building a fort which would block the river to other nations. D&#x27;Iberville left Brest with four ships in October 1698. He sailed along the Florida coast, past the base the Spanish were building at Pensacola. 

In March 1699, he entered the Birdfoot Delta. It was only after meeting some Indians who remembered La Salle that he was sure that this was the Mississippi. Having achieved his first aim and finding no good sites in the delta, he built a temporary fort Fort Maurepas at Ocean Springs, Mississippi, left a garrison of 81 men, and returned to France.
On his second voyage, he reached Biloxi in January 1700. He built a second &quot;Fort Maurepas&quot; 40 miles up the Mississippi River. On his return journey, he is said to have stopped at New York City and sold 9,000 furs that coureurs des bois had given him, in preference to hauling them back to Montreal. This story illustrates the benefits of the future New Orleans area as a port, the size of the French presence on the Mississippi at this early date, and d&#x27;Iberville&#x27;s questionable business practices. On his third voyage in February 1701, he built a fort at Mobile. Here, Henri de Tonti aided him in establishing good relations with the Indians. He left Louisiana for the last time in April 1702. His brother Jean-Baptiste Le Moyne de Bienville founded New Orleans in 1718.

==Queen Anne&#x27;s War and his death==
In 1702, England and France were again at war (War of the Spanish Succession, 1701–1714, the North American theater of which was Queen Anne&#x27;s War). D&#x27;Iberville had contracted malaria on the Gulf coast, and both his health and judgment seem to have deteriorated. Early in 1706, he left France in command of twelve vessels. A squadron under Henri-Louis de Chavagnac devastated Saint Kitts. From 1 to 22 April, d&#x27;Iberville and Chavagnac devastated the island of Nevis and took much of the population prisoner. 

He went to Havana, where he was involved in planning an expedition against Charles Town, Carolina (an English colonial settlement), when he died suddenly, perhaps of yellow fever, in July, 1706. D&#x27;Iberville was buried at Church of San Cristóbal (Havana Cathedral); the burial records identify him under his French name, and as El General Dom Pedro Berbila.

After his death, his estate became involved in an inquiry that dragged on for more than thirty years. D&#x27;Iberville had acquired a large fortune by uncertain means. The accounts of the West Indian expedition were hopelessly disorganized; there were accusations of embezzlement. His widow, Marie Thérèse Pollet (1672–1740) was forced to pay back a large part of her inheritance.

D&#x27;Iberville was perhaps the first great soldier born in Canada. Students of the art of war may see his career as an example of the importance of following up after a victory, for he won all his battles but never was able to consolidate what he had won.

==Honours==
Pierre Le Moyne d&#x27;Iberville was a knight of the Order of Saint-Louis.

===Legacy===

The following works and sites are named for d&#x27;Iberville:
* &quot;D&#x27;Iberville&quot;, a 39 episode television series on Radio-Canada from 1967 to 1968
* The city of Iberville, Quebec, now a district of Saint-Jean-sur-Richelieu
* A high school in Longueuil, Quebec, on the south shore of Montreal, is named after him. 
* A secondary school in Rouyn-Noranda, Québec, bears the name D&#x27;Iberville
* Avenue Iberville, located in Shawinigan, Quebec, Canada
* Rue D&#x27;Iberville and the adjacent D&#x27;Iberville metro station in Montreal, Quebec
* The provincial electoral district of Iberville, Quebec
* Mont d&#x27;Iberville, the highest mountain in Quebec
* The city of D&#x27;Iberville, Mississippi
* Iberville Parish, Louisiana
* Iberville Street in New Orleans, Louisiana
* Rue d&#x27;Iberville in Chicoutimi, Québec
* Rue Iberville in Radisson, Québec
* Rue d&#x27;Iberville in Alma, Québec
* D&#x27;Iberville St. in Carbonear, Newfoundland
* A number of French ships, notably:
** A torpedo aviso, one of the first French ships to be designated as a &quot;contre-torpilleur&quot; (destroyer)
** A colonial sloop scuttled in Toulon harbor on 27 November 1942
* , Canadian Coast Guard icebreaker.
* Has a statue in Mobile erected in 2002, a gift from Hand Arendall, L.L.C.
*The cafeteria at Northwestern State University of Louisiana is named for him.
* &quot;Ibervillea&quot;, a genus of flowering plants belonging to the family Cucurbitaceae, from Central America and Mexico.

==See also==

*Fort Gaines, Alabama
*D&#x27;Iberville (TV series)

==Notes==
==References==
==Bibliography==
* Frégault, Guy. &quot;Iberville le conquérant.&quot; (Montréal, 1944).

==External links==
* &quot;Pierre Le Moyne d&#x27;Iberville at the Valiants Memorial&quot;
* Iberville Prospectus at The Historic New Orleans Collection </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q55250" start="0" end="32" title="Pierre Le Moyne d&amp;#x27;Iberville" label="Pierre Le Moyne d&amp;#x27;Iberville"/>
<link wikidata="Q55250" start="65" end="87" title="Pierre Le Moyne d&amp;#x27;Iberville" label="Sieur d&amp;#x27;Iberville"/>
<link wikidata="Q658054" start="195" end="204" title="Louisiana (New France)" label="Louisiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q170604" start="208" end="218" title="New France" label="New France"/>
<link wikidata="Q1438794" start="329" end="345" title="Fort Ville-Marie" label="Fort Ville-Marie"/>
<link wikidata="Q340" start="351" end="359" title="Montreal" label="Montreal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2569593" start="386" end="392" title="Canada (New France)" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q581340" start="411" end="458" title="Charles le Moyne de Longueuil et de Châteauguay" label="Charles le Moyne de Longueuil et de Châteauguay"/>
<link wikidata="Q183557" start="472" end="478" title="Dieppe, France" label="Dieppe"/>
<link wikidata="Q15878" start="508" end="516" title="Normandy" label="Normandy"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="520" end="526" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q139398" start="539" end="548" title="Longueuil" label="Longueuil"/>
<link wikidata="Q30974" start="614" end="619" title="Rouen" label="Rouen"/>
<link wikidata="Q3159315" start="773" end="806" title="Jacques Le Moyne de Sainte-Hélène" label="Jacques Le Moyne de Sainte-Hélène"/>
<link wikidata="Q7431161" start="844" end="864" title="Schenectady massacre" label="Schenectady massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q2959403" start="911" end="960" title="Charles le Moyne de Longueuil, Baron de Longueuil" label="Charles le Moyne de Longueuil, Baron de Longueuil"/>
<link wikidata="Q55266" start="997" end="1029" title="Jean-Baptiste Le Moyne, Sieur de Bienville" label="Jean-Baptiste Le Moyne Bienville"/>
<link wikidata="Q34404" start="1039" end="1050" title="New Orleans" label="New Orleans"/>
<link wikidata="Q223810" start="1094" end="1103" title="James Bay" label="James Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q658054" start="1140" end="1149" title="Louisiana (New France)" label="Louisiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="1189" end="1197" title="Catholic Church" label="Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q36380" start="1208" end="1214" title="Jesuit" label="Jesuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q522379" start="1421" end="1430" title="Sulpician" label="Sulpician"/>
<link wikidata="Q3398298" start="1579" end="1589" title="Port-Royal (Acadia)" label="Port Royal"/>
<link wikidata="Q207353" start="1591" end="1597" title="Acadia" label="Acadia"/>
<link wikidata="Q878138" start="1631" end="1640" title="fur trade" label="fur trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q463165" start="1644" end="1660" title="Sault Ste. Marie, Ontario" label="Sault Ste. Marie"/>
<link wikidata="Q76039" start="1844" end="1869" title="Hudson&amp;#x27;s Bay Company" label="Hudson&amp;#x27;s Bay Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q3158068" start="2110" end="2137" title="Jacques-René de Brisay de Denonville, Marquis de Denonville" label="Governor General Denonville"/>
<link wikidata="Q3387726" start="2239" end="2276" title="Pierre de Troyes, Chevalier de Troyes" label="Pierre de Troyes, Chevalier de Troyes"/>
<link wikidata="Q3062432" start="2361" end="2385" title="Hudson Bay expedition" label="expedition to Hudson Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q3031892" start="2441" end="2454" title="Moose Factory" label="Moose Factory"/>
<link wikidata="Q3566531" start="2459" end="2470" title="Fort-Rupert" label="Fort-Rupert"/>
<link wikidata="Q210223" start="2488" end="2493" title="sloop" label="sloop"/>
<link wikidata="Q1313314" start="2647" end="2659" title="York Factory" label="York Factory"/>
<link wikidata="Q2888522" start="3104" end="3115" title="Battle of Fort Albany" label="he captured"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070342" start="3236" end="3259" title="King William&amp;#x27;s War" label="King William&amp;#x27;s War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1239783" start="3503" end="3514" title="Severn River (northern Ontario)" label="Fort Severn"/>
<link wikidata="Q2937687" start="3663" end="3686" title="capture of York Factory" label="capture of York Factory"/>
<link wikidata="Q123456671" start="3736" end="3747" title="Fort Albany (Ontario)" label="Fort Albany"/>
<link wikidata="Q2890600" start="3888" end="3910" title="Battle of Hudson&amp;#x27;s Bay" label="his most heroic battle"/>
<link wikidata="Q7431161" start="4185" end="4205" title="Schenectady Massacre" label="Schenectady Massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q2937687" start="4355" end="4376" title="Capture of York Factory" label="captured York Factory"/>
<link wikidata="Q207353" start="4536" end="4542" title="Acadia" label="Acadia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3185569" start="4544" end="4571" title="Joseph Robineau de Villebon" label="Joseph Robineau de Villebon"/>
<link wikidata="Q607546" start="4626" end="4642" title="Saint John River (Bay of Fundy)" label="Saint John River"/>
<link wikidata="Q2937688" start="4798" end="4822" title="Siege of Pemaquid (1696)" label="Siege of Pemaquid (1696)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2607939" start="4860" end="4869" title="Placentia, Newfoundland and Labrador" label="Placentia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2935388" start="4921" end="4946" title="Avalon Peninsula Campaign" label="Avalon Peninsula Campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q2890600" start="5332" end="5352" title="Battle of Hudson&amp;#x27;s Bay" label="capture York Factory"/>
<link wikidata="Q164393" start="5534" end="5551" title="Treaty of Ryswick" label="Treaty of Ryswick"/>
<link wikidata="Q298156" start="5605" end="5644" title="René-Robert Cavelier, Sieur de La Salle" label="René-Robert Cavelier, Sieur de La Salle"/>
<link wikidata="Q7347" start="5687" end="5698" title="Great Lakes" label="Great Lakes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1497" start="5708" end="5725" title="Mississippi River" label="Mississippi River"/>
<link wikidata="Q12630" start="5733" end="5747" title="Gulf of Mexico" label="Gulf of Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q134750" start="5817" end="5831" title="St. Lawrence River" label="Saint Lawrence"/>
<link wikidata="Q166620" start="5848" end="5854" title="drainage basin" label="basins"/>
<link wikidata="Q918254" start="5880" end="5887" title="English colonization of the Americas" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q97" start="5895" end="5903" title="Atlantic Ocean" label="Atlantic"/>
<link wikidata="Q93352" start="5904" end="5909" title="coast" label="coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q12630" start="5951" end="5955" title="Gulf of Mexico" label="Gulf"/>
<link wikidata="Q93352" start="5956" end="5961" title="coast" label="coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q170603" start="5999" end="6004" title="New Spain" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q3262231" start="6007" end="6020" title="Louis Phélypeaux (1643-1727)" label="Pontchartrain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1233637" start="6114" end="6119" title="river mouth" label="mouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1497" start="6127" end="6144" title="Mississippi River" label="Mississippi River"/>
<link wikidata="Q22124342" start="6187" end="6202" title="French colonization of Texas" label="last expedition"/>
<link wikidata="Q12193" start="6292" end="6297" title="Brest, France" label="Brest"/>
<link wikidata="Q555528" start="6351" end="6358" title="Spanish Florida" label="Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q170603" start="6384" end="6391" title="New Spain" label="Spanish"/>
<link wikidata="Q486306" start="6409" end="6418" title="Pensacola" label="Pensacola"/>
<link wikidata="Q1528035" start="6452" end="6466" title="Mississippi River Delta" label="Birdfoot Delta"/>
<link wikidata="Q36747" start="6499" end="6506" title="Indigenous peoples of the Americas" label="Indians"/>
<link wikidata="Q3077941" start="6675" end="6688" title="Fort Maurepas" label="Fort Maurepas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1769542" start="6692" end="6718" title="Ocean Springs, Mississippi" label="Ocean Springs, Mississippi"/>
<link wikidata="Q88556" start="6727" end="6735" title="garrison" label="garrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q70972" start="6763" end="6769" title="Kingdom of France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q769668" start="6960" end="6973" title="Province of New York" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q511878" start="6999" end="7016" title="coureurs des bois" label="coureurs des bois"/>
<link wikidata="Q340" start="7070" end="7078" title="Montreal" label="Montreal"/>
<link wikidata="Q34404" start="7130" end="7141" title="New Orleans" label="New Orleans"/>
<link wikidata="Q44782" start="7152" end="7156" title="port" label="port"/>
<link wikidata="Q3077929" start="7337" end="7343" title="Old Mobile Site" label="a fort"/>
<link wikidata="Q79875" start="7347" end="7353" title="Mobile, Alabama" label="Mobile"/>
<link wikidata="Q2711731" start="7361" end="7375" title="Henri de Tonti" label="Henri de Tonti"/>
<link wikidata="Q36747" start="7426" end="7433" title="Indigenous peoples of the Americas" label="Indians"/>
<link wikidata="Q658054" start="7443" end="7452" title="Louisiana (New France)" label="Louisiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q55266" start="7498" end="7533" title="Jean-Baptiste Le Moyne de Bienville" label="Jean-Baptiste Le Moyne de Bienville"/>
<link wikidata="Q150701" start="7651" end="7680" title="War of the Spanish Succession" label="War of the Spanish Succession"/>
<link wikidata="Q869045" start="7733" end="7754" title="Queen Anne&amp;#x27;s War" label="Queen Anne&amp;#x27;s War"/>
<link wikidata="Q12156" start="7789" end="7796" title="malaria" label="malaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q3130428" start="7953" end="7977" title="Henri-Louis de Chavagnac" label="Henri-Louis de Chavagnac"/>
<link wikidata="Q207794" start="8078" end="8083" title="Nevis" label="Nevis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1563" start="8139" end="8145" title="Havana" label="Havana"/>
<link wikidata="Q5082999" start="8181" end="8194" title="Charles Town expedition" label="an expedition"/>
<link wikidata="Q47716" start="8203" end="8225" title="Charleston, South Carolina" label="Charles Town, Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q179876" start="8230" end="8237" title="Kingdom of England" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q154874" start="8294" end="8306" title="yellow fever" label="yellow fever"/>
<link wikidata="Q15043487" start="8379" end="8395" title="Havana Cathedral" label="Havana Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q247777" start="9197" end="9217" title="Order of Saint-Louis" label="Order of Saint-Louis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3010928" start="9304" end="9320" title="D&amp;#x27;Iberville (TV series)" label="D&amp;#x27;Iberville"/>
<link wikidata="Q461761" start="9362" end="9374" title="Canadian Broadcasting Corporation" label="Radio-Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q266929" start="9407" end="9424" title="Iberville, Quebec" label="Iberville, Quebec"/>
<link wikidata="Q141977" start="9444" end="9468" title="Saint-Jean-sur-Richelieu" label="Saint-Jean-sur-Richelieu"/>
<link wikidata="Q139398" start="9488" end="9497" title="Longueuil" label="Longueuil"/>
<link wikidata="Q141804" start="9584" end="9597" title="Rouyn-Noranda" label="Rouyn-Noranda"/>
<link wikidata="Q141980" start="9670" end="9680" title="Shawinigan" label="Shawinigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q176" start="9682" end="9688" title="Quebec" label="Quebec"/>
<link wikidata="Q1272978" start="9737" end="9767" title="D&amp;#x27;Iberville (Montreal Metro)" label="D&amp;#x27;Iberville metro station"/>
<link wikidata="Q340" start="9771" end="9779" title="Montreal" label="Montreal"/>
<link wikidata="Q600540" start="9827" end="9836" title="Iberville (Quebec provincial electoral district)" label="Iberville"/>
<link wikidata="Q3321804" start="9847" end="9868" title="Mount Caubvick" label="Mont d&amp;#x27;Iberville"/>
<link wikidata="Q979265" start="9915" end="9931" title="D&amp;#x27;Iberville, Mississippi" label="D&amp;#x27;Iberville"/>
<link wikidata="Q1494" start="9933" end="9944" title="Mississippi" label="Mississippi"/>
<link wikidata="Q504350" start="9947" end="9974" title="Iberville Parish, Louisiana" label="Iberville Parish, Louisiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q34404" start="9997" end="10008" title="New Orleans" label="New Orleans"/>
<link wikidata="Q952269" start="10046" end="10056" title="Chicoutimi" label="Chicoutimi"/>
<link wikidata="Q326413" start="10084" end="10092" title="Radisson, Quebec" label="Radisson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5501985" start="10232" end="10245" title="French aviso D&amp;#x27;Iberville" label="torpedo aviso"/>
<link wikidata="Q174736" start="10330" end="10339" title="destroyer" label="destroyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q383520" start="10411" end="10431" title="Canadian Coast Guard" label="Canadian Coast Guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q9006602" start="10607" end="10617" title="Ibervillea" label="Ibervillea"/>
<link wikidata="Q25314" start="10636" end="10651" title="flowering plant" label="flowering plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q8314" start="10677" end="10690" title="Cucurbitaceae" label="Cucurbitaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q5471191" start="10741" end="10761" title="Fort Gaines, Alabama" label="Fort Gaines, Alabama"/>
<link wikidata="Q3010928" start="10763" end="10791" title="D&amp;#x27;Iberville (TV series)" label="D&amp;#x27;Iberville (TV series)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="246612" wikidata="Q193094" url="?curid=246612" title="Iraqi dinar">
<text>The Iraqi dinar (code: IQD) is the currency of Iraq. The Iraqi dinar is issued by the Central Bank of Iraq (CBI). On 7 February 2023, the exchange rate with the US dollar was US$1 = 1300 dinars.

==History==
The Iraqi dinar entered circulation on 1 April 1932, replacing the Indian rupee, which had been the official currency since the British occupation of the country in World War I, at a rate of 1 dinar = 11 rupees. The dinar was pegged at par with sterling until 1959 when, without changing its value, the peg was switched to the United States dollar at the rate of IQD 1 = US$2.80. By not following the US devaluations in 1971 and 1973, the official rate rose to US$3.3778, before a 5% devaluation reduced its rate to US$3.2169, a rate which remained until the Gulf War in 1990, although in late 1989 the black market rate was reported at five to six times higher than the official rate.

=== Post-1990 developments ===
After the Gulf War in 1990, due to UN sanctions, Iraq was no longer able to place orders with De La Rue for further issues of the previously high quality notes, so new notes were produced. The pre-1990 notes became known as &quot;Swiss dinars&quot; while the new dinar notes were called &quot;Saddam dinars&quot;. Due to United States and the international sanctions on Iraq along with excessive government printing, the Saddam dinar currency devalued quickly. By late 1995, US$1 was valued at 3,000 Saddam dinars on the black market.

During the Iraqi no-fly zones conflict, Swiss dinars notes continued to circulate in the then politically isolated Kurdish-populated northern Iraq. The northern Iraqi Kurdistan government that was created as a result, refused to accept the inflated Saddam dinar notes (which were issued in huge amounts). Since the supply of Saddam dinar notes increased while the supply of Swiss dinar notes remained stable (even decreased because of notes taken out of circulation), the Swiss dinar notes appreciated against the Saddam dinar note. By having its own stable supply of the Swiss Iraqi dinars, the politically isolated region effectively evaded inflation, which ran rampant throughout the rest of the country.

After Saddam Hussein was deposed in the 2003 invasion of Iraq, the Iraqi Governing Council and the Office for Reconstruction and Humanitarian Assistance printed more Saddam dinar notes as a stopgap measure to maintain the money supply until a new currency could be introduced.

Between 15 October 2003 and 15 January 2004, the Coalition Provisional Authority issued new Iraqi dinar notes and coins, with the notes printed by the British security printing firm De La Rue using modern anti-forgery techniques to &quot;create a single unified currency that is used throughout all of Iraq and will also make money more convenient to use in people&#x27;s everyday lives&quot;. Multiple trillions of dinars were shipped to Iraq and secured in the Central Bank to exchange for Saddam dinar notes. Saddam dinar notes were exchanged for the new dinars at par, while Swiss dinar notes were exchanged at a rate of one Swiss dinar = 150 new dinars.

Inflation and depreciation of the currency has continued since. On 19 December 2020, Iraq&#x27;s Central Bank devalued the dinar by 24% to improve the government&#x27;s revenue, which was affected by the COVID-19 pandemic and low oil prices. On 2 March 2019, the Central Bank&#x27;s indicative exchange rate was IQD 1,190 = US$1. and on 18 June 2021 it was IQD 1,460.5000 = US$1.

There is considerable confusion (perhaps intentional on the part of dinar sellers) around the role of the International Monetary Fund in Iraq. The IMF as part of the rebuilding of Iraq is monitoring Iraq&#x27;s finances and for this purpose uses a single rate (not a sell/buy) of IQD 1170 per US$. This &quot;program rate&quot; is used for calculations in the IMF monitoring program and is not a rate imposed on Iraq by the IMF. For a wider history surrounding currency in the region, see British currency in the Middle East.

=== Use in speculation and fraud since the Iraq war (2003–present) ===
There is little international demand for dinars, since Iraq has few exports other than oil, which is sold in US dollars. Thus there is often an extremely high exchange rate for dinars compared with other currencies.

However, the downfall of Saddam Hussein resulted in the development of a multi-million-dollar industry involving the sale of dinars to speculators. Such exchange services and companies sell dinars at an inflated price, pushing the idea that the dinar would sharply increase in value to a profitable exchange rate some time in the future, instead of being redenominated. This activity can be either a legitimate service to currency speculators, or foreign exchange fraud: at least one major such currency exchange provider was convicted of fraud involving the dinar. This trade revived after the election of Donald Trump in November 2016, with many buyers believing that Trump would cause a sharp revaluation in the dinar (often referred to by the abbreviation &quot;RV&quot; by supporters of the dinar trade,) to an exchange rate comparable to the US dollar.

In 2014, Keith Woodwell (director of the Utah Division of Securities) and Mike Rothschild (writer for &quot;Skeptoid&quot; blog) stated that the speculation over the Iraqi dinar originated from a misunderstanding of why the value of the Kuwaiti dinar recovered after the First Gulf War, leading to an assumption that the Iraqi dinar would follow suit after the fall of Saddam: Woodwell and Rothschild noted substantial differences in economic and political stability between Iraq and Kuwait, with Iraq facing pervasive sectarian violence amid near-total reliance on oil exports.

In response to the growing concerns about fraud and scams related to investment in the Iraqi dinar, State agencies such as Washington State, Utah, Oklahoma, Alabama and others issued statements and releases warning potential investors. Further alerts were issued by news agencies. These alerts usually warn potential investors that there is no place outside Iraq to exchange the dinar, that they are typically sold by dealers at inflated prices, and that there is little evidence to substantiate the claims of significant appreciation of their investment due to revaluation of the currency.

In February 2014, the Better Business Bureau included investing in the dinar as one of the ten most notable scams in 2013. There has also been a book written on the subject.

==Coins==
Coins were introduced in 1931 and 1932 in denominations of round 1 and 2 fils in bronze, and scalloped 4 and 10 fils in nickel. 20, 50, and 200 fils were 50% silver. The 200 fils coin is also known as a &quot;rial&quot;. Bronze substituted nickel in the 5 and 10 fils from 1938 to 1943 during the World War II period and reverted to nickel in 1953. Silver 100 fils coins were also introduced in 1953. These coins first depicted King Faisal I from 1931 to 1933, King Ghazi from 1938, and King Faisal II from 1943 until the end of the kingdom.

Following the establishment of the Iraqi Republic, a new series of coins was introduced in denominations of 1, 5, 10, 25, 50, and 100 fils, with the 25, 50, and 100 fils in silver until 1969. In this series an allegorical sun replaced the image of the king, shapes and sizes remained the same with the exception of the 1 fil which was decagon shaped. This image was then replaced by three palms in 1968. In 1970, 250 fils pieces were introduced, followed by 500 fils and IQD 1 coins in 1982. A number of the coins for 1982 were a commemorative series celebrating Babylonian achievements. During this period, many of the coins were identified by their shape due to being made of similar composition metals, as from 1980 onward 250 fils were octagonal, 500 fils square, and IQD 1 decagon shaped. Coin production ceased after 1990 due to the emergency conditions generated by the Gulf War and international sanctions.

In 2004, a new series of coins were issued in denominations of IQD 25, IQD 50 and IQD 100 and were struck in bronze, brass, and nickel-plated steel respectively. They are sparse in design and depict an abstract map of Iraq and the main rivers.

==Banknotes==
On 16 March 1932, banknotes were issued by the government in denominations of , , 1, 5, 10 and 100 dinars. The notes were printed in the United Kingdom by Bradbury, Wilkinson &amp; Co. From 1932 to 1947, the banknotes were issued by the Iraqi currency board for the government of Iraq and banknotes were convertible into pound sterling. From 1947, the banknotes were issued by the National Bank of Iraq, then after 1954 by the Central Bank of Iraq.

100 dinars notes ceased production in the 1940s, however, the same denominations were used until 1978, when IQD 25 notes were introduced. In 1991, IQD 50 were introduced and IQD 100 reintroduced, followed in 1995 by IQD 250 notes and IQD 10,000 notes in 2002.

Banknotes that were issued between 1990 and October 2003, along with an IQD 25 note issued in 1986, bear an idealized engraving of former Iraqi President Saddam Hussein. Following the 1991 Gulf War, Iraq&#x27;s currency was printed both locally and in China, using poor grade wood pulp paper (rather than cotton or linen) and inferior quality lithography (some notes were reputedly printed on presses designed for printing newspapers).

The primitive printing techniques resulted in a limitless variety in coloration and detail, one layer of the printing would be too faint while another would be too dark. Counterfeit banknotes often appeared to be of better quality than real notes. Some notes were very poorly cut, and some notes even lacked serial numbers. Despite the collapse in the value of the Iraqi dinar, the highest denomination printed until 2002 was IQD 250. In 2002, the Central Bank of Iraq issued an IQD 10,000 banknote to be used for &quot;larger, and inter-bank transactions&quot;. This note was rarely accepted in practice due to fears of looting and counterfeiting. This forced people to carry around stacks of IQD 250 note for everyday use. The other, smaller notes were so worthless that they largely fell into disuse. This situation meant that Iraq, for the most part, had only one denomination of currency in wide circulation.

Currency printed before the Gulf War was often called the &quot;Swiss dinar&quot;, a term of obscure and uncertain origins. These notes were manufactured in England by De La Rue and were of significantly higher quality than those later produced under the economic sanctions that were imposed after the first Gulf War. After a change-over period, this currency was unendorsed by the Iraqi government. However, this old currency still circulated in Kurdish-populated parts of northern Iraq until it was replaced with the new dinar after the second Gulf War. During this time the Swiss dinar retained its value, whilst the new currency consistently lost value at sometimes 30% per annum.

In 2003, new banknotes were issued consisting of six denominations: IQD 50, IQD 250, IQD 1,000, IQD 5,000, IQD 10,000, and IQD 25,000. The notes were similar in design to notes issued by the Central Bank of Iraq (CBI) in the 1970s and 1980s. An IQD 500 note was issued a year later, in October 2004. In the Kurdistan Region, the IQD 50 note is not in circulation.

In March 2014, the CBI began replacing banknotes with anti-counterfeiting enhanced versions that include SPARK optical security features, scanner readable guarantee threads in addition to braille embossing to assist vision-impaired persons.

In February 2015, the CBI announced the removal from circulation on 30 April 2015 of the IQD 50 notes. Persons holding these banknotes were advised to immediately redeem them at their nearest bank for the IQD 250 and higher denomination dinar notes at a one-to-one rate at no charge.

In November 2015, the CBI announced the introduction of a new IQD 50,000 banknote. This is the first new denomination banknote since the new series was first issued in 2003, and also the largest ever printed by the CBI. The current notes no longer depict Saddam Hussein and now feature inscriptions in Arabic, English and Kurdish. The banknotes are printed using new security features from Giesecke &amp; Devrient &amp; De La Rue and measure 156 × 65 mm. They feature an outline map of Iraq showing the Euphrates &amp; Tigris rivers as well as the Great Mosque of Samarra and the head of a purebred Arabian horse as a watermark.

In 2018, the Central Bank of Iraq (CBI) released new designs for the 25,000, 10,000, 1,000, 500, and 250 dinar notes. However, the most notable change was with the 1,000-dinar note, which was redesigned after social media users noticed that Surah Al-Ikhlas was written in the center of its front side. In the new design, the Surah was replaced by the Assyrian flag. Surah Al-Ikhlas is also written on the right side of the front of the 25,000-dinar note, and it remains in the new design.
Investing in the Iraqi dinar (IQD) represents a high-risk financial strategy that attracts speculative investors hoping for potential future currency appreciation. The investment involves purchasing Iraqi dinars with U.S. dollars, based on speculation about Iraq&#x27;s potential economic recovery.
The Iraqi dinar&#x27;s value is strictly controlled by the Iraqi government and does not freely float on global forex markets. This means that even if Iraq&#x27;s economic conditions improve, the currency may not automatically increase in value. Investors face numerous significant challenges, including extremely limited trading volume, high transaction fees that can reach up to 20%, and widespread scams within the currency exchange market.
Financial experts consistently warn about the risks associated with dinar investments. The currency&#x27;s value remains heavily dependent on Iraq&#x27;s complex political landscape, ongoing economic instability, and fluctuating oil prices. Despite Iraq&#x27;s substantial oil reserves, which could potentially support future economic growth, purchasing dinars is not considered a reliable investment strategy.
Alternative investment methods, such as investing directly in Iraqi stocks or companies, are generally recommended as more transparent and potentially more profitable approaches to engaging with Iraq&#x27;s economic potential. The currency&#x27;s fixed exchange rate and restricted trading options make it an particularly unattractive investment for international investors.
As of September 2024, one U.S. dollar remains worth approximately 1,310.6 Iraqi dinars, underscoring the currency&#x27;s current limited international value and speculative nature.

===Kingdom of Iraq dinar series (1932–1939)===

===Swiss dinar series (1979–1986)===

===1990–2003 series===

===2003–present===



==Exchange rate==
== See also ==
* British currency in the Middle East
* Central Bank of Iraq
* Economy of Iraq
* Iraqi art
* Iraqi Swiss dinar
* Jordanian dinar
* Kuwaiti dinar

==Notes==
== References ==
== External links ==
* Central Bank of Iraq homepage
* Council on Foreign Relations: benefits of the new Iraqi dinar 
* Iraqi Dinar Scam – Washington State Department of Financial Institutions warning
* Iraqi Dinar Scams – Oklahoma Securities Commission warns residents
* Dmoztools.net – Iraqi Dinar </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q193094" start="4" end="15" title="Iraqi dinar" label="Iraqi dinar"/>
<link wikidata="Q37431" start="17" end="21" title="ISO 4217" label="code"/>
<link wikidata="Q193094" start="23" end="26" title="Iraqi dinar" label="IQD"/>
<link wikidata="Q796" start="47" end="51" title="Iraq" label="Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q1778674" start="86" end="106" title="Central Bank of Iraq" label="Central Bank of Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q80524" start="275" end="287" title="Indian rupee" label="Indian rupee"/>
<link wikidata="Q18937" start="336" end="369" title="Mesopotamian campaign" label="British occupation of the country"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="373" end="384" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q25224" start="453" end="461" title="Pound sterling" label="sterling"/>
<link wikidata="Q4917" start="535" end="555" title="United States dollar" label="United States dollar"/>
<link wikidata="Q220788" start="612" end="623" title="devaluation" label="devaluation"/>
<link wikidata="Q37643" start="767" end="775" title="Gulf War" label="Gulf War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1099093" start="961" end="973" title="Sanctions against Iraq" label="UN sanctions"/>
<link wikidata="Q699810" start="1020" end="1029" title="De La Rue" label="De La Rue"/>
<link wikidata="Q1455593" start="1156" end="1168" title="Iraqi Swiss dinar" label="Swiss dinars"/>
<link wikidata="Q899657" start="1473" end="1500" title="Iraqi no-fly zones conflict" label="Iraqi no-fly zones conflict"/>
<link wikidata="Q1316" start="2177" end="2191" title="Saddam Hussein" label="Saddam Hussein"/>
<link wikidata="Q107802" start="2211" end="2232" title="2003 invasion of Iraq" label="2003 invasion of Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q1672361" start="2238" end="2261" title="Iraqi Governing Council" label="Iraqi Governing Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q965174" start="2270" end="2323" title="Office for Reconstruction and Humanitarian Assistance" label="Office for Reconstruction and Humanitarian Assistance"/>
<link wikidata="Q965174" start="2498" end="2529" title="Coalition Provisional Authority" label="Coalition Provisional Authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q699810" start="2631" end="2640" title="De La Rue" label="De La Rue"/>
<link wikidata="Q81068910" start="3313" end="3330" title="COVID-19 pandemic" label="COVID-19 pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7804" start="3596" end="3623" title="International Monetary Fund" label="International Monetary Fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q4971319" start="3979" end="4014" title="British currency in the Middle East" label="British currency in the Middle East"/>
<link wikidata="Q10513978" start="4197" end="4207" title="petrodollar" label="US dollars"/>
<link wikidata="Q66100" start="4247" end="4260" title="exchange rate" label="exchange rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1316" start="4330" end="4344" title="Saddam Hussein" label="Saddam Hussein"/>
<link wikidata="Q2002539" start="4458" end="4474" title="Bureau de change" label="exchange service"/>
<link wikidata="Q161081" start="4570" end="4587" title="deflation" label="increase in value"/>
<link wikidata="Q13167710" start="4660" end="4673" title="redenomination" label="redenominated"/>
<link wikidata="Q107885" start="4727" end="4747" title="Market speculation" label="currency speculators"/>
<link wikidata="Q733726" start="4752" end="4774" title="foreign exchange fraud" label="foreign exchange fraud"/>
<link wikidata="Q22686" start="4912" end="4924" title="Donald Trump" label="Donald Trump"/>
<link wikidata="Q4963634" start="5273" end="5281" title="Skeptoid" label="Skeptoid"/>
<link wikidata="Q193098" start="5402" end="5415" title="Kuwaiti dinar" label="Kuwaiti dinar"/>
<link wikidata="Q37643" start="5436" end="5450" title="Gulf War" label="First Gulf War"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5787" end="5802" title="List of confidence tricks#Iraqi Dinar" label="fraud and scams"/>
<link wikidata="Q1044785" start="6359" end="6381" title="Better Business Bureau" label="Better Business Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q918448" start="6564" end="6577" title="Denomination (currency)" label="denominations"/>
<link wikidata="Q212486" start="6950" end="6963" title="King Faisal I" label="King Faisal I"/>
<link wikidata="Q314784" start="6983" end="6993" title="King Ghazi" label="King Ghazi"/>
<link wikidata="Q149724" start="7009" end="7023" title="King Faisal II" label="King Faisal II"/>
<link wikidata="Q184625" start="7400" end="7407" title="decagon" label="decagon"/>
<link wikidata="Q37643" start="7942" end="7950" title="Gulf War" label="Gulf War"/>
<link wikidata="Q47433" start="8258" end="8267" title="banknotes" label="banknotes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1778674" start="8621" end="8642" title="National Bank of Iraq" label="National Bank of Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q1778674" start="8667" end="8687" title="Central Bank of Iraq" label="Central Bank of Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q1316" start="9105" end="9119" title="Saddam Hussein" label="Saddam Hussein"/>
<link wikidata="Q672506" start="9227" end="9236" title="wood pulp" label="wood pulp"/>
<link wikidata="Q1426327" start="9266" end="9271" title="linen" label="linen"/>
<link wikidata="Q133036" start="9294" end="9305" title="lithography" label="lithography"/>
<link wikidata="Q502918" start="9558" end="9569" title="Counterfeit" label="Counterfeit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1778674" start="9836" end="9856" title="Central Bank of Iraq" label="Central Bank of Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q1455593" start="10367" end="10378" title="Iraqi Swiss dinar" label="Swiss dinar"/>
<link wikidata="Q699810" start="10471" end="10480" title="De La Rue" label="De La Rue"/>
<link wikidata="Q1778674" start="11180" end="11200" title="Central Bank of Iraq" label="Central Bank of Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q205047" start="11296" end="11312" title="Kurdistan Region" label="Kurdistan Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q1316" start="12136" end="12150" title="Saddam Hussein" label="Saddam Hussein"/>
<link wikidata="Q461257" start="12271" end="12294" title="Giesecke &amp;amp; Devrient" label="Giesecke &amp;amp; Devrient"/>
<link wikidata="Q699810" start="12301" end="12310" title="De La Rue" label="De La Rue"/>
<link wikidata="Q34589" start="12384" end="12393" title="Euphrates" label="Euphrates"/>
<link wikidata="Q35591" start="12400" end="12406" title="Tigris" label="Tigris"/>
<link wikidata="Q593115" start="12429" end="12452" title="Great Mosque of Samarra" label="Great Mosque of Samarra"/>
<link wikidata="Q184138" start="12480" end="12493" title="Arabian horse" label="Arabian horse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1778674" start="12524" end="12544" title="Central Bank of Iraq" label="Central Bank of Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q234214" start="12758" end="12767" title="Al-Ikhlas" label="Al-Ikhlas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073859" start="12862" end="12875" title="Assyrian flag" label="Assyrian flag"/>
<link wikidata="Q107885" start="13091" end="13112" title="speculation" label="speculative investors"/>
<link wikidata="Q1672351" start="13354" end="13374" title="Federal government of Iraq" label="the Iraqi government"/>
<link wikidata="Q4971319" start="14878" end="14913" title="British currency in the Middle East" label="British currency in the Middle East"/>
<link wikidata="Q1778674" start="14916" end="14936" title="Central Bank of Iraq" label="Central Bank of Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q2087476" start="14939" end="14954" title="Economy of Iraq" label="Economy of Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q40887903" start="14957" end="14966" title="Iraqi art" label="Iraqi art"/>
<link wikidata="Q1455593" start="14969" end="14986" title="Iraqi Swiss dinar" label="Iraqi Swiss dinar"/>
<link wikidata="Q203722" start="14989" end="15004" title="Jordanian dinar" label="Jordanian dinar"/>
<link wikidata="Q193098" start="15007" end="15020" title="Kuwaiti dinar" label="Kuwaiti dinar"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="246629" wikidata="Q952890" url="?curid=246629" title="Outrider (album)">
<text>Outrider is an album by Jimmy Page, released by Geffen Records on 20 June 1988. It is his only solo studio album and the first time since 1969 he recorded with a record label other than Atlantic Records/Swan Song Records. Page recorded the music at his personal studio The Sol. Robert Plant guests on one track, &quot;The Only One&quot;, while John Bonham&#x27;s son Jason plays drums.

This was originally intended to be a two album release. However, during the early recording stages of this album, Page&#x27;s house was broken into and amongst the items stolen were the demo tapes which had been recorded up to that point. Page did not record any demos prior to recording the album itself.

==Reception==

The album reached No. 26 on the &quot;Billboard&quot; 200 chart, also peaking at No. 27 on the UK Album Chart. &quot;The Globe and Mail&quot; determined that &quot;&quot;Outrider&quot; is a mixed bag, ripe with snakelike blues riffs and Page&#x27;s impeccable use of textures, but hampered by mediocre songwriting.&quot;

Years later, Jimmy Page reflected on the album in rather positive terms:

==Track listing==

==Personnel==
Musicians
*Jimmy Page – guitars, synthesizer, backing vocals, production
*Tony Franklin – bass guitar on track 1
*Felix Krish – bass guitar on tracks 4, 5, 7, 8 and 9&quot;
*Durban Laverde – bass guitar on &quot;tracks 2, 3 and 6
*Chris Farlowe – lead vocals on tracks 6, 8 and 9
*John Miles – lead vocals on tracks 1 and 2 
*Robert Plant – lead vocals on track 4
*Barriemore Barlow – drums, percussion on tracks 5 and 7
*Jason Bonham – drums, percussion

Technical
*Peter Ashworth – photography
*Dick Beetham – assistant engineering
*Steve Hoyland – assistant engineering
*JL – artwork and cover co-ordination
*George Marino – mastering at Sterling Sound, New York
*Leif Mases – engineering, mixing

==Charts==
==Certifications==


==Accolades==
== Tour ==
==See also==
* &quot;Celebration Day&quot;
* The Honeydrippers
* Page and Plant

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q165467" start="24" end="34" title="Jimmy Page" label="Jimmy Page"/>
<link wikidata="Q212699" start="48" end="62" title="Geffen Records" label="Geffen Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q202440" start="186" end="202" title="Atlantic Records" label="Atlantic Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q632992" start="203" end="220" title="Swan Song Records" label="Swan Song Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q7555590" start="269" end="276" title="Sol Studios" label="The Sol"/>
<link wikidata="Q428223" start="278" end="290" title="Robert Plant" label="Robert Plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q485490" start="344" end="355" title="John Bonham" label="John Bonham"/>
<link wikidata="Q378072" start="367" end="372" title="Jason Bonham" label="Jason"/>
<link wikidata="Q220935" start="573" end="583" title="Demo (music)" label="demo tapes"/>
<link wikidata="Q188819" start="741" end="766" title="Billboard 200" label="&amp;quot;Billboard&amp;quot; 200"/>
<link wikidata="Q719415" start="804" end="818" title="UK Album Chart" label="UK Album Chart"/>
<link wikidata="Q604525" start="826" end="844" title="The Globe and Mail" label="The Globe and Mail"/>
<link wikidata="Q165467" start="1149" end="1159" title="Jimmy Page" label="Jimmy Page"/>
<link wikidata="Q6607" start="1162" end="1168" title="guitar" label="guitar"/>
<link wikidata="Q163829" start="1171" end="1182" title="synthesizer" label="synthesizer"/>
<link wikidata="Q798487" start="1184" end="1198" title="backing vocals" label="backing vocals"/>
<link wikidata="Q183945" start="1200" end="1210" title="Record producer" label="production"/>
<link wikidata="Q709763" start="1212" end="1225" title="Tony Franklin (musician)" label="Tony Franklin"/>
<link wikidata="Q46185" start="1228" end="1239" title="bass guitar" label="bass guitar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1077211" start="1369" end="1382" title="Chris Farlowe" label="Chris Farlowe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1117515" start="1419" end="1429" title="John Miles (musician)" label="John Miles"/>
<link wikidata="Q428223" start="1464" end="1476" title="Robert Plant" label="Robert Plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q513379" start="1503" end="1520" title="Barriemore Barlow" label="Barriemore Barlow"/>
<link wikidata="Q128309" start="1523" end="1528" title="Drum kit" label="drums"/>
<link wikidata="Q133163" start="1530" end="1540" title="Percussion instrument" label="percussion"/>
<link wikidata="Q378072" start="1560" end="1572" title="Jason Bonham" label="Jason Bonham"/>
<link wikidata="Q7172574" start="1605" end="1619" title="Peter Ashworth" label="Peter Ashworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q128124" start="1660" end="1671" title="Audio engineering" label="engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q16649858" start="1750" end="1763" title="George Marino" label="George Marino"/>
<link wikidata="Q421031" start="1766" end="1775" title="Audio mastering" label="mastering"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384" start="1795" end="1803" title="New York (state)" label="New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q17085328" start="1831" end="1837" title="Audio mixing (recorded music)" label="mixing"/>
<link wikidata="Q151827" start="1917" end="1932" title="Celebration Day (film)" label="Celebration Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q648841" start="1941" end="1958" title="The Honeydrippers" label="The Honeydrippers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1516315" start="1961" end="1975" title="Page and Plant" label="Page and Plant"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="246637" wikidata="Q5157005" url="?curid=246637" title="Comprehensive health insurance (Maine)">
<text>In June 2003, the Maine, US Legislature passed a comprehensive [[health insurance]] plan, granting low-cost coverage to all state residents by 2009. The law stated that a semi-private agency would provide coverage to uninsured residents, small businesses, municipalities, and the self-employed. Premiums were set at a sliding scale, where individuals making below $27,000 and families making below $55,000 would be eligible for reduced rates, and the law called for the creation of a watchdog group to monitor hospital and doctor costs. The bill passed the Maine House of Representatives 105 to 38, and the Maine Senate 25 to 8.

==Impacts==
About 15,000 of the 140,000 uninsured have been covered by the program. The original project goals were to pay for the program with savings from reducing inefficiencies in the existing system and not raise taxes, while providing insurance to 140,000 people. Another goal was to make hospital pricing more transparent to customers. Over time, the state was forced to raise taxes over 5% to help pay for this program, and enrollment in the program was ultimately closed due to cost issues.

==Analysis==
Scholars have identified Maine&#x27;s health insurance law as one of several state laws from the early 2000s designed to &quot;make insurance available to most of their residents.&quot; Other scholars suggested that state healthcare laws, including the Maine health insurance act, indicated that healthcare reform had become an issue of national significance.

==See also==
* Dirigo Health

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q724" start="18" end="23" title="Maine" label="Maine"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="25" end="27" title="United States" label="US"/>
<link wikidata="Q5157005" start="49" end="83" title="Comprehensive health insurance (Maine)" label="comprehensive [[health insurance]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q909004" start="557" end="587" title="Maine House of Representatives" label="Maine House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q909050" start="607" end="619" title="Maine Senate" label="Maine Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q5280774" start="1520" end="1533" title="Dirigo Health" label="Dirigo Health"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="246638" wikidata="Q1368771" url="?curid=246638" title="José Cuevas (boxer)">
<text>José Isidro &quot;Pipino&quot; Cuevas González (born December 27, 1957) is a Mexican former professional boxer who competed from 1971 to 1989. He held the WBA welterweight title from 1976 to 1980.

Cuevas was inducted into both the International Boxing Hall of Fame, and the World Boxing Hall of Fame.

==Professional career==

Cuevas turned professional at age 14; he won only seven of his first twelve bouts but eventually put together an eight bout winning streak before losing to Andy Price. On 17 July 1976, he received a shot at the WBA welterweight title against champion Ángel Espada. Cuevas pulled off an upset victory by knocking Espada to the canvas three times in the second round. At age 18, he was the youngest welterweight champion in history. In his first defense, he traveled to Japan and defeated hometown fighter Shoji Tsujimoto by knockout.

One of the greatest wins of his career was against Argentinian Miguel Angel Campanino, who boasted an impressive record (84-4-4), including a thirty-two fight winning streak. Once again, Pipino disposed of his challenger before the end of the second round.

On 8 June 1977, he faced veteran Clyde Gray of Canada who had only been stopped twice in his entire career which included fifty-eight wins. Yet again, Cuevas pulled off another second round knock out. A few months later, Cuevas returned to the ring for a rematch against Espada. This time Cuevas defeated Espada in the eleventh round after he sustained a broken jaw. On 4 March 1978, he disposed of Harold Weston in the ninth round after Weston also sustained a broken jaw like Cuevas&#x27; previous challenger. Cuevas then defeated former champion Billy Backus in one round. On 9 September 1978, he defeated hometown favorite Pete Ranzany (40-2-1) in Sacramento, California via a second-round knockout. He defeated Scott Clark (28-1-0) in another second-round knockout. Cuevas next title defense went the distance in a unanimous decision win against the durable Randy Shields (33-5-1). On 8 December 1979, he faced Espada for a third time, stopping him in the tenth round. Cuevas then defeated South African national champion Harold Volbrecht by fifth-round knockout.

Cuevas finally lost his title in 1980 to the undefeated and up-and-coming hometown hero Thomas Hearns in Detroit. The much taller and lankier Hearns was able to use his reach to his advantage as he kept Cuevas at a distance and knocked him out in the second round. Cuevas&#x27; talent began to decline after that loss; the most notable opponent he faced was Roberto Durán, who stopped him in the fourth round in the spring of 1983. He also lost to former world title challenger Jun Sok-Hwang and future or former world champions Jorge Vaca and Lupe Aquino before finally retiring in 1989.

Pipino Cuevas fought during a period when an unusual number of accomplished welterweights were active: Sugar Ray Leonard, Wilfred Benítez, Carlos Palomino, Thomas Hearns, and Roberto Durán, although his reign had nearly come to an end as Leonard, Benítez, Hearns, and Durán emerged as welterweight champions. Cuevas successfully defended his welterweight title eleven times against ten different boxers over a four-year span. During his reign as champion, Cuevas fought the best opposition available to him. In total, the opponents he faced throughout his career had a combined record of 505-70-29. In 2003, &quot;The Ring&quot; listed Cuevas as number thirty-one on their list of the 100 greatest punchers of all time. In 2002, Cuevas became a member of the International Boxing Hall of Fame.

==Retirement==
Cuevas is the owner of a restaurant and a security company in Mexico City. At one point of his career, he was also the owner of a famous sports and luxury car collection, and he was one of the first boxers to sport a golden tooth. Most people probably know him for his nickname &quot;Pipino&quot;, which is far more used to refer to him than &quot;Jose&quot; by fight commentators and magazine writers.

He ran into trouble with the law in 2001 when he was accused of racketeering in Mexico, in connection with a Mexican mayor. But he was declared innocent in 2002.

His record as a boxer was of 35 wins and 15 losses, with 31 wins by knockout.

==Professional boxing record==

==See also==
*List of Mexican boxing world champions
*List of world welterweight boxing champions

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1368771" start="0" end="46" title="José Cuevas (boxer)" label="José Isidro &amp;quot;Pipino&amp;quot; Cuevas González"/>
<link wikidata="Q2631720" start="92" end="110" title="professional boxer" label="professional boxer"/>
<link wikidata="Q725676" start="155" end="158" title="World Boxing Association" label="WBA"/>
<link wikidata="Q766904" start="159" end="171" title="welterweight" label="welterweight"/>
<link wikidata="Q572227" start="232" end="265" title="International Boxing Hall of Fame" label="International Boxing Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q725676" start="539" end="542" title="World Boxing Association" label="WBA"/>
<link wikidata="Q3577004" start="579" end="591" title="Ángel Espada" label="Ángel Espada"/>
<link wikidata="Q16115198" start="1153" end="1163" title="Clyde Gray" label="Clyde Gray"/>
<link wikidata="Q355952" start="1669" end="1681" title="Billy Backus" label="Billy Backus"/>
<link wikidata="Q7172207" start="1747" end="1759" title="Pete Ranzany" label="Pete Ranzany"/>
<link wikidata="Q18013" start="1772" end="1794" title="Sacramento, California" label="Sacramento, California"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2115" end="2128" title="Sport in South Africa#Boxing" label="South African"/>
<link wikidata="Q560409" start="2278" end="2291" title="Thomas Hearns" label="Thomas Hearns"/>
<link wikidata="Q12439" start="2295" end="2302" title="Detroit" label="Detroit"/>
<link wikidata="Q471571" start="2548" end="2561" title="Roberto Durán" label="Roberto Durán"/>
<link wikidata="Q3183899" start="2719" end="2729" title="Jorge Vaca" label="Jorge Vaca"/>
<link wikidata="Q3267644" start="2734" end="2745" title="Lupe Aquino" label="Lupe Aquino"/>
<link wikidata="Q335798" start="2883" end="2900" title="Sugar Ray Leonard" label="Sugar Ray Leonard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1386541" start="2902" end="2917" title="Wilfred Benítez" label="Wilfred Benítez"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747511" start="2919" end="2934" title="Carlos Palomino" label="Carlos Palomino"/>
<link wikidata="Q560409" start="2936" end="2949" title="Thomas Hearns" label="Thomas Hearns"/>
<link wikidata="Q471571" start="2955" end="2968" title="Roberto Durán" label="Roberto Durán"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140774" start="3394" end="3402" title="The Ring (magazine)" label="The Ring"/>
<link wikidata="Q572227" start="3539" end="3572" title="International Boxing Hall of Fame" label="International Boxing Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q1489" start="3652" end="3663" title="Mexico City" label="Mexico City"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4282" end="4320" title="List of Mexican boxing world champions#List of world champions" label="List of Mexican boxing world champions"/>
<link wikidata="Q2562372" start="4322" end="4365" title="List of world welterweight boxing champions" label="List of world welterweight boxing champions"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="246642" wikidata="Q5978315" url="?curid=246642" title="I Love the '80s (American TV series)">
<text>I Love the &#x27;80s is a 1980s nostalgia television program and the first installment of the &quot;I Love the...&quot; series that was produced by VH1, based on the BBC series of the same name. The first episode, &quot;I Love 1980&quot;, premiered on December 16, 2002, and the final episode, &quot;I Love 1989&quot;, premiered on December 20, 2002.

==Commentators==

*Sasha Alexander
*Anastacia
*Apollonia
*India.Arie
*Tom Arnold
*Christopher Atkins
*Sebastian Bach
*Jillian Barberie
*Barenaked Ladies (Steven Page, Tyler Stewart and Ed Robertson)
*Toni Basil
*Bill Bellamy and Peter Facinelli
*Richard Belzer
*Beyoncé
*Michael Ian Black
*Jack Blades
*Brian Boitano
*Brian Bonsall
*Meredith Brooks
*David Bryan
*Candace Cameron Bure
*Jere Burns and Suzanne Pleshette
*Timothy Busfield
*Dean Cain
*Carrot Top
*Tom Cavanagh
*Andrew Dice Clay
*Clarence Clemons
*Gary Cole
*Mo Collins
*Alice Cooper
*Anderson Cooper
*David Copperfield
*Creed (Scott Phillips, Scott Stapp and Mark Tremonti) (*)
*Tommy Davidson
*Dana Delany
*Mark Derwin
*Dustin Diamond
*Brooke Dillman and Constance Zimmer
*Simon Doonan
*Karen Duffy
*Rich Eisen
*Joe Elliott
*Melissa Etheridge
*Mark Feuerstein and Ashley Williams
*Kim Fields
*Greg Fitzsimmons
*Heidi Fleiss
*Dann Florek
*Larry Flynt
*Ben Folds
*Foo Fighters (Dave Grohl and Taylor Hawkins) (*)
*Matthew Fox
*Doug E. Fresh
*Soleil Moon Frye
*Daisy Fuentes
*Peter Gabriel
*Willie Garson
*Marla Gibbs
*Judy Gold
*Cuba Gooding, Jr.
*David Gray
*Kathy Griffin
*Sammy Hagar
*Ken Hakuta
*Rob Halford
*Mariska Hargitay
*Dennis Haskins
*Tommy Heath
*Sherman Hemsley
*Marilu Henner
*Natasha Henstridge
*Jason Hervey
*Faith Hill
*Cheryl Hines
*Mark Hoppus
*Finola Hughes
*Bonnie Hunt
*Alan Hunter
*Ice-T
*Chris Isaak
*Rick James
*Ron Jeremy
*Betsey Johnson
*Cherie Johnson
*Greg Kihn
*Kool &amp; the Gang (Ronald Bell and Robert &quot;Kool&quot; Bell)
*Uncle Kracker
*Brian Krause
*Wallace Langham
*Sharon Lawrence
*Juliette Lewis
*Lisa Ling
*Lisa Lisa
*Lisa Loeb
*Kenny Loggins
*Donal Logue
*Justin Long
*George Lopez and Constance Marie
*Mario Lopez
*Traci Lords
*Virginia Madsen
*A Martinez
*John Mayer
*Walta McCarthy
*Mark McGrath
*AJ McLean
*Julian McMahon
*Chris Meloni
*Bret Michaels
*Daryl &quot;Chill&quot; Mitchell
*Monica
*Eddie Money
*Paul Mooney
*Michael Moore
*Marianne Muellerleile
*Dave Mustaine
*Mya
*Nickelback (Ryan Peake and Chad Kroeger)
*Terri Nunn
*Patton Oswalt
*Erik Palladino
*Ray Parker Jr.
*Nia Peeples
*Tom Petty
*Anita Pointer
*Brian Posehn
*Scott Poulson-Bryant
*Rain Pryor
*Josh Randall
*Quiet Riot (Kevin DuBrow and Frankie Banali)
*Leah Remini
*Mary Lou Retton
*Alfonso Ribeiro
*Christina Ricci (*)
*Lionel Richie
*LeAnn Rimes
*Mo Rocca
*Nile Rodgers
*Freddy Rodriguez
*Henry Rollins
*Jeffrey Ross
*Kelly Rowland
*Kevin Rowland
*Darius Rucker
*John Rzeznik
*Richie Sambora
*Tessie Santiago and Matt Letscher
*Mia Sara
*Dan Savage
*Ricky Schroder
*Stuart Scott
*Jason Sehorn
*Tommy Shaw
*Michael Showalter
*Molly Sims (*)
*Dee Snider
*Kevin Sorbo
*Hal Sparks
*Joel Stein
*Kristy Swanson
*Raven-Symoné
*Robby Takac
*Rob Thomas
*Lea Thompson
*Tiffany
*Christopher Titus
*John Travolta (*)
*Aisha Tyler
*Victor Webster
*Kevin Weisman
*JoBeth Williams
*Debra Wilson
*Nancy and Ann Wilson
*Peter Wolf
*B.D. Wong
*Tom Wopat
*Wyclef
*Weird Al
*Jacklyn Zeman
(*) = archive footage

==Recurring segments==
*Makeout Songs: Lionel Richie presents the love songs from each year.
*Babes: Bret Michaels presents the attractive female celebrities or fictional characters from each year.
*Hunks: Traci Lords presents the attractive male celebrities from each year.
*Public Service Announcement: A public service announcement (PSA) from each year is presented.
*Then and Now: &quot;Weird Al&quot; Yankovic compares trends of the given year and the present day.
*Mr. &amp; Ms.: Andrew Dice Clay presents a male celebrity and a female celebrity of each year.
*Born In: Soleil Moon Frye presents the people, bands, and products that were born in each year.
*During the credits of every episode, a clip from a popular music video was played without any type of commentary. These were usually replaced with a show promo by Vh1.

==Topics covered by year==
===1980===
*&quot;The Love Boat&quot;
*&quot;Caddyshack&quot;
*&quot;Turning Japanese&quot; by The Vapors
*Punk and preppy fashion
*Strawberry Shortcake
*Brooke Shields 
*Designer jeans
*&quot;All Out of Love&quot; by Air Supply
*Pat Benatar and Debbie Harry
*&quot;Who shot J.R.?&quot;
*&quot;9 to 5&quot;
*&quot;Urban Cowboy&quot;
*&quot;Another One Bites the Dust&quot; by Queen
*Kenny Rogers
*&quot;Xanadu&quot;
*&quot;Airplane!&quot;
*&quot;Rapper&#x27;s Delight&quot; by The Sugarhill Gang
*&quot;Brass in Pocket&quot; by The Pretenders
*Mattel Electronic Football
*Miracle on Ice
*&quot;That&#x27;s Incredible!&quot;
*&quot;The Empire Strikes Back&quot;

Makeout Songs of 1980: &quot;Every Woman in the World&quot; by Air Supply, &quot;Longer&quot; by Dan Fogelberg and &quot;Do That to Me One More Time&quot; by Captain &amp; Tennille

Babes of 1980: Princess Leia, Bo Derek, Charlene Tilton, Victoria Principal and Suzanne Somers

Hunks of 1980: Richard Gere, Jim Palmer, John Travolta, Erik Estrada and Greg Evigan

PSA of 1980: Give a Kid a Book PSA

Then and Now 1980: Sony Walkman with Cassette (Then: $169.00 / Now: $19.95), Ross Harris (Then: Movie star of &quot;Airplane!&quot; / Now: Video star of &quot;Sad Caper&quot; by Hootie and the Blowfish) and The Big Gulp (Then: 32 oz. / Now: 64 oz.)

Mr. &amp; Ms. 1980: Ronald Reagan and Daisy Duke

Born in 1980:  Jessica Simpson, Christina Aguilera, Post-it notes, ethnic Barbie dolls and Macaulay Culkin

===1981===
*Cable television, MTV, and scrambled pornography
*&quot;Porky&#x27;s&quot;
*Reagan assassination attempt
*Pope John Paul II assassination attempt
*The Royal Wedding
*Luke and Laura Spencer
*Rick Springfield
*&quot;Arthur&quot;
*&quot;The Greatest American Hero&quot;
*DMC DeLorean
*Rubik&#x27;s Cube 
*&quot;Celebration&quot; by Kool &amp; the Gang
*&quot;Fridays&quot;
*&quot;Stripes&quot;
*&quot;Bosom Buddies&quot;
*John McEnroe
*&quot;Private Eyes&quot; by Hall &amp; Oates
*Members Only jackets
*Atari 2600
*&quot;The Jeffersons&quot;
*&quot;Raiders of the Lost Ark&quot;

Makeout Songs of 1981: &quot;Keep on Loving You&quot; by REO Speedwagon, &quot;Waiting For a Girl Like You&quot; by Foreigner and &quot;Endless Love&quot; by Lionel Richie and Diana Ross

Babes of 1981: Olivia Newton-John, Donna Dixon, Valerie Bertinelli, Kathleen Turner and Sandra Day O&#x27;Connor

Hunks of 1981: Patrick Duffy, Burt Reynolds, Harrison Ford, Mick Jagger and Richard Simmons

PSA of 1981: Girl Scouts in Gymnastics

Then and Now 1981: Tom Cruise (Then: &quot;Endless Love&quot; - $33 Million / Now: Endless Cash - $25 Million), Movie Tickets (Then: $3.00 / Now: $10.00) and Suntan Lotion (Then: Tanning oil / Now: Hawaiian Tropic Ozone SPF 70)

Mr. &amp; Ms. 1981: Tom Selleck and Sheena Easton

Born in 1981: Alicia Keys, Kelly Rowland, Beyoncé, the laptop computer, Justin Timberlake, Britney Spears, the thong, Serena Williams and Metallica

===1982===
*Mullets
*VJs
*&quot;Mickey&quot; by Toni Basil
*&quot;Fast Times at Ridgemont High&quot;
*&quot;Centerfold&quot; by The J. Geils Band
*&quot;Square Pegs&quot;
*&quot;Rocky III&quot;
*Ozzy Osbourne
*&quot;I Love Rock &#x27;N Roll&quot; by Joan Jett &amp; the Blackhearts
*&quot;The Dukes of Hazzard&quot;
*The Go-Go&#x27;s
*Aerobics
*&quot;I Ran (So Far Away)&quot; by A Flock of Seagulls
*&quot;Trivial Pursuit&quot;
*Keytar
*&quot;Joanie Loves Chachi&quot;
*&quot;Pac-Man&quot; and &quot;Ms. Pac-Man&quot;
*&quot;867-5309/Jenny&quot; by Tommy Tutone
*&quot;Dungeons &amp; Dragons&quot;
*&quot;Poltergeist&quot;
*&quot;The Message&quot; by Grandmaster Flash and the Furious Five
*&quot;Silver Spoons&quot;
*&quot;E.T. the Extra-Terrestrial&quot;

Makeout Songs of 1982: &quot;Up Where We Belong&quot; by Joe Cocker &amp; Jennifer Warnes and &quot;Truly&quot; by Lionel Richie

Babes of 1982: Kim Wilde, Rae Dawn Chong, Kirstie Alley, Pia Zadora and Tootsie

Hunks of 1982: John Stamos, David Lee Roth, Sting, Bruce Springsteen and the Soloflex Guy

PSA of 1982: Time for Timer&#x27;s &quot;Sunshine on a Stick&quot; PSA

Then and Now 1982: &quot;Cats&quot; (Then: On Broadway now and forever / Now: Gone), Scott Schwartz (Then: Child star of &quot;The Toy&quot; / Now: Porn star) and Concert Tickets for The Who (Then: Farewell tour - $25.00 / Now: Reunion tour - $250.00)

Mr. &amp; Ms. 1982: Eddie Murphy and Heather Locklear

Born in 1982: Kirsten Dunst, Prince William, Diet Coke, Public Enemy and liposuction

===1983===
*&quot;National Lampoon&#x27;s Vacation&quot;
*&quot;Family Ties&quot;
*Nancy Reagan guest stars on &quot;Diff&#x27;rent Strokes&quot;
*Cabbage Patch Kids
*Michael Jackson&#x27;s &quot;Thriller&quot; album
*&quot;Flashdance&quot;
*Duran Duran
*Valley girl
*&quot;Love Is a Battlefield&quot; by Pat Benatar
*&quot;Scarface&quot;
*&quot;The A-Team&quot;
*Def Leppard&#x27;s &quot;Pyromania&quot; album
*&quot;Eddie Murphy Delirious&quot;
*&quot;Come on Eileen&quot; by Dexys Midnight Runners
*Jerry Falwell vs. Larry Flynt
*&quot;Knight Rider&quot;
*&quot;WarGames&quot;
*Wacky WallWalker
*&quot;Mr. Roboto&quot; by Styx
*&quot;He-Man and the Masters of the Universe&quot;
*&quot;Return of the Jedi&quot;

Makeout Songs of 1983: &quot;Every Breath You Take&quot; by The Police, &quot;True&quot; by Spandau Ballet and &quot;Sexual Healing&quot; by Marvin Gaye

Babes of 1983: Maud Adams, Vanity, Joan Collins, Christie Brinkley and Rebecca De Mornay

Hunks of 1983: Lee Horsley, Rob Lowe, Marvin Gaye, Bruce Boxleitner and Chewbacca

PSA of 1983: Smokey Bear - Mask of Joanna Cassidy

Then and Now 1983: Talent Shows (Then: &quot;Star Search&quot; / Now: &quot;American Idol&quot;), Cellular Phones (Then: $3,000 / Now: Given Away) and Home Video Cameras (Then: Sony Betamovie - 6.5 lbs. / Now: Sony MicroMV Handycam - 12 oz.)

Mr. &amp; Ms. 1983: Tom Cruise and Ms. Pac-Man

Born in 1983: Michelle Branch, Bon Jovi, the Nintendo Entertainment System, Taylor Hanson and the Red Hot Chili Peppers

===1984===
*Breakdancing and &quot;Breakin&#x27;&quot;
*&quot;Footloose&quot;
*Madonna
*&quot;Sunglasses at Night&quot; by Corey Hart
*&quot;Where&#x27;s the beef?&quot;
*Bruce Springsteen&#x27;s &quot;Born in the U.S.A.&quot; album
*Mary Lou Retton
*&quot;Webster&quot; and &quot;Punky Brewster&quot;
*Huey Lewis and the News
*&quot;Miami Vice&quot;
*&quot;The Terminator&quot;
*&quot;Transformers&quot; and &quot;Care Bears&quot;
*Wham!
*Prince
*&quot;Sixteen Candles&quot;
*Cyndi Lauper
*Michael Jackson&#x27;s Pepsi commercial disaster
*&quot;Hello&quot; by Lionel Richie
*&quot;This Is Spinal Tap&quot;

Makeout Songs of 1984: &quot;Almost Paradise&quot; by Mike Reno &amp; Ann Wilson, &quot;Against All Odds&quot; by Phil Collins and &quot;Missing You&quot; by John Waite

Babes of 1984: Paulina Porizkova, Daryl Hannah, Tina Turner, Heather Thomas and Geraldine Ferraro

Hunks of 1984: Ralph Macchio, Matt Dillon, C. Thomas Howell, Duran Duran and Tom Hulce

PSA of 1984: &quot;Don&#x27;t let your lungs go to pot.&quot; - Cast of &quot;Fame&quot;

Then and Now 1984: Recreational Family Vehicles (Then: Chrysler Caravan - $8,669 / Now: Ford Explorer - $24,620), Super Bowl Tickets (Then: $60.00 / Now: $325.00) and The Mac (Then: 131,000 bytes of memory / Now: 500,000,000 bytes of memory)

Mr. &amp; Ms. 1984: Boy George

Born in 1984: Mandy Moore, Freddy Krueger, Kelly Osbourne, hair mousse and &quot;Punky Brewster&quot;

===1985===
*&quot;WrestleMania&quot;
*&quot;MacGyver&quot;
*&quot;Back to the Future&quot;
*&quot;Home Sweet Home&quot; by Mötley Crüe
*&quot;The Goonies&quot;
*&quot;Pee-wee&#x27;s Big Adventure&quot;
*&quot;Small Wonder&quot;
*&quot;Summer of &#x27;69&quot; by Bryan Adams
*Big hair
*&quot;Fletch&quot;
*&quot;The Super Bowl Shuffle&quot;
*Bartles &amp; Jaymes
*&quot;Cocoon&quot;
*&quot;Voices Carry&quot; by Til Tuesday
*Live Aid
*&quot;The Facts of Life&quot;
*&quot;Party All the Time&quot; by Eddie Murphy
*&quot;The Breakfast Club&quot; and &quot;St. Elmo&#x27;s Fire&quot;
*Day-Glo and oversized message T-shirts
*Pound Puppies
*&quot;We Are the World&quot; by USA for Africa and heavy metal musicians form Hear &#x27;n Aid

Makeout Songs of 1985: &quot;Careless Whisper&quot; by Wham!, &quot;Smooth Operator&quot; by Sade and &quot;Crazy for You&quot; by Madonna

Babes of 1985: Kelly LeBrock, Kelly McGillis, Rosanna Arquette, Grace Slick and Tipper Gore

Hunks of 1985: Sylvester Stallone, William &quot;The Refrigerator&quot; Perry, Robert Redford, Jim McMahon and Pee-wee Herman

PSA of 1985: Contract for Life

Then and Now 1985: Hit Soft Drinks (Then: New Coke / Now: Vanilla Coke) and Pro Wrestling (Then: Hulk Hogan / Now: The Rock)

Mr. &amp; Ms. 1985: Dolph Lundgren and Brigitte Nielsen

Born in 1985: Zac Hanson, Air Jordans, Frankie Muniz, Lee Press-On Nails and VH1

===1986===
*&quot;Ferris Bueller&#x27;s Day Off&quot;
*&quot;Wheel of Fortune&quot;
*Hands Across America
*Teddy Ruxpin
*&quot;ALF&quot;
*&quot;Pretty in Pink&quot;
*&quot;Papa Don&#x27;t Preach&quot; by Madonna
*Swatch
*1986 World Series and the Bill Buckner fielding error
*&quot;The Cosby Show&quot;
*Baby On Board
*&quot;&quot;Crocodile&quot; Dundee&quot;
*Celebrity marriages (specifically Tommy Lee &amp; Heather Locklear, Arnold Schwarzenegger &amp; Maria Shriver and Tatum O&#x27;Neal &amp; John McEnroe)
*Whitney Houston
*Comic Relief
*Janet Jackson&#x27;s &quot;Control&quot; album
*&quot;Stand by Me&quot;
*&quot;Walk This Way&quot; by Run-DMC and Aerosmith
*&quot;Top Gun&quot;

Makeout Songs of 1986: &quot;Take My Breath Away&quot; by Berlin, &quot;The Next Time I Fall&quot; by Peter Cetera &amp; Amy Grant and &quot;Secret Lovers&quot; by Atlantic Starr

Babes of 1986: Susanna Hoffs, Kim Basinger, Stevie Nicks, Bette Midler and the Statue of Liberty

Hunks of 1986: Tom Cruise, Walter Payton, Paul Hogan, Keith Hernandez and Howard the Duck

PSA of 1986: &quot;Vote With A Friend. Make It Count More&quot; with Quincy Jones and James Ingram

Then and Now 1986: Highest Baseball Salary (Then: Gary Carter - $2 Million / Now: Alex Rodriguez - $22 Million), David Lee Roth &amp; Sammy Hagar (Then: Rivals / Now: Together) and Ted Danson &amp; Kelsey Grammer (Then: Ted Danson making $45,000 an episode on &quot;Cheers&quot; / Now: Kelsey Grammer making $1,600,000 an episode on &quot;Frasier&quot;)

Mr. &amp; Ms. 1986: Mike Tyson and Oprah Winfrey

Born in 1986: Amanda Bynes, The Olsen twins (Mary-Kate and Ashley), Lindsay Lohan, the Goo Goo Dolls, Jolt Cola, the Pixies and the disposable camera

===1987===
*&quot;Dirty Dancing&quot;
*Tiffany and Debbie Gibson
*Hair crimping
*Lisa Lisa and Cult Jam
*&quot;Fatal Attraction&quot;
*Hair metal (specifically Poison, Bon Jovi, Def Leppard, Guns N&#x27; Roses and Mötley Crüe)
*FOX (specifically &quot;The Tracey Ullman Show&quot;, &quot;Married... with Children&quot; and &quot;21 Jump Street&quot;)
*&quot;It&#x27;s the End of the World as We Know It (And I Feel Fine)&quot; by R.E.M.
*Controversial extra-marital affairs (specifically Oliver North and Fawn Hall, Gary Hart and Donna Rice, Jim and Tammy Faye Bakker and Jessica Hahn)
*&quot;Wall Street&quot;
*&quot;(You Gotta) Fight for Your Right (To Party!)&quot; by Beastie Boys
*Acid wash and Converse
*&quot;Cheers&quot;
*&quot;Push It&quot; by Salt-N-Pepa
*&quot;Hollywood Shuffle&quot;
*&quot;Addicted to Love&quot; by Robert Palmer
*The Two Coreys (Corey Feldman and Corey Haim)
*U2&#x27;s &quot;The Joshua Tree&quot; album

Makeout Songs of 1987: &quot;At This Moment&quot; by Billy Vera &amp; The Beaters, &quot;Don&#x27;t Dream It&#x27;s Over&quot; by Crowded House and &quot;I Need Love&quot; by LL Cool J

Babes of 1987: Lisa Bonet, Sheena Easton, Jody Watley, Tawny Kitaen and the Church Lady

Hunks of 1987: LL Cool J, RoboCop, Dennis Quaid, Harry Hamlin and Harry from &quot;Harry and the Hendersons&quot;

PSA of 1987: Anti-Drug (Marijuana): &quot;I learned it by watching you!&quot;

Then and Now 1987: Richest Person in America (Then: Sam Walton - $4,500,000,000 / Now: Bill Gates - $43,000,000,000), Baby Jessica (Then: Stuck in a well / Now: Well adjusted) and Axl Rose (Then: New face of rock &#x27;n&#x27; roll / Now: New face)

Mr. &amp; Ms. 1987: Bruce Willis and Cher

Born in 1987: Lil&#x27; Bow Wow, Hilary Duff, Aaron Carter, Nirvana and condom commercials

===1988===
*Mike Tyson
*&quot;Child&#x27;s Play&quot;
*&quot;Roseanne&quot;
*&quot;Never Gonna Give You Up&quot; by Rick Astley
*Guns N&#x27; Roses&#x27; &quot;Appetite for Destruction&quot; album
*&quot;The Wonder Years&quot;
*Modern Rock (specifically INXS, The Cure, Morrissey, Depeche Mode, and Erasure)
*&quot;Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles&quot;
*&quot;Don&#x27;t Worry, Be Happy&quot; by Bobby McFerrin
*The California Raisins
*&quot;Perfect Strangers&quot;
*George Michael&#x27;s &quot;Faith&quot; album
*&quot;Pictionary&quot; and &quot;Win, Lose or Draw&quot;
*&quot;Red Red Wine&quot; by UB40 
*Working woman&#x27;s wardrobe and &quot;Color Me Beautiful&quot;
*Hip hop music (specifically &quot;Yo! MTV Raps&quot;, &quot;Parents Just Don&#x27;t Understand&quot; by DJ Jazzy Jeff &amp; the Fresh Prince, and the rise of gangsta rap (specifically N.W.A))
*&quot;Who&#x27;s the Boss?&quot;
*Terence Trent D&#x27;Arby
*The neo-hippie movement
*&quot;Touch of Grey&quot; by Grateful Dead
*&quot;Rain Man&quot;

Makeout Songs of 1988: &quot;She&#x27;s Like the Wind&quot; by Patrick Swayze, &quot;Hold On to the Nights&quot; by Richard Marx and &quot;The Flame&quot; by Cheap Trick

Babes of 1988: Jessica Rabbit, Kari Wuhrer, Samantha Fox, Julia Roberts and Divine

Hunks of 1988: John F. Kennedy Jr., Donald Trump, Kevin Costner, Joe Montana and Dan Quayle

PSA of 1988: Buckle Up (Car Crash Test Dummies)

Then and Now 1988: A Year of Tuition at Harvard (Then: $12,000 / Now: $35,000), Ricki Lake (Then: 250 lbs. / Now: 120 lbs.) and 100-Meter Sprint (Then: Ben Johnson - 9.79 seconds / Now: Tim Montgomery - 9.78 seconds)

Mr. and Ms. 1988: ALF and Debbie Gibson

Born in 1988: Haley Joel Osment, Mae Whitman, Alexa Vega, Teddy Grahams, Miami Heat, En Vogue and Prozac

===1989===
*New Kids on the Block
*&quot;Bill and Ted&#x27;s Excellent Adventure&quot;
*Milli Vanilli
*Game Boy and &quot;Tetris&quot;
*&quot;Cops&quot;
*Rob Lowe&#x27;s sex video
*&quot;If I Could Turn Back Time&quot; by Cher
*&quot;Do the Right Thing&quot;
*&quot;Like a Prayer&quot; by Madonna, and the ensuing Pepsi controversy
*&quot;Say Anything...&quot;
*&quot;The Arsenio Hall Show&quot;
*&quot;Love Shack&quot; by The B-52&#x27;s
*Bobby Brown
*Afrocentric clothing
*&quot;Baywatch&quot;
*&quot;Love in an Elevator&quot; by Aerosmith
*&quot;Heathers&quot;
*&quot;Saved by the Bell&quot;
*&quot;Funky Cold Medina&quot; by Tone Loc
*Fall of the Berlin Wall

Makeout Songs of 1989: &quot;Right Here Waiting&quot; by Richard Marx, &quot;If You Don&#x27;t Know Me by Now&quot; by Simply Red and &quot;Lovesong&quot; by The Cure

Babes of 1989: Winona Ryder, Paula Abdul, Tiffani-Amber Thiessen, Claudia Schiffer and Barbara Bush

Hunks of 1989: Batman, The Joker, Johnny Depp, Mel Gibson and Leonardo

PSA of 1989: Madonna on AIDS Prevention

Then and Now 1989: Bushes (Then: George H. W. Bush / Now: George W. Bush), Justin Timberlake (Then: Mouseketeer / Now: Michael Jackson) and World Wide Web (Then: Dialing up / Now: Off the hook)

Mr. and Ms. 1989: Fab Morvan and Meg Ryan

Born in 1989: Daniel Radcliffe, Hole, Hootie &amp; the Blowfish, Lil&#x27; Romeo and &quot;American Gladiators&quot;

==References==
==External links==
* &quot;I Love the &#x27;80s&quot; on VH1</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q28456047" start="26" end="41" title="1980s nostalgia" label="1980s nostalgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5978042" start="100" end="113" title="I Love..." label="I Love the..."/>
<link wikidata="Q203078" start="148" end="151" title="VH1" label="VH1"/>
<link wikidata="Q5978304" start="177" end="193" title="I Love the &amp;#x27;80s (U.K. TV series)" label="of the same name"/>
<link wikidata="Q231730" start="371" end="386" title="Sasha Alexander" label="Sasha Alexander"/>
<link wikidata="Q34584" start="388" end="397" title="Anastacia" label="Anastacia"/>
<link wikidata="Q619328" start="399" end="408" title="Apollonia Kotero" label="Apollonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q258750" start="410" end="420" title="India Arie" label="India.Arie"/>
<link wikidata="Q353755" start="422" end="432" title="Tom Arnold (actor)" label="Tom Arnold"/>
<link wikidata="Q532098" start="434" end="452" title="Christopher Atkins" label="Christopher Atkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q363490" start="454" end="468" title="Sebastian Bach" label="Sebastian Bach"/>
<link wikidata="Q2374888" start="470" end="486" title="Jillian Barberie" label="Jillian Barberie"/>
<link wikidata="Q371997" start="488" end="504" title="Barenaked Ladies" label="Barenaked Ladies"/>
<link wikidata="Q7615119" start="506" end="517" title="Steven Page" label="Steven Page"/>
<link wikidata="Q7860163" start="519" end="532" title="Tyler Stewart" label="Tyler Stewart"/>
<link wikidata="Q3718869" start="537" end="549" title="Ed Robertson" label="Ed Robertson"/>
<link wikidata="Q242889" start="552" end="562" title="Toni Basil" label="Toni Basil"/>
<link wikidata="Q2903116" start="564" end="576" title="Bill Bellamy" label="Bill Bellamy"/>
<link wikidata="Q192052" start="581" end="596" title="Peter Facinelli" label="Peter Facinelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q542816" start="598" end="612" title="Richard Belzer" label="Richard Belzer"/>
<link wikidata="Q36153" start="614" end="621" title="Beyoncé" label="Beyoncé"/>
<link wikidata="Q1677945" start="623" end="640" title="Michael Ian Black" label="Michael Ian Black"/>
<link wikidata="Q692393" start="642" end="653" title="Jack Blades" label="Jack Blades"/>
<link wikidata="Q451095" start="655" end="668" title="Brian Boitano" label="Brian Boitano"/>
<link wikidata="Q708777" start="670" end="683" title="Brian Bonsall" label="Brian Bonsall"/>
<link wikidata="Q237952" start="685" end="700" title="Meredith Brooks" label="Meredith Brooks"/>
<link wikidata="Q310098" start="702" end="713" title="David Bryan" label="David Bryan"/>
<link wikidata="Q235694" start="715" end="735" title="Candace Cameron Bure" label="Candace Cameron Bure"/>
<link wikidata="Q3481379" start="737" end="747" title="Jere Burns" label="Jere Burns"/>
<link wikidata="Q231224" start="752" end="769" title="Suzanne Pleshette" label="Suzanne Pleshette"/>
<link wikidata="Q714610" start="771" end="787" title="Timothy Busfield" label="Timothy Busfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q313788" start="789" end="798" title="Dean Cain" label="Dean Cain"/>
<link wikidata="Q559081" start="800" end="810" title="Carrot Top" label="Carrot Top"/>
<link wikidata="Q256061" start="812" end="824" title="Tom Cavanagh" label="Tom Cavanagh"/>
<link wikidata="Q504455" start="826" end="842" title="Andrew Dice Clay" label="Andrew Dice Clay"/>
<link wikidata="Q68543" start="844" end="860" title="Clarence Clemons" label="Clarence Clemons"/>
<link wikidata="Q315864" start="862" end="871" title="Gary Cole" label="Gary Cole"/>
<link wikidata="Q432973" start="873" end="883" title="Mo Collins" label="Mo Collins"/>
<link wikidata="Q332032" start="885" end="897" title="Alice Cooper" label="Alice Cooper"/>
<link wikidata="Q316997" start="899" end="914" title="Anderson Cooper" label="Anderson Cooper"/>
<link wikidata="Q139637" start="916" end="933" title="David Copperfield (magician)" label="David Copperfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q308816" start="935" end="940" title="Creed (band)" label="Creed"/>
<link wikidata="Q2477913" start="942" end="956" title="Scott Phillips (musician)" label="Scott Phillips"/>
<link wikidata="Q606969" start="958" end="969" title="Scott Stapp" label="Scott Stapp"/>
<link wikidata="Q547366" start="974" end="987" title="Mark Tremonti" label="Mark Tremonti"/>
<link wikidata="Q368587" start="994" end="1008" title="Tommy Davidson" label="Tommy Davidson"/>
<link wikidata="Q228925" start="1010" end="1021" title="Dana Delany" label="Dana Delany"/>
<link wikidata="Q540659" start="1023" end="1034" title="Mark Derwin" label="Mark Derwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q973475" start="1036" end="1050" title="Dustin Diamond" label="Dustin Diamond"/>
<link wikidata="Q4974424" start="1052" end="1066" title="Brooke Dillman" label="Brooke Dillman"/>
<link wikidata="Q442013" start="1071" end="1087" title="Constance Zimmer" label="Constance Zimmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7518637" start="1089" end="1101" title="Simon Doonan" label="Simon Doonan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6369611" start="1103" end="1114" title="Karen Duffy" label="Karen Duffy"/>
<link wikidata="Q12859526" start="1116" end="1126" title="Rich Eisen" label="Rich Eisen"/>
<link wikidata="Q541573" start="1128" end="1139" title="Joe Elliott" label="Joe Elliott"/>
<link wikidata="Q270669" start="1141" end="1158" title="Melissa Etheridge" label="Melissa Etheridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1312914" start="1160" end="1175" title="Mark Feuerstein" label="Mark Feuerstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q435839" start="1180" end="1195" title="Ashley Williams (actress)" label="Ashley Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q772031" start="1197" end="1207" title="Kim Fields" label="Kim Fields"/>
<link wikidata="Q5605563" start="1209" end="1225" title="Greg Fitzsimmons" label="Greg Fitzsimmons"/>
<link wikidata="Q271732" start="1227" end="1239" title="Heidi Fleiss" label="Heidi Fleiss"/>
<link wikidata="Q938416" start="1241" end="1252" title="Dann Florek" label="Dann Florek"/>
<link wikidata="Q223839" start="1254" end="1265" title="Larry Flynt" label="Larry Flynt"/>
<link wikidata="Q435681" start="1267" end="1276" title="Ben Folds" label="Ben Folds"/>
<link wikidata="Q483718" start="1278" end="1290" title="Foo Fighters" label="Foo Fighters"/>
<link wikidata="Q12006" start="1292" end="1302" title="Dave Grohl" label="Dave Grohl"/>
<link wikidata="Q312395" start="1307" end="1321" title="Taylor Hawkins" label="Taylor Hawkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q185554" start="1328" end="1339" title="Matthew Fox" label="Matthew Fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q269645" start="1341" end="1354" title="Doug E. Fresh" label="Doug E. Fresh"/>
<link wikidata="Q287805" start="1356" end="1372" title="Soleil Moon Frye" label="Soleil Moon Frye"/>
<link wikidata="Q453353" start="1374" end="1387" title="Daisy Fuentes" label="Daisy Fuentes"/>
<link wikidata="Q175195" start="1389" end="1402" title="Peter Gabriel" label="Peter Gabriel"/>
<link wikidata="Q463402" start="1404" end="1417" title="Willie Garson" label="Willie Garson"/>
<link wikidata="Q133665" start="1419" end="1430" title="Marla Gibbs" label="Marla Gibbs"/>
<link wikidata="Q3188035" start="1432" end="1441" title="Judy Gold" label="Judy Gold"/>
<link wikidata="Q136209" start="1443" end="1460" title="Cuba Gooding, Jr." label="Cuba Gooding, Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q320915" start="1462" end="1472" title="David Gray (British musician)" label="David Gray"/>
<link wikidata="Q432437" start="1474" end="1487" title="Kathy Griffin" label="Kathy Griffin"/>
<link wikidata="Q435780" start="1489" end="1500" title="Sammy Hagar" label="Sammy Hagar"/>
<link wikidata="Q6387726" start="1502" end="1512" title="Ken Hakuta" label="Ken Hakuta"/>
<link wikidata="Q271576" start="1514" end="1525" title="Rob Halford" label="Rob Halford"/>
<link wikidata="Q275964" start="1527" end="1543" title="Mariska Hargitay" label="Mariska Hargitay"/>
<link wikidata="Q741473" start="1545" end="1559" title="Dennis Haskins" label="Dennis Haskins"/>
<link wikidata="Q7819508" start="1561" end="1572" title="Tommy Heath" label="Tommy Heath"/>
<link wikidata="Q941960" start="1574" end="1589" title="Sherman Hemsley" label="Sherman Hemsley"/>
<link wikidata="Q270747" start="1591" end="1604" title="Marilu Henner" label="Marilu Henner"/>
<link wikidata="Q230527" start="1606" end="1624" title="Natasha Henstridge" label="Natasha Henstridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q674663" start="1626" end="1638" title="Jason Hervey" label="Jason Hervey"/>
<link wikidata="Q464241" start="1640" end="1650" title="Faith Hill" label="Faith Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q272917" start="1652" end="1664" title="Cheryl Hines" label="Cheryl Hines"/>
<link wikidata="Q4271" start="1666" end="1677" title="Mark Hoppus" label="Mark Hoppus"/>
<link wikidata="Q261669" start="1679" end="1692" title="Finola Hughes" label="Finola Hughes"/>
<link wikidata="Q272952" start="1694" end="1705" title="Bonnie Hunt" label="Bonnie Hunt"/>
<link wikidata="Q4706916" start="1707" end="1718" title="Alan Hunter (VJ)" label="Alan Hunter"/>
<link wikidata="Q309941" start="1720" end="1725" title="Ice-T" label="Ice-T"/>
<link wikidata="Q313009" start="1727" end="1738" title="Chris Isaak" label="Chris Isaak"/>
<link wikidata="Q248207" start="1740" end="1750" title="Rick James" label="Rick James"/>
<link wikidata="Q503013" start="1752" end="1762" title="Ron Jeremy" label="Ron Jeremy"/>
<link wikidata="Q467665" start="1764" end="1778" title="Betsey Johnson" label="Betsey Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5091948" start="1780" end="1794" title="Cherie Johnson" label="Cherie Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5605833" start="1796" end="1805" title="Greg Kihn" label="Greg Kihn"/>
<link wikidata="Q850290" start="1807" end="1826" title="Kool &amp;amp; the Gang" label="Kool &amp;amp; the Gang"/>
<link wikidata="Q7364677" start="1828" end="1839" title="Ronald Bell (musician)" label="Ronald Bell"/>
<link wikidata="Q3113271" start="1844" end="1872" title="Robert &amp;quot;Kool&amp;quot; Bell" label="Robert &amp;quot;Kool&amp;quot; Bell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1299129" start="1875" end="1888" title="Uncle Kracker" label="Uncle Kracker"/>
<link wikidata="Q315761" start="1890" end="1902" title="Brian Krause" label="Brian Krause"/>
<link wikidata="Q562069" start="1904" end="1919" title="Wallace Langham" label="Wallace Langham"/>
<link wikidata="Q266814" start="1921" end="1936" title="Sharon Lawrence" label="Sharon Lawrence"/>
<link wikidata="Q230523" start="1938" end="1952" title="Juliette Lewis" label="Juliette Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q4261889" start="1954" end="1963" title="Lisa Ling" label="Lisa Ling"/>
<link wikidata="Q26247069" start="1965" end="1974" title="Lisa Lisa" label="Lisa Lisa"/>
<link wikidata="Q237654" start="1976" end="1985" title="Lisa Loeb" label="Lisa Loeb"/>
<link wikidata="Q435965" start="1987" end="2000" title="Kenny Loggins" label="Kenny Loggins"/>
<link wikidata="Q517137" start="2002" end="2013" title="Donal Logue" label="Donal Logue"/>
<link wikidata="Q298672" start="2015" end="2026" title="Justin Long" label="Justin Long"/>
<link wikidata="Q73035" start="2028" end="2040" title="George Lopez" label="George Lopez"/>
<link wikidata="Q290048" start="2045" end="2060" title="Constance Marie" label="Constance Marie"/>
<link wikidata="Q372559" start="2062" end="2073" title="Mario Lopez" label="Mario Lopez"/>
<link wikidata="Q233118" start="2075" end="2086" title="Traci Lords" label="Traci Lords"/>
<link wikidata="Q229784" start="2088" end="2103" title="Virginia Madsen" label="Virginia Madsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q300479" start="2105" end="2115" title="A Martinez" label="A Martinez"/>
<link wikidata="Q215215" start="2117" end="2127" title="John Mayer" label="John Mayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2329080" start="2129" end="2143" title="Walter McCarty" label="Walta McCarthy"/>
<link wikidata="Q575444" start="2145" end="2157" title="Mark McGrath" label="Mark McGrath"/>
<link wikidata="Q313408" start="2159" end="2168" title="AJ McLean" label="AJ McLean"/>
<link wikidata="Q4223" start="2170" end="2184" title="Julian McMahon" label="Julian McMahon"/>
<link wikidata="Q380095" start="2186" end="2198" title="Chris Meloni" label="Chris Meloni"/>
<link wikidata="Q365042" start="2200" end="2213" title="Bret Michaels" label="Bret Michaels"/>
<link wikidata="Q728936" start="2215" end="2247" title="Daryl Mitchell (actor)" label="Daryl &amp;quot;Chill&amp;quot; Mitchell"/>
<link wikidata="Q231487" start="2249" end="2255" title="Monica (singer)" label="Monica"/>
<link wikidata="Q1282910" start="2257" end="2268" title="Eddie Money" label="Eddie Money"/>
<link wikidata="Q2911728" start="2270" end="2281" title="Paul Mooney (comedian)" label="Paul Mooney"/>
<link wikidata="Q174908" start="2283" end="2296" title="Michael Moore" label="Michael Moore"/>
<link wikidata="Q467496" start="2298" end="2319" title="Marianne Muellerleile" label="Marianne Muellerleile"/>
<link wikidata="Q187165" start="2321" end="2334" title="Dave Mustaine" label="Dave Mustaine"/>
<link wikidata="Q233736" start="2336" end="2339" title="Mya (singer)" label="Mya"/>
<link wikidata="Q483802" start="2341" end="2351" title="Nickelback" label="Nickelback"/>
<link wikidata="Q926931" start="2353" end="2363" title="Ryan Peake" label="Ryan Peake"/>
<link wikidata="Q294723" start="2368" end="2380" title="Chad Kroeger" label="Chad Kroeger"/>
<link wikidata="Q434025" start="2383" end="2393" title="Terri Nunn" label="Terri Nunn"/>
<link wikidata="Q374065" start="2395" end="2408" title="Patton Oswalt" label="Patton Oswalt"/>
<link wikidata="Q726165" start="2410" end="2424" title="Erik Palladino" label="Erik Palladino"/>
<link wikidata="Q381022" start="2426" end="2440" title="Ray Parker Jr." label="Ray Parker Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q17566665" start="2442" end="2453" title="Nia Peeples" label="Nia Peeples"/>
<link wikidata="Q311655" start="2455" end="2464" title="Tom Petty" label="Tom Petty"/>
<link wikidata="Q2745995" start="2466" end="2479" title="Anita Pointer" label="Anita Pointer"/>
<link wikidata="Q912938" start="2481" end="2493" title="Brian Posehn" label="Brian Posehn"/>
<link wikidata="Q7437076" start="2495" end="2515" title="Scott Poulson-Bryant" label="Scott Poulson-Bryant"/>
<link wikidata="Q13218387" start="2517" end="2527" title="Rain Pryor" label="Rain Pryor"/>
<link wikidata="Q351293" start="2529" end="2541" title="Josh Randall" label="Josh Randall"/>
<link wikidata="Q221494" start="2543" end="2553" title="Quiet Riot" label="Quiet Riot"/>
<link wikidata="Q369099" start="2555" end="2567" title="Kevin DuBrow" label="Kevin DuBrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q735152" start="2572" end="2586" title="Frankie Banali" label="Frankie Banali"/>
<link wikidata="Q242580" start="2589" end="2600" title="Leah Remini" label="Leah Remini"/>
<link wikidata="Q235975" start="2602" end="2617" title="Mary Lou Retton" label="Mary Lou Retton"/>
<link wikidata="Q447691" start="2619" end="2634" title="Alfonso Ribeiro" label="Alfonso Ribeiro"/>
<link wikidata="Q184103" start="2636" end="2651" title="Christina Ricci" label="Christina Ricci"/>
<link wikidata="Q26695" start="2657" end="2670" title="Lionel Richie" label="Lionel Richie"/>
<link wikidata="Q120533" start="2672" end="2683" title="LeAnn Rimes" label="LeAnn Rimes"/>
<link wikidata="Q6886262" start="2685" end="2693" title="Mo Rocca" label="Mo Rocca"/>
<link wikidata="Q497759" start="2695" end="2707" title="Nile Rodgers" label="Nile Rodgers"/>
<link wikidata="Q362697" start="2709" end="2725" title="Freddy Rodriguez (actor)" label="Freddy Rodriguez"/>
<link wikidata="Q318509" start="2727" end="2740" title="Henry Rollins" label="Henry Rollins"/>
<link wikidata="Q12858627" start="2742" end="2754" title="Jeffrey Ross" label="Jeffrey Ross"/>
<link wikidata="Q184249" start="2756" end="2769" title="Kelly Rowland" label="Kelly Rowland"/>
<link wikidata="Q335788" start="2771" end="2784" title="Kevin Rowland" label="Kevin Rowland"/>
<link wikidata="Q445405" start="2786" end="2799" title="Darius Rucker" label="Darius Rucker"/>
<link wikidata="Q929185" start="2801" end="2813" title="John Rzeznik" label="John Rzeznik"/>
<link wikidata="Q295153" start="2815" end="2829" title="Richie Sambora" label="Richie Sambora"/>
<link wikidata="Q3519015" start="2831" end="2846" title="Tessie Santiago" label="Tessie Santiago"/>
<link wikidata="Q1184704" start="2851" end="2864" title="Matt Letscher" label="Matt Letscher"/>
<link wikidata="Q253487" start="2866" end="2874" title="Mia Sara" label="Mia Sara"/>
<link wikidata="Q649667" start="2876" end="2886" title="Dan Savage" label="Dan Savage"/>
<link wikidata="Q303751" start="2888" end="2902" title="Ricky Schroder" label="Ricky Schroder"/>
<link wikidata="Q7627078" start="2904" end="2916" title="Stuart Scott" label="Stuart Scott"/>
<link wikidata="Q1683983" start="2918" end="2930" title="Jason Sehorn" label="Jason Sehorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1854719" start="2932" end="2942" title="Tommy Shaw" label="Tommy Shaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q2092899" start="2944" end="2961" title="Michael Showalter" label="Michael Showalter"/>
<link wikidata="Q236537" start="2963" end="2973" title="Molly Sims" label="Molly Sims"/>
<link wikidata="Q366044" start="2979" end="2989" title="Dee Snider" label="Dee Snider"/>
<link wikidata="Q313655" start="2991" end="3002" title="Kevin Sorbo" label="Kevin Sorbo"/>
<link wikidata="Q445367" start="3004" end="3014" title="Hal Sparks" label="Hal Sparks"/>
<link wikidata="Q3180265" start="3016" end="3026" title="Joel Stein" label="Joel Stein"/>
<link wikidata="Q238394" start="3028" end="3042" title="Kristy Swanson" label="Kristy Swanson"/>
<link wikidata="Q188648" start="3044" end="3056" title="Raven-Symoné" label="Raven-Symoné"/>
<link wikidata="Q5919863" start="3058" end="3069" title="Robby Takac" label="Robby Takac"/>
<link wikidata="Q754094" start="3071" end="3081" title="Rob Thomas (musician)" label="Rob Thomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q230605" start="3083" end="3095" title="Lea Thompson" label="Lea Thompson"/>
<link wikidata="Q233886" start="3097" end="3104" title="Tiffany Darwish" label="Tiffany"/>
<link wikidata="Q718870" start="3106" end="3123" title="Christopher Titus" label="Christopher Titus"/>
<link wikidata="Q80938" start="3125" end="3138" title="John Travolta" label="John Travolta"/>
<link wikidata="Q241800" start="3144" end="3155" title="Aisha Tyler" label="Aisha Tyler"/>
<link wikidata="Q724281" start="3157" end="3171" title="Victor Webster" label="Victor Webster"/>
<link wikidata="Q708320" start="3173" end="3186" title="Kevin Weisman" label="Kevin Weisman"/>
<link wikidata="Q237809" start="3188" end="3203" title="JoBeth Williams" label="JoBeth Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q194032" start="3205" end="3217" title="Debra Wilson" label="Debra Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q263772" start="3219" end="3224" title="Nancy Wilson (rock musician)" label="Nancy"/>
<link wikidata="Q258053" start="3229" end="3239" title="Ann Wilson" label="Ann Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1549911" start="3241" end="3251" title="Peter Wolf" label="Peter Wolf"/>
<link wikidata="Q359207" start="3253" end="3262" title="B.D. Wong" label="B.D. Wong"/>
<link wikidata="Q2004171" start="3264" end="3273" title="Tom Wopat" label="Tom Wopat"/>
<link wikidata="Q202663" start="3275" end="3281" title="Wyclef Jean" label="Wyclef"/>
<link wikidata="Q8349" start="3283" end="3291" title="&amp;quot;Weird Al&amp;quot; Yankovic" label="Weird Al"/>
<link wikidata="Q669144" start="3293" end="3306" title="Jacklyn Zeman" label="Jacklyn Zeman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196567" start="3637" end="3664" title="public service announcement" label="public service announcement"/>
<link wikidata="Q181998" start="4208" end="4221" title="The Love Boat" label="The Love Boat"/>
<link wikidata="Q311638" start="4235" end="4245" title="Caddyshack" label="Caddyshack"/>
<link wikidata="Q7856016" start="4259" end="4275" title="Turning Japanese" label="Turning Japanese"/>
<link wikidata="Q1504687" start="4285" end="4295" title="The Vapors" label="The Vapors"/>
<link wikidata="Q2423086" start="4297" end="4301" title="Punk fashion" label="Punk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1573001" start="4306" end="4312" title="preppy" label="preppy"/>
<link wikidata="Q990035" start="4322" end="4342" title="Strawberry Shortcake" label="Strawberry Shortcake"/>
<link wikidata="Q189400" start="4344" end="4358" title="Brooke Shields" label="Brooke Shields"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4361" end="4375" title="Designer clothing#Designer jeans" label="Designer jeans"/>
<link wikidata="Q2330876" start="4383" end="4398" title="All Out of Love" label="All Out of Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q407814" start="4408" end="4418" title="Air Supply" label="Air Supply"/>
<link wikidata="Q235252" start="4420" end="4431" title="Pat Benatar" label="Pat Benatar"/>
<link wikidata="Q215026" start="4436" end="4448" title="Debbie Harry" label="Debbie Harry"/>
<link wikidata="Q2923482" start="4456" end="4470" title="Who shot J.R.?" label="Who shot J.R.?"/>
<link wikidata="Q1466657" start="4484" end="4490" title="9 to 5 (film)" label="9 to 5"/>
<link wikidata="Q538042" start="4504" end="4516" title="Urban Cowboy" label="Urban Cowboy"/>
<link wikidata="Q568065" start="4530" end="4556" title="Another One Bites the Dust" label="Another One Bites the Dust"/>
<link wikidata="Q15862" start="4566" end="4571" title="Queen (band)" label="Queen"/>
<link wikidata="Q217160" start="4573" end="4585" title="Kenny Rogers" label="Kenny Rogers"/>
<link wikidata="Q777970" start="4593" end="4599" title="Xanadu (film)" label="Xanadu"/>
<link wikidata="Q497256" start="4613" end="4622" title="Airplane!" label="Airplane!"/>
<link wikidata="Q944039" start="4636" end="4657" title="Rapper&amp;#x27;s Delight" label="Rapper&amp;#x27;s Delight"/>
<link wikidata="Q1413494" start="4667" end="4685" title="The Sugarhill Gang" label="The Sugarhill Gang"/>
<link wikidata="Q4957886" start="4693" end="4708" title="Brass in Pocket" label="Brass in Pocket"/>
<link wikidata="Q667389" start="4718" end="4732" title="Pretenders (band)" label="The Pretenders"/>
<link wikidata="Q596139" start="4734" end="4740" title="Mattel" label="Mattel"/>
<link wikidata="Q287405" start="4762" end="4776" title="Miracle on Ice" label="Miracle on Ice"/>
<link wikidata="Q7710934" start="4784" end="4807" title="That&amp;#x27;s Incredible!" label="That&amp;#x27;s Incredible!"/>
<link wikidata="Q181795" start="4821" end="4844" title="The Empire Strikes Back" label="The Empire Strikes Back"/>
<link wikidata="Q28406615" start="4881" end="4905" title="Every Woman in the World" label="Every Woman in the World"/>
<link wikidata="Q253556" start="4933" end="4939" title="Longer" label="Longer"/>
<link wikidata="Q201047" start="4949" end="4962" title="Dan Fogelberg" label="Dan Fogelberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q5286260" start="4973" end="5000" title="Do That to Me One More Time" label="Do That to Me One More Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q1035077" start="5010" end="5032" title="Captain &amp;amp; Tennille" label="Captain &amp;amp; Tennille"/>
<link wikidata="Q51797" start="5049" end="5062" title="Princess Leia" label="Princess Leia"/>
<link wikidata="Q229477" start="5064" end="5072" title="Bo Derek" label="Bo Derek"/>
<link wikidata="Q239583" start="5074" end="5089" title="Charlene Tilton" label="Charlene Tilton"/>
<link wikidata="Q232834" start="5091" end="5109" title="Victoria Principal" label="Victoria Principal"/>
<link wikidata="Q242939" start="5114" end="5128" title="Suzanne Somers" label="Suzanne Somers"/>
<link wikidata="Q48410" start="5145" end="5157" title="Richard Gere" label="Richard Gere"/>
<link wikidata="Q1356627" start="5159" end="5169" title="Jim Palmer" label="Jim Palmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q706338" start="5186" end="5198" title="Erik Estrada" label="Erik Estrada"/>
<link wikidata="Q1320797" start="5203" end="5214" title="Greg Evigan" label="Greg Evigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q622493" start="5271" end="5297" title="Walkman" label="Sony Walkman with Cassette"/>
<link wikidata="Q2167709" start="5329" end="5340" title="Ross Harris (actor)" label="Ross Harris"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5411" end="5420" title="Fairweather Johnson#Track listing" label="Sad Caper"/>
<link wikidata="Q1476499" start="5430" end="5453" title="Hootie and the Blowfish" label="Hootie and the Blowfish"/>
<link wikidata="Q15902235" start="5459" end="5471" title="Big Gulp" label="The Big Gulp"/>
<link wikidata="Q9960" start="5522" end="5535" title="Ronald Reagan" label="Ronald Reagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1776723" start="5540" end="5550" title="Daisy Duke" label="Daisy Duke"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5566" end="5582" title=" Jessica Simpson" label=" Jessica Simpson"/>
<link wikidata="Q41594" start="5584" end="5602" title="Christina Aguilera" label="Christina Aguilera"/>
<link wikidata="Q181331" start="5604" end="5617" title="Post-it notes" label="Post-it notes"/>
<link wikidata="Q167447" start="5619" end="5625" title="Black Barbies" label="ethnic"/>
<link wikidata="Q167447" start="5626" end="5632" title="Barbie" label="Barbie"/>
<link wikidata="Q103578" start="5643" end="5658" title="Macaulay Culkin" label="Macaulay Culkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q184452" start="5672" end="5688" title="Cable television" label="Cable television"/>
<link wikidata="Q43359" start="5690" end="5693" title="MTV" label="MTV"/>
<link wikidata="Q3697256" start="5699" end="5713" title="scrambled porn" label="scrambled porn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1284961" start="5728" end="5740" title="Porky&amp;#x27;s" label="Porky&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q757979" start="5748" end="5776" title="Reagan assassination attempt" label="Reagan assassination attempt"/>
<link wikidata="Q989" start="5778" end="5795" title="Pope John Paul II" label="Pope John Paul II"/>
<link wikidata="Q2472593" start="5796" end="5817" title="1981 Pope John Paul II assassination attempt" label="assassination attempt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1094155" start="5819" end="5836" title="Wedding of Charles, Prince of Wales, and Lady Diana Spencer" label="The Royal Wedding"/>
<link wikidata="Q6702492" start="5838" end="5860" title="Luke and Laura Spencer" label="Luke and Laura Spencer"/>
<link wikidata="Q707446" start="5862" end="5878" title="Rick Springfield" label="Rick Springfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q627438" start="5886" end="5892" title="Arthur (1981 film)" label="Arthur"/>
<link wikidata="Q2297720" start="5906" end="5932" title="The Greatest American Hero" label="The Greatest American Hero"/>
<link wikidata="Q370524" start="5940" end="5952" title="DMC DeLorean" label="DMC DeLorean"/>
<link wikidata="Q47043" start="5954" end="5971" title="Rubik&amp;#x27;s Cube" label="Rubik&amp;#x27;s Cube"/>
<link wikidata="Q859298" start="5980" end="5991" title="Celebration (Kool &amp;amp; the Gang song)" label="Celebration"/>
<link wikidata="Q5503566" start="6028" end="6035" title="Fridays (TV series)" label="Fridays"/>
<link wikidata="Q174153" start="6049" end="6056" title="Stripes (film)" label="Stripes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2015828" start="6070" end="6083" title="Bosom Buddies" label="Bosom Buddies"/>
<link wikidata="Q16474" start="6091" end="6103" title="John McEnroe" label="John McEnroe"/>
<link wikidata="Q7246089" start="6111" end="6123" title="Private Eyes (song)" label="Private Eyes"/>
<link wikidata="Q733182" start="6133" end="6149" title="Hall &amp;amp; Oates" label="Hall &amp;amp; Oates"/>
<link wikidata="Q17080812" start="6151" end="6163" title="Members Only (fashion brand)" label="Members Only"/>
<link wikidata="Q849964" start="6164" end="6171" title="jackets" label="jackets"/>
<link wikidata="Q206261" start="6173" end="6183" title="Atari 2600" label="Atari 2600"/>
<link wikidata="Q153227" start="6191" end="6205" title="The Jeffersons" label="The Jeffersons"/>
<link wikidata="Q174284" start="6219" end="6242" title="Raiders of the Lost Ark" label="Raiders of the Lost Ark"/>
<link wikidata="Q1737746" start="6279" end="6297" title="Keep on Loving You (song)" label="Keep on Loving You"/>
<link wikidata="Q845084" start="6307" end="6321" title="REO Speedwagon" label="REO Speedwagon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3607139" start="6329" end="6356" title="Waiting For a Girl Like You" label="Waiting For a Girl Like You"/>
<link wikidata="Q275059" start="6366" end="6375" title="Foreigner (band)" label="Foreigner"/>
<link wikidata="Q989611" start="6386" end="6398" title="Endless Love (song)" label="Endless Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q36290" start="6426" end="6436" title="Diana Ross" label="Diana Ross"/>
<link wikidata="Q185165" start="6453" end="6471" title="Olivia Newton-John" label="Olivia Newton-John"/>
<link wikidata="Q452169" start="6473" end="6484" title="Donna Dixon" label="Donna Dixon"/>
<link wikidata="Q266917" start="6486" end="6504" title="Valerie Bertinelli" label="Valerie Bertinelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q222008" start="6506" end="6521" title="Kathleen Turner" label="Kathleen Turner"/>
<link wikidata="Q11132" start="6526" end="6550" title="Sandra Day O&amp;#x27;Connor" label="Sandra Day O&amp;#x27;Connor"/>
<link wikidata="Q316712" start="6567" end="6580" title="Patrick Duffy" label="Patrick Duffy"/>
<link wikidata="Q202148" start="6582" end="6595" title="Burt Reynolds" label="Burt Reynolds"/>
<link wikidata="Q81328" start="6597" end="6610" title="Harrison Ford" label="Harrison Ford"/>
<link wikidata="Q128121" start="6612" end="6623" title="Mick Jagger" label="Mick Jagger"/>
<link wikidata="Q498019" start="6628" end="6643" title="Richard Simmons" label="Richard Simmons"/>
<link wikidata="Q2576280" start="6658" end="6669" title="Girl Scouts of the USA" label="Girl Scouts"/>
<link wikidata="Q37079" start="6704" end="6714" title="Tom Cruise" label="Tom Cruise"/>
<link wikidata="Q388408" start="6728" end="6740" title="Endless Love (1981 film)" label="Endless Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q551800" start="6797" end="6810" title="Ticket (admission)" label="Movie Tickets"/>
<link wikidata="Q827658" start="6843" end="6856" title="Sunscreen" label="Suntan Lotion"/>
<link wikidata="Q16994968" start="6883" end="6898" title="Hawaiian Tropic" label="Hawaiian Tropic"/>
<link wikidata="Q213706" start="6934" end="6945" title="Tom Selleck" label="Tom Selleck"/>
<link wikidata="Q465977" start="6950" end="6963" title="Sheena Easton" label="Sheena Easton"/>
<link wikidata="Q121507" start="6979" end="6990" title="Alicia Keys" label="Alicia Keys"/>
<link wikidata="Q184249" start="6992" end="7005" title="Kelly Rowland" label="Kelly Rowland"/>
<link wikidata="Q3962" start="7020" end="7035" title="laptop computer" label="laptop computer"/>
<link wikidata="Q43432" start="7037" end="7054" title="Justin Timberlake" label="Justin Timberlake"/>
<link wikidata="Q11975" start="7056" end="7070" title="Britney Spears" label="Britney Spears"/>
<link wikidata="Q12955949" start="7076" end="7081" title="thong" label="thong"/>
<link wikidata="Q11459" start="7083" end="7098" title="Serena Williams" label="Serena Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q15920" start="7103" end="7112" title="Metallica" label="Metallica"/>
<link wikidata="Q1410374" start="7126" end="7133" title="Mullet (haircut)" label="Mullets"/>
<link wikidata="Q6399436" start="7135" end="7138" title="VJ (media personality)" label="VJs"/>
<link wikidata="Q257424" start="7146" end="7152" title="Mickey (Toni Basil song)" label="Mickey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1302846" start="7180" end="7208" title="Fast Times at Ridgemont High" label="Fast Times at Ridgemont High"/>
<link wikidata="Q1995973" start="7222" end="7232" title="Centerfold (song)" label="Centerfold"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542906" start="7242" end="7259" title="The J. Geils Band" label="The J. Geils Band"/>
<link wikidata="Q3494768" start="7267" end="7278" title="Square Pegs" label="Square Pegs"/>
<link wikidata="Q241504" start="7292" end="7301" title="Rocky III" label="Rocky III"/>
<link wikidata="Q133151" start="7309" end="7322" title="Ozzy Osbourne" label="Ozzy Osbourne"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7330" end="7354" title="I Love Rock &amp;#x27;N Roll#Joan Jett version" label="I Love Rock &amp;#x27;N Roll"/>
<link wikidata="Q5931437" start="7364" end="7395" title="Joan Jett &amp;amp; the Blackhearts" label="Joan Jett &amp;amp; the Blackhearts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1304408" start="7403" end="7423" title="The Dukes of Hazzard" label="The Dukes of Hazzard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1533339" start="7431" end="7447" title="The Go-Go&amp;#x27;s" label="The Go-Go&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q215641" start="7449" end="7457" title="Aerobics" label="Aerobics"/>
<link wikidata="Q3147136" start="7465" end="7484" title="I Ran (So Far Away)" label="I Ran (So Far Away)"/>
<link wikidata="Q300409" start="7494" end="7513" title="A Flock of Seagulls" label="A Flock of Seagulls"/>
<link wikidata="Q17250" start="7521" end="7536" title="Trivial Pursuit" label="Trivial Pursuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1112687" start="7544" end="7550" title="Keytar" label="Keytar"/>
<link wikidata="Q3807921" start="7558" end="7577" title="Joanie Loves Chachi" label="Joanie Loves Chachi"/>
<link wikidata="Q173626" start="7591" end="7598" title="Pac-Man" label="Pac-Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q2141683" start="7615" end="7626" title="Ms. Pac-Man" label="Ms. Pac-Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q4644903" start="7640" end="7654" title="867-5309/Jenny" label="867-5309/Jenny"/>
<link wikidata="Q3178123" start="7664" end="7676" title="Tommy Tutone" label="Tommy Tutone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1375" start="7684" end="7706" title="Dungeons &amp;amp; Dragons" label="Dungeons &amp;amp; Dragons"/>
<link wikidata="Q497622" start="7720" end="7731" title="Poltergeist (1982 film)" label="Poltergeist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1814594" start="7745" end="7756" title="The Message (Grandmaster Flash and the Furious Five song)" label="The Message"/>
<link wikidata="Q765409" start="7766" end="7804" title="Grandmaster Flash and the Furious Five" label="Grandmaster Flash and the Furious Five"/>
<link wikidata="Q1645344" start="7812" end="7825" title="Silver Spoons" label="Silver Spoons"/>
<link wikidata="Q11621" start="7839" end="7865" title="E.T. the Extra-Terrestrial" label="E.T. the Extra-Terrestrial"/>
<link wikidata="Q2064725" start="7902" end="7920" title="Up Where We Belong" label="Up Where We Belong"/>
<link wikidata="Q190076" start="7930" end="7940" title="Joe Cocker" label="Joe Cocker"/>
<link wikidata="Q238410" start="7947" end="7962" title="Jennifer Warnes" label="Jennifer Warnes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1557828" start="7973" end="7978" title="Truly (Lionel Richie song)" label="Truly"/>
<link wikidata="Q1790" start="8018" end="8027" title="Kim Wilde" label="Kim Wilde"/>
<link wikidata="Q261547" start="8029" end="8043" title="Rae Dawn Chong" label="Rae Dawn Chong"/>
<link wikidata="Q151935" start="8045" end="8058" title="Kirstie Alley" label="Kirstie Alley"/>
<link wikidata="Q437039" start="8060" end="8070" title="Pia Zadora" label="Pia Zadora"/>
<link wikidata="Q221249" start="8075" end="8082" title="Tootsie" label="Tootsie"/>
<link wikidata="Q356129" start="8099" end="8110" title="John Stamos" label="John Stamos"/>
<link wikidata="Q313992" start="8112" end="8126" title="David Lee Roth" label="David Lee Roth"/>
<link wikidata="Q483203" start="8128" end="8133" title="Sting (musician)" label="Sting"/>
<link wikidata="Q1225" start="8135" end="8152" title="Bruce Springsteen" label="Bruce Springsteen"/>
<link wikidata="Q7558508" start="8161" end="8169" title="Soloflex" label="Soloflex"/>
<link wikidata="Q7805309" start="8188" end="8202" title="Time for Timer" label="Time for Timer"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8216" end="8235" title="Time for Timer#Episodes" label="Sunshine on a Stick"/>
<link wikidata="Q337097" start="8272" end="8276" title="Cats (musical)" label="Cats"/>
<link wikidata="Q7437216" start="8332" end="8346" title="Scott Schwartz" label="Scott Schwartz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1197013" start="8374" end="8381" title="The Toy (1982 film)" label="The Toy"/>
<link wikidata="Q551800" start="8410" end="8425" title="Ticket (admission)" label="Concert Tickets"/>
<link wikidata="Q93346" start="8430" end="8437" title="The Who" label="The Who"/>
<link wikidata="Q43874" start="8520" end="8532" title="Eddie Murphy" label="Eddie Murphy"/>
<link wikidata="Q229749" start="8537" end="8553" title="Heather Locklear" label="Heather Locklear"/>
<link wikidata="Q76478" start="8569" end="8582" title="Kirsten Dunst" label="Kirsten Dunst"/>
<link wikidata="Q36812" start="8584" end="8598" title="Prince William" label="Prince William"/>
<link wikidata="Q1815345" start="8600" end="8609" title="Diet Coke" label="Diet Coke"/>
<link wikidata="Q209182" start="8611" end="8623" title="Public Enemy (group)" label="Public Enemy"/>
<link wikidata="Q825490" start="8628" end="8639" title="liposuction" label="liposuction"/>
<link wikidata="Q1219310" start="8659" end="8691" title="National Lampoon&amp;#x27;s Vacation" label="National Lampoon&amp;#x27;s Vacation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144624" start="8705" end="8716" title="Family Ties" label="Family Ties"/>
<link wikidata="Q193426" start="8724" end="8736" title="Nancy Reagan" label="Nancy Reagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2478848" start="8758" end="8780" title="Diff&amp;#x27;rent Strokes" label="Diff&amp;#x27;rent Strokes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2394642" start="8788" end="8806" title="Cabbage Patch Kids" label="Cabbage Patch Kids"/>
<link wikidata="Q2831" start="8808" end="8823" title="Michael Jackson" label="Michael Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q44320" start="8837" end="8845" title="Thriller (Michael Jackson album)" label="Thriller"/>
<link wikidata="Q611043" start="8865" end="8875" title="Flashdance" label="Flashdance"/>
<link wikidata="Q58381" start="8883" end="8894" title="Duran Duran" label="Duran Duran"/>
<link wikidata="Q3129796" start="8896" end="8907" title="Valley girl" label="Valley girl"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377726" start="8915" end="8936" title="Love Is a Battlefield" label="Love Is a Battlefield"/>
<link wikidata="Q47075" start="8965" end="8973" title="Scarface (1983 film)" label="Scarface"/>
<link wikidata="Q464123" start="8987" end="8997" title="The A-Team" label="The A-Team"/>
<link wikidata="Q182890" start="9005" end="9016" title="Def Leppard" label="Def Leppard"/>
<link wikidata="Q845281" start="9030" end="9039" title="Pyromania (album)" label="Pyromania"/>
<link wikidata="Q3296572" start="9059" end="9081" title="Eddie Murphy Delirious" label="Eddie Murphy Delirious"/>
<link wikidata="Q1113842" start="9095" end="9109" title="Come on Eileen" label="Come on Eileen"/>
<link wikidata="Q247259" start="9119" end="9141" title="Dexys Midnight Runners" label="Dexys Midnight Runners"/>
<link wikidata="Q313896" start="9143" end="9156" title="Jerry Falwell" label="Jerry Falwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q464009" start="9180" end="9192" title="Knight Rider (1982 TV series)" label="Knight Rider"/>
<link wikidata="Q504697" start="9206" end="9214" title="WarGames" label="WarGames"/>
<link wikidata="Q1561108" start="9222" end="9238" title="Wacky WallWalker" label="Wacky WallWalker"/>
<link wikidata="Q1579807" start="9246" end="9256" title="Mr. Roboto" label="Mr. Roboto"/>
<link wikidata="Q590102" start="9266" end="9270" title="Styx (band)" label="Styx"/>
<link wikidata="Q696870" start="9278" end="9316" title="He-Man and the Masters of the Universe" label="He-Man and the Masters of the Universe"/>
<link wikidata="Q181803" start="9330" end="9348" title="Return of the Jedi" label="Return of the Jedi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1330171" start="9385" end="9406" title="Every Breath You Take" label="Every Breath You Take"/>
<link wikidata="Q178095" start="9416" end="9426" title="The Police" label="The Police"/>
<link wikidata="Q1605038" start="9434" end="9438" title="True (Spandau Ballet song)" label="True"/>
<link wikidata="Q16011" start="9448" end="9462" title="Spandau Ballet" label="Spandau Ballet"/>
<link wikidata="Q56088104" start="9473" end="9487" title="Sexual Healing" label="Sexual Healing"/>
<link wikidata="Q189758" start="9497" end="9508" title="Marvin Gaye" label="Marvin Gaye"/>
<link wikidata="Q232429" start="9525" end="9535" title="Maud Adams" label="Maud Adams"/>
<link wikidata="Q715175" start="9537" end="9543" title="Vanity (singer)" label="Vanity"/>
<link wikidata="Q152843" start="9545" end="9557" title="Joan Collins" label="Joan Collins"/>
<link wikidata="Q253476" start="9559" end="9576" title="Christie Brinkley" label="Christie Brinkley"/>
<link wikidata="Q232851" start="9581" end="9598" title="Rebecca De Mornay" label="Rebecca De Mornay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364128" start="9615" end="9626" title="Lee Horsley" label="Lee Horsley"/>
<link wikidata="Q296505" start="9628" end="9636" title="Rob Lowe" label="Rob Lowe"/>
<link wikidata="Q356156" start="9651" end="9667" title="Bruce Boxleitner" label="Bruce Boxleitner"/>
<link wikidata="Q51803" start="9672" end="9681" title="Chewbacca" label="Chewbacca"/>
<link wikidata="Q493361" start="9696" end="9707" title="Smokey Bear" label="Smokey Bear"/>
<link wikidata="Q236702" start="9718" end="9732" title="Joanna Cassidy" label="Joanna Cassidy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1484397" start="9753" end="9765" title="Talent show" label="Talent Shows"/>
<link wikidata="Q687284" start="9779" end="9790" title="Star Search" label="Star Search"/>
<link wikidata="Q201052" start="9810" end="9823" title="American Idol" label="American Idol"/>
<link wikidata="Q17517" start="9832" end="9847" title="Mobile phone" label="Cellular Phones"/>
<link wikidata="Q313614" start="9885" end="9903" title="Video camera" label="Home Video Cameras"/>
<link wikidata="Q41187" start="9911" end="9915" title="Sony" label="Sony"/>
<link wikidata="Q55605267" start="9916" end="9925" title="Betamovie" label="Betamovie"/>
<link wikidata="Q41187" start="9944" end="9948" title="Sony" label="Sony"/>
<link wikidata="Q1931437" start="9949" end="9956" title="MicroMV" label="MicroMV"/>
<link wikidata="Q3276754" start="9957" end="9965" title="Handycam" label="Handycam"/>
<link wikidata="Q234685" start="10039" end="10054" title="Michelle Branch" label="Michelle Branch"/>
<link wikidata="Q259254" start="10056" end="10064" title="Bon Jovi" label="Bon Jovi"/>
<link wikidata="Q172742" start="10070" end="10099" title="Nintendo Entertainment System" label="Nintendo Entertainment System"/>
<link wikidata="Q2610405" start="10101" end="10114" title="Taylor Hanson" label="Taylor Hanson"/>
<link wikidata="Q10708" start="10123" end="10144" title="Red Hot Chili Peppers" label="Red Hot Chili Peppers"/>
<link wikidata="Q169737" start="10158" end="10170" title="Breakdancing" label="Breakdancing"/>
<link wikidata="Q903895" start="10181" end="10194" title="Breakin&amp;#x27;" label="Breakin&amp;#x27;"/>
<link wikidata="Q627533" start="10208" end="10217" title="Footloose (1984 film)" label="Footloose"/>
<link wikidata="Q1744" start="10225" end="10232" title="Madonna (entertainer)" label="Madonna"/>
<link wikidata="Q7640229" start="10240" end="10259" title="Sunglasses at Night" label="Sunglasses at Night"/>
<link wikidata="Q709024" start="10269" end="10279" title="Corey Hart (singer)" label="Corey Hart"/>
<link wikidata="Q1459668" start="10287" end="10309" title="Where&amp;#x27;s the beef?" label="Where&amp;#x27;s the beef?"/>
<link wikidata="Q40425" start="10348" end="10366" title="Born in the U.S.A." label="Born in the U.S.A."/>
<link wikidata="Q2455036" start="10403" end="10410" title="Webster (TV series)" label="Webster"/>
<link wikidata="Q1545971" start="10427" end="10441" title="Punky Brewster" label="Punky Brewster"/>
<link wikidata="Q657093" start="10449" end="10472" title="Huey Lewis and the News" label="Huey Lewis and the News"/>
<link wikidata="Q559321" start="10480" end="10490" title="Miami Vice" label="Miami Vice"/>
<link wikidata="Q162255" start="10504" end="10518" title="The Terminator" label="The Terminator"/>
<link wikidata="Q2278919" start="10532" end="10544" title="Transformers (toy line)" label="Transformers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1569886" start="10561" end="10571" title="Care Bears" label="Care Bears"/>
<link wikidata="Q744087" start="10579" end="10584" title="Wham!" label="Wham!"/>
<link wikidata="Q7542" start="10586" end="10592" title="Prince (musician)" label="Prince"/>
<link wikidata="Q572616" start="10600" end="10615" title="Sixteen Candles" label="Sixteen Candles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1545" start="10623" end="10635" title="Cyndi Lauper" label="Cyndi Lauper"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10660" end="10685" title="Michael Jackson#Pepsi incident and other commercial activities (1984–1985)" label="Pepsi commercial disaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q1603052" start="10693" end="10698" title="Hello (Lionel Richie song)" label="Hello"/>
<link wikidata="Q7810384" start="10729" end="10747" title="This Is Spinal Tap" label="This Is Spinal Tap"/>
<link wikidata="Q3612837" start="10784" end="10799" title="Almost Paradise (song)" label="Almost Paradise"/>
<link wikidata="Q649413" start="10809" end="10818" title="Mike Reno" label="Mike Reno"/>
<link wikidata="Q390134" start="10843" end="10859" title="Against All Odds (Take a Look at Me Now)" label="Against All Odds"/>
<link wikidata="Q144622" start="10869" end="10881" title="Phil Collins" label="Phil Collins"/>
<link wikidata="Q866186" start="10892" end="10903" title="Missing You (John Waite song)" label="Missing You"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344651" start="10913" end="10923" title="John Waite" label="John Waite"/>
<link wikidata="Q236154" start="10940" end="10957" title="Paulina Porizkova" label="Paulina Porizkova"/>
<link wikidata="Q207596" start="10959" end="10971" title="Daryl Hannah" label="Daryl Hannah"/>
<link wikidata="Q131814" start="10973" end="10984" title="Tina Turner" label="Tina Turner"/>
<link wikidata="Q451910" start="10986" end="11000" title="Heather Thomas" label="Heather Thomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q229141" start="11005" end="11022" title="Geraldine Ferraro" label="Geraldine Ferraro"/>
<link wikidata="Q73346" start="11039" end="11052" title="Ralph Macchio" label="Ralph Macchio"/>
<link wikidata="Q193070" start="11054" end="11065" title="Matt Dillon" label="Matt Dillon"/>
<link wikidata="Q464522" start="11067" end="11083" title="C. Thomas Howell" label="C. Thomas Howell"/>
<link wikidata="Q315039" start="11101" end="11110" title="Tom Hulce" label="Tom Hulce"/>
<link wikidata="Q7744284" start="11176" end="11200" title="The Kids from &amp;quot;Fame&amp;quot;" label="Cast of &amp;quot;Fame&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q192152" start="11221" end="11249" title="Sport utility vehicle" label="Recreational Family Vehicles"/>
<link wikidata="Q30599109" start="11257" end="11273" title="Chrysler minivans (S)" label="Chrysler Caravan"/>
<link wikidata="Q598084" start="11290" end="11303" title="Ford Explorer" label="Ford Explorer"/>
<link wikidata="Q551800" start="11316" end="11334" title="Ticket (admission)" label="Super Bowl Tickets"/>
<link wikidata="Q75687" start="11369" end="11376" title="Macintosh" label="The Mac"/>
<link wikidata="Q312883" start="11465" end="11475" title="Boy George" label="Boy George"/>
<link wikidata="Q187832" start="11491" end="11502" title="Mandy Moore" label="Mandy Moore"/>
<link wikidata="Q329466" start="11504" end="11518" title="Freddy Krueger" label="Freddy Krueger"/>
<link wikidata="Q231182" start="11520" end="11534" title="Kelly Osbourne" label="Kelly Osbourne"/>
<link wikidata="Q324053" start="11536" end="11547" title="hair mousse" label="hair mousse"/>
<link wikidata="Q50805" start="11598" end="11610" title="WrestleMania (1985)" label="WrestleMania"/>
<link wikidata="Q210257" start="11624" end="11632" title="MacGyver (1985 TV series)" label="MacGyver"/>
<link wikidata="Q91540" start="11646" end="11664" title="Back to the Future" label="Back to the Future"/>
<link wikidata="Q2888839" start="11678" end="11693" title="Home Sweet Home (Mötley Crüe song)" label="Home Sweet Home"/>
<link wikidata="Q486688" start="11703" end="11714" title="Mötley Crüe" label="Mötley Crüe"/>
<link wikidata="Q636043" start="11722" end="11733" title="The Goonies" label="The Goonies"/>
<link wikidata="Q2293972" start="11747" end="11775" title="Pee-wee&amp;#x27;s Big Adventure" label="Pee-wee&amp;#x27;s Big Adventure"/>
<link wikidata="Q2347191" start="11789" end="11801" title="Small Wonder (TV series)" label="Small Wonder"/>
<link wikidata="Q1472791" start="11815" end="11833" title="Summer of &amp;#x27;69" label="Summer of &amp;#x27;69"/>
<link wikidata="Q482907" start="11843" end="11854" title="Bryan Adams" label="Bryan Adams"/>
<link wikidata="Q4906738" start="11856" end="11864" title="Big hair" label="Big hair"/>
<link wikidata="Q1428153" start="11872" end="11878" title="Fletch (film)" label="Fletch"/>
<link wikidata="Q7767458" start="11892" end="11914" title="The Super Bowl Shuffle" label="The Super Bowl Shuffle"/>
<link wikidata="Q4865357" start="11922" end="11942" title="Bartles &amp;amp; Jaymes" label="Bartles &amp;amp; Jaymes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1105463" start="11950" end="11956" title="Cocoon (film)" label="Cocoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7939682" start="11970" end="11982" title="Voices Carry (song)" label="Voices Carry"/>
<link wikidata="Q3596267" start="11992" end="12003" title="Til Tuesday" label="Til Tuesday"/>
<link wikidata="Q193740" start="12005" end="12013" title="Live Aid" label="Live Aid"/>
<link wikidata="Q2517403" start="12021" end="12038" title="The Facts of Life (TV series)" label="The Facts of Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q3495978" start="12052" end="12070" title="Party All the Time" label="Party All the Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q43874" start="12080" end="12092" title="Eddie Murphy" label="Eddie Murphy"/>
<link wikidata="Q499152" start="12100" end="12118" title="The Breakfast Club" label="The Breakfast Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q1406821" start="12135" end="12155" title="St. Elmo&amp;#x27;s Fire (film)" label="St. Elmo&amp;#x27;s Fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q25000681" start="12163" end="12170" title="Day-Glo" label="Day-Glo"/>
<link wikidata="Q6376197" start="12175" end="12201" title="Katharine Hamnett" label="oversized message T-shirts"/>
<link wikidata="Q2734806" start="12203" end="12216" title="Pound Puppies" label="Pound Puppies"/>
<link wikidata="Q308895" start="12224" end="12240" title="We Are the World" label="We Are the World"/>
<link wikidata="Q1592356" start="12296" end="12312" title="Hear &amp;#x27;n Aid" label="Hear &amp;#x27;n Aid"/>
<link wikidata="Q651472" start="12343" end="12359" title="Careless Whisper" label="Careless Whisper"/>
<link wikidata="Q4049660" start="12382" end="12397" title="Smooth Operator" label="Smooth Operator"/>
<link wikidata="Q658182" start="12407" end="12411" title="Sade (band)" label="Sade"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139281" start="12422" end="12435" title="Crazy for You (Madonna song)" label="Crazy for You"/>
<link wikidata="Q242722" start="12469" end="12482" title="Kelly LeBrock" label="Kelly LeBrock"/>
<link wikidata="Q229147" start="12484" end="12498" title="Kelly McGillis" label="Kelly McGillis"/>
<link wikidata="Q109232" start="12500" end="12516" title="Rosanna Arquette" label="Rosanna Arquette"/>
<link wikidata="Q229881" start="12518" end="12529" title="Grace Slick" label="Grace Slick"/>
<link wikidata="Q241609" start="12534" end="12545" title="Tipper Gore" label="Tipper Gore"/>
<link wikidata="Q40026" start="12562" end="12580" title="Sylvester Stallone" label="Sylvester Stallone"/>
<link wikidata="Q510645" start="12582" end="12624" title="William &amp;quot;The Refrigerator&amp;quot; Perry" label="William &amp;quot;The Refrigerator&amp;quot; Perry"/>
<link wikidata="Q59215" start="12626" end="12640" title="Robert Redford" label="Robert Redford"/>
<link wikidata="Q1689159" start="12642" end="12653" title="Jim McMahon" label="Jim McMahon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3374172" start="12658" end="12672" title="Pee-wee Herman" label="Pee-wee Herman"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12687" end="12704" title="Students Against Destructive Decisions#History" label="Contract for Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q147538" start="12729" end="12740" title="Soft drink" label="Soft Drinks"/>
<link wikidata="Q41084" start="12748" end="12756" title="New Coke" label="New Coke"/>
<link wikidata="Q868130" start="12764" end="12776" title="Coca-Cola Vanilla" label="Vanilla Coke"/>
<link wikidata="Q131359" start="12782" end="12795" title="Professional wrestling" label="Pro Wrestling"/>
<link wikidata="Q44176" start="12803" end="12813" title="Hulk Hogan" label="Hulk Hogan"/>
<link wikidata="Q10738" start="12821" end="12829" title="The Rock (wrestler)" label="The Rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q181678" start="12852" end="12866" title="Dolph Lundgren" label="Dolph Lundgren"/>
<link wikidata="Q154519" start="12871" end="12887" title="Brigitte Nielsen" label="Brigitte Nielsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q768621" start="12903" end="12913" title="Zac Hanson" label="Zac Hanson"/>
<link wikidata="Q420953" start="12915" end="12926" title="Air Jordans" label="Air Jordans"/>
<link wikidata="Q310275" start="12928" end="12941" title="Frankie Muniz" label="Frankie Muniz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147671" start="12947" end="12961" title="Artificial nails" label="Press-On Nails"/>
<link wikidata="Q203078" start="12966" end="12969" title="VH1" label="VH1"/>
<link wikidata="Q498906" start="12989" end="13018" title="Ferris Bueller&amp;#x27;s Day Off" label="Ferris Bueller&amp;#x27;s Day Off"/>
<link wikidata="Q3567653" start="13032" end="13048" title="Wheel of Fortune (American game show)" label="Wheel of Fortune"/>
<link wikidata="Q5647565" start="13056" end="13076" title="Hands Across America" label="Hands Across America"/>
<link wikidata="Q1866654" start="13078" end="13090" title="Teddy Ruxpin" label="Teddy Ruxpin"/>
<link wikidata="Q264221" start="13098" end="13101" title="ALF (TV series)" label="ALF"/>
<link wikidata="Q777564" start="13115" end="13129" title="Pretty in Pink" label="Pretty in Pink"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137622" start="13143" end="13165" title="Papa Don&amp;#x27;t Preach" label="Papa Don&amp;#x27;t Preach"/>
<link wikidata="Q573422" start="13184" end="13190" title="Swatch" label="Swatch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1568875" start="13192" end="13209" title="1986 World Series" label="1986 World Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q2903144" start="13218" end="13230" title="Bill Buckner" label="Bill Buckner"/>
<link wikidata="Q463999" start="13253" end="13267" title="The Cosby Show" label="The Cosby Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q4838449" start="13275" end="13288" title="Baby On Board" label="Baby On Board"/>
<link wikidata="Q615254" start="13296" end="13324" title="&amp;quot;Crocodile&amp;quot; Dundee" label="&amp;quot;Crocodile&amp;quot; Dundee"/>
<link wikidata="Q5883076" start="13332" end="13350" title="Hollywood marriage" label="Celebrity marriage"/>
<link wikidata="Q331748" start="13366" end="13375" title="Tommy Lee" label="Tommy Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q229749" start="13382" end="13398" title="Heather Locklear" label="Heather Locklear"/>
<link wikidata="Q2685" start="13400" end="13421" title="Arnold Schwarzenegger" label="Arnold Schwarzenegger"/>
<link wikidata="Q230654" start="13428" end="13441" title="Maria Shriver" label="Maria Shriver"/>
<link wikidata="Q230138" start="13446" end="13463" title="Tatum O&amp;#x27;Neal" label="Tatum O&amp;#x27;Neal"/>
<link wikidata="Q16474" start="13470" end="13482" title="John McEnroe" label="John McEnroe"/>
<link wikidata="Q34389" start="13485" end="13500" title="Whitney Houston" label="Whitney Houston"/>
<link wikidata="Q5151767" start="13502" end="13514" title="Comic Relief USA" label="Comic Relief"/>
<link wikidata="Q131324" start="13516" end="13529" title="Janet Jackson" label="Janet Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q530266" start="13543" end="13550" title="Control (Janet Jackson album)" label="Control"/>
<link wikidata="Q494722" start="13570" end="13581" title="Stand by Me (film)" label="Stand by Me"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13595" end="13608" title="Walk This Way#Run-DMC/Aerosmith version" label="Walk This Way"/>
<link wikidata="Q159351" start="13618" end="13625" title="Run-DMC" label="Run-DMC"/>
<link wikidata="Q126826" start="13630" end="13639" title="Aerosmith" label="Aerosmith"/>
<link wikidata="Q110138" start="13647" end="13654" title="Top Gun" label="Top Gun"/>
<link wikidata="Q2298481" start="13691" end="13710" title="Take My Breath Away" label="Take My Breath Away"/>
<link wikidata="Q821198" start="13720" end="13726" title="Berlin (band)" label="Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q768277" start="13734" end="13754" title="The Next Time I Fall" label="The Next Time I Fall"/>
<link wikidata="Q468815" start="13764" end="13776" title="Peter Cetera" label="Peter Cetera"/>
<link wikidata="Q464213" start="13783" end="13792" title="Amy Grant" label="Amy Grant"/>
<link wikidata="Q7444053" start="13803" end="13816" title="Secret Lovers" label="Secret Lovers"/>
<link wikidata="Q3277102" start="13826" end="13840" title="Atlantic Starr" label="Atlantic Starr"/>
<link wikidata="Q272374" start="13857" end="13870" title="Susanna Hoffs" label="Susanna Hoffs"/>
<link wikidata="Q131380" start="13872" end="13884" title="Kim Basinger" label="Kim Basinger"/>
<link wikidata="Q234691" start="13886" end="13898" title="Stevie Nicks" label="Stevie Nicks"/>
<link wikidata="Q190631" start="13900" end="13912" title="Bette Midler" label="Bette Midler"/>
<link wikidata="Q9202" start="13921" end="13938" title="Statue of Liberty" label="Statue of Liberty"/>
<link wikidata="Q963117" start="13967" end="13980" title="Walter Payton" label="Walter Payton"/>
<link wikidata="Q296641" start="13982" end="13992" title="Paul Hogan" label="Paul Hogan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3194742" start="13994" end="14009" title="Keith Hernandez" label="Keith Hernandez"/>
<link wikidata="Q2708105" start="14014" end="14029" title="Howard the Duck" label="Howard the Duck"/>
<link wikidata="Q193645" start="14100" end="14112" title="Quincy Jones" label="Quincy Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q435789" start="14117" end="14129" title="James Ingram" label="James Ingram"/>
<link wikidata="Q6622430" start="14150" end="14173" title="List of highest paid Major League Baseball players" label="Highest Baseball Salary"/>
<link wikidata="Q1056011" start="14181" end="14192" title="Gary Carter" label="Gary Carter"/>
<link wikidata="Q558664" start="14213" end="14227" title="Alex Rodriguez" label="Alex Rodriguez"/>
<link wikidata="Q313992" start="14244" end="14258" title="David Lee Roth" label="David Lee Roth"/>
<link wikidata="Q381203" start="14312" end="14322" title="Ted Danson" label="Ted Danson"/>
<link wikidata="Q196560" start="14329" end="14343" title="Kelsey Grammer" label="Kelsey Grammer"/>
<link wikidata="Q732063" start="14397" end="14403" title="Cheers" label="Cheers"/>
<link wikidata="Q209282" start="14470" end="14477" title="Frasier" label="Frasier"/>
<link wikidata="Q79031" start="14506" end="14516" title="Mike Tyson" label="Mike Tyson"/>
<link wikidata="Q55800" start="14521" end="14534" title="Oprah Winfrey" label="Oprah Winfrey"/>
<link wikidata="Q212002" start="14550" end="14562" title="Amanda Bynes" label="Amanda Bynes"/>
<link wikidata="Q208415" start="14564" end="14579" title="The Olsen twins" label="The Olsen twins"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151944" start="14581" end="14590" title="Mary-Kate Olsen" label="Mary-Kate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193914" start="14595" end="14601" title="Ashley Olsen" label="Ashley"/>
<link wikidata="Q44903" start="14604" end="14617" title="Lindsay Lohan" label="Lindsay Lohan"/>
<link wikidata="Q730046" start="14623" end="14636" title="Goo Goo Dolls" label="Goo Goo Dolls"/>
<link wikidata="Q1702681" start="14638" end="14647" title="Jolt Cola" label="Jolt Cola"/>
<link wikidata="Q188464" start="14653" end="14659" title="Pixies (band)" label="Pixies"/>
<link wikidata="Q313658" start="14668" end="14685" title="disposable camera" label="disposable camera"/>
<link wikidata="Q253978" start="14705" end="14718" title="Dirty Dancing" label="Dirty Dancing"/>
<link wikidata="Q233817" start="14738" end="14751" title="Debbie Gibson" label="Debbie Gibson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5639507" start="14753" end="14766" title="Hair crimping" label="Hair crimping"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165645" start="14768" end="14790" title="Lisa Lisa and Cult Jam" label="Lisa Lisa and Cult Jam"/>
<link wikidata="Q504157" start="14798" end="14814" title="Fatal Attraction" label="Fatal Attraction"/>
<link wikidata="Q188539" start="14822" end="14832" title="Hair metal" label="Hair metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q550602" start="14847" end="14853" title="Poison (American band)" label="Poison"/>
<link wikidata="Q11895" start="14878" end="14896" title="Guns N&amp;#x27; Roses" label="Guns N&amp;#x27; Roses"/>
<link wikidata="Q166419" start="14915" end="14918" title="Fox Broadcasting Company" label="FOX"/>
<link wikidata="Q1216882" start="14939" end="14961" title="The Tracey Ullman Show" label="The Tracey Ullman Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q208647" start="14975" end="14999" title="Married... with Children" label="Married... with Children"/>
<link wikidata="Q214016" start="15016" end="15030" title="21 Jump Street" label="21 Jump Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q1675438" start="15045" end="15107" title="It&amp;#x27;s the End of the World as We Know It (And I Feel Fine)" label="It&amp;#x27;s the End of the World as We Know It (And I Feel Fine)"/>
<link wikidata="Q134969" start="15117" end="15123" title="R.E.M." label="R.E.M."/>
<link wikidata="Q1772698" start="15139" end="15160" title="extramarital affairs" label="extra-marital affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q431223" start="15175" end="15187" title="Oliver North" label="Oliver North"/>
<link wikidata="Q5438777" start="15192" end="15201" title="Fawn Hall" label="Fawn Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q919448" start="15203" end="15212" title="Gary Hart" label="Gary Hart"/>
<link wikidata="Q5296449" start="15217" end="15227" title="Donna Rice" label="Donna Rice"/>
<link wikidata="Q4355654" start="15229" end="15232" title="Jim Bakker" label="Jim"/>
<link wikidata="Q454364" start="15237" end="15254" title="Tammy Faye Bakker" label="Tammy Faye Bakker"/>
<link wikidata="Q4495352" start="15259" end="15271" title="Jessica Hahn" label="Jessica Hahn"/>
<link wikidata="Q332348" start="15280" end="15291" title="Wall Street (1987 film)" label="Wall Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q2282361" start="15305" end="15349" title="(You Gotta) Fight for Your Right (To Party!)" label="(You Gotta) Fight for Your Right (To Party!)"/>
<link wikidata="Q214039" start="15359" end="15371" title="Beastie Boys" label="Beastie Boys"/>
<link wikidata="Q7619091" start="15373" end="15382" title="Acid wash" label="Acid wash"/>
<link wikidata="Q319515" start="15387" end="15395" title="Converse (shoe company)" label="Converse"/>
<link wikidata="Q17065877" start="15423" end="15430" title="Push It (Salt-N-Pepa)" label="Push It"/>
<link wikidata="Q1545961" start="15440" end="15451" title="Salt-N-Pepa" label="Salt-N-Pepa"/>
<link wikidata="Q5882928" start="15459" end="15476" title="Hollywood Shuffle" label="Hollywood Shuffle"/>
<link wikidata="Q352920" start="15490" end="15506" title="Addicted to Love (song)" label="Addicted to Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q325412" start="15516" end="15529" title="Robert Palmer" label="Robert Palmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7770912" start="15531" end="15545" title="The Two Coreys" label="The Two Coreys"/>
<link wikidata="Q375419" start="15547" end="15560" title="Corey Feldman" label="Corey Feldman"/>
<link wikidata="Q342370" start="15565" end="15575" title="Corey Haim" label="Corey Haim"/>
<link wikidata="Q396" start="15578" end="15580" title="U2" label="U2"/>
<link wikidata="Q152873" start="15594" end="15609" title="The Joshua Tree" label="The Joshua Tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q4812420" start="15652" end="15666" title="At This Moment" label="At This Moment"/>
<link wikidata="Q434492" start="15676" end="15704" title="Billy Vera &amp;amp; The Beaters" label="Billy Vera &amp;amp; The Beaters"/>
<link wikidata="Q1242247" start="15712" end="15743" title="Don&amp;#x27;t Dream It&amp;#x27;s Over" label="Don&amp;#x27;t Dream It&amp;#x27;s Over"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128045" start="15753" end="15766" title="Crowded House" label="Crowded House"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321681" start="15777" end="15788" title="I Need Love (LL Cool J song)" label="I Need Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q52440" start="15798" end="15807" title="LL Cool J" label="LL Cool J"/>
<link wikidata="Q232414" start="15824" end="15834" title="Lisa Bonet" label="Lisa Bonet"/>
<link wikidata="Q465897" start="15851" end="15862" title="Jody Watley" label="Jody Watley"/>
<link wikidata="Q260298" start="15864" end="15876" title="Tawny Kitaen" label="Tawny Kitaen"/>
<link wikidata="Q7722854" start="15885" end="15896" title="Church Lady" label="Church Lady"/>
<link wikidata="Q372514" start="15924" end="15931" title="RoboCop" label="RoboCop"/>
<link wikidata="Q200768" start="15933" end="15945" title="Dennis Quaid" label="Dennis Quaid"/>
<link wikidata="Q567830" start="15947" end="15959" title="Harry Hamlin" label="Harry Hamlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q240899" start="15981" end="16005" title="Harry and the Hendersons" label="Harry and the Hendersons"/>
<link wikidata="Q5980182" start="16055" end="16084" title="I learned it by watching you!" label="I learned it by watching you!"/>
<link wikidata="Q6636580" start="16111" end="16136" title="List of richest Americans in history" label="Richest Person in America"/>
<link wikidata="Q497827" start="16144" end="16154" title="Sam Walton" label="Sam Walton"/>
<link wikidata="Q5284" start="16179" end="16189" title="Bill Gates" label="Bill Gates"/>
<link wikidata="Q2063360" start="16210" end="16222" title="Jessica McClure" label="Baby Jessica"/>
<link wikidata="Q11885" start="16272" end="16280" title="Axl Rose" label="Axl Rose"/>
<link wikidata="Q2680" start="16362" end="16374" title="Bruce Willis" label="Bruce Willis"/>
<link wikidata="Q12003" start="16379" end="16383" title="Cher" label="Cher"/>
<link wikidata="Q312173" start="16399" end="16416" title="Lil&amp;#x27; Bow Wow" label="Lil&amp;#x27; Bow Wow"/>
<link wikidata="Q122020" start="16418" end="16429" title="Hilary Duff" label="Hilary Duff"/>
<link wikidata="Q301818" start="16431" end="16443" title="Aaron Carter" label="Aaron Carter"/>
<link wikidata="Q11649" start="16445" end="16452" title="Nirvana (band)" label="Nirvana"/>
<link wikidata="Q14076" start="16457" end="16463" title="condom" label="condom"/>
<link wikidata="Q79031" start="16489" end="16499" title="Mike Tyson" label="Mike Tyson"/>
<link wikidata="Q935945" start="16507" end="16524" title="Child&amp;#x27;s Play (1988 film)" label="Child&amp;#x27;s Play"/>
<link wikidata="Q575373" start="16538" end="16546" title="Roseanne" label="Roseanne"/>
<link wikidata="Q57" start="16560" end="16583" title="Never Gonna Give You Up" label="Never Gonna Give You Up"/>
<link wikidata="Q219237" start="16593" end="16604" title="Rick Astley" label="Rick Astley"/>
<link wikidata="Q270690" start="16637" end="16661" title="Appetite for Destruction" label="Appetite for Destruction"/>
<link wikidata="Q691581" start="16681" end="16697" title="The Wonder Years" label="The Wonder Years"/>
<link wikidata="Q1037693" start="16705" end="16716" title="Modern Rock" label="Modern Rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q489801" start="16731" end="16735" title="INXS" label="INXS"/>
<link wikidata="Q484427" start="16737" end="16745" title="The Cure" label="The Cure"/>
<link wikidata="Q202246" start="16747" end="16756" title="Morrissey" label="Morrissey"/>
<link wikidata="Q482964" start="16758" end="16770" title="Depeche Mode" label="Depeche Mode"/>
<link wikidata="Q484885" start="16776" end="16783" title="Erasure (duo)" label="Erasure"/>
<link wikidata="Q249056" start="16792" end="16820" title="Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles (1987 TV series)" label="Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles"/>
<link wikidata="Q586931" start="16834" end="16860" title="Don&amp;#x27;t Worry, Be Happy" label="Don&amp;#x27;t Worry, Be Happy"/>
<link wikidata="Q310894" start="16870" end="16884" title="Bobby McFerrin" label="Bobby McFerrin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7720980" start="16886" end="16908" title="The California Raisins" label="The California Raisins"/>
<link wikidata="Q1304597" start="16916" end="16933" title="Perfect Strangers (TV series)" label="Perfect Strangers"/>
<link wikidata="Q130311" start="16941" end="16955" title="George Michael" label="George Michael"/>
<link wikidata="Q568555" start="16969" end="16974" title="Faith (George Michael album)" label="Faith"/>
<link wikidata="Q565449" start="16994" end="17004" title="Pictionary" label="Pictionary"/>
<link wikidata="Q3064584" start="17021" end="17038" title="Win, Lose or Draw" label="Win, Lose or Draw"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17052" end="17064" title="Red Red Wine#UB40 version" label="Red Red Wine"/>
<link wikidata="Q560153" start="17074" end="17078" title="UB40" label="UB40"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17121" end="17139" title="Color analysis (art)#Carole Jackson, Color Me Beautiful (1980)" label="Color Me Beautiful"/>
<link wikidata="Q11401" start="17147" end="17160" title="Hip hop music" label="Hip hop music"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754419" start="17181" end="17193" title="Yo! MTV Raps" label="Yo! MTV Raps"/>
<link wikidata="Q7136819" start="17207" end="17241" title="Parents Just Don&amp;#x27;t Understand" label="Parents Just Don&amp;#x27;t Understand"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154136" start="17251" end="17287" title="DJ Jazzy Jeff &amp;amp; the Fresh Prince" label="DJ Jazzy Jeff &amp;amp; the Fresh Prince"/>
<link wikidata="Q753679" start="17305" end="17316" title="gangsta rap" label="gangsta rap"/>
<link wikidata="Q216856" start="17331" end="17336" title="N.W.A" label="N.W.A"/>
<link wikidata="Q1623411" start="17346" end="17366" title="Who&amp;#x27;s the Boss?" label="Who&amp;#x27;s the Boss?"/>
<link wikidata="Q552384" start="17374" end="17399" title="Terence Trent D&amp;#x27;Arby" label="Terence Trent D&amp;#x27;Arby"/>
<link wikidata="Q339747" start="17409" end="17415" title="hippie" label="hippie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247572" start="17432" end="17445" title="Touch of Grey" label="Touch of Grey"/>
<link wikidata="Q212533" start="17455" end="17468" title="Grateful Dead" label="Grateful Dead"/>
<link wikidata="Q188845" start="17476" end="17484" title="Rain Man" label="Rain Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q1669968" start="17521" end="17545" title="She&amp;#x27;s Like the Wind" label="She&amp;#x27;s Like the Wind"/>
<link wikidata="Q49004" start="17555" end="17569" title="Patrick Swayze" label="Patrick Swayze"/>
<link wikidata="Q5879284" start="17577" end="17598" title="Hold On to the Nights" label="Hold On to the Nights"/>
<link wikidata="Q311256" start="17608" end="17620" title="Richard Marx" label="Richard Marx"/>
<link wikidata="Q7734338" start="17631" end="17640" title="The Flame (Cheap Trick song)" label="The Flame"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068713" start="17650" end="17661" title="Cheap Trick" label="Cheap Trick"/>
<link wikidata="Q1631670" start="17678" end="17692" title="Jessica Rabbit" label="Jessica Rabbit"/>
<link wikidata="Q238045" start="17694" end="17705" title="Kari Wuhrer" label="Kari Wuhrer"/>
<link wikidata="Q464052" start="17707" end="17719" title="Samantha Fox" label="Samantha Fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q40523" start="17721" end="17734" title="Julia Roberts" label="Julia Roberts"/>
<link wikidata="Q357786" start="17739" end="17745" title="Divine (performer)" label="Divine"/>
<link wikidata="Q316064" start="17762" end="17781" title="John F. Kennedy Jr." label="John F. Kennedy Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q22686" start="17783" end="17795" title="Donald Trump" label="Donald Trump"/>
<link wikidata="Q11930" start="17797" end="17810" title="Kevin Costner" label="Kevin Costner"/>
<link wikidata="Q348011" start="17812" end="17823" title="Joe Montana" label="Joe Montana"/>
<link wikidata="Q49214" start="17828" end="17838" title="Dan Quayle" label="Dan Quayle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138997" start="17864" end="17886" title="crash test dummy" label="Car Crash Test Dummies"/>
<link wikidata="Q538104" start="17918" end="17925" title="Tuition payments" label="Tuition"/>
<link wikidata="Q13371" start="17929" end="17936" title="Harvard University" label="Harvard"/>
<link wikidata="Q40128" start="17969" end="17979" title="Ricki Lake" label="Ricki Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q164761" start="18017" end="18033" title="100 metres" label="100-Meter Sprint"/>
<link wikidata="Q52614" start="18041" end="18052" title="Ben Johnson (Canadian sprinter)" label="Ben Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q316170" start="18075" end="18089" title="Tim Montgomery" label="Tim Montgomery"/>
<link wikidata="Q489856" start="18162" end="18179" title="Haley Joel Osment" label="Haley Joel Osment"/>
<link wikidata="Q232307" start="18181" end="18192" title="Mae Whitman" label="Mae Whitman"/>
<link wikidata="Q152555" start="18194" end="18204" title="Alexa Vega" label="Alexa Vega"/>
<link wikidata="Q7694018" start="18206" end="18219" title="Teddy Grahams" label="Teddy Grahams"/>
<link wikidata="Q169138" start="18221" end="18231" title="Miami Heat" label="Miami Heat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137304" start="18233" end="18241" title="En Vogue" label="En Vogue"/>
<link wikidata="Q422244" start="18246" end="18252" title="Fluoxetine" label="Prozac"/>
<link wikidata="Q212464" start="18266" end="18287" title="New Kids on the Block" label="New Kids on the Block"/>
<link wikidata="Q795042" start="18295" end="18334" title="Bill and Ted&amp;#x27;s Excellent Adventure" label="Bill and Ted&amp;#x27;s Excellent Adventure"/>
<link wikidata="Q850540" start="18342" end="18355" title="Milli Vanilli" label="Milli Vanilli"/>
<link wikidata="Q186437" start="18357" end="18365" title="Game Boy" label="Game Boy"/>
<link wikidata="Q71910" start="18376" end="18382" title="Tetris" label="Tetris"/>
<link wikidata="Q797907" start="18396" end="18400" title="Cops (TV program)" label="Cops"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18424" end="18433" title="Rob Lowe#Sex tape" label="sex video"/>
<link wikidata="Q2720861" start="18441" end="18466" title="If I Could Turn Back Time" label="If I Could Turn Back Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141252" start="18488" end="18506" title="Do the Right Thing" label="Do the Right Thing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1420677" start="18520" end="18533" title="Like a Prayer (song)" label="Like a Prayer"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18568" end="18585" title="Like a Prayer (song)#Reception and protests" label="Pepsi controversy"/>
<link wikidata="Q963713" start="18593" end="18608" title="Say Anything..." label="Say Anything..."/>
<link wikidata="Q7714341" start="18622" end="18643" title="The Arsenio Hall Show" label="The Arsenio Hall Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q51622" start="18657" end="18667" title="Love Shack" label="Love Shack"/>
<link wikidata="Q950309" start="18677" end="18692" title="The B-52&amp;#x27;s" label="The B-52&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q311241" start="18694" end="18705" title="Bobby Brown" label="Bobby Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q1876790" start="18707" end="18718" title="Afrocentrism" label="Afrocentric"/>
<link wikidata="Q223320" start="18735" end="18743" title="Baywatch" label="Baywatch"/>
<link wikidata="Q625885" start="18757" end="18776" title="Love in an Elevator" label="Love in an Elevator"/>
<link wikidata="Q1551916" start="18803" end="18811" title="Heathers" label="Heathers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026823" start="18825" end="18842" title="Saved by the Bell" label="Saved by the Bell"/>
<link wikidata="Q5509288" start="18856" end="18873" title="Funky Cold Medina" label="Funky Cold Medina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1552233" start="18883" end="18891" title="Tone Loc" label="Tone Loc"/>
<link wikidata="Q69163529" start="18893" end="18916" title="Fall of the Berlin Wall" label="Fall of the Berlin Wall"/>
<link wikidata="Q391559" start="18947" end="18965" title="Right Here Waiting" label="Right Here Waiting"/>
<link wikidata="Q1969724" start="18995" end="19027" title="If You Don&amp;#x27;t Know Me by Now" label="If You Don&amp;#x27;t Know Me by Now"/>
<link wikidata="Q339430" start="19037" end="19047" title="Simply Red" label="Simply Red"/>
<link wikidata="Q786392" start="19058" end="19066" title="Lovesong (The Cure song)" label="Lovesong"/>
<link wikidata="Q101797" start="19101" end="19113" title="Winona Ryder" label="Winona Ryder"/>
<link wikidata="Q185465" start="19115" end="19126" title="Paula Abdul" label="Paula Abdul"/>
<link wikidata="Q230045" start="19128" end="19150" title="Tiffani-Amber Thiessen" label="Tiffani-Amber Thiessen"/>
<link wikidata="Q76717" start="19152" end="19168" title="Claudia Schiffer" label="Claudia Schiffer"/>
<link wikidata="Q190628" start="19173" end="19185" title="Barbara Bush" label="Barbara Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q94496874" start="19202" end="19208" title="Batman (1989 film series character)" label="Batman"/>
<link wikidata="Q24049262" start="19210" end="19219" title="Joker (Jack Napier)" label="The Joker"/>
<link wikidata="Q37175" start="19221" end="19232" title="Johnny Depp" label="Johnny Depp"/>
<link wikidata="Q42229" start="19234" end="19244" title="Mel Gibson" label="Mel Gibson"/>
<link wikidata="Q323934" start="19249" end="19257" title="Leonardo (Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles)" label="Leonardo"/>
<link wikidata="Q7242372" start="19283" end="19298" title="Prevention of HIV/AIDS" label="AIDS Prevention"/>
<link wikidata="Q2743830" start="19319" end="19325" title="Bush family" label="Bushes"/>
<link wikidata="Q23505" start="19333" end="19350" title="George H. W. Bush" label="George H. W. Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q207" start="19358" end="19372" title="George W. Bush" label="George W. Bush"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19400" end="19411" title="The Mickey Mouse Club#1989-1994 revival, The All-New Mickey Mouse Club" label="Mouseketeer"/>
<link wikidata="Q513151" start="19419" end="19434" title="Justified (album)" label="Michael Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q466" start="19440" end="19454" title="World Wide Web" label="World Wide Web"/>
<link wikidata="Q563326" start="19513" end="19523" title="Fab Morvan" label="Fab Morvan"/>
<link wikidata="Q167498" start="19528" end="19536" title="Meg Ryan" label="Meg Ryan"/>
<link wikidata="Q38119" start="19552" end="19568" title="Daniel Radcliffe" label="Daniel Radcliffe"/>
<link wikidata="Q624790" start="19570" end="19574" title="Hole (band)" label="Hole"/>
<link wikidata="Q1476499" start="19576" end="19601" title="Hootie &amp;amp; the Blowfish" label="Hootie &amp;amp; the Blowfish"/>
<link wikidata="Q452307" start="19603" end="19618" title="Lil&amp;#x27; Romeo" label="Lil&amp;#x27; Romeo"/>
<link wikidata="Q464710" start="19629" end="19648" title="American Gladiators (1989 TV series)" label="American Gladiators"/>
<link wikidata="Q203078" start="19728" end="19731" title="VH1" label="VH1"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="246645" wikidata="Q7050752" url="?curid=246645" title="Nordic folk music">
<text>Nordic [[Traditional folk music|folk music]] includes a number of traditions of Nordic countries, especially Scandinavian. The Nordic countries are Iceland, Norway, Sweden, Denmark and Finland.

The many regions of the Nordic countries share certain traditions, many of which have diverged significantly. It is possible to group together Finland, Estonia, Latvia and northwest Russia as sharing cultural similarities, contrasted with Norway, Sweden, Denmark and the Atlantic islands of Iceland and the Faroe Islands. Greenland&#x27;s Inuit culture has its own musical traditions, influenced by Scandinavian culture. Finland shares many cultural similarities with both Baltics and the Scandinavian nations. The Saami of Sweden, Norway, Finland and Russia have their own unique culture, with ties to the neighboring cultures.

==Scandinavian music==

The dulcimer and fiddle are the two most characteristic instruments found throughout Scandinavia. In Norway, the eight- or nine-stringed hardanger fiddle is also found. Gammaldans are a kind of dance song played by harmonica and accordion, popular in both Sweden and Norway in the late 19th and early 20th century.

Circle dancing while singing ballads is a historic part of the folk traditions of all of northern Europe. Only the Faroe Islands have maintained this tradition to the present day, though it has been revived in some other areas. Iceland is home to many ancient musical practices no longer found elsewhere in the Nordic area, such as the use of parallel fifths and organum.

Greenland&#x27;s Inuit population has their own musical traditions, which have been melded with elements of Nordic music, such as the kalattuut style of Greenlandic polka.

Finland was long ruled by Sweden, so much of Finnish culture is influenced by Swedish. There are a number of Swedes living in Finland, and vice versa. These communities have produced traditional and neo-folk musicians like the Swedish-Finn Scea Jansson and Gjallarhorn, and the Finnish-Swedish Norrlåtar and JP Nyströms.

Baltic psalteries are a family of related plucked box zithers played throughout Finland (kantele), the Baltic states (kannel in Estonia, kanklės in Lithuania and kokles in Latvia respectively) and northwest Russia (krylovidnye gusli). A bowed lyre (Swedish &quot;tagelharpa&quot;, Estonian &quot;talharpa&quot; or &quot;hiiurootsi kannel&quot;, Finnish &quot;jouhikko&quot; or &quot;jouhikantele&quot;) was formerly played among Swedes living in Estonia, but usage declined until a recent revival. In the 19th century, all the Baltic states saw an influx of foreign instruments and styles, resulting in fusions like the zither kokles and German-influenced ziņģe singing style of Latvia.

==Sami music==
The Sami are found in Norway, Sweden, Finland and the northwest corner of Russia. The only traditional Sami instruments are drums and the flute, though modern bands use a variety of instrumentation. Joiks, unrhymed works without definite structure, are the most characteristic kind of song.

==Balto-Finnic music==

Balto-Finnic music is a category of music of Balto-Finnic people, that overlaps with both Nordic folk music of Nordic countries and Baltic folk music of Baltic states.

Finland&#x27;s musical ties are primarily to the Balto-Finnic peoples of Russia and Estonia (Cronshaw, 91). Runic singing was practiced throughout the area inhabited by these peoples. Estonia and Finland both have national epics based on interconnected forms of runo-song, &quot;Kalevipoeg&quot; and &quot;Kalevala&quot;, respectively. &quot;Estonian runic song has the same basic form as the Finnish variety to which it is related: the line has eight beats, the melody rarely spans more than the first five notes of a diatonic scale and its short phrases tend to use descending patterns&quot; (Cronshaw, 16).

== Contemporary Applications ==
In recent times Nordic folk music is used in developing the background score for movies, TV shows and games. Popular TV shows like Game of Thrones and games like God of War have used Nordic folk music to give a mythic experience.

==See also==
*Neofolk
*Nordic popular music

==References==

*Nettl, Bruno. &quot;Folk and Traditional Music of the Western Continents&quot;. 1965. Prentice-Hall. Eaglewood Cliffs, New Jersey.
*Broughton, Simon and Mark Ellingham with James McConnachie and Orla Duane (Ed.), &quot;World Music, Vol. 1: Africa, Europe and the Middle East&quot;. Rough Guides Ltd, Penguin Books. , The Book of Music and Nature: An Anthology of Sounds, Words, Thoughts (Music Culture)

==Further reading==
*</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7050752" start="0" end="44" title="Nordic folk music" label="Nordic [[Traditional folk music|folk music]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q52062" start="80" end="96" title="Nordic countries" label="Nordic countries"/>
<link wikidata="Q21195" start="109" end="120" title="Scandinavia" label="Scandinavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q52062" start="127" end="143" title="Nordic countries" label="Nordic countries"/>
<link wikidata="Q189" start="148" end="155" title="Iceland" label="Iceland"/>
<link wikidata="Q20" start="157" end="163" title="Norway" label="Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q34" start="165" end="171" title="Sweden" label="Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q35" start="173" end="180" title="Denmark" label="Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q33" start="185" end="192" title="Finland" label="Finland"/>
<link wikidata="Q191" start="347" end="354" title="Estonia" label="Estonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q211" start="356" end="362" title="Latvia" label="Latvia"/>
<link wikidata="Q15054934" start="367" end="383" title="northwest Russia" label="northwest Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q189975" start="534" end="539" title="Inuit" label="Inuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q39731" start="668" end="675" title="Baltics" label="Baltics"/>
<link wikidata="Q48199" start="710" end="715" title="Sami people" label="Saami"/>
<link wikidata="Q341663" start="853" end="861" title="dulcimer" label="dulcimer"/>
<link wikidata="Q510487" start="866" end="872" title="fiddle" label="fiddle"/>
<link wikidata="Q178933" start="986" end="1002" title="hardanger fiddle" label="hardanger fiddle"/>
<link wikidata="Q3354897" start="1018" end="1028" title="Gammaldans" label="Gammaldans"/>
<link wikidata="Q51290" start="1064" end="1073" title="harmonica" label="harmonica"/>
<link wikidata="Q79838" start="1078" end="1087" title="accordion" label="accordion"/>
<link wikidata="Q17080806" start="1165" end="1179" title="Circle dance" label="Circle dancing"/>
<link wikidata="Q182659" start="1194" end="1200" title="ballad" label="ballad"/>
<link wikidata="Q4628" start="1280" end="1293" title="Faroe Islands" label="Faroe Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q599877" start="1528" end="1535" title="organum" label="organum"/>
<link wikidata="Q189975" start="1555" end="1560" title="Inuit" label="Inuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q7198347" start="1586" end="1604" title="Inuit music" label="musical traditions"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1672" end="1681" title="kalattuut" label="kalattuut"/>
<link wikidata="Q153071" start="1703" end="1708" title="polka" label="polka"/>
<link wikidata="Q775614" start="1910" end="1918" title="neo-folk" label="neo-folk"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1951" end="1963" title="Scea Jansson" label="Scea Jansson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1528903" start="1968" end="1979" title="Gjallarhorn (band)" label="Gjallarhorn"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2005" end="2014" title="Norrlåtar" label="Norrlåtar"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2019" end="2030" title="JP Nyströms" label="JP Nyströms"/>
<link wikidata="Q4852742" start="2033" end="2050" title="Baltic psaltery" label="Baltic psalteries"/>
<link wikidata="Q230262" start="2075" end="2082" title="plucked string instrument" label="plucked"/>
<link wikidata="Q4951628" start="2083" end="2093" title="box zither" label="box zither"/>
<link wikidata="Q145840" start="2122" end="2129" title="kantele" label="kantele"/>
<link wikidata="Q3732881" start="2151" end="2157" title="kannel (instrument)" label="kannel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2595197" start="2170" end="2177" title="kanklės" label="kanklės"/>
<link wikidata="Q3504809" start="2195" end="2201" title="kokles" label="kokles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147128" start="2248" end="2265" title="krylovidnye gusli" label="krylovidnye gusli"/>
<link wikidata="Q201129" start="2276" end="2280" title="lyre" label="lyre"/>
<link wikidata="Q3504809" start="2653" end="2666" title="zither kokles" label="zither kokles"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2689" end="2694" title="ziņģe" label="ziņģe"/>
<link wikidata="Q128309" start="2860" end="2865" title="Drum kit" label="drums"/>
<link wikidata="Q11405" start="2874" end="2879" title="flute" label="flute"/>
<link wikidata="Q744327" start="2935" end="2939" title="Joik" label="Joik"/>
<link wikidata="Q3745748" start="3097" end="3116" title="Balto-Finnic people" label="Balto-Finnic people"/>
<link wikidata="Q52062" start="3163" end="3179" title="Nordic countries" label="Nordic countries"/>
<link wikidata="Q39731" start="3205" end="3218" title="Baltic states" label="Baltic states"/>
<link wikidata="Q4400125" start="3329" end="3342" title="Runic song" label="Runic singing"/>
<link wikidata="Q217100" start="3500" end="3510" title="Kalevipoeg" label="Kalevipoeg"/>
<link wikidata="Q130924" start="3527" end="3535" title="Kalevala" label="Kalevala"/>
<link wikidata="Q23572" start="3995" end="4010" title="Game of Thrones" label="Game of Thrones"/>
<link wikidata="Q390137" start="4026" end="4036" title="God of War (franchise)" label="God of War"/>
<link wikidata="Q775614" start="4109" end="4116" title="Neofolk" label="Neofolk"/>
<link wikidata="Q7050759" start="4118" end="4138" title="Nordic popular music" label="Nordic popular music"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="246647" wikidata="Q16883244" url="?curid=246647" title="Shortwing (bird)">
<text>The shortwings are colourful medium-sized mostly insectivorous birds in the genus &quot;Brachypteryx&quot; of the thrush family Turdidae, although some taxonomists place them in the Old World Flycatcher family Muscicapidae. They show strong sexual plumage dimorphism. All are southeast Asian species.

Most shortwings are place in the genus &quot;Brachypteryx&quot;.
* Rusty-bellied shortwing, &quot;Brachypteryx hyperythra&quot;
* Lesser shortwing, &quot;Brachypteryx leucophrys&quot;
* White-browed shortwing, &quot;Brachypteryx montana&quot;

Three other species, formerly placed in Brachypteryx, are now in two other genera.
* Great shortwing, &quot;Heinrichia calligyna&quot;
* Nilgiri blue robin (also known at Nilgiri shortwing), &quot;Myiomela major&quot;
* Gould&#x27;s shortwing, &quot;Heteroxenicus stellata&quot;</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5113" start="63" end="67" title="bird" label="bird"/>
<link wikidata="Q34740" start="76" end="81" title="genus" label="genus"/>
<link wikidata="Q848847" start="88" end="100" title="Brachypteryx" label="Brachypteryx"/>
<link wikidata="Q26050" start="114" end="120" title="thrush (bird)" label="thrush"/>
<link wikidata="Q26050" start="128" end="136" title="Turdidae" label="Turdidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q200989" start="210" end="222" title="Muscicapidae" label="Muscicapidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q848847" start="347" end="359" title="Brachypteryx" label="Brachypteryx"/>
<link wikidata="Q2668251" start="369" end="392" title="Rusty-bellied shortwing" label="Rusty-bellied shortwing"/>
<link wikidata="Q73854" start="432" end="448" title="Lesser shortwing" label="Lesser shortwing"/>
<link wikidata="Q3315631" start="488" end="510" title="White-browed shortwing" label="White-browed shortwing"/>
<link wikidata="Q853471" start="631" end="646" title="Great shortwing" label="Great shortwing"/>
<link wikidata="Q61995431" start="683" end="701" title="Nilgiri blue robin" label="Nilgiri blue robin"/>
<link wikidata="Q27075661" start="766" end="788" title="Gould&amp;#x27;s shortwing" label="Gould&amp;#x27;s shortwing"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="246652" wikidata="Q369242" url="?curid=246652" title="Alethe (genus)">
<text>Alethe is a genus of small mainly insectivorous birds in the Old World flycatcher family Muscicapidae that occur in West Africa.

The genus was erected by the American ornithologist John Cassin in 1859. The genus was previously placed in the thrush family Turdidae but in 2010 two separate molecular phylogenetic studies found that species in the genus were more closely related to members of the Old World flycatcher family.

The genus contains two species:
* White-tailed alethe, &quot;Alethe diademata&quot;
* Fire-crested alethe, &quot;Alethe castanea&quot;

==Formerly in this genus==
Four species formerly placed in this genus are not closely related to the type species, and have accordingly been reassigned to &quot;Chamaetylas&quot; (formerly &quot;Pseudalethe&quot;).

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q34740" start="12" end="17" title="genus" label="genus"/>
<link wikidata="Q200989" start="89" end="101" title="Muscicapidae" label="Muscicapidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q1349866" start="182" end="193" title="John Cassin" label="John Cassin"/>
<link wikidata="Q26050" start="256" end="264" title="Turdidae" label="Turdidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q2007033" start="290" end="312" title="molecular phylogenetic" label="molecular phylogenetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2225590" start="461" end="480" title="White-tailed alethe" label="White-tailed alethe"/>
<link wikidata="Q4763250" start="513" end="532" title="Fire-crested alethe" label="Fire-crested alethe"/>
<link wikidata="Q28807586" start="724" end="735" title="Chamaetylas" label="Chamaetylas"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="246654" wikidata="Q656643" url="?curid=246654" title="Whistling thrush">
<text>The whistling thrushes comprise a genus Myophonus of the Old World flycatcher family Muscicapidae.

They are all medium-sized mostly insectivorous or omnivorous birds. They are all brightly coloured species found in India and south-eastern Asia. The male is usually blue, and the females are either similar to the male or brown. The brighter blue patches found on the shoulders and sometimes the head, of whistling thrushes, uniquely for a passerine, reflect strongly in the ultraviolet.

==Taxonomy==
The genus &quot;Myophonus&quot; was introduced in 1822 by the Dutch zoologist Coenraad Jacob Temminck to accommodate a single species, &quot;Myophonus metallicus&quot; Temminck. This is a junior synonym of &quot;Turdus flavirostris&quot; Horsfield, a subspecies of the blue whistling thrush which is therefore the type species. There has been confusion as to the correct spelling of the genus name. Temminck&#x27;s work was published in 102 parts (livraisons) and Plate 170 with the associated text was included in Livraison 29 which was issued in December 1822. However, the assembled volumes included pages inserted before Plate 170 with the genus name spelled as &quot;Myiophoneus&quot;. These inserted pages cannot have been issued earlier than 1832. The genus name &quot;Myophonus&quot; is from the Ancient Greek &quot;muia&quot; meaning &quot;fly&quot; and &quot;phoneus&quot; meaning &quot;slayer&quot;. 

As the English name suggests, the genus was at one time placed in the thrush family Turdidae but in 2010 two separate molecular phylogenetic studies found that members of the genus were more closely related to species in the Old World flycatcher family Muscicapidae.

The genus includes nine species several of which have ranges that are restricted to islands or peninsulas:

Javan, Bornean and brown-winged were formerly lumped as the Sunda whistling thrush, but were split in 2004.

==Habits==

Whistling thrushes are mostly seen in hilly areas except during winter when they may descend to streams near the plains. They specialize in feeding on snails and their strong hooked bills are used to deal with them. They may choose a particular rock on which they crack the shells.

The nests are usually in crevices of rocks and boulders close to water. The cup nests have moss and twigs and is lined with roots and leaves. The eggs are usually three and sometimes four, elongate with a gray ground colour and marked with speckles.

==References==
==Further reading==
*&quot;Thrushes&quot; by Clement and Hathaway, </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q656643" start="4" end="22" title="Whistling thrush" label="whistling thrushes"/>
<link wikidata="Q34740" start="34" end="39" title="genus" label="genus"/>
<link wikidata="Q200989" start="85" end="97" title="Muscicapidae" label="Muscicapidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q5113" start="161" end="165" title="bird" label="bird"/>
<link wikidata="Q11391" start="475" end="486" title="ultraviolet" label="ultraviolet"/>
<link wikidata="Q31621" start="580" end="603" title="Coenraad Jacob Temminck" label="Coenraad Jacob Temminck"/>
<link wikidata="Q1040689" start="690" end="704" title="Synonym (taxonomy)" label="junior synonym"/>
<link wikidata="Q507763" start="740" end="749" title="Thomas Horsfield" label="Horsfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q68947" start="753" end="763" title="subspecies" label="subspecies"/>
<link wikidata="Q73427" start="771" end="792" title="blue whistling thrush" label="blue whistling thrush"/>
<link wikidata="Q252730" start="816" end="828" title="type species" label="type species"/>
<link wikidata="Q35497" start="1306" end="1319" title="Ancient Greek" label="Ancient Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q26050" start="1499" end="1507" title="Turdidae" label="Turdidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q2007033" start="1533" end="1555" title="molecular phylogenetic" label="molecular phylogenetic"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="246655" wikidata="Q1229571" url="?curid=246655" title="Distributed power">
<text>In rail transport, distributed power (DP) is a generic term referring to the physical distribution—at intermediate points throughout the length of a train—of separate motive power groups. Such &quot;groups&quot; may be single units or multiple consists, and are remotely controlled from the leading locomotive. The practice allows locomotives to be placed anywhere within the length of a train when standard multiple-unit (MU) operation is impossible or impractical. DP can be achieved by wireless (RF connectivity) or wired (trainlined) means. Wired systems now provided by various suppliers use the cabling already extant throughout a train equipped with electronically controlled pneumatic brakes (ECP).

==History==
Since the 1960s, railroad distributed power technology has been dominated by one company, Harris Controls (originally Harris Corporation — Controls &amp; Composition Division, later purchased by General Electric—the division now known as GE Transportation) who have manufactured and marketed a patented radio-control system with the trade-name of Locotrol, which is the predominant wireless DP system in use around the world today.

With its origins in the early days of SCADA technology for the remote control of pipelines and electric utilities, and from an early concept of Southern Railway President D.W. Brosnan, Locotrol was a product of the North Electric Company (Galion, Ohio) which was later purchased by Radiation Inc. (Melbourne, Florida) and—in turn—purchased by Harris Corporation (also headquartered in Melbourne). The nascent technology was first tested on the Southern Railway in 1963, and the first production systems were installed on the Southern Railway in 1965.

In the early years of this technology, WABCO also had—for a relatively brief period—a competing system called &quot;RMU&quot; (Remote Multiple Uniter), which was installed on a few North American railroads. However, this system did not prevail and soon went out of production. Prior to the advent by North Electric of the proprietary &quot;Locotrol&quot; name, the product was referred to as &quot;RCE&quot; (Radio Controlled Equipment) or &quot;RCS&quot; (Radio Control System) and the lead and remote units as &quot;master&quot; and &quot;slave&quot;. The colloquial &quot;master&quot; and &quot;slave&quot; terms, though, were not formally used by the manufacturer. In some U.S. railroad parlance, Locotrol trains are referred to as &quot;radio trains&quot;.

==Advantages and disadvantages==
The greatest benefit of distributed power—and the reason for development of the original concept—is the reduction of draw-gear draft forces, permitting a wholesale increase in the size of trains without exceeding draw-gear strength, through the use of mid- or end-of-train locomotives. There are also potential train-handling benefits. Over an undulating track profile, a skilful operator can manipulate the relative power outputs (as well as dynamic- and air-brake applications) to minimize run-in and run-out of coupler slack throughout the train.

Reduced draft forces along a train reduce the lateral force between wheel and rail on curves, thus reducing fuel consumption and wear on various running-gear components as well as the potential for a stringline derailment.

Another benefit is quicker application of air brakes. With all braking control on a conventional train being established at the head-end, it can take several seconds for brake pipe pressure changes initiated by the operator to propagate along the train. Under radio-controlled DP operation, the brakes are set at remote locomotives almost simultaneously with the command initiated on the lead locomotive, providing a more uniform air brake response throughout the train.

The main disadvantage is the operational time needed, and track configuration required, to add and remove additional locomotive units. Secondary disadvantages are the costs associated with equipping locomotives with the extra control apparatus and the potential for the intermittent loss of the telemetry signal. This latter is known as &quot;communication interrupt&quot; and is coped with by fail-safe software program inclusions.

==Technology==
Distributed power should not be confused with multiple-unit operation, which is a capability, generally found on all locomotives, that connects multiple locomotives directly together via MU cables and air brake control lines. MU operation in North America is designed so that any two locomotives so equipped, and regardless of age and manufacturer, can be coupled together and operated as a single locomotive by one operator in the cab of the lead unit. This is accomplished via a 27-pin MU cable and the connection of three additional air lines separate from the brake pipe (sometimes also called the &quot;train line&quot;). DP is an entirely separate arrangement to control locomotives that are physically separated from the lead unit(s) and therefore impossible to connect via multiple-uniting.

The first locomotive at the head of the train is called the &quot;lead unit&quot;, and &quot;remote units&quot; can be located at separate positions throughout the train. Each DP remote unit can be MU-connected to other units at that position to provide one or more &quot;remote consists&quot;.

The setup and linking of the DP lead and remote units is fairly straightforward, and the air brakes of the remote units also have to be properly configured to enable the system to function correctly. The system automatically chooses an available frequency during the linking process so that other DP trains nearby are unaffected. In a crowded yard or in hilly or mountainous terrain, it is not uncommon for the link to be temporarily lost.

As long as there is not an emergency or penalty brake application that eliminates the link, the system will reconnect automatically or the operator can attempt to reconnect manually. Originally the loss of connection would result in the remote units remaining in their last-commanded throttle or dynamic braking position. Later system versions and software updates typically reduce the remote unit power setting to Notch 4 by default if the link is lost.

Although the DP signals from lead to remote units (and vice versa) are nominally instantaneous, in reality it generally takes at least a few seconds for a remote unit to respond to a signal from the lead and for the change in status to show up on the DP display in the lead locomotive cab.

Distributed power originally could be provided at only one intermediate location within a train. These forerunner systems (Locotrol 102-105 and Locotrol II) required a radio-relay car to be attached via standard MU jumper cabling to the remote locomotive(s) to provide the radio-control commands and to facilitate feedback signals. Later, Locotrol II evolved into the &quot;Universal&quot; system in which the radio-control equipment could be installed on the locomotives themselves. With this option, the relay car — variously referred to as an RCU (remote control unit) or LRC (locomotive remote control) — was rendered redundant.

Locotrol III was the next development, compatible with both the Knorr-Bremse/New York Air Brake CCB and Wabtec&#x27;s EPIC electronic locomotive brake equipment, and permitting multiple remote unit locations. The latest incarnation of this equipment is LEB (Locotrol Electronic Brake), which integrates the GE Locotrol technology with K-B/NYAB&#x27;s CCBII brake.

==Users==
Distributed power (often known by the proprietary name, &quot;Locotrol&quot;) is used in the United States, Canada, China, Australia (Queensland, the Pilbara region of Western Australia, and in the southwest of Western Australia), Brazil, Germany, Russia and South Africa. It is also (or has been) in regular unit-train operation in India, Mauritania, and Mexico, and 
almost made it into operation in both pre- and post-revolutionary Iran.

In the south of Western Australia, Locotrol is used in the &quot;top-and-tail&quot; configuration rather than specifically for long-train operation. With the recent advent of electronically controlled pneumatic brakes (ECP)—either hard-wired or radio-controlled—and integrated electronics for locomotive control and operator&#x27;s cab display systems, DP can now be provided via the ECP brake communication media, and other manufacturers are able to provide this capability. A recent DP system from Wabtec, called PowerLink (which can be either wired or wireless) is in use in Queensland on narrow-gauge coal trains and in the North of Western Australia on standard-gauge iron ore trains.

Distributed power in a wired configuration (using the ECP trainline) is becoming increasingly common in North American and Australian heavy-haul unit-train operations.

==Other similar operations==
&quot;Top and tail&quot; is a phrase used to describe an operation where there is a locomotive at each end of the train, usually to make it easier to change direction at a terminal location where it is not possible to run the motive power around the train (i.e. swap the locomotives from one end of the train to the other); this arrangement is not used specifically to operate longer or heavier trains. Top-and-tail operation is not generally utilised with distributed power, although such a configuration could be used as such. One use of a distributed power top-and-tail configuration is in Western Australia&#x27;s wheatbelt, in which Locotrol provides an operational solution rather than increasing the train size.

The description should not be confused with &quot;push-pull&quot;, which refers specifically to a train configuration (usually associated with passenger trains) in which the motive power is located at one end of the train only. In this latter configuration, the train can be operated from the non-powered end by an operator&#x27;s control position (the &quot;cab-car&quot;) at that end of the train.

==Distributed traction==
In a distributed traction system there are no locomotives but power is distributed along the train by multiple traction motors. An electric multiple unit is an example of this system.

==See also==
* Locotrol
* Remote control locomotive

==References==
==External links==
* RailWA: Locotrol Workings – Images of Locotrol operations in the south of Western Australia</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3565868" start="3" end="17" title="rail transport" label="rail transport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1229571" start="19" end="36" title="Distributed power" label="distributed power"/>
<link wikidata="Q1229571" start="38" end="40" title="Distributed power" label="DP"/>
<link wikidata="Q870" start="149" end="154" title="train" label="train"/>
<link wikidata="Q93301" start="299" end="309" title="locomotive" label="locomotive"/>
<link wikidata="Q1332542" start="408" end="436" title="Multiple-unit train control" label="multiple-unit (MU) operation"/>
<link wikidata="Q11335086" start="657" end="699" title="electronically controlled pneumatic brakes" label="electronically controlled pneumatic brakes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1433308" start="838" end="856" title="Harris Corporation" label="Harris Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q6666034" start="1067" end="1075" title="Locotrol" label="Locotrol"/>
<link wikidata="Q17498" start="1191" end="1196" title="SCADA" label="SCADA"/>
<link wikidata="Q3257938" start="1744" end="1749" title="WABCO" label="WABCO"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501648" start="2618" end="2627" title="Draw gear" label="draw-gear"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196198" start="3318" end="3328" title="Railway air brake" label="air brakes"/>
<link wikidata="Q256290" start="7179" end="7191" title="Knorr-Bremse" label="Knorr-Bremse"/>
<link wikidata="Q11324968" start="7192" end="7210" title="New York Air Brake" label="New York Air Brake"/>
<link wikidata="Q741707" start="7219" end="7225" title="Wabtec" label="Wabtec"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7466" end="7471" title="CCBII" label="CCBII"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="7583" end="7596" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q16" start="7598" end="7604" title="Canada" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="7606" end="7611" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="7613" end="7622" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q36074" start="7624" end="7634" title="Queensland" label="Queensland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1362696" start="7640" end="7647" title="Pilbara" label="Pilbara"/>
<link wikidata="Q3206" start="7658" end="7675" title="Western Australia" label="Western Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q258" start="7749" end="7761" title="South Africa" label="South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q11335086" start="8107" end="8149" title="electronically controlled pneumatic brakes" label="electronically controlled pneumatic brakes"/>
<link wikidata="Q7824653" start="8827" end="8839" title="Top and tail" label="Top and tail"/>
<link wikidata="Q1392476" start="10078" end="10092" title="traction motor" label="traction motor"/>
<link wikidata="Q483373" start="10098" end="10120" title="electric multiple unit" label="electric multiple unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q6666034" start="10167" end="10175" title="Locotrol" label="Locotrol"/>
<link wikidata="Q7312140" start="10178" end="10203" title="Remote control locomotive" label="Remote control locomotive"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="246658" wikidata="Q1018435" url="?curid=246658" title="Bwana Devil">
<text>Bwana Devil is a 1952 American adventure B movie written, directed, and produced by Arch Oboler, and starring Robert Stack, Barbara Britton, and Nigel Bruce. &quot;Bwana Devil&quot; is based on the true story of the Tsavo maneaters and filmed with the Natural Vision 3D system. The film is notable for sparking the first 3D film craze in the motion picture industry, as well as for being the first feature-length 3D film in color and the first 3D sound feature in English.

The advertising tagline was: &quot;The Miracle of the Age!!! A LION in your lap! A LOVER in your arms!&quot;

==Plot==
The film is set in British East Africa in the early 20th century. Thousands of workers are building the Uganda Railway, Africa&#x27;s first railroad, and intense heat and sickness make it a formidable task. Two men in charge of the mission are Bob Hayward and Dr. Angus McLean. A pair of man-eating lions are on the loose and completely disrupt the undertaking. Hayward desperately attempts to overcome the situation, but the slaughter continues.

Britain sends three big-game hunters to kill the lions. With them comes Bob&#x27;s wife. After the game hunters are killed by the lions, Bob sets out once and for all to kill them. A grim battle between Bob and the lions endangers both Bob and his wife. Bob kills the lions and proves that he is not a weakling.

==Cast==
==Historic background==
The plot was based on a well-known historical event, that of the Tsavo maneaters, in which many workers building the Uganda Railway were killed by lions. These incidents were also the basis for the book &quot;The Man-eaters of Tsavo&quot; (1907), the story of the events as written by Lt. Col. J. H. Patterson, the British engineer who killed the animals. The story was also the basis for the film &quot;The Ghost and the Darkness&quot; (1996) with Michael Douglas and Val Kilmer.

==Natural Vision 3D Film Process==
By 1951 film attendance had fallen dramatically from 90 million in 1948 to 46 million. Television was seen as the culprit and Hollywood was looking for a way to lure audiences back. Cinerama had premiered on September 30, 1952, at the Broadway Theater in New York and was a success there, but its bulky and expensive three-projector system and huge curved screen were impractical, if not impossible, to duplicate in any but the largest theaters.

Former screenwriter Milton Gunzburg and his brother Julian thought they had a solution with their Natural Vision 3D film process. They shopped it around Hollywood. 20th Century Fox was focusing on the introduction of CinemaScope and had no interest in another new process. Both Columbia and Paramount passed it up.

Only John Arnold, who headed the Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer camera department, was impressed enough to convince MGM to take an option on it, but they quickly let the option lapse. Milton Gunzburg turned his focus to independent producers and demonstrated Natural Vision to Arch Oboler, producer and writer of the popular &quot;Lights Out&quot; radio show. Oboler was impressed enough to option it for his next film project.

Oboler said he had overheard Joseph Biroc and the camera crew talking about 3D while filming &quot;The Twonky&quot; and Oboler became interested.

==Production==
Oboler announced the project in March 1952. He said it would be called &quot;The Lions of Gulu&quot; and would include footage shot in Africa several years beforehand. Filming was to start in May. It was always going to be in Natural Vision.

Howard Duff and Hope Miller were the first stars signed.

Eventually Duff and Miller dropped out and were replaced by Robert Stack and Barbara Britton. The title of Oboler&#x27;s film was changed to &quot;Bwana Devil&quot; in June 1952. (Oboler already announced he would make a second film in the format, &quot;Spear in the Sand&quot; with Lisa Howard.)

The film was shot in the San Fernando Valley.

The Paramount Ranch, now located in The Santa Monica Mountains National Recreation Area, sat in for an African savanna. There is now a hiking trail in the area named &quot;The Bwana Trail&quot; to denote the locations used in &quot;Bwana Devil&quot;. Authentic African footage shot by Arch Oboler in 1948 (in 2D) was incorporated into the film. Ansco Color film was used, instead of the more expensive and cumbersome Technicolor process.

Lloyd Nolan appeared in a prologue for the film.

The film was given Code approval in two dimension but not in three dimension due to a kissing scene. Eventually approval was given.

==Release==
The film premiered under the banner of &quot;Arch Oboler Productions&quot; on Wednesday, November 26, 1952, with a twin engagement at the Hollywood Paramount Theatre and the Paramount Theatre in downtown Los Angeles. It opened to the public the following day.

At all U.S. screenings of feature-length 3D films in the 1950s, the polarized light method was used and the audience wore 3D glasses with gray Polaroid filters. The anaglyph color filter method was only used for a few short films during these years. The two-strip Natural Vision projection system required making substantial alterations to a theater&#x27;s projectors and providing its screen with a special non-depolarizing surface.

The film was a critical failure, but a runaway success with audiences. It opened in San Francisco on December 13, Philadelphia, Dallas, Houston, and San Antonio on December 25, and New York on February 18, 1953.

&quot;M.L. Gunzburg presents 3D&quot;, a short film produced by Bob Clampett and featuring Beany and Cecil, was screened preceding the film. Long thought lost, the short rejoined &quot;Bwana Devil&quot; for screenings at the Egyptian Theater in 2003 and 2006.

Natural Vision announced they would make 12 follow up films.

===United Artists===
United Artists bought the rights to &quot;Bwana Devil&quot; from Arch Oboler Productions for $500,000 and a share of the profits and began a wide release of the film in March as a United Artists film. A lawsuit followed, in which producer Edward L. Alperson Jr. claimed that he was part owner of the film after purchasing a share of it for $1,000,000 USD. The courts decided in Oboler&#x27;s favor, as Alperson&#x27;s claim was unsubstantiated and &quot;under the table&quot;.

The other major studios reacted by releasing their own 3D films. Warner Brothers optioned the Natural Vision process for &quot;House of Wax&quot;. It premiered on April 10, 1953, and was advertised as &quot;the first 3D release by a major studio&quot;. In truth, Columbia had trumped them by two days with their release of &quot;Man in the Dark&quot; on April 8, 1953.

==Commercial reception==
The film grossed $20,000 in its opening day from two theaters and went on to earn $75,000 in its first four days setting house records. It earned $2.7 million in theatrical rentals in the United States and Canada in 1953. United Artists ultimately ended up recording a loss of $200,000 on the film.

==Public reception==
In 1989, Pink spoke fondly of the opening week of &quot;Bwana Devil&quot; at the Hollywood Paramount Theater. &quot;They were lined up around the block&quot;. &quot;People would come out of the movie and yell, &#x27;Don&#x27;t go in, it stinks!&#x27; But nobody listened and they went in anyway.&quot;

==Reviews==
*Bosley Crowther of &quot;The New York Times&quot; said it was &quot;a clumsy try at an African adventure film, photographed in very poor color in what appear to be the California hills&quot;.
*&quot;Variety&quot; summed up the process: &quot;This novelty feature boasts of being the first full-length film in Natural Vision 3D. Although adding backsides to usually flat actors and depth to landscapes, the 3D technique still needs further technical advances.&quot;
*Hollis Alpert of &quot;The Saturday Review&quot; wrote on March 14, 1953, &quot;It is the worst movie in my rather faltering memory, and my hangover from it was so painful that I immediately went to see a two-dimensional movie for relief. Part of the hangover was undoubtedly induced by the photography process itself. To get all the wondrous effects of the stereoscopic motion picture one has to wear a pair of polaroid glasses, made—so far as I could determine—from tinted cellophane and cardboard. These keep slipping off, hanging from one ear, or sliding down the nose, all the while setting up extraneous tickling sensations. And once you have them adjusted and begin looking at the movie, you find that the tinted cellophane (or whatever it is) darkens the color of the screen, so that everything seems to be happening in late afternoon on a cloudy day. The people seem to have two faces, one receding behind the other; the screen becomes unaccountably small, as though one is peering in at a scene through a window. Everything keeps getting out of proportion. Nigel Bruce will either loom up before you or look like a puppet. Sometimes there is depth and sometimes there isn&#x27;t. One thing is certain: it was all horribly unreal.&quot;

==In popular culture==
&quot;Life&quot; magazine photographer J. R. Eyerman took a series of photos of the audience wearing 3D glasses at the premiere. One of the photos was published as a full page in the magazine and has become iconic. It was also used as the cover of &quot;Life, The Second Decade, 1946–1955&quot;, a book published in conjunction with an exhibition of photographs from &quot;Life&quot; held at the International Center of Photography, New York. Another of the photos was used as a symbol of alienation under capitalism, for the American cover of Guy Debord&#x27;s book &quot;The Society of the Spectacle&quot; (1973). The photo used for Debord&#x27;s book shows the audience in &quot;a virtually trance-like state of absorption, their faces grim, their lips pursed&quot;. However, in the one chosen by &quot;Life&quot;, &quot;the spectators are laughing, their expressions of hilarity conveying the pleasure of an uproarious, active spectatorship.&quot; The Debord version is also flipped left to right and cropped.

==Availability==
* Bwana Devil played at the Second World 3D Film Expo on September 13, 2006, in two strip polarized 3D at the Egyptian Theater in Hollywood, Ca.
*The film was never released on VHS and has not been released on DVD but is available on Amazon Video (as of October 2020). KINO LORBER released it on Blu-ray as 2D, 3-D and Anaglyphic 3-D on July 30, 2024.

==References==
==External links==
*</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q319221" start="31" end="40" title="adventure film" label="adventure"/>
<link wikidata="Q223770" start="41" end="48" title="B movie" label="B movie"/>
<link wikidata="Q632079" start="84" end="95" title="Arch Oboler" label="Arch Oboler"/>
<link wikidata="Q355153" start="110" end="122" title="Robert Stack" label="Robert Stack"/>
<link wikidata="Q2883923" start="124" end="139" title="Barbara Britton" label="Barbara Britton"/>
<link wikidata="Q728050" start="145" end="156" title="Nigel Bruce" label="Nigel Bruce"/>
<link wikidata="Q2510263" start="216" end="231" title="Tsavo maneaters" label="Tsavo maneaters"/>
<link wikidata="Q229390" start="321" end="328" title="3D film" label="3D film"/>
<link wikidata="Q876185" start="612" end="631" title="British East Africa" label="British East Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q500115" start="697" end="711" title="Uganda Railway" label="Uganda Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q140" start="892" end="896" title="lion" label="lion"/>
<link wikidata="Q4904849" start="1061" end="1076" title="big-game hunter" label="big-game hunter"/>
<link wikidata="Q2510263" start="1452" end="1467" title="Tsavo maneaters" label="Tsavo maneaters"/>
<link wikidata="Q3631559" start="1596" end="1619" title="The Man-eaters of Tsavo" label="The Man-eaters of Tsavo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1367797" start="1672" end="1696" title="John Henry Patterson (author)" label="Lt. Col. J. H. Patterson"/>
<link wikidata="Q728488" start="1791" end="1817" title="The Ghost and the Darkness" label="The Ghost and the Darkness"/>
<link wikidata="Q119798" start="1836" end="1851" title="Michael Douglas" label="Michael Douglas"/>
<link wikidata="Q191084" start="1856" end="1866" title="Val Kilmer" label="Val Kilmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q224655" start="2086" end="2094" title="Cinerama" label="Cinerama"/>
<link wikidata="Q6861114" start="2371" end="2386" title="Milton Gunzburg" label="Milton Gunzburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q229390" start="2464" end="2471" title="3D films" label="3D film"/>
<link wikidata="Q434841" start="2515" end="2531" title="20th Century Fox" label="20th Century Fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q485544" start="2568" end="2579" title="CinemaScope" label="CinemaScope"/>
<link wikidata="Q186941" start="2629" end="2637" title="Columbia Pictures" label="Columbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q159846" start="2642" end="2651" title="Paramount Pictures" label="Paramount"/>
<link wikidata="Q179200" start="2700" end="2719" title="Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer" label="Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q632079" start="2933" end="2944" title="Arch Oboler" label="Arch Oboler"/>
<link wikidata="Q6546539" start="2987" end="2997" title="Lights Out (radio show)" label="Lights Out"/>
<link wikidata="Q1631794" start="3490" end="3501" title="Howard Duff" label="Howard Duff"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3506" end="3517" title="Hope Miller" label="Hope Miller"/>
<link wikidata="Q1748732" start="3897" end="3912" title="movie ranch" label="Paramount Ranch"/>
<link wikidata="Q7419799" start="3933" end="3980" title="Santa Monica Mountains National Recreation Area" label="Santa Monica Mountains National Recreation Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q42320" start="4004" end="4011" title="savanna" label="savanna"/>
<link wikidata="Q340207" start="4238" end="4249" title="Ansco Color" label="Ansco Color"/>
<link wikidata="Q674564" start="4310" end="4321" title="Technicolor" label="Technicolor"/>
<link wikidata="Q849284" start="4665" end="4692" title="Hollywood Paramount Theatre" label="Hollywood Paramount Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q7135374" start="4701" end="4718" title="Paramount Theatre (Los Angeles)" label="Paramount Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q958131" start="4931" end="4939" title="Polaroid (polarizer)" label="Polaroid"/>
<link wikidata="Q484031" start="4953" end="4961" title="Anaglyph 3D" label="anaglyph"/>
<link wikidata="Q670417" start="5500" end="5512" title="Robert Clampett" label="Bob Clampett"/>
<link wikidata="Q4115300" start="5527" end="5542" title="Beany and Cecil" label="Beany and Cecil"/>
<link wikidata="Q5348452" start="5661" end="5677" title="Egyptian Theater" label="Egyptian Theater"/>
<link wikidata="Q219400" start="5780" end="5794" title="United Artists" label="United Artists"/>
<link wikidata="Q4917" start="6131" end="6134" title="USD" label="USD"/>
<link wikidata="Q126399" start="6323" end="6338" title="Warner Brothers" label="Warner Brothers"/>
<link wikidata="Q667733" start="6385" end="6397" title="House of Wax (1953 film)" label="House of Wax"/>
<link wikidata="Q8868913" start="6587" end="6602" title="Man in the Dark" label="Man in the Dark"/>
<link wikidata="Q877435" start="6815" end="6832" title="theatrical rental" label="theatrical rental"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="7315" end="7333" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q471728" start="7489" end="7496" title="Variety (magazine)" label="Variety"/>
<link wikidata="Q972766" start="7756" end="7769" title="Hollis Alpert" label="Hollis Alpert"/>
<link wikidata="Q15846515" start="7779" end="7798" title="Saturday Review (U.S. magazine)" label="The Saturday Review"/>
<link wikidata="Q463198" start="9026" end="9042" title="Life magazine" label="&amp;quot;Life&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q6106827" start="9065" end="9078" title="J. R. Eyerman" label="J. R. Eyerman"/>
<link wikidata="Q229381" start="9127" end="9137" title="Polarized 3D glasses" label="3D glasses"/>
<link wikidata="Q636942" start="9422" end="9457" title="International Center of Photography" label="International Center of Photography"/>
<link wikidata="Q298075" start="9570" end="9580" title="Guy Debord" label="Guy Debord"/>
<link wikidata="Q1213022" start="9599" end="9627" title="The Society of the Spectacle" label="The Society of the Spectacle"/>
<link wikidata="Q4740856" start="10292" end="10304" title="Amazon Video" label="Amazon Video"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="246659" wikidata="Q853286" url="?curid=246659" title="Bluebird">
<text>The bluebirds are a North American group of medium-sized, mostly insectivorous or omnivorous birds in the order of Passerines in the genus Sialia of the thrush family (Turdidae). Bluebirds are one of the few thrush genera in the Americas.

Bluebirds lay an average of 4 to 6 eggs per clutch. They will usually brood two or three times in a year. Bluebirds nest from March all the way through August.

Bluebirds have blue, or blue and rose beige, plumage. Female birds are less brightly colored than males, although color patterns are similar and there is no noticeable difference in size.

== Taxonomy and species ==

The genus &quot;Sialia&quot; was introduced by the English naturalist William Swainson in 1827 with the eastern bluebird (&quot;Sialia sialis&quot;) as the type species. A molecular phylogenetic study using mitochondrial sequences published in 2005 found that 
&quot;Sialia&quot;, &quot;Myadestes&quot; (solitaires) and &quot;Neocossyphus&quot; (African ant-thrushes) formed a basal clade in the family Turdidae. Within &quot;Sialia&quot; the mountain bluebird was sister to the eastern bluebird.

The genus contains three species:



==Behavior==

Bluebirds are territorial and prefer open grassland with scattered trees. This is similar to the behavior of many species of woodpeckers. Bluebirds can typically produce between two and four broods during the spring and summer (March through August in the Northeastern United States). Males identify potential nest sites and try to attract prospective female mates to those nesting sites with special behaviors that include singing and flapping wings, and then placing some material in a nesting box or cavity. If the female accepts the male and the nesting site, she alone builds the nest and incubates the eggs.

Predators of young bluebirds in the nests can include snakes, cats, and raccoons. Bird species competing with bluebirds for nesting locations include the common starling, American crow, and house sparrow, which take over the nesting sites of bluebirds, killing young, smashing eggs, and probably killing adult bluebirds.
Bluebirds are attracted to platform bird feeders, filled with grubs of the darkling beetle, sold by many online bird product wholesalers as mealworms. Bluebirds will also eat raisins soaked in water. In addition, in winter bluebirds use backyard heated birdbaths.

By the 1970s, bluebird numbers had declined by estimates ranging to 70% due to unsuccessful competition with house sparrows and starlings, both introduced species, for nesting cavities, coupled with a decline in habitat. In late 2005, Cornell University&#x27;s Laboratory of Ornithology reported bluebird sightings across the southern U.S. as part of its yearly Backyard Bird Count, a strong indication of the bluebird&#x27;s return to the region. This upsurge can be attributed largely to a movement of volunteers establishing and maintaining bluebird trails.

== In the garden ==
Bluebirds&#x27; consumption of insects make them popular with gardeners.

==In culture==
===Iroquois===
In traditional Iroquois cosmology, the call of the bluebird is believed to ward off the icy power of Sawiskera, also referred to as Flint, the spirit of the winter. Its call caused Sawiskera to flee in fear and the ice to recede.

=== As a symbol in songs ===
&quot;Bluebird of Happiness&quot; is a song composed in 1934 by Sandor Harmati, with words by Edward Heyman and additional lyrics by Harry Parr-Davies.

&quot;(There&#x27;ll Be Bluebirds Over) The White Cliffs of Dover&quot; was composed in 1941 by Walter Kent to lyrics by Nat Burton looking forward to a time when World War II would be over. Burton was unaware that the bluebird was not indigenous to England. Vera Lynn popularised the song with her performances to the troops.

&quot;Bluebird&quot; is a song written by Stephen Stills and recorded by the rock band Buffalo Springfield in 1967. It contains the lyrics &quot;There she sits aloft at perch. Strangest color blue.&quot;

==See also==
* Bluebird of happiness

==References==
== External links ==

*Eastern Bluebird at All About Birds, The Cornell Lab—descriptions, including range, calls and physical description
*Thrush videos on the Internet Bird Collection
*North American Bluebird Society 
* Sialis—Information on bluebirds and their conservation and restoration.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q853286" start="4" end="13" title="Bluebird" label="bluebirds"/>
<link wikidata="Q49" start="20" end="33" title="North America" label="North America"/>
<link wikidata="Q5113" start="93" end="97" title="bird" label="bird"/>
<link wikidata="Q25341" start="115" end="125" title="Passerines" label="Passerines"/>
<link wikidata="Q26050" start="153" end="159" title="thrush (bird)" label="thrush"/>
<link wikidata="Q828" start="229" end="237" title="Americas" label="Americas"/>
<link wikidata="Q34740" start="622" end="627" title="genus" label="genus"/>
<link wikidata="Q444164" start="688" end="704" title="William Swainson" label="William Swainson"/>
<link wikidata="Q252730" start="774" end="786" title="type species" label="type species"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088544" start="905" end="914" title="Myadestes" label="Myadestes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193809" start="944" end="956" title="Neocossyphus" label="Neocossyphus"/>
<link wikidata="Q713623" start="1001" end="1006" title="clade" label="clade"/>
<link wikidata="Q1567633" start="1083" end="1089" title="sister taxon" label="sister"/>
<link wikidata="Q25439" start="1292" end="1303" title="woodpeckers" label="woodpeckers"/>
<link wikidata="Q24460" start="1423" end="1449" title="Northeastern United States" label="Northeastern United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q25469" start="1936" end="1951" title="common starling" label="common starling"/>
<link wikidata="Q267735" start="1953" end="1966" title="American crow" label="American crow"/>
<link wikidata="Q14683" start="1972" end="1985" title="house sparrow" label="house sparrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q225965" start="2243" end="2251" title="mealworm" label="mealworm"/>
<link wikidata="Q14683" start="2477" end="2490" title="house sparrow" label="house sparrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q185237" start="2496" end="2505" title="starlings" label="starlings"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065449" start="2512" end="2530" title="introduced species" label="introduced species"/>
<link wikidata="Q2997535" start="2629" end="2654" title="Cornell Laboratory of Ornithology" label="Laboratory of Ornithology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1646000" start="2730" end="2749" title="National Audubon Society" label="Backyard Bird Count"/>
<link wikidata="Q68518" start="3069" end="3077" title="Iroquois" label="Iroquois"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3155" end="3164" title="Iroquois mythology#The Do-yo-da-no" label="Sawiskera"/>
<link wikidata="Q4930257" start="3320" end="3341" title="Bluebird of Happiness (song)" label="Bluebird of Happiness"/>
<link wikidata="Q3437295" start="3473" end="3532" title="(There&amp;#x27;ll Be Bluebirds Over) The White Cliffs of Dover" label="(There&amp;#x27;ll Be Bluebirds Over) The White Cliffs of Dover"/>
<link wikidata="Q7965339" start="3563" end="3574" title="Walter Kent" label="Walter Kent"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="3630" end="3642" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q229330" start="3726" end="3735" title="Vera Lynn" label="Vera Lynn"/>
<link wikidata="Q48765446" start="3801" end="3809" title="Bluebird (Buffalo Springfield song)" label="Bluebird"/>
<link wikidata="Q354496" start="3837" end="3851" title="Stephen Stills" label="Stephen Stills"/>
<link wikidata="Q48992" start="3882" end="3901" title="Buffalo Springfield" label="Buffalo Springfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q4930258" start="4015" end="4036" title="Bluebird of happiness" label="Bluebird of happiness"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="246660" wikidata="Q342987" url="?curid=246660" title="Decca">
<text>Decca may refer to:

==Music==
* Decca Records or Decca Music Group, record label
* Decca Gold, classical music record label owned by Universal Music Group
* Decca Broadway, musical theater record label
* Decca Studios, recording facility in West Hampstead, England
* London Decca, maker of turntable tonearms and cartridges
* Decca tree, microphone recording system
* The Deccas, guitar-based band from Medway, England

==People==
===Given name===
* Decca Aitkenhead, English journalist, writer and broadcaster.

===Surname===
* Grace Decca (born 1966), Cameroonian singer and producer
* Marie Decca (1859-?), American opera singer
* Mpundi Decca, Congolese guitarist

==Other==
* &quot;&quot;, 2006 book by Jessica Mitford
* Decca Navigator System, defunct marine and aeronautical navigation system
* Decca Radar, later Racal-Decca Marine, a defunct marine electronics manufacturer
* Decca Sports Ground, cricket ground in London, England
* Decca, old spelling of Dhaka, capital of Bangladesh
* &quot;Ladda decca&quot;, species of butterfly in the family Hesperiidae

==See also==
* Deca (disambiguation)
* Deccan (disambiguation), terms related to the Deccan Plateau in southern India</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q342987" start="0" end="5" title="Decca" label="Decca"/>
<link wikidata="Q557632" start="33" end="46" title="Decca Records" label="Decca Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q5248840" start="84" end="94" title="Decca Gold" label="Decca Gold"/>
<link wikidata="Q5248839" start="158" end="172" title="Decca Broadway" label="Decca Broadway"/>
<link wikidata="Q5248844" start="205" end="218" title="Decca Studios" label="Decca Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q19630402" start="268" end="280" title="London Decca" label="London Decca"/>
<link wikidata="Q1181746" start="327" end="337" title="Decca tree" label="Decca tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q7729500" start="369" end="379" title="The Deccas" label="The Deccas"/>
<link wikidata="Q5248838" start="451" end="467" title="Decca Aitkenhead" label="Decca Aitkenhead"/>
<link wikidata="Q27062890" start="530" end="541" title="Grace Decca" label="Grace Decca"/>
<link wikidata="Q64152792" start="589" end="600" title="Marie Decca" label="Marie Decca"/>
<link wikidata="Q6928336" start="635" end="647" title="Mpundi Decca" label="Mpundi Decca"/>
<link wikidata="Q552152" start="727" end="749" title="Decca Navigator System" label="Decca Navigator System"/>
<link wikidata="Q5248841" start="803" end="814" title="Decca Radar" label="Decca Radar"/>
<link wikidata="Q5248843" start="886" end="905" title="Decca Sports Ground" label="Decca Sports Ground"/>
<link wikidata="Q1354" start="966" end="971" title="Dhaka" label="Dhaka"/>
<link wikidata="Q5211115" start="1003" end="1014" title="Ladda decca" label="Ladda decca"/>
<link wikidata="Q409281" start="1085" end="1106" title="Deca (disambiguation)" label="Deca (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2428827" start="1109" end="1132" title="Deccan (disambiguation)" label="Deccan (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="246662" wikidata="Q7558188" url="?curid=246662" title="Solitaire (bird)">
<text>The solitaires are medium-sized mostly insectivorous birds in the genera &quot;Myadestes&quot;, &quot;Cichlopsis&quot; and &quot;Entomodestes&quot; of the thrush family Turdidae.

==Taxonomy==
Although all three genera of solitaires are morphologically similar, genetic studies have indicated that they are not particularly closely related. The genus &quot;Myadestes&quot; is in the basal clade of the family Turdidae, along with the genera &quot;Sialia&quot; (the bluebirds) and &quot;Neocossyphus&quot; (African ant-thrushes).

==Species list==
Thrushes in three genera are called &quot;solitaires&quot;:
* Genus &quot;Myadestes&quot; 12 species, including 1 now extinct, found in Hawaii, the Americas and the Caribbean
** Ōmao, &quot;Myadestes obscurus&quot;
** kāmao, &quot;Myadestes myadestinus&quot;
** Olomao, &quot;Myadestes lanaiensis&quot;
** Puaiohi, &quot;Myadestes palmeri&quot;
** Townsend&#x27;s solitaire, &quot;Myadestes townsendi&quot;
** Brown-backed solitaire, &quot;Myadestes occidentalis&quot;
** Cuban solitaire, &quot;Myadestes elisabeth&quot;
** Rufous-throated solitaire, &quot;Myadestes genibarbis&quot;
** Black-faced solitaire, &quot;Myadestes melanops&quot;
** Varied solitaire, &quot;Myadestes coloratus&quot;
** Andean solitaire, &quot;Myadestes ralloides&quot;
** Slate-colored solitaire, &quot;Myadestes unicolor&quot;

* Genus &quot;Cichlopsis&quot;: 1 species, found to South America
**Rufous-brown solitaire, &quot;Cichlopsis leucogenys&quot;

* Genus &quot;Entomodestes&quot;: 2 species, found in South America
**White-eared solitaire, &quot;Entomodestes leucotis&quot;
**Black solitaire, &quot;Entomodestes coracinus&quot;

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7558188" start="4" end="14" title="Solitaire (bird)" label="solitaires"/>
<link wikidata="Q677088" start="39" end="52" title="insectivorous" label="insectivorous"/>
<link wikidata="Q5113" start="53" end="57" title="bird" label="bird"/>
<link wikidata="Q34740" start="66" end="72" title="genus" label="genera"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088544" start="79" end="88" title="Myadestes" label="Myadestes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1083124" start="102" end="112" title="Cichlopsis" label="Cichlopsis"/>
<link wikidata="Q952454" start="129" end="141" title="Entomodestes" label="Entomodestes"/>
<link wikidata="Q26050" start="155" end="161" title="thrush (bird)" label="thrush"/>
<link wikidata="Q26050" start="169" end="177" title="Turdidae" label="Turdidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q379061" start="383" end="394" title="Basal (phylogenetics)" label="basal clade"/>
<link wikidata="Q20018065" start="447" end="453" title="Sialia" label="Sialia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193809" start="486" end="498" title="Neocossyphus" label="Neocossyphus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088544" start="621" end="630" title="Myadestes" label="Myadestes"/>
<link wikidata="Q3179495" start="725" end="729" title="‘Ōma’o" label="Ōmao"/>
<link wikidata="Q1042042" start="765" end="770" title="Kāmaʻo" label="kāmao"/>
<link wikidata="Q1301092" start="809" end="815" title="Olomaʻo" label="Olomao"/>
<link wikidata="Q2668284" start="853" end="860" title="Puaiohi" label="Puaiohi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2668264" start="895" end="920" title="Townsend&amp;#x27;s solitaire" label="Townsend&amp;#x27;s solitaire"/>
<link wikidata="Q3726393" start="957" end="979" title="Brown-backed solitaire" label="Brown-backed solitaire"/>
<link wikidata="Q3314718" start="1019" end="1034" title="Cuban solitaire" label="Cuban solitaire"/>
<link wikidata="Q3321742" start="1071" end="1096" title="Rufous-throated solitaire" label="Rufous-throated solitaire"/>
<link wikidata="Q665488" start="1134" end="1155" title="Black-faced solitaire" label="Black-faced solitaire"/>
<link wikidata="Q2225686" start="1191" end="1207" title="Varied solitaire" label="Varied solitaire"/>
<link wikidata="Q3489509" start="1244" end="1260" title="Andean solitaire" label="Andean solitaire"/>
<link wikidata="Q3315255" start="1297" end="1320" title="Slate-colored solitaire" label="Slate-colored solitaire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1083124" start="1368" end="1378" title="Cichlopsis" label="Cichlopsis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1083124" start="1422" end="1444" title="Rufous-brown solitaire" label="Rufous-brown solitaire"/>
<link wikidata="Q952454" start="1495" end="1507" title="Entomodestes" label="Entomodestes"/>
<link wikidata="Q3088404" start="1551" end="1572" title="White-eared solitaire" label="White-eared solitaire"/>
<link wikidata="Q2309917" start="1610" end="1625" title="Black solitaire" label="Black solitaire"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="246664" wikidata="Q253906" url="?curid=246664" title="Casey Jones">
<text>John Luther &quot;Casey&quot; Jones (March 14, 1863 – April 30, 1900) was an American railroader who was killed when his passenger train collided with a stalled freight train in Vaughan, Mississippi.

Jones was a locomotive engineer for the Illinois Central Railroad, based in Memphis, Tennessee, and Jackson, Mississippi. He was noted for his exceptionally punctual schedules, which sometimes required a degree of risk, though this was not a factor on his fatal last journey. However, there is some disagreement about the sequence of events on that night, April 29–30, 1900.

He was due to run the southbound passenger service from Memphis to Canton, Mississippi, departing 11:35 p.m. Owing to the absence of another engineer, he had to take over another service through the day, which may have deprived him of sleep. He eventually departed 75 minutes late, but was confident of making up the time with the powerful ten-wheeler Engine No. 382, known as &quot;Cannonball&quot;. This was then later referenced in a New York newspaper to describe Erwin Baker and his now infamous &quot;Cannonball Run&quot;.
Approaching Vaughan at high speed, he was unaware that three trains were occupying the station, one of which was broken down and directly on his line. Some claim that he ignored a flagman signaling to him, though this person may have been out of sight on a tight bend or obscured by fog. All are agreed, however, that Jones managed to avert a potentially disastrous crash through his exceptional skill at slowing the engine and saving the lives of the passengers at the cost of his own. For this, he was immortalized in a traditional song, &quot;The Ballad of Casey Jones&quot;.

==Family background==

Jones was born in rural southeastern Missouri. The Jones family moved to Cayce, Kentucky after his mother Ann Nolan Jones and his father Frank Jones, a schoolteacher, decided that the rural areas of Missouri offered few opportunities for their family. It was there that he acquired the nickname of &quot;Cayce&quot;, which he chose to spell as &quot;Casey&quot;.

Jones met his wife Mary Joanna &quot;Janie&quot; Brady through her father, who owned the boarding house where Jones was staying. Since she was Catholic, he decided to convert and was baptized on November 11, 1886, at St. Bridget&#x27;s Catholic Church in Whistler, Alabama to please her. They were married at St. Mary&#x27;s Catholic Church in Jackson, Tennessee, on November 25, 1886. They bought a house at West Chester Street in Jackson, Tennessee, where they raised their three children. By all accounts he was a devoted family man and teetotaler.

==Promotion to engineer==
Jones went to work for the Mobile &amp; Ohio Railroad as a telegraph operator, performed well, and was promoted to brakeman on the Columbus, Kentucky, to Jackson, Tennessee route, and then to fireman on the Jackson, Tennessee to Mobile, Alabama, route.

In the summer of 1887, a yellow fever epidemic struck many train crews on the neighboring
Illinois Central Railroad (IC), providing an unexpected opportunity for faster promotion of firemen on that line. On March 1, 1888, Jones switched to IC, firing a freight locomotive between Jackson, Tennessee and Water Valley, Mississippi.

He was promoted to engineer, his lifelong goal, on February 23, 1891. Jones reached the pinnacle of the railroad profession as an expert locomotive engineer for IC. Railroading was a talent, and Jones was recognized by his peers as one of the best engineers in the business. He was known for his insistence that he &quot;get her there on the advertised [time]&quot; and that he never &quot;fall down&quot;, meaning he never arrived at his destination behind schedule. He was so punctual, it was said that people set their watches by him.

His work in Jackson primarily involved freight service between Jackson and Water Valley, Mississippi. Both locations were busy and important stops for IC, and he developed close ties with them between 1890 and 1900.

==Service at the World&#x27;s Columbian Exposition of 1893==
During the World&#x27;s Columbian Exposition in Chicago, Illinois, in 1893, IC was charged with providing commuter service for the thousands of visitors to the fairground. A call was sent out for trainmen who wanted to work there. Jones answered it, spending the summer there with his wife. He shuttled many people from Van Buren Street to Jackson Park during the exposition. It was his first experience as an engineer in passenger service and he enjoyed it.

At the Exposition, he became acquainted with No. 638, a new freight engine IC had on display as the latest and greatest technological advancement in locomotives. It had eight drive wheels and two pilot wheels, a 2-8-0 &quot;Consolidation&quot; type. At the closing of the fair, No. 638 was due to be sent to Water Valley for service in the Jackson District. Jones asked for permission to drive the engine back to Water Valley. His request was approved, and No. 638 ran its first with Jones at the throttle to Water Valley. Jones liked No. 638 and liked working in the Jackson District because his family was there. They had once moved to Water Valley, but returned to Jackson, which they felt was home.

Jones drove the engine until he transferred to Memphis in February 1900. No. 638 stayed in Water Valley. That year, he drove the engine that became most closely associated with him one time. That was Engine No. 382, known affectionately as &quot;Ole 382.&quot;, or &quot;Cannonball&quot;. It was a steam-driven Rogers 4-6-0 &quot;Ten Wheeler&quot; with six drivers, each approximately six feet (1.8 m) high. Bought new in 1898 from the Rogers Locomotive Works, it was a very powerful engine for the time.

His regular fireman on No. 638 was his close friend John Wesley McKinnie, with whom he worked exclusively from about 1897 until he switched to the passenger run out of Memphis. There he worked with his next and last fireman, Simeon T. &quot;Sim&quot; Webb in 1900.

==Rescue of a child from the tracks==
A little-known example of Jones&#x27;s heroic instincts in action is described by his biographer and friend Fred J. Lee in his book &quot;Casey Jones: Epic of the American Railroad&quot; (1939). He recounts an incident in 1895 as Jones&#x27;s train approached Michigan City, Mississippi. He had left the cab with a fellow engineer Bob Stevenson, who had reduced speed sufficiently for Jones to walk safely out on the running board to oil the relief valves. He advanced from the running board to the steam chest and then to the pilot beam to adjust the spark screen. He had finished well before they arrived at the station, as planned, and was returning to the cab when he noticed a group of small children dart in front of the train some ahead. All cleared the rails easily except for a little girl who suddenly froze in fear at the sight of the oncoming locomotive. Jones shouted to Stevenson to reverse the train and yelled to the girl to get off the tracks in almost the same breath. Realizing that she was still immobile, he raced to the tip of the pilot (cowcatcher) and braced himself on it, reaching out as far as he could to pull the frightened but unharmed girl from the rails. The event was partially spoofed in &quot;The Brave Engineer&quot;, in which the hero rescued a damsel from a cliché bandit.

==Baseball player==
Jones was an avid baseball fan and watched or participated in the game whenever his schedule allowed. During the 1880s, he had played in Columbus, Kentucky, while he was a club operator on the M &amp; O. One Sunday during the summer of 1898, the Water Valley shop team was scheduled to play the Jackson shop team and Jones got to haul the team to Jackson for the game.

==Rules infractions==
Jones was issued nine citations for rules infractions in his career, with a total of 145 days suspended. But in the year prior to his death, Jones had not been cited for any rules infractions. Railroaders who worked with Jones liked him but admitted that he was a bit of a risk-taker. Unofficially though, the penalties were far more severe for running behind than breaking the rules. He was by all accounts an ambitious engineer, eager to move up the seniority ranks and serve on the better-paying, more prestigious passenger trains.

==Transfer to passenger trains==
In February 1900, Jones was transferred from Jackson, Tennessee to Memphis, Tennessee, for the passenger run between Memphis and Canton, Mississippi. This was one link of a four-train run between Chicago, Illinois, and New Orleans, Louisiana, the so-called &quot;cannonball&quot; passenger run. &quot;Cannonball&quot; was a contemporary term applied to fast mail and fast passenger trains of those days, but it was a generic term for speed service. This run offered the fastest schedules in the history of American railroading. Some veteran engineers doubted the times could be met and some quit.

Engineer Willard W. &quot;Bill&quot; Hatfield had transferred from Memphis back to a run out of Water Valley, thus opening up trains No. 2 (north) and No. 3 (south) to another engineer. Jones had to move his family to Memphis and give up working with his close friend John Wesley McKinnie on No. 638, but he thought the change was worth it. Jones would drive Hatfield&#x27;s Engine No. 382 until his death in 1900.

== Fatal accident ==
There is disagreement over the circumstances prior to Casey Jones&#x27;s fatal last run. In the account given in the book &quot;Railroad Avenue&quot; by Freeman H. Hubbard, which was based on an interview with fireman Sim Webb, he and Casey had been used extra on trains 3 and 2 to cover for engineer Sam Tate, who had marked off ill. They returned to Memphis at 6:25 a.m. on April 29. This gave them adequate time to be rested for No. 1 that night, which was their regular assigned run.

The Fred J. Lee biography &quot;Casey Jones&quot; contended that the men arrived in Memphis on No. 4 at 9 p.m. April 29. They were asked to turn around and take No. 1 back to Canton to fill in for Sam Tate, who had marked off. This would have given them little time to rest, as No. 1 was due out at 11:35 p.m. In both accounts, Jones&#x27;s regular run included trains 1 and 4.

In a third account, trains 3 and 2 were Jones and Webb&#x27;s regular run, and they were asked to fill in for Sam Tate that night on No. 1, having arrived that morning on No. 2.

In any event, they departed Memphis on the fatal run at 12:50 a.m., 75 minutes behind schedule owing to No. 1&#x27;s late arrival. The crew felt the conditions of the run, including a fast engine, a good fireman, a light train, and rainy or damp weather, were ideal for a record-setting run. The weather was foggy, reducing visibility, and the run was well known for its tricky curves.

In the first section of the run, Jones drove from Memphis south to Grenada, Mississippi, with an intermediate water stop at Sardis, Mississippi, over a new section of light and shaky rails at speeds of up to . By the time Jones arrived at Grenada for another water stop, he had made up 55 minutes of the 75-minute delay.

Jones made up another 15 minutes in the stretch from Grenada to Winona, Mississippi. By the time he got to Durant, Mississippi, Jones was almost on time. He was quite happy, saying to Webb at one point, &quot;Sim, the old girl&#x27;s got her dancing slippers on tonight!&quot; as he leaned on the Johnson bar.

At Durant, he received new orders to take to the siding at Goodman, Mississippi ( south of Durant), wait for the No. 2 passenger train to pass, and then continue on to Vaughan. Furthermore, he was informed he would meet local No. 26 passenger train at Vaughan ( south of Goodman). He was told No. 26 was in two sections and would be on the siding, so he would take priority over it. After allowing No. 2 by them at Goodman, Jones pulled out of the siding only five minutes behind schedule. With of fast track ahead, Jones likely felt he had a good chance to make it to Canton by 4:05 am &quot;on the advertised&quot;.

Unbeknownst to Jones, three separate trains were in the station at Vaughan. The No. 83, a double-header freight train (located to the north and headed south), which had been delayed, and the No. 72, a long freight train (located to the south and headed north), were both on the passing track to the east of the main line. The combined length of the two trains was ten cars longer than the length of the east passing track, causing some of the cars to be stopped on the main line. The two sections of No. 26 had arrived from Canton earlier, and required a saw-by maneuver to get to the house track west of the main line. The saw-by maneuver required No. 83 to back up onto the main line, to allow No. 72 to move northward and pull its overlapping cars off the main line and onto the east side track from the south switch. This allowed the two sections of No. 26 to gain access to the house track. The saw-by, however, left the rear cars of No. 83 overlapping above the north switch and on the main line, directly in Jones&#x27; path. As workers prepared a second saw-by to let Jones pass, an air hose broke on No. 72, locking its brakes and leaving the last four cars of No. 83 on the main line.

At the same time, Jones, who was almost back on schedule, was running at about toward Vaughan. As Jones and Webb approached the station, they went through a left-hand curve, and the locomotive&#x27;s boiler obscured Jones&#x27; view from the engine&#x27;s right side. Webb&#x27;s view from the left side was better, and he was first to see the red rear marker lights of the caboose on the main line. He alerted Jones, &quot;Oh, my Lord! There&#x27;s something on the main line!&quot; Jones jumped to his feet and looked across the boiler to where he could now see the impending collision. He shut off steam, reversed the throttle, and slammed the airbrakes into emergency stop, before ordering, &quot;Jump, Sim, and save yourself!&quot; &quot;You too, Casey!&quot;, Webb pleaded, but Jones firmly refused, &quot;No! I&#x27;ll stay at my post!&quot;

Sim then stepped down the ladder on Casey&#x27;s side of the engine, crouched, and flung himself into the darkness an estimated before impact, landing hard on the ballast and knocking himself unconscious. The last thing he heard as he jumped was the long, piercing whistle used by Jones to warn anyone still in the freight train looming ahead. At that point, Jones was only two minutes behind schedule.

Jones reversed the throttle and slammed the airbrakes into emergency stop, but it was too late. As the train crew of No. 83 ran for their lives, No. 382 quickly plowed through the caboose and two fully loaded boxcars of corn and hay, and overturned to the right, plowing into a six-foot earthen berm, coming to rest facing the direction it had come from. The tender followed the engine, and the baggage car behind the tender also climbed the embankment, breaking Baggageman Miller&#x27;s ribs, but his was the only serious injury of the crash.

As the crews of the parked freight trains ran to the scene, they quickly extinguished a small fire, caused when the hot coals from the firebox of Jones&#x27; engine lit the scattered hay from one of the boxcars ablaze. They then approached the overturned locomotive, and found Jones&#x27; body underneath the cab. There is conjecture about exactly what his cause of death was; some versions of the story say a piece of lumber was driven through his neck. Another says that one of his arms was ripped from its socket. Yet another states that his skull was crushed, or that he had been scalded to death by escaping steam. Above all, popular legend holds his hands still clutched the whistle cord and brake when his body was pulled from the wreckage. His watch stopped at the time of impact, 3:52 a.m.

At any rate, it&#x27;s believed Jones&#x27; actions prevented any other serious injury and death; Jones was the only fatality of the collision. He had been able to reduce his speed to about before impact.

The railroad employees carried Jones&#x27; remains over half a mile to the Vaughan depot, and laid them upon a baggage cart. The depot was closed for the night, requiring some of the men to kick the door down, in order to access the telegraph office to report the crash.

The next morning, Jones&#x27;s body was transported to Jackson, Tennessee by the No. 26 passenger train. A funeral service was held May 2, 1900, at St. Mary&#x27;s Church, where he and Janie Brady had married 14 years before. He was buried in Mount Calvary Cemetery. A record 15 enginemen rode from Water Valley to pay their last respects.

==Coverage of the accident==
The headlines in &quot;The Jackson Sun&quot; (Jackson, Tennessee) read: &quot;FATAL WRECK – Engineer Casey Jones, of This City, Killed Near Canton, Miss. – DENSE FOG THE DIRECT CAUSE – Of a Rear End Collision on the Illinois Central. – Fireman and Messenger Injured – Passenger Train Crashed Into a Local Freight Partly on the Siding – Several Cars Demolished.&quot;

A Jackson, Mississippi, newspaper report described the accident:

Jones&#x27;s legend was quickly fueled by headlines such as &quot;DEAD UNDER HIS CAB: THE SAD END OF ENGINEER CASEY JONES,&quot; &quot;The Commercial Appeal&quot;, Memphis, Tennessee; and &quot;HEROIC ENGINEER – Sticks to his post at cost of life. Railroad Wreck at Vaughan&#x27;s on Illinois Central Railroad – Terrible Fatality Prevented by Engineer&#x27;s Loyalty to Duty – A passenger&#x27;s Story,&quot; &quot;The Times-Democrat&quot;, New Orleans.

The passenger in the article was Adam Hauser, formerly a member of &quot;The Times-Democrat&quot; telegraph staff. He was in a sleeper on Jones&#x27;s southbound fast mail and said after the wreck:
==Illinois Central Railroad report on accident==
A conductor&#x27;s report filed five hours after the accident stated, &quot;Engineer on No.1 failed to answer flagman who was out proper distance. It is supposed he did not see the flag.&quot; This was the position the IC held in its official reports.

The final IC accident report was released July 13, 1900, by A.S. Sullivan, general superintendent of IC. It stated, &quot;Engineer Jones was solely responsible having disregarded the signals given by Flagman Newberry.&quot; John M. Newberry was the flagman on the southbound No. 83 that Jones hit. According to the report, he had gone out a distance of , where he had placed warning torpedoes on the rail. He continued north a further distance of 500 to 800 feet (150 to 240 m), where he stood and gave signals to Jones&#x27;s train No. 1. Historians and the press had questions about the official findings.

In the report, Fireman Sim Webb states that he heard the torpedo explode before going to the gangway on the engineer&#x27;s side and seeing the flagman with the red and white lights standing alongside the tracks. Going to the fireman&#x27;s side, he saw the markers of No. 83&#x27;s caboose and yelled to Jones. But it would have been impossible for him to have seen the flagman if the flagman had been positioned 500–800 feet (150–240 m) before the torpedoes, as the report says he was. In any event, some railroad historians have disputed the official account over the years, finding it difficult if not impossible to believe that an engineer of Jones&#x27;s experience would have ignored a flagman and fusees (flares) and torpedoes exploded on the rail to alert him to danger.

Contrary to what the report claimed, shortly after the accident and until his death Webb maintained, &quot;We saw no flagman or fusees, we heard no torpedoes. Without any warning we plowed into that caboose.&quot;

==Injuries and losses from wreck==
The personal injury and physical damage costs of the wreck were initially estimated as follows:

* Simeon T. Webb, Fireman Train No. 1, body bruises from jumping off Engine 382 – $5.00 (equivalent to $ in )
* Mrs. W. E. Breaux, passenger, 1472 Rocheblave Street, New Orleans, slight bruises – Not settled
* Mrs. Wm. Deto, passenger, No 25 East 33rd Street, Chicago, slight bruises left knee and left hand – Not settled
* Wm. Miller, Express Messenger, injuries to back and left side, apparently slight – $23.00 ($ in )
* W. L. Whiteside, Postal Clerk, jarred – $1.00 ($ in )
* R. A. Ford, Postal Clerk, jarred – $1.00 ($ in )
* Engine No. 382; $1,396.25 ($ in )
* Mail car No. 51 – $610.00 ($ in )
* Baggage car No. 217 – $105.00 ($ in )
* Caboose No. 98119 – $430.00 ($ in )
* IC box car 11380 – $4000.00 ($ in )
* IC box car 24116 – $55.00 ($ in )
* Total (property damage only) – $2,996.00 ($ in )

An update indicated an additional $327.50 in property damage ($102.50 in track damage, $100.00 for freight, and $125.00 in wrecking expense) plus a settlement of $1.00 to Mrs. Breaux for her injuries. Mrs. Deto was identified as the spouse of an IC engineer, and in the update her claim for injuries was still unsettled. There are no clearly authentic photographs of the famous wreck in existence.

There has been some controversy about exactly how Jones died. Massena Jones, (former postmaster of Vaughan and director of the now-closed museum there), said &quot;When they found Jones, according to Uncle Will Madison (a section hand who helped remove Jones&#x27;s body from the wreckage), he had a splinter of wood driven through his head. Now this is contrary to most of the stories, some of which say he had a bolt through his neck, some say he was crushed, some say he was scalded to death.&quot;

==Later history of engines==
For at least ten years after the wreck, the imprint of Jones&#x27;s engine was clearly visible in the embankment on the east side of the tracks about two-tenths of a mile north of Tucker&#x27;s Creek, which is where the marker was located. The imprint of the headlight, boiler, and the spokes of the wheels could be seen and people would ride up on handcars to view the traces of the famous wreck. Corn that was scattered by the wreck grew for years afterward in the surrounding fields.

The wrecked 382 was brought to the Water Valley shop and rebuilt &quot;just as it had come from the Rogers Locomotive Works in 1898,&quot; according to Bruce Gurner. It was soon back in service on the same run with Engineer Harry A. &quot;Dad&quot; Norton in charge—but bad luck seemed to follow it. During its 37 years of service, &quot;Ole 382&quot; was involved in accidents that took six lives before it was retired in July 1935. During its career, the 382 was renumbered 212, 2012, and 5012.

In January 1903, criminal train wreckers caused 382 to wreck, nearly demolishing the locomotive. Norton&#x27;s legs were broken and he was badly scalded. His fireman died three days later.

In September 1905, Norton and the 382 turned over in the Memphis South Yards. This time, however, the train was moving slowly and Norton was uninjured.

On January 22, 1912, 382 (now numbered 2012) was involved in a wreck that killed four prominent railroad men and injured several others. It is called the Kinmundy Wreck as it happened near Kinmundy, Illinois. An engineer by the name of Strude was driving.

Jones&#x27;s beloved Engine No. 638 was sold to the Mexican government in 1921 and still ran there in the 1940s.

==Other people involved==
Jones&#x27;s African-American fireman Simeon T. Webb (born May 12, 1874), died in Memphis on July 13, 1957, at age 83.

Jones&#x27;s widow, Janie Brady Jones (born October 29, 1866), died on November 21, 1958, in Jackson at age 92. At the time of Jones&#x27; death at age 37, his son Charles was 12, his daughter Helen was 10 and his youngest son John Lloyd (known as &quot;Casey Junior&quot;) was 4.

Jones&#x27;s wife received $3,000 in insurance payments (Jones was a member of two unions, the Brotherhood of Locomotive Firemen and the Brotherhood of Locomotive Engineers, and had a $1,500 policy with each union), and later settled with IC for an additional $2,650 (Earl Brewer, a Water Valley attorney who would later serve as Governor of Mississippi, represented her in the settlement). Other than these payments, Mrs. Jones received nothing as a result of the wreck or Jones&#x27;s service with the railroad, as the Railroad Retirement Fund was not established until 1937.

Jones&#x27;s wife said she never had any thought of remarrying. She wore black nearly every day for the rest of her life.

Jones&#x27;s tombstone in Jackson&#x27;s Mount Calvary Cemetery gives his birth year as 1864, but according to information his mother wrote in the family Bible, he was born in 1863. The tombstone was donated in 1947 by two out-of-town railroad enthusiasts who accidentally got his birth year wrong. Until then, a simple wooden cross had marked his grave.

==Casey Jones references in music==
Casey Jones&#x27;s fame is largely attributed to the traditional song, “The Ballad of Casey Jones”, also known as &quot;Casey Jones, the Brave Engineer&quot;, recorded by, among others, Billy Murray, Mississippi John Hurt, Harry McClintock, Furry Lewis, Johnny Cash, Ed McCurdy, and played live by the Grateful Dead, as well as Jones&#x27; friend Wallace Saunders, an African-American engine wiper for the IC.

Songs titled “Casey Jones”, usually about the crash or the engineer, have been recorded by Vernon Dalhart (Edison Disc recorded June 16, 1925), This Bike Is a Pipe Bomb, Feverfew (now known as Blueboy), Tom Russell, The New Christy Minstrels, Skillet Lickers, and the Grateful Dead.

IWW activist Joe Hill wrote and sang a protest song parody of &quot;The Ballad of Casey Jones&quot;, entitled ″Casey Jones—the Union Scab″. The song fictitiously portrays Jones as a strikebreaker at Southern Pacific. As his engine is badly in disrepair he crashes from a bridge, dies and goes to Heaven. There St. Peter wants him to break a strike of celestial musicians. The rebellious musicians form a local union and throw Casey down into Hell, where Satan urges him to shovel sulphur in the furnaces. Hill&#x27;s version of the song was later performed and recorded by Utah Phillips, Pete Seeger, in Russian by Leonid Utyosov, and Hungarian by the Szirt Együttes. The historic figure Casey Jones was a dues-paying member of two unions.

Songs about or related to Jones or the crash include:
* &quot;Casey&#x27;s Last Ride&quot; – Kris Kristofferson
* &quot;J C Cohen&quot; a parody by Allan Sherman
* &quot;Casey Jones&quot; – Johnny Cash
* “Casey Jones” – Elizabeth Cotten
* &quot;Do The Paranoid Style&quot; – Bad Religion
* &quot;Casey Jones&quot; – Grateful Dead
* &quot;Talking Casey&quot; – Mississippi John Hurt
* &quot;To the Dogs or Whoever&quot; – Josh Ritter from &quot;The Historical Conquests of Josh Ritter&quot;
* &quot;April the 14th Part 1&quot; and &quot;Ruination Day Part 2&quot; – Gillian Welch from &quot;Time (The Revelator)&quot; — Casey Jones becomes a simile for another great collision, that of the RMS Titanic, on April 14, 1912.
* &quot;St Luke&#x27;s Summer&quot; – Thea Gilmore from &quot;Rules For Jokers&quot;
* &quot;KC Jones&quot; – North Mississippi Allstars
* &quot;Ridin&#x27; With the Driver&quot; – Motörhead
* &quot;Casey Jones Was His Name&quot; – Hank Snow
* &quot;Freight Train Boogie&quot; – Marty Stuart
* “Freight Train Boogie” - The Delmore Brothers
* &quot;Knocking Down Casey Jones&quot; – Wilmer Watts
* &quot;What&#x27;s Next to the Moon&quot; – AC/DC
* “Casey Jones—the Union Scab” – Joe Hill
* &quot;Casey Jones&quot; – Gibson Bros. from &quot;Big Pine Boogie&quot;
* &quot;Casey Jones&quot; – This Bike is a Pipe Bomb
* &quot;Casey Jones&quot; – The Black
* &quot;Casey Jones&quot; – Claudia Lennear
* &quot;Casey Jones&quot; – Furry Lewis
* &quot;The Ballad of Casey Jones&quot; – Band of Annuals
* &quot;Grist for the Malady Mill&quot; – mewithoutYou
* &quot;What Have They Done To The Trains&quot; – Roy Acuff
* &quot;Casey Jones&quot; – Tony Trischka
* &quot;Statecny Strojvudce&quot; – Ladislav Vodicka
* &quot;Strojvudce Prihoda&quot; – Jiri Voskovec and Jan Werich
* &quot;Casey Caught the Cannonball&quot; – Jimbo Mathus
* &quot;Casey&#x27;s Crazy Train&quot; – DNatureofDTrain
* In the lyrics of their 1964 recording of Wabash Cannonball (found on the album Connie Francis and Hank Williams Jr. Sing Great Country Favorites), Connie Francis and Hank Williams Jr. make reference to Jones: &quot;We&#x27;ll drink a toast to Casey Jones, may his name forever stand&quot;.
* In the lyrics of &quot;From Dusk to Dawn&quot; by the Fever Dolls, the chorus includes the line &quot;Raise a glass to Casey Jones and to days of past and of fates unknown&quot;

==Casey Jones media references==
* A 1927 movie, &quot;Casey Jones&quot; (1927), starred Ralph Lewis as Casey Jones, Kate Price as his wife, and a young Jason Robards Sr. as Casey Jones, Jr.
*&quot;The Return of Casey Jones&quot; was released by Monogram Pictures in 1933. The movie was based upon the novelette written by John Johns, a real New York Central conductor, originally published in the April 1933 issue of &quot;Railroad Stories Magazine&quot;. The story was reprinted by Bold Venture Press in 2019 in &quot;Railroad Stories&quot; #7, collecting other stories by John Johns.
* In his 1975 painting &quot;Sources of Country Music&quot;, Thomas Hart Benton chose Casey Jones&#x27; fateful Engine No. 382, the &quot;Cannonball&quot;, to represent the influence of railroads on Country Music.
* A 1938 dramatic play by Robert Ardrey called &quot;Casey Jones&quot; stars a 1930s version of the hero. It was produced on Broadway with a critically heralded locomotive set-piece by Mordecai Gorelik.
* In the 1941 Walt Disney movie, &quot;Dumbo&quot;, a song refers to the engine of the circus train as &#x27;Casey Junior&#x27; early in the film. This inspired the Casey Jr. Circus Train attractions found at both Disneyland Park in Anaheim and Disneyland Park in Paris and the Casey Jr. Splash &#x27;n&#x27; Soak Station at the Magic Kingdom.
* In 1950, the Disney studio produced an animated cartoon short based on Casey Jones, entitled &quot;The Brave Engineer.&quot;
* From 1954 until 1973, Roger Awsumb played Casey Jones on &quot;Lunch With Casey&quot; in the Minneapolis/St. Paul market on WTCN-TV.
* The 1956 James Bond novel &quot;Diamonds Are Forever&quot; references Casey Jones during a train chase.
* Airing in 1958, &quot;Casey Jones&quot; was a television series loosely based on Jones&#x27;s legend. It starred Alan Hale, Jr. as Casey Jones; Hale would later become well remembered for his role as &quot;The Skipper&quot; on the TV series &quot;Gilligan&#x27;s Island&quot;. The series only ran for one season, with a total of 32 episodes. Its co-star was Dub Taylor.
* Beginning in 1950, Good &amp; Plenty candy began an advertising campaign featuring a cartoon character named &quot;Choo-Choo Charlie,&quot; a child railroad engineer who appeared in ads featuring a jingle based on &quot;The Ballad of Casey Jones&quot;.
* In an episode of &quot;Captain Caveman and the Teen Angels&quot; titled &quot;The Legend of Devil&#x27;s Run&quot;, the villain&#x27;s name is Casey Jones.
* &quot;Sesame Street&quot;: &quot;The Ballad Of Casey Macphee&quot; casts the Cookie Monster as an engine driver faced with his train loaded with cookies, chocolate, milk and cows trapped by an avalanche, but while tempted to consume the food bravely chooses to &quot;eat the snow instead&quot;.
* The 1982 film &quot;An Officer and a Gentleman&quot; features a coarse cadence call about &quot;Casey Jones&quot;, led by Gunnery Sgt. Foley (Louis Gossett Jr.). It carried over into the real military, until it was outlawed under the regulations regarding sexual harassment.
* Casey Jones is mentioned in Caryl Phillips&#x27;s stageplay &quot;The Shelter&quot; (1984).
* Casey Jones is the vigilante comrade of the &quot;Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles&quot;.
* An episode of &quot;The Real Ghostbusters&quot; (titled &quot;Last Train To Oblivion&quot;) (1987) features the ghost of Casey Jones. He abducts Peter Venkman, and always yells at him for more coal. Peter eventually realizes that Jones wants to repeat the journey that killed him, so that he can avoid the collision this time.
* Neil Young&#x27;s song &quot;Southern Pacific&quot; alludes to the Casey Jones legend by imagining a railroad engineer named &quot;Mr. Jones&quot; who meets a less heroic but in some ways a more tragic fate: when he turns 65 years old, he is compelled into retirement by the railroad company as &quot;company policy.&quot;
* Tommy Lee Jones&#x27; character in the film &quot;The Fugitive&quot; mentions Casey Jones after the initial train crash of the movie. 
* A 1993 episode of &quot;Shining Time Station&quot; called &quot;Billy&#x27;s Runaway Train&quot;, includes a play about Casey Jones.
* In a 1996 &quot;The Simpsons&quot; episode, &quot;Burns, Baby Burns&quot;, guest star Rodney Dangerfield voices a character that chases after a train and calls out to the conductor by referring to him as Casey Jones.
* In 1997, The Green Bag published a poem by Brainerd Currie, &quot;Casey Jones Redivivus&quot;, about a man injured in a railroad accident.

==Museums in Casey Jones&#x27;s honor==
* The Historic Casey Jones Home &amp; Railroad Museum in Jackson, Tennessee
* Water Valley Casey Jones Railroad Museum in Water Valley, Mississippi
* Casey Jones Railroad Museum State Park in Vaughan, Mississippi (Museum closed in 2004)

==References==

* &quot;A History of Railroad Accidents, Safety Precautions and Operating Practices&quot;, by Robert B. Shaw. p290. (1978)

==External links==
* Ballad of Casey Jones
* Photo of Sim Webb
* U.S. Postage stamp on Casey Jones
*Life Magazine Jan 26, 1942 story of Casey Jones</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q253906" start="0" end="11" title="Casey Jones" label="John Luther"/>
<link wikidata="Q253906" start="18" end="23" title="Casey Jones" label="Casey"/>
<link wikidata="Q253906" start="30" end="35" title="Casey Jones" label="Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q7917276" start="178" end="198" title="Vaughan, Mississippi" label="Vaughan, Mississippi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1093332" start="241" end="266" title="Illinois Central Railroad" label="Illinois Central Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q16563" start="277" end="295" title="Memphis, Tennessee" label="Memphis, Tennessee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1998325" start="644" end="663" title="Canton, Mississippi" label="Canton, Mississippi"/>
<link wikidata="Q124936816" start="940" end="943" title="Illinois Central 382" label="382"/>
<link wikidata="Q3732687" start="1045" end="1056" title="Erwin Baker" label="Erwin Baker"/>
<link wikidata="Q1033468" start="1084" end="1098" title="Cannonball Baker Sea-to-Shining-Sea Memorial Trophy Dash" label="Cannonball Run"/>
<link wikidata="Q7715409" start="1652" end="1677" title="The Ballad of Casey Jones" label="The Ballad of Casey Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q5055288" start="1782" end="1797" title="Cayce, Kentucky" label="Cayce, Kentucky"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="2216" end="2224" title="Catholic" label="Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7994052" start="2328" end="2345" title="Whistler, Alabama" label="Whistler, Alabama"/>
<link wikidata="Q985409" start="2417" end="2435" title="Jackson, Tennessee" label="Jackson, Tennessee"/>
<link wikidata="Q15131448" start="2613" end="2623" title="teetotaler" label="teetotaler"/>
<link wikidata="Q1523823" start="2679" end="2705" title="Mobile and Ohio Railroad" label="Mobile &amp;amp; Ohio Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q721587" start="2711" end="2720" title="telegraph" label="telegraph"/>
<link wikidata="Q637934" start="2767" end="2775" title="brakeman" label="brakeman"/>
<link wikidata="Q2170410" start="2783" end="2801" title="Columbus, Kentucky" label="Columbus, Kentucky"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147709" start="2844" end="2851" title="Fireman (steam engine)" label="fireman"/>
<link wikidata="Q79875" start="2881" end="2896" title="Mobile, Alabama" label="Mobile, Alabama"/>
<link wikidata="Q154874" start="2931" end="2943" title="yellow fever" label="yellow fever"/>
<link wikidata="Q1093332" start="2996" end="3021" title="Illinois Central Railroad" label="Illinois Central Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q2273194" start="3209" end="3234" title="Water Valley, Mississippi" label="Water Valley, Mississippi"/>
<link wikidata="Q285406" start="4065" end="4098" title="World&amp;#x27;s Columbian Exposition" label="World&amp;#x27;s Columbian Exposition"/>
<link wikidata="Q1297" start="4102" end="4119" title="Chicago, Illinois" label="Chicago, Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q2994663" start="4726" end="4731" title="2-8-0" label="2-8-0"/>
<link wikidata="Q124936816" start="5429" end="5432" title="Illinois Central 382" label="382"/>
<link wikidata="Q124936816" start="5468" end="5471" title="Illinois Central 382" label="382"/>
<link wikidata="Q483711" start="5536" end="5541" title="4-6-0" label="4-6-0"/>
<link wikidata="Q2734911" start="5654" end="5677" title="Rogers Locomotive and Machine Works" label="Rogers Locomotive Works"/>
<link wikidata="Q6837484" start="6288" end="6314" title="Michigan City, Mississippi" label="Michigan City, Mississippi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1417516" start="7088" end="7098" title="cowcatcher" label="cowcatcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q3520106" start="7256" end="7274" title="The Brave Engineer" label="The Brave Engineer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5369" start="7378" end="7386" title="baseball" label="baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q2170410" start="7497" end="7515" title="Columbus, Kentucky" label="Columbus, Kentucky"/>
<link wikidata="Q16563" start="8388" end="8406" title="Memphis, Tennessee" label="Memphis, Tennessee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1998325" start="8450" end="8469" title="Canton, Mississippi" label="Canton, Mississippi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1297" start="8517" end="8534" title="Chicago, Illinois" label="Chicago, Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q34404" start="8540" end="8562" title="New Orleans, Louisiana" label="New Orleans, Louisiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q124936816" start="9305" end="9308" title="Illinois Central 382" label="382"/>
<link wikidata="Q985543" start="10857" end="10877" title="Grenada, Mississippi" label="Grenada, Mississippi"/>
<link wikidata="Q7973765" start="10900" end="10910" title="water stop" label="water stop"/>
<link wikidata="Q1018253" start="10914" end="10933" title="Sardis, Mississippi" label="Sardis, Mississippi"/>
<link wikidata="Q732407" start="11176" end="11195" title="Winona, Mississippi" label="Winona, Mississippi"/>
<link wikidata="Q798425" start="11219" end="11238" title="Durant, Mississippi" label="Durant, Mississippi"/>
<link wikidata="Q17099746" start="11409" end="11420" title="Johnson Bar (locomotive)" label="Johnson bar"/>
<link wikidata="Q10667400" start="11472" end="11478" title="Siding (rail)" label="siding"/>
<link wikidata="Q2412249" start="11482" end="11502" title="Goodman, Mississippi" label="Goodman, Mississippi"/>
<link wikidata="Q784159" start="12597" end="12612" title="Passing loop" label="saw-by maneuver"/>
<link wikidata="Q5501358" start="12627" end="12638" title="Freight house" label="house track"/>
<link wikidata="Q4051135" start="16708" end="16723" title="The Jackson Sun" label="The Jackson Sun"/>
<link wikidata="Q28198" start="17055" end="17075" title="Jackson, Mississippi" label="Jackson, Mississippi"/>
<link wikidata="Q7726978" start="17254" end="17275" title="The Commercial Appeal" label="The Commercial Appeal"/>
<link wikidata="Q116886708" start="17534" end="17552" title="The Times-Picayune" label="The Times-Democrat"/>
<link wikidata="Q716482" start="18457" end="18466" title="railroad torpedo" label="torpedoes"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="21727" end="21746" title="Tucker&amp;#x27;s Creek" label="Tucker&amp;#x27;s Creek"/>
<link wikidata="Q124936816" start="22047" end="22050" title="Illinois Central 382" label="382"/>
<link wikidata="Q2734911" start="22135" end="22158" title="Rogers Locomotive Works" label="Rogers Locomotive Works"/>
<link wikidata="Q124936816" start="22492" end="22495" title="Illinois Central 382" label="382"/>
<link wikidata="Q575560" start="23065" end="23083" title="Kinmundy, Illinois" label="Kinmundy, Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q883261" start="23943" end="23954" title="Earl Brewer" label="Earl Brewer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7284074" start="24196" end="24220" title="Railroad Retirement Board" label="Railroad Retirement Fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q7715409" start="24841" end="24866" title="The Ballad of Casey Jones" label="The Ballad of Casey Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q440215" start="24955" end="24967" title="Billy Murray (singer)" label="Billy Murray"/>
<link wikidata="Q382962" start="24969" end="24990" title="Mississippi John Hurt" label="Mississippi John Hurt"/>
<link wikidata="Q918848" start="24992" end="25008" title="Harry McClintock" label="Harry McClintock"/>
<link wikidata="Q1475124" start="25010" end="25021" title="Furry Lewis" label="Furry Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q42775" start="25023" end="25034" title="Johnny Cash" label="Johnny Cash"/>
<link wikidata="Q3365382" start="25036" end="25046" title="Ed McCurdy" label="Ed McCurdy"/>
<link wikidata="Q212533" start="25071" end="25084" title="Grateful Dead" label="Grateful Dead"/>
<link wikidata="Q49085" start="25137" end="25153" title="African-American" label="African-American"/>
<link wikidata="Q17037595" start="25154" end="25166" title="Wiper (occupation)" label="engine wiper"/>
<link wikidata="Q704781" start="25271" end="25285" title="Vernon Dalhart" label="Vernon Dalhart"/>
<link wikidata="Q2513752" start="25324" end="25348" title="This Bike Is a Pipe Bomb" label="This Bike Is a Pipe Bomb"/>
<link wikidata="Q4930275" start="25373" end="25380" title="Blueboy (band)" label="Blueboy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345526" start="25383" end="25394" title="Tom Russell" label="Tom Russell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1569364" start="25396" end="25421" title="The New Christy Minstrels" label="The New Christy Minstrels"/>
<link wikidata="Q1523075" start="25423" end="25438" title="Skillet Lickers" label="Skillet Lickers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2940983" start="25444" end="25461" title="Casey Jones (Grateful Dead song)" label="the Grateful Dead"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046722" start="25464" end="25467" title="IWW" label="IWW"/>
<link wikidata="Q346993" start="25477" end="25485" title="Joe Hill (activist)" label="Joe Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q829147" start="25503" end="25515" title="protest song" label="protest song"/>
<link wikidata="Q170539" start="25516" end="25522" title="parody" label="parody"/>
<link wikidata="Q5048526" start="25575" end="25601" title="Casey Jones—the Union Scab" label="Casey Jones—the Union Scab"/>
<link wikidata="Q1340502" start="25646" end="25659" title="strikebreaker" label="strikebreaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q1473764" start="25663" end="25679" title="Southern Pacific Transportation Company" label="Southern Pacific"/>
<link wikidata="Q4489450" start="25760" end="25766" title="Heaven" label="Heaven"/>
<link wikidata="Q33923" start="25774" end="25783" title="St. Peter" label="St. Peter"/>
<link wikidata="Q564" start="25906" end="25910" title="Hell" label="Hell"/>
<link wikidata="Q35230" start="25918" end="25923" title="Satan" label="Satan"/>
<link wikidata="Q682" start="25944" end="25951" title="sulphur" label="sulphur"/>
<link wikidata="Q366306" start="26037" end="26050" title="Utah Phillips" label="Utah Phillips"/>
<link wikidata="Q244441" start="26052" end="26063" title="Pete Seeger" label="Pete Seeger"/>
<link wikidata="Q7737" start="26068" end="26075" title="Russian (language)" label="Russian"/>
<link wikidata="Q541493" start="26079" end="26093" title="Leonid Utyosov" label="Leonid Utyosov"/>
<link wikidata="Q208681" start="26298" end="26316" title="Kris Kristofferson" label="Kris Kristofferson"/>
<link wikidata="Q708963" start="26353" end="26366" title="Allan Sherman" label="Allan Sherman"/>
<link wikidata="Q42775" start="26395" end="26406" title="Johnny Cash" label="Johnny Cash"/>
<link wikidata="Q454320" start="26425" end="26441" title="Elizabeth Cotten" label="Elizabeth Cotten"/>
<link wikidata="Q201669" start="26480" end="26492" title="Bad Religion" label="Bad Religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q2940983" start="26501" end="26512" title="Casey Jones (Grateful Dead song)" label="Casey Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q212533" start="26521" end="26534" title="Grateful Dead" label="Grateful Dead"/>
<link wikidata="Q382962" start="26565" end="26586" title="Mississippi John Hurt" label="Mississippi John Hurt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1372074" start="26626" end="26637" title="Josh Ritter" label="Josh Ritter"/>
<link wikidata="Q7739759" start="26649" end="26688" title="The Historical Conquests of Josh Ritter" label="The Historical Conquests of Josh Ritter"/>
<link wikidata="Q442207" start="26770" end="26783" title="Gillian Welch" label="Gillian Welch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321150" start="26795" end="26815" title="Time (The Revelator)" label="Time (The Revelator)"/>
<link wikidata="Q25173" start="26894" end="26905" title="RMS Titanic" label="RMS Titanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7777206" start="26964" end="26976" title="Thea Gilmore" label="Thea Gilmore"/>
<link wikidata="Q475935" start="27036" end="27062" title="North Mississippi Allstars" label="North Mississippi Allstars"/>
<link wikidata="Q19697" start="27107" end="27116" title="Motörhead" label="Motörhead"/>
<link wikidata="Q648366" start="27158" end="27167" title="Hank Snow" label="Hank Snow"/>
<link wikidata="Q706332" start="27205" end="27217" title="Marty Stuart" label="Marty Stuart"/>
<link wikidata="Q27593" start="27366" end="27371" title="AC/DC" label="AC/DC"/>
<link wikidata="Q5048526" start="27375" end="27401" title="Casey Jones—the Union Scab" label="Casey Jones—the Union Scab"/>
<link wikidata="Q346993" start="27405" end="27413" title="Joe Hill (activist)" label="Joe Hill"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="27466" end="27481" title="Jeffrey Evans#Discography" label="Big Pine Boogie"/>
<link wikidata="Q2513752" start="27516" end="27540" title="This Bike is a Pipe Bomb" label="This Bike is a Pipe Bomb"/>
<link wikidata="Q12053167" start="27569" end="27578" title="The Black (American band)" label="The Black"/>
<link wikidata="Q5129213" start="27607" end="27622" title="Claudia Lennear" label="Claudia Lennear"/>
<link wikidata="Q1475124" start="27651" end="27662" title="Furry Lewis" label="Furry Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q286724" start="27763" end="27775" title="mewithoutYou" label="mewithoutYou"/>
<link wikidata="Q455773" start="27826" end="27835" title="Roy Acuff" label="Roy Acuff"/>
<link wikidata="Q3505379" start="27864" end="27877" title="Tony Trischka" label="Tony Trischka"/>
<link wikidata="Q774433" start="28152" end="28169" title="Wabash Cannonball" label="Wabash Cannonball"/>
<link wikidata="Q5161865" start="28190" end="28255" title="Connie Francis and Hank Williams Jr. Sing Great Country Favorites" label="Connie Francis and Hank Williams Jr. Sing Great Country Favorites"/>
<link wikidata="Q684079" start="28671" end="28682" title="Ralph Lewis (actor)" label="Ralph Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3193977" start="28699" end="28709" title="Kate Price (actress)" label="Kate Price"/>
<link wikidata="Q3074308" start="28735" end="28752" title="Jason Robards Sr." label="Jason Robards Sr."/>
<link wikidata="Q17140226" start="28780" end="28805" title="The Return of Casey Jones" label="The Return of Casey Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q471764" start="29230" end="29248" title="Thomas Hart Benton (painter)" label="Thomas Hart Benton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1125695" start="29409" end="29422" title="Robert Ardrey" label="Robert Ardrey"/>
<link wikidata="Q5048524" start="29430" end="29453" title="Casey Jones (play)" label="&amp;quot;Casey Jones&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q235065" start="29508" end="29516" title="Broadway theatre" label="Broadway"/>
<link wikidata="Q4144005" start="29568" end="29584" title="Mordecai Gorelik" label="Mordecai Gorelik"/>
<link wikidata="Q7414" start="29600" end="29611" title="The Walt Disney Company" label="Walt Disney"/>
<link wikidata="Q40895" start="29625" end="29630" title="Dumbo" label="Dumbo"/>
<link wikidata="Q5121852" start="29673" end="29685" title="circus train" label="circus train"/>
<link wikidata="Q2521960" start="29751" end="29773" title="Casey Jr. Circus Train" label="Casey Jr. Circus Train"/>
<link wikidata="Q181185" start="29800" end="29826" title="Disneyland" label="Disneyland Park in Anaheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q2313567" start="29831" end="29855" title="Disneyland Park (Paris)" label="Disneyland Park in Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q1324340" start="29915" end="29928" title="Magic Kingdom" label="Magic Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q11425" start="29971" end="29979" title="animated" label="animated"/>
<link wikidata="Q627603" start="29980" end="29987" title="cartoon" label="cartoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3520106" start="30031" end="30049" title="The Brave Engineer" label="The Brave Engineer"/>
<link wikidata="Q75687889" start="30081" end="30093" title="Roger Awsumb" label="Roger Awsumb"/>
<link wikidata="Q14692676" start="30183" end="30190" title="KARE (TV)" label="WTCN-TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q844" start="30203" end="30213" title="James Bond" label="James Bond"/>
<link wikidata="Q659731" start="30226" end="30246" title="Diamonds Are Forever (novel)" label="Diamonds Are Forever"/>
<link wikidata="Q5048522" start="30322" end="30333" title="Casey Jones (TV series)" label="Casey Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q640093" start="30413" end="30427" title="Alan Hale, Jr." label="Alan Hale, Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q1141741" start="30547" end="30569" title="Gilligan&amp;#x27;s Island" label="Gilligan&amp;#x27;s Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q611266" start="30658" end="30668" title="Dub Taylor" label="Dub Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q5582416" start="30691" end="30708" title="Good &amp;amp; Plenty" label="Good &amp;amp; Plenty"/>
<link wikidata="Q7715409" start="30892" end="30917" title="The Ballad of Casey Jones" label="The Ballad of Casey Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q864240" start="30950" end="30985" title="Captain Caveman and the Teen Angels" label="Captain Caveman and the Teen Angels"/>
<link wikidata="Q155629" start="31091" end="31104" title="Sesame Street" label="Sesame Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754267" start="31162" end="31176" title="Cookie Monster" label="Cookie Monster"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132575" start="31402" end="31428" title="An Officer and a Gentleman" label="An Officer and a Gentleman"/>
<link wikidata="Q2940996" start="31753" end="31764" title="Casey Jones (Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles)" label="Casey Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q1381762" start="31803" end="31831" title="Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles" label="Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1983062" start="31844" end="31851" title="episode" label="episode"/>
<link wikidata="Q733938" start="31861" end="31882" title="The Real Ghostbusters" label="The Real Ghostbusters"/>
<link wikidata="Q2483011" start="31986" end="31999" title="Peter Venkman" label="Peter Venkman"/>
<link wikidata="Q156309" start="32545" end="32557" title="The Fugitive (1993 film)" label="The Fugitive"/>
<link wikidata="Q7497567" start="32656" end="32676" title="Shining Time Station" label="Shining Time Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q886" start="32783" end="32795" title="The Simpsons" label="The Simpsons"/>
<link wikidata="Q2983619" start="32817" end="32834" title="Burns, Baby Burns" label="Burns, Baby Burns"/>
<link wikidata="Q436386" start="32853" end="32871" title="Rodney Dangerfield" label="Rodney Dangerfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q7738128" start="32995" end="33008" title="The Green Bag (1997)" label="The Green Bag"/>
<link wikidata="Q4955876" start="33029" end="33044" title="Brainerd Currie" label="Brainerd Currie"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="246670" wikidata="Q33287" url="?curid=246670" title="Ga language">
<text>Ga is a Kwa language spoken in Ghana, in and around the capital Accra, by the Ga people. There are also some speakers in Togo, Benin and western Nigeria. It has a phonemic distinction between three vowel lengths.

==Classification==
Ga is a Kwa language, part of the Niger–Congo family. It is very closely related to Adangme, and together they form the Ga–Dangme branch within Kwa.

Ga is the predominant language of the Ga people, an ethnic group of Ghana. Ethnic Ga family names (surnames) include Owoo, Lartey, Nortey, Aryee, Lamptey, Tetteh, Ankrah, Tetteyfio, Laryea, Ayitey, Okine, Bortey, Quarshie, Quaye, Quaynor, Ashong, Kotei, Clottey, Nai, Sowah, Odoi, Maale, Ako, Adjetey, Annang, Yemoh,and Abbey.

==Geographic distribution==
Ga is spoken in south-eastern Ghana, in and around the capital Accra. It has relatively little dialectal variation. Although English is the official language of Ghana, Ga is one of 16 languages in which the &quot;Bureau of Ghana Languages&quot; publishes material.

==Phonology==
===Consonants===
Ga has 31 consonant phonemes.
* is an allophone of which occurs before nasals and is represented with its own digraph in writing.
* may be realised as when between a consonant and vowel
* has an allophone before nasal vowels

===Vowels===
Ga has seven oral vowels and five nasal vowels. All of the vowels have three different vowel lengths: short, long or extra long (the latter appears only in the simple future and the simple past negative forms).

===Tones===
Ga has two tones, high and low. Like many West African languages, it has tone terracing.

===Phonotactics===
The syllable structure of Ga is , where the second phoneme of an initial consonant cluster can only be and a final consonant may only be a (short or long) nasal consonant, e.g. &quot;ekome&quot;, &quot;one&quot;, V-CV-CV; &quot;kakadaŋŋ&quot;, &quot;long&quot;, CV-CV-CVC; &quot;mli&quot;, &quot;inside&quot;, CCV. Ga syllables may also consist solely of a syllabic nasal, for example in the first syllable of &quot;ŋshɔ&quot;, &quot;sea&quot;.

==Writing system==
Ga was first written in about 1764, by Christian Jacob Protten (1715–1769), who was the son of a Danish soldier and a Ga woman. Protten was a Gold Coast Euro-African Moravian missionary and educator in the eighteenth century. In the mid-1800s, the Germany missionary Johannes Zimmermann (1825–1876), assisted by the Gold Coast historian Carl Christian Reindorf (1834–1917) and others, worked extensively on the grammar of the language, published a dictionary and translated the entire Bible into the Ga language. The orthography has been revised a number of times since 1968, with the most recent review in 1990. 

The writing system is a Latin-based alphabet and has 26 letters. It has three additional letter symbols which correspond to the IPA symbols. There are also eleven digraphs and two trigraphs. Vowel length is represented by doubling or tripling the vowel symbol, e.g. &#x27;a&#x27;, &#x27;aa&#x27; and &#x27;aaa&#x27;. Tones are not represented. Nasalisation is represented after oral consonants where it distinguishes between minimal pairs.

The Ga alphabet is:
Aa, Bb, Dd, Ee, Ɛɛ, Ff, Gg, Hh, Ii, Jj, Kk, Ll, Mm, Nn, Ŋŋ, Oo, Ɔɔ, Pp, Rr, Ss, Tt, Uu, Vv, Ww, Yy, Zz

The following letters represent sounds which do not correspond with the same letter as the IPA symbol (e.g. B represents ):
*J j - 
*Y y - 

Digraphs and trigraphs:
*Gb gb - 
*Gw gw - 
*Hw hw - 
*Jw jw - 
*Kp kp - 
*Kw kw - 
*Ny ny - 
*Ŋm ŋm - 
*Ŋw ŋw - (an allophone rather than a phoneme)
*Sh sh - 
*Ts ts - 
*Shw shw - 
*Tsw tsw - 

==Oral literature==
In his 1865 collection, &quot;Wit and Wisdom from West Africa&quot;, Richard Francis Burton published over 200 Ga proverbs and sayings with English translations, taken from Johannes Zimmermann&#x27;s &quot;Grammatical Sketch of the Akra Language&quot;. Here are some of those sayings:
*&quot;Tutsofa ke la yee.&quot; &quot;Gunpowder and fire do not agree.&quot; (#7)
*&quot;Ke dse na le, gbomei fe dio.&quot; &quot;If it is dark, all men are black.&quot; (#11)
*&quot;Nu ni ake-bagbe la le, ataoole kronkron.&quot; &quot;Clear water is not wanted for quenching fire.&quot; (#13)
*&quot;Ake hinmeii enyo kwee to mli.&quot; &quot;Not with both eyes people look into a bottle.&quot; (#15)

==See also==
* Ga people
* Languages of Ghana
*Christian Jacob Protten
* Carl Christian Reindorf
* Johannes Zimmermann

==Footnotes==
==References==
*
*
*

==External links==

*My First GaDangme Dictionary kasahorow
*Short tutorial on counting in the Ga language
*Young boy speaking about Ghanaian tribes in Ga language</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q33287" start="0" end="2" title="Ga language" label="Ga"/>
<link wikidata="Q33430" start="8" end="20" title="Kwa languages" label="Kwa language"/>
<link wikidata="Q117" start="31" end="36" title="Ghana" label="Ghana"/>
<link wikidata="Q3761" start="64" end="69" title="Accra" label="Accra"/>
<link wikidata="Q627897" start="78" end="87" title="Ga people" label="Ga people"/>
<link wikidata="Q945" start="121" end="125" title="Togo" label="Togo"/>
<link wikidata="Q962" start="127" end="132" title="Benin" label="Benin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1033" start="145" end="152" title="Nigeria" label="Nigeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q33430" start="241" end="244" title="Kwa languages" label="Kwa"/>
<link wikidata="Q33838" start="267" end="285" title="Niger–Congo languages" label="Niger–Congo family"/>
<link wikidata="Q35141" start="317" end="324" title="Adangme language" label="Adangme"/>
<link wikidata="Q3443338" start="353" end="362" title="Ga-Dangme languages" label="Ga–Dangme"/>
<link wikidata="Q627897" start="421" end="430" title="Ga people" label="Ga people"/>
<link wikidata="Q130357889" start="500" end="504" title="Owoo" label="Owoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q117" start="769" end="774" title="Ghana" label="Ghana"/>
<link wikidata="Q3761" start="802" end="807" title="Accra" label="Accra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1110362" start="1362" end="1374" title="vowel length" label="vowel length"/>
<link wikidata="Q4216617" start="1572" end="1586" title="tone terracing" label="tone terracing"/>
<link wikidata="Q57316349" start="2112" end="2135" title="Christian Jacob Protten" label="Christian Jacob Protten"/>
<link wikidata="Q55612760" start="2215" end="2238" title="Gold Coast Euro-Africans" label="Gold Coast Euro-African"/>
<link wikidata="Q159318" start="2239" end="2247" title="Moravian Church" label="Moravian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1698685" start="2340" end="2359" title="Johannes Zimmermann" label="Johannes Zimmermann"/>
<link wikidata="Q1037319" start="2410" end="2433" title="Carl Christian Reindorf" label="Carl Christian Reindorf"/>
<link wikidata="Q8229" start="2712" end="2717" title="Latin script" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q9779" start="2724" end="2732" title="alphabet" label="alphabet"/>
<link wikidata="Q21204" start="2816" end="2819" title="International Phonetic Alphabet" label="IPA"/>
<link wikidata="Q2479203" start="3066" end="3080" title="oral consonant" label="oral consonant"/>
<link wikidata="Q815955" start="3113" end="3126" title="minimal pairs" label="minimal pairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q21204" start="3344" end="3347" title="International Phonetic Alphabet" label="IPA"/>
<link wikidata="Q125057" start="3678" end="3700" title="Richard Francis Burton" label="Richard Francis Burton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1698685" start="3782" end="3801" title="Johannes Zimmermann" label="Johannes Zimmermann"/>
<link wikidata="Q627897" start="4311" end="4320" title="Ga people" label="Ga people"/>
<link wikidata="Q897882" start="4323" end="4341" title="Languages of Ghana" label="Languages of Ghana"/>
<link wikidata="Q57316349" start="4343" end="4366" title="Christian Jacob Protten" label="Christian Jacob Protten"/>
<link wikidata="Q1037319" start="4369" end="4392" title="Carl Christian Reindorf" label="Carl Christian Reindorf"/>
<link wikidata="Q1698685" start="4395" end="4414" title="Johannes Zimmermann" label="Johannes Zimmermann"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="246673" wikidata="Q463197" url="?curid=246673" title="American Airlines Flight 191">
<text>American Airlines Flight 191 was a regularly scheduled domestic passenger flight from O&#x27;Hare International Airport in Chicago to Los Angeles International Airport. On the afternoon of May 25, 1979, the McDonnell Douglas DC-10 operating this flight was taking off from runway 32R at O&#x27;Hare International when its left engine detached from the wing, causing a loss of control. The aircraft crashed about from the end of runway 32R. All 271 occupants on board were killed on impact, along with two people on the ground. With a total of 273 fatalities, the disaster is the deadliest aviation accident to have occurred in the United States.

The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB) found that as the aircraft was beginning its takeoff rotation, engine number one (the left engine) separated from the left wing, flipping over the top of the wing and landing on the runway. As the engine separated from the aircraft, it severed hydraulic lines that lock the wing&#x27;s leading-edge slats in place and damaged a section of the left wing&#x27;s leading edge. Aerodynamic forces acting on the wing resulted in an uncommanded retraction of the outboard slats. As the aircraft began to climb, the damaged left wing produced far less lift than the right wing, which had its slats still deployed and its engine providing full takeoff thrust. The disrupted and unbalanced aerodynamics of the aircraft caused it to roll abruptly to the left until it was partially inverted, reaching a bank angle of 112°, before crashing in an open field by a trailer park near the end of the runway. The engine separation was attributed to damage to the pylon structure holding the engine to the wing, caused by improper maintenance procedures at American Airlines.

== Background ==
=== Aircraft ===
The aircraft involved was a McDonnell Douglas DC-10-10 registered as N110AA. At the time of the crash, it had logged just under 20,000 hours of flying time over seven years since it was delivered in 1972. The aircraft was powered by three General Electric CF6-6D engines. A review of the aircraft&#x27;s flight logs and maintenance records showed that no mechanical discrepancies were noted for May 11, 1979. On the day of the accident, in violation of standard procedure, the records were not removed from the aircraft and were destroyed in the accident. The precautions toward making sure the plane was in a full working environment were not taken on the left wing&#x27;s engine.

===Flight crew=== 
Captain Walter H. Lux (age 53) had been flying the DC-10 since its introduction eight years earlier. He had logged around 22,000 flying hours, of which about 3,000 were in a DC-10. He was also qualified to pilot 17 other aircraft, including the DC-6, DC-7, and Boeing 727. First Officer James Dillard (age 49) and Flight Engineer Alfred Udovich (age 56) were also highly experienced; they had 9,275 hours and 15,000 hours, respectively. Between them, they had 1,830 hours of flying experience in the DC-10.

==Accident==
On the accident flight, during the takeoff rotation, the number-one engine and its pylon assembly separated from the left wing, ripping away a section of the leading edge with it. The combined unit flipped over the top of the wing and landed on the runway. Robert Graham, supervisor of maintenance for American Airlines, stated:
What was said in the cockpit in the 31 seconds leading up to the final impact is not known, as the cockpit voice recorder (CVR) lost power when the engine detached. The only crash-related audio collected by the recorder is a thumping noise (likely the sound of the engine separating), followed by the first officer exclaiming, &quot;Damn!&quot;, at which point the recording ends. This may also explain why air traffic controllers were unsuccessful in their attempts to radio the crew and inform them that they had lost an engine. This loss of power did, however, prove useful in the investigation, serving as a marker of exactly what circuit in the DC-10&#x27;s extensive electrical system had failed.

In addition, due to the loss of the engine, several related systems failed. The number-one hydraulic system, powered by the number-one engine failed, but continued to operate through motor pumps that mechanically connected it to hydraulic system three. Hydraulic system three was also damaged and began leaking fluid, but maintained pressure and operation until impact. Hydraulic system two was undamaged. The number-one electrical bus, the generator of which was attached to the number-one engine, failed as well, causing several electrical systems to go offline, most notably the captain&#x27;s instruments, his stick shaker, and the slat disagreement sensors. A switch in the overhead panel would have allowed the captain to restore power to his instruments, but it was not used. The flight engineer might have reached the backup power switch (as part of an abnormal situation checklist, not as part of their takeoff emergency procedure) to restore electrical power to the number-one electrical bus. That would have worked only if electrical faults were no longer present in the number-one electrical system. To reach that backup power switch, the flight engineer would have had to rotate his seat, release his safety belt, and stand up. Regardless, the aircraft did not get any higher than above the ground and was in the air for only 31 seconds between the time the engine separated and the moment it crashed; there was insufficient time to perform such an action. In any event, the first officer was flying the airplane, and his instruments continued to function normally.
The aircraft climbed to about above ground level while spewing a white mist trail of fuel and hydraulic fluid from the left wing. The first officer followed the flight director and raised the nose to 14°, which reduced the airspeed from to the takeoff safety airspeed (V2) of , the speed at which the aircraft could safely climb after sustaining an engine failure.

The engine separation severed the hydraulic fluid lines that controlled the leading-edge slats on the left wing and locked them in place, causing the outboard slats (immediately left of the number-one engine) to retract under air load. The retraction of the slats raised the stall speed of the left wing to about , higher than the prescribed takeoff safety airspeed (V2) of 153 knots. As a result, the left wing entered a full aerodynamic stall. With the left wing stalled, the aircraft began banking to the left, rolling over onto its side until it was partially inverted at a 112° bank angle with its right wing over its left wing. 
Since the cockpit had been equipped with a closed-circuit television camera positioned behind the captain&#x27;s shoulder and connected to view screens in the passenger cabin, the passengers may have witnessed these events from the viewpoint of the cockpit as the aircraft dove towards the ground. Whether the camera&#x27;s view was interrupted by the power loss from the number-one electrical bus is not known. The aircraft eventually slammed into a field around from the end of the runway. Large sections of aircraft debris were hurled by the force of the impact into an adjacent trailer park, destroying five trailers and several cars. The DC-10 also crashed into an old storage hangar at the edge of the airport at the former site of Ravenswood Airport. The aircraft was destroyed by the impact force and ignition of a nearly full load of of fuel; no sizable components other than the engines and tail section remained.

The crash site is a field located northwest of the intersection of Touhy Avenue (Illinois Route 72) and Mount Prospect Road on the border of the suburbs of Des Plaines and Mount Prospect, Illinois.

==Victims==
In addition to the 271 people on board the aircraft, two employees at a nearby repair garage were killed, and two more were severely burned.

===Nationalities of the victims===
====Passengers====
Two of the victims in the crash of Flight 191 were:
* Itzhak Bentov, a Czechoslovakia-born Israeli–American biomedical inventor (the cardiac catheter) and New Age author (&quot;Stalking the Wild Pendulum&quot; and &quot;A Cosmic Book&quot;)
* Leonard Stogel, music business producer/manager/promoter/executive for California Jam, California Jam II, Sweathog, The Cowsills, Sam the Sham, Tommy James and the Shondells, Redbone, Gentle Giant, and other musical groups. Stogel&#x27;s parents had died in an accident in 1962 on American Airlines Flight 1 in New York City.

===Memorial===
For 32 years, the victims had no permanent memorial. Funding was obtained for a memorial in 2009 through a two-year effort by the sixth-grade class of Decatur Classical School in Chicago. The memorial, a concave wall with interlocking bricks displaying the names of the crash victims, was formally dedicated in a ceremony on October 15, 2011. The memorial is located on the south shore of Lake Opeka, at Lake Park at the northwest corner of Lee and Touhy Avenues, two miles east of the crash site. A remembrance ceremony was held at the memorial on May 25, 2019, the 40th anniversary of the accident.

Thirty victims whose remains were never identified are buried at Green Hills Memorial Park in Rancho Palos Verdes, California. The site of the crash was redeveloped around March 2021, and has been named the future site of an interchange for Interstate 90.

==Investigation==
The disaster and investigation received widespread media coverage. The impact on the public was increased by the dramatic effect of an amateur photo taken of the aircraft rolling that was published on the front page of the &quot;Chicago Tribune&quot; on the Sunday two days after the crash. 

===Engine separation===
Witnesses to the crash were in universal agreement that the aircraft had not struck any foreign objects on the runway. In addition, no pieces of the wing or other aircraft components were found along with the separated engine, other than its supporting pylon; this led investigators to conclude that nothing else had broken free from the airframe and struck the engine. Hence, the engine/pylon assembly separation could only have resulted from a structural failure. The cockpit instrument panels were damaged so badly that they did not provide any useful information.

During the investigation, an examination of the pylon attachment points revealed some damage done to the wing&#x27;s pylon mounting bracket that matched the bent shape of the pylon&#x27;s rear attachment fitting. This meant that the pylon attachment fitting had struck the mounting bracket at some point. This was important evidence, as the only way the pylon fitting could strike the wing&#x27;s mounting bracket in the observed manner was if the bolts that held the pylon to the wing had been removed, and the engine/pylon assembly was supported by something other than the aircraft itself. Therefore, investigators could now conclude that the observed damage to the rear pylon mount had been present before the crash occurred rather than being caused by it.

The NTSB determined that the damage to the left-wing engine pylon had occurred during an earlier engine change at the American Airlines aircraft maintenance facility in Tulsa, Oklahoma, between March 29 and 30, 1979. On those dates, the aircraft had undergone routine service, during which the engine and pylon had been removed from the wing for inspection and maintenance. The removal procedure recommended by McDonnell-Douglas called for the engine to be detached from the pylon before detaching the pylon itself from the wing. However, American, as well as Continental Airlines and United Airlines, had developed a different procedure that saved about 200 working hours per aircraft and &quot;more importantly from a safety standpoint, it would reduce the number of disconnects (of systems such as hydraulic and fuel lines, electrical cables, and wiring) from 79 to 27.&quot; This new procedure involved the removal of the engine and pylon assembly as a single unit rather than as individual components. United&#x27;s implementation involved the use of an overhead crane to support the engine/pylon assembly during removal and reinstallation. The method chosen by American and Continental relied on supporting the engine/pylon assembly with a large forklift.

If the forklift had been positioned incorrectly, the engine/pylon assembly would not be stable as it was being handled, causing it to rock like a seesaw and jam the pylon against the wing&#x27;s attachment points. Forklift operators were guided only by hand and voice signals, as they could not directly see the junction between the pylon and the wing. Positioning had to be extremely accurate, or structural damage could result. Compounding the problem, maintenance work on N110AA did not go smoothly. The mechanics started disconnecting the engine and pylon as a single unit, but a shift change occurred halfway through the job. During this interval, even though the forklift remained stationary, the forks supporting the entire weight of the engine and pylon moved downward slightly due to a normal loss of hydraulic pressure associated with the forklift engine being turned off; this caused a misalignment between the engine/pylon and wing. When work was resumed, the pylon was jammed on the wing, and the forklift had to be re-positioned. Whether damage to the mount was caused by the initial downward movement of the engine/pylon structure or by the realignment attempt is unclear. Regardless of how it happened, the resulting damage, although insufficient to cause an immediate failure, eventually developed into fatigue cracking, worsening with each takeoff and landing cycle during the eight weeks that followed. When the attachment finally failed, the engine and its pylon broke away from the wing. The structure surrounding the forward pylon mount also failed from the resulting stresses.

Inspection of the DC-10 fleets of the three airlines revealed that while United&#x27;s hoist approach seemed harmless, several DC-10s at both American and Continental already had fatigue cracking and bending damage to their pylon mounts caused by similar maintenance procedures. The field service representative from McDonnell-Douglas stated the company would &quot;not encourage this procedure due to the element of risk&quot; and had so advised American Airlines. McDonnell-Douglas, however, &quot;does not have the authority to either approve or disapprove the maintenance procedures of its customers.&quot;

===Inadequate speed===
The NTSB determined that the loss of one engine and the asymmetrical drag caused by damage to the wing&#x27;s leading edge should not have been enough to cause the pilots to lose control of their aircraft; the aircraft should have been capable of returning to the airport using its remaining two engines. The NTSB thus examined the effects that the engine&#x27;s separation would have on the aircraft&#x27;s flight control, hydraulic, electrical, and instrumentation systems. Unlike other aircraft designs, the DC-10 was not equipped with a separate mechanism that would lock the extended leading-edge slats into place, relying instead solely on the hydraulic pressure within the system. The NTSB determined that the engine tore through hydraulic lines as it separated from the DC-10&#x27;s wing, causing a loss of hydraulic pressure; airflow over the wings forced the left wing slats to retract, which caused a stall over the left wing. In response to the accident, slat relief valves were mandated to prevent slat retraction in case of hydraulic line damage.

The wreckage was too severely fragmented to determine the exact position of the rudders, elevators, flaps, and slats before impact. An examination of eyewitness photographs showed only that the right wing slats were fully extended as the crew tried unsuccessfully to correct their steep roll. The position of the left wing slats could not be determined from the blurry color photographs, so they were sent to a laboratory in Palo Alto, California, for digital analysis, a process that pushed the limits of 1970s technology and necessitated large, complicated, and expensive equipment. The photographs were reduced to black-and-white, which made distinguishing the slats from the wing itself possible, thus proving that they were retracted. In addition, the aircraft&#x27;s tail section was verified to be undamaged, and the landing gear was down.

Wind-tunnel and flight-simulator tests were conducted to help understand the aircraft&#x27;s trajectory after the engine detached and the left wing slats retracted. Those tests established that the damage to the wing&#x27;s leading edge and retraction of the slats increased the stall speed of the left wing from to . The DC-10 incorporates two warning devices that might have alerted the pilots to the impending stall: the slat disagreement warning light, which should have illuminated after the uncommanded retraction of the slats, and the stick shaker on the captain&#x27;s control column, which activates close to the stall speed. Both of these warning devices were powered by an electric generator driven by the number-one engine, and both became inoperable after the loss of that engine. The first officer&#x27;s control column was not equipped with a stick shaker; McDonnell Douglas offered the device as an option for the first officer, but American Airlines chose not to have it installed on its DC-10 fleet. Stick shakers for both pilots became mandatory in response to this accident.

As the aircraft had reached V1, the crew was committed to takeoff, so they followed standard procedures for an engine-out situation. This procedure is to climb at the takeoff safety airspeed (V2) and attitude (angle), as directed by the flight director. The partial electrical power failure, produced by the separation of the left engine, meant that neither the stall warning nor the slat retraction indicator was operative. Therefore, the crew did not know that the slats on the left wing were retracting. This retraction significantly raised the stall speed of the left wing. Thus, flying at the takeoff safety airspeed caused the left wing to stall while the right wing was still producing lift, so the aircraft banked sharply and uncontrollably to the left. Simulator recreations after the accident determined that &quot;had the pilot maintained excess airspeed the accident may not have occurred.&quot;

===Probable cause===
The findings of the investigation by the NTSB were released on December 21, 1979:
==Legacy of the DC-10==
The crash of Flight 191 brought strong criticism from the media regarding the DC-10&#x27;s safety and design. The DC-10 had been involved in two accidents related to the design of its cargo doors, American Airlines Flight 96 (1972) and Turkish Airlines Flight 981 (1974). The separation of engine one from its mount, the publication of the dramatic images of the airplane missing its engine seconds before the crash, and a second photo of the fireball resulting from the impact, raised widespread concerns about the safety of the DC-10. Another blow to the airplane&#x27;s reputation was dealt two weeks after the crash when the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) grounded the aircraft. Although the aircraft itself was later exonerated, the damage in the public&#x27;s eye was already done.

The investigation also revealed other DC-10s with damage caused by the same faulty maintenance procedure. The faulty procedure was banned, and the aircraft type went on to have a long career as a passenger and cargo aircraft. In response to this accident, American Airlines was fined $500,000 (equivalent to $ million in ) by the U.S. government for improper maintenance procedures. Earl Russell Marshall, a crew chief at the American Airlines maintenance facility in Tulsa where the last maintenance procedure on the aircraft had taken place, died by suicide the night before he was to be deposed by McDonnell Douglas attorneys.
On June 6, 1979, two weeks after the accident, the FAA suspended the type certificate for the DC-10, thereby grounding all DC-10s under its jurisdiction. It also enacted a special air regulation banning the DC-10 from U.S. airspace, which prevented foreign DC-10s not under the jurisdiction of the FAA from flying within the country. This was done while the FAA investigated whether the airplane&#x27;s engine mounting and pylon design met relevant requirements. Once the FAA was satisfied that maintenance issues were primarily at fault and not the actual design of the aircraft, the type certificate was restored on July 13, and the special air regulation was repealed. The type certificate was amended, however, stating, &quot;...removal of the engine and pylon as a unit will immediately render the aircraft unairworthy.&quot;

In the wake of the grounding, the FAA convened a safety panel under the auspices of the National Academy of Sciences to evaluate the design of the DC-10 and the U.S. regulatory system in general. The panel&#x27;s report, published in June 1980, found &quot;critical deficiencies in the way the government certifies the safety of American-built airliners&quot;, focusing on a shortage of FAA expertise during the certification process and a corresponding overreliance on McDonnell Douglas to ensure that the design was safe. Writing for &quot;The Air Current&quot;, aviation journalist Jon Ostrower likens the panel&#x27;s conclusions to those of a later commission convened after the 2019 grounding of the Boeing 737 MAX. Ostrower faults both manufacturers for focusing on the letter of the law regarding regulatory standards, taking a design approach that addresses how the pilots could address single-system failures without adequately considering scenarios in which multiple simultaneous malfunctions of different systems could occur.

On October 31, 1979, a DC-10 flying as Western Airlines Flight 2605 crashed in Mexico City after a red-eye flight from Los Angeles. The Western crash, however, was due to low visibility and an attempt to land on a closed runway, through, reportedly, confusion of its crew.

The loss of Air New Zealand Flight 901 on November 28, 1979, which killed 257 people, added to the DC-10&#x27;s negative reputation. The Antarctic sightseeing flight hit a volcano, though this was caused by several human and environmental factors not related to the airworthiness of the DC-10, and the aircraft was later completely exonerated.

Another DC-10 crash 10 years later, United Airlines Flight 232, restored some of the aircraft&#x27;s reputation. Despite the aircraft losing an engine and all flight controls and crash-landing in a huge fireball (which was caught on video by a local news crew) that killed 112 people, 184 people survived the accident. Experts praised the DC-10&#x27;s sturdy construction as partly responsible for the high number of survivors.

Orders for DC-10s dropped off sharply after the events of 1979 (the U.S. economic recession of 1979–82 was also a contributing factor in reduced demand for airliners). From there until the end of production 10 years later, the two largest DC-10 customers were FedEx and the U.S. Air Force (KC-10 Extender). Despite initial safety concerns, DC-10 aircraft continued to serve with passenger airlines for over three decades after the crash of Flight 191. DC-10 production ended in 1988, and many retired passenger DC-10s have since been converted to all-cargo use. The DC-10 freighter, along with its derivative, the MD-11, constitute part of the FedEx Express fleet. The DC-10s have been upgraded with the glass cockpit from the MD-11, thereby turning them into MD-10s. American Airlines retired its last DC-10s in 2000 after 29 years of service. In February 2014, Biman Bangladesh Airlines operated the final DC-10 passenger flights.

==Depictions in media==
The cable/satellite National Geographic channel produced a documentary on the crash, and an episode from &quot;Seconds From Disaster&quot; titled &quot;Chicago Plane Crash&quot; detailed the crash and included film of the investigation press conferences. The Canadian television series &quot;Mayday&quot; profiled the crash in the episode &quot;Catastrophe at O&#x27;Hare&quot;, which subsequently aired in the U.S. on the Smithsonian Channel and National Geographic Channel&#x27;s television series &quot;Air Disasters&quot;. The accident was also discussed in &quot;Breaking Point&quot;, the second episode of the first season of TV show &quot;Why Planes Crash&quot; on MSNBC.

Chicago folk singer Steve Goodman wrote the song &quot;Ballad of Flight 191 (They Know Everything About It)&quot; in response to the crash and the subsequent investigation as the inaugural song for a series of topical songs that aired on National Public Radio in 1979.

==See also==
* List of disasters in the United States by death toll
* List of aircraft accidents and incidents by number of ground fatalities
* Aviation accidents and incidents
* Aviation safety
* Similar accidents caused by engine separation:
** China Airlines Flight 358
** El Al Flight 1862
**Japan Air Lines Cargo Flight 46E
**Trans-Air Service Flight 671
**Reeve Aleutian Airways Flight 8
* Flight 191 - a list of other accident and/or incident flights with the same or similar number

==Notes==
==References==
== Further reading ==

== External links ==
* Memorial in Lake Park, Des Plaines
* NTSB Accident Report
** Alternate link
*&quot;Public Lessons Learned from Accidents – American Airlines Flight 191&quot; (Archive)
* PlaneCrashInfo.Com – American Airlines Flight 191
*Flight 191 Remembered (Fox Chicago website) (Archive)
* Pre-crash pictures from Airliners.net
*NTSB Probable Cause Report (Alternate, Archive)
* News reports at The Museum of Classic Chicago Television</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q463197" start="0" end="28" title="American Airlines Flight 191" label="American Airlines Flight 191"/>
<link wikidata="Q5290183" start="55" end="80" title="domestic passenger flight" label="domestic passenger flight"/>
<link wikidata="Q213717" start="86" end="119" title="O&amp;#x27;Hare International Airport" label="O&amp;#x27;Hare International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1297" start="123" end="130" title="Chicago" label="Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q8731" start="134" end="167" title="Los Angeles International Airport" label="Los Angeles International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q208075" start="207" end="230" title="McDonnell Douglas DC-10" label="McDonnell Douglas DC-10"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053145" start="651" end="687" title="National Transportation Safety Board" label="National Transportation Safety Board"/>
<link wikidata="Q7370303" start="748" end="756" title="rotation (aviation)" label="rotation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425059" start="939" end="948" title="hydraulic fluid" label="hydraulic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2534008" start="981" end="999" title="leading-edge slats" label="leading-edge slats"/>
<link wikidata="Q789815" start="1641" end="1646" title="hardpoint" label="pylon"/>
<link wikidata="Q32396" start="1734" end="1751" title="American Airlines" label="American Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q54173" start="2027" end="2043" title="General Electric" label="General Electric"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501579" start="2044" end="2050" title="General Electric CF6" label="CF6-6D"/>
<link wikidata="Q503761" start="2735" end="2739" title="Douglas DC-6" label="DC-6"/>
<link wikidata="Q847409" start="2741" end="2745" title="Douglas DC-7" label="DC-7"/>
<link wikidata="Q6409" start="2751" end="2761" title="Boeing 727" label="Boeing 727"/>
<link wikidata="Q7370303" start="3046" end="3062" title="Rotation (aeronautics)" label="takeoff rotation"/>
<link wikidata="Q789815" start="3094" end="3099" title="aircraft pylon" label="pylon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754137" start="3169" end="3181" title="leading edge" label="leading edge"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3439" end="3461" title="Flight recorder#Cockpit voice recorder" label="cockpit voice recorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q334563" start="4658" end="4670" title="stick shaker" label="stick shaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q2534008" start="4680" end="4684" title="leading-edge slat" label="slat"/>
<link wikidata="Q752034" start="6416" end="6433" title="stall (flight)" label="aerodynamic stall"/>
<link wikidata="Q5135310" start="6667" end="6699" title="closed-circuit television camera" label="closed-circuit television camera"/>
<link wikidata="Q386961" start="7705" end="7716" title="Des Plaines, Illinois" label="Des Plaines"/>
<link wikidata="Q995793" start="7721" end="7745" title="Mount Prospect, Illinois" label="Mount Prospect, Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q6095261" start="8010" end="8023" title="Itzhak Bentov" label="Itzhak Bentov"/>
<link wikidata="Q183308" start="8111" end="8118" title="New Age" label="New Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q21664996" start="8199" end="8213" title="Leonard Stogel" label="Leonard Stogel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2933988" start="8270" end="8284" title="California Jam" label="California Jam"/>
<link wikidata="Q5020648" start="8286" end="8303" title="California Jam II" label="California Jam II"/>
<link wikidata="Q7654212" start="8305" end="8313" title="Sweathog" label="Sweathog"/>
<link wikidata="Q1658371" start="8315" end="8327" title="The Cowsills" label="The Cowsills"/>
<link wikidata="Q1971786" start="8329" end="8341" title="Sam the Sham" label="Sam the Sham"/>
<link wikidata="Q1932040" start="8343" end="8372" title="Tommy James and the Shondells" label="Tommy James and the Shondells"/>
<link wikidata="Q1751280" start="8374" end="8381" title="Redbone (band)" label="Redbone"/>
<link wikidata="Q943241" start="8383" end="8395" title="Gentle Giant" label="Gentle Giant"/>
<link wikidata="Q890629" start="8480" end="8506" title="American Airlines Flight 1 (1962)" label="American Airlines Flight 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q6477209" start="8930" end="8940" title="Lake Opeka" label="Lake Opeka"/>
<link wikidata="Q180226" start="9237" end="9268" title="Rancho Palos Verdes, California" label="Rancho Palos Verdes, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q94958" start="9384" end="9397" title="Interstate 90" label="Interstate 90"/>
<link wikidata="Q47596" start="9647" end="9662" title="Chicago Tribune" label="Chicago Tribune"/>
<link wikidata="Q222946" start="10073" end="10081" title="airframe" label="airframe"/>
<link wikidata="Q44989" start="11235" end="11250" title="Tulsa, Oklahoma" label="Tulsa, Oklahoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q216486" start="11626" end="11646" title="Continental Airlines" label="Continental Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q174769" start="11651" end="11666" title="United Airlines" label="United Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q1411613" start="12125" end="12139" title="hoist (device)" label="overhead crane"/>
<link wikidata="Q41577" start="12318" end="12326" title="forklift" label="forklift"/>
<link wikidata="Q19793" start="12475" end="12481" title="seesaw" label="seesaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q507234" start="13649" end="13665" title="fatigue (material)" label="fatigue cracking"/>
<link wikidata="Q47265" start="16052" end="16073" title="Palo Alto, California" label="Palo Alto, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q334563" start="17017" end="17029" title="stick shaker" label="stick shaker"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17599" end="17601" title="V speeds#V1 definitions" label="V1"/>
<link wikidata="Q986260" start="17763" end="17765" title="V speeds" label="V2"/>
<link wikidata="Q371949" start="17808" end="17823" title="flight director (aeronautics)" label="flight director"/>
<link wikidata="Q783579" start="18804" end="18831" title="American Airlines Flight 96" label="American Airlines Flight 96"/>
<link wikidata="Q462716" start="18843" end="18870" title="Turkish Airlines Flight 981" label="Turkish Airlines Flight 981"/>
<link wikidata="Q335357" start="19236" end="19267" title="Federal Aviation Administration" label="Federal Aviation Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q5260784" start="19993" end="20000" title="Deposition (law)" label="deposed"/>
<link wikidata="Q1418690" start="20102" end="20118" title="type certificate" label="type certificate"/>
<link wikidata="Q270794" start="20953" end="20981" title="National Academy of Sciences" label="National Academy of Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q62027184" start="21549" end="21585" title="Boeing 737 MAX groundings" label="2019 grounding of the Boeing 737 MAX"/>
<link wikidata="Q6533542" start="21642" end="21659" title="letter of the law" label="letter of the law"/>
<link wikidata="Q3562580" start="21943" end="21971" title="Western Airlines Flight 2605" label="Western Airlines Flight 2605"/>
<link wikidata="Q1363305" start="22003" end="22017" title="red-eye flight" label="red-eye flight"/>
<link wikidata="Q406599" start="22190" end="22216" title="Mount Erebus disaster" label="Air New Zealand Flight 901"/>
<link wikidata="Q1555938" start="22315" end="22324" title="Antarctic" label="Antarctic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129232" start="22344" end="22357" title="controlled flight into terrain" label="hit a volcano"/>
<link wikidata="Q580343" start="22559" end="22585" title="United Airlines Flight 232" label="United Airlines Flight 232"/>
<link wikidata="Q11223" start="23226" end="23240" title="United States Air Force" label="U.S. Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q585162" start="23242" end="23256" title="McDonnell Douglas KC-10 Extender" label="KC-10 Extender"/>
<link wikidata="Q62161" start="23566" end="23571" title="McDonnell Douglas MD-11" label="MD-11"/>
<link wikidata="Q782557" start="23596" end="23609" title="FedEx Express" label="FedEx Express"/>
<link wikidata="Q15038173" start="23656" end="23669" title="glass cockpit" label="glass cockpit"/>
<link wikidata="Q208075" start="23712" end="23717" title="MD-10" label="MD-10"/>
<link wikidata="Q863432" start="23815" end="23840" title="Biman Bangladesh Airlines" label="Biman Bangladesh Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q184452" start="23914" end="23919" title="cable television" label="cable"/>
<link wikidata="Q209588" start="23920" end="23929" title="satellite television" label="satellite"/>
<link wikidata="Q157118" start="23930" end="23949" title="National Geographic (U.S. TV channel)" label="National Geographic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140582" start="24021" end="24042" title="Seconds From Disaster" label="Seconds From Disaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q1087066" start="24202" end="24208" title="List of Mayday episodes" label="Mayday"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="24249" end="24287" title="List of Mayday episodes#ep92" label="&amp;quot;Catastrophe at O&amp;#x27;Hare&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q7545619" start="24333" end="24352" title="Smithsonian Channel" label="Smithsonian Channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q157118" start="24357" end="24384" title="National Geographic Channel" label="National Geographic Channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q527965" start="24416" end="24429" title="Mayday (Canadian TV series)" label="Air Disasters"/>
<link wikidata="Q39055523" start="24556" end="24572" title="Why Planes Crash" label="Why Planes Crash"/>
<link wikidata="Q13973" start="24582" end="24587" title="MSNBC" label="MSNBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q585159" start="24610" end="24623" title="Steve Goodman" label="Steve Goodman"/>
<link wikidata="Q671510" start="24828" end="24849" title="NPR" label="National Public Radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q6602758" start="24875" end="24927" title="List of disasters in the United States by death toll" label="List of disasters in the United States by death toll"/>
<link wikidata="Q21067774" start="24930" end="25001" title="List of aircraft accidents and incidents by number of ground fatalities" label="List of aircraft accidents and incidents by number of ground fatalities"/>
<link wikidata="Q108284447" start="25004" end="25036" title="Aviation accidents and incidents" label="Aviation accidents and incidents"/>
<link wikidata="Q640853" start="25039" end="25054" title="Aviation safety" label="Aviation safety"/>
<link wikidata="Q704766" start="25107" end="25132" title="China Airlines Flight 358" label="China Airlines Flight 358"/>
<link wikidata="Q1323799" start="25136" end="25153" title="El Al Flight 1862" label="El Al Flight 1862"/>
<link wikidata="Q6164968" start="25156" end="25188" title="Japan Air Lines Cargo Flight 46E" label="Japan Air Lines Cargo Flight 46E"/>
<link wikidata="Q97174681" start="25191" end="25219" title="Trans-Air Service Flight 671" label="Trans-Air Service Flight 671"/>
<link wikidata="Q22773990" start="25222" end="25253" title="Reeve Aleutian Airways Flight 8" label="Reeve Aleutian Airways Flight 8"/>
<link wikidata="Q5459153" start="25256" end="25266" title="Flight 191 (disambiguation)" label="Flight 191"/>
<link wikidata="Q7752704" start="25804" end="25844" title="The Museum of Classic Chicago Television" label="The Museum of Classic Chicago Television"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="246674" wikidata="Q2739141" url="?curid=246674" title="Weed control">
<text>Weed control is a type of pest control, which attempts to stop or reduce growth of weeds, especially noxious weeds, with the aim of reducing their competition with desired flora and fauna including domesticated plants and livestock, and in natural settings preventing non native species competing with native species.

Weed control is important in agriculture. Methods include hand cultivation with hoes, powered cultivation with cultivators, smothering with mulch, lethal wilting with high heat, burning, and chemical control with herbicides (weed killers).

== Need for control ==
Weeds compete with productive crops or pasture. They can be poisonous, distasteful, produce burrs, thorns, or otherwise interfere with the use and management of desirable plants by contaminating harvests or interfering with livestock.

Weeds compete with crops for space, nutrients, water and light. Smaller, slower growing seedlings are more susceptible than those that are larger and more vigorous. Onions are one of the most vulnerable, because they are slow to germinate and produce slender, upright stems. By contrast broad beans produce large seedlings and suffer far fewer effects other than during periods of water shortage at the crucial time when the pods are filling out. Transplanted crops raised in sterile soil or potting compost gain a head start over germinating weeds.

Weeds also vary in their competitive abilities according to conditions and season. Tall-growing vigorous weeds such as fat hen (&quot;Chenopodium album&quot;) can have the most pronounced effects on adjacent crops, although seedlings of fat hen that appear in late summer produce only small plants. Chickweed (&quot;Stellaria media&quot;), a low growing plant, can happily co-exist with a tall crop during the summer, but plants that have overwintered will grow rapidly in early spring and may swamp crops such as onions or spring greens.

The presence of weeds does not necessarily mean that they are damaging a crop, especially during the early growth stages when both weeds and crops can grow without interference. However, as growth proceeds they each begin to require greater amounts of water and nutrients. Estimates suggest that weed and crop can co-exist harmoniously for around three weeks before competition becomes significant. One study found that after competition had started, the final yield of onion bulbs was reduced at almost 4% per day.

Perennial weeds with bulbils, such as lesser celandine and oxalis, or with persistent underground stems such as couch grass (&quot;Agropyron repens&quot;) or creeping buttercup (&quot;Ranunculus repens&quot;) store reserves of food, and are thus able to persist in drought or through winter. Some perennials such as couch grass exude allelopathic chemicals that inhibit the growth of other nearby plants.

Weeds can also host pests and diseases that can spread to cultivated crops. Charlock and Shepherd&#x27;s purse may carry clubroot, eelworm can be harboured by chickweed, fat hen and shepherd&#x27;s purse, while the cucumber mosaic virus, which can devastate the cucurbit family, is carried by a range of different weeds including chickweed and groundsel.

Pests such as cutworms may first attack weeds but then move on to cultivated crops.

Some plants are considered weeds by some farmers and crops by others. Charlock, a common weed in the southeastern US, are weeds according to row crop growers, but are valued by beekeepers, who seek out places where it blooms all winter, thus providing pollen for honeybees and other pollinators. Its bloom resists all but a very hard freeze, and recovers once the freeze ends.

== Weed propagation ==
=== Seeds ===
Annual and biennial weeds such as chickweed, annual meadow grass, shepherd&#x27;s purse, groundsel, fat hen, cleaver, speedwell and hairy bittercress propagate themselves by seeding. Many produce huge numbers of seed several times a season, some all year round. Groundsel can produce 1000 seed, and can continue right through a mild winter, whilst Scentless Mayweed produces over 30,000 seeds per plant. Not all of these will germinate at once, but over several seasons, lying dormant in the soil sometimes for years until exposed to light. Poppy seed can survive 80–100 years, dock 50 or more. There can be many thousands of seeds in a square foot or square metre of ground, thus any soil disturbance will produce a flush of fresh weed seedlings.

=== Subsurface/surface ===
The most persistent perennials spread by underground creeping rhizomes that can regrow from a tiny fragment. These include couch grass, bindweed, ground elder, nettles, rosebay willow herb, Japanese knotweed, horsetail and bracken, as well as creeping thistle, whose tap roots can put out lateral roots. Other perennials put out runners that spread along the soil surface. As they creep they set down roots, enabling them to colonise bare ground with great rapidity. These include creeping buttercup and ground ivy. Yet another group of perennials propagate by stolons- stems that arch back into the ground to reroot. The most familiar of these is the bramble.

== Methods ==

Weed control plans typically consist of many methods which are divided into biological, chemical, cultural, and physical/mechanical control.

===Physical/mechanical methods===

==== Coverings ====
In a domestic gardens, methods of weed control include covering an area of ground with a material that creates an unsuitable environment for weed growth, known as a &quot;weed mat&quot;. For example, several layers of wet newspaper prevent light from reaching plants beneath, which kills them.

In the case of black plastic, the greenhouse effect kills the plants. Although the black plastic sheet is effective at preventing weeds that it covers, it is difficult to achieve complete coverage. Eradicating persistent perennials may require the sheets to be left in place for at least two seasons.

Some plants are said to produce root exudates that suppress herbaceous weeds. &quot;Tagetes minuta&quot; is claimed to be effective against couch and ground elder, whilst a border of comfrey is also said to act as a barrier against the invasion of some weeds including couch.
A layer of wood chip mulch prevents some weeds from sprouting.

Gravel can serve as an inorganic mulch.

Irrigation is sometimes used as a weed control measure such as in the case of paddy fields to kill any plant other than the water-tolerant rice crop.

==== Manual removal ====

Many gardeners still remove weeds by manually pulling them out of the ground, making sure to include the roots that would otherwise allow some to re-sprout.

Hoeing off weed leaves and stems as soon as they appear can eventually weaken and kill perennials, although this will require persistence in the case of plants such as bindweed. Nettle infestations can be tackled by cutting back at least three times a year, repeated over a three-year period. Bramble can be dealt with in a similar way.

A highly successful, mostly manual, removal programme of weed control in natural bush land has been the control of sea spurge by Sea Spurge Remote Area Teams in Tasmania.

==== Tillage ====

Ploughing includes tilling of soil, intercultural ploughing and summer ploughing. Ploughing uproots weeds, causing them to die. Summer ploughing also helps in killing pests.

Mechanical tilling with various types of cultivators can remove weeds around crop plants at various points in the growing process.

An Aquamog, an aquatic weed harvester, can be used to remove weeds covering a body of water.

==== Thermal ====

Several thermal methods can control weeds.

 uses a flame several centimetres/inches away from the weeds to singe them, giving them a sudden and severe heating. The goal of flame weeding is not necessarily burning the plant, but rather causing a lethal wilting by denaturing proteins in the weed. Similarly, hot air weeders can heat up the seeds to the point of destroying them. Flame weeders can be combined with techniques such as stale seedbeds (preparing and watering the seedbed early, then killing the nascent crop of weeds that springs up from it, then sowing the crop seeds) and pre-emergence flaming (doing a flame pass against weed seedlings after the sowing of the crop seeds but before those seedlings emerge from the soil—a span of time that can be days or weeks).

Hot foam causes the cell walls to rupture, killing the plant. Weed burners heat up soil quickly and destroy superficial parts of the plants. Weed seeds are often heat resistant and even react with an increase of growth on dry heat.

Since the 19th century soil steam sterilization has been used to clean weeds completely from soil. Several research results confirm the high effectiveness of humid heat against weeds and its seeds.

Soil solarization in some circumstances is very effective at eliminating weeds while maintaining grass. Planted grass tends to have a higher heat/humidity tolerance than unwanted weeds.

==== Lasers ====
In precision agriculture, novel agricultural robots and machines can use lasers for weed control, called &quot;laserweeding&quot;. Their benefits may include &quot;healthier crops and soil, decreased herbicide use, and reduced chemical and labor costs&quot;.

==== Seed targeting ====
In 1998, the Australian Herbicide Resistance Initiative debuted. gathered fifteen scientists and technical staff members to conduct field surveys, collect seeds, test for resistance and study the biochemical and genetic mechanisms of resistance. A collaboration with DuPont led to a mandatory herbicide labeling program, in which each mode of action is clearly identified by a letter of the alphabet.

The key innovation of the Australian Herbicide Resistance Initiative has been to focus on weed seeds. Ryegrass seeds last only a few years in soil, so if farmers can prevent new seeds from arriving, the number of sprouts will shrink each year. Until the new approach farmers were unintentionally helping the seeds. Their combines loosen ryegrass seeds from their stalks and spread them over the fields. In the mid-1980s, a few farmers hitched covered trailers, called &quot;chaff carts&quot;, behind their combines to catch the chaff and weed seeds. The collected material is then burned.

An alternative is to concentrate the seeds into a half-meter-wide strip called a windrow and burn the windrows after the harvest, destroying the seeds. Since 2003, windrow burning has been adopted by about 70% of farmers in Western Australia.

Yet another approach is the Harrington Seed Destructor, which is an adaptation of a coal pulverizing cage mill that uses steel bars whirling at up to 1500 rpm. It keeps all the organic material in the field and does not involve combustion, but kills 95% of seeds.

===Cultural methods===
==== Stale seed bed ====
Another manual technique is the ‘stale seed bed’, which involves cultivating the soil, then leaving it fallow for a week or so. When the initial weeds sprout, the grower lightly hoes them away before planting the desired crop. However, even a freshly cleared bed is susceptible to airborne seed from elsewhere, as well as seed carried by passing animals on their fur, or from imported manure.

==== Buried drip irrigation ====
Buried drip irrigation involves burying drip tape in the subsurface near the planting bed, thereby limiting weeds access to water while also allowing crops to obtain moisture. It is most effective during dry periods.

==== Crop rotation ====
Rotating crops with ones that kill weeds by choking them out, such as hemp, &quot;Mucuna pruriens&quot;, and other crops, can be a very effective method of weed control. It is a way to avoid the use of herbicides, and to gain the benefits of crop rotation.

=== Biological methods ===
A biological weed control regiment can consist of biological control agents, bioherbicides, use of grazing animals, and protection of natural predators. Post-dispersal, weed seed predators, like ground beetles and small vertebrates, can substantially contribute to the weed regulation by removing weed seeds from the soil surface and thus reduce seed bank size. Several studies provided evidence for the role of invertebrates to the biological control of weeds

==== Animal grazing ====

Companies using goats to control and eradicate leafy spurge, knapweed, and other toxic weeds have sprouted across the American West.

===Chemical methods===

==== Herbicides ====
The above described methods of weed control use no or very limited chemical inputs. They are preferred by organic gardeners or organic farmers.

However weed control can also be achieved by the use of herbicides. Selective herbicides kill certain targets while leaving the desired crop relatively unharmed. Some of these act by interfering with the growth of the weed and are often based on plant hormones. Herbicides are generally classified as follows:

* Contact herbicides destroy only plant tissue that contacts the herbicide. Generally, these are the fastest-acting herbicides. They are ineffective on perennial plants that can re-grow from roots or tubers.
* Systemic herbicides are foliar-applied and move through the plant where they destroy a greater amount of tissue. Glyphosate is currently the most used systemic herbicide.
* Soil-borne herbicides are applied to the soil and are taken up by the roots of the target plant.
* Pre-emergent herbicides are applied to the soil and prevent germination or early growth of weed seeds.

In agriculture large scale and systematic procedures are usually required, often by machines, such as large liquid herbicide &#x27;floater&#x27; sprayers, or aerial application.

These are thought to likely have several substantial detrimental impacts (e.g. on soils, health and insects) – which may partly explain the development of alternatives described here – and there are also systematic procedures using herbicides that have lower impacts such as robots and machines that apply low amounts with high precision.

===Organic approaches===

Organic weed control involves anything other than applying manufactured chemicals. Typically a combination of methods are used to achieve satisfactory control.

Sulfur in some circumstances is accepted within British Soil Association standards.

=== Bradley method ===
The Bradley Method of Bush Regeneration uses ecological processes to do much of the work.

Perennial weeds also propagate by seeding; the airborne seed of the dandelion and the rose-bay willow herb parachute far and wide. Dandelion and dock also put down deep tap roots, which, although they do not spread underground, are able to regrow from any remaining piece left in the ground.

=== Hybrid ===
One method of maintaining the effectiveness of individual strategies is to combine them with others that work in complete different ways. Thus seed targeting has been combined with herbicides. In Australia seed management has been effectively combined with trifluralin and clethodim.

== Herbicide resistance ==
Resistance occurs when a target plant species does not respond to a chemical that previously used to control it. It has been argued that over-reliance on herbicides along with the absence of any preventive or other cultural practices resulted in the evolution and spread of herbicide-resistant weeds. Increasing number of herbicide resistance weeds around the world has led to warnings on reducing frequent use of herbicides with the same or similar modes of action and combining chemicals with other weed control methods; this is called &#x27;Integrated Weed Management&#x27;.

===Farming practices===

Herbicide resistance recently became a critical problem as many Australian sheep farmers switched to exclusively growing wheat in their pastures in the 1970s. In wheat fields, introduced varieties of ryegrass, while good for grazing sheep, are intense competitors with wheat. Ryegrasses produce so many seeds that, if left unchecked, they can completely choke a field. Herbicides provided excellent control, while reducing soil disrupting because of less need to plough. Within little more than a decade, ryegrass and other weeds began to develop resistance. Australian farmers evolved again and began diversifying their techniques.

In 1983, patches of ryegrass had become immune to Hoegrass, a family of herbicides that inhibit an enzyme called acetyl coenzyme A carboxylase.

Ryegrass populations were large, and had substantial genetic diversity, because farmers had planted many varieties. Ryegrass is cross-pollinated by wind, so genes shuffle frequently. Farmers sprayed inexpensive Hoegrass year after year, creating selection pressure, but were diluting the herbicide in order to save money, increasing plants survival. Hoegrass was mostly replaced by a group of herbicides that block acetolactate synthase, again helped by poor application practices. Ryegrass evolved a kind of &quot;cross-resistance&quot; that allowed it to rapidly break down a variety of herbicides. Australian farmers lost four classes of herbicides in only a few years. As of 2013 only two herbicide classes, called Photosystem II and long-chain fatty acid inhibitors, had become the last hope.

== Weed societies ==
Internationally, weed societies help collaboration in weed science and management. In North America the Weed Science Society of America (WSSA) was founded in 1956 and publishes three journals: &quot;Weed Science&quot;, &quot;Weed Technology&quot;, and &quot;Invasive Plant Science and Management.&quot; In Britain, European Weed Research Council was established in 1958 and later expanded their scope under the name European Weed Research Society The main journal of this society is Weed Research. Moreover, the Council of Australasian Weed Society (CAWS) serves as a centre for information on Australian weeds, while New Zealand Plant Protection Society (NZPPS) facilitates information sharing in New Zealand. 

Strategic weed management is a process of managing weeds at a district, regional or national scale. In Australia the first published weed management strategies were developed in Tasmania, New South Wales and South Australian 1999, followed by the National Weeds Strategy in 1999.

== See also ==

* Control of Bramble
* Crop weed
* Integrated pest management
* Invasive species
* Mechanical weed control
* Mulch
* Noxious weed
* Pesticide application

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2739141" start="0" end="12" title="Weed control" label="Weed control"/>
<link wikidata="Q2306047" start="26" end="38" title="pest control" label="pest control"/>
<link wikidata="Q101879" start="83" end="87" title="weed" label="weed"/>
<link wikidata="Q7067310" start="101" end="113" title="noxious weed" label="noxious weed"/>
<link wikidata="Q11395" start="198" end="209" title="domesticate" label="domesticate"/>
<link wikidata="Q756" start="211" end="216" title="plant" label="plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q103459" start="222" end="231" title="livestock" label="livestock"/>
<link wikidata="Q11451" start="348" end="359" title="agriculture" label="agriculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q131154" start="399" end="403" title="hoe (tool)" label="hoes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1273840" start="430" end="440" title="cultivator" label="cultivator"/>
<link wikidata="Q9395337" start="459" end="464" title="mulch" label="mulch"/>
<link wikidata="Q2299244" start="473" end="480" title="wilting" label="wilting"/>
<link wikidata="Q170518" start="497" end="501" title="burn" label="burn"/>
<link wikidata="Q4392804" start="510" end="526" title="Benthiocarb" label="chemical control"/>
<link wikidata="Q178266" start="532" end="541" title="herbicide" label="herbicide"/>
<link wikidata="Q181394" start="855" end="863" title="nutrient" label="nutrient"/>
<link wikidata="Q23485" start="984" end="989" title="Onion" label="Onion"/>
<link wikidata="Q131342" start="1106" end="1117" title="broad beans" label="broad beans"/>
<link wikidata="Q212254" start="1319" end="1326" title="compost" label="compost"/>
<link wikidata="Q158610" start="1489" end="1496" title="Chenopodium album" label="fat hen"/>
<link wikidata="Q158711" start="1669" end="1678" title="Stellaria media" label="Chickweed"/>
<link wikidata="Q157957" start="2427" end="2436" title="Perennial plant" label="Perennial"/>
<link wikidata="Q10437539" start="2448" end="2454" title="bulbil" label="bulbil"/>
<link wikidata="Q157557" start="2465" end="2481" title="lesser celandine" label="lesser celandine"/>
<link wikidata="Q157378" start="2486" end="2492" title="oxalis" label="oxalis"/>
<link wikidata="Q276262" start="2539" end="2550" title="Elymus repens" label="couch grass"/>
<link wikidata="Q213356" start="2585" end="2603" title="creeping buttercup" label="creeping buttercup"/>
<link wikidata="Q190334" start="2761" end="2773" title="allelopathic" label="allelopathic"/>
<link wikidata="Q27986" start="2909" end="2917" title="Charlock" label="Charlock"/>
<link wikidata="Q27264" start="2922" end="2943" title="Shepherd&amp;#x27;s purse" label="Shepherd&amp;#x27;s purse"/>
<link wikidata="Q101095067" start="2954" end="2962" title="clubroot" label="clubroot"/>
<link wikidata="Q5185" start="2964" end="2971" title="nematode" label="eelworm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1518692" start="3048" end="3069" title="cucumber mosaic virus" label="cucumber mosaic virus"/>
<link wikidata="Q8314" start="3095" end="3110" title="Cucurbitaceae" label="cucurbit family"/>
<link wikidata="Q260779" start="3203" end="3210" title="cutworm" label="cutworm"/>
<link wikidata="Q27986" start="3344" end="3352" title="Charlock" label="Charlock"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="3388" end="3390" title="United States" label="US"/>
<link wikidata="Q852389" start="3451" end="3460" title="beekeeper" label="beekeeper"/>
<link wikidata="Q102857" start="3537" end="3545" title="honeybee" label="honeybee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141466" start="3557" end="3567" title="pollinator" label="pollinator"/>
<link wikidata="Q192691" start="3689" end="3695" title="Annual plant" label="Annual"/>
<link wikidata="Q189774" start="3700" end="3708" title="biennial plant" label="biennial"/>
<link wikidata="Q158711" start="3723" end="3732" title="chickweed" label="chickweed"/>
<link wikidata="Q27264" start="3755" end="3776" title="shepherd&amp;#x27;s purse" label="shepherd&amp;#x27;s purse"/>
<link wikidata="Q504256" start="3778" end="3787" title="Senecio vulgaris" label="groundsel"/>
<link wikidata="Q158610" start="3789" end="3796" title="Chenopodium album" label="fat hen"/>
<link wikidata="Q161581" start="3798" end="3805" title="Galium aparine" label="cleaver"/>
<link wikidata="Q7216874" start="3807" end="3816" title="Veronica (plant)" label="speedwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q157926" start="3821" end="3838" title="hairy bittercress" label="hairy bittercress"/>
<link wikidata="Q1479412" start="3839" end="3848" title="plant propagation" label="propagate"/>
<link wikidata="Q40763" start="3863" end="3867" title="seed" label="seed"/>
<link wikidata="Q19848986" start="4037" end="4054" title="Scentless Mayweed" label="Scentless Mayweed"/>
<link wikidata="Q193838" start="4115" end="4124" title="germinate" label="germinate"/>
<link wikidata="Q2007388" start="4230" end="4240" title="Poppy seed" label="Poppy seed"/>
<link wikidata="Q157264" start="4267" end="4271" title="Dock (plant)" label="dock"/>
<link wikidata="Q184208" start="4527" end="4534" title="rhizome" label="rhizome"/>
<link wikidata="Q276262" start="4588" end="4599" title="Elymus repens" label="couch grass"/>
<link wikidata="Q957750" start="4601" end="4609" title="bindweed" label="bindweed"/>
<link wikidata="Q217778" start="4611" end="4623" title="ground elder" label="ground elder"/>
<link wikidata="Q121671" start="4625" end="4632" title="Urtica" label="nettles"/>
<link wikidata="Q18421053" start="4655" end="4672" title="Japanese knotweed" label="Japanese knotweed"/>
<link wikidata="Q28114" start="4674" end="4683" title="horsetail" label="horsetail"/>
<link wikidata="Q258034" start="4688" end="4695" title="bracken" label="bracken"/>
<link wikidata="Q341600" start="4708" end="4724" title="creeping thistle" label="creeping thistle"/>
<link wikidata="Q36133" start="4824" end="4828" title="soil" label="soil"/>
<link wikidata="Q146130" start="4955" end="4964" title="buttercup" label="buttercup"/>
<link wikidata="Q162544" start="4969" end="4979" title="ground ivy" label="ground ivy"/>
<link wikidata="Q633912" start="5026" end="5032" title="stolon" label="stolon"/>
<link wikidata="Q602740" start="5117" end="5124" title="bramble" label="bramble"/>
<link wikidata="Q11032" start="5561" end="5570" title="newspaper" label="newspaper"/>
<link wikidata="Q41560" start="5668" end="5685" title="greenhouse effect" label="greenhouse effect"/>
<link wikidata="Q207123" start="5996" end="6000" title="herb" label="herb"/>
<link wikidata="Q599870" start="6020" end="6034" title="Tagetes minuta" label="Tagetes minuta"/>
<link wikidata="Q161566" start="6119" end="6126" title="comfrey" label="comfrey"/>
<link wikidata="Q663690" start="6223" end="6232" title="Woodchips" label="wood chip"/>
<link wikidata="Q9395337" start="6233" end="6238" title="mulch" label="mulch"/>
<link wikidata="Q133833" start="6276" end="6282" title="Gravel" label="Gravel"/>
<link wikidata="Q11453" start="6317" end="6327" title="Irrigation" label="Irrigation"/>
<link wikidata="Q842623" start="6395" end="6407" title="paddy fields" label="paddy fields"/>
<link wikidata="Q1250055" start="7105" end="7115" title="sea spurge" label="sea spurge"/>
<link wikidata="Q30688883" start="7119" end="7147" title="Sea Spurge Remote Area Teams" label="Sea Spurge Remote Area Teams"/>
<link wikidata="Q34366" start="7151" end="7159" title="Tasmania" label="Tasmania"/>
<link wikidata="Q11464" start="7181" end="7187" title="Plough" label="Plough"/>
<link wikidata="Q1273840" start="7397" end="7407" title="cultivator" label="cultivator"/>
<link wikidata="Q60754817" start="7491" end="7498" title="Aquamog" label="Aquamog"/>
<link wikidata="Q22965505" start="7503" end="7525" title="aquatic weed harvester" label="aquatic weed harvester"/>
<link wikidata="Q235544" start="7653" end="7658" title="flame" label="flame"/>
<link wikidata="Q2299244" start="7854" end="7861" title="wilting" label="wilting"/>
<link wikidata="Q273186" start="7865" end="7884" title="denaturation (biochemistry)" label="denaturing proteins"/>
<link wikidata="Q1269685" start="8636" end="8660" title="soil steam sterilization" label="soil steam sterilization"/>
<link wikidata="Q1750058" start="8812" end="8829" title="Soil solarization" label="Soil solarization"/>
<link wikidata="Q740083" start="9019" end="9040" title="precision agriculture" label="precision agriculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q4414810" start="9048" end="9066" title="agricultural robot" label="agricultural robot"/>
<link wikidata="Q4057127" start="9085" end="9095" title="agricultural technology" label="use lasers"/>
<link wikidata="Q889669" start="9200" end="9204" title="soil conservation" label="soil"/>
<link wikidata="Q221062" start="9568" end="9574" title="DuPont" label="DuPont"/>
<link wikidata="Q1610560" start="10374" end="10381" title="windrow" label="windrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q7597223" start="10883" end="10897" title="stale seed bed" label="stale seed bed"/>
<link wikidata="Q131154" start="11028" end="11032" title="Hoe (tool)" label="hoes"/>
<link wikidata="Q185716" start="11235" end="11241" title="manure" label="manure"/>
<link wikidata="Q746694" start="11277" end="11299" title="Drip irrigation" label="Buried drip irrigation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7150699" start="11589" end="11593" title="hemp" label="hemp"/>
<link wikidata="Q953611" start="11601" end="11616" title="Mucuna pruriens" label="Mucuna pruriens"/>
<link wikidata="Q191258" start="11761" end="11774" title="crop rotation" label="crop rotation"/>
<link wikidata="Q116890" start="11854" end="11879" title="Biological pest control" label="biological control agents"/>
<link wikidata="Q567968" start="11881" end="11893" title="bioherbicide" label="bioherbicide"/>
<link wikidata="Q160566" start="12339" end="12351" title="Euphorbia virgata" label="leafy spurge"/>
<link wikidata="Q156414" start="12353" end="12361" title="knapweed" label="knapweed"/>
<link wikidata="Q12612" start="12410" end="12423" title="American West" label="American West"/>
<link wikidata="Q3162639" start="12577" end="12594" title="Organic gardening" label="organic gardeners"/>
<link wikidata="Q165647" start="12598" end="12613" title="Organic farming" label="organic farmers"/>
<link wikidata="Q11364" start="12868" end="12875" title="hormone" label="hormone"/>
<link wikidata="Q183319" start="13127" end="13132" title="tuber" label="tuber"/>
<link wikidata="Q407232" start="13250" end="13260" title="Glyphosate" label="Glyphosate"/>
<link wikidata="Q2533557" start="13409" end="13421" title="Preemergent herbicides" label="Pre-emergent"/>
<link wikidata="Q11451" start="13516" end="13527" title="agriculture" label="agriculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q396053" start="13671" end="13689" title="aerial application" label="aerial application"/>
<link wikidata="Q740083" start="14010" end="14029" title="precision agriculture" label="with high precision"/>
<link wikidata="Q682" start="14219" end="14225" title="Sulfur" label="Sulfur"/>
<link wikidata="Q7554873" start="14275" end="14291" title="Soil Association" label="Soil Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q5001453" start="14331" end="14366" title="Bradley method of bush regeneration" label="Bradley Method of Bush Regeneration"/>
<link wikidata="Q157957" start="14418" end="14427" title="Perennial plant" label="Perennial"/>
<link wikidata="Q30024" start="14486" end="14495" title="dandelion" label="dandelion"/>
<link wikidata="Q157637" start="14504" end="14524" title="epilobium" label="rose-bay willow herb"/>
<link wikidata="Q609336" start="14587" end="14595" title="tap root" label="tap root"/>
<link wikidata="Q418247" start="14983" end="14994" title="trifluralin" label="trifluralin"/>
<link wikidata="Q178266" start="15360" end="15380" title="herbicide resistance" label="herbicide resistance"/>
<link wikidata="Q158509" start="15842" end="15850" title="ryegrass" label="ryegrass"/>
<link wikidata="Q715317" start="16389" end="16406" title="acetyl coenzyme A" label="acetyl coenzyme A"/>
<link wikidata="Q901081" start="16407" end="16418" title="carboxylase" label="carboxylase"/>
<link wikidata="Q2823839" start="16836" end="16857" title="acetolactate synthase" label="acetolactate synthase"/>
<link wikidata="Q22327014" start="17140" end="17154" title="Photosystem II" label="Photosystem II"/>
<link wikidata="Q61476" start="17159" end="17180" title="long-chain fatty acid" label="long-chain fatty acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q28404639" start="17345" end="17376" title="Weed Science Society of America" label="Weed Science Society of America"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18253" end="18271" title="Bramble#Uses#Control" label="Control of Bramble"/>
<link wikidata="Q5187959" start="18274" end="18283" title="Crop weed" label="Crop weed"/>
<link wikidata="Q525309" start="18286" end="18312" title="Integrated pest management" label="Integrated pest management"/>
<link wikidata="Q183368" start="18315" end="18331" title="Invasive species" label="Invasive species"/>
<link wikidata="Q6804556" start="18334" end="18357" title="Mechanical weed control" label="Mechanical weed control"/>
<link wikidata="Q9395337" start="18360" end="18365" title="Mulch" label="Mulch"/>
<link wikidata="Q7067310" start="18368" end="18380" title="Noxious weed" label="Noxious weed"/>
<link wikidata="Q1380756" start="18383" end="18404" title="Pesticide application" label="Pesticide application"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="246676" wikidata="Q2066705" url="?curid=246676" title="Ian Smith (actor)">
<text>Ian Smith (born 19 June 1938) is an Australian actor, television producer and screenwriter.

Smith is best known for his television roles most especially his lengthy tenure on serial &quot;Neighbours&quot; as Harold Bishop from 1987 until 1991, he returned as a regular again in 1996 and left in 2009, though has returned in guest parts in 2011, 2015, and 2022, respectively.

Previously, Smith had appeared on the cult series &quot;Prisoner&quot; in the recurring roles as Head of the Corrections Department, Ted Douglas. Smith also worked on that series as an executive producer and screenwriter.

In 2023 Smith stated he would make some guest appearances in the relaunch of &quot;Neighbours&quot;, but also said he was happy to call it a day. However in 2024 he returned to the role.
 On 2 December 2024, it was announced that Smith would depart &quot;Neighbours&quot; again after he revealed that he was diagnosed with terminal cancer.

==Career==

===Early career===
Smith started appearing in television roles in the late 1960s in guest roles in drama series for Crawford Productions, in police dramas &quot;Homicide&quot;, &quot;Division 4&quot;, &quot;Matlock Police&quot; and &quot;Bluey&quot;.

After having appeared in numerous guest parts, he got his major break gaining a regular role in television serial &quot;Bellbird&quot;; after this he made a guest appearance in serial &quot;The Box&quot; in 1975.

===&quot;Prisoner&quot;===
Smith had guest roles in the Grundy Production series &quot;Glenview High&quot; and &quot;Chopper Squad&quot;. He worked concurrently behind the scenes with Grundy&#x27;s as the associate producer and script editor of cult serial &quot;Prisoner&quot;, but also had a semi-regular role in the series as head of the Corrections Department, Ted Douglas.

Smith was not scheduled to play Ted Douglas, but the actor who had been contracted for the role did not show up on the day of filming and, given his acting experience, the crew said Smith should change hats and get in front of the camera.

===&quot;Neighbours&quot;===
Smith became famous through his portrayal of bumbling Harold Bishop in the soap opera &quot;Neighbours&quot; from 1987 to 1991, returning in 1996. He switched to recurring status from 2008 to 2009, becoming one of the program&#x27;s longest-serving characters after 2,132 episodes. For his portrayal of Harold, Smith received a nomination for a Gold Logie Award in 2009. In 1989, while he and co-star Anne Charleston were appearing in pantomime in the UK, they recorded the Christmas song &quot;Old Fashioned Christmas&quot;.

In December 2010, Ryan Moloney revealed to &quot;TV Week&quot; that Smith would be returning to &quot;Neighbours&quot; in 2011. Smith appeared for six weeks from May 2011. Smith returned to &quot;Neighbours&quot; in 2015, with former co-star Anne Charleston for the 30th anniversary. He also appeared in a documentary celebrating the anniversary titled &quot;Neighbours 30th: The Stars Reunite&quot;, which aired in Australia and the UK in March 2015.

In April 2018, Smith admitted that he should have left &quot;Neighbours&quot; sooner and admits he felt typecast. Smith admitted &quot;he wasn&#x27;t aware he was becoming &#x27;Harold from &quot;Neighbours&quot; while he was on the show&quot; and joked that when he auditioned for other roles he would be told &quot;Oh you were in &quot;Neighbours&quot;, you were Harold, you couldn&#x27;t possibly be a murdering paedophile&quot;.

In February 2022, Laura-Jayne Tyler of &quot;Inside Soap&quot; reported that Smith would be reprising his role to play a part in the show&#x27;s finale. Smith has filmed a part in an upcoming film titled &quot;Residence&quot;, playing Mike the Thaumaturge.

On 2 December 2024, it was announced that Smith would depart &quot;Neighbours&quot; after he was diagnosed with terminal cancer, with executive producer Jason Herbison saying that they would write the character out. Charleston returned for Smith&#x27;s last &quot;Neighbours&quot; appearance but as a new character.

===&quot;I&#x27;m a Celebrity&quot;===

Smith featured in Series 11 of &quot;I&#x27;m a Celebrity... Get Me Out of Here!&quot; to set the camp-mates challenges. He did not join the camp-mates.

===Theatre===
Smith has also worked in theatre since the late 1950s, including for companies J. C. Williamson&#x27;s, Tivoli and Melbourne Theatre Company, in roles in productions &quot;Merry Widow&quot;, &quot;Camelot&quot;, &quot;My Fair Lady&quot;, &quot;Fiddler on the Roof&quot;, &quot;Antony and Cleopatra&quot;.

==Personal life==

Smith and his wife Gail were married for over 50 years. Gail died on 21 December 2019 following a battle with cancer. Smith said he was devastated following the death of his wife.

Smith was 54 when his mother Connie Smith, realising she had very little time to live, told him that he had been adopted. After her death, Smith went in search of his natural mother Peg Kline, whom he finally found. According to Kline&#x27;s story, Smith was conceived when she was 14, the product of rape, and was put up for adoption. Kline eventually married and had two children from this marriage. She never told anyone besides her husband about her first son until she was contacted by Smith via a letter. Kline contacted Smith&#x27;s wife Gail, who mentioned that her husband was a prominent &quot;Neighbours&quot; actor, to which Kline replied, &quot;I&#x27;ve never seen &quot;Neighbours&quot; in my life&quot;. Smith and Kline were reunited and he built a strong relationship with his mother and two half-brothers, although Smith said that he did not feel a mother–son relationship. He called Kline &quot;one of my best friends&quot;. Kline died in May 2005 after a battle with cancer. Smith told his story in an exclusive interview on the biographical documentary series &quot;Australian Story&quot; in March 2005. He had also described the situation in a BBC interview some years before.

Although Smith was brought up as a Roman Catholic, in a 2008 interview, he was an atheist.

On 2 December 2024, Smith announced that he had been diagnosed with terminal lung cancer, resulting in his final departure from &quot;Neighbours&quot; in early 2025. On 30 December 2024, Smith gave an update to his condition confirming that his tumour had shrunk in size and was still undergoing treatment.

==Filmography==

===Film===
===Television===
==Theatre==

* &quot;Merry Widow&quot;
* &quot;Camelot&quot;
* &quot;My Fair Lady&quot;
* &quot;Fiddler on the Roof&quot;
* &quot;Antony and Cleopatra&quot;.

==References==
==External links==
* Ian Smith as Harold Bishop
* Ian Smith in Panto at Grand Opera House York</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2066705" start="0" end="9" title="Ian Smith (actor)" label="Ian Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q908708" start="189" end="199" title="Neighbours" label="Neighbours"/>
<link wikidata="Q5660104" start="209" end="222" title="Harold Bishop" label="Harold Bishop"/>
<link wikidata="Q209672" start="415" end="426" title="cult series" label="cult series"/>
<link wikidata="Q3397425" start="433" end="441" title="Prisoner (TV series)" label="Prisoner"/>
<link wikidata="Q1855346" start="1114" end="1122" title="Homicide (Australian TV series)" label="Homicide"/>
<link wikidata="Q5284430" start="1136" end="1146" title="Division 4" label="Division 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q6787687" start="1160" end="1174" title="Matlock Police" label="Matlock Police"/>
<link wikidata="Q3819508" start="1191" end="1196" title="Bluey (1976 TV series)" label="Bluey"/>
<link wikidata="Q4883566" start="1325" end="1333" title="Bellbird (soap opera)" label="Bellbird"/>
<link wikidata="Q7719571" start="1395" end="1402" title="The Box (Australian TV series)" label="The Box"/>
<link wikidata="Q7307783" start="1475" end="1492" title="Reg Grundy Organisation" label="Grundy Production"/>
<link wikidata="Q5569389" start="1506" end="1519" title="Glenview High" label="Glenview High"/>
<link wikidata="Q3675409" start="1536" end="1549" title="Chopper Squad" label="Chopper Squad"/>
<link wikidata="Q3397425" start="1682" end="1690" title="Prisoner (TV series)" label="Prisoner"/>
<link wikidata="Q5660104" start="2121" end="2134" title="Harold Bishop" label="Harold Bishop"/>
<link wikidata="Q908708" start="2159" end="2169" title="Neighbours" label="Neighbours"/>
<link wikidata="Q16191288" start="2412" end="2428" title="Gold Logie Award for Most Popular Personality on Australian Television" label="Gold Logie Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q4768226" start="2468" end="2483" title="Anne Charleston" label="Anne Charleston"/>
<link wikidata="Q131686850" start="2562" end="2585" title="Old Fashioned Christmas" label="Old Fashioned Christmas"/>
<link wikidata="Q5296779" start="2612" end="2624" title="Ryan Moloney" label="Ryan Moloney"/>
<link wikidata="Q7672446" start="2643" end="2650" title="TV Week" label="TV Week"/>
<link wikidata="Q4768226" start="2836" end="2851" title="Anne Charleston" label="Anne Charleston"/>
<link wikidata="" start="2953" end="2987" title="Neighbours 30th: The Stars Reunite" label="Neighbours 30th: The Stars Reunite"/>
<link wikidata="Q444259" start="3151" end="3159" title="Typecasting (acting)" label="typecast"/>
<link wikidata="Q6037817" start="3526" end="3537" title="Inside Soap" label="Inside Soap"/>
<link wikidata="Q16255108" start="3892" end="3906" title="Jason Herbison" label="Jason Herbison"/>
<link wikidata="Q3235466" start="4133" end="4176" title="I&amp;#x27;m a Celebrity...Get Me Out of Here! (British TV series)" label="I&amp;#x27;m a Celebrity... Get Me Out of Here!"/>
<link wikidata="Q86757800" start="4343" end="4366" title="J. C. Williamson&amp;#x27;s" label="J. C. Williamson&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q17025713" start="4368" end="4374" title="Tivoli circuit" label="Tivoli"/>
<link wikidata="Q6811899" start="4379" end="4404" title="Melbourne Theatre Company" label="Melbourne Theatre Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q478202" start="4436" end="4447" title="Merry Widow" label="Merry Widow"/>
<link wikidata="Q1028491" start="4461" end="4468" title="Camelot (musical)" label="Camelot"/>
<link wikidata="Q591943" start="4482" end="4494" title="My Fair Lady" label="My Fair Lady"/>
<link wikidata="Q487330" start="4508" end="4527" title="Fiddler on the Roof" label="Fiddler on the Roof"/>
<link wikidata="Q606830" start="4541" end="4561" title="Antony and Cleopatra" label="Antony and Cleopatra"/>
<link wikidata="Q180472" start="4883" end="4890" title="adoption" label="adopted"/>
<link wikidata="Q178651" start="5802" end="5811" title="interview" label="interview"/>
<link wikidata="Q36279" start="5819" end="5831" title="biography" label="biographical"/>
<link wikidata="Q4824717" start="5857" end="5873" title="Australian Story" label="Australian Story"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="6005" end="6019" title="Roman Catholic" label="Roman Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7066" start="6052" end="6059" title="atheist" label="atheist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364787" start="6130" end="6138" title="Terminal illness" label="terminal"/>
<link wikidata="Q47912" start="6139" end="6150" title="lung cancer" label="lung cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q478202" start="6436" end="6447" title="Merry Widow" label="Merry Widow"/>
<link wikidata="Q1028491" start="6462" end="6469" title="Camelot (musical)" label="Camelot"/>
<link wikidata="Q591943" start="6484" end="6496" title="My Fair Lady" label="My Fair Lady"/>
<link wikidata="Q487330" start="6511" end="6530" title="Fiddler on the Roof" label="Fiddler on the Roof"/>
<link wikidata="Q606830" start="6545" end="6565" title="Antony and Cleopatra" label="Antony and Cleopatra"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="246678" wikidata="Q1476861" url="?curid=246678" title="Maxwell Motor Company">
<text>Maxwell was an American automobile manufacturer which ran from 1904 to 1925. The present-day successor to the Maxwell company was Chrysler, now Stellantis North America, which acquired the company in 1925.

==History==
===Maxwell-Briscoe Company===
Maxwell automobile production began under the &quot;Maxwell-Briscoe Company&quot; of North Tarrytown, New York. The company was named after founder Jonathan Dixon Maxwell, who earlier had worked for Oldsmobile, and his business partner, Benjamin Briscoe, an automobile industry pioneer and part owner of the Briscoe Brothers Metalworks. Briscoe was president of Maxwell-Briscoe at its height.

In 1907, following a fire that destroyed the North Tarrytown, NY, factory, Maxwell-Briscoe opened a mammoth automobile factory at 1817 I Ave, New Castle, Indiana. The newspapers reported that the factory &quot;will operate as a whole, like an integral machine, the raw material going in at one end of the plant and the finished cars out the other end.&quot; This factory continued as a Chrysler plant following its takeover of Maxwell until its demolition in 2004.

For a time, Maxwell was considered one of the three top automobile firms in America, along with General Motors and Ford. (though the phrase &quot;the Big Three&quot; was not used at the time). Maxwell was the only profitable company of the combine named United States Motor Company, which was formed in 1910. Due to a conflict between two of its backers, the United States Motor Company collapsed in 1913 after the failure of its last supporting car manufacturer, the Brush Motor Company. Maxwell was the only survivor.

===Maxwell Motor Company, Inc.===
The company responded to the increasing number of low-priced cars—including the $600 Ford Model N, the high-volume Oldsmobile Runabout at $650, the $485 Brush Runabout, the Black at $375, the $500 Western Gale Model A, and the bargain-basement Success an amazingly low $250—by introducing the Model 25, their cheapest four yet. At $695, this five-seat touring car had high-tension magneto ignition, electric horn and (optional) electric starter and headlights, and an innovative shock absorber to protect the radiator.

By 1913, the Maxwell assets were overseen by Walter Flanders, who reorganized the company as the &quot;Maxwell Motor Company, Inc.&quot; The company moved to Highland Park, Michigan. Some of the Maxwells were also manufactured at three plants in Dayton, Ohio. By 1914, Maxwell had sold 60,000 cars.

===Takeover by Walter Chrysler===

Maxwell eventually over-extended and wound up deeply in debt, with over half of its production unsold in the post-World War I recession in 1920. The following year, Walter P. Chrysler arranged to take a controlling interest in Maxwell Motors, subsequently re-incorporating it in West Virginia with himself as the chairman. One of his first tasks was to correct the faults in the Maxwell, whose quality had faltered. This improved version of the car was marketed as the &quot;good Maxwell&quot;.

Around the time of Chrysler&#x27;s takeover, Maxwell was also in the process of merging, awkwardly at best, with the ailing Chalmers Automobile Company. Chalmers ceased production in late 1923.

===Phase out===
In 1925, Chrysler formed his own company, the Chrysler Corporation. That same year, the Maxwell line was phased out and the Maxwell company assets were absorbed by Chrysler. The Maxwell automobile would continue to live on in another form; however, because the new 4-cylinder Chrysler model that was introduced for the 1926 model year was created largely from the design of the previous year&#x27;s Maxwell. This former Maxwell would undergo another transformation in 1928, when a second reworking and renaming would bring about the creation of the first Plymouth.

== Marketing to women ==

Maxwell was one of the first car companies to market specifically to women. In 1909, it generated a great deal of publicity when it sponsored Alice Huyler Ramsey, an early advocate of women drivers, as the first woman to drive coast-to-coast across the United States. By 1914, the company had strongly aligned itself with the women&#x27;s rights movement. That year, it announced its plan to hire as many male sales personnel as female. At that time, it offered a promotional reception at its Manhattan dealership which featured several prominent suffragettes such as Crystal Eastman, while in a showroom window a woman assembled and disassembled a Maxwell engine in front of onlookers.

== In media ==

In 1920, the Maxwell Company contracted with actress and producer Nell Shipman to create a short promotional film featuring the Maxwell. She was able to stretch the money budgeted for the project into a multi-reel feature entitled &quot;Something New&quot;. The Maxwell&#x27;s abilities were prominently featured in this melodramatic film, which had Nell Shipman and Bert Van Tuyle escaping a band of Mexican bandits by racing the sturdy little car across the Mexican badlands where they overcame obstacles such as boulders, rivers, gulches, and all other sorts of rough terrain. Maxwell dealers presented this motion picture at various venues to promote the car, often with the now-battered Maxwell on display. The Maxwell Company had assisted in the film&#x27;s production by supplying a car and by deploying a mechanic to the filming location. The mechanic&#x27;s job included repeatedly replacing the car&#x27;s transmission, which kept getting torn up by the harsh desert landscape.

A decrepit old Maxwell was famous as the car Jack Benny drove, for decades after it had stopped being manufactured, on his long-running radio (and later TV) comedy series &quot;The Jack Benny Program&quot;. The running joke was that Benny was too stingy to buy himself a new car—or even a newer &quot;used&quot; car—as long as his old one still ran, however poorly. The sounds used for it initially were pre-recorded, but when a technical fault prevented one of the records from playing, voice actor Mel Blanc himself improvised the sounds of the sputtering car starting up. His performance was received well enough for him to continue that task permanently. In one gag from the show Rochester tells Benny that he reported to the police that the Maxwell had been stolen although he didn&#x27;t make the report until three hours after the theft; when Jack asked why Rochester delayed so long, Rochester explained that it was because that was when he stopped laughing.

The gag of the Maxwell as Benny&#x27;s car was used in the classic cartoon, &quot;The Mouse That Jack Built&quot;. Many people erroneously assume that the antique automobile Jack Benny is seen driving during his cameo appearance in the 1962 comedy film &quot;It&#x27;s a Mad, Mad, Mad, Mad World&quot; is a Maxwell; that car is, in fact, a 1931 Cadillac convertible coupe.

In the &quot;Mr. Bevis&quot; episode of &quot;The Twilight Zone&quot;, Bevis (Orson Bean) is talking to a police officer (William Schallert) about buying his wrecked 1924 Rickenbacker. The officer responds facetiously that he has his eye on a 1927 Maxwell, which is two years after the Maxwell company closed.

==See also==
* Carl Breer
* List of defunct United States automobile manufacturers

==References==
==Bibliography==
* Clymer, Floyd. &quot;Treasury of Early American Automobiles, 1877–1925&quot;. New York: Bonanza Books, 1950.
* Darke, Paul. &quot;Chrysler: The Baby of the Big Three&quot;, in Northey, Tom, ed. &quot;World of Automobiles&quot;, Vol. 4, pp. 364–9. London: Orbis, 1974.
* Kimes, Beverly Rae, and Clark, Henry Austin, Jr. &quot;Standard Catalog of American Cars, 1805–1942&quot; (second edition). Krause Publications, Inc. 1989. .
* Kimes, Beverly Rae, and Clark, Henry Austin, Jr. &quot;Standard Catalog of American Cars, 1805–1942&quot; (third edition). Krause Publications, Inc. 1996. .
* Yanik, Anthony J. &quot;Maxwell Motor and the Making of the Chrysler Corporation&quot;. Detroit: Wayne State University Press, 2009. .

==External links==
* Maxwell automobiles at ConceptCarz
* Maxwell: First Builder of Chrysler Cars at Allpar.com 
* Maxwell/Maxwell-Briscoe with photos of various Maxwells 
* Early Chrysler history (including Maxwell)
* Watch the 1920 movie &quot;Something New&quot; featuring the robust Maxwell-car in a 1-hr. extremely grueling albeit entertaining mountain-terrain ordeal .</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1476861" start="0" end="7" title="Maxwell Motor Company" label="Maxwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1420" start="24" end="34" title="automobile" label="automobile"/>
<link wikidata="Q181114" start="130" end="138" title="Stellantis North America" label="Chrysler"/>
<link wikidata="Q1025065" start="334" end="359" title="North Tarrytown, New York" label="North Tarrytown, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q204327" start="448" end="458" title="Oldsmobile" label="Oldsmobile"/>
<link wikidata="Q4888333" start="486" end="502" title="Benjamin Briscoe" label="Benjamin Briscoe"/>
<link wikidata="Q985283" start="785" end="804" title="New Castle, Indiana" label="New Castle, Indiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q81965" start="1205" end="1219" title="General Motors" label="General Motors"/>
<link wikidata="Q44294" start="1224" end="1228" title="Ford Motor Company" label="Ford"/>
<link wikidata="Q859399" start="1259" end="1268" title="Big Three automobile manufacturers" label="Big Three"/>
<link wikidata="Q778575" start="1349" end="1356" title="conglomerate (company)" label="combine"/>
<link wikidata="Q4700960" start="1363" end="1390" title="United States Motor Company" label="United States Motor Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q994313" start="1577" end="1596" title="Brush Motor Car Company" label="Brush Motor Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q1436919" start="1749" end="1761" title="Ford Model N" label="Ford Model N"/>
<link wikidata="Q204327" start="1779" end="1789" title="Oldsmobile" label="Oldsmobile"/>
<link wikidata="Q1617795" start="1790" end="1798" title="Oldsmobile Curved Dash" label="Runabout"/>
<link wikidata="Q994313" start="1817" end="1831" title="Brush Motor Car Company" label="Brush Runabout"/>
<link wikidata="Q880382" start="1837" end="1842" title="Black Motor Company" label="Black"/>
<link wikidata="Q2564982" start="1861" end="1868" title="Western Tool Works (automobile company)" label="Western"/>
<link wikidata="Q2362478" start="1908" end="1915" title="Success Automobile Manufacturing Company" label="Success"/>
<link wikidata="Q1402386" start="2016" end="2027" title="touring car" label="touring car"/>
<link wikidata="Q3773501" start="2045" end="2061" title="ignition magneto" label="magneto ignition"/>
<link wikidata="Q557828" start="2092" end="2108" title="electric starter" label="electric starter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1326621" start="2113" end="2122" title="electric light" label="headlight"/>
<link wikidata="Q211251" start="2143" end="2157" title="shock absorber" label="shock absorber"/>
<link wikidata="Q1572702" start="2173" end="2181" title="radiator" label="radiator"/>
<link wikidata="Q4017920" start="2229" end="2244" title="Walter Flanders" label="Walter Flanders"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144544" start="2342" end="2365" title="Highland Park, Michigan" label="Highland Park, Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q34739" start="2430" end="2442" title="Dayton, Ohio" label="Dayton, Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="2633" end="2644" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q318044" start="2684" end="2702" title="Walter P. Chrysler" label="Walter P. Chrysler"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371" start="2798" end="2811" title="West Virginia" label="West Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1060176" start="3139" end="3166" title="Chalmers automobile" label="Chalmers Automobile Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q181114" start="3272" end="3292" title="Chrysler Corporation" label="Chrysler Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2576663" start="3491" end="3501" title="4-cylinder" label="4-cylinder"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124857" start="3781" end="3789" title="Plymouth automobile" label="Plymouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q527103" start="3960" end="3979" title="Alice Huyler Ramsey" label="Alice Huyler Ramsey"/>
<link wikidata="Q223569" start="4144" end="4163" title="women&amp;#x27;s rights" label="women&amp;#x27;s rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q3246745" start="4365" end="4377" title="Women&amp;#x27;s suffrage in the United States" label="suffragettes"/>
<link wikidata="Q4945589" start="4386" end="4401" title="Crystal Eastman" label="Crystal Eastman"/>
<link wikidata="Q3337906" start="4588" end="4600" title="Nell Shipman" label="Nell Shipman"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4725" end="4735" title="reel#Motion picture terminology" label="multi-reel"/>
<link wikidata="Q16259746" start="5438" end="5450" title="Transmission (mechanics)" label="transmission"/>
<link wikidata="Q148732" start="5556" end="5566" title="Jack Benny" label="Jack Benny"/>
<link wikidata="Q1565777" start="5688" end="5710" title="The Jack Benny Program" label="The Jack Benny Program"/>
<link wikidata="Q22920017" start="5999" end="6010" title="voice actor" label="voice actor"/>
<link wikidata="Q349690" start="6011" end="6020" title="Mel Blanc" label="Mel Blanc"/>
<link wikidata="Q1751027" start="6195" end="6204" title="Eddie &amp;quot;Rochester&amp;quot; Anderson" label="Rochester"/>
<link wikidata="Q7752514" start="6561" end="6586" title="The Mouse That Jack Built" label="The Mouse That Jack Built"/>
<link wikidata="Q1306890" start="6738" end="6774" title="It&amp;#x27;s a Mad, Mad, Mad, Mad World" label="It&amp;#x27;s a Mad, Mad, Mad, Mad World"/>
<link wikidata="Q27436" start="6824" end="6832" title="Cadillac" label="Cadillac"/>
<link wikidata="Q3488509" start="6866" end="6875" title="Mr. Bevis" label="Mr. Bevis"/>
<link wikidata="Q742103" start="6899" end="6916" title="The Twilight Zone (1959 TV series)" label="The Twilight Zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1120700" start="6931" end="6941" title="Orson Bean" label="Orson Bean"/>
<link wikidata="Q1332676" start="6975" end="6992" title="William Schallert" label="William Schallert"/>
<link wikidata="Q5039933" start="7179" end="7189" title="Carl Breer" label="Carl Breer"/>
<link wikidata="Q4434543" start="7192" end="7246" title="List of defunct United States automobile manufacturers" label="List of defunct United States automobile manufacturers"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="246681" wikidata="Q5247252" url="?curid=246681" title="Death Wish II (album)">
<text>Death Wish II: The Original Soundtrack – Music by Jimmy Page is a soundtrack album by Jimmy Page, released by Swan Song Records on 15 February 1982, to accompany the film &quot;Death Wish II&quot;.

==Overview==
Following the XYZ project, Page was asked by his London neighbour, movie director Michael Winner, to record a soundtrack for the film &quot;Death Wish II&quot; in late August 1981. Page was given a deadline of a few weeks to write and record the album at his personal studio The Sol and to travel on location to Los Angeles with Winner for songwriting themes. Winner later explained:

&quot;Death Wish II&quot; starred Charles Bronson, and was set around Los Angeles, which inspired Page to write a blues-flavoured soundtrack. The soundtrack features Dave Mattacks from Fairport Convention, former Pretty Things keyboards player Gordon Edwards, and veteran singer Chris Farlowe, who also later appeared on Page&#x27;s 1988 solo album &quot;Outrider&quot;. Page used a Roland guitar synthesizer on a number of the tracks. Tracks from this album were later reused by Winner for &quot;Death Wish III&quot;. Page was later asked by Winner to compose the soundtrack for &quot;Scream for Help&quot; (1985), but he declined and suggested John Paul Jones to the director instead.

This album is Page&#x27;s only solo material to appear on Led Zeppelin&#x27;s record label Swan Song Records. His two later albums with The Firm were released on Atlantic and &quot;Outrider&quot; was on Geffen Records. Swan Song ceased operations in 1983.

In Japan a vinyl LP was released that featured rare outtakes from the Sol sessions. &quot;Death Wish II&quot; was released in CD format in 1999, but all CD versions of the album are now out of print. Today used copies are highly collectible, and can sell for over a hundred dollars.

Even though the track &quot;Prelude&quot; is credited solely to Page himself, it is based on &quot;Prelude No. 4 in E minor (Op. 28)&quot; by Frédéric Chopin.

The album was re-released by Jimmy Page exclusively through JimmyPage.com on 1 December 2011, in a &quot;heavyweight vinyl package [that] includes previously unreleased material, all-new 2011 sleeve notes and updated artwork.&quot; Only 1000 copies were released. Numbers 1–109 have been signed by Jimmy Page, while numbers 110–1000 are available unsigned.

== Track listing ==


1999 Compact disc edition
Same track listing and order as the vinyl release.

==Personnel==
*Jimmy Page – vocals, acoustic guitars, electric guitars, guitar synthesizer, synthesizer, theremin, bass, producer
*Gordon John Edwards – vocals, electric piano, piano
*Stuart Epps – engineer, mixing
*Chris Farlowe – Vocals
*Dave Lawson – piano, synthesizers
*Dave Mattacks – drums, percussion
*David Paton – bass
*David Sinclair Whittaker – piano
*GLC Philharmonic – orchestra
*The Sol Symphonic – strings

==Charts==
==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q165467" start="86" end="96" title="Jimmy Page" label="Jimmy Page"/>
<link wikidata="Q632992" start="110" end="127" title="Swan Song Records" label="Swan Song Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q848285" start="177" end="190" title="Death Wish II" label="Death Wish II"/>
<link wikidata="Q258931" start="226" end="229" title="XYZ (UK band)" label="XYZ"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="261" end="267" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q722890" start="294" end="308" title="Michael Winner" label="Michael Winner"/>
<link wikidata="Q7555590" start="487" end="494" title="Sol Studios" label="The Sol"/>
<link wikidata="Q65" start="524" end="535" title="Los Angeles" label="Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q36105" start="631" end="646" title="Charles Bronson" label="Charles Bronson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145652" start="782" end="801" title="Fairport Convention" label="Fairport Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364657" start="810" end="823" title="Pretty Things" label="Pretty Things"/>
<link wikidata="Q1077211" start="876" end="889" title="Chris Farlowe" label="Chris Farlowe"/>
<link wikidata="Q952890" start="952" end="960" title="Outrider (album)" label="Outrider"/>
<link wikidata="Q848280" start="1094" end="1108" title="Death Wish III" label="Death Wish III"/>
<link wikidata="Q7438900" start="1183" end="1198" title="Scream for Help (album)" label="Scream for Help"/>
<link wikidata="Q190243" start="1243" end="1258" title="John Paul Jones (musician)" label="John Paul Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q632992" start="1376" end="1393" title="Swan Song Records" label="Swan Song Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q938323" start="1421" end="1429" title="The Firm (rock band)" label="The Firm"/>
<link wikidata="Q202440" start="1447" end="1455" title="Atlantic Records" label="Atlantic"/>
<link wikidata="Q212699" start="1488" end="1502" title="Geffen Records" label="Geffen Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q10353577" start="1925" end="1958" title="Preludes (Chopin)" label="Prelude No. 4 in E minor (Op. 28)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1268" start="1968" end="1983" title="Frédéric Chopin" label="Frédéric Chopin"/>
<link wikidata="Q165467" start="2459" end="2469" title="Jimmy Page" label="Jimmy Page"/>
<link wikidata="Q31561" start="2480" end="2495" title="acoustic guitar" label="acoustic guitar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1527709" start="2516" end="2534" title="guitar synthesizer" label="guitar synthesizer"/>
<link wikidata="Q207691" start="2549" end="2557" title="theremin" label="theremin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136507" start="2605" end="2619" title="electric piano" label="electric piano"/>
<link wikidata="Q7626506" start="2628" end="2639" title="Stuart Epps" label="Stuart Epps"/>
<link wikidata="Q128124" start="2642" end="2650" title="audio engineer" label="engineer"/>
<link wikidata="Q17085328" start="2652" end="2658" title="Audio mixing (recorded music)" label="mixing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1077211" start="2660" end="2673" title="Chris Farlowe" label="Chris Farlowe"/>
<link wikidata="Q2717544" start="2719" end="2732" title="Dave Mattacks" label="Dave Mattacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q2165976" start="2754" end="2765" title="David Paton" label="David Paton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1177147" start="2774" end="2798" title="David Whitaker (composer)" label="David Sinclair Whittaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q2997126" start="2858" end="2865" title="string section" label="strings"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="246692" wikidata="Q1521373" url="?curid=246692" title="Gramophone Company">
<text>The Gramophone Company Limited was a British phonograph manufacturer and record label, founded in April 1898 by Emil Berliner. It was one of the earliest record labels. 

The company purchased the His Master&#x27;s Voice painting and trademark rights in 1899, using its artwork and creating the His Master&#x27;s Voice sub-label for its phonographs and releases in 1909, replacing its previous &quot;Recording Angel&quot; trademark. The company had an affiliation with the American Victor Talking Machine Company, who also began using the artwork. 

In 1931, The Gramophone Company partnered with the Columbia Graphophone Company to form Electric and Musical Industries Limited (EMI). The Gramophone Company continued as one of EMI&#x27;s music labels until 1973, when its legal entity was renamed to EMI Records Limited. His Master&#x27;s Voice continued until 1990.

== History ==
The Gramophone Company was founded in April 1898 by William Barry Owen and Edmund Trevor Lloyd Wynne Williams, commissioned by Emil Berliner, in London.

Owen was acting as agent for Emile Berliner, inventor of the gramophone record, whilst Williams provided the finances. Most of the company&#x27;s early discs were made in Hanover, Germany at a plant operated by members of Berliner&#x27;s family, though it had operations around the world.

In 1898, Fred Gaisberg moved from the U.S. to London to set up the first disc recording studio in Europe; it was situated in Maiden Lane. Among early artists he recorded was Syria Lamont, an Australian soprano whose single &quot;Coming through the Rye&quot; was one of the first ever issued. In December 1900, Owen gained the manufacturing rights for the Lambert Typewriter Company, and the Gramophone Company was for a few years renamed the Gramophone &amp; Typewriter Ltd. This was an attempt to diversify the business model, in response to a series of lawsuits by Edison Bell.

===Lawsuits===
The Berliner Gramophone Company was hit the hardest with a lawsuit that involved a former employee, Frank Seaman. Berliner had hired Seaman, part of The National Gramophone Company, to handle the distribution of record players and disk as an exclusive sales agent. In secret, he started producing a product inferior to the Gramophone, which he called the Zonophone and began solely marketing that instead of the gramophone. Berliner cancelled his contract with The National Gramophone Company, and in turn was sued for breach of contract.

In 1900, the U.S. parent of Gramophone lost a patent infringement suit brought on by Columbia Records and Zonophone, and was no longer permitted to produce records in the U.S.

The agreement allowed Columbia to produce disc records themselves in the United States, which they began doing in 1901, with the UK Gramophone Company and others continuing to do so outside of the US. Emile Berliner established Berliner Gramophone in Montreal, where he became Victor&#x27;s Canadian distributor and held the rights in Canada to the &quot;His Master&#x27;s Voice&quot; trademark.

===His Master&#x27;s Voice===

While the general public in the UK came to refer to the records and company as &quot;His Master&#x27;s Voice&quot; because of the prominence of the phrase on the record labels, The Gramophone Company was never officially incorporated as His Master&#x27;s Voice. The painting &quot;His Master&#x27;s Voice&quot; was made in the 1890s with the dog Nipper listening to an Edison cylinder phonograph.

In 1899, Owen bought the painting from Francis Barraud, the artist, and asked him to paint out the Edison machine and substitute a Gramophone, which he did. In 1900, Emile Berliner acquired the US rights to the painting and it became the trademark of the Victor Talking Machine Company in 1901; the UK rights were retained by the Gramophone Company. Victor utilized the Nipper trademark far more aggressively than the Gramophone Company, first using it on their record labels in 1902.

In February 1909, the Gramophone Company introduced new labels featuring the famous trademark known as &quot;His Master&#x27;s Voice&quot;, generally referred to in the UK as HMV, to distinguish them from earlier labels which featured the Recording Angel trademark. The latter had been designed by Theodore Birnbaum, an executive of the Gramophone Company pressing plant in Hanover, Germany.

===Recording studios===
In the mid-1920s, company chairman Trevor Osmond Williams approved funding for the company to secure property and build a recording studio, putting F. H. Dart from the company&#x27;s technical recording department in charge of the project. Number 3 Abbey Road was acquired in 1929 and, after nearly 2 years of extensive renovations, the 3-studio facility that would come to be known as EMI Recording Studios (and eventually Abbey Road Studios) opened on 12 November 1931.

===Formation of EMI===
In March 1931, Gramophone merged with the English Columbia Graphophone Company to form Electric and Musical Industries Ltd (EMI). The &quot;Gramophone Company, Ltd.&quot; name, however, continued to be used for many decades, especially for copyright notices on records.

From the 1930s onwards, HMV manufactured radio and television sets and radiograms under the HMV and Marconiphone brand names in its factory in Hayes, Middlesex.

Gramophone Company of India was formed in 1946. The Gramophone Company Ltd legal entity was renamed EMI Records Ltd. in 1973. After EMI was acquired by Universal Music, the company was renamed to Parlophone Records Ltd. and taken over by Warner Music.

== Acoustic recordings ==
From the 1890s to mid-1925, recordings were made without any electrical equipment, relying instead upon the energy inherent in the sound waves generated by the performers, to activate the recording apparatus.

== See also ==
* Lists of record labels
* HMV
* Sunrise Records
* For Your Entertainment (FYE)
* List of phonograph manufacturers
* Angel Records
*&quot;Addis v Gramophone Co Ltd&quot; [1909] UKHL 1

==References==
* Death of Gramophone Pioneer: Uxbridge &amp; W. Drayton Gazette 13 December 1946
* John R. Bennett: &quot;A catalogue of vocal recordings from the English catalogues of the Gramophone Company 1898–1899, the Gramophone Company Limited 1899 – 1900, the Gramophone &amp; Typewriter Company Limited 1901–1907 and the Gramophone Company Limited 1907 – 1925&quot;. England, Oakwood Press, 1956. Available at archive.org.(reprint: Westport, Conn., USA, Greenwood Press, 1978. )
* Alan Kelly: &quot;His master&#x27;s voice – La voce del padrone|the Italian catalogue; a complete numerical catalogue of Italian gramophone recordings made from 1898 to 1929 in Italy and elsewhere by the Gramophone Company Ltd.&quot;. New York; NY [et al.], Greenwood Press, 1988. 
* Alan Kelly: &quot;His master&#x27;s voice, the French catalogue; a complete numerical catalogue of French gramophone recordings made from 1898 to 1929 in France and elsewhere by the Gramophone Company Ltd&quot;. New York; NY [et al.], Greenwood Press, 1990. 
* Alan Kelly: &quot;His master&#x27;s voice, the German catalogue; a complete numerical catalogue of German gramophone recordings made from 1898 to 1929 in Germany, Austria, and elsewhere by The Gramophone Company Ltd&quot;. New York; NY [et al.], Greenwood Press, 1994. 
* Alan Kelly; Jacques Klöters: &quot;His master&#x27;s voice, the Dutch catalogue; a complete numerical catalogue of Dutch and Belgian gramophone recordings made from 1900 to 1929 in Holland, Belgium, and elsewhere by the Gramophone Company Ltd&quot;. Westport, Conn. [et al.], Greenwood Press, 1997. 
* &quot;The voice, the magazine of the Gramophone Co., Ltd.&quot;, Hayes, Middlesex, 1.1917 – 35.1954

==External links==
* The Gramophone Company&#x27;s trademark gramophone 1898
* The Gramophone Company Discography Searchable database of recordings made by the Gramophone Company, and its successor corporations during the 78 RPM era.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1521373" start="0" end="30" title="Gramophone Company" label="The Gramophone Company Limited"/>
<link wikidata="Q116434" start="45" end="55" title="phonograph" label="phonograph"/>
<link wikidata="Q18127" start="73" end="85" title="record label" label="record label"/>
<link wikidata="Q71004" start="112" end="125" title="Emil Berliner" label="Emil Berliner"/>
<link wikidata="Q301754" start="197" end="220" title="His Master&amp;#x27;s Voice" label="His Master&amp;#x27;s Voice"/>
<link wikidata="Q56762278" start="295" end="318" title="His Master&amp;#x27;s Voice (British record label)" label="His Master&amp;#x27;s Voice"/>
<link wikidata="Q1470329" start="482" end="512" title="Victor Talking Machine Company" label="Victor Talking Machine Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q1112471" start="601" end="629" title="Columbia Graphophone Company" label="Columbia Graphophone Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q183412" start="638" end="677" title="EMI" label="Electric and Musical Industries Limited"/>
<link wikidata="Q3629023" start="801" end="820" title="EMI Records" label="EMI Records Limited"/>
<link wikidata="Q56762278" start="822" end="845" title="His Master&amp;#x27;s Voice (British record label)" label="His Master&amp;#x27;s Voice"/>
<link wikidata="Q71004" start="1066" end="1080" title="Emile Berliner" label="Emile Berliner"/>
<link wikidata="Q16629185" start="1098" end="1115" title="gramophone record" label="gramophone record"/>
<link wikidata="Q1715" start="1208" end="1224" title="Hanover, Germany" label="Hanover, Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q5495215" start="1336" end="1349" title="Fred Gaisberg" label="Fred Gaisberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q19973779" start="1894" end="1905" title="Edison Bell" label="Edison Bell"/>
<link wikidata="Q183387" start="2548" end="2564" title="Columbia Records" label="Columbia Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q6271471" start="2569" end="2578" title="Zonophone" label="Zonophone"/>
<link wikidata="Q340" start="2891" end="2899" title="Montreal" label="Montreal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1752846" start="3414" end="3420" title="Nipper" label="Nipper"/>
<link wikidata="Q116434" start="3453" end="3463" title="phonograph" label="phonograph"/>
<link wikidata="Q71004" start="3632" end="3646" title="Emile Berliner" label="Emile Berliner"/>
<link wikidata="Q1470329" start="3721" end="3751" title="Victor Talking Machine Company" label="Victor Talking Machine Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q56762278" start="4061" end="4084" title="His Master&amp;#x27;s Voice (British record label)" label="His Master&amp;#x27;s Voice"/>
<link wikidata="Q4762258" start="4191" end="4206" title="Angel Records" label="Recording Angel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1715" start="4326" end="4342" title="Hanover, Germany" label="Hanover, Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q209651" start="4755" end="4776" title="Abbey Road Studios" label="EMI Recording Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q209651" start="4793" end="4811" title="Abbey Road Studios" label="Abbey Road Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q6757800" start="5236" end="5248" title="Marconiphone" label="Marconiphone"/>
<link wikidata="Q678138" start="5279" end="5284" title="Hayes, Hillingdon" label="Hayes"/>
<link wikidata="Q19186" start="5286" end="5295" title="Middlesex" label="Middlesex"/>
<link wikidata="Q122575" start="5298" end="5325" title="Gramophone Company of India" label="Gramophone Company of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q120801938" start="5804" end="5826" title="Lists of record labels" label="Lists of record labels"/>
<link wikidata="Q10854572" start="5829" end="5832" title="HMV" label="HMV"/>
<link wikidata="Q30600373" start="5835" end="5850" title="Sunrise Records (retailer)" label="Sunrise Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q5424141" start="5853" end="5881" title="FYE (retailer)" label="For Your Entertainment (FYE)"/>
<link wikidata="Q19630402" start="5884" end="5916" title="List of phonograph manufacturers" label="List of phonograph manufacturers"/>
<link wikidata="Q4762258" start="5919" end="5932" title="Angel Records" label="Angel Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q4681208" start="5940" end="5965" title="Addis v Gramophone Co Ltd" label="Addis v Gramophone Co Ltd"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="246697" wikidata="Q7921522" url="?curid=246697" title="Vermeer Quartet">
<text>The Vermeer Quartet was a string quartet founded in 1969 at the Marlboro Music Festival in Vermont and active until 2007.

==Background==
They performed in North and South America, Europe, the Far East, and Australia. Based in Chicago, they spent part of each summer on the coast of Maine as the featured ensemble for Bay Chamber Concerts. 

Their discography includes the complete string quartets of Beethoven, Tchaikovsky, and Bartók, plus various other works by Haydn, Schubert, Mendelssohn, Brahms, Dvořák, Verdi, Tchaikovsky, Shostakovich, and Schnittke. 

In 2003 they received a Grammy nomination for their CD of the Shostakovich and Schnittke piano quintets with Boris Berman on the Naxos label. Their recording of the six Bartók quartets was released by Naxos in May 2005, and received a 3rd Grammy nomination.

The Vermeer was associated with Northern Illinois University as &quot;resident artist faculty&quot; since 1970, where they trained the following ensembles: the Shanghai String Quartet, Enso String Quartet, Avalon String Quartet, Pacifica String Quartet, and Arianna String Quartet. They were also Fellows at the Royal Northern College of Music in Manchester, England.

==The Seven Last Words of Christ==

The Vermeer Quartet&#x27;s Grammy-nominated CD of Haydn&#x27;s &quot;The Seven Last Words of Christ&quot; [Alden Productions: CD 23042] -produced by its violist, Richard Young- features introductions by Rev. Martin Luther King Jr., evangelist Billy Graham, Father Virgil Elizondo, Dr. Martin Marty, Elder Dallin Oaks, Rev. Kelly Clem, Pastor T. L. Barrett, Father Raymond Brown, and Jason Robards.

==Reviews==

Switzerland&#x27;s &quot;Suisse&quot; wrote, &quot;Out of this alchemy is born a thing of beauty which one can define, without hesitation, as perfection.&quot; 

About their Beethoven recordings, &quot;Stereo Review&quot; said, &quot;What these peerless players give us is a heady blend of old-fashioned warmth and communicativeness, with exemplary demonstrations of modern standards of both taste and technique. More persuasive performances of any of these quartets are simply not to be found.&quot; 

Australia&#x27;s The Age wrote, &quot;Their performance was magnificent: majestic in style, technically without flaw, and utterly persuasive.&quot; 

According to Germany&#x27;s &quot;Süddeutsche Zeitung&quot;, &quot;This is music-making which reveals much of the inner self: music-making of untamed necessity that goes far beyond that which is merely pleasing to the ear.&quot; 

The &quot;Chicago Tribune&quot; wrote: &quot;When presented as poignantly as the Vermeer presents it, the inner core of the piece is left so exposed that both religious and dramatic power radiate from within. The tender loving care that the Vermeer lavishes over every phrase of this unique score is something quite special to behold.&quot; 

Poland&#x27;s Ruch Muzyczny summed up, &quot;The Vermeer&#x27;s interpretation seems so nearly ideal that one can more easily appreciate music as universal harmony.&quot; 

==Members==

The Vermeer Quartet&#x27;s last members were:

*Shmuel Ashkenasi, violin
*Mathias Tacke, violin
*Richard Young, viola
*Marc Johnson, cello

Previous members included Pierre Menard, second violin, (1970–1992), followed by Mathias Tacke, (1992–2007). Scott Nikrenz, viola, 1969, followed by Nobuko Imai (until 1978), Jerry Horner (1978–1980), Bernard Zaslav (1980–1985), and Richard Young (1985–2007). Richard Sher, cello (1969–1972), Ron Leonard, 1972, succeeded by Marc Johnson (1973–2007).

==References==
==Further reading==
*Interview with Shmuel Ashkenasi and Richard Young, June 21, 1989

==External links==
*The Vermeer Quartet is established (1969) at NIU</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7921522" start="4" end="19" title="Vermeer Quartet" label="Vermeer Quartet"/>
<link wikidata="Q207338" start="26" end="40" title="string quartet" label="string quartet"/>
<link wikidata="Q2133827" start="64" end="87" title="Marlboro Music School and Festival" label="Marlboro Music Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q16551" start="91" end="98" title="Vermont" label="Vermont"/>
<link wikidata="Q1297" start="227" end="234" title="Chicago" label="Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q4873949" start="318" end="338" title="Bay Chamber Concerts" label="Bay Chamber Concerts"/>
<link wikidata="Q255" start="401" end="410" title="Beethoven" label="Beethoven"/>
<link wikidata="Q7315" start="412" end="423" title="Tchaikovsky" label="Tchaikovsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q83326" start="429" end="435" title="Bartók" label="Bartók"/>
<link wikidata="Q7349" start="465" end="470" title="Haydn" label="Haydn"/>
<link wikidata="Q7312" start="472" end="480" title="Schubert" label="Schubert"/>
<link wikidata="Q46096" start="482" end="493" title="Felix Mendelssohn" label="Mendelssohn"/>
<link wikidata="Q7294" start="495" end="501" title="Brahms" label="Brahms"/>
<link wikidata="Q7298" start="503" end="509" title="Antonín Dvořák" label="Dvořák"/>
<link wikidata="Q7317" start="511" end="516" title="Verdi" label="Verdi"/>
<link wikidata="Q7315" start="518" end="529" title="Tchaikovsky" label="Tchaikovsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q80135" start="531" end="543" title="Shostakovich" label="Shostakovich"/>
<link wikidata="Q158078" start="549" end="558" title="Schnittke" label="Schnittke"/>
<link wikidata="Q41254" start="586" end="592" title="Grammy" label="Grammy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1746023" start="651" end="664" title="piano quintet" label="piano quintet"/>
<link wikidata="Q2599508" start="671" end="683" title="Boris Berman (musician)" label="Boris Berman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1579196" start="691" end="696" title="Naxos Records" label="Naxos"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191344" start="853" end="881" title="Northern Illinois University" label="Northern Illinois University"/>
<link wikidata="Q7488493" start="981" end="1004" title="Shanghai String Quartet" label="Shanghai String Quartet"/>
<link wikidata="Q5380036" start="1006" end="1025" title="Enso String Quartet" label="Enso String Quartet"/>
<link wikidata="Q7122806" start="1050" end="1073" title="Pacifica Quartet" label="Pacifica String Quartet"/>
<link wikidata="Q62073239" start="1079" end="1101" title="Arianna String Quartet" label="Arianna String Quartet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1544384" start="1133" end="1164" title="Royal Northern College of Music" label="Royal Northern College of Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q7349" start="1276" end="1281" title="Haydn" label="Haydn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1219505" start="1295" end="1325" title="The Seven Last Words of Christ (Haydn)" label="The Seven Last Words of Christ"/>
<link wikidata="Q8027" start="1434" end="1456" title="Martin Luther King Jr." label="Martin Luther King Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q213550" start="1469" end="1481" title="Billy Graham" label="Billy Graham"/>
<link wikidata="Q6152541" start="1511" end="1523" title="Martin Marty" label="Martin Marty"/>
<link wikidata="Q3012489" start="1531" end="1542" title="Dallin Oaks" label="Dallin Oaks"/>
<link wikidata="Q32837487" start="1568" end="1581" title="T. L. Barrett" label="T. L. Barrett"/>
<link wikidata="Q1285436" start="1590" end="1603" title="Raymond E. Brown" label="Raymond Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q296630" start="1609" end="1622" title="Jason Robards" label="Jason Robards"/>
<link wikidata="Q39" start="1663" end="1669" title="Suisse" label="Suisse"/>
<link wikidata="Q610609" start="1840" end="1853" title="Stereo Review" label="Stereo Review"/>
<link wikidata="Q631893" start="2158" end="2165" title="The Age" label="The Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q158870" start="2325" end="2344" title="Süddeutsche Zeitung" label="Süddeutsche Zeitung"/>
<link wikidata="Q47596" start="2532" end="2547" title="Chicago Tribune" label="Chicago Tribune"/>
<link wikidata="Q321539" start="3099" end="3115" title="Shmuel Ashkenasi" label="Shmuel Ashkenasi"/>
<link wikidata="Q19594755" start="3392" end="3406" title="Bernard Zaslav" label="Bernard Zaslav"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="246699" wikidata="Q8215452" url="?curid=246699" title="Mamitu">
<text>Mamitu (Mammitum, Mammitu, Mammi) was a Mesopotamian goddess associated with the underworld. She was regarded as the wife of Nergal, or sometimes of other gods regarded as analogous to him, such as Erra. Her importance in Mesopotamian religion was minor, and she was most likely worshiped primarily in Kutha, though attestations are available from other cities too. It is possible that she was a forerunner of the Mandean Amamit.

==Name and character==
Multiple variants of the theonym Mamitu are attested in cuneiform texts, including &quot;(d)ma-ma&quot;, &quot;dma-mi&quot; and &quot;dma-mi-tum&quot;. As the short form of her name is homophonous with Mami, a goddess of birth or &quot;divine midwife&quot;, some researchers treat them as one deity. However, while in theophoric names with elements such as &quot;ma-ma&quot; the identification of the deity invoked is not always possible, they are kept apart in ancient Mesopotamian god lists, such as the Weidner god list, the Nippur god list and both &quot;An = Anum&quot; and its Old Babylonian forerunner. Longer forms of the name, such as Mammītu, with the exception of a single passage from the &quot;Epic of Gilgamesh&quot; were never used to refer to Mami or any analogous deity. The goddess Mammītu who is responsible for the declaration of destiny alongside &quot;Anunnaku, the great gods&quot; in this composition (tablet X, lines 319–322) is commonly identified as Mami rather than Mammitum by modern translators. The opposite approach was common in early editions, but Rim Nurullin points out that the parallel passage in &quot;Atrahasis&quot; confirms that this interpretation is incorrect. 

It has been suggested that like in the case of Mami, Mamitu&#x27;s name goes back to a for mother, though it is also possible that might instead derive from the terms &quot;oath&quot; or &quot;frost&quot; (Akkadian &quot;mammû&quot;; also &quot;ice&quot;). If the last of these possibilities is correct, its meaning might be &quot;wintry&quot;. 

Mamitu was associated with the underworld.

==Associations with other deities==
As already attested in Old Babylonian sources, Mammitum&#x27;s spouse was Nergal. Wilfred G. Lambert noted that pairing them with each other was standard in this period, but from the Kassite period onward Mamitu came to be replaced by Laṣ. The god list &quot;An = Anum&quot; mentions both of them and equates them with each other. However, in Nippur god list Laṣ occurs separately from Nergal, while Mamitum is listed alongside him. It is possible that they coexisted in Kutha in the second millennium BCE. While a further goddess, Ereshkigal, could also be regarded as the wife of Nergal, there is no evidence that she was ever equated with Mamitu.

Mamitu could also be regarded as the wife of Erra, who came to be identified with Nergal from the Old Babylonian period onward. In the &quot;Epic of Erra&quot;, she appears as the wife of the eponymous god, though in this text he is referred both as Erra and Nergal at various points. &quot;An = Anum&quot; also refers to her as the wife of Meslamtaea, though in this context he is directly identified with Nergal. 

Douglas Frayne has proposed that in Tell al-Wilayah in the Ur III period Mamitu was regarded as the spouse of the local god Aški, who he interprets as an early form of Ḫuškia (later attested as a byname of Nergal; &quot;An = Anum&quot;, tablet VI line 5), as opposed to an alternate writing of Ashgi as sometimes suggested.

Cinzia Pappi argues that the name of the goddess Taški(m)-Mamma is a theophoric name, possibly one originally belonging to a ruler, and that based on apparent connection to the underworld and groundwater she displays it can be presumed that it invokes Mamitu, rather than Mami. This deity is known from texts from Mari, where she was already worshiped in the Šakkanakku period. She also received offerings during the reign of Zimri-Lim, and textual sources indicate a temple dedicated to her existed in the city.

==Worship==
The earliest possible attestations of Mamitu occur in theophoric names from the Early Dynastic and Old Akkadian periods with elements such as &quot;ma-ma&quot;, which also occur in both Akkadian and Amorite onomasticon in later periods, though the identification of the deity invoked in them with certainty is impossible. According to Marcos Such-Gutiérrez, it can be presumed that Mamitu appears in two names from Adab from between the Old Akkadian and Ur III periods, as the theophoric element is spelled as ma-mi-tum in this case. According to Douglas Frayne, names invoking her occur commonly in texts from Tell al-Wilayah from the Ur III period. Cinzia Pappi argues that she appears in theophoric names from Old Babylonian Mari as well. However, according to Ichiro Nakata &quot;dma-ma&quot; and &quot;dma-am-ma&quot; most likely represent the divine midwife Mami in this text corpus. Examples of Akkadian theophoric names invoking Mammitum are also known from Susa from the same period. However, Christa Müller-Kessler and Karlheinz Kessler state that ultimately she was entirely unknown outside of Mesopotamia. 

Mamitu&#x27;s importance in Mesopotamian religion was minor. In the Old Babylonian period she received offerings in the Ekur temple complex in Nippur alongside Nergal. However, most likely her significance was limited to Kutha and its immediate surroundings. Frans Wiggermann argues that she was initially introduced to the local pantheon alongside Erra. She continued to be worshiped there until the first millennium BCE. A hymn to Nanaya most likely composed no later than 744-734 BCE which enumerates goddesses of various cities lists Mamitu as the deity Kutha. The last available attestation of her from this city are theophoric names in a Hellenistic text dated to the year 226 BCE, though the evaluation of the scope of her cult is difficult as few cuneiform texts from late periods have been recovered from this site. She was also worshiped in Babylon. In a new year ritual from this city which according to Wilfred G. Lambert predates the reign of Nebuchadnezzar I and the rise of Marduk to the position of the head of the Mesopotamian pantheon which enumerates deities arriving in the &quot;akitu&quot; building, Mamitu is listed as one of the deities from Kutha alongside Nergal and Laṣ, next to Marduk, Zarpanitu and members of the pantheons of Kish (Zababa and Bau) and Borsippa (Nabu, Nanaya and Sutītu). She was also worshiped in Babylon in later periods, as evidenced by attestations of theophoric names invoking her in two texts dated to the 23rd year of the reign of Nebuchadnezzar II (Mammitu-silim) and the sixth year of the reign of Cyrus (Mammitu-silat), respectively.

==Later relevance==
It is possible that due to the cult of Mamitu retaining a degree of importance in both Babylon and Kutha in late periods, she came to be incorporated into Mandaean tradition. Christa Müller-Kessler and Karlheinz Kessler propose that Mamitu corresponds to Amamit (&quot;ˀmˀmyt&quot;, less commonly &quot;mˀmyt&quot;), who is attested as a demon in the fifth book of the Ginzā Yamina. Amamit is described as a daughter of Qin and spouse of Zartai-Zartanai, and her name can also function as an epithet of Libat, the planet Venus.

==Notes==
==References==
===Bibliography===
*
*
*
*
*
*
*</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q8215452" start="0" end="6" title="Mamitu" label="Mamitu"/>
<link wikidata="Q8215452" start="8" end="16" title="Mamitu" label="Mammitum"/>
<link wikidata="Q8215452" start="18" end="25" title="Mamitu" label="Mammitu"/>
<link wikidata="Q8215452" start="27" end="32" title="Mamitu" label="Mammi"/>
<link wikidata="Q16490393" start="40" end="60" title="Mesopotamian goddess" label="Mesopotamian goddess"/>
<link wikidata="Q784094" start="81" end="91" title="Ancient Mesopotamian underworld" label="underworld"/>
<link wikidata="Q468912" start="125" end="131" title="Nergal" label="Nergal"/>
<link wikidata="Q290861" start="198" end="202" title="Erra (god)" label="Erra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1096108" start="302" end="307" title="Kutha" label="Kutha"/>
<link wikidata="Q205754" start="414" end="421" title="Mandaeism" label="Mandean"/>
<link wikidata="Q111723947" start="422" end="428" title="Amamit" label="Amamit"/>
<link wikidata="Q12160552" start="479" end="486" title="theonym" label="theonym"/>
<link wikidata="Q401" start="510" end="519" title="cuneiform" label="cuneiform"/>
<link wikidata="Q87555087" start="544" end="545" title="dingir" label="d"/>
<link wikidata="Q221079" start="639" end="650" title="Homophone" label="homophonous"/>
<link wikidata="Q860243" start="656" end="660" title="Mami (goddess)" label="Mami"/>
<link wikidata="Q185196" start="697" end="704" title="midwife" label="midwife"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501358" start="772" end="787" title="theophoric name" label="theophoric name"/>
<link wikidata="Q1678518" start="937" end="946" title="lexical lists" label="god lists"/>
<link wikidata="Q116044954" start="960" end="976" title="Weidner god list" label="Weidner god list"/>
<link wikidata="Q188395" start="982" end="988" title="Nippur" label="Nippur"/>
<link wikidata="Q698039" start="1013" end="1022" title="An = Anum" label="An = Anum"/>
<link wikidata="Q733897" start="1037" end="1051" title="Old Babylonian Empire" label="Old Babylonian"/>
<link wikidata="Q8272" start="1161" end="1178" title="Epic of Gilgamesh" label="Epic of Gilgamesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q676379" start="1328" end="1336" title="Anunnaki" label="Anunnaku"/>
<link wikidata="Q757719" start="1595" end="1604" title="Atra-Hasis" label="Atrahasis"/>
<link wikidata="Q35518" start="1867" end="1875" title="Akkadian language" label="Akkadian"/>
<link wikidata="Q784094" start="2039" end="2049" title="Ancient Mesopotamian underworld" label="underworld"/>
<link wikidata="Q733897" start="2111" end="2125" title="Old Babylonian Empire" label="Old Babylonian"/>
<link wikidata="Q468912" start="2162" end="2168" title="Nergal" label="Nergal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2571034" start="2170" end="2188" title="Wilfred G. Lambert" label="Wilfred G. Lambert"/>
<link wikidata="Q243312" start="2271" end="2285" title="Kassite period" label="Kassite period"/>
<link wikidata="Q18431303" start="2323" end="2326" title="Laṣ" label="Laṣ"/>
<link wikidata="Q698039" start="2347" end="2356" title="An = Anum" label="An = Anum"/>
<link wikidata="Q188395" start="2431" end="2437" title="Nippur" label="Nippur"/>
<link wikidata="Q1096108" start="2559" end="2564" title="Kutha" label="Kutha"/>
<link wikidata="Q654458" start="2620" end="2630" title="Ereshkigal" label="Ereshkigal"/>
<link wikidata="Q290861" start="2784" end="2788" title="Erra (god)" label="Erra"/>
<link wikidata="Q290861" start="2880" end="2892" title="Epic of Erra" label="Epic of Erra"/>
<link wikidata="Q3266331" start="3080" end="3090" title="Lugal-irra and Meslamta-ea" label="Meslamtaea"/>
<link wikidata="Q108040702" start="3192" end="3207" title="Tell al-Wilayah" label="Tell al-Wilayah"/>
<link wikidata="Q723587" start="3215" end="3228" title="Ur III period" label="Ur III period"/>
<link wikidata="Q4673336" start="3450" end="3455" title="Ashgi" label="Ashgi"/>
<link wikidata="Q244762" start="3795" end="3799" title="Mari, Syria" label="Mari"/>
<link wikidata="Q15639328" start="3840" end="3850" title="Šakkanakku" label="Šakkanakku"/>
<link wikidata="Q203969" start="3907" end="3916" title="Zimri-Lim" label="Zimri-Lim"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414952" start="3949" end="3955" title="É (temple)" label="temple"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501358" start="4061" end="4076" title="theophoric name" label="theophoric name"/>
<link wikidata="Q716742" start="4087" end="4101" title="Early Dynastic Period (Mesopotamia)" label="Early Dynastic"/>
<link wikidata="Q4461035" start="4106" end="4118" title="Akkadian Empire" label="Old Akkadian"/>
<link wikidata="Q35518" start="4193" end="4201" title="Akkadian language" label="Akkadian"/>
<link wikidata="Q203507" start="4206" end="4213" title="Amorites" label="Amorite"/>
<link wikidata="Q346445" start="4422" end="4426" title="Adab (city)" label="Adab"/>
<link wikidata="Q723587" start="4461" end="4467" title="Ur III" label="Ur III"/>
<link wikidata="Q108040702" start="4618" end="4633" title="Tell al-Wilayah" label="Tell al-Wilayah"/>
<link wikidata="Q733897" start="4720" end="4734" title="Old Babylonian Empire" label="Old Babylonian"/>
<link wikidata="Q244762" start="4735" end="4739" title="Mari, Syria" label="Mari"/>
<link wikidata="Q860243" start="4871" end="4875" title="Mami (goddess)" label="Mami"/>
<link wikidata="Q180773" start="4973" end="4977" title="Susa" label="Susa"/>
<link wikidata="Q21028568" start="5155" end="5176" title="Ancient Mesopotamian religion" label="Mesopotamian religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1413201" start="5247" end="5251" title="Ekur" label="Ekur"/>
<link wikidata="Q188395" start="5270" end="5276" title="Nippur" label="Nippur"/>
<link wikidata="Q468912" start="5287" end="5293" title="Nergal" label="Nergal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1096108" start="5348" end="5353" title="Kutha" label="Kutha"/>
<link wikidata="Q290861" start="5476" end="5480" title="Erra (god)" label="Erra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1809764" start="5560" end="5566" title="Nanaya" label="Nanaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q428995" start="5771" end="5782" title="Hellenistic period" label="Hellenistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q5684" start="5978" end="5985" title="Babylon" label="Babylon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2571034" start="6042" end="6060" title="Wilfred G. Lambert" label="Wilfred G. Lambert"/>
<link wikidata="Q12610" start="6083" end="6099" title="Nebuchadnezzar I" label="Nebuchadnezzar I"/>
<link wikidata="Q190123" start="6116" end="6122" title="Marduk" label="Marduk"/>
<link wikidata="Q419358" start="6227" end="6232" title="akitu" label="akitu"/>
<link wikidata="Q18431303" start="6320" end="6323" title="Laṣ" label="Laṣ"/>
<link wikidata="Q267445" start="6341" end="6350" title="Zarpanitu" label="Zarpanitu"/>
<link wikidata="Q132272" start="6383" end="6387" title="Kish (Sumer)" label="Kish"/>
<link wikidata="Q147461" start="6389" end="6395" title="Zababa" label="Zababa"/>
<link wikidata="Q431958" start="6400" end="6403" title="Bau (goddess)" label="Bau"/>
<link wikidata="Q625134" start="6409" end="6417" title="Borsippa" label="Borsippa"/>
<link wikidata="Q392239" start="6419" end="6423" title="Nabu" label="Nabu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1809764" start="6425" end="6431" title="Nanaya" label="Nanaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q115817814" start="6436" end="6442" title="Sutītu" label="Sutītu"/>
<link wikidata="Q12591" start="6611" end="6628" title="Nebuchadnezzar II" label="Nebuchadnezzar II"/>
<link wikidata="Q8423" start="6680" end="6685" title="Cyrus the Great" label="Cyrus"/>
<link wikidata="Q756820" start="6769" end="6773" title="Cult (religious practice)" label="cult"/>
<link wikidata="Q6747710" start="6893" end="6901" title="Mandaeans" label="Mandaean"/>
<link wikidata="Q111723947" start="6993" end="6999" title="Amamit" label="Amamit"/>
<link wikidata="Q111944593" start="7076" end="7081" title="Demons in Mandaeism" label="demon"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7089" end="7119" title="Right Ginza#Book 5" label="fifth book of the Ginzā Yamina"/>
<link wikidata="Q110029294" start="7158" end="7161" title="Qin (Mandaeism)" label="Qin"/>
<link wikidata="Q110324133" start="7176" end="7191" title="Zartai-Zartanai" label="Zartai-Zartanai"/>
<link wikidata="Q111723947" start="7241" end="7246" title="Libat" label="Libat"/>
<link wikidata="Q313" start="7259" end="7264" title="Venus" label="Venus"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="246701" wikidata="Q288587" url="?curid=246701" title="Thalassocracy">
<text>A thalassocracy or thalattocracy, sometimes also maritime empire, is a state with primarily maritime realms, an empire at sea, or a seaborne empire. Traditional thalassocracies seldom dominate interiors, even in their home territories. Examples of this were the Phoenician states of Tyre, Sidon and Carthage; the Italian maritime republics of Venice and Genoa of the Mediterranean; the Omani Empire of Arabia; and the empires of Srivijaya and Majapahit in Maritime Southeast Asia. Thalassocracies can thus be distinguished from traditional empires, where a state&#x27;s territories, though possibly linked principally or solely by the sea lanes, generally extend into mainland interiors in a tellurocracy (&quot;land-based hegemony&quot;).

The term &quot;thalassocracy&quot; can also simply refer to naval supremacy, in either military or commercial senses. The ancient Greeks first used the word &quot;thalassocracy&quot; to describe the government of the Minoan civilization, whose power depended on its navy. Herodotus distinguished sea-power from land-power and spoke of the need to counter the Phoenician thalassocracy by developing a Greek &quot;empire of the sea&quot;.

Its realization and ideological construct is sometimes called maritimism (cf. Pluricontinentalism or Atlanticism), contrasting continentalism (cf. Eurasianism).

== Origin of the concept: Eusebius&#x27; list ==

Thalassocracy was a resurrection of a word known from a very specific classical document, which British classical scholar John Linton Myres termed &quot;the List of Thalassocracies&quot;. The list was in the Chronicon, a work of universal history of Eusebius, an early 4th century bishop of Caesarea Maritima. Eusebius categorized several historical polities in the Mediterranean as &quot;sea-controlling&quot;, and listed them in a chronology.

The list includes a successive series of &quot;thalassocracies&quot;, begins from the Lydians after the fall of Troy, and ends with Aegina, each controlled the sea for a number of years. The list therefore presents a series of the successive exclusive naval domains, as the total control of the seas changed hands between these thalassocracies. Since it does not mention Aegina&#x27;s final submission of its naval force to Athens, the original list was likely compiled before the consolidation of the Athenian-led Delian League.

Eusebius&#x27; list survived through fragments of Diodorus Siculus&#x27; works, while also appeared in 4th-century theologian and historian Jerome&#x27;s Chronicon, and Byzantine chronicler George Syncellus&#x27; &quot;Extract of Chronography&quot;. German classical scholar Christian Gottlob Heyne reconstructed the list through fragments in 1771. The list was then further surveyed by John Myres in 1906-07 and extensively studied by Molly Miller in the 1970s.

==History and examples==

=== Indo-Pacific ===
The Austronesian peoples of Maritime Southeast Asia developed the Indian Ocean&#x27;s first true maritime trade network. They established trade routes with Southern India and Sri Lanka as early as 1500 BC, ushering in an exchange of material culture (like catamarans, outrigger boats, lashed-lug and sewn-plank boats, and paan) and cultigens (like coconuts, sandalwood, bananas, and sugarcane); as well as connecting the material cultures of India and China. Indonesians in particular traded in spices (mainly cinnamon and cassia) with East Africa, using catamaran and outrigger boats and sailing with the help of the Westerlies in the Indian Ocean. This trade network expanded west to Africa and the Arabian Peninsula, resulting in the Austronesian colonization of Madagascar by the first half of the first millennium AD. It continued into historic times, later becoming the Maritime Silk Road.

The first thalassocracies in the Indo-Pacific region began to emerge around the 2nd century AD, through the rise of emporia exploiting the prosperous trade routes between Funan and India through the Malacca Strait using advanced Austronesian sailing technologies. Numerous coastal city-states emerged, centered on trading ports built near or around river mouths which allowed easy access to goods from inland for maritime trade. These city-states established commercial networks with other trading centers in Southeast Asia and beyond. Their rulers also gradually Indianized by adopting the social structures and religions of India to consolidate their power.

The thalassocratic empire of Srivijaya emerged by the 7th century through conquest and subjugation of neighboring thalassocracies. These included Melayu, Kedah, Tarumanagara, and Mataram, among others. These polities controlled the sea lanes in Southeast Asia and exploited the spice trade of the Spice Islands, as well as maritime trade-routes between India and China. Srivijaya was in turn subjugated by Singhasari around 1275, before finally being absorbed by the successor thalassocracy of Majapahit (1293–1527).

The Arakkal Ali Rajas of Kannur, Kerala are another example. Ali Moossa, the fifth ruler is said to have conquered some of the Maladweep (Maldives) islands in 1183-84 CE.

The connection with the Maldives and Lakshadweep (Laccadives) was well-known to the Portuguese and other Europeans, with the 9° channel separating Minicoy from the Laccadive group being referred to as the &#x27;Mammali’s Channel&#x27; after the Arakkal kings. Even during the beginning of the 16th century, the king of Maldives was a tributary of this House. The Jagir of Laccadive islands, received by the Ali Rajas from Kolathiris in the 16th century, enhanced the status of the House. Kannur (Cannanore) could effectively be characterised as a Muslim thalassocracy, acknowledging that the religious identity of the Ali Rajas had a significant role in their political prominence. 
A link can be made of the income from importing horses from West Asia to the political power of the Ali Rajas throughout the sixteenth century.

===Europe and the Mediterranean===
Ancient maritime-centered or seaborne powers in the Mediterranean include Phoenicians, Athens (Delian League), Carthage, Liburnians and to a lesser degree Aegina and Rhodes.

The Middle Ages saw multiple thalassocracies, often land-based empires which controlled areas of the sea, the best known of them were the Republic of Venice, the Republic of Genoa and the Republic of Pisa; the others were: the Duchy of Amalfi, the Republic of Ancona, the Republic of Ragusa, the Duchy of Gaeta and the Republic of Noli. They were known as maritime republics, controlling trade and territories in the Mediterranean Sea for centuries. These contacts were not only commercial, but also cultural and artistic. They also had an essential role in the Crusades.

The Venetian republic was conventionally divided in the fifteenth century into the &quot;Dogado&quot; of Venice and the Lagoon, the &quot;Stato di Terraferma&quot; of Venetian holdings in northern Italy, and the &quot;Stato da Màr&quot; of the Venetian outlands bound by the sea. According to the French historian Fernand Braudel, Venice was a scattered empire, a trading-post empire forming a long capitalist antenna.

From the 12th to the 15th century the Genoese Republic had the monopoly on the Western Mediterranean trade, establishing colonies and trading posts in numerous countries, and eventually came to control regions in the Black Sea as well. It was also one of the largest naval powers of Europe during the Late Middle Ages.

The Early Middle Ages ( 500–1000 AD) saw many of the coastal cities of Southern Italy develop into minor thalassocracies whose chief powers lay in their ports and in their ability to sail navies to defend friendly coasts and to ravage enemy ones. These include the duchies of Gaeta and Amalfi.

In Northern Europe, Kingdom of the Isles lasted from the 9th to 13th centuries AD, and comprised the Isle of Man, the Hebrides and other islands off the coast of Great Britain.

During the 14th and 15th centuries, the Crown of Aragon was also a thalassocracy controlling a large portion of present-day eastern Spain, parts of what is now southern France and other territories in the Mediterranean. The extent of the Catalan language is a result of this; it&#x27;s spoken in Alghero on Sardinia.

=== Transcontinental ===
With the modern age, the Age of Exploration saw some transcontinental thalassocracies emerge. Anchored in their European territories, several nations established colonial empires held together by naval supremacy. First among them chronologically was the Portuguese Empire, followed soon by the Spanish Empire, which was challenged by the Dutch Empire, itself replaced on the high seas by the British Empire, which had large landed possessions held together by the Royal Navy. With naval arms-races (especially between Germany and Britain), the end of colonialism, and the winning of independence by many colonies, European thalassocracies, which had controlled the world&#x27;s oceans for centuries, diminished—though Britain&#x27;s power-projection in the Falklands War of 1982 demonstrated continuing thalassocratic clout.

The Ottoman Empire expanded from a land-based region to dominate the Eastern Mediterranean and to expand into the Indian Ocean as a thalassocracy from the 15th century AD.

== List of historical thalassocracies ==

* Ajuran Sultanate
* Ancient Carthage
* Arakkal kingdom
* British Empire
* Bruneian Sultanate (1368–1888) (Old Brunei)
* Champa
* Chola Empire
* Crown of Aragon
* Dál Riata
* Delian League
* Demak Sultanate
* Denmark–Norway
* Doric Hexapolis
* Dutch Empire
* Empire of Japan
* Frisian Kingdom
* Hanseatic League
* Johor Sultanate
* Kedah
* Kediri Kingdom
* Kilwa Sultanate
* Kingdom of the Isles
* Liburnia
* Majapahit
* Malacca Sultanate
* Maritime republics
* Maynila
* Mataram Kingdom
* Melayu Kingdom
* Minoan civilization
* Muscat and Oman
* North Sea Empire
* Norwegian Empire
* Omani Empire
* Phoenicia
* Portuguese Empire
* Rajahnate of Butuan
* Rajahnate of Cebu
* Republic of Pirates
* Republic of Venice
* Ryukyu Kingdom
* Singhasari
* Spanish Empire
* Srivijaya
* Sultanate of Gowa
* Sultanate of Maguindanao
* Sultanate of Sulu
* Sultanate of Ternate
* Sultanate of Tidore
* Swedish Empire
* Tarumanagara
* Tundun Kingdom
* Tungning Kingdom
* Tuʻi Tonga Empire
* Yapese Empire

==See also==

* Alfred Thayer Mahan
* Archipelagic state
* Blue-water navy
* List of transcontinental countries
* List of former transcontinental countries
* Maritime power
* Naval warfare
* Nomadic empire
* Tellurocracy
== References ==
==External links==
* The Fragility of Thalassocracy, Pericles to Heinlein</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q288587" start="2" end="15" title="Thalassocracy" label="thalassocracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q288587" start="19" end="32" title="Thalassocracy" label="thalattocracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q288587" start="49" end="64" title="Thalassocracy" label="maritime empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q48349" start="112" end="118" title="empire" label="empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q41642" start="262" end="271" title="Phoenicia" label="Phoenicia"/>
<link wikidata="Q82070" start="283" end="287" title="Tyre (Lebanon)" label="Tyre"/>
<link wikidata="Q163490" start="289" end="294" title="Sidon" label="Sidon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2429397" start="299" end="307" title="Ancient Carthage" label="Carthage"/>
<link wikidata="Q4115680" start="313" end="320" title="Italian city-states" label="Italian"/>
<link wikidata="Q62825" start="321" end="339" title="maritime republics" label="maritime republics"/>
<link wikidata="Q4948" start="343" end="349" title="Republic of Venice" label="Venice"/>
<link wikidata="Q174306" start="354" end="359" title="Republic of Genoa" label="Genoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q4918" start="367" end="380" title="Mediterranean" label="Mediterranean"/>
<link wikidata="Q22684779" start="386" end="398" title="Omani Empire" label="Omani Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q31945" start="402" end="408" title="Arabia" label="Arabia"/>
<link wikidata="Q234197" start="429" end="438" title="Srivijaya" label="Srivijaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q49326" start="443" end="452" title="Majapahit" label="Majapahit"/>
<link wikidata="Q2919361" start="456" end="479" title="Maritime Southeast Asia" label="Maritime Southeast Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1757209" start="635" end="643" title="sea lane" label="sea lane"/>
<link wikidata="Q4454245" start="692" end="704" title="tellurocracy" label="tellurocracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1761621" start="801" end="816" title="command of the sea" label="naval supremacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q11772" start="863" end="877" title="ancient Greeks" label="ancient Greeks"/>
<link wikidata="Q134178" start="958" end="977" title="Minoan civilization" label="Minoan civilization"/>
<link wikidata="Q26825" start="1013" end="1022" title="Herodotus" label="Herodotus"/>
<link wikidata="Q288587" start="1241" end="1251" title="Thalassocracy" label="maritimism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7205549" start="1257" end="1276" title="Pluricontinentalism" label="Pluricontinentalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q388698" start="1280" end="1291" title="Atlanticism" label="Atlanticism"/>
<link wikidata="Q5165343" start="1306" end="1320" title="continentalism" label="continentalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1324222" start="1326" end="1337" title="Eurasianism" label="Eurasianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1700856" start="1513" end="1530" title="John Myres" label="John Linton Myres"/>
<link wikidata="Q3675944" start="1599" end="1608" title="Chronicon (Eusebius)" label="Chronicon"/>
<link wikidata="Q18882" start="1620" end="1637" title="Universal history (genre)" label="universal history"/>
<link wikidata="Q142999" start="1641" end="1649" title="Eusebius" label="Eusebius"/>
<link wikidata="Q319242" start="1682" end="1699" title="Caesarea Maritima" label="Caesarea Maritima"/>
<link wikidata="Q1778719" start="1923" end="1930" title="Lydians" label="Lydians"/>
<link wikidata="Q22647" start="1949" end="1953" title="Troy" label="Troy"/>
<link wikidata="Q191082" start="1969" end="1975" title="Aegina" label="Aegina"/>
<link wikidata="Q193235" start="2352" end="2365" title="Delian League" label="Delian League"/>
<link wikidata="Q171241" start="2418" end="2434" title="Diodorus Siculus" label="Diodorus Siculus"/>
<link wikidata="Q44248" start="2508" end="2514" title="Jerome" label="Jerome"/>
<link wikidata="Q3675945" start="2522" end="2531" title="Chronicon (Jerome)" label="Chronicon"/>
<link wikidata="Q366382" start="2558" end="2574" title="George Syncellus" label="George Syncellus"/>
<link wikidata="Q63182" start="2643" end="2666" title="Christian Gottlob Heyne" label="Christian Gottlob Heyne"/>
<link wikidata="Q861225" start="2883" end="2903" title="Austronesian peoples" label="Austronesian peoples"/>
<link wikidata="Q2919361" start="2907" end="2930" title="Maritime Southeast Asia" label="Maritime Southeast Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1239" start="2945" end="2957" title="Indian Ocean" label="Indian Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q542146" start="3035" end="3049" title="Southern India" label="Southern India"/>
<link wikidata="Q854" start="3054" end="3063" title="Sri Lanka" label="Sri Lanka"/>
<link wikidata="Q190403" start="3135" end="3144" title="catamaran" label="catamaran"/>
<link wikidata="Q639140" start="3147" end="3161" title="outrigger boat" label="outrigger boat"/>
<link wikidata="Q85775905" start="3164" end="3174" title="lashed-lug" label="lashed-lug"/>
<link wikidata="Q3273203" start="3179" end="3194" title="sewn-plank boat" label="sewn-plank boat"/>
<link wikidata="Q2901824" start="3201" end="3205" title="paan" label="paan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1362373" start="3211" end="3219" title="cultigen" label="cultigen"/>
<link wikidata="Q13187" start="3227" end="3234" title="coconut" label="coconut"/>
<link wikidata="Q11122366" start="3237" end="3247" title="sandalwood" label="sandalwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q503" start="3249" end="3255" title="banana" label="banana"/>
<link wikidata="Q36940" start="3262" end="3271" title="sugarcane" label="sugarcane"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="3321" end="3326" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="3331" end="3336" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q83828" start="3338" end="3349" title="Ethnic groups in Indonesia" label="Indonesians"/>
<link wikidata="Q28165" start="3389" end="3397" title="cinnamon" label="cinnamon"/>
<link wikidata="Q204148" start="3402" end="3408" title="Cassia bark" label="cassia"/>
<link wikidata="Q27407" start="3415" end="3426" title="East Africa" label="East Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q190403" start="3434" end="3443" title="catamaran" label="catamaran"/>
<link wikidata="Q12343832" start="3497" end="3507" title="Westerlies" label="Westerlies"/>
<link wikidata="Q15" start="3565" end="3571" title="Africa" label="Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q31945" start="3580" end="3597" title="Arabian Peninsula" label="Arabian Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q1019" start="3645" end="3655" title="Madagascar" label="Madagascar"/>
<link wikidata="Q11149509" start="3755" end="3773" title="Maritime Silk Road" label="Maritime Silk Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q655593" start="3892" end="3899" title="Emporium (antiquity)" label="emporia"/>
<link wikidata="Q867782" start="3947" end="3952" title="Funan" label="Funan"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="3957" end="3962" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q48359" start="3975" end="3989" title="Malacca Strait" label="Malacca Strait"/>
<link wikidata="Q1233637" start="4125" end="4136" title="river mouth" label="river mouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q11708" start="4285" end="4299" title="Southeast Asia" label="Southeast Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q11014588" start="4340" end="4350" title="Indianized kingdoms" label="Indianized"/>
<link wikidata="Q25107" start="4429" end="4434" title="Power (social and political)" label="power"/>
<link wikidata="Q234197" start="4466" end="4475" title="Srivijaya" label="Srivijaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q3112053" start="4583" end="4589" title="Melayu Kingdom" label="Melayu"/>
<link wikidata="Q188947" start="4591" end="4596" title="Kedah" label="Kedah"/>
<link wikidata="Q2247225" start="4598" end="4610" title="Tarumanagara" label="Tarumanagara"/>
<link wikidata="Q402580" start="4616" end="4623" title="Mataram Kingdom" label="Mataram"/>
<link wikidata="Q3827" start="4734" end="4747" title="Maluku islands" label="Spice Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="4790" end="4795" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="4800" end="4805" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q2060657" start="4843" end="4853" title="Singhasari" label="Singhasari"/>
<link wikidata="Q49326" start="4931" end="4940" title="Majapahit" label="Majapahit"/>
<link wikidata="Q4783847" start="4959" end="4966" title="Arakkal" label="Arakkal"/>
<link wikidata="Q4789666" start="4980" end="4986" title="Kannur" label="Kannur"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186" start="4988" end="4994" title="Kerala" label="Kerala"/>
<link wikidata="Q826" start="5093" end="5101" title="Maldives" label="Maldives"/>
<link wikidata="Q26927" start="5164" end="5175" title="Lakshadweep" label="Lakshadweep"/>
<link wikidata="Q6427080" start="5549" end="5559" title="Kolathiris" label="Kolathiris"/>
<link wikidata="Q41642" start="6064" end="6073" title="Phoenicia" label="Phoenicia"/>
<link wikidata="Q844930" start="6077" end="6083" title="Classical Athens" label="Athens"/>
<link wikidata="Q193235" start="6085" end="6098" title="Delian League" label="Delian League"/>
<link wikidata="Q2429397" start="6101" end="6109" title="Ancient Carthage" label="Carthage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1259473" start="6111" end="6121" title="Liburnians" label="Liburnians"/>
<link wikidata="Q191082" start="6145" end="6151" title="Aegina" label="Aegina"/>
<link wikidata="Q43048" start="6156" end="6162" title="Rhodes" label="Rhodes"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="6169" end="6180" title="Middle Ages" label="Middle Ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q4948" start="6303" end="6321" title="Republic of Venice" label="Republic of Venice"/>
<link wikidata="Q174306" start="6327" end="6344" title="Republic of Genoa" label="Republic of Genoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365493" start="6353" end="6369" title="Republic of Pisa" label="Republic of Pisa"/>
<link wikidata="Q686312" start="6392" end="6407" title="Duchy of Amalfi" label="Duchy of Amalfi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1627613" start="6413" end="6431" title="Republic of Ancona" label="Republic of Ancona"/>
<link wikidata="Q208169" start="6437" end="6455" title="Republic of Ragusa" label="Republic of Ragusa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2457072" start="6461" end="6475" title="Duchy of Gaeta" label="Duchy of Gaeta"/>
<link wikidata="Q3933247" start="6484" end="6500" title="Republic of Noli" label="Republic of Noli"/>
<link wikidata="Q62825" start="6521" end="6539" title="maritime republics" label="maritime republics"/>
<link wikidata="Q12546" start="6727" end="6735" title="Crusades" label="Crusades"/>
<link wikidata="Q1234658" start="6827" end="6833" title="Dogado" label="Dogado"/>
<link wikidata="Q2062829" start="6870" end="6901" title="Domini di Terraferma" label="&amp;quot;Stato di Terraferma&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1782789" start="6956" end="6968" title="Stato da Màr" label="Stato da Màr"/>
<link wikidata="Q185105" start="7052" end="7067" title="Fernand Braudel" label="Fernand Braudel"/>
<link wikidata="Q6206" start="7137" end="7147" title="Capitalism" label="capitalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q4918" start="7237" end="7258" title="Western Mediterranean" label="Western Mediterranean"/>
<link wikidata="Q212976" start="7459" end="7475" title="Late Middle Ages" label="Late Middle Ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q202763" start="7482" end="7499" title="Early Middle Ages" label="Early Middle Ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q207989" start="7549" end="7563" title="Southern Italy" label="Southern Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2457072" start="7754" end="7759" title="Duchy of Gaeta" label="Gaeta"/>
<link wikidata="Q686312" start="7764" end="7770" title="Duchy of Amalfi" label="Amalfi"/>
<link wikidata="Q27479" start="7776" end="7791" title="Northern Europe" label="Northern Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q459188" start="7793" end="7813" title="Kingdom of the Isles" label="Kingdom of the Isles"/>
<link wikidata="Q9676" start="7874" end="7885" title="Isle of Man" label="Isle of Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q123377" start="7891" end="7899" title="Hebrides" label="Hebrides"/>
<link wikidata="Q23666" start="7935" end="7948" title="Great Britain" label="Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q204920" start="7991" end="8006" title="Crown of Aragon" label="Crown of Aragon"/>
<link wikidata="Q29" start="8083" end="8088" title="Spain" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q15580" start="8111" end="8126" title="Northern Catalonia" label="southern France"/>
<link wikidata="Q7026" start="8189" end="8205" title="Catalan language" label="Catalan language"/>
<link wikidata="Q585704" start="8247" end="8254" title="Algherese dialect" label="Alghero"/>
<link wikidata="Q133641" start="8319" end="8337" title="Age of Exploration" label="Age of Exploration"/>
<link wikidata="Q200464" start="8548" end="8565" title="Portuguese Empire" label="Portuguese Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q80702" start="8588" end="8602" title="Spanish Empire" label="Spanish Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q130654" start="8632" end="8644" title="Dutch Empire" label="Dutch Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q8680" start="8686" end="8700" title="British Empire" label="British Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q43287" start="8812" end="8819" title="German Empire" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q174193" start="8824" end="8831" title="United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland" label="Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q48249" start="9051" end="9064" title="Falklands War" label="Falklands War"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="9124" end="9138" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q3301962" start="9189" end="9210" title="Eastern Mediterranean" label="Eastern Mediterranean"/>
<link wikidata="Q762191" start="9225" end="9246" title="Ottoman naval expeditions in the Indian Ocean" label="into the Indian Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q862532" start="9337" end="9353" title="Ajuran Sultanate" label="Ajuran Sultanate"/>
<link wikidata="Q2429397" start="9356" end="9372" title="Ancient Carthage" label="Ancient Carthage"/>
<link wikidata="Q4783847" start="9375" end="9390" title="Arakkal kingdom" label="Arakkal kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q8680" start="9393" end="9407" title="British Empire" label="British Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q887803" start="9410" end="9440" title="Bruneian Sultanate (1368–1888)" label="Bruneian Sultanate (1368–1888)"/>
<link wikidata="Q216786" start="9456" end="9462" title="Champa" label="Champa"/>
<link wikidata="Q6806806" start="9465" end="9477" title="Chola Empire" label="Chola Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q204920" start="9480" end="9495" title="Crown of Aragon" label="Crown of Aragon"/>
<link wikidata="Q111471" start="9498" end="9507" title="Dál Riata" label="Dál Riata"/>
<link wikidata="Q193235" start="9510" end="9523" title="Delian League" label="Delian League"/>
<link wikidata="Q49322" start="9526" end="9541" title="Demak Sultanate" label="Demak Sultanate"/>
<link wikidata="Q62651" start="9544" end="9558" title="Denmark–Norway" label="Denmark–Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1233764" start="9561" end="9576" title="Doric Hexapolis" label="Doric Hexapolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q130654" start="9579" end="9591" title="Dutch Empire" label="Dutch Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q188712" start="9594" end="9609" title="Empire of Japan" label="Empire of Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q87791" start="9612" end="9627" title="Frisian Kingdom" label="Frisian Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q42908" start="9630" end="9646" title="Hanseatic League" label="Hanseatic League"/>
<link wikidata="Q1150344" start="9649" end="9664" title="Johor Sultanate" label="Johor Sultanate"/>
<link wikidata="Q188947" start="9667" end="9672" title="Kedah" label="Kedah"/>
<link wikidata="Q756895" start="9675" end="9689" title="Kediri Kingdom" label="Kediri Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q3107156" start="9692" end="9707" title="Kilwa Sultanate" label="Kilwa Sultanate"/>
<link wikidata="Q459188" start="9710" end="9730" title="Kingdom of the Isles" label="Kingdom of the Isles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247020" start="9733" end="9741" title="Liburnia" label="Liburnia"/>
<link wikidata="Q49326" start="9744" end="9753" title="Majapahit" label="Majapahit"/>
<link wikidata="Q46652" start="9756" end="9773" title="Malacca Sultanate" label="Malacca Sultanate"/>
<link wikidata="Q62825" start="9776" end="9794" title="Maritime republics" label="Maritime republics"/>
<link wikidata="Q4401247" start="9797" end="9804" title="Maynila (historical polity)" label="Maynila"/>
<link wikidata="Q402580" start="9807" end="9822" title="Mataram Kingdom" label="Mataram Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q3112053" start="9825" end="9839" title="Melayu Kingdom" label="Melayu Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q134178" start="9842" end="9861" title="Minoan civilization" label="Minoan civilization"/>
<link wikidata="Q157734" start="9864" end="9879" title="Muscat and Oman" label="Muscat and Oman"/>
<link wikidata="Q3281269" start="9882" end="9898" title="North Sea Empire" label="North Sea Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q2196956" start="9901" end="9917" title="Norwegian Empire" label="Norwegian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q22684779" start="9920" end="9932" title="Omani Empire" label="Omani Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q41642" start="9935" end="9944" title="Phoenicia" label="Phoenicia"/>
<link wikidata="Q200464" start="9947" end="9964" title="Portuguese Empire" label="Portuguese Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q4401303" start="9967" end="9986" title="Rajahnate of Butuan" label="Rajahnate of Butuan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4401071" start="9989" end="10006" title="Cebu (historical polity)" label="Rajahnate of Cebu"/>
<link wikidata="Q18085321" start="10009" end="10028" title="Republic of Pirates" label="Republic of Pirates"/>
<link wikidata="Q4948" start="10031" end="10049" title="Republic of Venice" label="Republic of Venice"/>
<link wikidata="Q28025" start="10052" end="10066" title="Ryukyu Kingdom" label="Ryukyu Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q2060657" start="10069" end="10079" title="Singhasari" label="Singhasari"/>
<link wikidata="Q80702" start="10082" end="10096" title="Spanish Empire" label="Spanish Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q234197" start="10099" end="10108" title="Srivijaya" label="Srivijaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q1408641" start="10111" end="10128" title="Sultanate of Gowa" label="Sultanate of Gowa"/>
<link wikidata="Q248572" start="10131" end="10155" title="Sultanate of Maguindanao" label="Sultanate of Maguindanao"/>
<link wikidata="Q422065" start="10158" end="10175" title="Sultanate of Sulu" label="Sultanate of Sulu"/>
<link wikidata="Q2029522" start="10178" end="10198" title="Sultanate of Ternate" label="Sultanate of Ternate"/>
<link wikidata="Q4118614" start="10201" end="10220" title="Sultanate of Tidore" label="Sultanate of Tidore"/>
<link wikidata="Q215443" start="10223" end="10237" title="Swedish Empire" label="Swedish Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q2247225" start="10240" end="10252" title="Tarumanagara" label="Tarumanagara"/>
<link wikidata="Q1642472" start="10255" end="10269" title="Tondo (historical polity)" label="Tundun Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q152855" start="10272" end="10288" title="Kingdom of Tungning" label="Tungning Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q842390" start="10291" end="10308" title="Tuʻi Tonga Empire" label="Tuʻi Tonga Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q117032703" start="10311" end="10324" title="Yapese Empire" label="Yapese Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q142988" start="10342" end="10361" title="Alfred Thayer Mahan" label="Alfred Thayer Mahan"/>
<link wikidata="Q13107770" start="10364" end="10382" title="Archipelagic state" label="Archipelagic state"/>
<link wikidata="Q1622314" start="10385" end="10400" title="Blue-water navy" label="Blue-water navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q113237304" start="10403" end="10437" title="List of transcontinental countries" label="List of transcontinental countries"/>
<link wikidata="Q6623344" start="10440" end="10481" title="List of former transcontinental countries" label="List of former transcontinental countries"/>
<link wikidata="Q11308878" start="10484" end="10498" title="Maritime power" label="Maritime power"/>
<link wikidata="Q876274" start="10501" end="10514" title="Naval warfare" label="Naval warfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q2495771" start="10517" end="10531" title="Nomadic empire" label="Nomadic empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q4454245" start="10534" end="10546" title="Tellurocracy" label="Tellurocracy"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="246702" wikidata="Q523649" url="?curid=246702" title="Flying">
<text>Flying may refer to:
* Flight, the process of flying
* Aviation, the creation and operation of aircraft

==Music==

===Albums===
* &quot;Flying (Cody Fry album)&quot;, 2017
* &quot;Flying&quot; (Grammatrain album), 1997
* &quot;Flying&quot; (Jonathan Fagerlund album), 2008
* &quot;UFO 2: Flying&quot; (UFO album), 1971
* &quot;Flying&quot;, by Bae Seul-ki
* &quot;Flying&quot;, by Chas &amp; Dave
* &quot;Flying&quot;, by The Hometown Band

===Songs===
* &quot;Flying&quot; (Beatles song), 1967
* &quot;Flying&quot; (Bryan Adams song), 2004
* &quot;Flying&quot; (Cast song), 1996
* &quot;Flying&quot; (Chas &amp; Dave song), 1982
* &quot;Flying&quot;, by Anathema from &quot;A Natural Disaster&quot;
* &quot;Flying&quot;, by Badfinger from &quot;Straight Up&quot;
* &quot;Flying&quot;, by Cory Marks from the 2022 extended play &quot;I Rise&quot;
* &quot;Flying&quot;, by James Newton Howard from the film &quot;Peter Pan&quot;
* &quot;Flying&quot;, by Living Colour from &quot;Collideøscope&quot;
* &quot;Flying&quot;, by Stan Rogers from &quot;From Fresh Water&quot;
* &quot;Flyin&#x27;&quot;, by Prism from &quot;See Forever Eyes&quot;

==Other uses==
* &quot;Flying&quot; (magazine), a monthly publication
* &quot;Flying&quot; (film), a 1986 drama film
* &quot;Flying&quot; (&quot;Bagpuss&quot;), a 1974 children&#x27;s television episode
* &quot;Flying&quot; (&quot;The Good Place&quot;), an episode of the American comedy television series
* &quot;Flying&quot;, a 1974 book by Kate Millett

==See also==
* Fly (disambiguation)
* Flying and gliding animals</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q523649" start="0" end="6" title="Flying" label="Flying"/>
<link wikidata="Q206021" start="23" end="29" title="Flight" label="Flight"/>
<link wikidata="Q765633" start="55" end="63" title="Aviation" label="Aviation"/>
<link wikidata="Q110409485" start="137" end="160" title="Flying (Cody Fry album)" label="Flying (Cody Fry album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5463338" start="175" end="213" title="Flying (Grammatrain album)" label="&amp;quot;Flying&amp;quot; (Grammatrain album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q17508036" start="222" end="267" title="Flying (Jonathan Fagerlund album)" label="&amp;quot;Flying&amp;quot; (Jonathan Fagerlund album)"/>
<link wikidata="" start="282" end="295" title="UFO 2: Flying" label="UFO 2: Flying"/>
<link wikidata="Q491360" start="345" end="356" title="Bae Seul-ki" label="Bae Seul-ki"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067929" start="382" end="397" title="Chas &amp;amp; Dave" label="Chas &amp;amp; Dave"/>
<link wikidata="Q5890607" start="423" end="440" title="The Hometown Band" label="The Hometown Band"/>
<link wikidata="Q2072064" start="456" end="489" title="Flying (Beatles song)" label="&amp;quot;Flying&amp;quot; (Beatles song)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5463342" start="498" end="535" title="Flying (Bryan Adams song)" label="&amp;quot;Flying&amp;quot; (Bryan Adams song)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5463336" start="544" end="574" title="Flying (Cast song)" label="&amp;quot;Flying&amp;quot; (Cast song)"/>
<link wikidata="Q14954799" start="583" end="624" title="Flying (Chas &amp;amp; Dave song)" label="&amp;quot;Flying&amp;quot; (Chas &amp;amp; Dave song)"/>
<link wikidata="Q300494" start="676" end="694" title="A Natural Disaster" label="A Natural Disaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q7621052" start="747" end="758" title="Straight Up (Badfinger album)" label="Straight Up"/>
<link wikidata="Q98126969" start="790" end="800" title="Cory Marks" label="Cory Marks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364029" start="913" end="922" title="Peter Pan (2003 film)" label="Peter Pan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1767341" start="979" end="992" title="Collideøscope" label="Collideøscope"/>
<link wikidata="Q5505411" start="1047" end="1063" title="From Fresh Water" label="From Fresh Water"/>
<link wikidata="Q7445482" start="1117" end="1133" title="See Forever Eyes" label="See Forever Eyes"/>
<link wikidata="Q4577908" start="1158" end="1187" title="Flying (magazine)" label="&amp;quot;Flying&amp;quot; (magazine)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5463341" start="1213" end="1238" title="Flying (film)" label="&amp;quot;Flying&amp;quot; (film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2879179" start="1260" end="1300" title="Flying (Bagpuss)" label="&amp;quot;Flying&amp;quot; (&amp;quot;Bagpuss&amp;quot;)"/>
<link wikidata="Q27105313" start="1346" end="1393" title="Flying (The Good Place)" label="&amp;quot;Flying&amp;quot; (&amp;quot;The Good Place&amp;quot;)"/>
<link wikidata="Q292268" start="1484" end="1496" title="Kate Millett" label="Kate Millett"/>
<link wikidata="Q227217" start="1513" end="1533" title="Fly (disambiguation)" label="Fly (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2917486" start="1536" end="1562" title="Flying and gliding animals" label="Flying and gliding animals"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="246703" wikidata="Q544590" url="?curid=246703" title="Ekeko">
<text>The Ekeko (contemporary Aymara spelling: &quot;Iqiqu&quot;) is the Tiwanakan (pre Columbian civilization) god of abundance and prosperity in the mythology and folklore of the people from the Altiplano. Its chief importance in popular culture is as the main figure of the annual Alasitas fair, a cultural event that happens every January 24 in La Paz, Bolivia. The Ekeko is a traditional god of luck and prosperity popular in the western region of Bolivia. In Peru the main festival is celebrated on May 3 of every year in the city of Puno, on the Machallata hill.

==Etymology==
The name Ekeko comes from the alteration of the original term &quot;Ekhako&quot; or &quot;Eqaqo&quot;, popularized as &quot;Ekhekho&quot; which was the ancient god of fortune and prosperity in the Qullasuyu. The &quot;Ekhako&quot; was often invoked when a disgrace disturbed their homes.

==Origins==

===Pre-Columbian references===
The scholar Ernesto Cavour in his book &quot;Alasitas&quot;, makes reference to anthropomorphic and zoomorphic stone, mud and gold figures that were found in the areas belonging to the Bolivian departments of La Paz, Oruro and Potosí. Cavour considers that these figures were made using basalt—extracted from the pre-Columbian mines in the shores of the Lake Poopó—and andesite from the Copacabana peninsula.

Carlos Ponce Sanginés, for his part, focus his researches in the anthropomorphic figures with phallic elements and prominent humps which, in his opinion, go back to the Inca civilization and, according to his observations, they would correspond to the predecessors of the colonial &quot;Ekeko&quot;.

The historian Antonio Paredes Candia considers that these figures would be the remains of ancient sacred festivities during the summer solstice in the southern hemisphere. Arthur Posnansky also observes that in dates near the 22 December, in the Tiwanaku culture, the population used to worship their deities to ask for good luck, offering miniatures of what they wished to have or achieve.

==Characteristics==

===Description===

The Ekeko is depicted as a man with a mustache wearing traditional Andean clothes (especially the poncho) and completely loaded with bags and baskets with grain and food, (compare with the cornucopia of some Greco-Roman deities), household objects, and currency bills, and basically anything that a person is thought to want or need to have a comfortable and prosperous life; he is commonly found as a little statue to be put in some place of the house, preferably a comfortable one, but also as an amulet attached to key rings; modern statues of the god include a circular opening in his mouth in which to place a cigarette for Ekeko&#x27;s pleasure. Latest tradition has the Ekeko &quot;smoke&quot; a lit cigarette once a year to ensure a full year of prosperity.

&quot;Ekeko&quot; should be placed in a place of honor at home. Some versions can be carried in necklaces or key chains.

===Purpose===
&quot;Ekeko&quot; brings monetary wealth to its worshippers. An offering is generally required before he provides his services. Banknotes are often clipped to the &quot;Ekeko&quot; as offerings, but some statuettes allow for a cigarette to be lit as an offering. The figurines which allow for cigarette offerings have mouth openings large enough for cigarettes to be inserted. &quot;Ekeko&quot; additionally provides good harvests when offered grain.

== Legend of Ekeko ==
The legend of the Ekeko, as narrated by Antonio Díaz Villamil, dates around 1781 in La Paz, Bolivia.
At this time, the city of La Paz was under siege by indigenous people, who were still at war with Spanish forces.

The story of the origin of the Ekeko starts with Paulita Tintaya, an Indian girl who worked for Doña Josefa Ursula de Rojas Foronda, in La Paz.

The girl was in love with Isidoro Choquehuanca. Years before, she had left the hacienda where they both had grown up. Before her departure, Isidoro gave her a small statue to protect her. This small statue was the Ekeko, which was known to the Andean people to be a god of fortune and luck.

At the time of the siege, people were starving to death. Isidoro was enrolled in the indigenous army, and he manage to reach Paulita&#x27;s house. Every week, he left her food near the statue, which was placed outside the house, but nobody knew he was doing it. Both Paulita and her boss, Doña Josefa, were able to survive the siege because of the food left near the statue by Isidoro. That is the origin of the beliefs of Ekeko&#x27;s powers in providing abundance.

== Central role in the Alasitas festival ==

In March 2011 Elizabeth Salguero, Minister of Cultures, nominated Alasitas along with two other Bolivian festivals to UNESCO for World Heritage recognition as part of the cultural and intangible heritage of humanity. 
People attend the event from all over the city and even travel from other cities inside Bolivia to buy miniature versions of goods to give to others, in the hope that the recipient will receive the real item during the coming year.

Throughout other regions the festival for the Ekeko is held in October and known by the name &quot;Calvario&quot;.

==Notes==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q544590" start="4" end="9" title="Ekeko" label="Ekeko"/>
<link wikidata="Q4627" start="24" end="30" title="Aymara language" label="Aymara"/>
<link wikidata="Q61750" start="67" end="76" title="Tiwanaku" label="Tiwanakan"/>
<link wikidata="Q12827256" start="145" end="154" title="mythology" label="mythology"/>
<link wikidata="Q36192" start="159" end="167" title="folklore" label="folklore"/>
<link wikidata="Q15690127" start="278" end="286" title="Alasitas" label="Alasitas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1491" start="343" end="349" title="La Paz" label="La Paz"/>
<link wikidata="Q750" start="351" end="358" title="Bolivia" label="Bolivia"/>
<link wikidata="Q750" start="447" end="454" title="Bolivia" label="Bolivia"/>
<link wikidata="Q419" start="459" end="463" title="Peru" label="Peru"/>
<link wikidata="Q232842" start="534" end="538" title="Puno" label="Puno"/>
<link wikidata="Q2039069" start="776" end="785" title="Qullasuyu" label="Qullasuyu"/>
<link wikidata="Q3057259" start="924" end="938" title="Ernesto Cavour" label="Ernesto Cavour"/>
<link wikidata="Q132987" start="992" end="1007" title="Anthropomorphism" label="anthropomorphic"/>
<link wikidata="Q220304" start="1012" end="1022" title="Zoomorphism" label="zoomorphic"/>
<link wikidata="Q750" start="1097" end="1104" title="Bolivia" label="Bolivia"/>
<link wikidata="Q272784" start="1121" end="1127" title="La Paz Department, Bolivia" label="La Paz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061368" start="1129" end="1134" title="Oruro Department" label="Oruro"/>
<link wikidata="Q238079" start="1139" end="1145" title="Potosí Department" label="Potosí"/>
<link wikidata="Q43338" start="1199" end="1205" title="basalt" label="basalt"/>
<link wikidata="Q202390" start="1225" end="1238" title="pre-Columbian" label="pre-Columbian"/>
<link wikidata="Q464945" start="1266" end="1276" title="Lake Poopó" label="Lake Poopó"/>
<link wikidata="Q181908" start="1281" end="1289" title="andesite" label="andesite"/>
<link wikidata="Q114211" start="1299" end="1319" title="Copacabana, Bolivia" label="Copacabana peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q5395730" start="1322" end="1343" title="Carlos Ponce Sanginés" label="Carlos Ponce Sanginés"/>
<link wikidata="Q168552" start="1416" end="1423" title="phallic" label="phallic"/>
<link wikidata="Q28573" start="1491" end="1508" title="Inca civilization" label="Inca civilization"/>
<link wikidata="Q2857388" start="1637" end="1659" title="Antonio Paredes Candia" label="Antonio Paredes Candia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7603898" start="1751" end="1766" title="summer solstice" label="summer solstice"/>
<link wikidata="Q41228" start="1774" end="1793" title="southern hemisphere" label="southern hemisphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q4368887" start="1795" end="1811" title="Arthur Posnansky" label="Arthur Posnansky"/>
<link wikidata="Q1307407" start="1869" end="1885" title="Tiwanaku culture" label="Tiwanaku culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q332682" start="2244" end="2254" title="cornucopia" label="cornucopia"/>
<link wikidata="Q131557" start="2554" end="2560" title="amulet" label="amulet"/>
<link wikidata="Q5698191" start="3472" end="3493" title="Antonio Díaz Villamil" label="Antonio Díaz Villamil"/>
<link wikidata="Q1491" start="3516" end="3522" title="La Paz" label="La Paz"/>
<link wikidata="Q750" start="3524" end="3531" title="Bolivia" label="Bolivia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1491" start="3784" end="3790" title="La Paz" label="La Paz"/>
<link wikidata="Q5363468" start="4612" end="4630" title="Elizabeth Salguero" label="Elizabeth Salguero"/>
<link wikidata="Q7809" start="4716" end="4722" title="UNESCO" label="UNESCO"/>
<link wikidata="Q9259" start="4727" end="4741" title="World Heritage" label="World Heritage"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="246706" wikidata="Q1788178" url="?curid=246706" title="Roodmas">
<text>Roodmas (from Old English &quot;rood&quot; &quot;rod&quot;, &quot;cross&quot; and &quot;mas&quot;, Mass; similar to the etymology of Christmas), is a name for the celebration of the Feast of the Cross. It has been applied to both historical commemoration on May 3 and September 14. It commemorates the finding by Saint Helena of the True Cross in Jerusalem in 326.

==History==
The feast originally commemorated the dedication of the Martyrium, and was linked with the finding of the Cross shortly thereafter. Saint Helena reportedly found the Cross on September 14, 326. Many legends developed, and the story of the “invention,” or the finding of the cross, enhanced by romances, became a favourite throughout Christendom. The feast entered the Western calendar in the seventh century after Emperor Heraclius recovered the cross from the Persians.

===&quot;Invention&quot; (Finding) of the True Cross===
Beginning about the seventh century, the Gallican Church, celebrated the Feast of the Cross on May 3. The Feast of the &quot;Invention of the True Cross&quot; commemorates the recovery by the Byzantine Emperor Heraclius, of a portion of the Holy Cross on 3 May 629, after it fell into the hands of the Persians. 
According to Herbert Thurston: [T]he portion of the Holy Cross preserved in Jerusalem afterwards fell into the hands of the Persians, but was recovered and...was solemnly brought back to Jerusalem on 3 May, 629. This day seems to have attracted special attention among Celtic liturgists in the West and, though disregarded in the East, has passed through Celtic channels (we meet it first in the Lectionary of Silos and in the Bobbio Missal) into general recognition under the mistaken title of &quot;Invention of the Cross. The commemoration of the &quot;Invention of the True Cross&#x27;, particularly popular in the historical Gallican Rite of the Catholic Church. was kept by the Western Church on 3 May. 

==Later developments==
After the Gallican and Latin liturgical rites were combined, the days were observed individually as the Finding of the Holy Cross (May 3) and the Triumph of the Cross (September 14). Some Protestant churches followed this practice; the Church of England&#x27;s &quot;Book of Common Prayer&quot; places Roodmas on May 3. In Devonshire, Roodmas was observed on the first Monday after May 3 with a procession of the bounds of the parish. 

In 1960, Pope John XXIII combined both Latin Church&#x27;s celebrations into the September 14 feast, in line with his revisions to the General Roman Calendar that, among other things, eliminated duplicate feasts. The Church of England followed suit with the adoption of the &quot;Common Worship&quot; liturgy in 2000.

In the Philippines, the &quot;Santacruzan&quot;—a ritual pageant commemorating the Finding of the True Cross—is still held in May as the custom originated in the pre-1970 Filipino Catholic observance of Roodmas.

==Folklore==
In Scotland, Roodmas (or Féill Ròid) marks the start of the rutting season of the deer. It was held that if the night before it was wet, it would be followed by a month of dry weather, &quot;and the farmer need be under no apprehension of securing his crops.&quot; John Gregorson Campbell described the belling of the red deer among the hills on this night as &quot;magnificent&quot;. Market fairs were held in Scotland.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1788178" start="0" end="7" title="Roodmas" label="Roodmas"/>
<link wikidata="Q42365" start="14" end="25" title="Old English" label="Old English"/>
<link wikidata="Q449189" start="32" end="36" title="rood" label="rood"/>
<link wikidata="Q6783971" start="99" end="103" title="Mass (liturgy)" label="Mass"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="120" end="142" title="Christmas#Etymology" label="etymology of Christmas"/>
<link wikidata="Q815520" start="182" end="200" title="Feast of the Cross" label="Feast of the Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q170164" start="313" end="325" title="Helena of Constantinople" label="Saint Helena"/>
<link wikidata="Q380356" start="333" end="343" title="True Cross" label="True Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q1218" start="347" end="356" title="Jerusalem" label="Jerusalem"/>
<link wikidata="Q187702" start="434" end="443" title="Church of the Holy Sepulchre" label="Martyrium"/>
<link wikidata="Q128866" start="1098" end="1115" title="Byzantine Emperor" label="Byzantine Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q41852" start="1116" end="1125" title="Heraclius" label="Heraclius"/>
<link wikidata="Q5735760" start="1232" end="1248" title="Herbert Thurston" label="Herbert Thurston"/>
<link wikidata="Q2716959" start="1849" end="1862" title="Gallican Rite" label="Gallican Rite"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="1870" end="1885" title="Catholic Church" label="Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q49374" start="1976" end="1997" title="Latin liturgical rite" label="Latin liturgical rite"/>
<link wikidata="Q815520" start="2099" end="2119" title="Triumph of the Cross" label="Triumph of the Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q23540" start="2141" end="2151" title="Protestant" label="Protestant"/>
<link wikidata="Q82708" start="2189" end="2206" title="Church of England" label="Church of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q111837194" start="2220" end="2241" title="Book of Common Prayer (1662)" label="Book of Common Prayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q23873" start="2399" end="2414" title="Pope John XXIII" label="Pope John XXIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q597526" start="2429" end="2441" title="Latin Church" label="Latin Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q5532158" start="2504" end="2517" title="General Roman Calendar of 1960" label="his revisions"/>
<link wikidata="Q13012667" start="2525" end="2547" title="General Roman Calendar" label="General Roman Calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q17001796" start="2670" end="2684" title="Common Worship" label="Common Worship"/>
<link wikidata="Q928" start="2716" end="2727" title="Philippines" label="Philippines"/>
<link wikidata="Q5460947" start="2739" end="2750" title="Santacruzan" label="Santacruzan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1586870" start="2880" end="2897" title="Catholic Church in the Philippines" label="Filipino Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q17067736" start="3200" end="3223" title="John Gregorson Campbell" label="John Gregorson Campbell"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="246707" wikidata="Q7558028" url="?curid=246707" title="Solidità della nebbia">
<text>Solidità della nebbia (Solidity of mist) is a piece of electronic music, composed by Juan Maria Solare, for bassett horn and electronic sounds. It was made at the Studio of the Musikhochschule in Cologne with the support of Marcel Schmidt and the guidance of Hans Ulrich Humpert. Based on samples of basset horn, performed by Michele Marelli, and of his voice. The first performance was by Michele Marelli (corno di bassetto) on 12 October 2000 in the Aula Magna of the Hochschule für Musik at Cologne, opening the festival for the 35th anniversary of the School&#x27;s Studio for Electronic Music. It was repeated by Michele Marelli on 25 January 2002 in Alessandria (Italy) for the Jazz Association &quot;L&#x27; AX&quot;. In May 2002 the piece won an award at the Tribuna Argentina de Música Electroacústica (TRIME), organized by the Foundation Encuentros Internacionales de Música Contemporánea (EIMC-SIMC), with the support of the Consejo Argentino de la Música (CAMU-CIM-Unesco).</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q9778" start="55" end="71" title="electronic music" label="electronic music"/>
<link wikidata="Q566338" start="85" end="102" title="Juan Maria Solare" label="Juan Maria Solare"/>
<link wikidata="Q810515" start="108" end="120" title="bassett horn" label="bassett horn"/>
<link wikidata="Q365" start="196" end="203" title="Cologne, Germany" label="Cologne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1931082" start="390" end="405" title="Michele Marelli" label="Michele Marelli"/>
</links>
</doc>
