<doc id="464698" wikidata="Q695020" url="?curid=464698" title="Massacres of Poles in Volhynia and Eastern Galicia">
<text>The Massacres of Poles in Volhynia and Eastern Galicia (; ) were carried out in German-occupied Poland by the Ukrainian Insurgent Army (UPA), with the support of parts of the local Ukrainian population, against the Polish minority in Volhynia, Eastern Galicia, parts of Polesia, and the Lublin region from 1943 to 1945.

The peak of the massacres took place in July and August 1943. These killings were exceptionally brutal, and most of the victims were women and children. The UPA&#x27;s actions resulted in up to 100,000 Polish deaths. Estimates of the death toll range from 60,000 to 120,000. Other victims of the massacres included several hundred Armenians, Jews, Russians, Czechs, Georgians, and Ukrainians who were part of Polish families or opposed the UPA and impeded the massacres by hiding Polish escapees.

The ethnic cleansing was a Ukrainian attempt to prevent the post-war Polish state from asserting its sovereignty over Ukrainian-majority areas that had been part of the pre-war Polish state. The decision to force the Polish population to leave areas that the Banderite faction of the Organization of Ukrainian Nationalists (OUN-B) considered to be Ukrainian took place at a meeting of military referents in the autumn of 1942, and plans were made to liquidate Polish-community leaders and any of the Polish community who resisted. Local UPA commanders in Volhynia began attacking the Polish population, committing massacres in numerous villages.

Encountering resistance, the UPA commander in Volhynia, Dmytro Klyachkivsky (&quot;Klym Savur&quot;), issued an order in June 1943 for the &quot;general physical liquidation of the entire Polish population&quot;. The largest wave of attacks took place in July and August 1943, the assaults in Volhynia continuing until the spring of 1944, when the Red Army arrived in Volhynia and the Polish underground, which had organized Polish self-defense, formed the 27th AK Infantry Division. Approximately 50,000–60,000 Poles died as a result of the massacres in Volhynia, while up to 2,000–3,000 Ukrainians died as a result of Polish retaliatory actions.

At the 3rd OUN Congress in August 1943, Mykola Lebed criticized the Ukrainian Insurgent Army&#x27;s actions in Volhynia as &quot;banditry&quot;. The majority of delegates disagreed with his assessment, and the congress decided to extend the anti-Polish operation into eastern Galicia. However, it took a different course: by the end of 1943, it was limited to killing leaders of the Polish community and exhorting Poles to flee to the west under threat of looming genocide.

In March 1944, the UPA command, headed by Roman Shuchevych, issued an order to drive Poles out of Eastern Galicia, first with warnings and then by raiding villages, murdering men, and burning buildings. A similar order was issued by the UPA commander in Eastern Galicia, Vasyl Sydor (&quot;Shelest&quot;). This order was often disobeyed and entire villages were slaughtered. In Eastern Galicia between 1943 and 1946, OUN-B and UPA killed 20,000–25,000 Poles. 1,000–2,000 Ukrainians were killed by the Polish underground.

Some Ukrainian religious authorities, institutions, and leaders protested the slayings of Polish civilians, but to little effect.

In 2008 Poland&#x27;s Parliament adopted a resolution calling UPA&#x27;s crimes against Poles &quot;crimes bearing the hallmarks of genocide&quot;. In 2013 it adopted a resolution calling them &quot;ethnic cleansing with the hallmarks of genocide&quot;. On 22 July 2016, Poland&#x27;s Sejm established 11 July as a National Day of Remembrance for the Victims of Genocide committed by Ukrainian nationalists against citizens of the Second Polish Republic. This characterization is disputed by Ukraine and by some non-Polish historians, who characterize it instead as ethnic cleansing.

==Background==
===Interwar period in Second Polish Republic===
The recreated Polish state covered large territories inhabited by Ukrainians, while the Ukrainian movement failed to achieve independence. According to the Polish census of 1931, in Eastern Galicia, the Ukrainian language was spoken by 52% of the inhabitants, Polish by 40% and Yiddish by 7%. In Wołyn (Volhynia), Ukrainian was spoken by 68% of the inhabitants, Polish by 17%, Yiddish by 10%, German by 2%, Czech by 2% and Russian by 1%.

==== Ukrainian radical nationalism ====
In 1920, exiled Ukrainian officers, mostly former Sich Riflemen and veterans of Polish–Ukrainian War, founded the Ukrainian Military Organization (UVO), an underground military organization with the goal of continuing the armed struggle for independent Ukraine. As soon as the second half of 1922, UVO organized a wave of sabotage actions and assassination attempts on Polish officials and moderate Ukrainian activists. In 1929, the Organization of Ukrainian Nationalists (OUN) was formed in Vienna, Austria, and was the result of a union between several radical nationalist and extreme right-wing organisations with UVO. Members of the organization carried out several acts of terror and assassinations in Poland, but it was still rather fringe movement, condemned for its violence by figures from mainstream Ukrainian society such as the head of the Ukrainian Greek Catholic Church, Andriy Sheptytsky. The most popular political party among Ukrainians was in fact the Ukrainian National Democratic Alliance (UNDO), which was opposed to Polish rule but called for peaceful and democratic means to achieve independence from Poland.

By the beginning of the Second World War, the membership of OUN had risen to 20,000 active members, and the number of supporters was many times as many.

==== Polish policy towards Ukrainian minority ====
The policy of the Polish authorities towards the Ukrainian minority was changeable throughout the interwar period, varying between attempts at assimilation, conciliation and a policy of repression.

For example in 1930 terror campaign and civil unrest in the Galician countryside resulted in Polish police exacting a policy of collective responsibility on local Ukrainians in an effort to &quot;pacify&quot; the region. Ukrainian parliamentarians were placed under house arrest to prevent them from participating in elections, with their constituents terrorized into voting for Polish candidates. Beginning in 1937, the Polish government in Volhynia initiated an active campaign to use religion as a tool for Polonization and to convert the Orthodox population to Roman Catholicism. Over 190 Orthodox churches were destroyed and 150 converted to Roman Catholic churches.

On the other hand just before the war, Volhynia was &quot;the site of one of eastern Europe&#x27;s most ambitious policies of toleration&quot;. Through supporting Ukrainian culture and religious autonomy and the Ukrainization of the Orthodox Church, the Sanacja regime wanted to achieve Ukrainian loyalty to the Polish state and to minimise Soviet influences in the borderline region. That approach was gradually abandoned after Józef Piłsudski&#x27;s death in 1935. Practically all government and administrative positions, including the police, were assigned to Poles.

Harsh policies implemented by the Second Polish Republic were often a response to OUN-B violence, but contributed to a further deterioration of relations between the two ethnic groups. Between 1921 and 1938, Polish colonists and war veterans were encouraged to settle in the Volhynian and Galician countryside; their number reached 17,700 in Volhynia in 3,500 new settlements by 1939. Between 1934 and 1938, a series of violent and sometimes-deadly attacks against Ukrainians were carried out in other parts of Poland. Volhynia was a place of increasingly violent conflict, with Polish police on one side and Western Ukrainian communists supported by many dissatisfied Ukrainian peasants on the other. The communists organized strikes, killed at least 31 suspected police informers in 1935–1936, and assassinated local Ukrainian officials for &quot;collaboration&quot; with the Polish government. The police conducted mass arrests, reported the killing of 18 communists in 1935, and killed at least 31 people in gunfights and during arrest attempts in 1936.

=== Second World War ===
==== Soviet occupation of Volhynia and Eastern Galicia ====
In September 1939, Poland was invaded by Nazi Germany and the Soviet Union. The eastern part of Poland was annexed by the Soviet Union; Volhynia and Eastern Galicia were attached to the Ukrainian SSR. After the annexation, the Soviet NKVD started eliminating the predominantly Polish middle and upper classes, including social activists and military leaders. Between 1939 and 1941, 200,000 Poles were deported to Siberia. The deportations and murders deprived the Poles of their community leaders.

During the wartime Soviet occupation, Polish members of the local administration were replaced by Ukrainians and Jews, and the Soviet NKVD subverted the Ukrainian independence movement. All local Ukrainian political parties were abolished. Between 20,000 and 30,000 Ukrainian activists fled to German-occupied territory; most of those who did not escape were arrested. For example, Dmytro Levytsky, head of the UNDO, was arrested along with many of his colleagues, and never heard from again. The elimination by the Soviets of the moderate or liberal political leaders within Ukrainian society allowed the extremist underground OUN to remain the only surviving group with a significant organizational presence among western Ukrainians.

==== OUN activities 1939–1941 ====
In Kraków on 10 February 1940, a revolutionary faction of the OUN emerged, called the OUN-R or, after its leader Stepan Bandera, the OUN-B (Banderites). This was opposed by the current leadership of the organization, so it split, and the old group was called OUN-M after the leader Andriy Melnyk (Melnykites).

On 22 June 1941, the Soviet Union was attacked by Germany; the Soviets quickly withdrew eastward and left Volhynia. The OUN supported Germans, seized about 213 villages and organized diversion in the rear of the Red Army. The OUN-B formed Ukrainian militias that, displaying exceptional cruelty, carried out antisemitic pogroms and massacres of Jews. The biggest pogroms carried out by the Ukrainian nationalists took place in Lviv, resulting in the massacre of 6,000 Polish Jews. The involvement of OUN-B is unclear, but at the very least OUN-B propaganda fuelled antisemitism. The vast majority of pogroms carried out by the Banderites occurred in Eastern Galicia and Volhynia. Several hundred Poles were also killed at the hands of Ukrainian nationalists at the time, and a group of about a hundred Polish students were murdered in Lviv.

On 30 June 1941, the OUN-B proclaimed the establishment of Ukrainian State in Lviv. In response to the declaration, OUN-B leaders and associates were arrested and imprisoned by the Gestapo (ca. 1500 persons). The OUN-M continued to operate openly, collaborating with the Germans and taking over local administration, but its leaders also began to be arrested and the organisation&#x27;s influence was curtailed by the Germans in early 1942. Meanwhile, the OUN-B, unwilling and unable to openly resist the Germans, began methodically creating a clandestine organization, engaging in propaganda work, and building weapons stockpiles. It set out to infiltrate the local collaborationist police, from which it received training and weapons. The auxiliary police assisted the German SS in the murder by shooting of approximately 200,000 Volhynian Jews, and their experience both led them to believe the Germans would turn on them next and taught them how to make use of genocidal techniques.

In the Chełm region, 394 Ukrainian community leaders were killed by the Poles on the grounds of collaboration with German authorities.

==== Polish underground in Volhynia and Eastern Galicia ====
During the Soviet occupation, the Polish underground in the eastern territories collapsed. However, after the Germans took control of the area, the structures of the Home Army (AK) were rebuilt. In Volhynia, an Independent District of the Home Army was established, while in Eastern Galicia the Lwów Area of the Home Army was created. The former numbered around 8,000 sworn soldiers at the end of 1943, while the latter numbered around 27,000 at the beginning of 1944. The Polish forces were preparing to launch an anti-German uprising once the German army disintegrated. From 1943 onwards, the plan was to focus on capturing Lwów and western Volhynia once the Red Army arrived, and a fight against Ukrainian forces was also anticipated.

Due to OUN&#x27;s collaboration with the Nazis, local Poles generally thought there is no possibility for reconciliation and that Ukrainians ought to be deported to Soviet Ukraine after the war. Such view was shared by the local Home Army command, but the Polish authorities in Warsaw and London took a more moderate stance, discussing the possibility of limited Ukrainian autonomy.

==== Polish-Ukrainian antagonism ====
Both the Polish government-in-exile and the underground state and the Ukrainian OUN-B considered the possibility that in the event of mutually exhaustive attrition warfare between Germany and the Soviet Union, the region would become a scene of conflict between Poles and Ukrainians. In early 1943, the Polish underground considered the possibility of rapprochement with Ukrainians, which proved fruitless since neither side was willing to sacrifice their claims.

The field of competition was the occupation administration. As a rule, the Germans preferred Ukrainians and filled administrative positions with them. However, a shortage of suitably qualified people forced the Germans to reach out to Poles, who began to gain the upper hand in lower-level administration during 1942. This process caused unrest in the Ukrainian underground.

Even in the interwar period, the OUN adhered to concepts of integral nationalism in its totalitarian form, which stipulated that a Ukrainian state must be ethnically homogeneous and the only way to defeat the Polish enemy was through the elimination of Poles from Ukrainian territories. From the OUN-B perspective, the Jews had already been annihilated, and the Russians and Germans were only temporarily in Ukraine, but Poles had to be forcefully removed. The OUN-B came to believe that it had to move fast while the Germans still controlled the area in order to pre-empt future Polish efforts to re-establish Poland&#x27;s prewar borders. The result was that the local OUN-B commanders in Volhynia and Galicia, if not the OUN-B leadership itself, decided that ethnic cleansing of Poles from the area through terror and murder to be necessary.

Only one faction of Ukrainian nationalists, OUN-B under Mykola Lebed and then Roman Shukhevych, was committed to the ethnic cleansing of Volhynia. Taras Bulba-Borovets, the founder of the Ukrainian People&#x27;s Revolutionary Army, rejected the idea and condemned the anti-Polish massacres when they started. The OUN-M leadership did not believe that such an operation was advantageous in 1943.

==Massacres==
===Volhynia===
==== Creation of UPA ====
By late 1942, the OUN-B in Volhynia was avoiding conflict with the German authorities and working with them; anti-German resistance was limited to Soviet partisans on the extreme northern edge of Volhynia, small bands of OUN-M fighters, and to a group of guerillas knowns as the UPA or the Polessian Sich, unaffiliated with the OUN-B and led by Taras Bulba-Borovets of the exiled Ukrainian People&#x27;s Republic. Soviet partisans raided local settlements in search of supplies. Soon Germans began &quot;pacifying&quot; entire villages in Volhynia in retaliation for real or alleged support of Soviet partisans; the raids were often conducted by Ukrainian auxiliary police units under the direct supervision of Germans. One of the best-known examples was the pacification of Obórki, a village in Lutsk County, on 13–14 November 1942.

In October 1942, OUN-B decided to form its own partisans, called OUN Military Detachments. Individual units entered active combat in February 1943 (first came the sotnia of Hryhoriy Perehinyak attack on German police station in Volodymyrets on 7 February). At the third OUN-B conference (17–23 February 1943), the decision was made to launch an anti-German uprising in order to liberate as much territory as possible before the arrival of the Red Army. The uprising was to break out first in Volhynia; therefore, the formation of a partisan army called the Ukrainian Liberation Army began there. The uprising broke out in mid-March, with Dmytro Klyachkivsky and Vasyl Ivakhiv leading it, then Klyachkivsky alone after Ivakhiv&#x27;s death in May that year. It was also at that time that the name Ukrainian Liberation Army was abandoned and the name Ukrainian Insurgent Army, hijacked from Bulba-Borovets, began to be used, thus impersonating it. The base of the new army was made up of Ukrainian policemen, approximately 5,000 of whom deserted en masse between March and April 1943, and men absorbed from Bulba-Borovets and OUN-M units. By July 1943, the UPA had twenty thousand soldiers. According to Timothy Snyder, in their struggle for dominance, OUN-B forces would kill tens of thousands of Ukrainians for supposed links to Melnyk or Bulba-Borovets.

Even before the anti-German uprising began, OUN-B units started attacking Polish villages and murdering Poles. The attacks soon turned into a full-scale extermination campaign, aimed at killing off or driving out the Polish population from areas considered by OUN-B to be Ukrainian. With dominance secured in spring 1943, when the UPA had gained control over the Volhynian countryside from the Germans, the UPA began large-scale operations against the Polish population.

==== First massacres ====
Between 1939 and 1943, the share of Polish population in Volhynia had dropped to about 8% (approximately 200,000 inhabitants). Volhynian Poles were dispersed across rural areas, Soviet deportations stripped them of their community leaders, and they had neither own local partisan army nor state power (with exception of the German occupants) to turn to for protection.

On 9 February 1943, a UPA group, commanded by Hryhory Perehyniak, pretended to be Soviet partisans and assaulted the Parośle settlement in Sarny county. It is considered a prelude to the massacres and is recognized as the first mass murder committed by the UPA in the area. Estimates of the number of victims range from 149 to 173.

Throughout Volhynia, individuals, often with their families, began to be killed, while in the Kostopol and Sarny counties in the northeastern part of Volhynia, where &quot;Dubovy&quot; was in command, the UPA proceeded to systematically murder Poles. They attacked dozens of villages, the largest massacre of which took place in Lipniki, where one of the first Polish self-defences was established, but despite resistance during the attack on the night of 26–27 March, the &quot;Dubovy&quot; unit murdered 184 people. About 130 people were murdered in Brzezina on 8 April 1943. Then the massacres began to be carried out in the westward located counties, mainly in the Lutsk county. According to Timothy Snyder, in late March and early April 1943, the UPA forces killed 7,000 Polish civilians.

==== Wave of massacres during Holy Week of 1943 ====
The OUN-B and UPA leadership chose Holy Week (18–26 April) as the period for an organised attack on the Polish population, which was to include the western counties of Równo and Krzemieniec, where &quot;Eney&quot; was in command.

Several villages was attacked, but the most bloody was the massacre of the night of 22–23 April in Janowa Dolina, where UPA unit commanded by Ivan Lytvynchuk &quot;Dubovy&quot; killed 600 people and burned down the entire village. In another massacre, according to the UPA reports, the Polish colonies of Kuty, in the Szumski region, and Nowa Nowica, in the Webski region, were liquidated for co-operation with the Gestapo and the other German authorities. According to Polish sources, the Kuty self-defense unit managed to repel a UPA assault, but at least 53 Poles were murdered. The rest of the inhabitants decided to abandon the village and were escorted by the Germans who arrived at Kuty, alerted by the glow of fire and the sound of gunfire.

The assaults spread throughout the eastern Volhynia, and in some localities Poles managed to organise self-defence units that were able to repel attacks by the Ukrainian Insurgent Army, but in most cases the UPA slaughtered and burned Polish villages. In May and June, the purge extended to Petro Olijnyk&#x27;s subordinate areas of the Rivne and Kremenets districts. Maksym Skorupskyi, one of the UPA commanders, wrote in his diary: &quot;Starting from our action on Kuty, day by day after sunset, the sky was bathing in the glow of conflagration. Polish villages were burning&quot;.

==== Polish proposals for a truce ====
The local Home Army command, under Col. &quot;Luboń&quot;, responded to the attacks by organising local self-defences, of which about 100 were formed by July 1943, in a bid to protect the population and prevent them from fleeing to the cities. It was determined to fight the Ukrainian Insurgent Army (UPA), not believing there was any possibility of an agreement, but at the same time it was obliged to carry out the plan of an anti-German general uprising, which ordered it to spare its forces until the Soviet-German front arrived. On the opposite side was the local Government Delegate, &quot;Jan Linowski&quot;, who still believed in the plan agreed with headquarters and Home Army commander General Rowecki to reach an agreement with the Ukrainians, which he had been trying to implement since 1942.

Among local Home Army soldiers, Banach had a reputation as a traitor. Banach attempted to hold talks with the Ukrainian Insurgent Army (UPA) through the local OUN SB commander Shabatura. Preliminary talks took place on 7 July. For the second round on 10 July, the plenipotentiary of the District Delegation, Zygmunt Rumel &quot;Krzysztof Poręba&quot;, and the representative of the Volhynia District of the AK Krzysztof Markiewicz &quot;Czart&quot;, together with the coachman Witold Dobrowolski, went. All three were brutally murdered on 10 July 1943 in the village of Kustycze. This event ultimately discredited the stance taken by Banach. A plan was drawn up in the Home Army command to organise a military operation against the Ukrainian Insurgent Army (UPA) to thwart the next wave of genocidal attacks, which, according to intelligence information, was planned for 20 July.

==== July wave of massacres ====
The Soviet victories acted as a stimulus for the escalation of massacres in July 1943, when the ethnic cleansing reached its peak. In the 1990s, a citation from an alleged &quot;secret directive&quot; by Dmytro Klyachkivsky (head-commander of the UPA-North) was published by Polish historian Władysław Filar: 
We should make a large action of the liquidation of the Polish element. As the German armies withdraw, we should take advantage of this convenient moment for liquidating the entire male population in the age from 16 up to 60 years. We cannot lose this fight, and it is necessary at all costs to weaken Polish forces. Villages and settlements lying next to the massive forests, should disappear from the face of the earth.
Full text of the &quot;secret order&quot; was never published and its authenticity is questioned.

The UPA command decided to extend the genocidal action to the western areas of Volhynia, the districts of Horochów, Kowel and Vladimir, an area more densely populated by Poles. The action was to be coordinated to exploit the element of surprise to the maximum. The day after murder of Polish emissaries, 11 July 1943, was the start of the operation and is regarded as the bloodiest day of the massacres, with many reports of UPA units marching from village to village and killing Polish civilians. On that day, UPA units surrounded and attacked 96 Polish villages and settlements located in counties Horochów, and Włodzimierz Wołyński, and 3 in Kowel county. Fifty villages in the first two counties were attacked the following day.

In the Polish village of Gurów, out of 480 inhabitants, only 70 survived; in the settlement of Orzeszyn, the UPA killed 306 out of 340 Poles; in the village of Sadowa out of 600 Polish inhabitants, only 20 survived. In Zagaje 260 Poles was killed. The wave of massacres lasted five days until July 16. The UPA continued the ethnic cleansing, particularly in rural areas, until most Poles had been deported, killed or expelled. The thoroughly-planned actions were conducted by many units and were well-coordinated. In August 1943, the Polish village of Gaj, near Kovel, was burned and some 600 people were massacred, and 438 people were killed, including 246 children, in Ostrówki. In July 1943, a total of 520 Polish villages were attacked, killing 10,000–11,000 Poles. At the same time, the killings in the eastern part of the county continued.

==== August wave of massacres ====
Another large wave of slaughter of the Polish population took place on 29 and 30 August 1943, this time also covering the Luboml district. The killings continued until mid-September.

During the night of August 30 &quot;Lysiy&quot; unit surrounded the village of Kąty, where Poles were murdered farm by farm, killing 180–213 people. Then, on August 31, the unit killed 86–87 people in the village of Jankowce. On the same day they surrounded the village of Ostrówek. The population was gathered in the school and church, valuables were taken away. Then the men were killed with blunt tools in three different places. The rest of the population was shot in the cemetery. A total of 476 to 520 people were killed. Another unit entered the village of Wola Ostrowiecka on the morning of 30 August. Children were treated with candy, and a speech was made to the population calling for a joint fight against the Germans, then the entire population was gathered in the school. Men were led outside and killed with axes and blunt tools, then the school, with women and children inside, was set on fire and pelted with grenades. Overall 572–520 people were killed. In total, several hundred Polish villages were attacked in August 1943.

In the eastern part of Volhynia the slaughter of the Polish population continued, the attacks were generally not coordinated, the UPA units attacking those Polish villages that still survived. Many of them had been turned into self-defence points, so the massacres were often preceded by fights, sometimes the defenders managed to repel the UPA units.

In the summer of 1943, in Volhynia, every Pole and every person with Polish roots was facing death at the hands of Ukrainian nationalists. Ukrainians with Polish roots were also killed, as were people from mixed families. Poles could only feel relatively safe in self-defence bases and larger towns. One Polish refugee from Volhynia wrote at the time: &quot;All around dead bodies and potential victims. It smells of corpses from every Pole now. There are living corpses walking around.&quot;

==== Polish self-defence and reprisal ====
After unsuccessful attempts to conclude a truce with the UPA, the Polish underground moved to active defence and offensive actions. On 20 July 1943, decisions were made to form nine partisan units, totalling around a thousand men. Their task was to support Polish self-defences and to attack UPA bases. There was a growing desire among the Polish population to retaliate against the Ukrainians. It is estimated that around 2,000 people were killed in Polish attacks on Ukrainian villages.

==== The last wave of massacres in Volhynia in the winter of 1943–1944 ====
The UPA&#x27;s command decided to take advantage of the coming Soviet offensive to launch a final liquidation action against the Polish population. It was decided to attack those villages from which German or Hungarian units had already withdrawn and the Soviets had not yet entered. Many partisan units also undertook offensive actions against the Germans, making it impossible for them to protect the civilian population. The attacks began on 7 December with assaults on the villages of Budki Borowskie, Dołhań and Okopy. Most assaults took place right before Christmas. The attacks continued until March. One of the bloodiest massacres took place in Wiśniowiec, in February 1944, when the OUN SB units managed to capture the Monastery of the Discalced Carmelites, which had been attacked several times during 1943. Almost all of the 300–400 Poles hiding there, including monks, were killed, as well as 138 people in neighbouring Wiśniowiec Stary.

==== Operations of the 27th Volhynian Infantry Division of the Home Army ====
In January 1944, at the same time as the UPA was carrying out its last wave of massacres of the Polish population, the units of the Home Army in Volhynia embarked on the implementation of Operation Tempest, i.e. an anti-German uprising. To this end, AK units from across Volhynia were to assemble in western Volhynia to form the 27th Volhynian Infantry Division. However, some units, mainly those forming part of self-defences, refused to carry out the order, not wanting to leave the civilian population at the mercy of the UPA. Despite this, the division was formed and managed to capture a part of Volhynia between Kovel and Volodymyr-Volynskyi. Fearful of being surrounded by UPA units, the division began fighting them. From 11 January to 18 March 1944, the division fought sixteen major clashes with the Ukrainians, coming out mostly successful. The Ukrainian population was expelled from the captured villages in the area of Svynaryn forest and its surroundings. Ukrainian sources state that the division&#x27;s soldiers committed atrocities in some Ukrainian villages, the greatest of which would be the crime in Ochniwka, where, according to Yaroslav Tsaruk (), 166 people were allegedly killed.

After the battles with the Ukrainian Insurgent Army, the division fought almost exclusively against the Germans, soon withdrawing from Volhynia to the Lublin region.

==== Reactions of other Ukrainian organisations ====
The killings were opposed by the Ukrainian Central Committee under Volodymyr Kubiyovych. In response, UPA units murdered Ukrainian Central Committee representatives and a Ukrainian Catholic priest who had read an appeal by the Ukrainian Central Committee from his pulpit.

=== Eastern Galicia ===

==== Polish-Ukrainian tension in Eastern Galicia ====
The Polish underground stood firm on the integrity of the pre-war borders, but was prepared to make certain concessions to the Ukrainians. At the same time, it was convinced that the OUN, faced with a choice between western Ukraine belonging to the USSR or Poland, would ultimately opt for Poland. However, the OUN rejected these proposals, issuing statements accusing the Polish population of collaboration with the Germans and Soviets. In this atmosphere, and against the backdrop of the ongoing ethnic cleansing of the Polish population in Volhynia, talks between the Polish underground and the OUN Central Provision had been taking place since the summer of 1943 on a possible agreement. The last meeting took place on 8 March 1944.

==== Decision to carry out anti-Polish action in Eastern Galicia ====
At the 3rd OUN Congress in August 1943, Mykola Lebed and criticised the UPA&#x27;s actions in Volhynia as &quot;bandit&quot;. The majority of delegates, however, opposed his assessment and opted for transferring the Volhynian actions against Poles into Galicia. It is not clear when the final decision was made, it was probably made by Shuchevych, at that time already the commander of the OUN-B and UPA, after inspecting Volhynia and seeing the effects of the action in the region.

==== Ethnic cleansing ====
In late 1943 and early 1944, after most Poles in Volhynia had either been murdered or had fled the area, the conflict spread to the neighboring province of Galicia, where most of the population was still Ukrainian, but the Polish presence was strong. Unlike in the case of Volhynia, where Polish villages were usually destroyed and their inhabitants murdered without warning, in eastern Galicia, Poles were sometimes given the choice of fleeing or being killed. An order by a UPA commander in Galicia stated, &quot;Once more I remind you: first call upon Poles to abandon their land and only later liquidate them, not the other way around&quot;. The choice of other tactics, combined with better Polish self-defence and a demographic balance more favorable to Poles, resulted in a significantly lower death toll among Poles in Galicia than in Volhynia.

The methods used by Ukrainian nationalists in this area were the same: rounding up and killing all the Polish residents of the villages and then looting the villages and burning them to the ground. On 28 February 1944, in the village of Korosciatyn 135 Poles were murdered; the victims were later counted by a local Roman Catholic priest, Mieczysław Kamiński. Jan Zaleski (father of Tadeusz Isakowicz-Zaleski) who witnessed the massacre, wrote in his diary: &quot;The slaughter lasted almost all night. We heard terrible cries, the roar of cattle burning alive, shooting. It seemed that Antichrist himself began his activity!&quot; Kamiński claimed that in Koropiec, where no Poles were actually murdered, a local Greek Catholic priest, in reference to mixed Polish-Ukrainian families, proclaimed from the pulpit: &quot;Mother, you&#x27;re suckling an enemy – strangle it.&quot; Among the scores of Polish villages whose inhabitants were murdered and all buildings burned are places like Berezowica, near Zbaraz; Ihrowica, near Ternopil; Plotych, near Ternopil; Podkamien, near Brody; and Hanachiv and Hanachivka, near Przemyślany.

Roman Shukhevych, a UPA commander, stated in his order from 25 February 1944: &quot;In view of the success of the Soviet forces it is necessary to speed up the liquidation of the Poles, they must be totally wiped out, their villages burned... only the Polish population must be destroyed&quot;.
One of the most infamous massacres took place on 28 February 1944 in the Polish village of Huta Pieniacka, with over 1,000 inhabitants. The village had served as a shelter for refugees including Polish Jews as well as a recuperation base for Polish and communist partisans. One AK unit was active there. In the winter of 1944, a Soviet partisan unit numbering 1,000 was stationed in the village for two weeks. Huta Pieniacka&#x27;s villagers, although poor, organized a well-fortified and armed self-defense unit, which fought off a Ukrainian and German reconnaissance attack on 23 February 1944. Two soldiers of the 14th Waffen Grenadier Division of the SS Galicia (1st Ukrainian) Division of the Waffen-SS were killed and one wounded by the villagers. On February 28, elements of the Ukrainian 14th SS Division from Brody returned with 500–600 men, assisted by a group of civilian nationalists. The killing spree lasted all day. Kazimierz Wojciechowski, the commander of the Polish self-defense unit, was drenched with gasoline and burned alive at the main square. The village was utterly destroyed and all of its occupants killed. The civilians, mostly women and children, were rounded up at a church, divided and locked into barns, which were set on fire. Estimates of casualties in the Huta Pieniacka massacre vary and include 500 (Ukrainian archives), over 1,000 (Tadeusz Piotrowski), and 1,200 (Sol Littman). According to IPN investigation, the crime was committed by the 4th battalion of the Ukrainian 14th SS Division supported by UPA units and local Ukrainian civilians.

A military journal of the Ukrainian 14th SS Division condemned the killing of Poles. In a 2 March 1944 article addressed to the Ukrainian youth, which was written by military leaders, Soviet partisans were blamed for the murders of Poles and Ukrainians, and the authors stated, &quot;If God forbid, among those who committed such inhuman acts, a Ukrainian hand was found, it will be forever excluded from the Ukrainian national community&quot;. Some historians deny the role of the Ukrainian 14th SS Division in the killings and attribute them entirely to German units, but others disagree. According to Yale historian Timothy Snyder, the Ukrainian 14th SS Division&#x27;s role in the ethnic cleansing of Poles from western Ukraine was marginal.

The village of Pidkamin (Podkamień), near Brody, was a shelter for Poles, who hid in the monastery of the Dominicans there. Some 2,000 persons, mostly women and children, were living there when the monastery was attacked in mid-March 1944 by the UPA units, which Polish Home Army accounts accused of co-operating with the Ukrainian SS. Over 250 Poles were killed. In the nearby village of Palikrovy, 300 Poles were killed, 20 in Maliniska and 16 in Chernytsia. Armed Ukrainian groups destroyed the monastery and stole all valuables. What remained was the painting of Mary of Pidkamin, which now is kept in St. Wojciech Church in Wrocław. According to Kirichuk, the first attacks on the Poles took place there in August 1943 and were probably the work of the UPA units from Volhynia. In retaliation, Poles killed important Ukrainians, including a Ukrainian doctor from Lviv, called Lastowiecky and a popular football player from Przemyśl, called Wowczyszyn.

By the end of the summer, mass acts of terror aimed at Poles were taking place in Eastern Galicia to force Poles to settle on the western bank of the San River under the slogan &quot;Poles behind the San&quot;. Snyder estimates that 25,000 Poles were killed in Galicia alone, and Grzegorz Motyka estimated the number of victims at 30,000–40,000.

The slaughter did not stop after the Red Army entered the areas, with massacres taking place in 1945 in such places as Czerwonogrod (Ukrainian: Irkiv), where 60 Poles were murdered on February 2, 1945, the day before they were scheduled to depart for the Recovered Territories.

By Autumn 1944, anti-Polish actions stopped, and terror was used only against those who co-operated with the NKVD, but in late 1944-early 1945, the UPA performed a last massive anti-Polish action in the Ternopil region. On the night of 5–6 February 1945, Ukrainian groups attacked the Polish village of Barysz, near Buchach; 126 Poles were massacred, including women and children. A few days later, on 12–13 February, a local group of OUN under Petro Khamchuk attacked the Polish settlement of Puźniki, killed around 100 people and burned houses. Most of those who survived moved to Niemysłowice near Prudnik, Silesia.

Approximately 150–366 Ukrainian and a few Polish inhabitants of Pawłokoma were killed on 3 March 1945 by a former Polish Home Army unit, aided by Polish self-defense groups from nearby villages. The massacre is believed to be an act of retaliation for earlier alleged murders by UPA of 9 or 11 Poles in Pawłokoma and unspecified number of Poles killed by the UPA in the neighboring villages.

===Atrocities===
Attacks on Poles during the massacres in Volhynia and Eastern Galicia were marked with extreme sadism and brutality. Rape, torture and mutilation were commonplace, with entire villages wiped out as a result. Poles were burned alive, flayed, impaled, crucified, disembowelled, dismembered and beheaded. Women were gang raped and had their breasts sliced off, children were hacked to pieces with axes, babies were impaled on bayonets and pitchforks or bashed against trees.

According to a document by the Polish underground, the crimes were atrocious:According to eyewitness Tadeusz Piotrowski about the fate of his friend&#x27;s family:The atrocities were carried out indiscriminately and without restraint. The victims, regardless of their age or gender, were routinely tortured to death. Norman Davies in &quot;No Simple Victory&quot; gives a short but shocking description of the massacres:

An OUN order from early 1944 stated: 
 UPA commander&#x27;s order of 6 April 1944 stated: &quot;Fight them [the Poles] unmercifully. No one is to be spared, even in case of mixed marriages&quot;.

Timothy Snyder describes the murders: &quot;Ukrainian partisans burned homes, shot or forced back inside those who tried to flee, and used sickles and pitchforks to kill those they captured outside. In some cases, beheaded, crucified, dismembered, or disemboweled bodies were displayed, in order to encourage remaining Poles to flee&quot;. The Ukrainian historian Yuryi Kirichuk described the conflict as similar to medieval peasant uprisings.

According to the Polish historian Piotr Łossowski, the method used in most of the attacks was the same. At first, local Poles were assured that nothing would happen to them. Then, at dawn, a village was surrounded by armed members of the UPA, behind whom were peasants with axes, knives, hatchets, hammers, pitchforks, shovels, sickles, scythes, hoes and various other farming tools. All of the Poles who were encountered were murdered; most were killed in their homes but sometimes they were herded into churches or barns which were then set on fire. Many Poles were thrown down wells or killed and then buried in shallow mass graves as well. After a massacre, all goods were looted, including clothes, grain and furniture. The final part of an attack was setting fire to the entire village. All vestiges of Polish existence were eradicated, even abandoned Polish settlements were burned to the ground.

Even though it may be an exaggeration to say that the massacres enjoyed the general support of the Ukrainians, it has been suggested that without wide support from local Ukrainians, they would have been impossible. The Ukrainian peasants who took part in the killings created their own groups, the SKV or &quot;Samoboronni Kushtchovi Viddily&quot; (Самооборонні Кущові Відділи, СКВ). Many of their victims who were perceived as Poles, even despite not knowing the Polish language, were murdered by СКВ along with the others.

The violence reached its peak on 11 July 1943 known to many Poles as &quot;Bloody Sunday&quot; when the UPA carried out attacks on 100 Polish villages in Volhynia burning them to the ground and slaughtering some 8,000 Polish men, women and children including patients and nurses at a hospital. These attacks as well as others could have been stopped at anytime by the Germans who in some cases were stationed in garrisons in or near the villages that were attacked. German soldiers however were given orders not to intervene. In some cases individual German soldiers and officers made deals with the UPA to give weapons and other materials to them in exchange for a share of the loot taken from Poles.

Ukrainians in ethnically mixed settlements were offered material incentives to convince them to assist in the attacks on their Polish neighbors or warned by the UPA&#x27;s security service (Sluzhba Bezbeky) to leave by night, and all remaining inhabitants were murdered at dawn. Many Ukrainians risked and in some cases lost their lives for trying to shelter or warn Poles. Such activities were treated by the UPA as collaboration with the enemy and severely punished. In 2007, the Polish Institute of National Remembrance (IPN) published a document, &quot;Kresowa Księga Sprawiedliwych 1939–1945. O Ukraińcach ratujących Polaków poddanych eksterminacji przez OUN i UPA&quot; (&quot;Borderland&#x27;s Book of the Righteous. About Ukrainians saving Poles from extermination of OUN and UIA&quot;). The author of the book, IPN&#x27;s historian Romuald Niedzielko, documented 1341 cases in which Ukrainian civilians helped their Polish neighbours, which caused 384 Ukrainians to be executed by the UPA.

In Polish-Ukrainian families, one common UPA instruction was to kill one&#x27;s Polish spouse and children born of that marriage. People who refused to carry such an order were often murdered, together with their entire family.

According to Ukrainian sources, in October 1943 the Volhynian delegation of the Polish government estimated the number of Polish casualties in Sarny, Kostopol, Równe and Zdołbunów counties to exceed 15,000. Timothy Snyder estimates that in July 1943, the UPA actions resulted in the deaths of at least 40,000 Polish civilians in Volhynia (in March 1944, another 10,000 were killed in Galicia), causing additional 200,000 Poles to flee west before September 1944 and 800,000 afterward.

===Self-defence organizations===
The massacres prompted Poles in April 1943 to begin to organize in self-defence, 100 of such organizations being formed in Volhynia in 1943. Sometimes, self-defence organizations obtained arms from the Germans, but other times, the Germans confiscated their weapons and arrested the leaders. Many of the organizations could not withstand the pressure of the UPA and were destroyed. Only the largest self-defense organizations, which were able to obtain help from the Home Army or Soviet partisans, were able to survive. Kazimierz Bąbiński, commander of the Union for Armed Struggle-Home Army Wołyń in his order to AK partisan units stated:

On 20 July 1943, Polish self-defense units were ordered to subordinate themselves to the Home Army&#x27;s control. Ten days later, the Home Army declared itself in support of an independent Ukrainian state that would encompass non-Polish inhabited areas, and made an appeal to end the civilian bloodshed.

Polish self-defence organizations started to take part in revenge massacres of Ukrainian civilians in the summer of 1943, when Ukrainian villagers who had nothing to do with the massacres suffered at the hands of Polish partisan forces. Evidence includes a letter dated 26 August 1943 to the local Polish self-defence in which the AK commander Kazimierz Bąbiński criticized the burning of neighboring Ukrainian villages, the killing of any Ukrainian who crossed its path and the robbing of Ukrainians of their material possessions. The total number of Ukrainian civilians murdered in Volyn in retaliatory acts by Poles is estimated at 2,000–3,000.

The 27th Home Army Infantry Division was established in January 1944 with the purpose of fighting the UPA and later the German forces.

===German involvement===
While Germans actively encouraged the conflict, they tried not to get directly involved. Special German units formed from the collaborationist Ukrainian and later the Polish auxiliary police were deployed in pacification actions in Volhynia, and some of their crimes were attributed to the Home Army or to the UPA.

According to Yuriy Kirichuk the Germans actively prodded both sides of the conflict against each other. Erich Koch once said: &quot;We have to do everything possible so that a Pole meeting a Ukrainian, would be willing to kill him and conversely, a Ukrainian would be willing to kill a Pole&quot;. Kirichuk quotes a German commissioner from Sarny who responded to the Polish complaints: &quot;You want Sikorski, the Ukrainians want Bandera. Fight each other&quot;.

The Germans replaced Ukrainian policemen who deserted from the German service with Polish policemen. Around 1,200 local Poles joined the police, mainly out of desire to avenge UPA atrocities and to obtain means to defend themselves. German policy called for the murder of the family of every Ukrainian police officer who deserted and the destruction of the village of any Ukrainian police officer who deserted with his weapons. Those retaliations were carried out using newly recruited Polish policemen. Polish participation in the German police followed UPA attacks on Polish settlements, but it provided Ukrainian nationalists with useful sources of propaganda and was used as a justification for the ethnic cleansing. The OUN-B leader summarized the situation in August 1943 by saying that the German administration &quot;uses Polaks in its destructive actions. In response we destroy them unmercifully&quot;. Despite the desertions in March and April 1943, Ukrainian policemen continued to comprise a significant part of the auxiliary police forces and to pacify Polish and other villages under German orders.

On 25 August 1943, the German authorities ordered all Poles to leave the villages and settlements and to move to larger towns.

Soviet partisan units in the area were aware of the massacres. On 25 May 1943, the commander of the Soviet partisan forces of the Rivne area stressed in his report to the headquarters that Ukrainian nationalists did not shoot the Poles but cut them dead with knives and axes, with no consideration for age or gender.

==Number of victims==

According to historian George Liber, 

===Polish casualties===
The death toll among civilians murdered during the Volhynia Massacre is still being researched. At least 10% of ethnic Poles in Volhynia were killed by the UPA, according to Ivan Katchanovski, and thus &quot;Polish casualties comprised about 1% of the prewar population of Poles on territories where the UPA was active and 0.2% of the entire ethnically Polish population in Ukraine and Poland&quot;. Łossowski emphasizes that documentation is far from conclusive, as in numerous cases, no survivors were later able to testify.

The Soviet and German invasions of prewar eastern Poland, the UPA massacres, and the postwar Soviet expulsions of Poles contributed to the virtual elimination of a Polish presence in the region. Those who remained left Volhynia, mostly for the neighbouring province of Lublin. After the war, the survivors moved further west to the territories of Lower Silesia. Polish orphans from Volhynia were kept in several orphanages, with the largest of them around Kraków. Several former Polish villages in Volhynia and Eastern Galicia no longer exist, and those that remain are in ruins.

The Institute of National Remembrance estimates that 100,000 Poles were killed by the Ukrainian nationalists (40,000–60,000 victims in Volhynia, 30,000–40,000 in Eastern Galicia and at least 4,000 in Lesser Poland, including up to 2,000 in the Chełm region). For Eastern Galicia, other estimates range between 20,000 and 25,000, 25,000 and 30,000–40,000. In his 2006 general history of WWII, Niall Ferguson gives the total number of Polish victims in Volhynia and Eastern Galicia as between 60,000 and 80,000. G. Rossolinski-Liebe estimated 70,000–100,000. John P. Himka says that &quot;perhaps a hundred thousand&quot; Poles were killed in Volhynia and Eastern Galicia. According to Motyka, from 1943 to 1945 in all territories covered by the conflict, approximately 100,000 Poles were killed. Ivan Katchanovski, a Ukrainian political scientist, writes that, according to Polish and Western estimates, 35,000–60,000 Poles were killed by the UPA in Volhynia alone; he states: &quot;the lower bound of these estimates [35,000] is more reliable than higher estimates which are based on an assumption that the Polish population in the region was several times less likely to perish as a result of Nazi genocidal policies compared to other regions of Poland and compared to the Ukrainian population of Volhynia&quot;. Władysław Siemaszko and his daughter Ewa have documented 33,454 Polish victims, 18,208 of whom are known by surname. (in July 2010, Ewa increased the accounts to 38,600 documented victims, 22,113 of whom are known by surname). At the first-ever joint Polish-Ukrainian conference in Podkowa Leśna, organized on June 7–9, 1994 by Karta Centre, and subsequent Polish-Ukrainian historian meetings, with almost 50 Polish and Ukrainian participants, an estimate of 50,000 Polish deaths in Volhynia was settled on, which they considered to be moderate. According to the sociologist Piotrowski, the UPA actions resulted in an estimated number of 68,700 deaths in Wołyń Voivodeship. Per Anders Rudling states that the UPA killed 40,000–70,000 Poles in the area. Some extreme estimates place the number of Polish victims as high as 300,000. Also, the numbers include Polonized Armenians killed in the massacres, such as in Kuty. The studies from 2011 quote 91,200 confirmed deaths, 43,987 of which are known by name.

===Ukrainian casualties===
After the initiation of the massacres, Polish self-defense units responded in kind. All conflicts resulted in Poles taking revenge on Ukrainian civilians. A. Rudling estimates Ukrainian casualties which were caused by Polish retribution at 2,000–3,000 in Volhynia. G. Rossolinski-Liebe puts the number of Ukrainians, both OUN-UPA members and civilians, killed by Poles during and after World War II to be 10,000–20,000. According to Kataryna Wolczuk, for all of the areas affected by conflict, the Ukrainian casualties range from 10,000 to 30,000 between 1943 and 1947. According to Motyka, the author of a fundamental monograph about the UPA, estimations of 30,000 Ukrainian casualties are unsupported; his estimates are 2,000–3,000 Ukrainians killed in Volhynia and 10,000–15,000 in all of the territories covered by the conflict in 1943–1947. He states that most of the Ukrainian casualties occurred within the post-war Polish borders (8,000–10,000, including 5,000–6,000 Ukrainians killed in 1944–1947).

The historian Timothy Snyder considers it likely that the UPA killed as many Ukrainians as it killed Poles, because local Ukrainians who did not adhere to its form of nationalism were considered traitors.

==Responsibility==
The Organization of Ukrainian Nationalists (OUN), of which the UPA had become the armed wing, promoted the removal, by force if necessary, of non-Ukrainians from the social and economic spheres of a future Ukrainian state.

The OUN adopted in 1929 the &quot;Ten Commandments of the Ukrainian Nationalists&quot; to which all of its members were expected to adhere. They stated, &quot;Do not hesitate to carry out the most dangerous deeds&quot; and &quot;Treat the enemies of your nation with hatred and ruthlessness&quot;.

The decision of ethnic cleansing of the area east of the Bug River was taken by the UPA early in 1943. In March 1943, the OUN(B) (specifically Mykola Lebed) imposed a collective death sentence of all Poles living in the former east of the Second Polish Republic, and a few months later, local units of the UPA were instructed to complete the operation soon. The decision to eliminate the territory&#x27;s Poles determined the course of future events. According to Timothy Snyder, the ethnic cleansing of the Poles was exclusively the work of the extremist Bandera faction of the OUN, rather than its Melnyk faction or other Ukrainian political or religious organizations. Polish investigators claim that the OUN-B central leadership decided in February 1943 to drive all Poles out of Volhynia to obtain an &quot;ethnically pure territory&quot; in the postwar period. Among those who were behind the decision, Polish investigators singled out Dmytro Klyachkivsky, Vasyl Ivakhov, Ivan Lytvynchuk and Petro Oliynyk.

Ethnic violence was exacerbated with the circulation of posters and leaflets inciting the Ukrainian population to murder Poles and &quot;Judeo-Muscovites&quot; alike.

Taras Bulba-Borovets, the founder of the UPA, criticized the attacks as soon as they began: 

According to prosecutor Piotr Zając, the Polish Institute of National Remembrance in 2003 considered three different versions of the events in its investigation:
# The Ukrainians at first planned to chase the Poles out, but events got out of hand over time.
# The decision to exterminate the Poles came directly from the OUN-UPA headquarters.
# The decision to exterminate the Poles can be attributed to some of the leaders of the OUN-UPA in the course of an internal conflict in the organisation.

The IPN concluded that the second version to be the most likely.

In October 1943 the OUN issued a communication (in Ukrainian only) that condemned the &quot;mutual mass murders&quot; of Ukrainians and Poles.

==Reconciliation==
In 1944–1945, the UPA and Home Army initiated a ceasefire and orders to cease any actions against civilians, and with mediation of Orthodox and Roman Catholic clergy a meeting was arranged between commanders of both formations. The agreement resulted in joint UPA-Home Army operation against NKVD prison in Hrubieszów. By 1948, both organisations largely ceased to exist with its members arrested or escaping to the West.

The question of official acknowledgment of the ethnic cleansing remains a matter of discussion between Polish and Ukrainian historians and political leaders. Efforts are ongoing to bring about reconciliation between Poles and Ukrainians regarding the events. The Polish side has made steps towards reconciliation; in 2002 President Aleksander Kwaśniewski expressed regret over the resettlement program, known as Operation Vistula: &quot;The infamous Operation Vistula is a symbol of the abominable deeds perpetrated by the communist authorities against Polish citizens of Ukrainian origin.&quot; He stated that the argument that &quot;Operation Vistula was the revenge for the slaughter of Poles by the Ukrainian Insurgent Army&quot; in 1943–1944 to be &quot;fallacious and ethically inadmissible&quot; by invoking &quot;the principle of collective guilt&quot;. The Ukrainian government has not yet issued an apology.

On 11 July 2003, Presidents Aleksander Kwaśniewski and Leonid Kuchma attended a ceremony held in the Volhynian village of Pavlivka (previously known as Poryck), where they unveiled a monument to the reconciliation. The Polish president said that it is unjust to blame the entire Ukrainian nation for these acts of terror: &quot;The Ukrainian nation cannot be blamed for the massacre perpetrated on the Polish population. There are no nations that are guilty... It is always specific people who bear the responsibility for crimes&quot;.

Between 2015 and 2018 a Forum of Polish and Ukrainian Historians was jointly researching archival documents, including new archives declassified by Ukrainian government. Another joint effort resulted in publishing multi-volume book &quot;Poland and Ukraine in the 1930s–1940s: Unknown documents from the secret service archives&quot; first volume of which was published in 1998 and 10th in 2020. The cooperation is led on government level by Institute of National Remembrance (Poland) and Sectoral State Archive of the Security Service of Ukraine (HDA SBU).

In 2016 Ukrainian president Petro Poroshenko visited Warsaw and paid tribute to the victims at the Volhynia monument.

In 2017, Ukrainian politicians banned the exhumation of the remains of Polish victims in Ukraine killed by the UPA in revenge for Polish demolition of the illegal UPA monument in the village of Hruszowice.

In 2018, Polish president Andrzej Duda refused to participate in a joint ceremony commemorating the 75th anniversary of the massacres with the Ukrainian President Petro Poroshenko and instead travelled to Lutsk to hold a separate event.

In May 2023, Ukraine&#x27;s Rada chairman Ruslan Stefanchuk spoke in front of the Polish Sejm, where he expressed sympathy to the victims of the massacre, their families and descendants and called for reconciliation. Stefanchuk promised continued joint work on explaining the details of the tragedy. The speech was described as Polish minister of foreign affairs Zbigniew Rau as &quot;promising&quot;.

In June 2023 archeological excavations started in a former village of Puzhniki in Volhynia by a group of Polish scientists to identify possible mass graves of the massacre victims.

In July 2023, Polish president Andrzej Duda and Ukrainian president Volodymyr Zelensky jointly paid tribute to the victims in Lutsk, administrative capital of the Volhynia region, attended a mass in local church on the 80th anniversary of the tragedy. A joint declaration on the need of reconciliation was also signed by heads of Roman Catholic Church in Poland, archbishop Stanisław Gądecki, and Ukrainian Greek Catholic Church Sviatoslav Shevchuk. Polish Sejm adopted a resolution commemorating the victims, blaming OUN and UPA, praising rescue offered to the Poles by some Ukrainian individuals, calling for reconciliation recognizing guilt of the perpetrators and highlighting the need for exhumations.

On 15 January 2025, Ukrainian president Zelensky and Polish prime minister Donald Tusk reached an agreement to allow exhumations, it also being noted by the Polish deputy prime minister that this impacted Ukraine&#x27;s joining of the European Union.

==Classification as genocide==
===Scholarly consensus===
UCLA historian Jared McBride, an expert in the region and in the Holocaust, writing in &quot;Slavic Review&quot; in 2016, said there is a &quot;scholarly consensus that this was a case of ethnic cleansing as opposed to genocide&quot;.

Writing in 2004, historian Antony Polonsky, an expert on the Holocaust and Polish Jewish history, said that the &quot;[massacres&#x27;] goal was not so much genocide as it was to force the local Polish population to leave.&quot;

Historian Per Anders Rudling wrote in 2006 that the goal of the OUN-UPA was not the extermination of Poles but ethnic cleansing of the region to attain an ethnically homogeneous state. The goal was thus to prevent a repeat of 1918–20, when Poland crushed Ukrainian independence, as the Polish Home Army was attempting to restore the Polish Republic in its pre-1939 borders.

According to a 2010 conference paper by Ivan Katchanovski, the mass killings of Poles in Volhynia by the UPA cannot be classified as a genocide because there is no evidence that the UPA intended to annihilate entire or significant parts of the Polish nation, the UPA action was mostly limited to a relatively small area and the number of Poles killed was quite a small fraction of the prewar Polish population in both the territories in which the UPA operated and of the entire Polish population in Poland and Ukraine.

In 2016, Grzegorz Rossoliński-Liebe, author of a scholarly biography of Bandera, argued that the killings were ethnic cleansing rather than genocide. Rossoliński-Liebe sees &quot;genocide&quot;, in this context, as a word that is sometimes used in political attacks on Ukraine.

However, historian Grzegorz Motyka, an expert on Polish-Ukrainian issues, argued in 2021 that &quot;although the anti-Polish action was an ethnic cleansing, it also meets the definition of genocide&quot;.

===Polish view===
The Polish Institute of National Remembrance investigated the crimes committed by the UPA against the Poles in Volhynia, Galicia and prewar Lublin Voivodeship and collected over 10,000 pages of documents and protocols. The massacres were described by the commission&#x27;s prosecutor, Piotr Zając, as bearing the characteristics of a genocide: &quot;there is no doubt that the crimes committed against the people of Polish nationality have the character of genocide&quot;. The Institute of National Remembrance stated:
The Volhynian massacres have all the traits of genocide listed in the 1948 UN Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide, which defines genocide as an act &quot;committed with intent to destroy, in whole or in part, a national, ethnical, racial or religious group, as such&quot;.
Some participants at a conference on the massacres held in 2008 by the Institute used the word &quot;Zagłada&quot;, originally applied to the Final Solution, to describe them.

On 15 July 2009, the Sejm of the Republic of Poland unanimously adopted a resolution regarding &quot;the tragic fate of Poles in Eastern Borderlands&quot;. The text of the resolution states that July 2009 marks the 66th anniversary &quot;of the beginning of anti-Polish actions by the Organization of Ukrainian nationalists and the UPA on Polish Eastern territories – mass murders characterised by ethnic cleansing with marks of genocide&quot;. On 8 July 2016, the Sejm passed a resolution declaring 11 July a National Day of Remembrance of the victims of the Genocide of the Citizens of the Polish Republic committed by Ukrainian Nationalists and formally called the massacres a genocide.

A number of Polish authors, especially on the right, have labeled the Volhynia massacres worse than Nazi or Soviet atrocities in terms of their brutality, though not in scale, as so many of the victims were tortured and mutilated.

===Ukrainian view===
In Ukraine, the events are called &quot;Volhynia tragedy&quot;. Coverage in textbooks may be brief and/or euphemistic. Some Ukrainian historians accept the genocide classification, but argue that it was a &quot;bilateral genocide&quot; and that the Home Army was responsible for crimes against Ukrainian civilians that were equivalent in nature.

Many Ukrainians perceived the 2016 resolution as an &quot;anti-Ukrainian gesture&quot; in the context of Vladimir Putin&#x27;s attempts to use the Volhynia issue to divide Poland and Ukraine in the context of the Russian–Ukrainian war. In September 2016, the parliament of Ukraine, the Verkhovna Rada, passed a resolution condemning &quot;the one-sided political assessment of the historical events&quot; in Poland. According to Ukrainian historian Andrii Portnov, the classification as genocide has been strongly supported by Poles who were expelled from the east and by parts of the Polish right-wing politics.

Ukrainian historians called for assessing the massacres in the historical context, pointing out historical repressions against Ukrainian population and forced polonization in pre-war Poland.

Ukrainian historian Yuri Shapoval openly speaks about the &quot;Volhynia Slaughter&quot; and calls for increased recognition of the massacre inside Ukraine, pointing out very complex ethnic composition of these territories, mutual historical resentments and incitement by external parties, Soviets, Germans and Polish government on exile.

==In popular culture==
In 2009, a Polish historical documentary film &quot;Było sobie miasteczko...&quot; was produced by Adam Kruk for Telewizja Polska which tells the story of the Kisielin massacre.

The massacre of Poles in Volhynia was depicted in the 2016 movie &quot;Volhynia&quot;, which was directed by the Polish screenwriter and film director Wojciech Smarzowski.

==See also==

* Historiography of the Massacre of Poles in Volhynia
* 27th Polish Home Army Infantry Division
* Baligród massacre
* Bloody Sunday on Volhynia
* Budy Ossowskie massacre
* Chodaczków Wielki massacre
* Chrynów massacre
* Dominopol massacre
* Gaj massacres
* Głęboczyca massacre
* Gurów massacre
* Hurby massacre
* Huta Pieniacka massacre
* Janowa Dolina massacre
* Kisielin massacre
* Koliyivschyna
* Korosciatyn massacre
* Marianna Dolińska
* Massacre of Ostrówki
* Massacre of Wola Ostrowiecka
* Muczne massacre
* Operation Vistula
* Palikrowy massacre
* Parośla I massacre
* Pidkamin massacre
* Poryck Massacre
* Przebraże Defence
* Wiązownica massacre
* Wiśniowiec massacres
* Zagaje massacre
* List of massacres in Ukraine

==Notes==
== References ==
== Bibliography ==
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*Wiktor Poliszczuk &quot;Bitter truth&quot;: The criminality of the Organization of Ukrainian Nationalists (OUN) and the Ukrainian Insurgent Army (UPA), the testimony of a Ukrainian, 
* 
* 
* 
*
*
*

== External links ==

* Volhynia massacre. Truth and Remembrance – Institute of National Remembrance
* The Polish Institute of National Membrance, Ewa Siemaszko, Balance of the crime
* Pictures from massacres. Association Commemorating Victims of the Crime of Ukrainian nationalists
* Volhynia and Eastern Galicia 1943–1944. Documents of State Committee on Archives of Ukraine
* Tragedy of Volhynia 1943–1944. Documents of State Committee on Archives of Ukraine
* Kost Bondarenko, &quot;The Volyn Tragedy: Echoes Through Decades&quot; in &quot;Zerkalo Nedeli&quot; (the Mirror Weekly), February 15–21, 2003.
* Volyn Discussion (a list of articles)
*An abbreviated preface to the monographic book of Władysław Siemaszko and Ewa Siemaszko, November 2000.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q695020" start="4" end="54" title="Massacres of Poles in Volhynia and Eastern Galicia" label="Massacres of Poles in Volhynia and Eastern Galicia"/>
<link wikidata="Q700120" start="80" end="102" title="Occupation of Poland (1939–1945)" label="German-occupied Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q737212" start="110" end="134" title="Ukrainian Insurgent Army" label="Ukrainian Insurgent Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q44806" start="181" end="190" title="Ukrainians" label="Ukrainian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026" start="215" end="221" title="Polish people" label="Polish"/>
<link wikidata="Q7530" start="234" end="242" title="Volhynia" label="Volhynia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3573883" start="244" end="259" title="Eastern Galicia" label="Eastern Galicia"/>
<link wikidata="Q208987" start="270" end="277" title="Polesia" label="Polesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q54155" start="287" end="300" title="Lublin Voivodeship" label="Lublin region"/>
<link wikidata="Q4077250" start="1078" end="1087" title="Banderite" label="Banderite"/>
<link wikidata="Q844787" start="1103" end="1141" title="Organization of Ukrainian Nationalists" label="Organization of Ukrainian Nationalists"/>
<link wikidata="Q749594" start="1522" end="1541" title="Dmytro Klyachkivsky" label="Dmytro Klyachkivsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q4632612" start="1923" end="1948" title="27th Home Army Infantry Division (Poland)" label="27th AK Infantry Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q1970821" start="2155" end="2167" title="Mykola Lebed" label="Mykola Lebed"/>
<link wikidata="Q463766" start="2632" end="2648" title="Roman Shukhevych" label="Roman Shuchevych"/>
<link wikidata="Q2616797" start="2861" end="2872" title="Vasyl Sydor" label="Vasyl Sydor"/>
<link wikidata="Q98964" start="3528" end="3532" title="Sejm of the Republic of Poland" label="Sejm"/>
<link wikidata="Q154278" start="3809" end="3825" title="ethnic cleansing" label="ethnic cleansing"/>
<link wikidata="Q14645946" start="4420" end="4433" title="Sich Riflemen" label="Sich Riflemen"/>
<link wikidata="Q842774" start="4450" end="4470" title="Polish–Ukrainian War" label="Polish–Ukrainian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2616878" start="4484" end="4515" title="Ukrainian Military Organization" label="Ukrainian Military Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q844787" start="4803" end="4841" title="Organization of Ukrainian Nationalists" label="Organization of Ukrainian Nationalists"/>
<link wikidata="Q1741" start="4862" end="4868" title="Vienna" label="Vienna"/>
<link wikidata="Q40" start="4870" end="4877" title="Austria" label="Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q472189" start="5222" end="5253" title="Ukrainian Greek Catholic Church" label="Ukrainian Greek Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q24194" start="5255" end="5272" title="Andriy Sheptytsky" label="Andriy Sheptytsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q7878482" start="5340" end="5378" title="Ukrainian National Democratic Alliance" label="Ukrainian National Democratic Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q2072548" start="6014" end="6060" title="Pacification of Ukrainians in Eastern Galicia" label="exacting a policy of collective responsibility"/>
<link wikidata="Q639715" start="6417" end="6429" title="Polonization" label="Polonization"/>
<link wikidata="Q2305266" start="6614" end="6617" title="Soviet invasion of Poland" label="war"/>
<link wikidata="Q95736217" start="6743" end="6760" title="Ukrainian culture" label="Ukrainian culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q586557" start="6834" end="6841" title="Sanacja" label="Sanacja"/>
<link wikidata="Q885" start="7009" end="7024" title="Józef Piłsudski" label="Józef Piłsudski"/>
<link wikidata="Q2625779" start="7359" end="7375" title="Osadnik" label="Polish colonists"/>
<link wikidata="Q2390001" start="7760" end="7788" title="Communist Party of Western Ukraine" label="Western Ukrainian communists"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="8336" end="8348" title="Nazi Germany" label="Nazi Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q2305266" start="8357" end="8369" title="Soviet invasion of Poland" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q7530" start="8431" end="8439" title="Volhynia" label="Volhynia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3573883" start="8444" end="8459" title="Eastern Galicia" label="Eastern Galicia"/>
<link wikidata="Q133356" start="8481" end="8494" title="Ukrainian SSR" label="Ukrainian SSR"/>
<link wikidata="Q182449" start="8529" end="8533" title="NKVD" label="NKVD"/>
<link wikidata="Q7659544" start="8696" end="8715" title="Sybiracy" label="deported to Siberia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5285815" start="9176" end="9191" title="Dmytro Levytsky" label="Dmytro Levytsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q7878482" start="9205" end="9209" title="Ukrainian National Democratic Alliance" label="UNDO"/>
<link wikidata="Q157280" start="9679" end="9693" title="Stepan Bandera" label="Stepan Bandera"/>
<link wikidata="Q4077250" start="9706" end="9716" title="Banderites" label="Banderites"/>
<link wikidata="Q117559" start="9848" end="9861" title="Andriy Melnyk (Ukrainian military leader)" label="Andriy Melnyk"/>
<link wikidata="Q83055" start="9911" end="9923" title="Operation Barbarossa" label="was attacked"/>
<link wikidata="Q20714157" start="10116" end="10134" title="Ukrainian People&amp;#x27;s Militsiya" label="Ukrainian militias"/>
<link wikidata="Q177716" start="10197" end="10203" title="pogrom" label="pogrom"/>
<link wikidata="Q667890" start="10290" end="10308" title="Lviv pogroms (1941)" label="took place in Lviv"/>
<link wikidata="Q1516823" start="10345" end="10356" title="Polish Jews" label="Polish Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q4077250" start="10504" end="10514" title="Banderites" label="Banderites"/>
<link wikidata="Q180086" start="10535" end="10542" title="Galicia (Eastern Europe)" label="Galicia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7530" start="10547" end="10555" title="Volhynia" label="Volhynia"/>
<link wikidata="Q277167" start="10761" end="10793" title="Proclamation of Ukrainian Independence" label="establishment of Ukrainian State"/>
<link wikidata="Q36036" start="10797" end="10801" title="Lviv" label="Lviv"/>
<link wikidata="Q43250" start="10900" end="10907" title="Gestapo" label="Gestapo"/>
<link wikidata="Q44687" start="11497" end="11499" title="Schutzstaffel" label="SS"/>
<link wikidata="Q234184" start="11714" end="11719" title="Chełm" label="Chełm"/>
<link wikidata="Q152529" start="12070" end="12079" title="Home Army" label="Home Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q116080" start="12906" end="12927" title="Polish Underground State" label="authorities in Warsaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q210846" start="12932" end="12938" title="Polish government-in-exile" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q210846" start="13074" end="13100" title="Polish government-in-exile" label="Polish government-in-exile"/>
<link wikidata="Q116080" start="13109" end="13126" title="Polish Underground State" label="underground state"/>
<link wikidata="Q831550" start="13219" end="13236" title="attrition warfare" label="attrition warfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q1970821" start="14808" end="14820" title="Mykola Lebed" label="Mykola Lebed"/>
<link wikidata="Q463766" start="14830" end="14846" title="Roman Shukhevych" label="Roman Shukhevych"/>
<link wikidata="Q864887" start="14899" end="14919" title="Taras Bulba-Borovets" label="Taras Bulba-Borovets"/>
<link wikidata="Q2660076" start="14940" end="14982" title="Ukrainian People&amp;#x27;s Revolutionary Army" label="Ukrainian People&amp;#x27;s Revolutionary Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q2660076" start="15493" end="15507" title="Ukrainian People&amp;#x27;s Revolutionary Army" label="Polessian Sich"/>
<link wikidata="Q864887" start="15548" end="15568" title="Taras Bulba-Borovets" label="Taras Bulba-Borovets"/>
<link wikidata="Q243610" start="15583" end="15615" title="Ukrainian People&amp;#x27;s Republic" label="Ukrainian People&amp;#x27;s Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q653339" start="15849" end="15875" title="Schutzmannschaft" label="Ukrainian auxiliary police"/>
<link wikidata="Q7550" start="15999" end="16004" title="Lutsk" label="Lutsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q2658213" start="16266" end="16278" title="Volodymyrets" label="Volodymyrets"/>
<link wikidata="Q251395" start="16481" end="16489" title="Red Army" label="Red Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q749594" start="16676" end="16695" title="Dmytro Klyachkivsky" label="Dmytro Klyachkivsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q7139605" start="18365" end="18386" title="Parośla I massacre" label="assaulted the Parośle"/>
<link wikidata="Q997512" start="18401" end="18406" title="Sarny" label="Sarny"/>
<link wikidata="Q148985" start="18689" end="18697" title="Kostopil" label="Kostopol"/>
<link wikidata="Q997512" start="18702" end="18707" title="Sarny" label="Sarny"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19147" end="19155" title="Massacre in Brzezina" label="Brzezina"/>
<link wikidata="Q156739" start="19611" end="19616" title="Rivne" label="Równo"/>
<link wikidata="Q849116" start="19621" end="19632" title="Kremenets" label="Krzemieniec"/>
<link wikidata="Q2074247" start="19773" end="19786" title="Janowa Dolina" label="Janowa Dolina"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19816" end="19831" title="Ivan Lytwynchuk" label="Ivan Lytvynchuk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1794734" start="19979" end="19983" title="Kuty" label="Kuty"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20012" end="20023" title="Nowa Nowica" label="Nowa Nowica"/>
<link wikidata="Q6448675" start="20164" end="20181" title="Kuty (Kąty) defence" label="Kuty self-defense"/>
<link wikidata="Q156739" start="20761" end="20766" title="Rivne" label="Rivne"/>
<link wikidata="Q849116" start="20771" end="20780" title="Kremenets" label="Kremenets"/>
<link wikidata="Q8075810" start="22163" end="22176" title="Zygmunt Rumel" label="Zygmunt Rumel"/>
<link wikidata="Q25929999" start="22265" end="22285" title="Krzysztof Markiewicz" label="Krzysztof Markiewicz"/>
<link wikidata="Q749594" start="22973" end="22992" title="Dmytro Klyachkivsky" label="Dmytro Klyachkivsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q8041210" start="23061" end="23076" title="Władysław Filar" label="Władysław Filar"/>
<link wikidata="Q148974" start="24200" end="24208" title="Horochow" label="Horochów"/>
<link wikidata="Q33544" start="24214" end="24234" title="Włodzimierz Wołyński" label="Włodzimierz Wołyński"/>
<link wikidata="Q156704" start="24245" end="24250" title="Kowel" label="Kowel"/>
<link wikidata="Q156704" start="24896" end="24901" title="Kovel" label="Kovel"/>
<link wikidata="Q974468" start="25338" end="25344" title="Liuboml" label="Luboml"/>
<link wikidata="Q3848408" start="25908" end="25926" title="Massacre of Ostrowki" label="people were killed"/>
<link wikidata="Q6784491" start="26352" end="26370" title="Massacre of Wola Ostrowiecka" label="people were killed"/>
<link wikidata="Q9388761" start="28520" end="28539" title="Wiśniowiec massacres" label="bloodiest massacres"/>
<link wikidata="Q422376" start="29118" end="29135" title="Operation Tempest" label="Operation Tempest"/>
<link wikidata="Q156704" start="29548" end="29553" title="Kovel" label="Kovel"/>
<link wikidata="Q33544" start="29558" end="29577" title="Volodymyr-Volynskyi" label="Volodymyr-Volynskyi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1711620" start="29862" end="29870" title="Svynaryn" label="Svynaryn"/>
<link wikidata="Q2377655" start="30423" end="30443" title="Volodymyr Kubiyovych" label="Volodymyr Kubiyovych"/>
<link wikidata="Q1970821" start="31556" end="31568" title="Mykola Lebed" label="Mykola Lebed"/>
<link wikidata="Q3692537" start="33264" end="33289" title="Tadeusz Isakowicz-Zaleski" label="Tadeusz Isakowicz-Zaleski"/>
<link wikidata="Q174546" start="33468" end="33478" title="Antichrist" label="Antichrist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1784662" start="33538" end="33546" title="Koropiec" label="Koropiec"/>
<link wikidata="Q1019899" start="33886" end="33892" title="Zbaraz" label="Zbaraz"/>
<link wikidata="Q156743" start="33909" end="33917" title="Ternopil" label="Ternopil"/>
<link wikidata="Q156743" start="33933" end="33941" title="Ternopil" label="Ternopil"/>
<link wikidata="Q465104" start="33959" end="33964" title="Brody" label="Brody"/>
<link wikidata="Q997462" start="34000" end="34011" title="Peremyshliany" label="Przemyślany"/>
<link wikidata="Q463766" start="34014" end="34030" title="Roman Shukhevych" label="Roman Shukhevych"/>
<link wikidata="Q1532930" start="34400" end="34414" title="Huta Pieniacka" label="Huta Pieniacka"/>
<link wikidata="Q251741" start="34863" end="34877" title="reconnaissance" label="reconnaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q188099" start="34926" end="34990" title="14th Waffen Grenadier Division of the SS Galicia (1st Ukrainian)" label="14th Waffen Grenadier Division of the SS Galicia (1st Ukrainian)"/>
<link wikidata="Q323886" start="35600" end="35623" title="Huta Pieniacka massacre" label="Huta Pieniacka massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q5642112" start="35679" end="35697" title="Tadeusz Piotrowski (sociologist)" label="Tadeusz Piotrowski"/>
<link wikidata="Q747312" start="36510" end="36524" title="Timothy Snyder" label="Timothy Snyder"/>
<link wikidata="Q2509983" start="36653" end="36661" title="Pidkamin" label="Pidkamin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2509983" start="37213" end="37221" title="Pidkamin" label="Pidkamin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1799" start="37267" end="37274" title="Wrocław" label="Wrocław"/>
<link wikidata="Q208473" start="37566" end="37574" title="Przemyśl" label="Przemyśl"/>
<link wikidata="Q216488" start="37746" end="37755" title="San River" label="San River"/>
<link wikidata="Q5612537" start="37876" end="37891" title="Grzegorz Motyka (historian)" label="Grzegorz Motyka"/>
<link wikidata="Q251395" start="37980" end="37988" title="Red Army" label="Red Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q4512232" start="38062" end="38074" title="Czerwonogrod" label="Czerwonogrod"/>
<link wikidata="Q2607319" start="38198" end="38219" title="Recovered Territories" label="Recovered Territories"/>
<link wikidata="Q849109" start="38538" end="38545" title="Buchach" label="Buchach"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="38716" end="38723" title="Puźniki" label="Puźniki"/>
<link wikidata="Q2684463" start="38805" end="38817" title="Niemysłowice" label="Niemysłowice"/>
<link wikidata="Q986984" start="38823" end="38830" title="Prudnik" label="Prudnik"/>
<link wikidata="Q81720" start="38832" end="38839" title="Silesia" label="Silesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1000414" start="38906" end="38915" title="Pawłokoma" label="Pawłokoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q1966827" start="38916" end="38927" title="Pawłokoma massacre" label="were killed"/>
<link wikidata="Q376303" start="40042" end="40055" title="Norman Davies" label="Norman Davies"/>
<link wikidata="Q747312" start="40344" end="40358" title="Timothy Snyder" label="Timothy Snyder"/>
<link wikidata="Q11818337" start="40823" end="40838" title="Piotr Łossowski" label="Piotr Łossowski"/>
<link wikidata="Q2075589" start="43113" end="43128" title="Sluzhba Bezbeky" label="Sluzhba Bezbeky"/>
<link wikidata="Q705173" start="43412" end="43445" title="Institute of National Remembrance" label="Institute of National Remembrance"/>
<link wikidata="Q152529" start="45138" end="45147" title="Home Army" label="Home Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q4632612" start="46271" end="46303" title="27th Home Army Infantry Division (Poland)" label="27th Home Army Infantry Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q128781" start="46387" end="46400" title="Wehrmacht" label="German forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q60353" start="46848" end="46858" title="Erich Koch" label="Erich Koch"/>
<link wikidata="Q997512" start="47085" end="47090" title="Sarny" label="Sarny"/>
<link wikidata="Q153132" start="47146" end="47154" title="Władysław Sikorski" label="Sikorski"/>
<link wikidata="Q157280" start="47176" end="47183" title="Stepan Bandera" label="Bandera"/>
<link wikidata="Q7122819" start="48270" end="48276" title="pacification operations in German-occupied Poland" label="pacify"/>
<link wikidata="Q313830" start="48453" end="48468" title="Soviet partisans" label="Soviet partisan"/>
<link wikidata="Q156739" start="48583" end="48588" title="Rivne" label="Rivne"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="48817" end="48829" title="George Liber" label="George Liber"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="49031" end="49048" title="Ivan Katchanovski" label="Ivan Katchanovski"/>
<link wikidata="Q37333" start="49654" end="49660" title="Lublin" label="Lublin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2353353" start="49732" end="49745" title="Lower Silesia" label="Lower Silesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q377638" start="50358" end="50372" title="Niall Ferguson" label="Niall Ferguson"/>
<link wikidata="Q18668450" start="50476" end="50496" title="Grzegorz Rossoliński-Liebe" label="G. Rossolinski-Liebe"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="50761" end="50778" title="Ivan Katchanovski" label="Ivan Katchanovski"/>
<link wikidata="Q8041244" start="51280" end="51299" title="Władysław Siemaszko" label="Władysław Siemaszko"/>
<link wikidata="Q5418855" start="51317" end="51320" title="Ewa Siemaszko" label="Ewa"/>
<link wikidata="Q422177" start="51562" end="51575" title="Podkowa Leśna" label="Podkowa Leśna"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131687" start="51608" end="51620" title="Karta Centre" label="Karta Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1940320" start="51935" end="51952" title="Wołyń Voivodeship (1921–1939)" label="Wołyń Voivodeship"/>
<link wikidata="Q11815608" start="51954" end="51972" title="Per Anders Rudling" label="Per Anders Rudling"/>
<link wikidata="Q1569569" start="52137" end="52156" title="Armenians in Poland" label="Polonized Armenians"/>
<link wikidata="Q1794734" start="52193" end="52197" title="Kuty" label="Kuty"/>
<link wikidata="Q747312" start="53338" end="53352" title="Timothy Snyder" label="Timothy Snyder"/>
<link wikidata="Q844787" start="53553" end="53591" title="Organization of Ukrainian Nationalists" label="Organization of Ukrainian Nationalists"/>
<link wikidata="Q156237" start="54129" end="54138" title="Bug River" label="Bug River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1970821" start="54215" end="54227" title="Mykola Lebed" label="Mykola Lebed"/>
<link wikidata="Q747312" start="54536" end="54550" title="Timothy Snyder" label="Timothy Snyder"/>
<link wikidata="Q749594" start="55014" end="55033" title="Dmytro Klyachkivsky" label="Dmytro Klyachkivsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q864887" start="55254" end="55274" title="Taras Bulba-Borovets" label="Taras Bulba-Borovets"/>
<link wikidata="Q8798" start="55964" end="55973" title="Ukrainian language" label="Ukrainian"/>
<link wikidata="Q4818003" start="56350" end="56393" title="Attack on Hrubieszów" label="operation against NKVD prison in Hrubieszów"/>
<link wikidata="Q55758" start="56831" end="56853" title="Aleksander Kwaśniewski" label="Aleksander Kwaśniewski"/>
<link wikidata="Q422493" start="56911" end="56928" title="Operation Vistula" label="Operation Vistula"/>
<link wikidata="Q629702" start="57473" end="57486" title="Leonid Kuchma" label="Leonid Kuchma"/>
<link wikidata="Q2065690" start="57570" end="57576" title="Poryck Massacre" label="Poryck"/>
<link wikidata="Q705173" start="58397" end="58430" title="Institute of National Remembrance" label="Institute of National Remembrance"/>
<link wikidata="Q615811" start="58474" end="58501" title="Security Service of Ukraine" label="Security Service of Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q9151911" start="58866" end="58878" title="Andrzej Duda" label="Andrzej Duda"/>
<link wikidata="Q58077" start="59003" end="59019" title="Petro Poroshenko" label="Petro Poroshenko"/>
<link wikidata="Q176296" start="59106" end="59110" title="Verkhovna Rada" label="Rada"/>
<link wikidata="Q20070130" start="59120" end="59137" title="Ruslan Stefanchuk" label="Ruslan Stefanchuk"/>
<link wikidata="Q98964" start="59167" end="59171" title="Sejm" label="Sejm"/>
<link wikidata="Q9388252" start="59441" end="59453" title="Zbigniew Rau" label="Zbigniew Rau"/>
<link wikidata="Q3874799" start="59731" end="59749" title="Volodymyr Zelenskyy" label="Volodymyr Zelensky"/>
<link wikidata="Q7550" start="59789" end="59794" title="Lutsk" label="Lutsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1152005" start="59993" end="60014" title="Catholic Church in Poland" label="Roman Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q472189" start="60060" end="60091" title="Ukrainian Greek Catholic Church" label="Ukrainian Greek Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q48767" start="60092" end="60111" title="Sviatoslav Shevchuk" label="Sviatoslav Shevchuk"/>
<link wikidata="Q98964" start="60120" end="60124" title="Sejm" label="Sejm"/>
<link wikidata="Q946" start="60446" end="60457" title="Donald Tusk" label="Donald Tusk"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="60488" end="60499" title="Burial#Exhumation" label="exhumations"/>
<link wikidata="Q1374797" start="60535" end="60556" title="Władysław Kosiniak-Kamysz" label="deputy prime minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="60606" end="60620" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q174710" start="60680" end="60684" title="UCLA" label="UCLA"/>
<link wikidata="Q7539352" start="60773" end="60786" title="Slavic Review" label="Slavic Review"/>
<link wikidata="Q4777243" start="60943" end="60958" title="Antony Polonsky" label="Antony Polonsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q2763" start="60977" end="60986" title="Holocaust" label="Holocaust"/>
<link wikidata="Q1516823" start="60991" end="61012" title="Polish Jewish history" label="Polish Jewish history"/>
<link wikidata="Q11815608" start="61156" end="61174" title="Per Anders Rudling" label="Per Anders Rudling"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="61561" end="61578" title="Ivan Katchanovski" label="Ivan Katchanovski"/>
<link wikidata="Q18668450" start="62050" end="62076" title="Grzegorz Rossoliński-Liebe" label="Grzegorz Rossoliński-Liebe"/>
<link wikidata="Q154278" start="62152" end="62168" title="ethnic cleansing" label="ethnic cleansing"/>
<link wikidata="Q5612537" start="62339" end="62354" title="Grzegorz Motyka" label="Grzegorz Motyka"/>
<link wikidata="Q705173" start="62555" end="62588" title="Institute of National Remembrance" label="Institute of National Remembrance"/>
<link wikidata="Q54155" start="62684" end="62702" title="Lublin Voivodeship" label="Lublin Voivodeship"/>
<link wikidata="Q41397" start="62878" end="62886" title="genocide" label="genocide"/>
<link wikidata="Q127013" start="63511" end="63525" title="Final Solution" label="Final Solution"/>
<link wikidata="Q98964" start="63567" end="63597" title="Sejm of the Republic of Poland" label="Sejm of the Republic of Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q25975801" start="64056" end="64189" title="National Day of Remembrance of the victims of the Genocide of the Citizens of the Polish Republic committed by Ukrainian Nationalists" label="National Day of Remembrance of the victims of the Genocide of the Citizens of the Polish Republic committed by Ukrainian Nationalists"/>
<link wikidata="Q7747" start="64942" end="64956" title="Vladimir Putin" label="Vladimir Putin"/>
<link wikidata="Q15860072" start="65050" end="65071" title="Russian–Ukrainian war" label="Russian–Ukrainian war"/>
<link wikidata="Q176296" start="65123" end="65137" title="Verkhovna Rada" label="Verkhovna Rada"/>
<link wikidata="Q4373279" start="65286" end="65300" title="Andrii Portnov" label="Andrii Portnov"/>
<link wikidata="Q639715" start="65610" end="65622" title="polonization" label="polonization"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="65663" end="65676" title="Yuri Shapoval" label="Yuri Shapoval"/>
<link wikidata="Q93204" start="66035" end="66051" title="documentary film" label="documentary film"/>
<link wikidata="Q5004734" start="66058" end="66082" title="Było sobie miasteczko..." label="Było sobie miasteczko..."/>
<link wikidata="Q129110" start="66119" end="66135" title="Telewizja Polska" label="Telewizja Polska"/>
<link wikidata="Q6416698" start="66165" end="66182" title="Kisielin massacre" label="Kisielin massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q27149954" start="66256" end="66264" title="Volhynia (film)" label="Volhynia"/>
<link wikidata="Q63258" start="66336" end="66355" title="Wojciech Smarzowski" label="Wojciech Smarzowski"/>
<link wikidata="Q16843530" start="66374" end="66425" title="Historiography of the Massacre of Poles in Volhynia" label="Historiography of the Massacre of Poles in Volhynia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4632612" start="66428" end="66467" title="27th Polish Home Army Infantry Division" label="27th Polish Home Army Infantry Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q4850887" start="66470" end="66487" title="Baligród massacre" label="Baligród massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q14946228" start="66490" end="66515" title="Bloody Sunday on Volhynia" label="Bloody Sunday on Volhynia"/>
<link wikidata="Q9388737" start="66518" end="66541" title="Budy Ossowskie massacre" label="Budy Ossowskie massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q11838376" start="66544" end="66570" title="Chodaczków Wielki massacre" label="Chodaczków Wielki massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q9388614" start="66573" end="66589" title="Chrynów massacre" label="Chrynów massacre"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="66592" end="66610" title="Dominopol#The massacre" label="Dominopol massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q9388741" start="66613" end="66626" title="Gaj massacres" label="Gaj massacres"/>
<link wikidata="Q9388622" start="66629" end="66648" title="Głęboczyca massacre" label="Głęboczyca massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q9388620" start="66651" end="66665" title="Gurów massacre" label="Gurów massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q9388624" start="66668" end="66682" title="Hurby massacre" label="Hurby massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q323886" start="66685" end="66708" title="Huta Pieniacka massacre" label="Huta Pieniacka massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q2074247" start="66711" end="66733" title="Janowa Dolina massacre" label="Janowa Dolina massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q6416698" start="66736" end="66753" title="Kisielin massacre" label="Kisielin massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1659789" start="66756" end="66769" title="Koliyivschyna" label="Koliyivschyna"/>
<link wikidata="Q6432569" start="66772" end="66792" title="Korosciatyn massacre" label="Korosciatyn massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q11769832" start="66795" end="66812" title="Marianna Dolińska" label="Marianna Dolińska"/>
<link wikidata="Q3848408" start="66815" end="66835" title="Massacre of Ostrówki" label="Massacre of Ostrówki"/>
<link wikidata="Q6784491" start="66838" end="66866" title="Massacre of Wola Ostrowiecka" label="Massacre of Wola Ostrowiecka"/>
<link wikidata="Q6931318" start="66869" end="66884" title="Muczne massacre" label="Muczne massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q422493" start="66887" end="66904" title="Operation Vistula" label="Operation Vistula"/>
<link wikidata="Q7127536" start="66907" end="66925" title="Palikrowy massacre" label="Palikrowy massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q7139605" start="66928" end="66946" title="Parośla I massacre" label="Parośla I massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q4461744" start="66949" end="66966" title="Pidkamin massacre" label="Pidkamin massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q2065690" start="66969" end="66984" title="Poryck Massacre" label="Poryck Massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q2065606" start="66987" end="67004" title="Przebraże Defence" label="Przebraże Defence"/>
<link wikidata="Q18431780" start="67007" end="67026" title="Wiązownica massacre" label="Wiązownica massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q9388761" start="67029" end="67049" title="Wiśniowiec massacres" label="Wiśniowiec massacres"/>
<link wikidata="Q27972878" start="67052" end="67067" title="Zagaje massacre" label="Zagaje massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q6627296" start="67070" end="67098" title="List of massacres in Ukraine" label="List of massacres in Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2388914" start="67161" end="67178" title="Wiktor Poliszczuk" label="Wiktor Poliszczuk"/>
<link wikidata="Q705173" start="67427" end="67460" title="Institute of National Remembrance" label="Institute of National Remembrance"/>
<link wikidata="Q5418855" start="67507" end="67520" title="Ewa Siemaszko" label="Ewa Siemaszko"/>
<link wikidata="Q1972759" start="67904" end="67918" title="Zerkalo Nedeli" label="Zerkalo Nedeli"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="464699" wikidata="Q708092" url="?curid=464699" title="Aukštieji Paneriai">
<text>Aukštieji Paneriai (&quot;literally&quot; ; adapted to , /Ponar) is a neighborhood of Vilnius, situated about 10 kilometres away from the city center. It is located on low forested hills, on the Vilnius-Warsaw road. Paneriai was the site of the Ponary massacre, a mass killing of as many as 100,000 people from Vilnius and nearby towns and villages during World War II.

==History==
The village was probably founded some time in the 14th century. In 1390, it was acquired by the Vilnius Bishopric and soon became the main supplier of bricks to the nearby city. It shared a common history with Vilnius. After the final Partition of Poland in 1795, it became a part of the Vilna Governorate of the Russian Empire. During the November Uprising, on 19 June 1831, the Battle of Paneriai took place near the village, in which the forces of Dezydery Chłapowski and Antoni Giełgud were defeated by Russian infantry.

=== 20th century ===
As result of Russia&#x27;s withdrawal from World War I, and the signing of the Treaty of Brest-Litovsk, the area was occupied by German forces and transferred to Lithuania. With Germany&#x27;s defeat several months later the territory underwent significant political upheaval, but following the Lithuanian–Bolshevik War, Polish-Bolshevik War, and the Polish-Lithuanian War, it eventually became part of Poland. In 1939, after the invasion of Poland, the village was captured by the Soviet Union and transferred to Lithuania, only to be reannexed by Soviets the following year.

Between July 1941, and August 1944, Paneriai became the mass murder site of approximately 70,000 Jews, 20,000 Polish intelligents, and 8,000 Russian POWs. The executions were planned and carried out by German units of SD and SS with help from local lithuanian collaborationists Special SD and Security Police Squad. The site of the massacre is commemorated by a memorial to the victims of the Holocaust, a memorial to the Polish victims and a small museum.

Since 1990, again part of independent Lithuania, it was incorporated to the city of Vilnius as one of its districts.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q708092" start="0" end="18" title="Aukštieji Paneriai" label="Aukštieji Paneriai"/>
<link wikidata="Q216" start="86" end="93" title="Vilnius" label="Vilnius"/>
<link wikidata="Q270" start="203" end="209" title="Warsaw" label="Warsaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q2005090" start="245" end="260" title="Ponary massacre" label="Ponary massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="356" end="368" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365873" start="479" end="496" title="Archdiocese of Vilnius" label="Vilnius Bishopric"/>
<link wikidata="Q40089" start="534" end="539" title="brick" label="brick"/>
<link wikidata="Q152006" start="618" end="637" title="Partition of Poland" label="Partition of Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q279583" start="671" end="688" title="Vilna Governorate" label="Vilna Governorate"/>
<link wikidata="Q34266" start="696" end="710" title="Russian Empire" label="Russian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q462964" start="723" end="740" title="November Uprising" label="November Uprising"/>
<link wikidata="Q9173440" start="763" end="781" title="Battle of Paneriai" label="Battle of Paneriai"/>
<link wikidata="Q571323" start="834" end="853" title="Dezydery Chłapowski" label="Dezydery Chłapowski"/>
<link wikidata="Q4134984" start="858" end="872" title="Antoni Gielgud" label="Antoni Giełgud"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="973" end="984" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q122371" start="1009" end="1032" title="Treaty of Brest-Litovsk" label="Treaty of Brest-Litovsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q37" start="1092" end="1101" title="Lithuania" label="Lithuania"/>
<link wikidata="Q1604816" start="1225" end="1249" title="Lithuanian–Bolshevik War" label="Lithuanian–Bolshevik War"/>
<link wikidata="Q186284" start="1251" end="1271" title="Polish-Bolshevik War" label="Polish-Bolshevik War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1495944" start="1281" end="1302" title="Polish-Lithuanian War" label="Polish-Lithuanian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q150812" start="1360" end="1378" title="invasion of Poland" label="invasion of Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="1412" end="1424" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q37" start="1444" end="1453" title="Lithuania" label="Lithuania"/>
<link wikidata="Q2005090" start="1544" end="1580" title="Ponary massacre" label="Paneriai became the mass murder site"/>
<link wikidata="Q7325" start="1605" end="1609" title="Jews" label="Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q153559" start="1726" end="1728" title="Sicherheitsdienst" label="SD"/>
<link wikidata="Q44687" start="1733" end="1735" title="SS" label="SS"/>
<link wikidata="Q156744" start="1768" end="1785" title="Collaborationism" label="collaborationists"/>
<link wikidata="Q2619096" start="1786" end="1822" title="Ypatingasis būrys" label="Special SD and Security Police Squad"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="464702" wikidata="Q1289015" url="?curid=464702" title="Stephen I, Ban of Bosnia">
<text>Stephen I Kotromanić () (1242–1314) was a Bosnian Ban from 1287 to 1290 jointly with Ban Prijezda II and 1290–1314 alone as a vassal of the Kingdom of Hungary.

==Origin==
His ancestry is not known precisely. It is believed that he was the son of a German nobleman &quot;Gotfrid&quot;, founder of the family he belonged to &quot;Kelad&quot; went to strengthen the Hungarian hold in Bosnia in 1162 or 1163. This German nobleman co-signed the edicts for Bosnia in the Split Church in 1163 with the Hungarian King Stephen IV. Apparently, the Hungarian King Stephen III invited him to place him as a regional ruler in Hungary&#x27;s name because of his ancestor&#x27;s successes. Kotroman ruled as a vassal of this King. Mauro Orbini claimed in his work The Kingdom of Slavs that the Ragusan document refers to him as &quot; Cotrumano Goto&quot;, i.e. &quot;Kotroman the German&quot; but it&#x27;s unclear from where did Orbini make this reference. It has also been speculated that Kotroman might have been a son of Bosnian Ban Prijezda I.

==Biography==
===Before Banate===
Since 1287, when his father, Ban Prijezda I withdrew from power, Kotroman ruled jointly as Ban of Bosnia with another son of Prijezda I, Prijezda II. Kotroman separated the country with Prijezda II, and took eastern Bosnia. After the death of Prijezda II, Kotroman became the sole Ban of Bosnia in 1290.

===Marriage===
In 1284 he married Elizabeth of Serbia, daughter of the King of Syrmia, Stefan Dragutin of the House of Nemanjić, and Queen Catherine, daughter of Hungarian King Stephen V and Elizabeth the Cuman. Dragutin had already controlled two banates in Bosnia: Usora and Soli and Kotroman immediately fell under his influence – many of his acts were at Dragutin&#x27;s command. The marriage was political and arranged by Ban Prijezda II who had attempted to forge an alliance with Stefan Dragutin.

===Hungarian War of Succession===
In 1290 Hungarian King Ladislaus IV died leaving no heirs to the throne. The cousin of Ladislaus IV, Andrew III, was crowned King, despite the desire of the sister of the former King Ladislaus IV, Mary of Hungary, Queen of Naples, who wanted her son, Charles Martel as the new King in Hungary. The latter party had much more support, so Pope Nicholas IV had crowned Charles Martel as King of Hungary. This movement was supported by the most powerful Croatian nobility, the Šubićs, Princes of Bribir. As the current head of the family, Paul Šubić was also son-in-law of King Stefan Dragutin, family connections made Kotroman support Charles Martel&#x27;s crowning. To increase his influence in Kotroman&#x27;s realm, Charles Martel issued numerous edicts to split the land among the lesser gentry to gain support for his reign. It appears that he gave the reign over Bosnia to the Šubićs. Charles Martel died unexpectedly in 1295, before the campaign to seize the power in Hungary was finished. The Queen of Naples and sister of former King Ladislaus IV, Mary, had then decided to put her grandson, son of Charles Martel, Charles Robert as the future King of Hungary. Pope Boniface VIII declared the twelve-year-old boy as King Charles I of Hungary in 1297. Paul Šubić of Croatia declared himself as &quot;Dominus of Bosnia&quot; in 1299 and gave the title of Bosnian Ban to his brother, Mladen I Šubić. All of Kotroman&#x27;s land except for the &quot;Donji Kraji&quot; (), which was ruled by Prince Hrvatin Stjepanić as a vassal of the Šubićs, was held by the House of Šubić; as was confirmed by Charles I Robert. Paul Šubić wanted to bring King Charles Robert to Split across Croatia to Zagreb, which would become the main station of his campaign against King Andrew III of Hungary. During the preparations for war, Andrew III died unexpectedly. Charles Robert assessed the Hungarian throne, but had to fight numerous opponents to his regime up to 1309.

===Internal wars===
Stephen Kotroman had resisted the growth of the Šubićs&#x27; power in Bosnia, but had lost by 1302 most control over the land to Mladen I Šubić. Although, Kotroman was not defeated as he still had some influence and power in Bosnia. His father-in-law King Stefan Dragutin could not send him aid since a succession-war had erupted in the Serbian Kingdom between him and his brother, the powerful King Stefan Milutin. Additionally, during the problems over the Hungarian crown, Dragutin had attempted to insert his son Vladislav as the new King of Hungary.

Despite the many difficulties, Stephen Kotroman had held out. The war turned into religious conflict, as Mladen I Šubić had started a campaign to exterminate the adherents of the Bosnian Church – the kristjani. This balanced the conflict in Kotroman&#x27;s favour, as number of kristjani had joined his side because of this. After his death Paul Šubić in 1305 proclaimed himself &quot;lord of All Bosnia&quot;.

===End of reign===
Paul&#x27;s reign did not last long as he died in 1312. The disappointed Ban Stephen Kotroman died in 1314, before he managed to act.

==Issue==
Stephen and Elisabeth had six children:
* Vladislaus
* Ninoslaus
* Stephen
* Son 
* Catherine, who married Prince Nicholas of Zahumlje in 1338
* Mary

Stephen II was to succeed Kotroman as Bosnian Ban; but had to flee to the Republic of Ragusa to hide from the Šubićs with his brothers and their mother, Elizabeth.

==References==
==Sources==
* 
* 
* 
==External links==
*Stjepan I Kotroman Ban of Bosnia 1242 - 1316 - The Douglas Archives (in English)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1289015" start="0" end="20" title="Stephen I, Ban of Bosnia" label="Stephen I Kotromanić"/>
<link wikidata="Q277789" start="42" end="53" title="List of rulers of Bosnia" label="Bosnian Ban"/>
<link wikidata="Q1280447" start="85" end="100" title="Ban Prijezda II" label="Ban Prijezda II"/>
<link wikidata="Q223266" start="126" end="132" title="vassal" label="vassal"/>
<link wikidata="Q171150" start="140" end="158" title="Kingdom of Hungary" label="Kingdom of Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q1284645" start="441" end="446" title="edict" label="edict"/>
<link wikidata="Q188736" start="452" end="458" title="Bosnia (region)" label="Bosnia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1663" start="466" end="471" title="Split (city)" label="Split"/>
<link wikidata="Q16970" start="472" end="478" title="Church (building)" label="Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q208083" start="496" end="510" title="List of Hungarian rulers" label="Hungarian King"/>
<link wikidata="Q86946" start="511" end="521" title="Stephen IV of Hungary" label="Stephen IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q208083" start="539" end="553" title="List of Hungarian rulers" label="Hungarian King"/>
<link wikidata="Q87051" start="554" end="565" title="Stephen III of Hungary" label="Stephen III"/>
<link wikidata="Q116" start="711" end="715" title="Monarch" label="King"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="831" end="835" title="Goths#Symbolic legacy" label="Goto"/>
<link wikidata="Q277789" start="1012" end="1023" title="List of rulers of Bosnia" label="Bosnian Ban"/>
<link wikidata="Q1288937" start="1024" end="1034" title="Prijezda I" label="Prijezda I"/>
<link wikidata="Q577017" start="1100" end="1103" title="Ban (title)" label="Ban"/>
<link wikidata="Q1288937" start="1104" end="1114" title="Prijezda I" label="Prijezda I"/>
<link wikidata="Q188736" start="1169" end="1175" title="Bosnia (region)" label="Bosnia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1280447" start="1208" end="1219" title="Prijezda II" label="Prijezda II"/>
<link wikidata="Q188736" start="1287" end="1293" title="Bosnia (region)" label="Bosnia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3627069" start="1359" end="1365" title="Banate of Bosnia" label="Bosnia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3917684" start="1410" end="1429" title="Elizabeth of Serbia" label="Elizabeth of Serbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1309492" start="1455" end="1461" title="Syrmia" label="Syrmia"/>
<link wikidata="Q290786" start="1463" end="1478" title="Stefan Dragutin" label="Stefan Dragutin"/>
<link wikidata="Q746782" start="1486" end="1503" title="Nemanjić" label="House of Nemanjić"/>
<link wikidata="Q208083" start="1538" end="1552" title="List of Hungarian rulers" label="Hungarian King"/>
<link wikidata="Q158038" start="1553" end="1562" title="Stephen V of Hungary" label="Stephen V"/>
<link wikidata="Q265467" start="1567" end="1586" title="Elizabeth the Cuman" label="Elizabeth the Cuman"/>
<link wikidata="Q295985" start="1643" end="1648" title="Usora (region)" label="Usora"/>
<link wikidata="Q7557747" start="1653" end="1657" title="Soli (region)" label="Soli"/>
<link wikidata="Q1280447" start="1807" end="1818" title="Prijezda II" label="Prijezda II"/>
<link wikidata="Q290786" start="1863" end="1878" title="Stefan Dragutin" label="Stefan Dragutin"/>
<link wikidata="Q208083" start="1923" end="1937" title="List of Hungarian rulers" label="Hungarian King"/>
<link wikidata="Q156147" start="1938" end="1950" title="Ladislaus IV of Hungary" label="Ladislaus IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q189233" start="1980" end="1986" title="throne" label="throne"/>
<link wikidata="Q298056" start="2016" end="2026" title="Andrew III of Hungary" label="Andrew III"/>
<link wikidata="Q116" start="2040" end="2044" title="Monarch" label="King"/>
<link wikidata="Q156147" start="2098" end="2110" title="Ladislaus IV of Hungary" label="Ladislaus IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q614258" start="2112" end="2144" title="Mary of Hungary, Queen of Naples" label="Mary of Hungary, Queen of Naples"/>
<link wikidata="Q359237" start="2166" end="2180" title="Charles Martel of Anjou" label="Charles Martel"/>
<link wikidata="Q103625" start="2252" end="2268" title="Pope Nicholas IV" label="Pope Nicholas IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q224" start="2365" end="2372" title="Croatia" label="Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q378793" start="2388" end="2393" title="Šubić" label="Šubić"/>
<link wikidata="Q2747456" start="2396" end="2402" title="Prince" label="Prince"/>
<link wikidata="Q913358" start="2407" end="2413" title="Bribir (Dalmatia)" label="Bribir"/>
<link wikidata="Q1291568" start="2450" end="2460" title="Pavao Šubić Bribirski" label="Paul Šubić"/>
<link wikidata="Q290786" start="2489" end="2504" title="Stefan Dragutin" label="Stefan Dragutin"/>
<link wikidata="Q844586" start="2704" end="2710" title="gentry" label="gentry"/>
<link wikidata="Q188736" start="2781" end="2787" title="Bosnia (region)" label="Bosnia"/>
<link wikidata="Q28" start="2887" end="2894" title="Hungary" label="Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q213061" start="3036" end="3050" title="Charles I of Hungary" label="Charles Robert"/>
<link wikidata="Q134646" start="3082" end="3100" title="Pope Boniface VIII" label="Pope Boniface VIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q213061" start="3142" end="3162" title="Charles I of Hungary" label="Charles I of Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q1291568" start="3172" end="3182" title="Pavao Šubić Bribirski" label="Paul Šubić"/>
<link wikidata="Q224" start="3186" end="3193" title="Croatia" label="Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1283380" start="3220" end="3227" title="Dominus (title)" label="Dominus"/>
<link wikidata="Q188736" start="3231" end="3237" title="Bosnia (region)" label="Bosnia"/>
<link wikidata="Q277789" start="3274" end="3285" title="list of rulers of Bosnia" label="Bosnian Ban"/>
<link wikidata="Q2716495" start="3302" end="3316" title="Mladen Šubić Bribirski" label="Mladen I Šubić"/>
<link wikidata="Q5296194" start="3367" end="3378" title="Donji Kraji" label="Donji Kraji"/>
<link wikidata="Q2747456" start="3408" end="3414" title="Prince" label="Prince"/>
<link wikidata="Q25936290" start="3415" end="3432" title="Hrvatin Stjepanić" label="Hrvatin Stjepanić"/>
<link wikidata="Q116" start="3557" end="3561" title="Monarch" label="King"/>
<link wikidata="Q1663" start="3580" end="3585" title="Split (city)" label="Split"/>
<link wikidata="Q224" start="3593" end="3600" title="Croatia" label="Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1435" start="3604" end="3610" title="Zagreb" label="Zagreb"/>
<link wikidata="Q213061" start="3763" end="3777" title="Charles I of Hungary" label="Charles Robert"/>
<link wikidata="Q2716495" start="4021" end="4035" title="Mladen Šubić Bribirski" label="Mladen I Šubić"/>
<link wikidata="Q290786" start="4148" end="4163" title="Stefan Dragutin" label="Stefan Dragutin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2415003" start="4229" end="4244" title="Kingdom of Serbia (medieval)" label="Serbian Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q615450" start="4287" end="4291" title="List of Serbian monarchs" label="King"/>
<link wikidata="Q319597" start="4292" end="4306" title="Stefan Milutin" label="Stefan Milutin"/>
<link wikidata="Q208083" start="4430" end="4445" title="List of Hungarian rulers" label="King of Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q831663" start="4582" end="4590" title="Military campaign" label="campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q894479" start="4627" end="4641" title="Bosnian Church" label="Bosnian Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q577017" start="4952" end="4955" title="Ban (title)" label="Ban"/>
<link wikidata="Q2750878" start="5066" end="5076" title="Vladislaus of Bosnia" label="Vladislaus"/>
<link wikidata="Q965795" start="5091" end="5098" title="Stephen II Kotromanić" label="Stephen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2747456" start="5131" end="5137" title="Prince" label="Prince"/>
<link wikidata="Q1311704" start="5150" end="5158" title="Zahumlje" label="Zahumlje"/>
<link wikidata="Q277789" start="5213" end="5224" title="List of rulers of Bosnia" label="Bosnian Ban"/>
<link wikidata="Q208169" start="5249" end="5267" title="Republic of Ragusa" label="Republic of Ragusa"/>
<link wikidata="Q378793" start="5285" end="5290" title="Šubić" label="Šubić"/>
<link wikidata="Q3917684" start="5328" end="5337" title="Elizabeth of Serbia" label="Elizabeth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860" start="5468" end="5475" title="English language" label="English"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="464704" wikidata="Q7627113" url="?curid=464704" title="Stuart Spencer (political consultant)">
<text>Stuart Krieg Spencer (né Murphy; February 20, 1927 – January 12, 2025) was an American political consultant. As co-founder of Spencer-Roberts, he and his firm have managed over 400 Republican political campaigns.

==Life and career==
Stuart Murphy was born in Phoenix, Arizona, on February 20, 1927. His father abandoned the family, and Stuart&#x27;s surname was changed to Spencer after his mother re-married, to California dentist A. Kenneth Spencer. Spencer grew up in Alhambra, California, where he took after his adoptive father&#x27;s involvement in Republican politics. He served in the United States Navy from 1945 to 1946, and then graduated from the East Los Angeles Junior College with an Associate of Arts, and from California State University, Los Angeles, with a Bachelor of Arts in sociology in 1951.

==Career==
Spencer-Roberts &amp; Associates, Inc., was established in California in 1960 with Bill Roberts. They were among the first professional campaign managers. In 1962, he managed Tom Kuchel&#x27;s campaign for United States Senate in California. After that, he managed Nelson Rockefeller&#x27;s presidential campaign of 1964, and Don Riegle&#x27;s run for Congress, Michigan, in 1966.

He ran Ronald Reagan&#x27;s gubernatorial campaign in California in 1966. That year, Reagan told Spencer that &quot;Politics is just like show business. You have a hell of an opening, coast for a while, and then have a hell of a close.&quot; He also ran Reagan&#x27;s gubernatorial campaign in 1970, and his presidential campaigns in 1980 and 1984.

Stuart Spencer became the sole owner of Spencer-Roberts in 1974. In 1976 he served as Deputy Chairman for Political Organization in Gerald Ford&#x27;s presidential re-election campaign. When he served as Reagan&#x27;s campaign manager in 1980, he suggested that he choose George H. W. Bush as his running mate, but later recounted that Reagan was not keen on the idea, apparently because Reagan did not like Bush.

In 1985, his firm allegedly received over $350,000 to run the Panamanian presidential campaign of Eric Delvalle, and in 1988 he was assigned to improve Dan Quayle&#x27;s image.

Spencer&#x27;s daughter, Karen, joined Spencer-Roberts in 1989 and expanded the firm&#x27;s roles into public policy, avocation, and political strategic planning. She registered as a California state lobbyist and as a federal lobbyist in Washington, DC.

Spencer voted Democratic for president only twice in his life: in the 1948 election, he supported Harry S. Truman, as he felt he &quot;owed him one&quot; due to Truman&#x27;s decision to drop atomic bombs over Hiroshima and Nagasaki, which prevented him from having to fight in Japan during his Navy service. His second Democratic vote was for Joe Biden in the 2020 election, as he refused to support Donald Trump, whom he labeled a &quot;demagogue and an opportunist&quot;; in 2016, he had voted for Gary Johnson of the Libertarian Party.

==Personal life and death==
Spencer was first married to Joan Dikeman, with whom he had two children before divorcing; he later married Barbara Callihan in 1992.

Spencer died at his home in Palm Desert, California, on January 12, 2025, at the age of 97.

==References==
==External links==
* 
* Los Angeles Times profile of Stuart Spencer and his role in the 2020 elections.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7627113" start="0" end="20" title="Stuart Spencer (political consultant)" label="Stuart Krieg Spencer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7627113" start="25" end="31" title="Stuart Spencer (political consultant)" label="Murphy"/>
<link wikidata="Q29468" start="181" end="191" title="United States Republican Party" label="Republican"/>
<link wikidata="Q16556" start="260" end="276" title="Phoenix, Arizona" label="Phoenix, Arizona"/>
<link wikidata="Q752681" start="472" end="492" title="Alhambra, California" label="Alhambra, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q29468" start="556" end="566" title="Republican Party (United States)" label="Republican"/>
<link wikidata="Q11220" start="594" end="612" title="United States Navy" label="United States Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q14625016" start="700" end="717" title="Associate of Arts" label="Associate of Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026932" start="728" end="768" title="California State University, Los Angeles" label="California State University, Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1765120" start="777" end="793" title="Bachelor of Arts" label="Bachelor of Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q96362539" start="986" end="990" title="1962 United States Senate election in California" label="1962"/>
<link wikidata="Q344538" start="1003" end="1013" title="Tom Kuchel" label="Tom Kuchel"/>
<link wikidata="Q11237" start="1093" end="1111" title="Nelson Rockefeller" label="Nelson Rockefeller"/>
<link wikidata="Q7314677" start="1144" end="1148" title="1964 Republican Party presidential primaries" label="1964"/>
<link wikidata="Q1240457" start="1154" end="1164" title="Don Riegle" label="Don Riegle"/>
<link wikidata="Q11268" start="1180" end="1188" title="United States Congress" label="Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q9960" start="1217" end="1230" title="Ronald Reagan" label="Ronald Reagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5021251" start="1278" end="1282" title="1966 California gubernatorial election" label="1966"/>
<link wikidata="Q5021252" start="1504" end="1508" title="1970 California gubernatorial election" label="1970"/>
<link wikidata="Q699716" start="1544" end="1548" title="1980 United States presidential election" label="1980"/>
<link wikidata="Q699744" start="1553" end="1557" title="1984 United States presidential election" label="1984"/>
<link wikidata="Q699693" start="1628" end="1632" title="1976 United States presidential election" label="1976"/>
<link wikidata="Q9582" start="1692" end="1703" title="Gerald Ford" label="Gerald Ford"/>
<link wikidata="Q125689846" start="1711" end="1744" title="Gerald Ford 1976 presidential campaign" label="presidential re-election campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q7365209" start="1778" end="1802" title="Ronald Reagan 1980 presidential campaign" label="campaign manager in 1980"/>
<link wikidata="Q23505" start="1832" end="1849" title="George H. W. Bush" label="George H. W. Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q739390" start="2073" end="2086" title="Eric Delvalle" label="Eric Delvalle"/>
<link wikidata="Q49214" start="2127" end="2137" title="Dan Quayle" label="Dan Quayle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1267055" start="2271" end="2280" title="avocation" label="avocation"/>
<link wikidata="Q568973" start="2478" end="2491" title="1948 United States presidential election" label="1948 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q11613" start="2506" end="2521" title="Harry S. Truman" label="Harry S. Truman"/>
<link wikidata="Q488" start="2595" end="2640" title="Atomic bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki" label="drop atomic bombs over Hiroshima and Nagasaki"/>
<link wikidata="Q6279" start="2752" end="2761" title="Joe Biden" label="Joe Biden"/>
<link wikidata="Q22923830" start="2769" end="2782" title="2020 United States presidential election" label="2020 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q22686" start="2809" end="2821" title="Donald Trump" label="Donald Trump"/>
<link wikidata="Q699872" start="2886" end="2890" title="2016 United States presidential election" label="2016"/>
<link wikidata="Q352123" start="2909" end="2921" title="Gary Johnson" label="Gary Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q558334" start="2929" end="2946" title="Libertarian Party (United States)" label="Libertarian Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q399976" start="3140" end="3163" title="Palm Desert, California" label="Palm Desert, California"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="464708" wikidata="Q262389" url="?curid=464708" title="Alberta Watson">
<text>Faith Susan Alberta Watson (March 6, 1955 – March 21, 2015), better known as Alberta Watson, was a Canadian film and television actress.

==Early life==
Watson was born in Toronto, Ontario, in 1955. She grew up in Toronto with her mother Grace, a factory worker, and her brother. She began performing with a local Toronto theatre group, T.H.O.G. (Theatre House of God), of the Bathurst Street United Church, at age 15.

Watson took a workshop for the &quot;Hair&quot; musical. While at the workshop she acted in &quot;Hamlet&quot;, which was directed by René Bonnière, who later directed her in &quot;La Femme Nikita&quot;.

==Acting career==
Watson got her first role at age 19 in a CBC movie called &quot;Honor Thy Father&quot;. Early in her career she portrayed the role of Mitzi in George Kaczender&#x27;s &quot;In Praise of Older Women&quot; (1978), for which she received a Genie nomination. A year later she received the Best Actress award at the Yorkton Film Festival for &quot;Exposure&quot;. She moved to Los Angeles, California, and later to New York City.

Watson lived in New Jersey for eight years with her husband until they divorced. She then returned to Toronto and focused on finding roles in independent films. She worked with director Colleen Murphy on the film &quot;Shoemaker&quot; (1996), for which she received a second Genie nomination for Best Actress.

Among her well-known film roles are the bed-ridden mother Susan Aibelli in the 1994 American independent film &quot;Spanking the Monkey&quot;, Lauren Murphy (the mother of Jonny Lee Miller&#x27;s character Dade, also called &quot;Crash Override&quot;/&quot;Zero Cool&quot;) in the 1995 cult film &quot;Hackers&quot;, and Risa in the 1997 Academy Award-nominated Canadian film &quot;The Sweet Hereafter&quot;, directed by Atom Egoyan.

In &quot;Spanking the Monkey&quot;, Watson plays her favourite character, a mother who has an incestuous relationship with her son. The role was turned down by several actresses such as Susan Sarandon, Jessica Lange and others. Watson said:

She played the role of Madeline in &quot;La Femme Nikita&quot; for four seasons from 1997 to 2001 (with guest appearances in the short fifth season). During the show&#x27;s second season (in 1998), Watson was diagnosed with lymphoma, for which she had to undergo chemotherapy treatment which caused her to lose her hair. Producers at &quot;La Femme Nikita&quot; worked around her treatment and limited her appearances. Watson wore wigs in the show when she lost her hair. When her hair started to regrow, she sported the short haircut in her role as Madeline in the show&#x27;s third season.

Watson&#x27;s first name inspired the character Alberta Green in the first season of &quot;24&quot;. In 2005, Watson joined the cast of &quot;24&quot;, playing CTU Director Erin Driscoll for 12 episodes of the show&#x27;s fourth season.

During 2007 and 2008, Watson played a supporting role in the Canadian television series &quot;The Border&quot; as the Minister of Public Safety.

In 2010, Watson guest-starred in &quot;Heartland&quot;, a series on CBC Television, and she won a 2011 Gemini Award for her portrayal of Sarah Craven.

In a nod to her &quot;La Femme Nikita&quot; role, Alberta played a recurring character Madeline Pierce in &quot;Nikita&quot;, the CW&#x27;s 2010–2013 reboot of the film and TV series.

==Death==
Watson died on March 21, 2015, due to complications from cancer at Kensington Hospice in Toronto fifteen days after her 60th birthday.

==Filmography==

===Film===
===Television===
==Bibliography==
* Heyn, Christopher. &quot;A Conversation with Alberta Watson&quot;. &quot;Inside Section One: Creating and Producing TV&#x27;s La Femme Nikita&quot;. Introduction by Peta Wilson. Los Angeles: Persistence of Vision Press, 2006. pp. 88–93. . In-depth conversation with Alberta Watson about her role as Madeline on &quot;La Femme Nikita&quot;, as well as her more recent acting experiences.

==References==
==External links==
*An Alberta Watson interview
*Alberta&#x27;s fan site(Wayback version)
*Alberta Watson; Aveleyman</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q262389" start="0" end="26" title="Alberta Watson" label="Faith Susan Alberta Watson"/>
<link wikidata="Q262389" start="77" end="91" title="Alberta Watson" label="Alberta Watson"/>
<link wikidata="Q172" start="172" end="188" title="Toronto" label="Toronto, Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165499" start="451" end="475" title="Hair (musical)" label="&amp;quot;Hair&amp;quot; musical"/>
<link wikidata="Q1449299" start="554" end="567" title="René Bonnière" label="René Bonnière"/>
<link wikidata="Q1869406" start="601" end="616" title="La Femme Nikita (TV series)" label="La Femme Nikita"/>
<link wikidata="Q3101686" start="786" end="802" title="George Kaczender" label="George Kaczender"/>
<link wikidata="Q6010467" start="816" end="840" title="In Praise of Older Women (1978 film)" label="In Praise of Older Women"/>
<link wikidata="Q1502249" start="880" end="896" title="Genie Award" label="Genie nomination"/>
<link wikidata="Q17059525" start="954" end="975" title="Yorkton Short Film and Video Festival" label="Yorkton Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q65" start="1015" end="1038" title="Los Angeles, California" label="Los Angeles, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="1053" end="1066" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q1408" start="1085" end="1095" title="New Jersey" label="New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q16186390" start="1255" end="1269" title="Colleen Murphy (filmmaker)" label="Colleen Murphy"/>
<link wikidata="Q14949729" start="1288" end="1297" title="Shoemaker (film)" label="Shoemaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q2810905" start="1365" end="1377" title="18th Genie Awards" label="Best Actress"/>
<link wikidata="Q1757776" start="1496" end="1515" title="Spanking the Monkey" label="Spanking the Monkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q7516" start="1552" end="1568" title="Jonny Lee Miller" label="Jonny Lee Miller"/>
<link wikidata="Q13908" start="1682" end="1689" title="Hackers (film)" label="Hackers"/>
<link wikidata="Q19020" start="1718" end="1731" title="Academy Award" label="Academy Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q135315" start="1762" end="1781" title="The Sweet Hereafter (film)" label="The Sweet Hereafter"/>
<link wikidata="Q212167" start="1801" end="1812" title="Atom Egoyan" label="Atom Egoyan"/>
<link wikidata="Q133050" start="2001" end="2015" title="Susan Sarandon" label="Susan Sarandon"/>
<link wikidata="Q173585" start="2017" end="2030" title="Jessica Lange" label="Jessica Lange"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2080" end="2088" title="La Femme Nikita (TV series)#Madeline (Alberta Watson)" label="Madeline"/>
<link wikidata="Q1869406" start="2098" end="2113" title="La Femme Nikita (TV series)" label="La Femme Nikita"/>
<link wikidata="Q208414" start="2281" end="2289" title="lymphoma" label="lymphoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q974135" start="2320" end="2332" title="chemotherapy" label="chemotherapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q56194" start="2741" end="2743" title="24 (TV series)" label="24"/>
<link wikidata="Q2891256" start="2823" end="2836" title="Erin Driscoll" label="Erin Driscoll"/>
<link wikidata="Q613076" start="2982" end="2992" title="The Border (TV series)" label="The Border"/>
<link wikidata="Q521858" start="3073" end="3082" title="Heartland (Canadian TV series)" label="Heartland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1869406" start="3208" end="3223" title="La Femme Nikita (TV series)" label="La Femme Nikita"/>
<link wikidata="Q390405" start="3298" end="3304" title="Nikita (TV series)" label="Nikita"/>
<link wikidata="Q1869406" start="3898" end="3913" title="La Femme Nikita (TV series)" label="La Femme Nikita"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="464712" wikidata="Q2268798" url="?curid=464712" title="Voyage of the Zeno brothers">
<text>The Zeno brothers, Nicolò (c. 1326 – c. 1402) and Antonio (died c. 1403), were Italian noblemen from the Republic of Venice who lived during the 14th century. They came to prominence in 1558, when their descendant, Nicolò Zeno the Younger, published a map and a series of letters purporting to describe an exploration made by the brothers of the north Atlantic and Arctic waters in the 1390s. The younger Nicolò claimed the documents were discovered in a storeroom of his family home.

Widely accepted at the time of publication, the map was incorporated into the works of leading cartographers, including Gerardus Mercator. Modern historians and geographers have disputed the veracity of the map and the described voyages, with some accusing the younger Zeno of forgery.

Nicolò and Antonio were brothers of the Venetian naval hero Carlo Zeno. The Zeno family was an established part of the aristocracy of Venice and held the franchise for transportation between Venice and the Holy Land during the Crusades. According to the younger Zeno, the map and letters date from around the year 1400 and describe a long voyage made by the Zeno brothers in the 1390s under the direction of a prince named Zichmni. Supporters of a legend involving the contemporaneous Scottish nobleman Henry Sinclair, Earl of Orkney suggest that &quot;Zichmni&quot; is a mistranscription of &quot;d’Orkney&quot;. The voyage supposedly traversed the North Atlantic and, according to some interpretations, reached North America nearly a century before the voyages of Christopher Columbus.

==Alleged voyage==
Nicolò and Antonio are notable for a number of letters and a map (the so-called &quot;Zeno map&quot;) published in the year 1558 by one of their descendants, also named Nicolò Zeno. This descendant was a historian who has published other works on the history of Venice. The letters, allegedly written by the brothers around 1400, describe a voyage of exploration that they say they undertook throughout the North Atlantic (and, by some interpretations, to North America) under the command of a prince named Zichmni (whom some have identified as Henry Sinclair). Some commentators have suggested that a descendant, William Sinclair (c. 1404 – c. 1484), the builder of Rosslyn Chapel, had knowledge of Henry Sinclair&#x27;s involvement with the Zeno brothers and had decorated the interior of the chapel with carvings of plants discovered during the voyage. This claim of &quot;proof&quot; that the voyage took place has been discredited.

The letters and accompanying map are controversial and are regarded by at least one historian as a hoax, perpetrated either by the Zeno brothers themselves or by their descendant who wrote a narrative which he said was based on what was left of letters that he had torn up as a boy. In 1989, Italian scholar Giorgio Padoan published a study, suggesting that there is some authenticity in their travels and that Nicolò is not to be found in any document between the years 1396–1400 (so he could have been at least in Iceland). Padoan studied the &quot;detailed descriptions that could have not been borrowed by others&quot;, as geographer Von Humboldt stated, in the book written by the younger Nicolò about his father. 

==The letters==
The letters are divided into two parts. The first set contains letters from Nicolò to Antonio. The second consists of letters from Antonio to their brother Carlo.

The first letters (from Nicolò to Antonio) tell how Nicolò set off in 1380 on a voyage from Venice to England and Flanders. Evidence exists that such a voyage took place, and that Nicolò returned to Venice around 1385.

In the letters, Nicolò describes being stranded on an island between Great Britain and Iceland called Frislanda, which is described as being larger in size than Ireland. By chance Nicolò is rescued by Zichmni, who is described as a prince who owned some islands called Porlanda off the southern coast of Frislanda, and who ruled the duchy of Sorant, or Sorand, southeast of Frislanda. It has been suggested that Frislanda is in fact a stand-in for the Faroe Islands, with individual islands mistakenly merged into a single landmass by Nicolò the younger, although Frisland and the Faroe Islands appear together on several maps, many hundreds of miles apart.

Nicolò invites Antonio to come to Frislanda with him, which he does, staying for fourteen years. Under Zichmni&#x27;s direction, Antonio attacks &quot;Estlanda&quot; (ostensibly the Shetland Islands or a neighbouring island, as indicated by similarities between placenames mentioned in the letters). Zichmni then attempts to attack &quot;Islanda&quot; (Likely Shetland conflated with the name of Iceland). After finding it too well-defended, he attacks seven islands along its eastern side: Bres, Talas, Broas, Iscant, Trans, Mimant, and Damberc. All of these islands are fictitious. An alternative interpretation finds that in transcribing the letters the Zeno brothers&#x27; descendant mistook a reference to &quot;Estlanda&quot; for &quot;Islanda&quot; or Iceland, thus accounting for both the presence of those superfluous islands off Iceland and the mysterious absence of an equal number of islands off of the Shetland Islands. Further evidence in support of this claim is the similarity of placenames in the Zenos&#x27; &quot;Islanda&quot; to placenames in modern‐day Shetland, for instance the island of Bressay for &quot;Bres&quot;, and Danaberg sound near Lerwick for &quot;Damberc&quot;.

Zichmni then builds a fort on Bres and leaves Nicolò in charge of it. Nicolò makes a voyage to Greenland and finds a monastery with central heating. According to the alternative interpretation cited above, in which the travellers had yet to leave Estlanda, the subsequent destination is in fact Iceland, explaining the presence of geothermal heating and other observations.

Zichmni receives word that a group of lost fishermen from Frislanda have returned after an absence of over twenty-five years. The fishermen describe making landfall in the far west in unknown countries called Estotiland and Drogeo. They claim to have encountered strange animals as well as cannibals, from whom they escaped only after teaching the cannibals how to fish. Inspired by the tales of the fishermen, Zichmni undertakes a voyage to the west with Antonio in charge of his fleet. To the west of Frislanda (see the Zeno map), they encounter a large island called Icaria, which does not exist.

According to the letters, the inhabitants of Icaria greet them before they can make landfall. Only one person among the Icarians is able to speak a language that Zichmni understands. The inhabitants state that visitors to the island are not welcome and that they will defend the island to the last man if need be. Zichmni sails along the island looking for a place to make landfall, but the inhabitants chase him and Zichmni abandons the effort.

Sailing west, they make landfall at a promontory called Trin on the southern tip of &quot;Engrouelanda&quot;. Zichmni likes the climate and the soil, but his crew find it inhospitable. The sailors return home with Antonio, while Zichmni stays on to explore the area and build a town.

==The map==
===Phantom islands===
====Estotiland====
&quot;Estotiland&quot; appears on the Zeno map ostensibly on the western side of the Atlantic Ocean, in the approximate location of what is now known to be Labrador, on the northeast coast of North America. Estotiland is listed along with Eden and Arcadia under the heading &quot;utopia, paradise, heaven, heaven on earth&quot; in &quot;Roget&#x27;s International Thesaurus&quot;. It is one of the sources for the Russian &quot;Estoty&quot;, featured in Vladimir Nabokov&#x27;s &quot;Ada&quot;.

====Frisland====

&quot;Frisland&quot; appeared on virtually all maps of the North Atlantic from the 1560s to the 1660s. It is not to be confused with the similarly named Friesland in the Netherlands, nor the two Frieslands (East and North) in Germany. The placename originally referred to Iceland (&quot;Freezeland&quot;), but after the Zeno map placed it as an entirely separate island south (or occasionally southwest) of Iceland, it appeared that way on maps for the next 100 years.

===Other islands===
&quot;Islanda&quot; is clearly Iceland. &quot;Estland&quot; is presumed to be Shetland, with various placenames recognisable as belonging to that island group. It has been tentatively suggested that &quot;Podalida&quot; is a corruption of Pomona, a historical name for Mainland, Orkney. &quot;Icaria&quot;, or &quot;Caria&quot; if the initial &quot;I&quot; means &quot;Island&quot;, has been suggested as a misplaced Kerry or Kilda, but may simply be an invention of the mapmaker. &quot;Neome&quot; has been identified as Fair Isle or Foula.

==Controversy and criticism==
The account of the voyages given by the younger Nicolò continues to attract debate. Some of the islands the Zeno brothers allegedly visited either conflate existing locations or do not exist at all. Research has shown that the Zeno brothers were occupied elsewhere when they were supposedly doing their exploring. Contemporary Venetian court documents place Nicolò as undergoing trial for embezzlement in 1394 for his actions as military governor of Modone and Corone in Greece from 1390–1392. He wrote his last will and testament in Venice in 1400, many years after his alleged death in Frislanda around 1394. There is disagreement about the brothers&#x27; whereabouts at the time of the supposed voyages, with some readings of archival records placing the brothers in Venice at that time. Andrea di Robilant, who wrote a book on the purported voyage, suggests this interpretation is in error.

According to &quot;The Dictionary of Canadian Biography Online&quot;, &quot;the Zeno affair remains one of the most preposterous and at the same time one of the most successful fabrications in the history of exploration.&quot; Herbert Wrigley Wilson described and analysed the story at length in &quot;The Royal Navy, a History from the Earliest Times to the Present&quot;, and was sceptical about its veracity, noting &quot;At the date when the work was published Venice was extremely eager to claim for herself some share in the credit of Columbus&#x27;s discoveries as against her old rival Genoa, from whom Columbus had sprung.&quot; Di Robilant disagrees, stating that the younger Nicolò was &quot;a first-class muddler, not a fablemonger&quot;, whose inaccuracy was the result of second-hand retelling that still contains much of the truth of his forebears&#x27; voyages.

===Modern views===
Most historians regard the map and accompanying narrative as a hoax, perpetrated by the younger Zeno to make a retroactive claim for Venice as having discovered the New World before Christopher Columbus.

The evidence against the authenticity of the map is based largely on the appearance of many phantom islands in the North Atlantic and off the coast of Iceland. One of these non-existent islands was Frisland, where the Zeno brothers allegedly spent some time.

Current scholarship regards the map as being based on existing maps of the 16th century, in particular:

*The Olaus Magnus map of the North, the &quot;Carta marina&quot;
*The &quot;Caerte van Oostlant&quot; of Cornelis Anthoniszoon
*Claudius Clavus-type maps of the North

== Footnotes ==
==Sources==
* Cooper, Robert L. D. (Ed.) &quot;The Voyages of the Venetian Brothers Nicolo &amp; Antonion Zeno to the Northern Seas in the XIVth Century&quot;. Masonic Publishing Co. 2004. .
* Di Robilant, Andrea. &quot;Irresistible North: From Venice to Greenland on the Trail of the Zen Brothers&quot;. Publisher Alfred A. Knopf. New York, 2011 
* 
* Smith, Brian. Earl Henry Sinclair&#x27;s fictitious trip to America. &quot;New Orkney Antiquarian Journal&quot;, vol 2., 2002

== External links ==
*The Voyages of the Venetian Brothers, Nicolò and Antonio Zeno, to the Northern Seas in the XIVth Century, comprising the latest known Accounts of the Lost Colony of Greenland; and of the Northmen in America before Columbus. Translated and Edited, with Notes and an Introduction, by Richard Henry Major, Hakluyt Society, 1st ser., London 1873. Pages ciii, 64 + 4 maps.
*Earl Henry Sinclair&#x27;s fictitious trip to America by Brian Smith, First published in New Orkney Antiquarian Journal, vol. 2, 2002
*&quot;Early Italian Images of America&quot; by Scaglione, Aldo</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2268798" start="4" end="17" title="Voyage of the Zeno brothers" label="Zeno brothers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2268798" start="19" end="25" title="Voyage of the Zeno brothers" label="Nicolò"/>
<link wikidata="Q2268798" start="50" end="57" title="Voyage of the Zeno brothers" label="Antonio"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="79" end="86" title="Italy" label="Italian"/>
<link wikidata="Q4948" start="105" end="123" title="Republic of Venice" label="Republic of Venice"/>
<link wikidata="Q16854442" start="215" end="238" title="Nicolò Zen the younger" label="Nicolò Zeno the Younger"/>
<link wikidata="Q6353" start="606" end="623" title="Gerardus Mercator" label="Gerardus Mercator"/>
<link wikidata="Q2257817" start="833" end="843" title="Carlo Zeno" label="Carlo Zeno"/>
<link wikidata="Q48175" start="979" end="988" title="Holy Land" label="Holy Land"/>
<link wikidata="Q12546" start="1000" end="1008" title="Crusades" label="Crusades"/>
<link wikidata="Q8071464" start="1196" end="1203" title="Zichmni" label="Zichmni"/>
<link wikidata="Q1233728" start="1276" end="1306" title="Henry I Sinclair, Earl of Orkney" label="Henry Sinclair, Earl of Orkney"/>
<link wikidata="Q49" start="1486" end="1499" title="North America" label="North America"/>
<link wikidata="Q7322" start="1539" end="1559" title="Christopher Columbus" label="Christopher Columbus"/>
<link wikidata="Q641" start="1843" end="1849" title="Venice" label="Venice"/>
<link wikidata="Q97" start="1988" end="2002" title="North Atlantic" label="North Atlantic"/>
<link wikidata="Q49" start="2037" end="2050" title="North America" label="North America"/>
<link wikidata="Q8071464" start="2088" end="2095" title="Zichmni" label="Zichmni"/>
<link wikidata="Q1233728" start="2126" end="2140" title="Henry I Sinclair, Earl of Orkney" label="Henry Sinclair"/>
<link wikidata="Q3568958" start="2195" end="2211" title="William Sinclair, 1st Earl of Caithness" label="William Sinclair"/>
<link wikidata="Q49642" start="2248" end="2262" title="Rosslyn Chapel" label="Rosslyn Chapel"/>
<link wikidata="Q190084" start="2618" end="2622" title="hoax" label="hoax"/>
<link wikidata="Q21" start="3522" end="3529" title="England" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q234" start="3534" end="3542" title="Flanders" label="Flanders"/>
<link wikidata="Q23666" start="3709" end="3722" title="Great Britain" label="Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q189" start="3727" end="3734" title="Iceland" label="Iceland"/>
<link wikidata="Q930506" start="3742" end="3750" title="Frisland" label="Frisland"/>
<link wikidata="Q22890" start="3801" end="3808" title="Ireland" label="Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q4628" start="4092" end="4105" title="Faroe Islands" label="Faroe Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q47134" start="4481" end="4497" title="Shetland Islands" label="Shetland Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q565640" start="5410" end="5417" title="Bressay" label="Bressay"/>
<link wikidata="Q213485" start="5464" end="5471" title="Lerwick" label="Lerwick"/>
<link wikidata="Q223" start="5593" end="5602" title="Greenland" label="Greenland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2268798" start="6082" end="6092" title="Estotiland" label="Estotiland"/>
<link wikidata="Q97" start="7344" end="7358" title="Atlantic Ocean" label="Atlantic Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q380307" start="7415" end="7423" title="Labrador" label="Labrador"/>
<link wikidata="Q49" start="7451" end="7464" title="North America" label="North America"/>
<link wikidata="Q36591" start="7713" end="7729" title="Vladimir Nabokov" label="Vladimir Nabokov"/>
<link wikidata="" start="7743" end="7746" title="Ada or Ardor: A Family Chronicle" label="Ada"/>
<link wikidata="Q770" start="7926" end="7935" title="Friesland" label="Friesland"/>
<link wikidata="Q55" start="7943" end="7954" title="Netherlands" label="Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q165269" start="7980" end="7984" title="East Frisia" label="East"/>
<link wikidata="Q1421347" start="7989" end="7994" title="North Frisia" label="North"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="7999" end="8006" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q189" start="8045" end="8052" title="Iceland" label="Iceland"/>
<link wikidata="Q189" start="8294" end="8301" title="Iceland" label="Iceland"/>
<link wikidata="Q47134" start="8341" end="8349" title="Shetland" label="Shetland"/>
<link wikidata="Q148749" start="8532" end="8548" title="Mainland, Orkney" label="Mainland, Orkney"/>
<link wikidata="Q184469" start="8680" end="8685" title="County Kerry" label="Kerry"/>
<link wikidata="Q166479" start="8689" end="8694" title="St Kilda, Scotland" label="Kilda"/>
<link wikidata="Q762752" start="8785" end="8794" title="Fair Isle" label="Fair Isle"/>
<link wikidata="Q932332" start="8798" end="8803" title="Foula" label="Foula"/>
<link wikidata="Q998805" start="9286" end="9292" title="Modone" label="Modone"/>
<link wikidata="Q954866" start="9297" end="9303" title="Koroni" label="Corone"/>
<link wikidata="Q2652504" start="9627" end="9645" title="Andrea di Robilant" label="Andrea di Robilant"/>
<link wikidata="Q5735980" start="9959" end="9981" title="Herbert Wrigley Wilson" label="Herbert Wrigley Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q190084" start="10693" end="10697" title="hoax" label="hoax"/>
<link wikidata="Q7322" start="10812" end="10832" title="Christopher Columbus" label="Christopher Columbus"/>
<link wikidata="Q129264" start="10927" end="10941" title="phantom island" label="phantom island"/>
<link wikidata="Q189" start="10986" end="10993" title="Iceland" label="Iceland"/>
<link wikidata="Q930506" start="11033" end="11041" title="Frisland" label="Frisland"/>
<link wikidata="Q315804" start="11205" end="11217" title="Olaus Magnus" label="Olaus Magnus"/>
<link wikidata="Q161055" start="11246" end="11258" title="Carta marina" label="Carta marina"/>
<link wikidata="Q2761474" start="11305" end="11326" title="Cornelis Anthoniszoon" label="Cornelis Anthoniszoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1098291" start="11328" end="11343" title="Claudius Clavus" label="Claudius Clavus"/>
<link wikidata="Q5972789" start="12168" end="12187" title="Richard Henry Major" label="Richard Henry Major"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="464714" wikidata="Q27037058" url="?curid=464714" title="Antonio Zeno">
<text>Antonio Zeno may refer to:

*Antonio Zeno (bishop) (died 1503), Italian Roman Catholic bishop
*Antonio Zeno (died 1403), Italian nobleman from Venice and one of the Zeno brothers</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q27841653" start="29" end="50" title="Antonio Zeno (bishop)" label="Antonio Zeno (bishop)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2268798" start="165" end="178" title="Zeno brothers" label="Zeno brothers"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="464720" wikidata="Q1788258" url="?curid=464720" title="Koszalin University of Technology">
<text>Koszalin University of Technology () is a Polish public technical university located in Koszalin and other cities, i.e. Chojnice.

The institution was established in 1968 as the Higher School of Engineering. The university obtained its present name and status in 1996.

The university consists of the following faculties and institutes:

# Faculty of Civil and Environmental Engineering
# Faculty of Economics and Management
# Faculty of Electronics and Computer Science
# Faculty of Mechanical Engineering
# Institute of Mechatronics, Nanotechnology and Vacuum Technique

The University is taking part in international exchange programmes, including Erasmus Programme.

== References ==
== External links ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1788258" start="0" end="33" title="Koszalin University of Technology" label="Koszalin University of Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q875538" start="49" end="76" title="public university" label="public technical university"/>
<link wikidata="Q62868" start="88" end="96" title="Koszalin" label="Koszalin"/>
<link wikidata="Q740241" start="120" end="128" title="Chojnice" label="Chojnice"/>
<link wikidata="Q77590" start="351" end="356" title="Civil Engineering" label="Civil"/>
<link wikidata="Q146326" start="361" end="386" title="Environmental engineering" label="Environmental Engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q8134" start="400" end="409" title="Economics" label="Economics"/>
<link wikidata="Q2920921" start="414" end="424" title="Management" label="Management"/>
<link wikidata="Q11650" start="438" end="449" title="Electronics" label="Electronics"/>
<link wikidata="Q21198" start="454" end="470" title="Computer Science" label="Computer Science"/>
<link wikidata="Q466950" start="484" end="506" title="Mechanical Engineering" label="Mechanical Engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q180165" start="522" end="534" title="Mechatronics" label="Mechatronics"/>
<link wikidata="Q11468" start="536" end="550" title="Nanotechnology" label="Nanotechnology"/>
<link wikidata="Q11475" start="555" end="561" title="Vacuum" label="Vacuum"/>
<link wikidata="Q254168" start="651" end="668" title="Erasmus Programme" label="Erasmus Programme"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="464723" wikidata="Q5171769" url="?curid=464723" title="Corning, New York (disambiguation)">
<text>Corning, New York is the name of two places in Steuben County, New York, although it most frequently means the City of Corning. 

*Corning (city), New York
*Corning (town), New York, adjacent to the city

==See also==
*Corning (disambiguation), includes other places named &quot;Corning&quot;</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5171769" start="0" end="17" title="Corning, New York (disambiguation)" label="Corning, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q71100" start="47" end="71" title="Steuben County, New York" label="Steuben County, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q576395" start="131" end="155" title="Corning (city), New York" label="Corning (city), New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q5171776" start="157" end="181" title="Corning (town), New York" label="Corning (town), New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q231931" start="219" end="243" title="Corning (disambiguation)" label="Corning (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="464724" wikidata="Q1757776" url="?curid=464724" title="Spanking the Monkey">
<text>Spanking the Monkey is a 1994 American black comedy film written and directed by David O. Russell. It was filmed in Pawling, New York.

==Plot==
Ray Aibelli has finished his first year of college at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. He plans to spend his summer taking advantage of the prestigious medical internship he earned; however, he has to forego the award to take care of his mother, Susan Aibelli. She has suffered a leg injury keeping her homebound just as her husband, Tom, is about to leave for an extended period to work as a traveling salesman. Ray&#x27;s relationship with his overly controlling father is troubled. Meanwhile, his parents also have a strained relationship with one another. Susan often feels lonely and disappointed by a lack of achievement in life while Tom regularly cheats on his wife with sex workers.

Ray feels obliged to take care of his mother. While helping her shower, he glimpses her naked and experiences a sexual attraction towards her. This leads to a moment of intimacy when he massages her upper thigh. He feels extreme guilt for his incestuous feelings and rubs his skin raw to punish himself. His sexual frustration is exacerbated when while trying to masturbate he is unable to do so, due to the family&#x27;s dog repeatedly interrupting him. He seeks refuge through his friends from high school, however they are immature and Ray feels increasingly alienated from them. Seeking connection, he begins a relationship with local teenager Toni Peck whom he struggles to communicate with, both socially and during sex, leading to her rebuffing him.

Feeling isolated, Ray turns to his mother and shares with her his recent sexual encounter with Toni, and she offers him sexual advice. He later openly stares at his mother&#x27;s body in the shower, increasing their physical intimacy. Just as things are escalating between Ray and his mother, Ray has an opportunity to leave his mother behind when his Aunt Helen offers to be Susan&#x27;s caretaker. He excitedly prepares to leave the next day. Despite this, Ray and Susan have another sexual encounter after Helen annoys them both. This happens late at night and leads to Ray missing his bus the next day. Then, Ray&#x27;s father informs him that he will no longer be able to pay for his university tuition causing Ray&#x27;s concern about his future to increase.

Toni and Ray resume their sexual relationship and are kissing when Susan interrupts them. She slaps Toni, injuring her. Ray and Susan have a loud argument that quickly devolves into groping and kissing. Meanwhile, Toni flees and is comforted by her father who then confronts Ray; however, Susan flirts with Toni&#x27;s father, distracting him from punishing Ray.

Ray attempts to commit suicide by hanging himself from the bathroom door but Susan interrupts him. Frustrated, he complains that he can&#x27;t achieve anything and attempts to initiate sexual contact with Susan. He kisses her passionately but then pulls back and attempts to strangle her to death, but then stops himself. He accepts an invitation from his friends to hang out with them again, joining them near the river. After being provoked by one of his friends, he jumps off a cliff. Early the next morning, Ray is seen hitching a ride with a truck driver.

==Cast==
* Jeremy Davies as Raymond &quot;Ray&quot; Aibelli
* Alberta Watson as Susan Aibelli
* Benjamin Hendrickson as Tom Aibelli
* Carla Gallo as Toni Peck
* Judette Jones as Aunt Helen
* Matthew Puckett as Nicky
* Zak Orth as Curtis
* Josh Philip Weinstein as Joel
* Judah Domke as Don
* Nancy Fields as Dr. Wilson

==Music==
Select tracks from Morphine&#x27;s album &quot;Cure for Pain&quot; are used throughout the film, including &quot;In Spite of Me&quot; which plays over the end credits.

==Reception==
&quot;Spanking the Monkey&quot; was a box office success, grossing $1,359,736 on a $200,000 budget.

On Rotten Tomatoes, the film has an approval rating of 92% based on reviews from 26 critics and an average rating of 7.4/10. The site&#x27;s consensus states: &quot;David O. Russell&#x27;s feature debut scores with an endearing cast and offbeat humor, finding compelling sweetness in perverse places.&quot; On Metacritic it has a score of 66% based on reviews from 15 critics.

The film won the Audience Award at the 1994 Sundance Film Festival and the Independent Spirit Award for Best First Screenplay.

=== Year-end lists ===
* 6th – Bob Strauss, &quot;Los Angeles Daily News&quot;
* 6th – Douglas Armstrong, &quot;The Milwaukee Journal&quot;
* 10th – Peter Travers, &quot;Rolling Stone&quot;
* 10th – Todd Anthony, &quot;Miami New Times&quot;
* Top 10 (listed alphabetically, not ranked) – Jimmy Fowler, &quot;Dallas Observer&quot;
* Top 10 runner-ups (not ranked) – Janet Maslin, &quot;The New York Times&quot;
* Honorable mention – Glenn Lovell, &quot;San Jose Mercury News&quot;

==References==
==External links==
* 
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q53094" start="39" end="56" title="black comedy film" label="black comedy film"/>
<link wikidata="Q314342" start="81" end="97" title="David O. Russell" label="David O. Russell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1020213" start="116" end="133" title="Pawling (village), New York" label="Pawling, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q49108" start="203" end="240" title="Massachusetts Institute of Technology" label="Massachusetts Institute of Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q736922" start="1017" end="1025" title="intimacy" label="intimacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q312337" start="3309" end="3322" title="Jeremy Davies" label="Jeremy Davies"/>
<link wikidata="Q262389" start="3360" end="3374" title="Alberta Watson" label="Alberta Watson"/>
<link wikidata="Q946815" start="3394" end="3414" title="Benjamin Hendrickson" label="Benjamin Hendrickson"/>
<link wikidata="Q432281" start="3432" end="3443" title="Carla Gallo" label="Carla Gallo"/>
<link wikidata="Q6791101" start="3489" end="3504" title="Matthew Puckett" label="Matthew Puckett"/>
<link wikidata="Q2919454" start="3516" end="3524" title="Zak Orth" label="Zak Orth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1164913" start="3647" end="3655" title="Morphine (band)" label="Morphine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1935052" start="3675" end="3688" title="Cure for Pain" label="Cure for Pain"/>
<link wikidata="Q105584" start="3915" end="3930" title="Rotten Tomatoes" label="Rotten Tomatoes"/>
<link wikidata="Q150248" start="4222" end="4232" title="Metacritic" label="Metacritic"/>
<link wikidata="Q189887" start="4334" end="4356" title="Sundance Film Festival" label="Sundance Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q1171956" start="4365" end="4415" title="Independent Spirit Award for Best First Screenplay" label="Independent Spirit Award for Best First Screenplay"/>
<link wikidata="Q499188" start="4468" end="4490" title="Los Angeles Daily News" label="Los Angeles Daily News"/>
<link wikidata="Q1765623" start="4530" end="4551" title="The Milwaukee Journal" label="The Milwaukee Journal"/>
<link wikidata="Q890207" start="4567" end="4580" title="Peter Travers" label="Peter Travers"/>
<link wikidata="Q33511" start="4588" end="4601" title="Rolling Stone" label="Rolling Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q6827370" start="4637" end="4652" title="Miami New Times" label="Miami New Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q5211375" start="4726" end="4741" title="Dallas Observer" label="Dallas Observer"/>
<link wikidata="Q509946" start="4783" end="4795" title="Janet Maslin" label="Janet Maslin"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="4803" end="4821" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q575741" start="4870" end="4891" title="San Jose Mercury News" label="San Jose Mercury News"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="464726" wikidata="Q151839" url="?curid=464726" title="Taihape">
<text>Taihape is in the Rangitikei District of the North Island of New Zealand. It serves a large rural community. State Highway 1, which runs North to South through the centre of the North Island, passes through the town.

== History and culture ==

===Early history===
The Taihape region was originally inhabited by Māori. These iwi (tribes) still live in the area. The first record of a European to the region is William Colenso&#x27;s visit in 1845. In 1884, the surveyor&#x27;s party for the Main Trunk railway line cut a rough track through the district.

The town was founded in 1894, when European settlers arrived from Canterbury in the South Island. The site of the town was a small natural clearing in dense native bush, which the first settlers set about clearing. Many of the original families have descendants still living in the area. The settlement was first called Hautapu after the local river, then Otaihape (&quot;the place of Tai the Hunchback&quot;), and finally Taihape.

Before the establishment of the railway, the bulk of farming produce (wool) had to be transported east by horse and bullock cart to Napier, from where it was exported. Until the establishment of roads and railways in the early 1900s, Taihape, like other rural towns, remained largely an isolated pioneer settlement.

===Recent history===

Taihape developed as a key railway and transport town, reaching its peak of population and activity during the heyday of the 1950s and 1960s. The town declined during the downturn of the 1980s and today it is largely a refreshment stop for travellers and a service point for the local farming community.

Taihape is home of the annual Gumboot Day, first celebrated on 9 April 1985. This festival was devised by local business people who decided to capitalise on its rural image. Taihape&#x27;s association with gumboots is marked by a large sculpture of a gumboot positioned prominently on the edge of town. Local business owners commissioned the New Zealand sculptor Jeff Thomson to produce the oversized gumboot using his signature material, corrugated iron. Entertainer John Clarke used Taihape as a location for his Fred Dagg comedy persona.

===Marae===

There are five marae in the Taihape area, where local iwi and hapū meet:

* Kuratahi Marae and Te Karere meeting house is affiliated with the Ngāti Rangi hapū of Ngāti Rangituhia and Ngāti Parenga
* Opaea Marae and Tumakaurangi meeting house is affiliated with the Ngāti Tūwharetoa hapū of Ngāti Tamakōpiri
* Raketapauma Marae and Rangituhia meeting house is affiliated with the Ngāti Rangi hapū of Ngāti Rangituhia
* Tamakopiri Marae and Tumakaurangi meeting house is affiliated with the Ngāti Kahungunu hapū of Ngāti Tama
* Winiata Marae, with its meeting house named Tautahi, is the tūrangawaewae of Ngāti Hinemanu (wife of Tautahi) and its hapū, Ngāti Paki

In October 2020, the Government committed $836,930 from the Provincial Growth Fund to upgrade a cluster of 7 marae, including Opaea Marae and Raketapauma Marae, creating 95 jobs. It also committed a further $239,367 towards Raketapauma Marae and another marae, creating 34 jobs.

== Economy ==

Taihape is a rural supply town and at its peak during the 1960s, was the main railway and transport hub for the surrounding farming community. Much of its economic activity revolved around the railway and rural communities. A major decline occurred in the 1980s due to a restructure and electrification of the railway system and a general downturn in the farming sector.

In recent years and with the advent of major tourist attractions, Taihape is now experiencing an upturn in local commerce. Its location on the North Island Main Trunk railway and on State Highway 1 has ensured its economic survival. Taihape markets itself as the &quot;Gumboot Capital of the World&quot;, and it attracts large numbers of people to the annual gumboot-throwing contest.

== Geography ==

Taihape is near the confluence of the Hautapu and Rangitikei rivers about 500 m (1500 ft) above sea level. It lies in a sheltered valley among the high country of the central North Island, close to the Rangitikei River and the Ruahine Ranges. It is surrounded by fertile high country ideal for sheep and deer farming and its location close to the mountains, rivers and lakes has made it an important service hub for hunting and outdoor tourism. The town is located at the southern edge of the volcanic plateau.

Transport routes in and out of Taihape have improved over the years and what were once twisting and treacherous roads through the high country are now easy and fast deviations through the hills to Mangaweka in the south and Waiouru to the north. 

===Climate===

Taihape&#x27;s climate is temperate, with mild summers and frosty winters, with an average of 31 days exceeding and 45 nights dropping below every year. There is significant rainfall throughout the year in Taihape. According to the Köppen climate classification, this climate is classified as oceanic climate (Cfb). The average annual temperature is 11.5 °C and about 953 mm of precipitation falls annually.

== People ==
Taihape covers and had an estimated population of as of with a population density of people per km2. Population peaked at around 3,500 in the late 1960s, but declined in parallel with many other rural towns after that time.
Taihape had a population of 1,716 at the 2018 New Zealand census, an increase of 141 people (9.0%) since the 2013 census, and a decrease of 123 people (−6.7%) since the 2006 census. There were 684 households, comprising 855 males and 861 females, giving a sex ratio of 0.99 males per female. The median age was 40.2 years (compared with 37.4 years nationally), with 369 people (21.5%) aged under 15 years, 297 (17.3%) aged 15 to 29, 741 (43.2%) aged 30 to 64, and 309 (18.0%) aged 65 or older.

Ethnicities were 69.1% European/Pākehā, 47.9% Māori, 4.4% Pacific peoples, 3.7% Asian, and 1.2% other ethnicities. People may identify with more than one ethnicity.

The percentage of people born overseas was 10.1, compared with 27.1% nationally.

Although some people chose not to answer the census&#x27;s question about religious affiliation, 45.1% had no religion, 37.9% were Christian, 5.4% had Māori religious beliefs, 0.3% were Hindu, 0.5% were Muslim, 0.2% were Buddhist and 0.9% had other religions.

Of those at least 15 years old, 117 (8.7%) people had a bachelor&#x27;s or higher degree, and 369 (27.4%) people had no formal qualifications. The median income was $27,100, compared with $31,800 nationally. 144 people (10.7%) earned over $70,000 compared to 17.2% nationally. The employment status of those at least 15 was that 684 (50.8%) people were employed full-time, 243 (18.0%) were part-time, and 24 (1.8%) were unemployed.

==Railways==
Taihape Railway Station was an important railway stop on the North Island Main Trunk line, with a marshalling yard and locomotive depot until the late 1970s. 
There were many railway houses situated along the length of Mataroa Road; now only three remain. At one time Taihape had two lodges of the Royal Antediluvian Order of Buffaloes. One of the lodges was named Kaikoura Lodge No 226 (after the local Kaikoura River) this lodge survived until 2007. The lodge once had its own lodge rooms. The former railways house painted purple located on the highway travelling south into Taihape was once one of the two Buffaloes halls. The lodge in Taihape once boasted a large membership due in part to the numbers of Railways and Post Office staff stationed in the town.

In 1999 Tranz Rail demolished the historic Taihape Railway Station. The Refreshment Rooms still stand on the former station platform, as do the old goods shed and locomotive depot compound at the south end of the rail yard. After a long period of fund-raising by Rotary, a loco turntable was re-purchased and installed in the station yard, so that special trains can run to Taihape and turn around for the return run.

==Government and politics==

===Local politics===
Taihape is part of the Rangitikei District, overseen by the Rangitikei District Council. The Mayor of Rangitikei since 2013 is Andy Watson.

===National government===
Taihape, like the rest of the Rangitikei District, is located in the general electorate of Rangitīkei and in the Māori electorate of Te Tai Hauāuru. Rangitīkei is a safe National Party seat since the 1938 election with the exception of 1978–1984 when it was held by Bruce Beetham of the Social Credit Party.

Te Tai Hauāuru is a more unstable seat, having been held by three different parties since 1996: New Zealand First, the Māori Party and the Labour Party.

==Education==

Taihape Area School is a co-educational state area school for Year 1 to 13 students, with a roll of as of . The school was established in 2005 through the amalgamation of Taihape&#x27;s primary and secondary schools due to the declining rolls at both schools.

St Joseph&#x27;s School, also located in Taihape, is a co-educational state-integrated Catholic primary school for Year 1 to 8 students. with a roll of . The school was established in 1916.

== Notable people==

* Douglas MacDiarmid, artist
* Nehe Milner-Skudder, rugby union player
* Nash Chase, entertainer
* Moke Belliss, rugby union player

==References==
==External links==

*Taihape in the &quot;Cyclopedia of New Zealand&quot;, 1908</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q151839" start="0" end="7" title="Taihape" label="Taihape"/>
<link wikidata="Q591972" start="18" end="37" title="Rangitikei District" label="Rangitikei District"/>
<link wikidata="Q1547145" start="109" end="124" title="New Zealand State Highway 1" label="State Highway 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q6122670" start="312" end="317" title="Māori people" label="Māori"/>
<link wikidata="Q1676081" start="325" end="328" title="iwi" label="iwi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1396997" start="491" end="514" title="North Island Main Trunk" label="Main Trunk railway line"/>
<link wikidata="Q657004" start="622" end="632" title="Canterbury, New Zealand" label="Canterbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q120755" start="640" end="652" title="South Island" label="South Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q5682935" start="876" end="883" title="Hautapu River" label="Hautapu"/>
<link wikidata="Q203380" start="1121" end="1127" title="Napier, New Zealand" label="Napier"/>
<link wikidata="Q607162" start="1663" end="1674" title="Gumboot Day" label="Gumboot Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q6226240" start="2101" end="2112" title="John Clarke (satirist)" label="John Clarke"/>
<link wikidata="Q1452247" start="2148" end="2157" title="Fred Dagg" label="Fred Dagg"/>
<link wikidata="Q186685" start="2203" end="2208" title="marae" label="marae"/>
<link wikidata="Q1676081" start="2242" end="2245" title="iwi" label="iwi"/>
<link wikidata="Q675182" start="2250" end="2254" title="hapū" label="hapū"/>
<link wikidata="Q7022133" start="2330" end="2341" title="Ngāti Rangi" label="Ngāti Rangi"/>
<link wikidata="Q7022133" start="2350" end="2366" title="Ngāti Rangituhia" label="Ngāti Rangituhia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7022133" start="2371" end="2384" title="Ngāti Parenga" label="Ngāti Parenga"/>
<link wikidata="Q7023290" start="2453" end="2469" title="Ngāti Tūwharetoa" label="Ngāti Tūwharetoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q7023290" start="2478" end="2494" title="Ngāti Tamakōpiri" label="Ngāti Tamakōpiri"/>
<link wikidata="Q7022133" start="2567" end="2578" title="Ngāti Rangi" label="Ngāti Rangi"/>
<link wikidata="Q7022133" start="2587" end="2603" title="Ngāti Rangituhia" label="Ngāti Rangituhia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138165" start="2677" end="2692" title="Ngāti Kahungunu" label="Ngāti Kahungunu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138165" start="2701" end="2711" title="Ngāti Tama (Ngāti Kahungunu)" label="Ngāti Tama"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138165" start="2791" end="2805" title="Ngāti Hinemanu (Ngāti Kahungunu)" label="Ngāti Hinemanu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138165" start="2838" end="2848" title="Ngāti Paki" label="Ngāti Paki"/>
<link wikidata="Q7488117" start="2910" end="2932" title="Provincial Growth Fund" label="Provincial Growth Fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q1396997" start="3660" end="3683" title="North Island Main Trunk" label="North Island Main Trunk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1547145" start="3699" end="3714" title="New Zealand State Highway 1" label="State Highway 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q1768704" start="4122" end="4138" title="Rangitikei River" label="Rangitikei River"/>
<link wikidata="Q190309" start="4413" end="4429" title="North Island Volcanic Plateau" label="volcanic plateau"/>
<link wikidata="Q1767257" start="4629" end="4638" title="Mangaweka" label="Mangaweka"/>
<link wikidata="Q912379" start="4656" end="4663" title="Waiouru" label="Waiouru"/>
<link wikidata="Q124095" start="4927" end="4956" title="Köppen climate classification" label="Köppen climate classification"/>
<link wikidata="Q182090" start="4988" end="5003" title="oceanic climate" label="oceanic climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q30637539" start="5382" end="5405" title="2018 New Zealand census" label="2018 New Zealand census"/>
<link wikidata="Q24189861" start="5450" end="5461" title="2013 New Zealand census" label="2013 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q7015254" start="5510" end="5521" title="2006 New Zealand census" label="2006 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q1250849" start="5868" end="5874" title="Pākehā" label="Pākehā"/>
<link wikidata="Q6122670" start="5882" end="5887" title="Māori people" label="Māori"/>
<link wikidata="Q111951548" start="5894" end="5909" title="Pasifika New Zealanders" label="Pacific peoples"/>
<link wikidata="Q29467330" start="5916" end="5921" title="Asian New Zealanders" label="Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q4116486" start="6215" end="6224" title="Christianity in New Zealand" label="Christian"/>
<link wikidata="Q6950631" start="6235" end="6258" title="Religion of Māori people" label="Māori religious beliefs"/>
<link wikidata="Q16821145" start="6270" end="6275" title="Hinduism in New Zealand" label="Hindu"/>
<link wikidata="Q152997" start="6287" end="6293" title="Islam in New Zealand" label="Muslim"/>
<link wikidata="Q28174275" start="6305" end="6313" title="Buddhism in New Zealand" label="Buddhist"/>
<link wikidata="Q16927220" start="6791" end="6814" title="Taihape Railway Station" label="Taihape Railway Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q1396997" start="6852" end="6875" title="North Island Main Trunk" label="North Island Main Trunk"/>
<link wikidata="Q7373663" start="7089" end="7126" title="Royal Antediluvian Order of Buffaloes" label="Royal Antediluvian Order of Buffaloes"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7195" end="7209" title="Kaikoura River" label="Kaikoura River"/>
<link wikidata="Q7835507" start="7564" end="7574" title="Tranz Rail" label="Tranz Rail"/>
<link wikidata="Q591972" start="8048" end="8067" title="Rangitikei District" label="Rangitikei District"/>
<link wikidata="Q24189349" start="8085" end="8112" title="Rangitikei District Council" label="Rangitikei District Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q24962448" start="8118" end="8137" title="Mayor of Rangitikei" label="Mayor of Rangitikei"/>
<link wikidata="Q24895797" start="8144" end="8148" title="2013 Rangitikei local elections" label="2013"/>
<link wikidata="Q25189876" start="8152" end="8163" title="Andy Watson (mayor)" label="Andy Watson"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8261" end="8279" title="New Zealand electorates#General electorates" label="general electorate"/>
<link wikidata="Q7292867" start="8283" end="8293" title="Rangitīkei (New Zealand electorate)" label="Rangitīkei"/>
<link wikidata="Q1959427" start="8305" end="8321" title="Māori electorates" label="Māori electorate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1725044" start="8325" end="8339" title="Te Tai Hauāuru" label="Te Tai Hauāuru"/>
<link wikidata="Q204716" start="8362" end="8376" title="New Zealand National Party" label="National Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q7016132" start="8392" end="8405" title="1938 New Zealand general election" label="1938 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q4977136" start="8458" end="8471" title="Bruce Beetham" label="Bruce Beetham"/>
<link wikidata="Q7550492" start="8479" end="8498" title="Social Credit Party (New Zealand)" label="Social Credit Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1725044" start="8501" end="8515" title="Te Tai Hauāuru" label="Te Tai Hauāuru"/>
<link wikidata="Q17055270" start="8591" end="8595" title="1996 New Zealand general election" label="1996"/>
<link wikidata="Q180059" start="8597" end="8614" title="New Zealand First" label="New Zealand First"/>
<link wikidata="Q1375170" start="8620" end="8631" title="Māori Party" label="Māori Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048192" start="8640" end="8652" title="New Zealand Labour Party" label="Labour Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q24998643" start="8670" end="8689" title="Taihape Area School" label="Taihape Area School"/>
<link wikidata="Q23683366" start="9145" end="9163" title="Douglas MacDiarmid" label="Douglas MacDiarmid"/>
<link wikidata="Q18391686" start="9174" end="9193" title="Nehe Milner-Skudder" label="Nehe Milner-Skudder"/>
<link wikidata="Q26705353" start="9216" end="9226" title="Nash Chase" label="Nash Chase"/>
<link wikidata="Q68980233" start="9242" end="9254" title="Moke Belliss" label="Moke Belliss"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="464727" wikidata="Q6979651" url="?curid=464727" title="National poetry">
<text>This is a list of articles about poetry in a single language or produced by a single nation.

World languages will tend to have a large body of poetry contributed to by several nations (Anglosphere, Francophonie, Latin America, German-speaking Europe), while for smaller languages, the body of poetry in a particular language will be identical to the national poetry of the nation or ethnicity associated with that language.

==Contemporary==
===Asia===

====Middle East====
* Persian poets
* Piyyut
* Modern Hebrew poetry

====Near East====
* Arabic poetry
* Azerbaijani literature
* Persian poetry
*Turkish poetry

====South Asia====
* Afghan poetry
** Pashto literature and poetry
* Bangladeshi poetry
** Puthi
* Indian poetry
** Assamese Poetry
** Bengali poetry
** Gujarati poetry
** Hindi poetry
** Kannada poetry
** Kashmiri poetry
** Malayalam poetry
** Marathi poetry
** Meitei poetry (Manipuri poetry) 
** Nepali poetry
** Rajasthani poetry
** Sindhi poetry
** Tamil poetry
** Telugu poetry
** Urdu poetry
** Indian Poetry in English
* Pakistani poetry
** Urdu poetry

====East Asia====
* Chinese poetry
* Japanese poetry
* Korean poetry
* Vietnamese poetry

====Southeast Asia====
* Javanese poetry
* Thai poetry
* Filipino poetry
* Singaporean Poetry
* Southeast asian poetry

===Europe===
* Albanian poetry
** Albanian epic poetry
* Bosniak epic poetry
* British poetry
** Cornish poetry
** English poetry
*** Old English poetry
** Manx poetry
** Scottish poetry
** Welsh poetry
*** Anglo-Welsh poetry
* Catalan poetry
* Finnish poetry
* French poetry
* German poetry
* Icelandic poetry
* Irish poetry
* Italian poetry
* List of Polish language poets
* Portuguese poetry
* Romanian poetry
* Russian poetry
* Bulgarian poetry
* Serbian epic poetry
* Slovak poetry
* Spanish poetry
* Ukrainian poetry

===Americas===
* Brazilian poetry
* Canadian poetry
* Latin American poetry
* Mexican poetry
* Peruvian poetry
* United States poetry
* Puerto Rican poetry

===Africa===
*Malagasy poetry
*South African poetry
*Swahili poetry

==Historical==
*Rhapsode
*Rishi
*Sanskrit poetry
*Indian epic poetry
*Bard
*Skald
*Germanic poetry
*Old Norse poetry
*Biblical poetry
*Hebrew and Jewish epic poetry
* Ghazal
* Latin poetry

== See also ==

*Ethnopoetics
*Latin American poetry</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q482" start="33" end="39" title="poetry" label="poetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q315" start="52" end="60" title="language" label="language"/>
<link wikidata="Q6266" start="85" end="91" title="nation" label="nation"/>
<link wikidata="Q10953859" start="94" end="108" title="World language" label="World language"/>
<link wikidata="Q541576" start="186" end="197" title="Anglosphere" label="Anglosphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q1003588" start="199" end="211" title="Francophonie" label="Francophonie"/>
<link wikidata="Q12585" start="213" end="226" title="Latin America" label="Latin America"/>
<link wikidata="Q872260" start="228" end="250" title="German-speaking Europe" label="German-speaking Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q6646804" start="477" end="490" title="Persian poets" label="Persian poets"/>
<link wikidata="Q781402" start="493" end="499" title="Piyyut" label="Piyyut"/>
<link wikidata="Q6888692" start="502" end="522" title="Modern Hebrew poetry" label="Modern Hebrew poetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1292502" start="544" end="557" title="Arabic poetry" label="Arabic poetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q724091" start="560" end="582" title="Azerbaijani literature" label="Azerbaijani literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q365585" start="585" end="599" title="Persian poetry" label="Persian poetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1328366" start="601" end="615" title="Turkish literature" label="Turkish poetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1510912" start="638" end="651" title="Afghan poetry" label="Afghan poetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q253928" start="655" end="683" title="Pashto literature and poetry" label="Pashto literature and poetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q4887695" start="686" end="704" title="Bengali poetry" label="Bangladeshi poetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q7262226" start="708" end="713" title="Puthi" label="Puthi"/>
<link wikidata="Q16056640" start="716" end="729" title="Indian poetry" label="Indian poetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q4808404" start="733" end="748" title="Assamese Poetry" label="Assamese Poetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q4887695" start="752" end="766" title="Bengali poetry" label="Bengali poetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q3633531" start="770" end="785" title="Gujarati literature" label="Gujarati poetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1322592" start="789" end="801" title="Hindi literature" label="Hindi poetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q6363899" start="805" end="819" title="Kannada poetry" label="Kannada poetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q6374465" start="823" end="838" title="Literature of Kashmir" label="Kashmiri poetry"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="842" end="858" title="Malayalam literature#Poetry" label="Malayalam poetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q13646664" start="862" end="876" title="Marathi poetry" label="Marathi poetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q10978685" start="880" end="893" title="Meitei literature" label="Meitei poetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q10978685" start="895" end="910" title="Manipuri literature" label="Manipuri poetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q2364784" start="916" end="929" title="Nepali literature" label="Nepali poetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q7285859" start="933" end="950" title="Rajasthani literature" label="Rajasthani poetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q5193638" start="954" end="967" title="Sindhi poetry" label="Sindhi poetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q10549089" start="971" end="983" title="Tamil literature" label="Tamil poetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q3595276" start="987" end="1000" title="Telugu poetry" label="Telugu poetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q288909" start="1004" end="1015" title="Urdu poetry" label="Urdu poetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q17128092" start="1019" end="1043" title="Indian Poetry in English" label="Indian Poetry in English"/>
<link wikidata="Q6829643" start="1046" end="1062" title="Pakistani poetry" label="Pakistani poetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q288909" start="1066" end="1077" title="Urdu poetry" label="Urdu poetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069928" start="1099" end="1113" title="Chinese poetry" label="Chinese poetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1683305" start="1116" end="1131" title="Japanese poetry" label="Japanese poetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1784354" start="1134" end="1147" title="Korean poetry" label="Korean poetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q7928675" start="1150" end="1167" title="Vietnamese poetry" label="Vietnamese poetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q12520649" start="1194" end="1209" title="Javanese poetry" label="Javanese poetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q7709192" start="1212" end="1223" title="Thai poetry" label="Thai poetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051868" start="1304" end="1319" title="Albanian poetry" label="Albanian poetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q4709196" start="1323" end="1343" title="Albanian epic poetry" label="Albanian epic poetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q117231244" start="1346" end="1365" title="Bosniak epic poetry" label="Bosniak epic poetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q900642" start="1386" end="1400" title="Cornish poetry" label="Cornish poetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q2671604" start="1404" end="1418" title="English poetry" label="English poetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q437112" start="1423" end="1441" title="Old English poetry" label="Old English poetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q3404069" start="1445" end="1456" title="Manx poetry" label="Manx poetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q17017104" start="1460" end="1475" title="Scottish poetry" label="Scottish poetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q3906965" start="1479" end="1491" title="Welsh poetry" label="Welsh poetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q2178726" start="1496" end="1514" title="Anglo-Welsh poetry" label="Anglo-Welsh poetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q741937" start="1517" end="1531" title="Catalan poetry" label="Catalan poetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q5450854" start="1534" end="1548" title="Finnish poetry" label="Finnish poetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q3943110" start="1551" end="1564" title="French poetry" label="French poetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q181287" start="1567" end="1580" title="German poetry" label="German poetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414023" start="1583" end="1599" title="Icelandic poetry" label="Icelandic poetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q580340" start="1602" end="1614" title="Irish poetry" label="Irish poetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q6093382" start="1617" end="1631" title="Italian poetry" label="Italian poetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q4375688" start="1634" end="1663" title="List of Polish language poets" label="List of Polish language poets"/>
<link wikidata="Q7232787" start="1666" end="1683" title="Portuguese poetry" label="Portuguese poetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q2077256" start="1686" end="1701" title="Romanian poetry" label="Romanian poetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q2727246" start="1704" end="1718" title="Russian poetry" label="Russian poetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q2267821" start="1721" end="1737" title="Bulgarian poetry" label="Bulgarian poetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1277508" start="1740" end="1759" title="Serbian epic poetry" label="Serbian epic poetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q427053" start="1762" end="1775" title="Slovak poetry" label="Slovak poetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q3426697" start="1778" end="1792" title="Spanish poetry" label="Spanish poetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q6601329" start="1795" end="1811" title="List of Ukrainian-language poets" label="Ukrainian poetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q849186" start="1830" end="1846" title="Brazilian poetry" label="Brazilian poetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q5030855" start="1849" end="1864" title="Canadian poetry" label="Canadian poetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q17075496" start="1867" end="1888" title="Latin American poetry" label="Latin American poetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050166" start="1891" end="1905" title="Mexican poetry" label="Mexican poetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q3179865" start="1908" end="1923" title="Peruvian poetry" label="Peruvian poetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q3099146" start="1926" end="1946" title="Poetry of the United States" label="United States poetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q3125764" start="1984" end="1999" title="Malagasy poetry" label="Malagasy poetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q7565898" start="2001" end="2021" title="South African poetry" label="South African poetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q3831140" start="2023" end="2037" title="Swahili poetry" label="Swahili poetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q936371" start="2055" end="2063" title="Rhapsode" label="Rhapsode"/>
<link wikidata="Q755990" start="2065" end="2070" title="Rishi" label="Rishi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053936" start="2072" end="2087" title="Sanskrit poetry" label="Sanskrit poetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193297" start="2089" end="2107" title="Indian epic poetry" label="Indian epic poetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q215144" start="2109" end="2113" title="Bard" label="Bard"/>
<link wikidata="Q947305" start="2115" end="2120" title="Skald" label="Skald"/>
<link wikidata="Q1397862" start="2122" end="2137" title="Germanic poetry" label="Germanic poetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q7084639" start="2139" end="2155" title="Old Norse poetry" label="Old Norse poetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q4903301" start="2157" end="2172" title="Biblical poetry" label="Biblical poetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q5695903" start="2174" end="2203" title="Hebrew and Jewish epic poetry" label="Hebrew and Jewish epic poetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q281111" start="2206" end="2212" title="Ghazal" label="Ghazal"/>
<link wikidata="Q6496542" start="2215" end="2227" title="Latin poetry" label="Latin poetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q2911397" start="2246" end="2258" title="Ethnopoetics" label="Ethnopoetics"/>
<link wikidata="Q17075496" start="2260" end="2281" title="Latin American poetry" label="Latin American poetry"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="464728" wikidata="Q2213965" url="?curid=464728" title="Interstate 370">
<text>Interstate 370 (I-370) is a Interstate Highway spur route off I-270 in Gaithersburg, Maryland, to the western end of the Maryland Route 200 (MD 200, Intercounty Connector) toll road at an interchange that provides access to the park and ride lot at the Shady Grove station on the Red Line of the Washington Metro. Despite the number, I-370 does not connect to I-70 itself. The road continues to the west of I-270 as Sam Eig Highway, a surface road. Along the way, I-370 has interchanges with MD 355 and Shady Grove Road. The freeway was completed in the late 1980s to connect I-270 to the Shady Grove station. I-370 was always part of the planned Intercounty Connector but was the only segment to be built at the time. The opening of MD 200 east of I-370 resulted in the truncation of I-370 to the interchange with MD 200 and the redesignation of the road leading into the Shady Grove station as MD 200A.

==Route description==

I-370 begins a short distance to the west of the I-270 interchange in Gaithersburg, Montgomery County, heading northeast as a six-lane freeway. Southwest of this interchange, the road continues as Sam Eig Highway (named after Washington real estate developer Sam Eig) which interchanges with Washingtonian Boulevard before becoming a surface road. The highway passes woods to the northwest and a shopping center to the southeast as it reaches an interchange with I-270. From this point, I-370 turns east and runs between residential neighborhoods to the north and business parks to the south, with trees separating the road from these areas. The freeway curves northeast again and comes to the MD 355 interchange. Past this, the highway passes more commercial development before reaching a bridge over CSX&#x27;s Metropolitan Subdivision railroad line. A short distance later, I-370 comes to a trumpet interchange with MD 200A, a freeway that provides access to Shady Grove Road and the Shady Grove station of Washington Metro&#x27;s Red Line. At this point, I-370 ends and the freeway continues east as MD 200 (Intercounty Connector), a toll road.

==History==

What is now I-370 was originally proposed as part of the Intercounty Connector in the late 1970s. The I-370 freeway opened on December 17, 1988, connecting I-270 to the Shady Grove station. After three and a half years of construction, the freeway was four lanes wide and long. Its construction cost $169 million (equivalent to $ in ), with federal funds paying for 90 percent of the cost. The state of Maryland&#x27;s portion of the cost was funded with a portion of the proceeds of a gas tax increase in 1987. Prior to its opening, driving from I-270 to the Shady Grove station involved exiting at Shady Grove Road and passing six traffic lights to arrive at the station. Upon its opening, the remainder of the Intercounty Connector was planned but not yet built. At the time, it was the fourth shortest Interstate, after I-878 in New York, I-375 in Detroit, and I-395 in Baltimore.

In 2007, construction began on MD 200, which was to head east from I-370. At this time, the ramp from Shady Grove Road to westbound I-370 was shifted to a new alignment. In 2009, the lanes along I-370 were shifted to allow for construction of the MD 200 interchange. Construction on this segment of MD 200 was completed in February 2011, with the road opening to traffic on February 23. As a result of the completion of MD 200, the eastern terminus of I-370 was truncated to the west end of MD 200, with the freeway connection to the Shady Grove station becoming MD 200A.

==Exit list==



==See also==

==References==
==External links==
*I-370 on Kurumi.com
*Interstate Guide - I-370
*I-370 at MDRoads.com
*I-370 at AARoads.com
*Maryland Roads - I-370</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2213965" start="0" end="14" title="Interstate 370" label="Interstate 370"/>
<link wikidata="Q2213965" start="16" end="21" title="Interstate 370" label="I-370"/>
<link wikidata="Q94247" start="28" end="46" title="Interstate Highway" label="Interstate Highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q2213923" start="62" end="67" title="Interstate 270 (Maryland)" label="I-270"/>
<link wikidata="Q752719" start="71" end="83" title="Gaithersburg, Maryland" label="Gaithersburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1391" start="85" end="93" title="Maryland" label="Maryland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2480195" start="121" end="139" title="Maryland Route 200" label="Maryland Route 200"/>
<link wikidata="Q738031" start="228" end="241" title="park and ride" label="park and ride"/>
<link wikidata="Q3234043" start="253" end="272" title="Shady Grove station" label="Shady Grove station"/>
<link wikidata="Q2193330" start="280" end="288" title="Red Line (Washington Metro)" label="Red Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q171221" start="296" end="312" title="Washington Metro" label="Washington Metro"/>
<link wikidata="Q2213710" start="360" end="364" title="Interstate 70 in Maryland" label="I-70"/>
<link wikidata="Q2480424" start="492" end="498" title="Maryland Route 355" label="MD 355"/>
<link wikidata="Q2480195" start="815" end="821" title="Maryland Route 200" label="MD 200"/>
<link wikidata="Q2213923" start="978" end="983" title="Interstate 270 (Maryland)" label="I-270"/>
<link wikidata="Q752719" start="999" end="1011" title="Gaithersburg, Maryland" label="Gaithersburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q488659" start="1013" end="1030" title="Montgomery County, Maryland" label="Montgomery County"/>
<link wikidata="Q46622" start="1064" end="1071" title="freeway" label="freeway"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="1155" end="1165" title="Washington, D.C." label="Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q7407444" start="1188" end="1195" title="Sam Eig" label="Sam Eig"/>
<link wikidata="Q2480424" start="1623" end="1629" title="Maryland Route 355" label="MD 355"/>
<link wikidata="Q856783" start="1731" end="1734" title="CSX" label="CSX"/>
<link wikidata="Q6825270" start="1742" end="1766" title="Metropolitan Subdivision" label="Metropolitan Subdivision"/>
<link wikidata="Q2376564" start="1823" end="1842" title="trumpet interchange" label="trumpet interchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q3234043" start="1916" end="1935" title="Shady Grove station" label="Shady Grove station"/>
<link wikidata="Q171221" start="1939" end="1955" title="Washington Metro" label="Washington Metro"/>
<link wikidata="Q2193330" start="1963" end="1971" title="Red Line (Washington Metro)" label="Red Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q2480195" start="2033" end="2039" title="Maryland Route 200" label="MD 200"/>
<link wikidata="Q2454823" start="2916" end="2921" title="Interstate 878" label="I-878"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384" start="2925" end="2933" title="New York (state)" label="New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q2351916" start="2935" end="2940" title="Interstate 375 (Michigan)" label="I-375"/>
<link wikidata="Q12439" start="2944" end="2951" title="Detroit" label="Detroit"/>
<link wikidata="Q2213992" start="2957" end="2962" title="Interstate 395 (Maryland)" label="I-395"/>
<link wikidata="Q5092" start="2966" end="2975" title="Baltimore" label="Baltimore"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="464729" wikidata="Q141986" url="?curid=464729" title="Brucepattersonius">
<text>Brucepattersonius is a genus of rodents within the tribe Akodontini from southeastern South America. Also known as brucies, the genus is named after Bruce Patterson, MacArthur Curator at the Department of Zoology (Mammals), at the Field Museum of Natural History, Chicago.

==History==
In 1998, Philip Hershkovitz described the genus and four species from the Atlantic Forest of southeastern Brazil and also included the previously described species &quot;B. iheringi&quot;, which had been included in &quot;Oxymycterus&quot; and some other genera before. Two years later, Mares and Braun described three additional species from Misiones Province, northeastern Argentina, on the basis of a total of three specimens. In 2006, Vilela and others found that two of Hershkovitz&#x27;s species were in fact identical. More material from Argentina was later reported, but not assigned to species.

==Description==
The brucies belong to the subfamily Sigmodontinae and the tribe Akodontini. They are ground-dwellers, and may have a preference for higher altitudes within the rainforest area. Each species is thought to be restricted to a limited area. It is uncertain if they are all distinct species, since many are known from very few specimens, which makes it difficult to know how variable brucies are.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q34740" start="23" end="28" title="genus" label="genus"/>
<link wikidata="Q10850" start="32" end="38" title="rodent" label="rodent"/>
<link wikidata="Q2440089" start="57" end="67" title="Akodontini" label="Akodontini"/>
<link wikidata="Q141986" start="115" end="122" title="Brucepattersonius" label="brucies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1122595" start="231" end="262" title="Field Museum of Natural History" label="Field Museum of Natural History"/>
<link wikidata="Q1297" start="264" end="271" title="Chicago" label="Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q537642" start="295" end="313" title="Philip Hershkovitz" label="Philip Hershkovitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q477047" start="360" end="375" title="Atlantic Forest" label="Atlantic Forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q841809" start="392" end="398" title="List of mammals of Brazil" label="Brazil"/>
<link wikidata="Q766177" start="508" end="519" title="Oxymycterus" label="Oxymycterus"/>
<link wikidata="Q44798" start="629" end="646" title="Misiones Province" label="Misiones Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q164280" start="933" end="942" title="Subfamily (biology)" label="subfamily"/>
<link wikidata="Q133373" start="943" end="956" title="Sigmodontinae" label="Sigmodontinae"/>
<link wikidata="Q227936" start="965" end="970" title="tribe (biology)" label="tribe"/>
<link wikidata="Q2440089" start="971" end="981" title="Akodontini" label="Akodontini"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="464739" wikidata="Q876994" url="?curid=464739" title="Changi Naval Base">
<text>Changi Naval Base (CNB), officially known as RSS &quot;Singapura&quot; – Changi Naval Base, is a naval base of the Republic of Singapore Navy (RSN) and United States Navy (USN). Located about 1.5 kilometres east of Changi Air Base (East) and 3.5 kilometres east of Singapore Changi Airport, the base was built on of reclaimed land. It was officially opened on 21 May 2004 by then Prime Minister of Singapore, Goh Chok Tong. A Navy Museum was opened at the entrance of the base in 2012.

==Overview==

Its berthing space can accommodate an aircraft carrier and is often used by visiting ships of the Royal Navy as part of the Five Power Defence Arrangements (FPDA) and United States Navy, as a result of the signing of the addendum to the 1990 United States–Singapore Memorandum of Understanding on 10 November 1990, which formalised arrangements for US Navy ships to use CNB facilities.

&quot;The Straits Times&quot; stated in an editorial that:
In 2017, India and Singapore signed a bilateral agreement which will allow Indian Navy ships limited logistical support, including refuelling, at CNB.

==Design==

Automation was incorporated into the design of CNB to reduce manpower requirements. It has an automated underground ammunition depot that allows ammunition to be loaded onto the ships and an automated warehouse system to store items. The base has a fibre-optic broadband network for information management. The base was also designed to be environment-friendly, with three small-scale wind turbines powering the 50 lights along the breakwaters at night. Conventional roof construction materials were substituted by 72 thin-film solar panels and the solar energy generated lights 100 downlights in the base. Seawater is used in the air-conditioning system, saving about 35,000 m3 (equivalent to 20 Olympic-sized pools) of potable water annually.

==Deployment==
Currently, aircraft carriers, submarines, frigates, amphibious transport docks and missile gunboats are based at CNB. Co-located in CNB is the Changi Naval Training Base, also known as RSS &quot;Panglima&quot;—named in honour of the first ship of the Navy.

==References==
==External links==

*RSN web page on Changi Naval Base (CNB)
*Changi Naval Base on GlobalSecurity.Org</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q876994" start="0" end="17" title="Changi Naval Base" label="Changi Naval Base"/>
<link wikidata="Q876994" start="19" end="22" title="Changi Naval Base" label="CNB"/>
<link wikidata="Q876994" start="45" end="90" title="Changi Naval Base" label="RSS &amp;quot;Singapura&amp;quot; – Changi Naval Base"/>
<link wikidata="Q2531890" start="115" end="141" title="Republic of Singapore Navy" label="Republic of Singapore Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q11220" start="152" end="170" title="United States Navy" label="United States Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1836723" start="215" end="237" title="Changi Air Base (East)" label="Changi Air Base (East)"/>
<link wikidata="Q32159" start="265" end="289" title="Singapore Changi Airport" label="Singapore Changi Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130322" start="316" end="330" title="reclaimed land" label="reclaimed land"/>
<link wikidata="Q313300" start="409" end="422" title="Goh Chok Tong" label="Goh Chok Tong"/>
<link wikidata="Q172771" start="599" end="609" title="Royal Navy" label="Royal Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3045582" start="625" end="656" title="Five Power Defence Arrangements" label="Five Power Defence Arrangements"/>
<link wikidata="Q11220" start="668" end="686" title="United States Navy" label="United States Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q498921" start="894" end="911" title="The Straits Times" label="The Straits Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q356359" start="1022" end="1033" title="Indian Navy" label="Indian Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3379265" start="1694" end="1703" title="downlight" label="downlight"/>
<link wikidata="Q2600478" start="1914" end="1922" title="Formidable class frigate" label="frigates"/>
<link wikidata="Q2975865" start="1924" end="1950" title="Endurance class landing platform dock ship" label="amphibious transport docks"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="464746" wikidata="Q1671370" url="?curid=464746" title="Interstate 670">
<text>Interstate 670 may refer to:
*Interstate 670 (Kansas–Missouri), a connector highway within Kansas City
*Interstate 670 (Ohio), a spur highway connecting Columbus, Ohio, to Gahanna, Ohio</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2453708" start="30" end="62" title="Interstate 670 (Kansas–Missouri)" label="Interstate 670 (Kansas–Missouri)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131988" start="104" end="125" title="Interstate 670 (Ohio)" label="Interstate 670 (Ohio)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="464747" wikidata="Q454399" url="?curid=464747" title="History of Gdańsk">
<text>Gdańsk (; ) is one of the oldest cities in Poland. Founded by the Polish ruler Mieszko I in the 10th century, the city was for a long time part of Piast state either directly or as a fief. In 1308 the city became part of the Monastic State of the Teutonic Knights until 1454. Thereafter it became part of Poland again, although with increasing autonomy. A vital naval city for Polish grain trade, it attracted people from all over the European continent. The city was taken over by Prussia during the Second Partition of Poland in 1793 and subsequently lost its importance as a trading port. Briefly becoming a free city during Napoleonic Wars, it was again Prussian after Napoleon&#x27;s defeat, and later became part of the newly created German Empire.

After World War I the Free City of Danzig was created, a city-state under the supervision of the League of Nations. The German attack on the Polish military depot at Westerplatte marks the start of World War II and the city was annexed by Nazi Germany in 1939. Local Jews were systematically murdered in the Holocaust while Poles and Kashubians also faced persecution. After World War II the city became again part of Poland and the city&#x27;s German inhabitants, that had constituted the majority of the city&#x27;s mixed population before the war, either fled or were expelled to Germany in accordance with the Potsdam Agreement. During post-1945 era, the city was rebuilt from war damage, and vast shipyards were constructed. The centre of Solidarity strikes in the 1980s, after abolishment of communism in 1989 its population faced poverty and large unemployment with most of the ship building industry closed down.

== History ==

=== Early times ===

The area around the Vistula delta was inhabited by populations belonging to the various archaeological cultures of the Stone Age, Bronze Age, and Iron Age. Settlements existed in the area for several centuries BC.

=== Foundation in early Polish state ===

Most likely Mieszko I of Poland founded the town in the 980s, thereby connecting the Polish state ruled by the Piast dynasty with the trade routes of the Baltic Sea. The earliest traces of medieval settlement were discovered in an area now occupied by the town hall of the Main Town, on top of archaeological remains from the Roman Iron Age. The oldest constructions of this settlement were built, according to dendrochronology, with timber from trees cut in 930. The immediate western vicinity of the town hall has, however, so far not been surveyed, thus it can not be excluded that the settlement extended further to the west. Dendrodates exclusively refer to the 10th century, no constructions from the 11th century were found. The very beginning of Gdańsk is related to the fall of Truso in the second half of the 10th century - the Viking Age Emporium situated on eastern side of the Vistula delta. Only after this town declined, it was eclipsed as a trade centre by nearby Gdańsk.

In the area south of the current St. Nicholas Church, settlement started some years later. The oldest constructions there were dated by finds of pottery to either the second half of the 10th century or the turn of the 10th to the 11th century. The first written record thought to refer to Gdańsk is the &quot;vita of Saint Adalbert&quot;: Written in 999, it describes how in 997 Saint Adalbert of Prague baptized the inhabitants of &quot;urbs Gyddannyzc&quot;, &quot;which separated the great realm of the duke from the sea.&quot; No further written sources exist for the 10th and 11th centuries.
In the area of the current Great Mill the oldest settlement layers were dated by finds of pottery to the 11th century or the turn of the 12th. Though the area between St. Nicholas Church and the Great Mill has not yet been sufficiently surveyed, it has been suggested by Paner that in the course of the 11th century the settlement just south of St. Nicholas was expanded to the northwest to reach the vicinity of the Great Mill and, possibly, the area around St. Catherine church. In the northern vicinity of St. Nicholas, in the area of the current market hall, settlement then started probably in the 12th century. , archaeologists have not been able to find traces of fortifications around the before mentioned settlement(s).

Slightly east of the Great Mill, at the banks of the Motława river, a stronghold was built in the 1060s. This stronghold encompassed roughly the area now enclosed by the Rycerska and Sukiennicza streets, and in the 11th century was located at the confluence of the Motława and Vistula rivers. The stronghold consisted of a fort and a suburbium covering 2.7 ha which may have held 2,200 to 2,500 inhabitants. Timber from trees cut between 1054 and 1063 was used for buildings of the first phase of the stronghold&#x27;s construction, timber from trees cut around 1090 was used to construct the buildings of the subsequent phase. A first rampart enclosing the stronghold was built with timber from trees cut in the 1060s. Starting in 1112, according to dendrodates, the stronghold was first leveled and subsequently transformed. This corresponds with written sources mentioning the subduction of Pomerelia by Piast Polish king Boleslaw III Wrymouth between 1112 and 1116. 
The youngest examined layers from which dendrodates could be derived point at around 1135.

Starting in the mid-12th and throughout the 13th centuries, the settlement west of the stronghold greatly expanded northwards to comprise the wider area around present-day Rajska and Podbielanska streets in the Old Town. In the southern part of the settlement, in the area now occupied by the market hall, a Romanesque St. Nicholas church was built in the second half of the 12th century, which according to Paner &quot;was probably the second masonry church in Gdansk, after the stronghold&#x27;s church&quot; and was replaced by another Romanesque St. Nicholas church built in 1223-1241 by the Dominicans, who owned the area since 1227. In 1168, the Cistercians built a monastery in nearby Oliwa (northwest of the town) which is inside the modern city limits. A parochial St. Catherine church is first mentioned in written records in the second half of the 13th century, situated in the new centre of the expanded settlement.

=== Capital of a Pomerelian Duchy (1215–1271) ===


At the end of the 11th century Poland lost control over Pomerelia and did not regain it until the 12th century. Soon after Poland itself was divided into several autonomous provinces formally under the overlordship of the High-Duke of Kraków. The Pomerelian duchies remained under the control of stewards, of the Samborides dynasty, appointed by Polish Dukes, usually those of Greater Poland, although like other Polish provinces during the period of the fragmentation of Poland it increased its regional autonomy. Gdańsk was the main stronghold of Samborides, serving as residence of Mestwin I (1207–1220), Swietopelk II (1215–1266) and Mestwin II (1271–1294).

In 1226, the monastery in Oliwa was raided by pagan Old Prussians.

Around 1235 the settlement had some 2,000 inhabitants and was granted Lübeck city rights by Swietopelk II. Merchants from the Hanseatic cities of Lübeck and Bremen began to settle in the town after 1257, although a significant German population was not present until the 14th century. Officially chartered as a city in 1224, it rose to become one of the more important trading and fishing ports along the Baltic Sea coast. However, in 1282/1294 Mestwin II, the last duke of Pomerelia, ceded all his lands including Gdańsk to Przemysł II, Duke of Greater Poland, who soon became King of Poland, thus it was reunited with the Kingdom of Poland.

=== Monastic State of the Teutonic Knights (1308–1454) ===

At the beginning of the 14th century, the region was plunged into war involving Poland and the Margraviate of Brandenburg. Because King Władysław I of Poland&#x27;s troops were unable to relieve Gdańsk from a siege by Brandenburg, the city&#x27;s Pomeranian judge, Bogusza, appealed to the Teutonic Knights for assistance. The Knights expelled the Brandenburgers in 1308, but did not relinquish the city to Poland. The townspeople rebelled in an uprising bloodily repressed by the Knights. The royal garrison was attacked and expelled and the suburban populace was slaughtered, with the suburbs subsequently destroyed. Gdańsk&#x27;s colony of German merchants and artisans was specifically attacked because they competed with the Knights&#x27; town of Elbing (Elbląg), a nearby city. Polish reports claimed that 10,000 inhabitants were slain in the city. Although that number has been subject of debate among historians, a consensus has been established that many people were murdered and a considerable part of the town was destroyed in the context of the take-over.

The Knights then captured the rest of Pomerelia from Brandenburg&#x27;s troops. In September 1309, Margrave Waldemar of Brandenburg-Stendal sold his claim to the territory to the Teutonic Order for 10,000 marks, thereby connecting the Order&#x27;s territory with that of the Holy Roman Empire. Gdańsk, under the Germanized name &quot;Danzig&quot;, was incorporated into the Monastic State of the Teutonic Knights. Previously allies against the Baltic tribe of the Old Prussians, Poland and the Teutonic Order engaged in a series of Polish-Teutonic Wars after the Knights&#x27; capture of Pomerelia.

Between 1361 and 1416 the city&#x27;s burghers rose in several armed revolts against the rule of the Teutonic Knights. In 1410, during the Polish–Lithuanian–Teutonic War the city&#x27;s council recognized the Polish king, Władysław Jagiełło as its sovereign. After the end of the war, concluded with the Peace of Toruń in 1411, Jagiełło relieved the city of its oath of fealty and it reverted to Teutonic rule. Subsequently, the city&#x27;s populace was repressed by the German knights as punishment for its support of the Polish king.

In 1380, the first Scots settled in the city, founding what would eventually become a significant Scottish diaspora in Poland.

Development of the city initially stagnated after its capture by the Teutonic Knights. The new rulers tried to reduce the economic significance of Danzig by abolishing the local government and the privileges of the town&#x27;s traders. This was exemplified by the fact that the Danzig city council, including Arnold Hecht and Conrad Letzkau, was removed and its leaders beheaded in 1411. Later on, the German knights had to accept the fact that Danzig defended its independence and was the largest and most important seaport of the region after overtaking Elbing. Subsequently, Danzig flourished, benefiting from major investment and economic prosperity in the Teutonic Prussia and Poland, which stimulated trade along the Vistula. The city had become a full member of the Hanseatic League by 1361, but its merchants remained resentful at the barriers to the trade up the Vistula river to Poland, along with the lack of political rights in a state ruled in the interest of the Order&#x27;s religiously motivated knight-monks.

The takeover of Gdańsk by the Teutonic Order was questioned consistently by the Polish kings Władysław and Casimir III the Great, which led to a series of bloody wars and legal suits in the papal court in 1320 and 1333. Peace was established in the Treaty of Kalisz in 1343; although the Polish kings were able to retain the title &quot;Duke of Pomerania&quot; and were recognized as titular overlords of the crusaders, the Knights retained control of Danzig for the time being.

=== As part of the Kingdom of Poland (1454–1793) ===

In 1440, the city participated in the foundation of the Prussian Confederation which was an organisation opposed to the rule of the Teutonic Knights. The organisation in its complaint of 1453 mentioned repeated cases in which the Teutonic Knights imprisoned or murdered local patricians and mayors without a court verdict. On the request of the organisation King Casimir IV Jagiellon reincorporated the territory to the Kingdom of Poland in 1454. Since 1454, the city was authorized by the King to mint Polish coins. The local mayor pledged allegiance to the King during the incorporation on March 6, 1454, in Kraków, and the city again solemnly pledged allegiance to the King in June 1454 in Elbląg, recognizing the prior Teutonic annexation and rule as unlawful. In 1457, King Casimir IV vested the city was new privileges. During the resulting Thirteen Years&#x27; War (1454–1466), the fleet of Danzig fought on the side of Poland in several battles, scoring important victories in the Battle of Bornholm (1457) and the Battle of Vistula Lagoon (1463). The war ended in 1466 with the Order&#x27;s defeat. With the Second Peace of Thorn (1466), the Teutonic Knights renounced claims to the city and recognized it being a province of the Crown of the Kingdom of Poland. Administratively, it was part of the Pomeranian Voivodeship in the autonomous province of Royal Prussia (later also part of the Greater Poland Province).

The 15th and 16th centuries brought changes to the city&#x27;s cultural heritage. They could be seen in the arts and language, as well as Danzig&#x27;s contributions to the world of science. In 1471, a refurbished sailing ship under the native Danzig captain Paul Beneke brought the famous altar painting titled &quot;The Last Judgment&quot; by artist Hans Memling to the city. Around 1480–1490, tablets were installed at St. Mary&#x27;s Church, depicting the Ten Commandments in Middle Low German.

The city was visited by Nicolaus Copernicus in 1504 and 1526, and &quot;Narratio Prima&quot;, the first printed publication of his heliocentric theory, was published there in 1540.

In 1520 Lutheran scriptures were printed, in 1522 the first Lutheran liturgy was held by the local cleric Jakob Hegge and the Protestant Reformation was soon supported by the local populace. In 1523 some iconoclastic riots occurred and the towncouncil was deposed. This revolt was quelled in 1524 by Polish troops and the leaders were executed or imprisoned, some of them released and exiled to the Protestant Duchy of Prussia, a vassal duchy of Poland, on request of Albert of Prussia. While the city ordinance of 1526 penalized the Lutheran liturgy under death penalty, the burghers were still influenced by reformatory ideas. In 1557 the Lutheran Eucharist was permitted and both religious orientations were tolerated.
Georg Joachim Rheticus visited the mayor of Danzig in 1539, while he was working with Nicolaus Copernicus in nearby Frombork. The mayor of Danzig gave Rheticus financial assistance for the publication of the &quot;Narratio Prima&quot;, published by the Danzig printer Franz Rhode in 1540 and to this day considered the best introduction to the Copernican theory. While in Danzig, Rheticus, who was also a cartographer and navigational instrument maker, interviewed Danzig sailors as to their navigational needs. He presented the &quot;Tabula chorographica auff Preusse&quot; to Duke Albert of Prussia in 1541.

From 1563, for over a century, the post of town master builder was held by architects from the Netherlands. Entire streets were designed in Dutch Renaissance style.

In 1566, the official language of the city&#x27;s governing institutions was changed from Middle Low German, which had been used throughout the Hanseatic cities, to standard German, used in most German courts. The Polish language was taught in local Academic Gymnasium (Grammar School or High School) from 1589.

Danzig opposed to the Lublin Union as violating its constitutional rights. German historians have portrayed this resistance as a national conflict in which the large cities of Danzig, Elbing and Thorn in the struggle against the suppression of their German nationality.

In the 16th century, Danzig was the largest and one of the most influential cities of Poland and had a preponderantly German-speaking population. The city enjoyed voting rights during the free election period. The city flourished and several of its landmarks were erected in the 16th and 17th centuries, including the Highland Gate, Golden Gate, Neptune&#x27;s Fountain, Royal Chapel, Great Armoury and Green Gate, an official residence of Polish Kings. The St. Mary&#x27;s Church and Main Town Hall were completed, with the latter topped with a gilded statue of Polish King Sigismund II Augustus.

During the Danzig rebellion the city was besieged for six months in 1577 by the forces of King Stephen Báthory. With the Royal army unable to capture the city and the Danzig forces failing to lift the siege a settlement was negotiated in which Báthory confirmed the city&#x27;s special status and her Danzig law privileges and the city recognised him as ruler of the Commonwealth and paid him a large sum of 200,000 złotys.

In 1606 a distillery named &quot;Der Lachs&quot; (German for &quot;the Salmon&quot;) was founded, which produced one of Danzig&#x27;s most famous products, a liqueur named &quot;Danziger Goldwasser&quot;.

The Danzig printer Andreas Hünefeld (&quot;Hunsfeldus&quot;) (1606–1652) printed a Danzig edition of the Rosicrucian Manifestos. Later on, he published the poems of Martin Opitz. Opitz had died in 1639 and his friend, Pastor Bartholomaeus Nigrinus of Danzig, together with two associates edited the Opitz poems for the Hünefeld printing house.
Polish private schools were opened in addition to public schools who taught Polish during this period with 1370 Polish students in later half of the 17th century.

Around 1640, Johannes Hevelius established his astronomical observatory in the Old Town. Polish King John III Sobieski regularly visited Hevelius numerous times.

From the 14th century until the mid-17th century, Danzig experienced rapid growth, becoming by the 16th century the largest city on the Baltic seaboard, owing to its large trade with the Netherlands and its handling of most of Poland&#x27;s seaborne trade, transported northward via the Vistula River. The city&#x27;s prosperity was severely restricted, however, by the Polish–Swedish wars of 1626–1629 and the 1655–1660, and it suffered an epidemic of bubonic plague in 1709. In 1627, the naval Battle of Oliwa was fought near the city, regarded as one of the greatest victories in the history of the Polish Navy. In 1655, Charles X Gustav of Sweden invaded Poland and appeared outside the Danzig city walls, but refrained from laying siege. A Dutch fleet arrived in July 1656, reopening the vital trade with the Netherlands. The war of 1655–1660 ended with the Treaty of Oliwa, signed in the present-day district of Oliwa.

In 1650 87 percent of the populace were Lutheran, 6 percent Calvinists and about 7 percent Catholics, a number that would grow to more than 20 percent in 1800 due to the migration of Catholics from the vicinity. A large share of the Lutheran population used Polish as their language and Poles played an influential role in the Lutheran Church in Royal Prussia.

Danzig took part in all Hanseatic League conferences until the final one in 1669. By that time the United Provinces and other long-distance overseas commercial powers had surpassed the Baltic trade centres such as Danzig. In 1677, a Polish-Swedish alliance against Brandenburg was signed in the city.

After the outbreak of the Rákóczi&#x27;s War of Independence against Austria, in 1703, Polish King Augustus II the Strong in an official document to the city prohibited the purchase of weapons for the Hungarian insurgents, but at the same time he secretly assured Francis II Rákóczi of his friendship, and many weapons were supplied to the Hungarians through the city during the war. After the fall of the uprising in 1711, Rákóczi and his court, including essayist Kelemen Mikes and painter Ádám Mányoki, found refuge in the city. Rákóczi often met with Polish dignitaries and the envoy of France in the city. In 1712, Rákóczi left the city for France, however, some Hungarians, like court marshall Ádám Vay stayed.

In 1734, the city was briefly occupied by the Russians under Field Marshal Munnich after the prolonged Siege of Danzig during the War of the Polish Succession. The city, which supported Stanisław Leszczyński, the losing candidate for the throne, was forced to pay reparations following the siege.
The future Polish king Stanisław August Poniatowski lived in Danzig until the age of 7, and his brother Michał Jerzy Poniatowski, who would become the Primate of Poland, was born in the city.

In 1743 the Danzig Research Society was formed by Daniel Gralath and Gottfried Lengnich.

=== In the Kingdom of Prussia (1793–1806) ===

After the First Partition of Poland in 1772, the inhabitants of Danzig fought fiercely for it to remain a part of Poland, although the surrounding Pomeranian Voivodeship fell to the Kingdom of Prussia. The city remained a Polish exclave until it was eventually captured by Prussian forces during the Second Partition of Poland in 1793 and incorporated into the Kingdom of Prussia as part of the province of West Prussia. According to Peter Oliver Loew (2011) the common language in Danzig until the partition was German and the knowledge of German was the premise to become an integrated burgher. Both the Polish and the German-speaking inhabitants opposed the Prussian annexation and wished the city to remain part of Poland. Many demonstrated their resentment towards Prussia, with some, like Arthur Schopenhauer&#x27;s family, choosing emigration. The mayor of the city stepped down from his office due to the annexation, and also notable city councilor Jan Uphagen, historian and art collector, whose Baroque house is now a museum, resigned as a sign of protest against the annexation. An attempt of student uprising against Prussia led by Gottfried Benjamin Bartholdi was crushed quickly by the authorities in 1797. The migration processes that happened after Prussia took over the city diminished the usage of Polish language and structure of population.

=== Napoleonic Free City (1807–1814) ===

After the defeat of the Fourth Coalition, and the capture of the city by French, Polish and Italian troops, Napoleon Bonaparte created the semi-independent Free City of Danzig (1807–1814). Danzig reverted to Prussia after Napoleon&#x27;s defeat in 1814, following another siege that lasted almost a whole year. The city became the capital of Regierungsbezirk Danzig within West Prussia in 1815.

=== In the Kingdom of Prussia (1815–1919) ===

In 1816 about 70 percent of the populace were Lutheran, 23.6 percent Catholics; the share of Catholics would grow to 33 percent in 1910.

Since the 1820s, the Wisłoujście Fortress served as a prison, mainly for Polish political prisoners, including resistance members, protesters, insurgents of the November and January uprisings and refugees from the Russian Partition of Poland fleeing conscription into the Russian Army. Insurgents of the November Uprising were also imprisoned in Biskupia Górka. In October and November 1831, several Polish cavalry units of the November Uprising stopped near the city on the way to their internment places, and in May–June 1832 and November 1833, more than 1,000 Polish insurgents departed partitioned Poland through the city&#x27;s port, boarding ships bound for France, the United Kingdom and the United States (see &quot;Great Emigration&quot;).

With the Industrial Revolution and the steam engine trains, industrial machinery and Ferdinand Schichau&#x27;s Schichau-Werke company gained the upper hand for Elbing over Danzig. Schichau later constructed a large shipyard in Danzig as well.

From 1824 until 1878, East and West Prussia were combined as a single province within the Prussian Kingdom. As a part of Prussia Danzig was a member of the Zollverein and elected its representatives to the German National Assembly of 1848, but lay outside of the borders of the 1815–1866 German Confederation. In the second half of the 19th century the growth of the German population in the city was being slowly reversed, with more Poles settling in, mainly from Pomerania, and parts of the local population discovering their Polish roots.

In 1871 the city was included in the newly created German Empire. The Polish minority in the city started its activities in the late 1870s and 1880s with the creation of Polish organisation &quot;Ogniwo&quot; and formation of Polish bank Bank Bałtycki. In 1891 a Polish newspaper called Gazeta Gdańska was printed, later joined by two publishing houses and a printing press. Local Poles focused their cultural life in the vicinity of Church of Saint Anna.

By 1875 the city&#x27;s importance in the European wheat trade was evident, and it was second only to Odessa in terms of export volume. Two thirds of the wheat coming into the city was from Russian Poland. In 1865, the export value of the wheat for that year was 11,500,000 thalers. The export of other grains was only valued at 3,300,000 thalers.

In 1907 local Poles from the &quot;Straż&quot; movement organised protests against Prussian policies of Germanization, including a ban on Polish language and expropriation of Polish home owners.

=== Free City (1920–1939) ===
Following Germany&#x27;s defeat in World War I, the Allied powers in the Treaty of Versailles (1919) decided to create the Free City of Danzig (under a commissioner appointed by the League of Nations) covering the city itself, the seaport, and a substantial surrounding territory. The League of Nations rejected the citizens&#x27; petition to have their city officially named as the Free Hanseatic city of Danzig (&quot;Freie Hansestadt Danzig&quot;). The citizens of Danzig received a separate citizenship of the Free City and thus lost their former German citizenship. A customs union with Poland was created by the victorious allies of World War I, and Poland&#x27;s rights also included free use of the harbour, a Polish post office and a Polish garrison in Westerplatte district. This arrangement was inspired by the history of the city, which for hundreds of years was part of Poland, with which it shared economic interests, thanks to which it flourished, and within which it enjoyed wide autonomy.

According to the official census of 1923 3.7 percent of city population was Polish (13,656 out of 366,730 citizens of the Free City) and in the 1920s and 1930s the city&#x27;s population was over 90% German. However Polish claims range up to around 22.000, or around 6% of the population, and increased to around 13% in the 1930s. Other estimates give the number of Poles as 17% in the whole area of the Free City In the elections to the Free City of Danzig&#x27;s Parliament the results of Polish Parties declined from 6.08 percent of votes in 1919 to 3.15 in 1927 and 3.53 in 1935. According to Henryk Stępniak many Poles voted for the Catholic Zentrumspartei instead and, based on these assumed voting patterns, he estimates the number of Poles in the city to be 25-30% of Catholics living within it or about 30-36 thousand people. In addition around 4,000 Polish nationals were registered in the city, bringing the total number of Polish population to 9.4-11% of people in this estimate. According to other estimates about 10 percent of the 130,000 Catholics were Polish. Piotr Mickiewicz claims, the city authorities were made up of former Prussian officials who were hostile to Poland and Poles. According to Artur Hutnikiewicz the Polish population faced discrimination and persecution in the Free City, which it tried to resist. Poles faced discrimination from German officials in employment and in education. This constituted violation of international laws, which obliged the city to treat Poles equally to Germans.

The Free City of Danzig issued its own stamps and currency (the &quot;Gulden&quot;). Many examples of stamps and coins, bearing the legend &quot;Freie Stadt Danzig&quot;, survive in collections.

The strategic aim of Poland was to gain free access to the open sea, and the territories assigned to Poland in the Treaty of Versailles provided a good opportunity to do so. However, during the Polish-Soviet War, Danzig workers went on strike to block delivery of ammunition to the Polish army when the Soviet Red Army tried to capture Warsaw. The Second Polish Republic then built a military transit depot with a small squad of troops at Westerplatte.

Due to the massive resentment by the Danzigers and with large foreign investments, Poland began building a large military port in Gdynia, just away from Danzig. Unlike Danzig, Gdynia was in the direct possession of Poland and soon became the so-called &quot;Polish outside window&quot;.

Due to a German-Polish customs war between 1925 and 1934, Poland became focused on international trade; for example, a new railway line was built to connect Silesia with the coast and the new tariffs made it cheaper to send goods through Polish ports rather than German ones. Gdynia became the biggest port on the Baltic sea. Nevertheless, Poland resorted to economic sanctions during the Danzig-Polish conflicts and Danzig suffered greatly. There was a strong desire to rescind the Allied Powers&#x27; decision on the status of the city&#x27;s 400,000 citizens which were predominantly German. This culminated in the election of a National Socialist government in Danzig&#x27;s elections in May 1933.

The German incorporation of Danzig was a territorial claim that every government of the Weimar Republic put on its agenda.

A German–Polish declaration of non-aggression was signed and the Free City&#x27;s government was ordered by the Nazis to stop making problems between Poland and Danzig. Poland and Danzig entered a brief period of good economic cooperation and prosperity. Nevertheless, a totalitarian society was being constructed in Germany, and especially members of the Polish or Jewish minority required stamina in the face of everyday acts of violence and persecution from the Nazis.

With the growth of Nazism among Germans, anti-Polish sentiment increased and both Germanisation and segregation policies intensified, in the 1930s the rights of local Poles were commonly violated and limited by the local administration. Polish children were refused admission to public Polish-language schools, premises were not allowed to be rented to Polish schools and preschools. Due to such policies, only 8 Polish-language public schools existed in the city, and Poles managed to organize 7 more private Polish schools. In 1937, Poles who sent their children to private Polish schools were demanded to transfer children to German schools, under threat of police intervention, and attacks were carried out on Polish schools and Polish youth.

German militias carried out numerous beatings of Polish activists, scouts, and even mailmen, as &quot;punishment&quot; for distributing the Polish press. German students attacked and expelled Polish students from the technical university. Dozens of Polish surnames were forcibly Germanized, while Polish symbols that reminded that for centuries Danzig was part of Poland were removed from the city&#x27;s landmarks, such as the Artus Court and the Neptune&#x27;s Fountain.

From 1937, the employment of Poles by German companies was prohibited, and already employed Poles were fired, the use of Polish in public places was banned and Poles were not allowed to enter several restaurants, in particular those owned by Germans. In 1938, the Germans committed over 100 attacks on Polish homes on the day of the Polish 3 May Constitution Day. In 1939, before the German invasion of Poland and outbreak of World War II, local Polish railwaymen were victims of beatings and arrests.

About 50 percent of members of the Jewish Community of Danzig had left the city within a year after a pogrom in October 1937, after the Kristallnacht riots in November 1938 the community decided to organize its emigration and in March 1939 a first transport to Mandate Palestine started. By September 1939 barely 1,700 mostly elderly Jews remained. In early 1941 just 600 Jews were still living in Danzig who were later deported to the ghetto in Warsaw or to Theresienstadt. The majority of them were later sent to various extermination camps.
Out of the 2938 Jewish community in the city 1227 were able to escape from the Nazis before the outbreak of war

=== World War II (1939–1945) ===

Following the annexation of Austria and the Sudetenland, Germany in October 1938 urged the Danzig territory&#x27;s cession to Germany. On 1 September 1939 Nazi Germany invaded Poland, initiating World War II. On 2 September 1939 Germany officially annexed the Free City. The Nazi regime murdered the Polish postmen defending the Polish Post Office: this was one of the first war crimes during the war. Other Polish soldiers defending the Westerplatte stronghold surrendered after seven days of fighting. The German commander returned the sword to the Polish commander for putting up a brave fight, while the same time one the captured defenders, Kazimierz Rasinski was brutally tortured by Germans and murdered when he refused to reveal Polish communication codes. On September 1, the Germans assaulted the Polish Railway Administration and arrested its chief and employees. Captain , who refused to allow the German battleship SMS &quot;Schleswig-Holstein&quot; to enter the port in the prior days, was also arrested, and then sent to Stutthof and murdered in 1940. On September 7, NSDAP organised night parade on Adolf-Hitlerstrasse to celebrate success. It was bombed by a single Polish hydroplane operating from Hel Peninsula piloted by Józef Rudzki and Zdzisław Juszczakiewicz. Six bombs each weighing were dropped from very low height.
In October 1939, Danzig, together with the prewar Pomeranian Voivodship to the south and west, became the German &quot;Reichsgau&quot; (administrative district) of Danzig-West Prussia.

With the start of the war the Nazi regime began its policy of extermination in Pomerania; Poles, Kashubians and Jews and the political opposition were sent to concentration camps, especially neighbouring Stutthof where 85,000 victims perished. In September 1939, the Germans carried out arrests of over 800 Polish railwaymen, who were then deported to concentration camps and murdered in the following months. Also those arrested before the war were executed in various locations. The Germans also carried out mass arrests and executions of local Polish activists, even those who escaped to Gdynia and Warsaw. 29 Polish teachers from the city were murdered, and others were deported to concentration camps. Execution sites of said Poles included Piaśnica, Sztutowo, Nowy Port, Westerplatte and Berlin, whereas the defenders of the Polish Post were massacred in Zaspa.

The &quot;Einsatzkommando 16&quot;, SS Heimwehr-Sturmbann Gotze and SS Heimwehr Danzig, were formed in the city, before entering Polish Pomerania to commit crimes against Poles. Members of the local SS became leaders of the newly established German &quot;Selbstschutz&quot; in German-occupied Gdynia.

During the war, the Germans operated a Nazi prison in the city, an &quot;Einsatzgruppen&quot;-operated penal camp, a camp for Romani people, two subcamps of the Stalag XX-B prisoner-of-war camp for Allied POWs, and several subcamps of the Stutthof concentration camp within the present-day city limits. In August 1944, also two assembly centers for Allied POWs (AGSSt 32 and 33) were established by the Germans in the city, and were soon moved to other locations in German-occupied Poland and France.

In the city itself hundreds of prisoners were subjected to cruel Nazi executions and experiments, which included castration of men and sterilization of women considered dangerous to the &quot;purity of Nordic race&quot; and beheading by guillotine The courts and judicial system in the annexed territories of Nazi Germany was one of the main ways to legislate an extermination policy against ethnic Poles, terminology in the courts was full of statements such as &quot;Polish subhumans&quot; and &quot;Polish rabble&quot;. Some judges even declared that Poles were to have tougher sentences than Germans because of their alleged racial inferiority.

The Polish resistance movement was active in the city. The Poles smuggled documents about German V-weapons, infiltrated the local German industry, plus one of Pomerania&#x27;s main smuggling points for underground Polish press was located in the city. The resistance also facilitated escapes of endangered Polish resistance members and British prisoners of war who fled from German POW camps via the city&#x27;s port to neutral Sweden. The Home Army also co-operated with the local vice-consul of Denmark.

At the beginning of 1945, facing the imminent fall of the Nazi State, Germany started evacuating civilians from Danzig. Most Germans fled the city, many by seaborne evacuation to Schleswig-Holstein. This happened in winter under the threat of bombs and in constant danger of submarines.

After a siege, on 30 March 1945 the Soviet Red Army occupied a largely destroyed Danzig. The exact circumstances of the occupation remain a matter of dispute. While the traditional Polish historiography stressed the role of the German resistance, after 1990 reports about deliberate destructions and arsons by the Soviets were published. However, as Soviet sources about the events are inaccessible, the topic has not been conclusively clarified. In December 1945 the Soviet Consulate explained the existing &quot;anti-Soviet feelings&quot; with some &quot;excesses&quot; of the Red Army.

In June 1945 124,000 Germans and 8,000 Poles lived in the city, from 1945 to 1950 most Germans were expelled in accordance with the Potsdam Agreement.

=== Post-World War II ===

With the German defeat the planned genocide of the Polish population, who were deemed by the German authorities to be &quot;subhuman,&quot; was averted and Poles returned to Gdańsk.

Already before the end of World War II, the Yalta Conference had agreed to place the city, under Polish name Gdańsk, under &quot;de facto&quot; administration of Poland, and this decision was confirmed at the Potsdam Conference.

A Polish administration was set up in the devastated Gdańsk on 30 March 1945. New Polish residents were settled in Gdańsk, 3,200 in April and more than 4,000 in May and June 1945. As of 1948 more than two thirds of the 150,000 inhabitants came from Central Poland, about 15 to 18 percent from Polish-speaking areas east of the Curzon Line that were annexed by the Soviet Union after World War II. Many local Kashubians also moved into the city. The deportation of the German populace started in July 1945, thus the pre-war populace soon became a small minority within post-war Gdańsk.

The members of the pre-war Polish minority in the city organized associations dedicated to upholding their past traditions and history; the first one being Związek Weteranów Walk o Polskość Gdańska i Wybrzeża. In the following years additional ones were founded like Towarzystwo Przyjaciół Gdańska which continues its work to this day.

Between 1952 and the late 1960s Polish artisans restored much of the old city&#x27;s architecture, up to 90% destroyed in the war. Initially the reconstruction of parts of the inner city (Główne Miasto) was controversial. As a result of anti-German sentiments and the new settlers&#x27; at least indifferent attitude towards the unknown, German city a modern architecture was preferred. The decision to reconstruct a traditional old town was politically motivated in order to symbolize the city&#x27;s reunification with Poland and limited to the area of the Główne Miasto. The Old town and other historical districts were, with the exception of some monumental buildings, built-up with modern architecture. The reconstruction is not tied to the city&#x27;s pre-war appearance, instead its purpose was to rebuild an idealized pre-1793 state. 19th and early 20th-century architecture, any traces of German tradition were ignored or regarded as &quot;Prussian barbarism&quot; worth of demolition while Flemish-Dutch, Italian and French influences were emphasized.
After 1990 this concept has been criticized by Donald Tusk, who called the reconstruction &quot;in the spirit of Communism&quot; the city&#x27;s second catastrophe of the 20th century.
The city districts were renamed to their historic Polish names (such as Wrzeszcz, Siedlce, Nowy Port), but in some cases the specifications of the Commission for the Determination of Place Names were initially ignored and place names originating in the home region of the settlers were used.

In 1946, the Soviet-installed communist regime executed 17-year-old Danuta Siedzikówna and 42-year-old Feliks Selmanowicz, Polish resistance members, in the local prison.

The port of Gdańsk was one of the three Polish ports through which Greeks and Macedonians, refugees of the Greek Civil War, reached Poland. In 1949, four transports of Greek and Macedonian refugees arrived at the port of Gdańsk, from where they were transported to new homes in Poland.

Gdańsk was the scene of anti-government demonstrations which led to the downfall of Poland&#x27;s communist leader Władysław Gomułka in December 1970, and ten years later was the birthplace of the Solidarity trade union movement, whose opposition to the government helped end of communist party rule in 1989 and the election as president of Poland of its leader Lech Wałęsa. It remains today a major port and industrial city.

A list of the 173 mayors of the city from 1347 to March 1945 was compiled by the current Gdańsk city government and can be found on their recent website with the invitation for the &quot;First World Gdańsk Reunion&quot;, which took place in May 2002.

In 2014, the remains of Danuta Siedzikówna and Feliks Selmanowicz were found at the local Garrison Cemetery, and then their state burial was held in Gdańsk in 2016, with the participation of thousands of people from all over Poland and the highest Polish authorities.

In recent history, Gdańsk has co-hosted various international sports competitions, including the EuroBasket 2009, 2011 FIVB Volleyball World League, UEFA Euro 2012, 2013 Men&#x27;s European Volleyball Championship, 2014 FIVB Volleyball Men&#x27;s World Championship, 2016 European Men&#x27;s Handball Championship, 2017 Men&#x27;s European Volleyball Championship, 2021 Men&#x27;s European Volleyball Championship, 2022 FIVB Volleyball Women&#x27;s World Championship, 2023 World Men&#x27;s Handball Championship and 2023 FIVB Volleyball Men&#x27;s Nations League.

===Famous people born in the city===
* List of people from Gdańsk
* List of mayors of Gdańsk
* List of mayors of Danzig
* Johannes Dantiscus, 1485, poet, diplomat, church canon and bishop
* Bernhard von Reesen, 1490
* Albrecht Giese, 1524
* Johannes Hevelius, 1611, astronomer
* Daniel Schultz, 1615
* Bogusław Radziwiłł, 1620, Polish princely magnate
* Andreas Schlüter, 1660
* Aleksander Benedykt Sobieski, 1677, Polish prince
* Jacob Theodor Klein, 1685
* Daniel Gabriel Fahrenheit, 1686–1736, physicist and engineer
* Daniel Gralath, 1708, physicist and mayor
* Louise Adelgunde Gottsched, 1713, writer
* Daniel Chodowiecki, 1726, painter
* Adam Kazimierz Czartoryski, 1734, Polish statesman and writer
* Michał Jerzy Poniatowski, 1736, Archbishop of Gniezno and Primate of Poland, brother of King Stanisław August Poniatowski
* Johann Wilhelm Archenholz, 1741
* Avraham Danzig, 1748, rabbi
* Georg Forster, 1754
* Gottlieb Hufeland. 1760
* Johanna Schopenhauer, 1766
* Johannes Daniel Falk, 1768
* Władysław Franciszek Jabłonowski, 1769, Polish general
* Arthur Schopenhauer, 1788
* Miltiades Caridis, 1923, conductor
* Günter Grass, 1927, writer and philosopher
* Zdzisław Kuźniar, 1931, actor
* Janusz Kupcewicz, 1955, footballer
* Paweł Huelle, 1957, writer and journalist
* Donald Tusk, 1957, Prime Minister of Poland (2007–2014, 2023–present), President of the European Council (2014–2019), President of the European People&#x27;s Party (2019–2022)
* Dariusz Michalczewski &quot;Tiger&quot;, 1968, boxer who won WBO (Light heavyweight) title in 1994, and then defended that title 23 consecutive times, Tiger Energy Drink was named after him
* Leszek Możdżer, 1971, jazz musician

=== Famous people living or working in the city ===
* Edward O&#x27;Rourke, the first bishop of the Diocese of Danzig
* Lech Wałęsa, b. 1943, Nobel Peace Prize laureate in 1983, first directly elected president of Poland (1990)
* Stanisław Pestka, b. 1929 in Rolbik - Kashubian poet
* Robert Gordon b. 1668, d. 1731, Merchant and philanthropist

==See also==
* Timeline of Gdańsk history
* List of Gdańsk aristocratic families
* Lists of Danzig officials
* List of mayors of Danzig

== References ==
== Further reading ==

* Prutz, &quot;Danzig, das nordische Venedig&quot; (Leipzig, 1868)
* Wistulanus, &quot;Geschichte der Stadt Danzig&quot; (Danzig, 1891)
* Puttner, &quot;Danzig&quot; (Danzig, 1899)
* (ed.) E. Cieślak, &quot;Historia Gdańska&quot;, vol. I–II, Gdańsk 1978
* E. Cieślak, C. Biernat, &quot;Dzieje Gdańska&quot;, Gdańsk 1969
* P. Simson, &quot;Geschichte der Stadt Danzig&quot;, vol. 1–4, Danzig 1913-18
* H. Samsonowicz, &quot;Badania nad kapitałem mieszczańskim Gdańska w II połowie VX wieku.&quot;, Warszawa 1960
* Cz. Biernat, &quot;Statystyka obrotu towarowego Gdańska w latach 1651–1815.&quot;, Warszawa 1962
* M. Bogucka, &quot;Gdańsk jako ośrodek produkcyjny w XIV–XVII wieku.&quot;, Warszawa 1962
* M. Bogucka, &quot;Handel zagraniczny Gdańska w pierwszej połowie XVII wieku&quot;, Wrocław 1970
* H. Górnowicz, Z. Brocki, &quot;Nazwy miast Pomorza Gdańskiego&quot;, Wrocław 1978
* &quot;Gminy województwa gdańskiego&quot;, Gdańsk 1995
* Gerard Labuda (ed.), &quot;Historia Pomorza&quot;, vol. I–IV, Poznań 1969-2003
* L. Bądkowski, &quot;Pomorska myśl polityczna&quot;, Gdańsk 1990
* W. Odyniec, &quot;Dzieje Prus Królewskich (1454–1772). Zarys monograficzny&quot;, Warszawa 1972
* (ed.) W. Odyniec, &quot;Dzieje Pomorza Nadwiślańskiego od VII wieku do 1945 roku&quot;, Gdańsk 1978
* L. Bądkowski, W. Samp, &quot;Poczet książąt Pomorza Gdańskiego&quot;, Gdańsk 1974
* B. Śliwiński, &quot;Poczet książąt gdańskich&quot;, Gdańsk 1997
* Józef Spors, &quot;Podziały administracyjne Pomorza Gdańskiego i Sławieńsko-Słupskiego od XII do początków XIV w&quot;, Słupsk 1983
* M. Latoszek, &quot;Pomorze. Zagadnienia etniczno-regionalne&quot;, Gdańsk 1996
* &quot;Działacze polscy i przedstawiciele R.P. w Wolnym Mieście Gdańsku&quot;, Pomorze Gdańskie nr 9, Gdańsk 1974
* B. Bojarska, &quot;Eksterminacja inteligencji polskiej na Pomorzu Gdańskim (wrzesień-grudzień 1939)&quot;, Poznań 1972
* K. Ciechanowski, &quot;Ruch oporu na Pomorzu Gdańskim 1939–1945.&quot;, Warszawa 1972
* &quot;Dziedzictwo kulturowe Pomorza nad Wisłą&quot;, Pomorze Gdańskie nr 20, Gdańsk 1997
* &quot;Gdańsk 1939: wspomnienia Polaków-Gdańszczan&quot; Wydawnictwo. &quot;Marpress&quot;, 2002
* Piotr Semków &quot;Polityka Trzeciej Rzeszy wobec ludności polskiej na terenie byłego Wolnego Miasta Gdańska w latach 1939–1945&quot; , 2001
* Wolne Miasto Gdańsk w koncepcjach wojskowych i polityce II Rzeczypospolitej Piotr Mickiewicz Wydawn. A. Marszałek, 1999 
* Polacy w Wolnym Mieście Gdańsku (1920-1933): polityka Senatu gdańskiego wobec ludności polskiej Andrzej Drzycimski Zakład Narodowy im. Ossolińskich, 1978

== External links ==

* Free City of Danzig stamps
* Information on Danzig (in German)
* A multicultural history of the Gdańsk Calvinists
* Bombing on Sep 7 1939 </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1792" start="0" end="6" title="Gdańsk" label="Gdańsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q53435" start="79" end="88" title="Mieszko I" label="Mieszko I"/>
<link wikidata="Q201615" start="147" end="152" title="Piast" label="Piast"/>
<link wikidata="Q188063" start="183" end="187" title="fief" label="fief"/>
<link wikidata="Q156020" start="225" end="263" title="Monastic State of the Teutonic Knights" label="Monastic State of the Teutonic Knights"/>
<link wikidata="Q5593509" start="384" end="395" title="grain trade" label="grain trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q27306" start="482" end="489" title="Kingdom of Prussia" label="Prussia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3025374" start="501" end="527" title="Second Partition of Poland" label="Second Partition of Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q78994" start="628" end="643" title="Napoleonic Wars" label="Napoleonic Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q43287" start="740" end="753" title="German Empire" label="German Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="762" end="773" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q216173" start="778" end="797" title="Free City of Danzig" label="Free City of Danzig"/>
<link wikidata="Q38130" start="853" end="870" title="League of Nations" label="League of Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q517081" start="922" end="934" title="Westerplatte" label="Westerplatte"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="954" end="966" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="995" end="1007" title="Nazi Germany" label="Nazi Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q7325" start="1023" end="1027" title="Jews" label="Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q2763" start="1064" end="1073" title="Holocaust" label="Holocaust"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026" start="1080" end="1085" title="Polish people" label="Poles"/>
<link wikidata="Q147239" start="1090" end="1100" title="Kashubians" label="Kashubians"/>
<link wikidata="Q6983410" start="1106" end="1123" title="Nazi crimes against the Polish nation" label="faced persecution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1536279" start="1322" end="1335" title="Expulsion of Germans after World War II" label="were expelled"/>
<link wikidata="Q277476" start="1370" end="1387" title="Potsdam Agreement" label="Potsdam Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q1003" start="1500" end="1510" title="Solidarity (Polish trade union)" label="Solidarity"/>
<link wikidata="Q6186" start="1554" end="1563" title="communism" label="communism"/>
<link wikidata="Q548" start="1734" end="1741" title="Vistula" label="Vistula"/>
<link wikidata="Q11759" start="1833" end="1842" title="Stone Age" label="Stone Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q11761" start="1844" end="1854" title="Bronze Age" label="Bronze Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q11764" start="1860" end="1868" title="Iron Age" label="Iron Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q53435" start="1983" end="2002" title="Mieszko I of Poland" label="Mieszko I of Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q353227" start="2056" end="2068" title="History of Poland (966–1385)" label="Polish state"/>
<link wikidata="Q201615" start="2082" end="2095" title="Piast dynasty" label="Piast dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q545" start="2125" end="2135" title="Baltic Sea" label="Baltic Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q6606068" start="2297" end="2311" title="Roman Iron Age" label="Roman Iron Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q80205" start="2382" end="2398" title="dendrochronology" label="dendrochronology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1752073" start="2758" end="2763" title="Truso" label="Truso"/>
<link wikidata="Q3736104" start="2861" end="2874" title="Vistula delta" label="Vistula delta"/>
<link wikidata="Q11747294" start="2993" end="3012" title="Basilica of St. Nicholas, Gdańsk" label="St. Nicholas Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q77394" start="3277" end="3291" title="Adalbert (Archbishop of Magdeburg)" label="Saint Adalbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q243427" start="3345" end="3363" title="Adalbert of Prague" label="Adalbert of Prague"/>
<link wikidata="Q53436" start="3466" end="3470" title="Bolesław I Chrobry" label="duke"/>
<link wikidata="Q1950176" start="4340" end="4347" title="Motława" label="Motława"/>
<link wikidata="Q35852" start="4644" end="4646" title="hectare" label="ha"/>
<link wikidata="Q326188" start="5181" end="5190" title="Pomerelia" label="Pomerelia"/>
<link wikidata="Q353227" start="5194" end="5206" title="Piast Poland" label="Piast Polish"/>
<link wikidata="Q53441" start="5212" end="5233" title="Boleslaw III Wrymouth" label="Boleslaw III Wrymouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165324" start="5561" end="5569" title="Old Town (Gdańsk)" label="Old Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q46261" start="5658" end="5668" title="Romanesque architecture" label="Romanesque"/>
<link wikidata="Q131479" start="5946" end="5956" title="Dominican Order" label="Dominicans"/>
<link wikidata="Q166861" start="6002" end="6013" title="Cistercians" label="Cistercians"/>
<link wikidata="Q1775766" start="6022" end="6031" title="Oliwa Abbey" label="monastery"/>
<link wikidata="Q1447540" start="6042" end="6047" title="Oliwa" label="Oliwa"/>
<link wikidata="Q326188" start="6387" end="6396" title="Pomerelia" label="Pomerelia"/>
<link wikidata="Q31487" start="6566" end="6572" title="Kraków" label="Kraków"/>
<link wikidata="Q370303" start="6578" end="6596" title="Pomeranian duchies and dukes" label="Pomerelian duchies"/>
<link wikidata="Q316796" start="6644" end="6654" title="Samborides" label="Samborides"/>
<link wikidata="Q211371" start="6708" end="6722" title="Greater Poland" label="Greater Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q353227" start="6786" end="6809" title="fragmentation of Poland" label="fragmentation of Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q572017" start="6916" end="6925" title="Mestwin I, Duke of Pomerania" label="Mestwin I"/>
<link wikidata="Q696750" start="6939" end="6952" title="Swietopelk II, Duke of Pomerania" label="Swietopelk II"/>
<link wikidata="Q572038" start="6969" end="6979" title="Mestwin II, Duke of Pomerania" label="Mestwin II"/>
<link wikidata="Q109073" start="7046" end="7059" title="Old Prussians" label="Old Prussians"/>
<link wikidata="Q686235" start="7132" end="7150" title="Lübeck city rights" label="Lübeck city rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q42908" start="7188" end="7197" title="Hanseatic League" label="Hanseatic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2843" start="7208" end="7214" title="Lübeck" label="Lübeck"/>
<link wikidata="Q24879" start="7219" end="7225" title="Bremen (city)" label="Bremen"/>
<link wikidata="Q545" start="7467" end="7477" title="Baltic Sea" label="Baltic Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q54017" start="7587" end="7598" title="Przemysł II" label="Przemysł II"/>
<link wikidata="Q148499" start="7861" end="7887" title="Margraviate of Brandenburg" label="Margraviate of Brandenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q54048" start="7902" end="7913" title="Władysław I the Elbow-high" label="Władysław I"/>
<link wikidata="Q48189" start="8056" end="8072" title="Teutonic Knights" label="Teutonic Knights"/>
<link wikidata="Q333023" start="8305" end="8342" title="Teutonic takeover of Danzig (Gdańsk)" label="the suburban populace was slaughtered"/>
<link wikidata="Q104712" start="8526" end="8532" title="Elbląg" label="Elbląg"/>
<link wikidata="Q565434" start="8943" end="8951" title="Waldemar, Margrave of Brandenburg-Stendal" label="Waldemar"/>
<link wikidata="Q7082" start="8967" end="8974" title="Stendal" label="Stendal"/>
<link wikidata="Q12548" start="9110" end="9127" title="Holy Roman Empire" label="Holy Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q156020" start="9209" end="9247" title="Monastic State of the Teutonic Knights" label="Monastic State of the Teutonic Knights"/>
<link wikidata="Q109073" start="9299" end="9312" title="Old Prussians" label="Old Prussians"/>
<link wikidata="Q4371264" start="9367" end="9386" title="Polish-Teutonic War" label="Polish-Teutonic War"/>
<link wikidata="Q937255" start="9574" end="9604" title="Polish–Lithuanian–Teutonic War" label="Polish–Lithuanian–Teutonic War"/>
<link wikidata="Q54049" start="9657" end="9675" title="Władysław Jagiełło" label="Władysław Jagiełło"/>
<link wikidata="Q26679" start="9739" end="9753" title="Peace of Thorn (1411)" label="Peace of Toruń"/>
<link wikidata="Q21003960" start="10070" end="10097" title="Scots in Poland" label="Scottish diaspora in Poland"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10409" end="10421" title="Arnold Hecht" label="Arnold Hecht"/>
<link wikidata="Q1126883" start="10426" end="10440" title="Conrad Letzkau" label="Conrad Letzkau"/>
<link wikidata="Q42908" start="10873" end="10889" title="Hanseatic League" label="Hanseatic League"/>
<link wikidata="Q53457" start="11234" end="11255" title="Casimir III the Great" label="Casimir III the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q573380" start="11376" end="11400" title="Treaty of Kalisz (1343)" label="Treaty of Kalisz in 1343"/>
<link wikidata="Q281484" start="11717" end="11739" title="Prussian Confederation" label="Prussian Confederation"/>
<link wikidata="Q53459" start="12024" end="12044" title="Casimir IV Jagiellon" label="Casimir IV Jagiellon"/>
<link wikidata="Q171348" start="12081" end="12098" title="Crown of the Kingdom of Poland" label="Kingdom of Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q31487" start="12271" end="12277" title="Kraków" label="Kraków"/>
<link wikidata="Q104712" start="12354" end="12360" title="Elbląg" label="Elbląg"/>
<link wikidata="Q273395" start="12475" end="12485" title="Privilege (law)" label="privileges"/>
<link wikidata="Q315921" start="12508" end="12544" title="Thirteen Years&amp;#x27; War (1454–1466)" label="Thirteen Years&amp;#x27; War (1454–1466)"/>
<link wikidata="Q742137" start="12650" end="12675" title="Battle of Bornholm (1457)" label="Battle of Bornholm (1457)"/>
<link wikidata="Q835077" start="12684" end="12708" title="Battle of Vistula Lagoon" label="Battle of Vistula Lagoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q233532" start="12778" end="12806" title="Second Peace of Thorn (1466)" label="Second Peace of Thorn (1466)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048909" start="12969" end="12991" title="Pomeranian Voivodeship (1466–1772)" label="Pomeranian Voivodeship"/>
<link wikidata="Q589662" start="13022" end="13035" title="Royal Prussia" label="Royal Prussia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3500794" start="13060" end="13083" title="Greater Poland Province, Crown of the Kingdom of Poland" label="Greater Poland Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q86585" start="13346" end="13357" title="Paul Beneke" label="Paul Beneke"/>
<link wikidata="Q701035" start="13405" end="13422" title="The Last Judgment (Memling)" label="The Last Judgment"/>
<link wikidata="Q106851" start="13439" end="13451" title="Hans Memling" label="Hans Memling"/>
<link wikidata="Q933903" start="13509" end="13531" title="St. Mary&amp;#x27;s Church, Gdańsk" label="St. Mary&amp;#x27;s Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q34623" start="13547" end="13563" title="Ten Commandments" label="Ten Commandments"/>
<link wikidata="Q505674" start="13567" end="13584" title="Middle Low German" label="Middle Low German"/>
<link wikidata="Q619" start="13611" end="13630" title="Nicolaus Copernicus" label="Nicolaus Copernicus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1965339" start="13659" end="13673" title="Narratio Prima" label="Narratio Prima"/>
<link wikidata="Q103983" start="13718" end="13737" title="heliocentric theory" label="heliocentric theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q75809" start="13777" end="13785" title="Lutheran" label="Lutheran"/>
<link wikidata="Q12562" start="13895" end="13917" title="Protestant Reformation" label="Protestant Reformation"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13973" end="13991" title="iconoclastic#Reformation iconoclasm" label="iconoclastic riots"/>
<link wikidata="Q153091" start="14179" end="14195" title="Duchy of Prussia" label="Duchy of Prussia"/>
<link wikidata="Q40433" start="14237" end="14254" title="Albert of Prussia" label="Albert of Prussia"/>
<link wikidata="Q93588" start="14491" end="14513" title="Georg Joachim Rheticus" label="Georg Joachim Rheticus"/>
<link wikidata="Q619" start="14577" end="14596" title="Nicolaus Copernicus" label="Nicolaus Copernicus"/>
<link wikidata="Q497115" start="14607" end="14615" title="Frombork" label="Frombork"/>
<link wikidata="Q1965339" start="14705" end="14719" title="Narratio Prima" label="Narratio Prima"/>
<link wikidata="Q99289" start="14759" end="14770" title="Franz Rhode" label="Franz Rhode"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15242" end="15259" title="Renaissance architecture#Netherlands/Flanders" label="Dutch Renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q505674" start="15358" end="15375" title="Middle Low German" label="Middle Low German"/>
<link wikidata="Q188" start="15433" end="15448" title="German language" label="standard German"/>
<link wikidata="Q809" start="15482" end="15497" title="Polish language" label="Polish language"/>
<link wikidata="Q963303" start="15603" end="15615" title="Lublin Union" label="Lublin Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156016" start="16040" end="16053" title="Royal elections in Poland" label="free election"/>
<link wikidata="Q1426552" start="16185" end="16196" title="Golden Gate (Gdańsk)" label="Golden Gate"/>
<link wikidata="Q783294" start="16198" end="16221" title="Neptune&amp;#x27;s Fountain, Gdańsk" label="Neptune&amp;#x27;s Fountain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1450669" start="16255" end="16265" title="Green Gate" label="Green Gate"/>
<link wikidata="Q933903" start="16310" end="16332" title="St. Mary&amp;#x27;s Church, Gdańsk" label="St. Mary&amp;#x27;s Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q2135657" start="16337" end="16351" title="Gdańsk Town Hall" label="Main Town Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q1334300" start="16398" end="16404" title="gilding" label="gilded"/>
<link wikidata="Q54058" start="16427" end="16448" title="Sigismund II Augustus" label="Sigismund II Augustus"/>
<link wikidata="Q617281" start="16462" end="16478" title="Danzig rebellion" label="Danzig rebellion"/>
<link wikidata="Q3625471" start="16492" end="16500" title="Siege of Danzig (1577)" label="besieged"/>
<link wikidata="Q54030" start="16546" end="16561" title="Stephen Báthory" label="Stephen Báthory"/>
<link wikidata="Q836692" start="17063" end="17073" title="Goldwasser" label="Goldwasser"/>
<link wikidata="" start="17101" end="17117" title=":pl:Andrzej Hünefeld" label="Andreas Hünefeld"/>
<link wikidata="Q194267" start="17187" end="17198" title="Rosicrucian" label="Rosicrucian"/>
<link wikidata="Q60946" start="17247" end="17259" title="Martin Opitz" label="Martin Opitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q4865210" start="17307" end="17329" title="Bartholomaeus Nigrinus" label="Bartholomaeus Nigrinus"/>
<link wikidata="Q57963" start="17603" end="17620" title="Johannes Hevelius" label="Johannes Hevelius"/>
<link wikidata="Q53454" start="17691" end="17708" title="John III Sobieski" label="John III Sobieski"/>
<link wikidata="Q55" start="17940" end="17951" title="Netherlands" label="Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q548" start="18040" end="18047" title="Vistula" label="Vistula"/>
<link wikidata="Q2985977" start="18146" end="18155" title="Polish–Swedish War (1626–1629)" label="1626–1629"/>
<link wikidata="Q631163" start="18164" end="18173" title="Deluge (history)" label="1655–1660"/>
<link wikidata="Q217519" start="18206" end="18220" title="bubonic plague" label="bubonic plague"/>
<link wikidata="Q1967790" start="18249" end="18264" title="Battle of Oliwa" label="Battle of Oliwa"/>
<link wikidata="Q267167" start="18355" end="18366" title="Polish Navy" label="Polish Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q52936" start="18377" end="18403" title="Charles X Gustav of Sweden" label="Charles X Gustav of Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q17335" start="18616" end="18631" title="Treaty of Oliwa" label="Treaty of Oliwa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1447540" start="18671" end="18676" title="Oliwa" label="Oliwa"/>
<link wikidata="Q75809" start="18719" end="18727" title="Lutheran" label="Lutheran"/>
<link wikidata="Q101849" start="18739" end="18748" title="Calvinist" label="Calvinist"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="18770" end="18779" title="Catholics" label="Catholics"/>
<link wikidata="Q170072" start="19140" end="19156" title="Dutch Republic" label="United Provinces"/>
<link wikidata="Q148499" start="19306" end="19317" title="Margraviate of Brandenburg" label="Brandenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q595545" start="19369" end="19403" title="Rákóczi&amp;#x27;s War of Independence" label="Rákóczi&amp;#x27;s War of Independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q153136" start="19412" end="19419" title="Habsburg monarchy" label="Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q53437" start="19442" end="19464" title="Augustus II the Strong" label="Augustus II the Strong"/>
<link wikidata="Q181333" start="19607" end="19625" title="Francis II Rákóczi" label="Francis II Rákóczi"/>
<link wikidata="Q540184" start="19809" end="19822" title="Kelemen Mikes" label="Kelemen Mikes"/>
<link wikidata="Q350369" start="19835" end="19847" title="Ádám Mányoki" label="Ádám Mányoki"/>
<link wikidata="Q61710" start="20136" end="20143" title="Munnich" label="Munnich"/>
<link wikidata="Q2354105" start="20164" end="20179" title="Siege of Danzig (1734)" label="Siege of Danzig"/>
<link wikidata="Q212658" start="20191" end="20219" title="War of the Polish Succession" label="War of the Polish Succession"/>
<link wikidata="Q54022" start="20247" end="20268" title="Stanisław Leszczyński" label="Stanisław Leszczyński"/>
<link wikidata="Q54019" start="20381" end="20409" title="Stanisław August Poniatowski" label="Stanisław August Poniatowski"/>
<link wikidata="Q2626375" start="20462" end="20486" title="Michał Jerzy Poniatowski" label="Michał Jerzy Poniatowski"/>
<link wikidata="Q326330" start="20509" end="20516" title="Primate (bishop)" label="Primate"/>
<link wikidata="Q831727" start="20563" end="20586" title="Danzig Research Society" label="Danzig Research Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q74345" start="20601" end="20615" title="Daniel Gralath" label="Daniel Gralath"/>
<link wikidata="Q88192" start="20620" end="20638" title="Gottfried Lengnich" label="Gottfried Lengnich"/>
<link wikidata="Q597506" start="20698" end="20723" title="First Partition of Poland" label="First Partition of Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q27306" start="20870" end="20888" title="Kingdom of Prussia" label="Kingdom of Prussia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3025374" start="20988" end="21014" title="Second Partition of Poland" label="Second Partition of Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q27306" start="21049" end="21067" title="Kingdom of Prussia" label="Kingdom of Prussia"/>
<link wikidata="Q161947" start="21095" end="21107" title="West Prussia" label="West Prussia"/>
<link wikidata="Q87722" start="21122" end="21139" title="Peter Oliver Loew" label="Peter Oliver Loew"/>
<link wikidata="Q38193" start="21483" end="21502" title="Arthur Schopenhauer" label="Arthur Schopenhauer"/>
<link wikidata="Q4863053" start="21693" end="21700" title="Baroque in Poland" label="Baroque"/>
<link wikidata="Q2499641" start="21716" end="21722" title="Uphagen&amp;#x27;s House" label="museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q605977" start="22116" end="22132" title="Fourth Coalition" label="Fourth Coalition"/>
<link wikidata="Q901954" start="22142" end="22161" title="Siege of Danzig (1807)" label="capture of the city"/>
<link wikidata="Q517" start="22200" end="22218" title="Napoleon Bonaparte" label="Napoleon Bonaparte"/>
<link wikidata="Q901974" start="22248" end="22267" title="Free City of Danzig (Napoleonic)" label="Free City of Danzig"/>
<link wikidata="Q1992111" start="22364" end="22369" title="Siege of Danzig (1813)" label="siege"/>
<link wikidata="Q479800" start="22434" end="22457" title="Danzig (region)" label="Regierungsbezirk Danzig"/>
<link wikidata="Q1409002" start="22694" end="22714" title="Wisłoujście Fortress" label="Wisłoujście Fortress"/>
<link wikidata="Q7210074" start="22784" end="22802" title="Resistance movements in partitioned Poland (1795–1918)" label="resistance members"/>
<link wikidata="Q462964" start="22834" end="22842" title="November Uprising" label="November"/>
<link wikidata="Q473670" start="22847" end="22854" title="January Uprising" label="January"/>
<link wikidata="Q129797" start="22887" end="22904" title="Russian Partition" label="Russian Partition"/>
<link wikidata="Q866378" start="23019" end="23033" title="Biskupia Górka" label="Biskupia Górka"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="23337" end="23343" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="23349" end="23363" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="23372" end="23385" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q720008" start="23397" end="23413" title="Great Emigration" label="Great Emigration"/>
<link wikidata="Q2269" start="23432" end="23453" title="Industrial Revolution" label="Industrial Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q73056" start="23508" end="23526" title="Ferdinand Schichau" label="Ferdinand Schichau"/>
<link wikidata="Q573094" start="23534" end="23548" title="Schichau-Werke" label="Schichau-Werke"/>
<link wikidata="Q103801" start="23689" end="23693" title="East Prussia" label="East"/>
<link wikidata="Q161947" start="23698" end="23710" title="West Prussia" label="West Prussia"/>
<link wikidata="Q675291" start="23730" end="23745" title="Province of Prussia" label="single province"/>
<link wikidata="Q155707" start="23823" end="23833" title="Zollverein" label="Zollverein"/>
<link wikidata="Q157638" start="23873" end="23905" title="Frankfurt Parliament" label="German National Assembly of 1848"/>
<link wikidata="Q151624" start="23955" end="23975" title="German Confederation" label="German Confederation"/>
<link wikidata="Q43287" start="24261" end="24274" title="German Empire" label="German Empire"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="24400" end="24418" title="Ogniwo (organisation)" label="&amp;quot;Ogniwo&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="24448" end="24461" title="Bank Bałtycki" label="Bank Bałtycki"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="24497" end="24511" title="Gazeta Gdańska" label="Gazeta Gdańska"/>
<link wikidata="Q164294" start="24654" end="24664" title="Saint Anna" label="Saint Anna"/>
<link wikidata="Q1874" start="24769" end="24775" title="Odesa" label="Odessa"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="24941" end="24948" title="Thaler#19th-century Germany" label="thalers"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="25277" end="25288" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q8736" start="25315" end="25335" title="Treaty of Versailles" label="Treaty of Versailles"/>
<link wikidata="Q216173" start="25365" end="25384" title="Free City of Danzig" label="Free City of Danzig"/>
<link wikidata="Q38130" start="25424" end="25441" title="League of Nations" label="League of Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q218819" start="25815" end="25828" title="customs union" label="customs union"/>
<link wikidata="Q517081" start="26004" end="26016" title="Westerplatte" label="Westerplatte"/>
<link wikidata="Q871859" start="26687" end="26724" title="Volkstag" label="Free City of Danzig&amp;#x27;s Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q157537" start="26896" end="26910" title="Zentrumspartei" label="Zentrumspartei"/>
<link wikidata="Q700109" start="27846" end="27852" title="Danzig gulden" label="Gulden"/>
<link wikidata="Q186284" start="28166" end="28183" title="Polish-Soviet War" label="Polish-Soviet War"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="28275" end="28281" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet"/>
<link wikidata="Q251395" start="28282" end="28290" title="Red Army" label="Red Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q270" start="28308" end="28314" title="Warsaw" label="Warsaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q207272" start="28320" end="28342" title="Second Polish Republic" label="Second Polish Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q517081" start="28411" end="28423" title="Westerplatte" label="Westerplatte"/>
<link wikidata="Q385" start="28556" end="28562" title="Gdynia" label="Gdynia"/>
<link wikidata="Q821376" start="28723" end="28748" title="German-Polish customs war" label="German-Polish customs war"/>
<link wikidata="Q1502867" start="28837" end="28849" title="Polish Coal Trunk-Line" label="railway line"/>
<link wikidata="Q81720" start="28871" end="28878" title="Silesia" label="Silesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7320" start="29346" end="29364" title="Nazi Party" label="National Socialist"/>
<link wikidata="Q41304" start="29505" end="29520" title="Weimar Republic" label="Weimar Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q126413" start="29543" end="29586" title="German–Polish declaration of non-aggression" label="German–Polish declaration of non-aggression"/>
<link wikidata="Q7325" start="29907" end="29910" title="Jew" label="Jew"/>
<link wikidata="Q7310" start="30033" end="30039" title="Nazism" label="Nazism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2629561" start="30055" end="30076" title="anti-Polish sentiment" label="anti-Polish sentiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q326128" start="30096" end="30109" title="Germanisation" label="Germanisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q59816" start="30114" end="30125" title="Racial segregation" label="segregation"/>
<link wikidata="Q715753" start="31190" end="31201" title="Artus Court" label="Artus Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q783294" start="31210" end="31233" title="Neptune&amp;#x27;s Fountain, Gdańsk" label="Neptune&amp;#x27;s Fountain"/>
<link wikidata="Q3847743" start="31576" end="31598" title="3 May Constitution Day" label="3 May Constitution Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q150812" start="31627" end="31645" title="invasion of Poland" label="invasion of Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="31662" end="31674" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q11709939" start="31774" end="31800" title="Jewish Community of Danzig" label="Jewish Community of Danzig"/>
<link wikidata="Q177716" start="31841" end="31847" title="pogrom" label="pogrom"/>
<link wikidata="Q36756" start="31875" end="31888" title="Kristallnacht" label="Kristallnacht"/>
<link wikidata="Q193714" start="32000" end="32017" title="Mandate Palestine" label="Mandate Palestine"/>
<link wikidata="Q15111616" start="32198" end="32212" title="Theresienstadt" label="Theresienstadt"/>
<link wikidata="Q6383487" start="32299" end="32315" title="Kehilla (modern)" label="Jewish community"/>
<link wikidata="Q154681" start="32444" end="32454" title="Anschluss" label="annexation"/>
<link wikidata="Q40" start="32458" end="32465" title="Austria" label="Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q194242" start="32474" end="32485" title="Sudetenland" label="Sudetenland"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="32585" end="32597" title="Nazi Germany" label="Nazi Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="32625" end="32637" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q564388" start="32745" end="32777" title="Defence of the Polish Post in Danzig" label="defending the Polish Post Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q135010" start="32805" end="32815" title="war crimes" label="war crimes"/>
<link wikidata="Q533034" start="32854" end="32880" title="Battle of Westerplatte" label="defending the Westerplatte"/>
<link wikidata="Q170363" start="33358" end="33392" title="SMS Schleswig-Holstein" label="SMS &amp;quot;Schleswig-Holstein&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q7320" start="33513" end="33518" title="NSDAP" label="NSDAP"/>
<link wikidata="Q5606" start="33646" end="33659" title="Hel Peninsula" label="Hel Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q581404" start="33822" end="33843" title="Pomeranian Voivodeship (1919–39)" label="Pomeranian Voivodship"/>
<link wikidata="Q642961" start="33891" end="33900" title="Reichsgau" label="Reichsgau"/>
<link wikidata="Q510368" start="33936" end="33955" title="Danzig-West Prussia" label="Danzig-West Prussia"/>
<link wikidata="Q328468" start="34117" end="34136" title="Nazi concentration camps" label="concentration camps"/>
<link wikidata="Q326193" start="34162" end="34170" title="Stutthof concentration camp" label="Stutthof"/>
<link wikidata="Q821391" start="34704" end="34712" title="Massacres in Piaśnica" label="Piaśnica"/>
<link wikidata="Q1790121" start="34714" end="34722" title="Sztutowo" label="Sztutowo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1837513" start="34724" end="34733" title="Nowy Port" label="Nowy Port"/>
<link wikidata="Q64" start="34752" end="34758" title="Berlin" label="Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q4188196" start="34819" end="34824" title="Zaspa" label="Zaspa"/>
<link wikidata="Q13479365" start="34837" end="34855" title="Einsatzkommando" label="Einsatzkommando 16"/>
<link wikidata="Q15460398" start="34895" end="34913" title="SS Heimwehr Danzig" label="SS Heimwehr Danzig"/>
<link wikidata="Q44687" start="35026" end="35028" title="SS" label="SS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1416195" start="35082" end="35094" title="Selbstschutz" label="Selbstschutz"/>
<link wikidata="Q152543" start="35202" end="35216" title="Einsatzgruppen" label="Einsatzgruppen"/>
<link wikidata="Q8060" start="35255" end="35268" title="Romani people" label="Romani people"/>
<link wikidata="Q7597208" start="35290" end="35301" title="Stalag XX-B" label="Stalag XX-B"/>
<link wikidata="Q321177" start="35302" end="35322" title="German prisoner-of-war camps in World War II" label="prisoner-of-war camp"/>
<link wikidata="Q329888" start="35327" end="35333" title="Allies of World War II" label="Allied"/>
<link wikidata="Q326193" start="35368" end="35395" title="Stutthof concentration camp" label="Stutthof concentration camp"/>
<link wikidata="Q128015" start="35868" end="35878" title="guillotine" label="guillotine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2363019" start="36285" end="36311" title="Polish resistance movement in World War II" label="Polish resistance movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q650153" start="36378" end="36387" title="V-weapons" label="V-weapons"/>
<link wikidata="Q321177" start="36656" end="36672" title="German prisoner-of-war camps in World War II" label="German POW camps"/>
<link wikidata="Q16969638" start="36701" end="36708" title="Neutral powers during World War II" label="neutral"/>
<link wikidata="Q34" start="36709" end="36715" title="Sweden" label="Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q152529" start="36721" end="36730" title="Home Army" label="Home Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q35" start="36778" end="36785" title="Denmark" label="Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q695666" start="36944" end="36963" title="Operation Hannibal" label="seaborne evacuation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194" start="36967" end="36985" title="Schleswig-Holstein" label="Schleswig-Holstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q108266326" start="37084" end="37089" title="Siege of Danzig (1945)" label="siege"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="37112" end="37118" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet"/>
<link wikidata="Q251395" start="37119" end="37127" title="Red Army" label="Red Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q1536279" start="37766" end="37774" title="Expulsion of Germans after World War II" label="expelled"/>
<link wikidata="Q277476" start="37798" end="37815" title="Potsdam Agreement" label="Potsdam Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q161227" start="38072" end="38088" title="Yalta Conference" label="Yalta Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q712144" start="38157" end="38165" title="de facto" label="de facto"/>
<link wikidata="Q151187" start="38237" end="38255" title="Potsdam Conference" label="Potsdam Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q335255" start="38585" end="38596" title="Curzon Line" label="Curzon Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q1294787" start="39220" end="39227" title="artisan" label="artisan"/>
<link wikidata="Q608585" start="39369" end="39382" title="Główne Miasto" label="Główne Miasto"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165324" start="39759" end="39767" title="Old Town (Gdańsk)" label="Old town"/>
<link wikidata="Q946" start="40290" end="40301" title="Donald Tusk" label="Donald Tusk"/>
<link wikidata="Q541765" start="40500" end="40508" title="Wrzeszcz" label="Wrzeszcz"/>
<link wikidata="Q2797902" start="40510" end="40517" title="Siedlce, Gdańsk" label="Siedlce"/>
<link wikidata="Q1837513" start="40519" end="40528" title="Nowy Port" label="Nowy Port"/>
<link wikidata="Q5152669" start="40575" end="40622" title="Commission for the Determination of Place Names" label="Commission for the Determination of Place Names"/>
<link wikidata="Q45379" start="40789" end="40807" title="Danuta Siedzikówna" label="Danuta Siedzikówna"/>
<link wikidata="" start="40824" end="40842" title=":pl:Feliks Selmanowicz" label="Feliks Selmanowicz"/>
<link wikidata="Q539051" start="40960" end="40966" title="Greeks" label="Greeks"/>
<link wikidata="Q2436423" start="40971" end="40982" title="Macedonians (ethnic group)" label="Macedonians"/>
<link wikidata="Q7307676" start="40984" end="41015" title="refugees of the Greek Civil War" label="refugees of the Greek Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q159603" start="41295" end="41312" title="Władysław Gomułka" label="Władysław Gomułka"/>
<link wikidata="Q1003" start="41377" end="41387" title="Solidarity (Polish trade union)" label="Solidarity"/>
<link wikidata="Q444" start="41542" end="41553" title="Lech Wałęsa" label="Lech Wałęsa"/>
<link wikidata="Q45379" start="41883" end="41901" title="Danuta Siedzikówna" label="Danuta Siedzikówna"/>
<link wikidata="Q81274" start="42225" end="42240" title="EuroBasket 2009" label="EuroBasket 2009"/>
<link wikidata="Q1458069" start="42242" end="42275" title="2011 FIVB Volleyball World League" label="2011 FIVB Volleyball World League"/>
<link wikidata="Q22669" start="42277" end="42291" title="UEFA Euro 2012" label="UEFA Euro 2012"/>
<link wikidata="Q181337" start="42293" end="42341" title="2013 Men&amp;#x27;s European Volleyball Championship" label="2013 Men&amp;#x27;s European Volleyball Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q2520188" start="42343" end="42393" title="2014 FIVB Volleyball Men&amp;#x27;s World Championship" label="2014 FIVB Volleyball Men&amp;#x27;s World Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q2756007" start="42395" end="42441" title="2016 European Men&amp;#x27;s Handball Championship" label="2016 European Men&amp;#x27;s Handball Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q18432245" start="42443" end="42491" title="2017 Men&amp;#x27;s European Volleyball Championship" label="2017 Men&amp;#x27;s European Volleyball Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q76761946" start="42493" end="42541" title="2021 Men&amp;#x27;s European Volleyball Championship" label="2021 Men&amp;#x27;s European Volleyball Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q59384237" start="42543" end="42595" title="2022 FIVB Volleyball Women&amp;#x27;s World Championship" label="2022 FIVB Volleyball Women&amp;#x27;s World Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q19344375" start="42597" end="42640" title="2023 World Men&amp;#x27;s Handball Championship" label="2023 World Men&amp;#x27;s Handball Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q115356430" start="42645" end="42691" title="2023 FIVB Volleyball Men&amp;#x27;s Nations League" label="2023 FIVB Volleyball Men&amp;#x27;s Nations League"/>
<link wikidata="Q1864017" start="42733" end="42759" title="List of people from Gdańsk" label="List of people from Gdańsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q502619" start="42762" end="42786" title="List of mayors of Gdańsk" label="List of mayors of Gdańsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q502619" start="42789" end="42813" title="List of mayors of Danzig" label="List of mayors of Danzig"/>
<link wikidata="Q1358292" start="42816" end="42834" title="Johannes Dantiscus" label="Johannes Dantiscus"/>
<link wikidata="Q4894249" start="42884" end="42903" title="Bernhard von Reesen" label="Bernhard von Reesen"/>
<link wikidata="Q97625" start="42912" end="42926" title="Albrecht Giese" label="Albrecht Giese"/>
<link wikidata="Q57963" start="42935" end="42952" title="Johannes Hevelius" label="Johannes Hevelius"/>
<link wikidata="Q552280" start="42973" end="42987" title="Daniel Schultz" label="Daniel Schultz"/>
<link wikidata="Q694375" start="42996" end="43014" title="Bogusław Radziwiłł" label="Bogusław Radziwiłł"/>
<link wikidata="Q500465" start="43048" end="43064" title="Andreas Schlüter" label="Andreas Schlüter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1373167" start="43073" end="43101" title="Aleksander Benedykt Sobieski" label="Aleksander Benedykt Sobieski"/>
<link wikidata="Q65219" start="43125" end="43144" title="Jacob Theodor Klein" label="Jacob Theodor Klein"/>
<link wikidata="Q57073" start="43153" end="43178" title="Daniel Gabriel Fahrenheit" label="Daniel Gabriel Fahrenheit"/>
<link wikidata="Q74345" start="43216" end="43230" title="Daniel Gralath" label="Daniel Gralath"/>
<link wikidata="Q65863" start="43260" end="43286" title="Louise Adelgunde Gottsched" label="Louise Adelgunde Gottsched"/>
<link wikidata="Q696720" start="43303" end="43321" title="Daniel Chodowiecki" label="Daniel Chodowiecki"/>
<link wikidata="Q349948" start="43339" end="43365" title="Adam Kazimierz Czartoryski" label="Adam Kazimierz Czartoryski"/>
<link wikidata="Q2626375" start="43403" end="43427" title="Michał Jerzy Poniatowski" label="Michał Jerzy Poniatowski"/>
<link wikidata="Q54019" start="43496" end="43524" title="Stanisław August Poniatowski" label="Stanisław August Poniatowski"/>
<link wikidata="Q170029" start="43527" end="43552" title="Johann Wilhelm Archenholz" label="Johann Wilhelm Archenholz"/>
<link wikidata="Q2909560" start="43561" end="43575" title="Avraham Danzig" label="Avraham Danzig"/>
<link wikidata="Q58062" start="43591" end="43604" title="Georg Forster" label="Georg Forster"/>
<link wikidata="Q74420" start="43613" end="43630" title="Gottlieb Hufeland" label="Gottlieb Hufeland"/>
<link wikidata="Q61440" start="43639" end="43659" title="Johanna Schopenhauer" label="Johanna Schopenhauer"/>
<link wikidata="Q84344" start="43668" end="43688" title="Johannes Daniel Falk" label="Johannes Daniel Falk"/>
<link wikidata="Q3569565" start="43697" end="43729" title="Władysław Franciszek Jabłonowski" label="Władysław Franciszek Jabłonowski"/>
<link wikidata="Q38193" start="43754" end="43773" title="Arthur Schopenhauer" label="Arthur Schopenhauer"/>
<link wikidata="Q638521" start="43782" end="43799" title="Miltiades Caridis" label="Miltiades Caridis"/>
<link wikidata="Q6538" start="43819" end="43831" title="Günter Grass" label="Günter Grass"/>
<link wikidata="Q9389727" start="43864" end="43880" title="Zdzisław Kuźniar" label="Zdzisław Kuźniar"/>
<link wikidata="Q981877" start="43896" end="43912" title="Janusz Kupcewicz" label="Janusz Kupcewicz"/>
<link wikidata="Q928556" start="43933" end="43945" title="Paweł Huelle" label="Paweł Huelle"/>
<link wikidata="Q946" start="43977" end="43988" title="Donald Tusk" label="Donald Tusk"/>
<link wikidata="Q3259469" start="43996" end="44020" title="Prime Minister of Poland" label="Prime Minister of Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q735587" start="44048" end="44081" title="President of the European Council" label="President of the European Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q208242" start="44112" end="44140" title="European People&amp;#x27;s Party" label="European People&amp;#x27;s Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q655728" start="44155" end="44194" title="Dariusz Michalczewski" label="Dariusz Michalczewski &amp;quot;Tiger&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q830940" start="44216" end="44219" title="World Boxing Organization" label="WBO"/>
<link wikidata="Q1004748" start="44221" end="44238" title="Light heavyweight" label="Light heavyweight"/>
<link wikidata="Q7801404" start="44306" end="44324" title="Tiger Energy Drink" label="Tiger Energy Drink"/>
<link wikidata="Q1387810" start="44347" end="44361" title="Leszek Możdżer" label="Leszek Możdżer"/>
<link wikidata="Q337366" start="44438" end="44458" title="Edward O&amp;#x27;Rourke" label="Edward O&amp;#x27;Rourke"/>
<link wikidata="Q2165775" start="44484" end="44501" title="Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Gdańsk" label="Diocese of Danzig"/>
<link wikidata="Q444" start="44504" end="44515" title="Lech Wałęsa" label="Lech Wałęsa"/>
<link wikidata="Q643610" start="44526" end="44552" title="List of Nobel Peace Prize laureates" label="Nobel Peace Prize laureate"/>
<link wikidata="Q673527" start="44606" end="44610" title="1990 Polish presidential election" label="1990"/>
<link wikidata="Q7599205" start="44614" end="44630" title="Stanisław Pestka" label="Stanisław Pestka"/>
<link wikidata="Q7360611" start="44643" end="44649" title="Rolbik" label="Rolbik"/>
<link wikidata="Q147239" start="44652" end="44661" title="Kashubians" label="Kashubian"/>
<link wikidata="Q7344866" start="44669" end="44682" title="Robert Gordon (philanthropist)" label="Robert Gordon"/>
<link wikidata="Q130384" start="44745" end="44771" title="Timeline of Gdańsk history" label="Timeline of Gdańsk history"/>
<link wikidata="Q30672065" start="44774" end="44810" title="List of Gdańsk aristocratic families" label="List of Gdańsk aristocratic families"/>
<link wikidata="Q11722244" start="44813" end="44838" title="Lists of Danzig officials" label="Lists of Danzig officials"/>
<link wikidata="Q502619" start="44841" end="44865" title="List of mayors of Danzig" label="List of mayors of Danzig"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="464751" wikidata="Q209896" url="?curid=464751" title="Honorary degree">
<text>An honorary degree is an academic degree for which a university (or other degree-awarding institution) has waived all of the usual requirements. It is also known by the Latin phrases &quot;honoris causa&quot; (&quot;for the sake of the honour&quot;) or &quot;ad honorem &quot; (&quot;to the honour&quot;). The degree is typically a doctorate or, less commonly, a master&#x27;s degree, and may be awarded to someone who has no prior connection with the academic institution or no previous postsecondary education. An example of identifying a recipient of this award is as follows: Doctorate in Business Administration (&quot;Hon. Causa&quot;).

The degree is often conferred as a way of honouring a distinguished visitor&#x27;s contributions to a specific field or to society in general.

Honorary doctorates are purely titular degrees in that they confer no rights on the recipient and carry with them no formal academic qualification. As such, it is always expected that such degrees be listed in one&#x27;s curriculum vitae (CV) as an award, and not in the education section. With regard to the use of this honorific, the policies of institutions of higher education generally ask that recipients &quot;refrain from adopting the misleading title&quot; and that a recipient of an honorary doctorate should restrict the use of the title &quot;Dr&quot; before their name to any engagement with the institution of higher education in question and not within the broader community.

==Historical origins==
The practice dates back to the Middle Ages, when for various reasons a university might be persuaded, or otherwise see fit, to grant exemption from some or all of the usual statutory requirements for the award of a degree. The earliest honorary degree on record was awarded to Lionel Woodville in the late 1470s by the University of Oxford. He later became Bishop of Salisbury.

In the late 16th century, the granting of honorary degrees became quite common, especially on the occasion of royal visits to Oxford or Cambridge. On the visit of James I to Oxford in 1605, for example, forty-three members of his retinue (fifteen of whom were earls or barons) received the degree of Master of Arts, and the Register of Convocation explicitly states that these were full degrees, carrying the usual privileges, such as voting rights in Convocation and Congregation.

There were also some special cases: for example the critic John Ruskin suffered a physical or mental breakdown in 1840 and dropped out of the University of Oxford. He returned to Oxford in 1842, and sat a single exam, and was awarded an honorary fourth-class degree.

In the United States, the Doctor of Philosophy (Ph.D.) degree was first conferred as an honorary degree at Bucknell University in 1852; not until 1861 did Yale University award the first earned Ph.D., becoming the first American university to do so. Over one hundred institutions in the United States conferred honorary Ph.D. degrees in the 19th century, to more than seven hundred recipients. However, the practice of awarding the Ph.D. as an honorary degree drew condemnation from organizations such as the American Philological Association and the American Association for the Advancement of Science, and the board of regents of the University of the State of New York prohibited any university in the state from conferring an honorary Ph.D. effective in 1897. The number of honorary Ph.D. degrees awarded in the U.S. declined in the 20th century, and surveys by the United States Office of Education found none conferred in 1940 or later years. One of the last known recipients of an honorary Ph.D. was singer Bing Crosby, from Gonzaga University in 1937.

By 2001, about 21 U.S. states had begun allowing public schools to grant honorary high school diplomas to military veterans under a program called &quot;Operation Recognition&quot;. In Ohio, it was unclear whether public schools had the legal authority to grant them until 12 July 2001, when Governor Bob Taft signed a bill allowing public school districts to grant them to honorably discharged veterans of World War II. Lakota East High School is believed to have awarded the first such diplomas to a group of 20 veterans in May of that year.

==Modern practice==
Honorary degrees are usually awarded at regular graduation ceremonies, at which the recipients are often invited to make a speech of acceptance before the assembled faculty and graduates—an event which often forms the highlight of the ceremony. Generally, universities nominate several persons each year for honorary degrees; these nominations usually go through several committees before receiving approval. Nominees are generally not told until a formal approval and invitation are made; often it is perceived that the system is shrouded in secrecy, and occasionally seen as political and controversial. On occasion, organisations have been awarded honorary doctorates.

&quot;Honoris causa&quot; degrees are not considered of the same standing as substantive degrees earned by the standard academic processes of courses and original research, except perhaps where the recipient has demonstrated an appropriate level of academic scholarship that would ordinarily qualify him or her for the award of a substantive degree. Recipients of honorary degrees typically wear the same academic dress as recipients of substantive degrees, although there are a few exceptions: honorary graduates at the University of Cambridge wear the appropriate full-dress gown but not the hood, and those at the University of St Andrews wear a black cassock instead of the usual full-dress gown.

An &quot;ad eundem&quot; or &quot;jure officii&quot; degree is sometimes considered honorary, although these are only conferred on an individual who has already achieved a comparable qualification at another university or attained an office requiring the appropriate level of scholarship. Under certain circumstances, a degree may be conferred on an individual for both the nature of the office they hold and the completion of a dissertation. The &quot;dissertation et jure dignitatis&quot; is considered to be a full academic degree. See below.

Although higher doctorates such as Doctor of Science, Doctor of Letters, etc. are often awarded &quot;honoris causa&quot;, in many countries (notably England and Scotland, Ireland, Australia, and New Zealand) it is formally possible to earn such a degree as a substantive one. This typically involves the submission of a portfolio of peer-refereed research, usually undertaken over a number of years, which has made a substantial contribution to the academic field in question. The university will appoint a panel of examiners who will consider the case and prepare a report recommending whether or not the degree be awarded. Usually, the applicant must have some strong formal connection with the university in question, for example full-time academic staff, or graduates of several years&#x27; standing.

Some universities, seeking to differentiate between substantive and honorary doctorates, have a degree (often DUniv, or Doctor of the University) which is used for these purposes, with the other higher doctorates reserved for formally examined academic scholarship.

The Archbishop of Canterbury has the authority to award degrees. These &quot;Lambeth degrees&quot; are sometimes, erroneously, thought to be honorary; however the archbishops have for many centuries had the legal authority (originally as the representatives of the Pope, later confirmed by a 1533 Act of Henry VIII), to award degrees and regularly do so to people who have either passed an examination or are deemed to have satisfied the appropriate requirements.

Between the two extremes of honouring celebrities and formally assessing a portfolio of research, some universities use honorary degrees to recognise achievements of intellectual rigour. Some institutes of higher education do not confer honorary degrees as a matter of policy—see below. Some learned societies award honorary fellowships in the same way as honorary degrees are awarded by universities, for similar reasons.

===Practical use===
A typical example of university regulations is, &quot;Honorary graduates may use the approved post-nominal letters. It is not customary, however, for recipients of an honorary doctorate to adopt the prefix &#x27;Dr. It is generally considered improper practice for an honorary doctor to use the formal title of &quot;Doctor,&quot; regardless of the background circumstances for the award. Written communications where an honorary doctorate has been awarded may include the letters &quot;h.c.&quot; after the award to indicate that status.

The recipient of an honorary degree may add the degree title postnominally, but it should always be made clear that the degree is honorary by adding &quot;honorary&quot; or &quot;honoris causa&quot; or &quot;h.c.&quot; in parentheses after the degree title. In some countries, a person who holds an honorary doctorate may use the title &quot;Doctor&quot; prenominally, abbreviated &quot;Dr.h.c.&quot; or &quot;Dr.(h.c.)&quot;. Sometimes, they use &quot;Hon&quot; before the degree letters, for example, &quot;Hon DMus&quot;.

In recent years, some universities have adopted entirely separate postnominal titles for honorary degrees. This is in part due to the confusion that honorary degrees have caused. For example, an honorary doctorate from the Auckland University of Technology takes the special title &quot;HonD&quot; since it is now common in certain countries to use certain degrees, such as LLD or HonD, as purely honorary. Some universities, including the Open University, grant Doctor of the University (DUniv) degrees to selected nominees, while awarding PhD or EdD degrees to those who have fulfilled the academic requirements.

Most American universities award the degrees of LLD (Doctor of Laws), LittD (Doctor of Letters), LHD (Doctor of Humane Letters), ScD (Doctor of Science), PedD (Doctor of Pedagogy) and DD (Doctor of Divinity) only as honorary degrees. American universities do not have the system of &quot;higher doctorates&quot; used in the UK and some other universities around the world.

===Customary degrees (&quot;ad eundem&quot; or &quot;jure officii&quot; degrees)===
Some universities and colleges have the custom of awarding a master&#x27;s degree to every scholar appointed as a full professor, who had never earned a degree there. At the universities of Oxford, Dublin and Cambridge, many senior staff are granted the degree of Master of Arts after three years of service. 

In the United States, at Amherst, Wesleyan, and Yale, the AM &quot;ad eundem&quot; degree is conferred upon those who rise to the rank of full professor. At Brown and Harvard the degrees are awarded to those faculty who are granted tenure and the rank of associate professor, usually after approximately eight years of service to the university as an assistant professor or for a shorter amount of time for a professor with prior service at another university.

Similarly, a &quot;jure dignitatis&quot; degree is awarded to someone who has demonstrated eminence and scholarship by being appointed to a particular office. Thus, for example, a DD (Doctor of Divinity) might be conferred upon a bishop on the occasion of his consecration, or a judge created LLD (Legum Doctor) or DCL (Doctor of Civil Law) upon his or her appointment to the judicial bench. These, also, are properly considered substantive rather than honorary degrees.

===Institutions not awarding honorary degrees===
Some US universities such as the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT), Cornell University, Stanford University, and Rice University, do not award honorary degrees as a matter of policy. The University of Virginia (founded in 1819) was probably the first US university to explicitly have a policy of not awarding honorary degrees at the request of its founder, Thomas Jefferson. In 1845, William Barton Rogers, then chairman of the faculty, vigorously defended this policy; in 1861, he founded MIT in Boston and continued this practice. The University of Virginia does annually award Thomas Jefferson Medals in Architecture and in Law, as the highest honours accorded by that institution.

The Stanford Alumni Association occasionally awards the &quot;Degree of Uncommon Man/Woman&quot; to individuals who have given &quot;rare and exceptional service&quot; to the university. Though UCLA has imposed a moratorium on awarding honorary degrees, it honours notable people with the UCLA Medal instead. St. John&#x27;s College has not granted honorary degrees since 1936, but its alumni association occasionally offers honorary membership to retiring faculty, staff, and other close associates of the college.

==Controversy==
Some universities and colleges have been accused of granting honorary degrees in exchange for large donations. Honorary degree recipients, particularly those who have no prior academic qualifications, have sometimes been criticized if they insist on being called &quot;Doctor&quot; as a result of their award, as the honorific may mislead the general public about their qualifications.

In 1985, as a deliberate snub, the University of Oxford voted to refuse Margaret Thatcher an honorary degree in protest against her cuts in funding for higher education. This award had previously been given to all prime ministers who had been educated at Oxford.

The Philosophy Faculty at Cambridge courted controversy among the academic community in March 1992, when three of its members posed a temporary veto against the awarding of an honorary doctorate to Jacques Derrida; they and other non-Cambridge proponents of analytic philosophy protested against the granting on the grounds that Derrida&#x27;s work &quot;did not conform with accepted measures of academic rigor.&quot; Although the university eventually passed the motion, the episode did more to draw attention to the continuing antipathy between the analytic (of which Cambridge&#x27;s faculty is a leading exponent) and the post-Hegelian continental philosophical traditions (with which Derrida&#x27;s work is more closely associated).

In 1996, Southampton College at Long Island University (now a campus of Stony Brook University) awarded an Honorary Doctorate of Amphibious Letters to Muppet Kermit the Frog. Although some students objected to awarding a degree to a Muppet, Kermit delivered an enjoyable commencement address and the small college received considerable press coverage. The degree was conferred in recognition of efforts in the area of environmentalism. The university stated: &quot;His theme song, &#x27;It&#x27;s Not Easy Bein&#x27; Green,&#x27; has become a rallying cry of the environmental movement. Kermit has used his celebrity to spread positive messages in public service announcements for the National Wildlife Federation, National Park Service, the Better World Society, and others.&quot;

The awarding of an honorary degree to political figures can prompt protests from faculty or students. In 2001, George W. Bush received an honorary degree from Yale University, where he had earned his bachelor&#x27;s degree in history in 1968. Some students and faculty chose to boycott the university&#x27;s 300th commencement. Andrew Card, who served as Bush&#x27;s Chief of Staff from 2001 to 2006, ultimately chose not to speak when the University of Massachusetts Amherst awarded him an honorary degree in 2007, in response to protests from students and faculty at the commencement ceremonies.

In 2005 at the University of Western Ontario, Henry Morgentaler, a gynecologist involved in a legal case decriminalizing abortion in Canada (&quot;R. v. Morgentaler&quot;), was made an honorary Doctor of Laws. Over 12,000 signatures were acquired asking the UWO to reverse its decision to honor Morgentaler. Several protest rallies were held, including one on the day the honorary degree was bestowed (a counter petition to support Morgentaler&#x27;s degree gained 10,000 signatures).

In 2007, protesters demanded that the University of Edinburgh revoke an honorary degree awarded to Zimbabwean leader Robert Mugabe in 1984. The university subsequently revealed plans to review its honorary degree policy and strip certain figures of their honorary degrees who did not deserve them. When considering revoking the honorary degree of a political figure, such reasons as human rights abuse or political corruption would be considered. As a result, it was announced that Mugabe had been stripped of his honorary degree. The university also planned to have a more rigorous selection procedure regarding potential recipients of honorary degrees, in an attempt to rectify the trend of awarding degrees to celebrities. Students at the University of Massachusetts Amherst also
asked the university to revoke the honorary degree that was awarded to Mugabe over twenty years ago, and on 12 June 2008 the trustees unanimously rescinded Robert Mugabe&#x27;s honorary degree. Michigan State University has also rescinded its honorary degree.

In April 2009, Arizona State University&#x27;s president, Michael M. Crow, refused to give an honorary degree to US President Barack Obama for his lack of adequate qualifying achievements thus far. Also, controversy was ignited about Notre Dame awarding Obama an honorary degree, as the institution is Roman Catholic and Obama holds pro-choice views on abortion and supports embryonic stem cell research.

In February 2012, Rosmah Mansor, the wife of the Prime Minister of Malaysia, Najib Razak was controversially awarded an honorary doctorate by the Curtin University for &quot;services to childhood education&quot;. The university honored Rosmah for founding and driving the Permata early childhood centres in Malaysia although some alumni and students contended that the government-funded centres are &quot;an abuse of taxpayers&#x27; money&quot;.

Over 50 honorary degrees awarded to Bill Cosby have been rescinded due to allegations and lawsuits of sexual assault.

In December 2022, the School of the Art Institute of Chicago rescinded an honorary doctorate degree awarded to rapper Kanye West after a series of racist and antisemitic remarks made by West.

==Use of title associated with honorary doctorates==
By convention, recipients of honorary doctorates do not use the title &quot;Dr&quot; in general correspondence. Recipients are not addressed orally or in writing as &quot;Dr&quot; by other academic institutions – and not correctly addressed as &quot;Dr&quot; in their professional/personal life. They continue to be addressed orally and in writing with the form of address to which they entitled prior to receiving the honor. E.g., Mr./Ms./Mrs. However, this social convention is not always scrupulously observed. Notable people who have used the honorary prefix include:

* Maya Angelou, a memoirist and poet who had no earned degrees, but she received dozens of honorary ones and she preferred to be called &quot;Dr. Angelou&quot; by people other than family and close friends.
* Stephen Colbert, who received an honorary doctorate in fine arts from Knox College in 2006, frequently made light of the concept of an &quot;honorary doctor&quot; by offering up scurrilous medical advice in a segment called &quot;Cheating Death With Dr. Stephen Colbert, D.F.A.&quot; on his television program &quot;The Colbert Report&quot; after being awarded a D.F.A.
* Benjamin Franklin, who received an honorary master&#x27;s degree from The College of William and Mary in 1756, and doctorates from the University of St. Andrews in 1759 and the University of Oxford in 1762 for his scientific accomplishments. He thereafter referred to himself as &quot;Doctor Franklin&quot;.
* Alan García, former Peruvian president and politician, who for many years held the title of Dr. in official presentations as head of state and as a civilian throughout his political career. Heavily criticized by the media when discovering his last degree to be a master&#x27;s in economic development and not completing his doctoral studies in law, he was awarded an honorary doctorate from the University of Delhi in 1987, while making an official visit to India in his first term as president.
* Samuel Johnson, an author and lexicographer, who had some years earlier been unable (due to financial considerations) to complete his undergraduate studies at Pembroke College, Oxford, was awarded the degree of Master of Arts by diploma in 1755, in recognition of his scholarly achievements. In 1765, Trinity College, Dublin awarded him the degree of Doctor of Laws and in 1775 Oxford bestowed upon him the degree of Doctor of Civil Law by diploma.
* Edwin H. Land, who invented the Land Camera instant camera, and was a co-founder of the Polaroid Corporation, received an honorary doctorate from Harvard University and was often referred to as &quot;Dr. Land&quot;, though he did not have any earned degree.
* Richard Stallman, the founder of the Free Software Foundation in the field of information technology, has been awarded fourteen honorary doctorates from various international educational institutions from 1996 through 2014 including the North American Lakehead University in 2009, and now refers to himself as &quot;Dr. Richard Stallman&quot; in speeches, talks, videos, and email.
* Sukarno, the first president of Indonesia, was awarded 26 honorary doctorates from various international universities including Columbia University, the University of Michigan, the University of Berlin, the Al-Azhar University, the University of Belgrade, the Lomonosov University and many more; and also from domestic universities, including the Universitas Gadjah Mada, the Universitas Indonesia, the Bandung Institute of Technology, and the Universitas Padjadjaran. He had often been referred to by the Indonesian Government at the time as &quot;Dr. Ir. Sukarno&quot;, combined with his engineer&#x27;s degree (Ir.) from Bandung Institute of Technology.

==See also==
* Academic degree
* Freedom of the City
* Homage
* Latin honors

== References ==
== External links ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q209896" start="3" end="18" title="Honorary degree" label="honorary degree"/>
<link wikidata="Q189533" start="25" end="40" title="academic degree" label="academic degree"/>
<link wikidata="Q3918" start="53" end="63" title="university" label="university"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="169" end="174" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055153" start="259" end="269" title="ad honorem" label="ad honorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q849697" start="332" end="341" title="doctorate" label="doctorate"/>
<link wikidata="Q183816" start="363" end="383" title="master&amp;#x27;s degree" label="master&amp;#x27;s degree"/>
<link wikidata="Q186649" start="1009" end="1025" title="curriculum vitae" label="curriculum vitae"/>
<link wikidata="Q618779" start="1037" end="1042" title="award" label="award"/>
<link wikidata="Q4618975" start="1331" end="1351" title="Doctor (title)" label="title &amp;quot;Dr&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="1534" end="1545" title="Middle Ages" label="Middle Ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q11707742" start="1780" end="1796" title="Lionel Woodville" label="Lionel Woodville"/>
<link wikidata="Q34433" start="1822" end="1842" title="University of Oxford" label="University of Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q1636762" start="1860" end="1879" title="Bishop of Salisbury" label="Bishop of Salisbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q35794" start="2018" end="2027" title="University of Cambridge" label="Cambridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q79972" start="2045" end="2052" title="James I of England" label="James I"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128240" start="2142" end="2146" title="earl" label="earl"/>
<link wikidata="Q165503" start="2151" end="2156" title="baron" label="baron"/>
<link wikidata="Q3297864" start="2182" end="2196" title="Master of Arts (Oxbridge and Dublin)" label="Master of Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q3765035" start="2334" end="2345" title="Convocation" label="Convocation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5160574" start="2350" end="2362" title="Congregation (university)" label="Congregation"/>
<link wikidata="Q179126" start="2424" end="2435" title="John Ruskin" label="John Ruskin"/>
<link wikidata="Q34433" start="2507" end="2527" title="University of Oxford" label="University of Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q752297" start="2659" end="2679" title="Doctor of Philosophy" label="Doctor of Philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3444679" start="2740" end="2759" title="Bucknell University" label="Bucknell University"/>
<link wikidata="Q49112" start="2788" end="2803" title="Yale University" label="Yale University"/>
<link wikidata="Q466021" start="3142" end="3175" title="American Philological Association" label="American Philological Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q40358" start="3184" end="3235" title="American Association for the Advancement of Science" label="American Association for the Advancement of Science"/>
<link wikidata="Q7896774" start="3269" end="3304" title="University of the State of New York" label="University of the State of New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q16984683" start="3503" end="3536" title="United States Office of Education" label="United States Office of Education"/>
<link wikidata="Q72984" start="3647" end="3658" title="Bing Crosby" label="Bing Crosby"/>
<link wikidata="Q1537303" start="3665" end="3683" title="Gonzaga University" label="Gonzaga University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1312529" start="3776" end="3795" title="high school diploma" label="high school diploma"/>
<link wikidata="Q888281" start="3995" end="4003" title="Bob Taft" label="Bob Taft"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="4101" end="4113" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q6479749" start="4115" end="4138" title="Lakota East High School" label="Lakota East High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054021" start="4307" end="4317" title="graduation" label="graduation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5428874" start="4424" end="4431" title="faculty (teaching staff)" label="faculty"/>
<link wikidata="Q865588" start="4630" end="4639" title="committee" label="committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1349227" start="5337" end="5351" title="academic dress" label="academic dress"/>
<link wikidata="Q4671180" start="5453" end="5476" title="Academic dress of the University of Cambridge" label="University of Cambridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q4671192" start="5549" end="5573" title="Academic dress of the University of St Andrews" label="University of St Andrews"/>
<link wikidata="Q324708" start="5587" end="5594" title="cassock" label="cassock"/>
<link wikidata="Q60989228" start="5643" end="5652" title="ad eundem degree" label="ad eundem"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6173" end="6178" title="#Customary_degrees_.28Ad_eundem_degrees.29" label="below"/>
<link wikidata="Q849697" start="6190" end="6206" title="higher doctorate" label="higher doctorate"/>
<link wikidata="Q2248352" start="6216" end="6233" title="Doctor of Science" label="Doctor of Science"/>
<link wikidata="Q837343" start="6235" end="6252" title="Doctor of Letters" label="Doctor of Letters"/>
<link wikidata="Q29282" start="7259" end="7283" title="Archbishop of Canterbury" label="Archbishop of Canterbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q6481462" start="7332" end="7347" title="Lambeth degrees" label="Lambeth degrees"/>
<link wikidata="Q19546" start="7520" end="7524" title="Pope" label="Pope"/>
<link wikidata="Q4676609" start="7545" end="7555" title="Act Concerning Peter&amp;#x27;s Pence and Dispensations" label="a 1533 Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q38370" start="7559" end="7569" title="Henry VIII of England" label="Henry VIII"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8000" end="8005" title="#Institutions_not_awarding_honorary_degrees" label="below"/>
<link wikidata="Q2330404" start="8765" end="8776" title="postnominal" label="postnominal"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8926" end="8937" title="Bracket#Parentheses" label="parentheses"/>
<link wikidata="Q7239251" start="9059" end="9069" title="prenominal" label="prenominal"/>
<link wikidata="Q758659" start="9453" end="9486" title="Auckland University of Technology" label="Auckland University of Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q2413375" start="9670" end="9685" title="Open University" label="Open University"/>
<link wikidata="Q959320" start="9899" end="9913" title="Doctor of Laws" label="Doctor of Laws"/>
<link wikidata="Q837343" start="9923" end="9940" title="Doctor of Letters" label="Doctor of Letters"/>
<link wikidata="Q9301216" start="9948" end="9972" title="Doctor of Humane Letters" label="Doctor of Humane Letters"/>
<link wikidata="Q2248352" start="9980" end="9997" title="Doctor of Science" label="Doctor of Science"/>
<link wikidata="Q1984623" start="10034" end="10052" title="Doctor of Divinity" label="Doctor of Divinity"/>
<link wikidata="Q2496094" start="10502" end="10508" title="University of Dublin" label="Dublin"/>
<link wikidata="Q60989228" start="10682" end="10691" title="ad eundem" label="ad eundem"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10753" end="10767" title="Professors in the United States#Tenured and tenure-track positions" label="full professor"/>
<link wikidata="Q27118301" start="10847" end="10853" title="Academic tenure in North America" label="tenure"/>
<link wikidata="Q6518699" start="11370" end="11373" title="Legum Doctor" label="LLD"/>
<link wikidata="Q5287501" start="11392" end="11395" title="Doctor of Civil Law" label="DCL"/>
<link wikidata="Q49108" start="11631" end="11668" title="Massachusetts Institute of Technology" label="Massachusetts Institute of Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q49115" start="11676" end="11694" title="Cornell University" label="Cornell University"/>
<link wikidata="Q41506" start="11696" end="11715" title="Stanford University" label="Stanford University"/>
<link wikidata="Q842909" start="11721" end="11736" title="Rice University" label="Rice University"/>
<link wikidata="Q213439" start="11795" end="11817" title="University of Virginia" label="University of Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q11812" start="11965" end="11981" title="Thomas Jefferson" label="Thomas Jefferson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2341286" start="11992" end="12013" title="William Barton Rogers" label="William Barton Rogers"/>
<link wikidata="Q174710" start="12488" end="12492" title="UCLA" label="UCLA"/>
<link wikidata="Q663625" start="12603" end="12626" title="St. John&amp;#x27;s College (Annapolis/Santa Fe)" label="St. John&amp;#x27;s College"/>
<link wikidata="Q447877" start="12680" end="12698" title="alumni association" label="alumni association"/>
<link wikidata="Q1326966" start="13144" end="13153" title="honorific" label="honorific"/>
<link wikidata="Q7548771" start="13239" end="13243" title="snub" label="snub"/>
<link wikidata="Q7416" start="13286" end="13303" title="Margaret Thatcher" label="Margaret Thatcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q14212" start="13428" end="13442" title="prime minister" label="prime minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q130631" start="13676" end="13691" title="Jacques Derrida" label="Jacques Derrida"/>
<link wikidata="Q183216" start="13736" end="13755" title="analytic philosophy" label="analytic philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q9235" start="14110" end="14118" title="Hegelianism" label="Hegelian"/>
<link wikidata="Q59104" start="14119" end="14130" title="continental philosophy" label="continental"/>
<link wikidata="Q7569110" start="14227" end="14246" title="Southampton College" label="Southampton College"/>
<link wikidata="Q1783603" start="14250" end="14272" title="Long Island University" label="Long Island University"/>
<link wikidata="Q969850" start="14290" end="14312" title="Stony Brook University" label="Stony Brook University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1953422" start="14369" end="14375" title="Muppet" label="Muppet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1107971" start="14376" end="14391" title="Kermit the Frog" label="Kermit the Frog"/>
<link wikidata="Q2855609" start="14636" end="14652" title="environmentalism" label="environmentalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2131529" start="14705" end="14740" title="It&amp;#x27;s Not Easy Bein&amp;#x27; Green" label="It&amp;#x27;s Not Easy Bein&amp;#x27; Green"/>
<link wikidata="Q178231" start="14903" end="14931" title="National Wildlife Federation" label="National Wildlife Federation"/>
<link wikidata="Q308439" start="14933" end="14954" title="National Park Service" label="National Park Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q207" start="15112" end="15126" title="George W. Bush" label="George W. Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q49112" start="15160" end="15175" title="Yale University" label="Yale University"/>
<link wikidata="Q5152362" start="15315" end="15327" title="Commencement speech" label="commencement"/>
<link wikidata="Q504029" start="15329" end="15340" title="Andrew Card" label="Andrew Card"/>
<link wikidata="Q786242" start="15368" end="15382" title="White House Chief of Staff" label="Chief of Staff"/>
<link wikidata="Q15142" start="15441" end="15476" title="University of Massachusetts Amherst" label="University of Massachusetts Amherst"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144262" start="15615" end="15644" title="University of Western Ontario" label="University of Western Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q476995" start="15646" end="15663" title="Henry Morgentaler" label="Henry Morgentaler"/>
<link wikidata="Q3414986" start="15747" end="15764" title="R. v. Morgentaler" label="R. v. Morgentaler"/>
<link wikidata="Q160302" start="16124" end="16147" title="University of Edinburgh" label="University of Edinburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q954" start="16185" end="16193" title="Zimbabwe" label="Zimbabwe"/>
<link wikidata="Q10707" start="16203" end="16216" title="Robert Mugabe" label="Robert Mugabe"/>
<link wikidata="Q8458" start="16469" end="16487" title="human rights abuse" label="human rights abuse"/>
<link wikidata="Q10858400" start="16491" end="16511" title="political corruption" label="political corruption"/>
<link wikidata="Q15142" start="16828" end="16863" title="University of Massachusetts Amherst" label="University of Massachusetts Amherst"/>
<link wikidata="Q270222" start="17063" end="17088" title="Michigan State University" label="Michigan State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q6832387" start="17188" end="17203" title="Michael M. Crow" label="Michael M. Crow"/>
<link wikidata="Q76" start="17256" end="17268" title="Barack Obama" label="Barack Obama"/>
<link wikidata="Q1331070" start="17463" end="17473" title="pro-choice" label="pro-choice"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151519" start="17505" end="17524" title="embryonic stem cell" label="embryonic stem cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1100237" start="17554" end="17567" title="Rosmah Mansor" label="Rosmah Mansor"/>
<link wikidata="Q862559" start="17585" end="17611" title="Prime Minister of Malaysia" label="Prime Minister of Malaysia"/>
<link wikidata="Q57675" start="17613" end="17624" title="Najib Razak" label="Najib Razak"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145497" start="17682" end="17699" title="Curtin University" label="Curtin University"/>
<link wikidata="Q213512" start="18019" end="18029" title="Bill Cosby" label="Bill Cosby"/>
<link wikidata="Q85779648" start="18040" end="18049" title="List of honorary degrees awarded to Bill Cosby" label="rescinded"/>
<link wikidata="Q7432601" start="18124" end="18162" title="School of the Art Institute of Chicago" label="School of the Art Institute of Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q15935" start="18220" end="18230" title="Kanye West" label="Kanye West"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18237" end="18292" title="Views of Kanye West#2022" label="a series of racist and antisemitic remarks made by West"/>
<link wikidata="Q367293" start="18807" end="18824" title="social convention" label="social convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q19526" start="18923" end="18935" title="Maya Angelou" label="Maya Angelou"/>
<link wikidata="Q212886" start="19130" end="19145" title="Stephen Colbert" label="Stephen Colbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q669442" start="19200" end="19212" title="Knox College (Illinois)" label="Knox College"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130799" start="19446" end="19464" title="The Colbert Report" label="The Colbert Report"/>
<link wikidata="Q34969" start="19502" end="19519" title="Benjamin Franklin" label="Benjamin Franklin"/>
<link wikidata="Q875637" start="19572" end="19603" title="The College of William and Mary" label="The College of William and Mary"/>
<link wikidata="Q216273" start="19637" end="19662" title="University of St. Andrews" label="University of St. Andrews"/>
<link wikidata="Q167211" start="19812" end="19823" title="Alan García" label="Alan García"/>
<link wikidata="Q665105" start="20207" end="20226" title="University of Delhi" label="University of Delhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="20270" end="20275" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q183266" start="20310" end="20324" title="Samuel Johnson" label="Samuel Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q82606" start="20469" end="20493" title="Pembroke College, Oxford" label="Pembroke College, Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q258464" start="20611" end="20634" title="Trinity College, Dublin" label="Trinity College, Dublin"/>
<link wikidata="Q380134" start="20761" end="20774" title="Edwin H. Land" label="Edwin H. Land"/>
<link wikidata="Q10856492" start="20793" end="20804" title="Land Camera" label="Land Camera"/>
<link wikidata="Q313695" start="20805" end="20819" title="instant camera" label="instant camera"/>
<link wikidata="Q494389" start="20849" end="20869" title="Polaroid Corporation" label="Polaroid Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7439" start="21021" end="21037" title="Richard Stallman" label="Richard Stallman"/>
<link wikidata="Q48413" start="21058" end="21082" title="Free Software Foundation" label="Free Software Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q11661" start="21099" end="21121" title="information technology" label="information technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165215" start="21273" end="21292" title="Lakehead University" label="Lakehead University"/>
<link wikidata="Q76127" start="21405" end="21412" title="Sukarno" label="Sukarno"/>
<link wikidata="Q252" start="21437" end="21446" title="Indonesia" label="Indonesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q49088" start="21533" end="21552" title="Columbia University" label="Columbia University"/>
<link wikidata="Q230492" start="21558" end="21580" title="University of Michigan" label="University of Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q152087" start="21586" end="21606" title="University of Berlin" label="University of Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q173959" start="21612" end="21631" title="Al-Azhar University" label="Al-Azhar University"/>
<link wikidata="Q240631" start="21637" end="21659" title="University of Belgrade" label="University of Belgrade"/>
<link wikidata="Q13164" start="21665" end="21685" title="Lomonosov University" label="Lomonosov University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145992" start="21752" end="21775" title="Universitas Gadjah Mada" label="Universitas Gadjah Mada"/>
<link wikidata="Q534515" start="21781" end="21802" title="Universitas Indonesia" label="Universitas Indonesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1579397" start="21808" end="21839" title="Bandung Institute of Technology" label="Bandung Institute of Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q3181122" start="21849" end="21872" title="Universitas Padjadjaran" label="Universitas Padjadjaran"/>
<link wikidata="Q20716634" start="21911" end="21932" title="Indonesian Government" label="Indonesian Government"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="21995" end="22017" title="Engineer&amp;#x27;s degree#The Netherlands" label="engineer&amp;#x27;s degree"/>
<link wikidata="Q15206450" start="22019" end="22022" title="Ingenieur" label="Ir."/>
<link wikidata="Q1579397" start="22029" end="22060" title="Bandung Institute of Technology" label="Bandung Institute of Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q189533" start="22078" end="22093" title="Academic degree" label="Academic degree"/>
<link wikidata="Q99864" start="22096" end="22115" title="Freedom of the City" label="Freedom of the City"/>
<link wikidata="Q16249975" start="22118" end="22124" title="Homage (arts)" label="Homage"/>
<link wikidata="Q6581478" start="22127" end="22139" title="Latin honors" label="Latin honors"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="464753" wikidata="Q294946" url="?curid=464753" title="Peters">
<text>Peters may refer to:

==People==
* Peters (surname)
* Peters Band, a First Nations band in British Columbia, Canada

==Places==
===United States===
* Peters, California, a census-designated place
* Peters, Florida, a town
* Peters Township, Kingman County, Kansas
* Peters, an unincorporated community in Casco Township, St. Clair County, Michigan
* Peters Township, Franklin County, Pennsylvania
* Peters Township, Washington County, Pennsylvania
* Peters, Texas, an unincorporated area
* Peters Mountain, in Virginia and West Virginia
* Peters Glacier (Alaska Range), Alaska
* Peters Glacier (Brooks Range), Alaska
* Peters Canyon, Orange County, California
* Peters Reservation, Massachusetts, a nature reserve
* Peters Park (Boston)
* Peters River, in Massachusetts and Rhode Island
* Peters Brook (disambiguation)
* Peters Creek (California)
* Peters Creek (Pennsylvania)

===Elsewhere===
* Peters Peak, Ross Dependency, Antarctica
* Peters Butte, Marie Byrd Land, Antarctica
* Peters Glacier (South Georgia), South Georgia Island, Atlantic Ocean
* Peters (crater), on the Moon
* Peters Bay, NE Greenland
* Peters Village, Kent

==In business==
* Edition Peters, a German music publishing house, also known as C.F. Peters Musikverlag
* Peters (bakery) a bakery chain in the United Kingdom
* Peters Bookselling Services, a specialist children&#x27;s bookseller in Birmingham UK
* Peters Cartridge Company, a former gunpowder and ammunition producer in Kings Mills, Ohio
* Peters Fashions, a family-run department store in Huddersfield, West Yorkshire, England
* Peters Ice Cream, an Australian ice cream brand now owned by Nestlé

==See also==
* Peter&#x27;s Food Services, a Welsh food company
* Peters Bastion, a mountain in Palmer Land, Antarctica
* Peters Dome, a mountain in Alaska
* Peter (disambiguation)
* Justice Peters (disambiguation)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q294946" start="0" end="6" title="Peters" label="Peters"/>
<link wikidata="Q2079518" start="35" end="51" title="Peters (surname)" label="Peters (surname)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7178105" start="54" end="65" title="Peters Band" label="Peters Band"/>
<link wikidata="Q6073506" start="150" end="168" title="Peters, California" label="Peters, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q7178095" start="198" end="213" title="Peters, Florida" label="Peters, Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q5813234" start="224" end="263" title="Peters Township, Kingman County, Kansas" label="Peters Township, Kingman County, Kansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q5048275" start="305" end="347" title="Casco Township, St. Clair County, Michigan" label="Casco Township, St. Clair County, Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7178148" start="350" end="396" title="Peters Township, Franklin County, Pennsylvania" label="Peters Township, Franklin County, Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q7178152" start="399" end="447" title="Peters Township, Washington County, Pennsylvania" label="Peters Township, Washington County, Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q14711234" start="450" end="463" title="Peters, Texas" label="Peters, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q7178133" start="490" end="505" title="Peters Mountain" label="Peters Mountain"/>
<link wikidata="Q11830740" start="539" end="568" title="Peters Glacier (Alaska Range)" label="Peters Glacier (Alaska Range)"/>
<link wikidata="Q11830606" start="579" end="608" title="Peters Glacier (Brooks Range)" label="Peters Glacier (Brooks Range)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7178118" start="619" end="632" title="Peters Canyon" label="Peters Canyon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7178139" start="662" end="680" title="Peters Reservation" label="Peters Reservation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2304457" start="716" end="736" title="Peters Park (Boston)" label="Peters Park (Boston)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7178142" start="739" end="751" title="Peters River" label="Peters River"/>
<link wikidata="Q7178113" start="789" end="818" title="Peters Brook (disambiguation)" label="Peters Brook (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7178124" start="821" end="846" title="Peters Creek (California)" label="Peters Creek (California)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7178127" start="849" end="876" title="Peters Creek (Pennsylvania)" label="Peters Creek (Pennsylvania)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5887046" start="896" end="907" title="Peters Peak" label="Peters Peak"/>
<link wikidata="Q6672609" start="939" end="951" title="Peters Butte" label="Peters Butte"/>
<link wikidata="Q7178129" start="983" end="1013" title="Peters Glacier (South Georgia)" label="Peters Glacier (South Georgia)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1337170" start="1054" end="1069" title="Peters (crater)" label="Peters (crater)"/>
<link wikidata="Q24827604" start="1085" end="1095" title="Peters Bay" label="Peters Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1855812" start="1112" end="1132" title="Peters Village, Kent" label="Peters Village, Kent"/>
<link wikidata="Q468157" start="1152" end="1166" title="Edition Peters" label="Edition Peters"/>
<link wikidata="Q7178102" start="1241" end="1256" title="Peters (bakery)" label="Peters (bakery)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7178109" start="1296" end="1323" title="Peters Bookselling Services" label="Peters Bookselling Services"/>
<link wikidata="Q7178120" start="1384" end="1408" title="Peters Cartridge Company" label="Peters Cartridge Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q17020660" start="1476" end="1491" title="Peters Fashions" label="Peters Fashions"/>
<link wikidata="Q7178131" start="1566" end="1582" title="Peters Ice Cream" label="Peters Ice Cream"/>
<link wikidata="Q7172379" start="1650" end="1676" title="Peter&amp;#x27;s Food Services" label="Peter&amp;#x27;s Food Services"/>
<link wikidata="Q5353419" start="1701" end="1715" title="Peters Bastion" label="Peters Bastion"/>
<link wikidata="Q14680189" start="1757" end="1768" title="Peters Dome" label="Peters Dome"/>
<link wikidata="Q226393" start="1793" end="1815" title="Peter (disambiguation)" label="Peter (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q28967245" start="1818" end="1849" title="Justice Peters (disambiguation)" label="Justice Peters (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="464758" wikidata="Q157624" url="?curid=464758" title="Betula pubescens">
<text>Betula pubescens (syn. &quot;Betula alba&quot;), commonly known as downy birch and also as moor birch, white birch, European white birch or hairy birch, is a species of deciduous tree, native and abundant throughout northern Europe and northern Asia, growing further north than any other broadleaf tree. It is closely related to, and often confused with, the silver birch (&quot;B. pendula&quot;), but grows in wetter places with heavier soils and poorer drainage; smaller trees can also be confused with the dwarf birch (&quot;B. nana&quot;).

Six varieties are recognised and it hybridises with the silver and dwarf birches. A number of cultivars have been developed, but many are no longer in cultivation. The larva of the autumnal moth (&quot;Epirrita autumnata&quot;) feeds on the foliage and in some years, large areas of birch forest can be defoliated by this insect. Many fungi are associated with the tree and certain pathogenic fungi are the causal agents of birch dieback disease.

The tree is a pioneer species, readily colonising cleared land, but later being replaced by taller, more long-lived species. The bark can be stripped off without killing the tree. The bark and the timber is used for turnery and in the manufacture of plywood, furniture, shelves, coffins, matches, toys and wood flooring. The inner bark is edible and it was ground up and used in bread-making in times of famine. The rising sap in spring can be used to make refreshing drinks, wines, ales and liqueurs and various parts of the tree have been used in herbal medicine.

==Description==

&quot;Betula pubescens&quot; is known as downy birch, with other common names including moor birch, white birch, European white birch or hairy birch.
It is a deciduous tree growing to tall (rarely to 27 m), with a slender crown and a trunk up to (exceptionally 1 m) in diameter, with smooth but dull grey-white bark finely marked with dark horizontal lenticels. The shoots are grey-brown with fine downy. The leaves are ovate-acute, long and broad, with a finely serrated margin. The flowers are wind-pollinated catkins, produced in early spring before the leaves. The fruit is a pendulous, cylindrical aggregate long and wide which disintegrates at maturity, releasing the individual seeds; these seeds are long with two small wings along the side.

===Species identification===
&quot;B. pubescens&quot; is closely related to, and often confused with, the silver birch (&quot;B. pendula&quot;). Many North American texts treat the two species as conspecific (and cause confusion by combining the downy birch&#x27;s alternative vernacular name, white birch, with the scientific name &quot;B. pendula&quot; of the other species), but they are regarded as distinct species throughout Europe.

Downy birch can be distinguished from silver birch with its smooth, downy shoots, which are hairless and warty in silver birch. The bark of the downy birch is a dull greyish white, whereas the silver birch has striking white, papery bark with black fissures. The leaf margins also differ, finely serrated in downy birch, coarsely double-toothed in silver birch. The two have differences in habitat requirements, with downy birch more common on wet, poorly drained sites, such as clays and peat bogs, and silver birch found mainly on dry, sandy soils.

In more northerly locations, downy birch can also be confused with the dwarf birch (&quot;Betula nana&quot;), both species being morphologically variable. All three species can be distinguished cytologically, silver birch and dwarf birch being diploid (with two sets of chromosomes), whereas downy birch is tetraploid (with four sets of chromosomes). In Iceland, dwarf birch and downy birch sometimes hybridise, the resulting plants being triploid (with three sets of chromosomes).

===Distribution and habitat===

&quot;Betula pubescens&quot; has a wide distribution in northern and central Europe and Asia. Its range extends from Newfoundland, Iceland, the British Isles and Spain eastwards across northern and central Europe and Asia as far as the Lake Baikal region in Siberia. The range extends southwards to about 40°N, its southernmost limit being Turkey, the Caucasus and the Altai Mountains. It is a pioneer species which establishes itself readily in new areas away from the parent tree. This allows other woodland trees to become established and the birch, a short-lived tree, eventually gets crowded out as its seedlings are intolerant of shady conditions.

Downy birch extends further north into the Arctic than any other broadleaf tree. Specimens of the subarctic populations are usually small and very contorted, and are often distinguished as arctic downy birch or mountain birch, &quot;B. p.&quot; var. &quot;pumila&quot;. (not to be confused with &quot;B. nana&quot;). This variety is notable as being one of very few trees native to Iceland and Greenland, and is the only tree to form woodland in Iceland. At one time the island is thought to have been covered in downy birch woodland, but that cover is reduced to about one percent of the land surface today.

==Varieties and cultivars==

Three varieties are recognised, the nominate &quot;Betula pubescens&quot; var. &quot;pubescens&quot;, &quot;B. p.&quot; var. &quot;litwinowii&quot; (distributed in the Caucasus and Turkey) and &quot;B. p.&quot; var. &quot;pumila&quot; (arctic downy birch or mountain birch, formerly called &quot;B. p.&quot; subsp. &quot;tortuosa&quot;). The latter has arisen from the hybridization of var. &quot;pubescens&quot; and &quot;B. nana&quot; (dwarf birch) and is characterised by its shrubby habit, smaller leaves, resinous glands and the smaller wings on the fruit. A number of cultivars have been grown, but many are no longer in cultivation. They include &quot;Armenian gold&quot;, &quot;Arnold Brembo&quot; (scented foliage), &quot;crenata nana&quot; (shrubby and dwarf), &quot;incisa&quot; (lobed foliage), &quot;integrifolia&quot; (unlobed foliage), &quot;murigthii&quot; (shrubby with doubly serrate leaves), &quot;ponitica&quot; (hairless), &quot;undulata&quot; (leaf margins waxy), &quot;urticifolia&quot; (nettle-leaved), &quot;variegata&quot; (variegated) and &quot;Yellow wings&quot;. Two others, described by the German botanist Ernst Schelle in 1903, are also lost; &quot;pendula&quot;, a cultivar with a leader and weeping branches, and &quot;pendula nana&quot;, which grows into an umbrella-shaped tree with weeping branches, but no leader. &quot;Betula pubescens&quot; &#x27;Rubra&#x27; has maroon foliage.

==Ecology==

The larva of the autumnal moth (&quot;Epirrita autumnata&quot;) feeds on the foliage of &quot;Betula pubescens&quot; and other tree species. In outbreak years, large areas of birch forest can be defoliated by this insect. Damage to the leaf tissue stimulates the tree to produce chemicals that reduce foliage quality, stunting the growth of the larvae and reducing their pupal weights.

In Greenland, about seventy species of fungi have been found growing in association with &quot;B. pubescens&quot;, as parasites or saprobes on living or dead wood. Some of the most common fungi include &quot;Ceriporia reticulata&quot;, &quot;Chondrostereum purpureum&quot;, &quot;Exidia repanda&quot;, &quot;Hyphoderma&quot; spp, &quot;Inonotus obliquus&quot;, &quot;Inonotus radiatus&quot;, &quot;Mycena galericulata&quot;, &quot;Mycena rubromarginata&quot;, &quot;Panellus ringens&quot;, &quot;Peniophora incarnata&quot;, &quot;Phellinus lundellii&quot;, &quot;Radulomyces confluens&quot;, &quot;Stereum rugosum&quot;, &quot;Trechispora&quot; spp., &quot;Tubulicrinis&quot; spp. and &quot;Tyromyces chioneus&quot;.

Birch dieback disease, associated with the fungal pathogens &quot;Marssonina betulae&quot; and &quot;Anisogramma virgultorum&quot;, can affect planted trees, while naturally regenerated trees seem less susceptible. This disease also affects &quot;Betula pendula&quot; and in 2000 was reported at many of the sites planted with birch in Scotland during the 1990s.

==Uses==

The outer layer of bark can be stripped off the tree without killing it and can be used to make canoe skins, drinking vessels and roofing tiles. The inner bark can be used for the production of rope and for making a form of oiled paper. This bark is also rich in tannin and has been used as a brown dye and as a preservative. The bark can also be turned into a high quality charcoal favoured by artists. The twigs and young branches are very flexible and make good whisks and brooms. The timber is pale in colour with a fine, uniform texture and is used in the manufacture of plywood, furniture, shelves, coffins, matches and toys, and in turnery.

The Sami people of Scandinavia used the bark of both &quot;B. pubescens&quot; and &quot;B. pendula&quot; as an ingredient in bread-making; the reddish phloem, just below the outer bark, was dried, ground up and blended with wheat flour to make a traditional loaf. In Finland, mämmi, a traditional Easter food, was packed and baked in boxes of birch bark. Nowadays, cardboard boxes are used, but imprinted with the typical bark pattern. Birch bark was used as an emergency food in times of famine; in Novgorod in 1127–28, desperate people ate it along with such things as the leaves of lime trees, wood pulp, straw, husks and moss. In Iceland, trimmings of birch trees are used with birch sap in the making of a sweet birch liqueur. The removal of bark was at one time so widespread that Carl Linnaeus expressed his concern for the survival of the woodlands. The leaves can be infused with boiling water to make a tea, and extracts of the plant have been used as herbal remedies.

Both &quot;B. pubescens&quot; and &quot;B. pendula&quot; can be tapped in spring to obtain a sugary fluid. This can be consumed fresh, concentrated into a syrup similar to the better-known maple syrup, or can be fermented into an ale or wine. In Scandinavia and Finland, this is done on a domestic scale, but in the former USSR, particularly Russia, Ukraine, Belarus, Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania, birch sap is harvested commercially and used to manufacture cosmetics, medicines and foodstuffs.

==References==
==External links==

* &quot;Betula pubescens&quot; - information, genetic conservation units and related resources. European Forest Genetic Resources Programme (EUFORGEN)
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q157624" start="67" end="78" title="Betula pubescens" label="downy birch"/>
<link wikidata="Q157624" start="91" end="101" title="Betula pubescens" label="moor birch"/>
<link wikidata="Q157624" start="103" end="114" title="Betula pubescens" label="white birch"/>
<link wikidata="Q157624" start="116" end="136" title="Betula pubescens" label="European white birch"/>
<link wikidata="Q157624" start="140" end="151" title="Betula pubescens" label="hairy birch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131316" start="169" end="178" title="deciduous" label="deciduous"/>
<link wikidata="Q46" start="225" end="231" title="Europe" label="Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q48" start="245" end="249" title="Asia" label="Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q148993" start="288" end="302" title="broadleaf tree" label="broadleaf tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q156895" start="359" end="371" title="Betula pendula" label="silver birch"/>
<link wikidata="Q157628" start="509" end="520" title="Betula nana" label="dwarf birch"/>
<link wikidata="Q2370188" start="726" end="739" title="autumnal moth" label="autumnal moth"/>
<link wikidata="Q25221562" start="969" end="990" title="Birch dieback" label="birch dieback disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q927054" start="1007" end="1022" title="pioneer species" label="pioneer species"/>
<link wikidata="Q21141633" start="1299" end="1312" title="wood flooring" label="wood flooring"/>
<link wikidata="Q168247" start="1397" end="1403" title="famine" label="famine"/>
<link wikidata="Q861699" start="1542" end="1557" title="herbal medicine" label="herbal medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131316" start="1735" end="1744" title="deciduous" label="deciduous"/>
<link wikidata="Q10884" start="1745" end="1749" title="tree" label="tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q184453" start="1888" end="1892" title="Bark (botany)" label="bark"/>
<link wikidata="Q1155708" start="1928" end="1936" title="lenticel" label="lenticel"/>
<link wikidata="Q33971" start="1986" end="1992" title="leaf" label="leaves"/>
<link wikidata="Q506" start="2061" end="2067" title="flower" label="flower"/>
<link wikidata="Q217753" start="2089" end="2095" title="catkin" label="catkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3314483" start="2146" end="2151" title="fruit" label="fruit"/>
<link wikidata="Q156895" start="2434" end="2446" title="silver birch" label="silver birch"/>
<link wikidata="Q49" start="2478" end="2491" title="North America" label="North America"/>
<link wikidata="Q1782625" start="2524" end="2535" title="conspecific" label="conspecific"/>
<link wikidata="Q52105" start="3158" end="3165" title="Habitat (ecology)" label="habitat"/>
<link wikidata="Q157628" start="3391" end="3402" title="Betula nana" label="dwarf birch"/>
<link wikidata="Q7141" start="3514" end="3527" title="cell biology" label="cytologically"/>
<link wikidata="Q118406" start="3564" end="3571" title="diploid" label="diploid"/>
<link wikidata="Q213410" start="3627" end="3637" title="tetraploid" label="tetraploid"/>
<link wikidata="Q213410" start="3759" end="3767" title="triploid" label="triploid"/>
<link wikidata="Q5513" start="4071" end="4082" title="Lake Baikal" label="Lake Baikal"/>
<link wikidata="Q18869" start="4187" end="4195" title="Caucasus" label="Caucasus"/>
<link wikidata="Q5955" start="4204" end="4219" title="Altai Mountains" label="Altai Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q927054" start="4229" end="4244" title="pioneer species" label="pioneer species"/>
<link wikidata="Q25322" start="4533" end="4539" title="Arctic" label="Arctic"/>
<link wikidata="Q157628" start="4791" end="4798" title="Betula nana" label="B. nana"/>
<link wikidata="Q189" start="4872" end="4879" title="Iceland" label="Iceland"/>
<link wikidata="Q223" start="4884" end="4893" title="Greenland" label="Greenland"/>
<link wikidata="Q18869" start="5297" end="5305" title="Caucasus" label="Caucasus"/>
<link wikidata="Q43" start="5310" end="5316" title="Turkey" label="Turkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q4522680" start="6266" end="6279" title="Ernst Schelle" label="Ernst Schelle"/>
<link wikidata="Q4899047" start="6310" end="6317" title="Betula pubescens &amp;#x27;Pendula&amp;#x27;" label="pendula"/>
<link wikidata="Q4899047" start="6382" end="6394" title="Betula pubescens &amp;#x27;Pendula&amp;#x27;" label="pendula nana"/>
<link wikidata="Q2370188" start="6579" end="6592" title="autumnal moth" label="autumnal moth"/>
<link wikidata="Q764" start="6988" end="6993" title="Fungus" label="fungi"/>
<link wikidata="Q186517" start="7067" end="7076" title="Parasitism" label="parasites"/>
<link wikidata="Q23001591" start="7080" end="7088" title="Saprotrophic nutrition" label="saprobes"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7157" end="7177" title="Ceriporia reticulata" label="Ceriporia reticulata"/>
<link wikidata="Q45541" start="7191" end="7215" title="Chondrostereum purpureum" label="Chondrostereum purpureum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1739206" start="7229" end="7243" title="Exidia repanda" label="Exidia repanda"/>
<link wikidata="Q5231594" start="7257" end="7267" title="Hyphoderma" label="Hyphoderma"/>
<link wikidata="Q1956937" start="7285" end="7302" title="Inonotus obliquus" label="Inonotus obliquus"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7316" end="7333" title="Inonotus radiatus" label="Inonotus radiatus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1467364" start="7347" end="7366" title="Mycena galericulata" label="Mycena galericulata"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7380" end="7401" title="Mycena rubromarginata" label="Mycena rubromarginata"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7415" end="7431" title="Panellus ringens" label="Panellus ringens"/>
<link wikidata="Q10708038" start="7445" end="7465" title="Peniophora incarnata" label="Peniophora incarnata"/>
<link wikidata="Q10430553" start="7479" end="7498" title="Phellinus lundellii" label="Phellinus lundellii"/>
<link wikidata="Q10431782" start="7512" end="7533" title="Radulomyces confluens" label="Radulomyces confluens"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7547" end="7562" title="Stereum rugosum" label="Stereum rugosum"/>
<link wikidata="Q7837442" start="7576" end="7587" title="Trechispora" label="Trechispora"/>
<link wikidata="Q4000149" start="7606" end="7618" title="Tubulicrinis" label="Tubulicrinis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1649913" start="7640" end="7658" title="Tyromyces chioneus" label="Tyromyces chioneus"/>
<link wikidata="Q25221562" start="7667" end="7688" title="Birch dieback" label="Birch dieback disease"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7733" end="7751" title="Marssonina betulae" label="Marssonina betulae"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7768" end="7791" title="Anisogramma virgultorum" label="Anisogramma virgultorum"/>
<link wikidata="Q171529" start="8137" end="8142" title="canoe" label="canoe"/>
<link wikidata="Q31029" start="8235" end="8239" title="rope" label="rope"/>
<link wikidata="Q187607" start="8304" end="8310" title="tannin" label="tannin"/>
<link wikidata="Q177463" start="8415" end="8423" title="charcoal" label="charcoal"/>
<link wikidata="Q263057" start="8506" end="8511" title="whisk" label="whisk"/>
<link wikidata="Q172833" start="8517" end="8522" title="broom" label="broom"/>
<link wikidata="Q48199" start="8694" end="8705" title="Sami people" label="Sami people"/>
<link wikidata="Q185138" start="8841" end="8847" title="phloem" label="phloem"/>
<link wikidata="Q33" start="8957" end="8964" title="Finland" label="Finland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1630666" start="8966" end="8971" title="mämmi" label="mämmi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2235" start="9190" end="9198" title="Novgorod" label="Novgorod"/>
<link wikidata="Q158746" start="9275" end="9285" title="Tilia cordata" label="lime trees"/>
<link wikidata="Q1043" start="9477" end="9490" title="Carl Linnaeus" label="Carl Linnaeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q402563" start="9859" end="9870" title="maple syrup" label="maple syrup"/>
<link wikidata="Q30324092" start="10298" end="10341" title="European Forest Genetic Resources Programme" label="European Forest Genetic Resources Programme"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="464762" wikidata="Q6259703" url="?curid=464762" title="John Sutherland (author)">
<text>John Andrew Sutherland (born 9 October 1938) is a British academic, newspaper columnist and author. He is Emeritus Lord Northcliffe Professor of Modern English Literature at University College London.

==Biography==
After graduating from the University of Leicester in 1964, Sutherland gained a PhD from the University of Edinburgh, where he began his academic career as an assistant lecturer. He specialises in Victorian fiction, 20th-century literature, and the history of publishing. Among his works of scholarship is the &quot;Longman Companion to Victorian Fiction&quot; (known in the US as &quot;Stanford Companion&quot;, 1989), a comprehensive encyclopaedia of Victorian fiction. A second edition was published in 2009 with 900 biographical entries, synopses of over 600 novels, and extensive background material on publishers, reviewers, and readers.

Apart from writing regularly for &quot;The Guardian&quot; newspaper, Sutherland has published a number of books of literary scholarship and is editing the forthcoming &quot;Oxford Companion to Popular Fiction&quot;. The series of books which starts with &quot;Is Heathcliff a Murderer?&quot; has brought him a wide readership. The books in the series are collections of essays about classic fiction from the Victorian period. Carefully going over the text, Sutherland highlights apparent inconsistencies, anachronisms and oversights, and explains references which the modern reader is likely to overlook. In some cases, he demonstrates the likelihood that the author simply forgot a minor detail. In others, apparent slips on the part of the author are presented as evidence that something is going on below the surface of the book which is not explicitly described (such as his explanation for why Sherlock Holmes should mis-address Miss Stoner as Miss Roylott in &quot;The Adventure of the Speckled Band&quot;).

In 2001, he published &quot;Last Drink to LA&quot;, a chronicle of his alcoholism, drug addiction, and return to sobriety. In 2004, he published a biography of Stephen Spender. In 2005, he was involved in Dot Mobile&#x27;s project to translate summaries and quotes of classic literature into text messaging shorthand. In the same year, he was also Chair of Judges for the Man Booker Prize, despite having caused some controversy in 1999 when he revealed details of disagreements between his fellow judges in his &quot;Guardian&quot; column. In 2007, he published an autobiography, &quot;The Boy Who Loved Books&quot;. The same year, his annotated edition of Robert Louis Stevenson&#x27;s &quot;The Black Arrow&quot; was released by Penguin Books. In 2011, he published &quot;Lives of the Novelists: A History of Fiction in 294 Lives&quot;, an 800-page book containing 294 idiosyncratic sketches of famous and lesser-known novelists selected from the past 400 years.

He has also provided the forewords and introductions to a number of titles in the Oxford World&#x27;s Classics series; for authors such as William Makepeace Thackeray, Anthony Trollope and Wilkie Collins. Similarly for various titles published by Penguin Classics, the Folio Society and others.
A number of his earlier books have the author as &quot;J. Sutherland&quot; or &quot;J. A. Sutherland&quot;, and should not be confused with the scholar James R. Sutherland who was also a Lord Northcliffe Professor.

==Partial bibliography==
*&quot;Thackeray at Work&quot;, Athlone Press, 1974, 
*&quot;Victorian Novelists and Publishers&quot;, Athlone Press, 1976, 
*&quot;Fiction and the Fiction Industry&quot;, Athlone Press, 1978, 
*&quot;Bestsellers: Popular Fiction of the 1970&#x27;s&quot;, Routledge &amp; Kegan Paul, 1981, 
*&quot;Offensive Literature: Decensorship in Britain 1960-1982&quot;, Junction Books, 1982, 
*&quot;The Longman Companion to Victorian Fiction&quot;, Longman, 1988; or (US edition) &quot;The Stanford Companion to Victorian Fiction&quot;, Stanford University Press, 1989. (revised edition, 2009) 
*&quot;Mrs Humphry Ward: Eminent Victorian, Pre-Eminent Edwardian&quot;, Oxford University Press, 1990, online copy
*&quot;Victorian Fiction: Writers, Publishers, Readers&quot;, Palgrave Macmillan, 1995, 
*&quot;The Life of Walter Scott. A Critical Biography&quot;, Wiley-Blackwell, 1995, 
*&quot;The Oxford Book of English Love Stories&quot;, Oxford University Press, 1996, (editor)
*&quot;Is Heathcliff a Murderer? Puzzles in Nineteenth-century Fiction&quot;, Oxford University Press, 1996, 
*&quot;Can Jane Eyre Be Happy? More Puzzles in Classic Fiction&quot;, Oxford University Press, 1997, 
*&quot;Where Was Rebecca Shot? Puzzles, Curiosities and Conundrums in Modern Fiction&quot;, Weidenfeld &amp; Nicolson, 1998, 
*&quot;Who Betrays Elizabeth Bennet? Further Puzzles in Classic Fiction&quot;, Oxford University Press, 1999
*&quot;Henry V, War Criminal? &amp; Other Shakespeare Puzzles&quot;, (w/ Cedric Watts), Oxford University Press, 2000, 
*&quot;The Literary Detective: 100 Puzzles in Classic Fiction&quot;, Oxford University Press, 2000, (omnibus edition)
*&quot;Last Drink to LA&quot;, Faber and Faber, 2001, 
*&quot;Literary Lives: Intimate Biographies of the Famous by the Famous&quot;, Oxford University Press, 2001, (editor)
*&quot;Reading the Decades: Fifty Years of British History Through the Nation&#x27;s Bestsellers&quot;, BBC Books, 2002, 
*&quot;Stephen Spender: The Authorized Biography&quot;, Viking, 2004, 
*&quot;How to Read a Novel: A User&#x27;s Guide&quot;, Profile, 2006, 
*&quot;The Boy Who Loved Books: A Memoir&quot;, John Murray, 2007, 
*&quot;Bestsellers: A Very Short Introduction&quot;, Oxford University Press, 2007, 
*&quot;Curiosities of Literature: A Book-lover&#x27;s Anthology of Literary Erudition&quot;, Random House, 2008, 
*&quot;So You Think You Know Jane Austen? A Literary Quizbook&quot;, Oxford University Press, 2009, (with Deirdre Le Faye)
*&quot;50 Literature Ideas You Really Need to Know&quot;, Quercus, 2010, ; or (US edition) &quot;How Literature Works: 50 Key Concepts&quot;, Oxford University Press, 2011, 
*&quot;Love, Sex, Death and Words: Surprising Tales from a Year in Literature&quot;, Icon Books, 2010, (with Stephen Fender)
*&quot;Lives of the Novelists: A History of Fiction in 294 Lives&quot;, Profile Books, 2011, 
*&quot;Stephen Spender: New Selected Journals, 1939-1995&quot;, Faber &amp; Faber, 2012, (editor with Lara Feigel)
*&quot;The Connell Guide to F. Scott Fitzgerald&#x27;s Great Gatsby&quot;, Connell Publishing, 2012, (with Jolyon Connell)
*&quot;The Connell Guide to Charles Dickens&#x27;s Great Expectations&quot;, Connell Publishing, 2012, (with Jolyon Connell)
*&quot;The Connell Guide to Jane Austen&#x27;s Emma&quot;, Connell Publishing, 2012, (with Jolyon Connell)
*&quot;The Dickens Dictionary: An A-Z of Britain&#x27;s Greatest Novelist&quot;, Icon Books, 2012, 
*&quot;A Little History of Literature&quot;, Yale University Press, 2013, 
*&quot;The Connell Guide to Virginia Woolf&#x27;s Mrs Dalloway&quot;, Connell Publishing, 2014, (with Susanna Hislop)
*&quot;How to be Well Read&quot;, Random House Books, 2014, 
*&quot;Jumbo: The Unauthorised Biography of a Victorian Sensation&quot;, Aurum Press, 2014, 
*&quot;How Good is Your Grammar?&quot;, Short Books, 2015, 
*&quot;The War on the Old&quot;, Biteback, 2016, 
*&quot;Orwell&#x27;s Nose: A Pathological Biography&quot;, Reaktion Books, 2016, 
*&quot;The War on the Young&quot;, Biteback, 2018, 
*&quot;The Connell Guide to Jane Austen&#x27;s Mansfield Park&quot;, Connell Publishing, 2018, (with Jolyon Connell)
*&quot;Literary Landscapes: Charting the Worlds of Classical Literature&quot;, Black Dog &amp; Leventhal, 2018, (General editor)
*&quot;Rogue Publisher, &#x27;The Prince of Puffers&#x27;: The Life and Works of the Publisher Henry Colburn&quot;, EER, 2018, 
*&quot;The Secret Trollope: Anthony Trollope Uncovered&quot;, EER, 2019, 
*&quot;Monica Jones, Philip Larkin and Me: Her Life and Long Loves&quot;, Weidenfeld &amp; Nicolson, 2021, 
*&quot;Triggered Literature: Cancellation, Stealth Censorship and Cultural Warfare&quot;, Biteback, 2023, 

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6259703" start="0" end="22" title="John Sutherland (author)" label="John Andrew Sutherland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1930187" start="68" end="87" title="journalist" label="newspaper columnist"/>
<link wikidata="Q335193" start="115" end="131" title="Lord Northcliffe" label="Lord Northcliffe"/>
<link wikidata="Q193196" start="174" end="199" title="University College London" label="University College London"/>
<link wikidata="Q1333399" start="242" end="265" title="University of Leicester" label="University of Leicester"/>
<link wikidata="Q160302" start="308" end="331" title="University of Edinburgh" label="University of Edinburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q619593" start="412" end="429" title="Victorian literature" label="Victorian fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q11148" start="899" end="911" title="The Guardian" label="The Guardian"/>
<link wikidata="Q4653" start="1759" end="1774" title="Sherlock Holmes" label="Sherlock Holmes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1060471" start="1831" end="1865" title="The Adventure of the Speckled Band" label="The Adventure of the Speckled Band"/>
<link wikidata="Q15326" start="1946" end="1956" title="alcoholism" label="alcoholism"/>
<link wikidata="Q448764" start="2035" end="2050" title="Stephen Spender" label="Stephen Spender"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2080" end="2090" title="Dot Mobile" label="Dot Mobile"/>
<link wikidata="Q160082" start="2247" end="2263" title="Man Booker Prize" label="Man Booker Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q1512" start="2533" end="2555" title="Robert Louis Stevenson" label="Robert Louis Stevenson"/>
<link wikidata="" start="2569" end="2584" title="The Black Arrow: A Tale of the Two Roses" label="The Black Arrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q1336200" start="2607" end="2620" title="Penguin Books" label="Penguin Books"/>
<link wikidata="Q2042817" start="2924" end="2952" title="Oxford World&amp;#x27;s Classics" label="Oxford World&amp;#x27;s Classics"/>
<link wikidata="Q167768" start="2981" end="3008" title="William Makepeace Thackeray" label="William Makepeace Thackeray"/>
<link wikidata="Q318399" start="3010" end="3026" title="Anthony Trollope" label="Anthony Trollope"/>
<link wikidata="Q210740" start="3031" end="3045" title="Wilkie Collins" label="Wilkie Collins"/>
<link wikidata="Q11281443" start="3089" end="3105" title="Penguin Classics" label="Penguin Classics"/>
<link wikidata="Q8961925" start="3111" end="3124" title="Folio Society" label="Folio Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q55676176" start="3289" end="3308" title="James Runcieman Sutherland" label="James R. Sutherland"/>
<link wikidata="Q952452" start="3972" end="3988" title="Mary Augusta Ward" label="Mrs Humphry Ward"/>
<link wikidata="Q79025" start="4189" end="4201" title="Walter Scott" label="Walter Scott"/>
<link wikidata="Q2590055" start="4470" end="4479" title="Jane Eyre (character)" label="Jane Eyre"/>
<link wikidata="Q448764" start="5337" end="5352" title="Stephen Spender" label="Stephen Spender"/>
<link wikidata="Q3138797" start="5562" end="5585" title="Very Short Introductions" label="Very Short Introduction"/>
<link wikidata="Q3021324" start="5845" end="5860" title="Deirdre Le Faye" label="Deirdre Le Faye"/>
<link wikidata="Q6270165" start="6477" end="6491" title="Jolyon Connell" label="Jolyon Connell"/>
<link wikidata="Q831999" start="7086" end="7091" title="Jumbo" label="Jumbo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3335" start="7289" end="7302" title="George Orwell" label="Orwell&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q2846305" start="7757" end="7770" title="Henry Colburn" label="Henry Colburn"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7871" end="7883" title="Relationships that influenced Philip Larkin#Monica Jones" label="Monica Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q313758" start="7885" end="7898" title="Philip Larkin" label="Philip Larkin"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="464765" wikidata="Q1563934" url="?curid=464765" title="Interstate 470">
<text>Interstate 470 may refer to:
*Interstate 470 (Kansas), a loop around Topeka
*Interstate 470 (Missouri), a connection at Kansas City
*Interstate 470 (Ohio–West Virginia), a loop around Wheeling, West Virginia
*Three highways which are part of what was once proposed as an Interstate 470 around Denver, Colorado:
**Colorado State Highway 470
**E-470
**Northwest Parkway</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q966240" start="30" end="53" title="Interstate 470 (Kansas)" label="Interstate 470 (Kansas)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2451333" start="77" end="102" title="Interstate 470 (Missouri)" label="Interstate 470 (Missouri)"/>
<link wikidata="Q452974" start="133" end="168" title="Interstate 470 (Ohio–West Virginia)" label="Interstate 470 (Ohio–West Virginia)"/>
<link wikidata="Q16554" start="293" end="309" title="Denver, Colorado" label="Denver, Colorado"/>
<link wikidata="Q2139118" start="313" end="339" title="Colorado State Highway 470" label="Colorado State Highway 470"/>
<link wikidata="Q2139154" start="342" end="347" title="E-470" label="E-470"/>
<link wikidata="Q2139297" start="350" end="367" title="Northwest Parkway" label="Northwest Parkway"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="464766" wikidata="Q2991980" url="?curid=464766" title="Stroke order">
<text>Stroke order is the order in which the strokes of a Chinese character are written. A stroke is a movement of a writing instrument on a writing surface.

==Basic principles==
Chinese characters are logograms constructed with strokes. Over the millennia a set of generally agreed rules have been developed by custom. Minor variations exist between countries, but the basic principles remain the same, namely that writing characters should be economical, with the fewest hand movements to write the most strokes possible. This promotes writing speed, accuracy, and readability. This idea is particularly important since as learners progress, characters often get more complex. Since stroke order also aids learning and memorization, students are often taught about it from a very early age in schools and encouraged to follow them.

The Eight Principles of Yong uses the single character (&#x27;eternity&#x27;) to teach eight of the most basic strokes in regular script.

== Stroke order per style ==
===Ancient China===
In ancient China, the Oracle bone script carved on ox scapula and tortoise plastrons showed no indication of stroke order. The characters show huge variations from piece to piece, sometimes even within one piece. During the divination ceremony, after the cracks were made, the characters were written with a brush on the shell or bone (to be carved in a workshop later). Although the brush-written stroke order is not discernible after carving, there exists some evidence that it was not entirely idiosyncratic: a few of the characters, often marginal administrative notations recording the provenance of the shells or bones, were not later re-carved, and the stroke order of these characters tends to resemble traditional and modern stroke order. For those characters (the vast majority) which were later engraved into the hard surface using a knife, perhaps by a separate individual, there is evidence (from incompletely engraved pieces) that in at least some cases all the strokes running one way were carved, then the piece was turned, and strokes running another way were then carved.

===Imperial China===
In early Imperial China, the common script was the small seal script. About 220 BC, the emperor Qin Shi Huang, the first to conquer all of China, imposed Li Si&#x27;s character consolidation, a set of 3300 standardized small seal characters. Its graphs on old steles—some dating from 200 BC—reveal indications of the stroke order of the time. However, stroke order could still not yet be ascertained from the steles, and no paper from that time is extant.

The true starting point of stroke order is the clerical script which is more regularized, and in some ways similar to modern text. By looking at the clerical style steles&#x27; graphs and the placement of each stroke, one can see hierarchical priority between the strokes, which indicates the stroke order used by the calligrapher or stele sculptors.

Regular script is the most recent major script style, allowing one to more easily guess the stroke order used to write on the steles. The stroke order 1000 years ago was similar to that toward the end of Imperial China. For example, the stroke order of is clear in the &quot;Kangxi Dictionary&quot; of 1716; but in a modern book, the official stroke order (the same) will not appear clearly. The Kangxi and current shapes have tiny differences, while current stroke order is still the same, according to the old style. However, the stroke orders implied by the Kangxi dictionary are not necessarily similar to nowadays&#x27; norm.

===Cursive styles and hand-written styles===
Cursive and semi-cursive script show stroke order more clearly than Regular Script, as each move made by the writing tool is visible.

== Stroke order per polity ==
The modern governments of mainland China, Hong Kong, Taiwan, and Japan have standardized official stroke orders to be taught in schools. These stroke order standards are prescribed in conjunction to each government&#x27;s standard character sets. The various official stroke orders agree on the vast majority of characters, but each has its differences. No governmental standard matches traditional stroke orders completely. The differences between the governmental standards and traditional stroke orders arise from accommodation for schoolchildren who may be overwhelmed if the rules about stroke orders are too detailed, or if there are too many exceptions. The differences listed below are not exhaustive.
* Traditional stroke order: Widely used in Imperial China, currently used in the Chinese cultural sphere secondary to each region&#x27;s governmental standards. Practiced mainly by informed scholars of calligraphy. Also called &quot;calligraphic&quot; stroke order. These stroke orders are established by study of handwritten documents from pre-Republic China, especially those of notable calligraphers. These stroke orders are most conservative regarding etymology, character construction, character evolution, and tradition. Many characters have more than one stroke correct form. Stroke orders may vary depending on the script style. Unlike the other standards, this is not a governmental standard.
* Japanese stroke order: Prescribed mostly in modern Japan. The standard character set of the MEXT is the Jōyō kanji, which contains many characters reformed in 1946. The MEXT lets editors freely prescribe a character&#x27;s stroke order, which all should &quot;follow commonsensical orders which are widely accepted in the society&quot;. This standard diverges from the traditional stroke order in that the two sides of the grass radical () are joined, and written with three strokes. Also, this standard is influenced by semi-cursive script, leading to some vertical strokes to precede intersecting horizontal strokes if the vertical stroke does not pass through the lowest horizontal stroke, as in and . is written with the top dot first, while the traditional stroke order writes the first.
* Taiwan stroke order (): Prescribed mostly in modern Taiwan. The standard character set of the ROC Ministry of Education is the Standard Form of National Characters. This standard diverges from the traditional stroke order in that the upper-right dot of the component is written second to last. The vertical stroke in is written second. starts with the horizontal. Also, the component, as seen in and , is written with the horizontal stroke first in all instances, while the traditional stroke order differentiates the stroke order of according to etymology and character structure.
* Mainland China stroke order: Prescribed mostly in modern Mainland China. In 1956, the government of the PRC introduced many newly created characters and substitutions, called Simplified Chinese characters, which form part of the PRC Ministry of Education&#x27;s standard character set, the Xiàndài Hànyǔ Chángyòng Zìbiǎo. This in turn reformed the stroke order of many characters. Besides these characters, this standard diverges from the traditional stroke order in characters with the radical, merging both sides like the Japanese standard. Also, the horizontal stroke of the component is written first in all instances. ends with . starts with the horizontal. In 1997, the PRC Ministry of Education published the official stroke order standard for commonly used characters.
* Hong Kong stroke order: Prescribed mostly in modern Hong Kong. The standard character set of the Hong Kong Education Bureau is the List of Forms of Frequently Used Characters. In this standard, is written vertical–horizontal–vertical–horizontal, instead of the traditional vertical–horizontal–horizontal–vertical. starts with the horizontal.

== Alternative stroke orders ==
Besides general errors and regional differences in stroke order, it is common in the People&#x27;s Republic of China to apply alternative stroke orders which resemble PRC stroke orders to Traditional Chinese characters, although the mainland generally uses Simplified characters. In the below example, the traditional character (simplified: ) is shown with both the traditional stroke order (left, starting with the left vertical stroke), as in imperial China, Taiwan, Japan, and Hong Kong, and with the Simplified stroke order (right, with the left vertical stroke fourth).
== General guidelines ==
&quot;Note: There are exceptions within and among different standards. The following are only guidelines.&quot;

1. Write from top to bottom, and left to right. 

As a general rule, strokes are written from top to bottom and left to right. For example, among the first characters usually learned is the number one, which is written with a single horizontal line: . This character has one stroke which is written from left to right.

The character for &quot;two&quot; has two strokes: . In this case, both are written from left to right, but the top stroke is written first. The character for &quot;three&quot; has three strokes: . Each stroke is written from left to right, starting with the uppermost stroke.

This rule also applies to the order of components. For example, can be divided into two. The entire left side () is written before the right side (). There are some exceptions to this rule, mainly occurring when the right side of a character has a lower enclosure (see below).

When there are upper and lower components, the upper components are written first, then the lower components, as in and .

2. Horizontal before vertical 

When horizontal and vertical strokes cross, horizontal strokes are usually written before vertical strokes: the character for &quot;ten&quot;, , has two strokes. The horizontal stroke, , is written first, followed by the vertical stroke, to obtain .

Similarly, when a horizontal stroke is crossed by a right-to-left diagonal (丿), the horizontal stroke is written first, e.g., the first stroke of 大 is 一, followed by 丿.

In the Japanese standard, a vertical stroke may precede many intersecting horizontal strokes if the vertical stroke does not pass through the lowest horizontal stroke.

3. Character-spanning strokes last 

Vertical strokes that pass through many other strokes are written after the strokes through which they pass, as in and .

Horizontal strokes that pass through many other strokes are written last, as in and .

4. Diagonals right-to-left before diagonals left-to-right 

Right-to-left diagonals () are written before left-to-right diagonals (), as in .

This is for symmetric diagonals; for asymmetric diagonals, as in , the left-to-right may precede the right-to-left, based on other rules.

5. Center before outside in vertically symmetrical characters 

In vertically symmetrical characters, the center components are written before components on the left or right. Components on the left are written before components on the right, as in and .

6. Enclosures before contents 

Outside enclosing components are written before inside components; bottom strokes in the enclosure are written last if present, as in and . (A common mnemonic is &quot;Put people inside first, then close the door.&quot;) Enclosures may also have no bottom stroke, as in and .

7. Left vertical before enclosing 

Left vertical strokes are written before enclosing strokes. In the following two examples, the leftmost vertical stroke (|) is written first, followed by the uppermost and rightmost lines (┐) (which are written as one stroke): and .

8. Bottom enclosures last 

Bottom enclosing components are usually written last: , , .

9. Dots and minor strokes last 

Minor strokes are usually written last, as the small &quot;dot&quot; in the following: , , .

10. Vertical before diagonal lower-left-to-right 

A vertical is written before a crossing diagonal lower-left-to-right stroke (㇀, &quot;ti&quot;), such as: 物, 软, 打.

== Representations ==
There are various ways to describe the stroke order of a character. Children learn the stroke order in courses, as part of writing learning. Various graphical representations are possible, most notably successive images of the character with one more stroke added (or changing color) each time, numbering strokes, color-coding, fanning, and more recently animations. Stroke order is often described in person by writing characters on paper or in the air.

==See also==

* Chinese characters description languages
* Stroke Orders of the Commonly Used Standard Chinese Characters
* Stroke Order Standard of GB 13000.1 Character Set
* Stroke orders of CJK Unified Ideographs (YES order)

==Notes==
==References==
;Traditional stroke order
* 

;ROC stroke order
* (Authoritative)

;PRC stroke order
* (Authoritative)

;Japanese
* (Authoritative from 1958 to 1977).
* Hadamitzky, Wolfgang &amp; Mark Spahn. &quot;A Handbook of the Japanese Writing System&quot;. Charles E. Tuttle Co. .
* Henshall, Kenneth G. &quot;A Guide to Remembering Japanese Characters&quot;. Charles E. Tuttle Co. .
* O&#x27;Neill, P.G. &quot;Essential Kanji: 2,000 Basic Japanese Characters Systematically Arranged for Learning and Reference&quot;. Weatherhill. .
** Includes a translation of the Japanese Ministry of Education rules on Kanji stroke order.

;Hong Kong
* . Online version available at http://www.edbchinese.hk/lexlist_ch/. (Print version is official curriculum supporting material.)

;Archaic characters

;Other issues
* 

==External links==

;PRC
*Animated stroke order, from the California State University, Long Beach
*LearnchineseOK.com Web resources, instructions and animations for Chinese character stroke order
*Animated stroke order for Chinese characters Stroke Order tool with option to see many characters&#x27; stroke order at once.

;ROC
*Learning Program for Stroke Order of Frequently Used Chinese Characters (常用國字標準字體筆順學習網) with animated stroke order, by the Ministry of Education, R.O.C. (Taiwan).

;Hong Kong
*中英對照香港學校中文學習基礎字詞 - Lexical Items with English Explanations for Fundamental Chinese Learning in Hong Kong Schools, by the Hong Kong Education Bureau
*香港標準字形及筆順 - stroke orders following the Hong Kong Education Bureau&#x27;s List of Commonly Used Characters

;Japanese
*Kanji Stroke Order, from the Engineering Department of New Mexico Tech, Socorro.
*Kanji alive, a free web application for learning Japanese kanji with stroke order animations.
*SODER Project, 1,513 Japanese kanji stroke order diagrams and animations, freely downloadable under license.
*Kakijun Kanji stroke order animations.
*Kanji stroke order font, Japanese kanji stroke order diagrams presented as a TrueType font.
*Kanji Kakijun navi Japanese kanji stroke order.

;Korean
*한자사전(漢字辭典) with stroke order diagrams </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2991980" start="0" end="12" title="Stroke order" label="Stroke order"/>
<link wikidata="Q1689024" start="39" end="46" title="Stroke (CJK character)" label="strokes"/>
<link wikidata="Q8201" start="52" end="69" title="Chinese character" label="Chinese character"/>
<link wikidata="Q8201" start="174" end="191" title="Chinese character" label="Chinese character"/>
<link wikidata="Q138659" start="197" end="205" title="logogram" label="logogram"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143266" start="834" end="858" title="Eight Principles of Yong" label="Eight Principles of Yong"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196029" start="952" end="966" title="regular script" label="regular script"/>
<link wikidata="Q82972" start="1021" end="1034" title="ancient China" label="ancient China"/>
<link wikidata="Q7476695" start="1040" end="1058" title="Oracle bone script" label="Oracle bone script"/>
<link wikidata="Q16336" start="1072" end="1079" title="scapula" label="scapula"/>
<link wikidata="Q13486671" start="1093" end="1102" title="plastrons" label="plastrons"/>
<link wikidata="Q82972" start="2139" end="2153" title="Imperial era of Chinese history" label="Imperial China"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195660" start="2181" end="2198" title="small seal script" label="small seal script"/>
<link wikidata="Q7192" start="2226" end="2239" title="Qin Shi Huang" label="Qin Shi Huang"/>
<link wikidata="Q152919" start="2284" end="2289" title="Li Si" label="Li Si"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073960" start="2634" end="2649" title="clerical script" label="clerical script"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196029" start="2939" end="2953" title="Regular script" label="Regular script"/>
<link wikidata="Q850590" start="3214" end="3231" title="Kangxi Dictionary" label="Kangxi Dictionary"/>
<link wikidata="Q1367992" start="3628" end="3647" title="semi-cursive script" label="semi-cursive script"/>
<link wikidata="Q369577" start="3857" end="3869" title="standardization" label="standardized"/>
<link wikidata="Q82972" start="4534" end="4548" title="Imperial China" label="Imperial China"/>
<link wikidata="Q716566" start="4572" end="4595" title="Chinese cultural sphere" label="Chinese cultural sphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q837611" start="5068" end="5072" title="Variant Chinese character" label="form"/>
<link wikidata="Q11059241" start="5114" end="5126" title="Chinese script styles" label="script style"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="5246" end="5251" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054379" start="5287" end="5291" title="Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology" label="MEXT"/>
<link wikidata="Q875368" start="5299" end="5309" title="Jōyō kanji" label="Jōyō kanji"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055887" start="5342" end="5350" title="shinjitai" label="reformed"/>
<link wikidata="Q1367992" start="5716" end="5735" title="semi-cursive script" label="semi-cursive script"/>
<link wikidata="Q865" start="6042" end="6048" title="Taiwan" label="Taiwan"/>
<link wikidata="Q697093" start="6084" end="6109" title="Ministry of Education (Republic of China)" label="ROC Ministry of Education"/>
<link wikidata="Q906019" start="6117" end="6153" title="Standard Form of National Characters" label="Standard Form of National Characters"/>
<link wikidata="Q19188" start="6631" end="6645" title="Mainland China" label="Mainland China"/>
<link wikidata="Q185614" start="6749" end="6777" title="Simplified Chinese character" label="Simplified Chinese character"/>
<link wikidata="Q1042167" start="6803" end="6828" title="Ministry of Education of the People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China" label="PRC Ministry of Education"/>
<link wikidata="Q5934868" start="6864" end="6894" title="Xiàndài Hànyǔ Chángyòng Zìbiǎo" label="Xiàndài Hànyǔ Chángyòng Zìbiǎo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1042167" start="7250" end="7275" title="Ministry of Education of the People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China" label="PRC Ministry of Education"/>
<link wikidata="Q8646" start="7405" end="7414" title="Hong Kong" label="Hong Kong"/>
<link wikidata="Q2301502" start="7460" end="7476" title="Education Bureau" label="Education Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q6152418" start="7484" end="7527" title="List of Forms of Frequently Used Characters" label="List of Forms of Frequently Used Characters"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="7813" end="7844" title="China" label="People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q5100720" start="12302" end="12342" title="Chinese characters description languages" label="Chinese characters description languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q113584747" start="12345" end="12407" title="Stroke Orders of the Commonly Used Standard Chinese Characters" label="Stroke Orders of the Commonly Used Standard Chinese Characters"/>
<link wikidata="Q127502447" start="12410" end="12459" title="Stroke Order Standard of GB 13000.1 Character Set" label="Stroke Order Standard of GB 13000.1 Character Set"/>
<link wikidata="Q126325805" start="12462" end="12513" title="Stroke orders of CJK Unified Ideographs (YES order)" label="Stroke orders of CJK Unified Ideographs (YES order)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2301502" start="13975" end="13991" title="Education Bureau" label="Education Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q82772" start="14252" end="14257" title="kanji" label="kanji"/>
<link wikidata="Q82772" start="14319" end="14324" title="kanji" label="kanji"/>
<link wikidata="Q82772" start="14473" end="14478" title="kanji" label="kanji"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="464767" wikidata="Q56172" url="?curid=464767" title="Hugh Sykes Davies">
<text>Hugh Sykes Davies (17 August 1909 – 6 June 1984) was an English poet, novelist and communist, who was one of a small group of 1930s British surrealists.

== Biography==
Davies was born in Prescot, Merseyside (then in Lancashire), to a Methodist minister and his wife. He went to Kingswood School, Bath, and read the Classics and English Triposes at St John&#x27;s College, Cambridge, where he co-edited the student magazine &quot;Experiment&quot; with William Empson. Following graduation he was awarded both the Jebb Studentship and the Le Bas Essay Prize. In 1933 he was elected the first-ever fellow of English at St John&#x27;s College, and three years later he was appointed a University Lecturer in the subject. While at Cambridge he was a member of the Apostles.

Davies spent some time in Paris during the 1930s, and in 1936 he was one of the organisers of the London International Surrealist Exhibition, where he met the artist Salvador Dalí. His poems were mostly published in &quot;avant garde&quot; magazines and were not collected during his lifetime; his best known was arguably &quot;Petron&quot; (1935). His novels include &quot;Full Fathom Five&quot; (1956) and &quot;The Papers of Andrew Melmoth&quot; (1960), while his works of literary scholarship include &quot;Realism in the Drama&quot; (his prize-winning entry for the Le Bas competition; 1933), &quot;Surrealism&quot; (1936), &quot;Macaulay&#x27;s Marginalia to Lucretius&quot; (1937) and &quot;Grammar Without Tears&quot; (1951).

Politically Davies was of the left, and he intended to stand as the Labour Party candidate for Isle of Ely in the anticipated 1940 general election, but his prospective candidature was terminated when the party found out that he was also a member of the Communist Party. During World War II he was employed at the Ministry of Food, which gave him an insight into administrative problems; perhaps consequently, he lost much of his youthful utopianism, and in the 1950s renounced his communist affiliation and reverted to a more orthodox social democracy in its stead.

==Personal life==
Davies had a talent for friendship, and in addition to Empson and Dalí he numbered T. S. Eliot, I. A. Richards, Anthony Blunt and Ludwig Wittgenstein amongst his circle. At one stage he had Malcolm Lowry declared his ward in an attempt to stop Lowry&#x27;s drinking. He appears in the National Film Board of Canada&#x27;s feature-length documentary &quot;&quot; (1976), where he talks about Lowry and their friendship.

Davies died at St John&#x27;s College in Cambridge on 6 June 1984, after recovering several months earlier from a serious operation. He was married five times to four women, the first of whom was the poet Kathleen Raine.

==External links==
*Biography, poems, prose and checklist of publications

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q56172" start="0" end="17" title="Hugh Sykes Davies" label="Hugh Sykes Davies"/>
<link wikidata="Q39427" start="140" end="151" title="Surrealism" label="surrealists"/>
<link wikidata="Q1976655" start="188" end="195" title="Prescot" label="Prescot"/>
<link wikidata="Q23100" start="197" end="207" title="Merseyside" label="Merseyside"/>
<link wikidata="Q23077" start="217" end="227" title="Lancashire" label="Lancashire"/>
<link wikidata="Q6413785" start="279" end="295" title="Kingswood School" label="Kingswood School"/>
<link wikidata="Q22889" start="297" end="301" title="Bath, Somerset" label="Bath"/>
<link wikidata="Q691283" start="349" end="382" title="St John&amp;#x27;s College, Cambridge" label="St John&amp;#x27;s College, Cambridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q966870" start="452" end="466" title="William Empson" label="William Empson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1028290" start="760" end="768" title="Cambridge Apostles" label="Apostles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1666958" start="869" end="911" title="London International Surrealist Exhibition" label="London International Surrealist Exhibition"/>
<link wikidata="Q5577" start="937" end="950" title="Salvador Dalí" label="Salvador Dalí"/>
<link wikidata="Q9630" start="1574" end="1586" title="Labour Party (UK)" label="Labour Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q6083907" start="1601" end="1612" title="Isle of Ely (UK Parliament constituency)" label="Isle of Ely"/>
<link wikidata="Q592068" start="1760" end="1775" title="Communist Party of Great Britain" label="Communist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q16578697" start="1820" end="1836" title="Ministry of Food (United Kingdom)" label="Ministry of Food"/>
<link wikidata="Q37767" start="2175" end="2186" title="T. S. Eliot" label="T. S. Eliot"/>
<link wikidata="Q718585" start="2188" end="2202" title="I. A. Richards" label="I. A. Richards"/>
<link wikidata="Q508392" start="2204" end="2217" title="Anthony Blunt" label="Anthony Blunt"/>
<link wikidata="Q9391" start="2222" end="2241" title="Ludwig Wittgenstein" label="Ludwig Wittgenstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q357120" start="2282" end="2295" title="Malcolm Lowry" label="Malcolm Lowry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1530721" start="2377" end="2413" title="National Film Board of Canada" label="National Film Board of Canada&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q350" start="2553" end="2562" title="Cambridge" label="Cambridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q460183" start="2717" end="2731" title="Kathleen Raine" label="Kathleen Raine"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="464770" wikidata="Q808760" url="?curid=464770" title="Barotrauma">
<text>Barotrauma is physical damage to body tissues caused by a difference in pressure between a gas space inside, or in contact with, the body and the surrounding gas or liquid. The initial damage is usually due to over-stretching the tissues in tension or shear, either directly by an expansion of the gas in the closed space or by pressure difference hydrostatically transmitted through the tissue. Tissue rupture may be complicated by the introduction of gas into the local tissue or circulation through the initial trauma site, which can cause blockage of circulation at distant sites or interfere with the normal function of an organ by its presence. The term is usually applied when the gas volume involved already exists prior to decompression. Barotrauma can occur during both compression and decompression events.

Barotrauma generally manifests as sinus or middle ear effects, lung overpressure injuries and injuries resulting from external squeezes. Decompression sickness is indirectly caused by ambient pressure reduction, and tissue damage is caused directly and indirectly by gas bubbles. However, these bubbles form out of supersaturated solution from dissolved gases, and are not generally considered barotrauma. Decompression illness is a term that includes decompression sickness and arterial gas embolism caused by lung overexpansion barotrauma. It is also classified under the broader term of dysbarism, which covers all medical conditions resulting from changes in ambient pressure.

Barotrauma typically occurs when the organism is exposed to a significant change in ambient pressure, such as when a scuba diver, a free-diver or an airplane passenger ascends or descends or during uncontrolled decompression of a pressure vessel such as a diving chamber or pressurized aircraft, but can also be caused by a shock wave. Ventilator-induced lung injury (VILI) is a condition caused by over-expansion of the lungs by mechanical ventilation used when the body is unable to breathe for itself and is associated with relatively large tidal volumes and relatively high peak pressures. Barotrauma due to overexpansion of an internal gas-filled space may also be termed volutrauma.

== Presentation ==
Examples of organs or tissues easily damaged by barotrauma are:
* Middle ear and inner ear (barotitis or aerotitis)
* Paranasal sinuses (causing aerosinusitis)
* Lungs may be affected by both under-pressure or, more commonly, overpressure relative to the external pressure
* Eyes (the under-pressure air space is inside the diving mask or swimming goggles)
* Skin (when wearing a diving suit which creates an air space)
* Brain and cranium (temporal lobe injury secondary to temporal bone rupture)
* Teeth (causing barodontalgia, i.e., barometric pressure related dental pain, or dental fractures)
* Genital squeeze and associated urinary complications of &quot;P-valve&quot; use
* is caused by over-expansion of gas trapped in the intestines during ascent.
== Causes ==

When diving, the pressure differences which cause the barotrauma are changes in hydrostatic pressure. There are two components to the surrounding pressure acting on the diver: the atmospheric pressure and the water pressure. A descent of 10 metres (33 feet) in water increases the ambient pressure by an amount approximately equal to the pressure of the atmosphere at sea level. So, a descent from the surface to 10 metres (33 feet) underwater results in a doubling of the pressure on the diver. This pressure change will reduce the volume of a flexible gas-filled space by half. Boyle&#x27;s law describes the relationship between the volume of the gas space and the pressure in the gas.

Barotraumas of descent, also known as compression barotrauma, and squeezes, are caused by preventing the free change of volume of the gas in a closed space in contact with the diver, resulting in a pressure difference between the tissues and the gas space, and the unbalanced force due to this pressure difference causes deformation of the tissues resulting in cell rupture. Barotraumas of ascent, also called decompression barotrauma, are also caused when the free change of volume of the gas in a closed space in contact with the diver is prevented. In this case the pressure difference causes a resultant tension in the surrounding tissues which exceeds their tensile strength.

Patients undergoing hyperbaric oxygen therapy must equalize their ears to avoid barotrauma. High risk of otic barotrauma is associated with unconscious patients. Explosive decompression of a hyperbaric environment can produce severe barotrauma, followed by severe decompression bubble formation and other related injury. The &quot;Byford Dolphin&quot; incident is an example. Rapid uncontrolled decompression from caissons, airlocks, pressurised aircraft, spacecraft, and pressure suits can have similar effects of decompression barotrauma.

Collapse of a pressure resistant structure such as a submarine, submersible, or atmospheric diving suit can cause rapid compression barotrauma. A rapid change of altitude can cause barotrauma when internal air spaces cannot be equalised. Excessively strenuous efforts to equalise the ears using the Valsalva manoeuvre can overpressurise the middle ear, and can cause middle ear and/or inner ear barotrauma. An explosive blast and explosive decompression create a pressure wave that can induce barotrauma. The difference in pressure between internal organs and the outer surface of the body causes injuries to internal organs that contain gas, such as the lungs, gastrointestinal tract, and ear. Lung injuries can also occur during rapid decompression, although the risk of injury is lower than with explosive decompression.

Mechanical ventilation can lead to barotrauma of the lungs. This can be due to either:
* absolute pressures used in order to ventilate non-compliant lungs.
* shearing forces, particularly associated with rapid changes in gas velocity.
The resultant alveolar rupture can lead to pneumothorax, pulmonary interstitial emphysema (PIE) and pneumomediastinum.

Barotrauma is a recognised complication of mechanical ventilation that can occur in any patient receiving mechanical ventilation, but is most commonly associated with acute respiratory distress syndrome. It used to be the most common complication of mechanical ventilation but can usually be avoided by limiting tidal volume and plateau pressure to less than 30 to 50 cm water column (30 to 50 mb). As an indicator of transalveolar pressure, which predicts alveolar distention, plateau pressure or peak airway pressure (PAP) may be the most effective predictor of risk, but there is no generally accepted safe pressure at which there is no risk. Risk also appears to be increased by aspiration of stomach contents and pre-existing disease such as necrotising pneumonia and chronic lung disease. Status asthmaticus is a particular problem as it requires relatively high pressures to overcome bronchial obstruction.

When lung tissues are damaged by alveolar over-distension, the injury may be termed volutrauma, but volume and transpulmonary pressure are closely related. Ventilator induced lung injury is often associated with high tidal volumes (Vt).

Other injuries with similar causes are decompression sickness and ebullism.

== Pathophysiology ==

===Lung overpressure injury===

A free-diver can dive and safely ascend without exhaling, because the gas in the lungs had been inhaled at atmospheric pressure, is compressed during the descent, and expands back to the original volume during ascent. A scuba or surface-supplied diver breathing gas at depth from underwater breathing apparatus fills their lungs with gas at an ambient pressure greater than atmospheric pressure. At 10 metres the lungs contain twice the amount of gas that they would contain at atmospheric pressure, and if they ascend without exhaling the gas will expand to match the decreasing pressure until the lungs reach their elastic limit, and begin to tear, and is very likely to sustain life-threatening lung damage. Besides tissue rupture, the overpressure may cause ingress of gases into the tissues through the ruptures, and further afield through the circulatory system. Pulmonary barotrauma (PBt) of ascent is also known as pulmonary over-inflation syndrome (POIS), lung over-pressure injury (LOP) and burst lung. Consequent injuries may include arterial gas embolism, pneumothorax, mediastinal, interstitial and subcutaneous emphysemas, depending on where the gas ends up, not usually all at the same time.

POIS may also be caused by mechanical ventilation.

=== Arterial gas embolism ===

Gas in the arterial system can be carried to the blood vessels of the brain and other vital organs. It typically causes transient embolism similar to thromboembolism but of shorter duration. Where damage occurs to the endothelium inflammation develops and symptoms resembling stroke may follow. The bubbles are generally distributed and of various sizes, and usually affect several areas, resulting in an unpredictable variety of neurological deficits. Unconsciousness or other major changes to the state of consciousness within about 10 minutes of surfacing are generally assumed to be gas embolism until proven otherwise. The belief that the gas bubbles themselves formed static emboli which remain in place until recompression has been superseded by the knowledge that the gas emboli are normally transient, and the damage is due to inflammation following endothelial damage and secondary injury from inflammatory mediator upregulation.

Hyperbaric oxygen can cause downregulation of the inflammatory response and resolution of oedema by causing hyperoxic arterial vasoconstriction of the supply to capillary beds. High concentration normobaric oxygen is appropriate as first aid but is not considered definitive treatment even when the symptoms appear to resolve. Relapses are common after discontinuing oxygen without recompression.

===Pneumothorax===

A pneumothorax is an abnormal collection of air in the pleural space between the lung and the chest wall. Symptoms typically include sudden onset of sharp, one-sided chest pain and shortness of breath. In a minority of cases, a one-way valve is formed by an area of damaged tissue, and the amount of air in the space between chest wall and lungs increases; this is called a tension pneumothorax. This can cause a steadily worsening oxygen shortage and low blood pressure. This leads to a type of shock called obstructive shock, which can be fatal unless reversed. Very rarely, both lungs may be affected by a pneumothorax. It is often called a &quot;collapsed lung&quot;, although that term may also refer to atelectasis.
Divers who breathe from an underwater apparatus are supplied with breathing gas at ambient pressure, which results in their lungs containing gas at higher than atmospheric pressure. Divers breathing compressed air (such as when scuba diving) may develop a pneumothorax as a result of barotrauma from ascending just while breath-holding with their lungs fully inflated. An additional problem in these cases is that those with other features of decompression sickness are typically treated in a diving chamber with hyperbaric therapy; this can lead to a small pneumothorax rapidly enlarging and causing features of tension.
Diagnosis of a pneumothorax by physical examination alone can be difficult (particularly in smaller pneumothoraces). A chest X-ray, computed tomography (CT) scan, or ultrasound is usually used to confirm its presence. Other conditions that can result in similar symptoms include a hemothorax (buildup of blood in the pleural space), pulmonary embolism, and heart attack. A large bulla may look similar on a chest X-ray.

===Pneumomediastinum===

Also known as mediastinal emphysema to divers, pneumomediastinum is a volume of gas inside the mediastinum, the central cavity in the chest between the lungs and surrounding the heart and central blood vessels, usually formed by gas escaping from the lungs as a result of lung rupture.

Gas bubbles escaping from a ruptured lung can travel along the outside of bronchioles and blood vessels until they reach the mediastinal cavity round the heart, major blood vessels, oesophagus and trachea. Gas trapped in the mediastinum expands as the diver continues to rise. The pressure of the trapped gas may cause intense pain inside the rib cage and in the shoulders, and the gas may compress the respiratory passageways, making breathing difficult, and collapse blood vessels. Symptoms range from pain under the sternum, shock, shallow breathing, unconsciousness, respiratory failure, and associated cyanosis. The gas will usually be absorbed by the body over time, and when the symptoms are mild, no treatment may be necessary. Otherwise it may be vented through a hypodermic needle inserted into the mediastinum. Recompression is not usually indicated.

== Diagnosis ==
Diagnosis of barotrauma generally involves a history of exposure to a source of pressure which could cause the injury suggested by the symptoms. This can vary from the immediately obvious if exposed to explosive blast, or mask squeeze, to rather complex discrimination between possibilities of inner ear decompression sickness and inner ear barotrauma, which may have nearly identical symptoms but different causative mechanism and mutually incompatible treatments. The detailed dive history may be necessary in these cases.

In terms of &quot;barotrauma&quot; the diagnostic workup for the affected individual could include the following:

Laboratory:
* Creatine kinase (CPK) level: Increases in CPK levels indicate tissue damage associated with decompression sickness.
* Complete blood count (CBC)
* Arterial blood gas (ABG) determination

Imaging:
* Chest radiography can show pneumothorax, and is indicated if there is chest discomfort or breathing difficulty
* Computed tomography (CT) scans and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) may be indicated when there is severe headache or severe back pain after diving.
* CT is the most sensitive method to evaluate for pneumothorax. It can be used where barotrauma-related pneumothorax is suspected and chest radiograph findings are negative.
* Echocardiography can be used to detect the number and size of gas bubbles in the right side of the heart.

=== Ear barotrauma ===
Barotrauma can affect the external, middle, or inner ear. Middle ear barotrauma (MEBT) is the most common diving injury, being experienced by between 10% and 30% of divers and is due to insufficient equilibration of the middle ear. External ear barotrauma may occur if air is trapped in the external auditory canal. Diagnosis of middle and external ear barotrauma is relatively simple, as the damage is usually visible if severe enough to require intervention.

====External auditory canal====
Barotrauma can occur in the external auditory canal if it is blocked by cerumen, exostoses, a tight-fitting diving suit hood or earplugs, which create an airtight, air-filled space between the eardrum and the blockage. On descent, a pressure differential develops between the ambient water and the interior of this space, and this can cause swelling and haemorrhagic blistering of the canal. Treatment is usually analgesics and topical steroid eardrops. Complications may include local infection. This form of barotrauma is usually easily avoided.

====Middle ear====

Middle ear barotrauma (MEBT) is an injury caused by a difference in pressure between the external ear canal and the middle ear. It is common in underwater divers and usually occurs when the diver does not equalise sufficiently during descent or, less commonly, on ascent. Failure to equalise may be due to inexperience or eustachian tube dysfunction, which can have many possible causes. Unequalised ambient pressure increase during descent causes a pressure imbalance between the middle ear air space and the external auiditory canal over the eardrum, referred to by divers as ear squeeze, causing inward stretching, serous effusion and haemorrhage, and eventual rupture. During ascent internal over-pressure is normally passively released through the eustachian tube, but if this does not happen the volume expansion of middle ear gas will cause outward bulging, stretching and eventual rupture of the eardrum known to divers as . This damage causes local pain and hearing loss. Tympanic rupture during a dive can allow water into the middle ear, which can cause severe vertigo from caloric stimulation. This may cause nausea and vomiting underwater, which has a high risk of aspiration of vomit or water, with possible fatal consequences.
====Inner ear====
Inner ear barotrauma (IEBt), though much less common than MEBT, shares a similar external cause. Mechanical trauma to the inner ear can lead to varying degrees of conductive and sensorineural hearing loss as well as vertigo. It is also common for conditions affecting the inner ear to result in auditory hypersensitivity. Two possible mechanisms are associated with forced Valsalva manoeuvre. In the one, the Eustachian tube opens in response to the pressure, and a sudden rush of high pressure air into the middle ear causes stapes footplate dislocation and inward rupture of the oval or round window. In the other, the tube remains closed and increased cerebrospinal fluid pressure is transmitted through the cochlea and causes outward rupture of the round window.

Inner ear barotrauma can be difficult to distinguish from Inner ear decompression sickness. Both conditions manifest as cochleovestibular symptoms. The similarity of symptoms makes differential diagnosis difficult, which can delay appropriate treatment or lead to inappropriate treatment.

Nitrogen narcosis, oxygen toxicity, hypercarbia, and hypoxia can cause disturbances in balance or vertigo, but these appear to be central nervous system effects, not directly related to effects on the vestibular organs. High-pressure nervous syndrome during heliox compression is also a central nervous system dysfunction. Inner ear injuries with lasting effects are usually due to round window ruptures, often associated with Valsalva maneuver or inadequate middle ear equalisation. Inner ear barotrauma is often concurrent with middle ear barotrauma as the external causes are generally the same. A variety of injuries may be present, which may include inner ear haemorrhage, intralabyrinthine membrane tear, perilymph fistula, and other pathologies.

Divers who develop cochlear and/or vestibular symptoms during descent to any depth, or during shallow diving in which decompression sickness is unlikely, should be treated with bed rest with head elevation, and should avoid any activity which could cause raised cerebrospinal fluid and intralabyrinthine pressure. If there is no improvement in symptoms after 48 hours, exploratory tympanotomy may be considered to investigate possible repair of a labyrinthine window fistula. Recompression therapy is contraindicated in these cases, but is the definitive treatment for inner ear decompression sickness, making an early and accurate differential diagnosis important for deciding on appropriate treatment. IEBt in divers may be difficult to distinguish from inner ear decompression sickness (IEDCS), and as a dive profile alone cannot always eliminate either of the possibilities, the detailed dive history may be necessary to diagnose the more likely injury. It is also possible for both to occur at the same time, and IEDCS is more likely to affect the semicircular canals, causing severe vertigo, while IEBt is more likely to affect the cochlea, causing hearing loss, but these are just statistical probabilities, and in reality it can go either way or both. It is accepted practice to assume that if any symptom typical of DCS is present, that the diver has DCS and will be treated accordingly with recompression. Limited case data suggest that recompression does not usually cause harm if the differential diagnosis between IEBt vs IEDCS is doubtful.

=== Barosinusitis ===

The sinuses, like other air-filled cavities, are susceptible to barotrauma if their openings become obstructed. This can result in pain as well as epistaxis (nosebleed). Diagnosis is usually simple provided the history of pressure exposure is mentioned. Barosinusitis, is also called aerosinusitis, sinus squeeze or sinus barotrauma. Sinus barotrauma can be caused by external or internal overpressure. External over-pressure is called sinus squeeze by divers, while internal over-pressure is usually referred to as reverse block or reverse squeeze.

=== Mask squeeze ===
If a diver&#x27;s mask is not equalized during descent the relative negative internal pressure can produce petechial hemorrhages in the area covered by the mask along with subconjunctival hemorrhages.

=== Helmet squeeze ===

A problem mostly of historical interest, but still relevant to surface supplied divers who dive with the helmet sealed to the dry suit. If the air supply hose is ruptured near or above the surface, the pressure difference between the water around the diver and the air in the hose can be several bar. The non-return valve at the connection to the helmet will prevent backflow if it is working correctly, but if absent, as in the early days of helmet diving, or if it fails, the pressure difference will tend to squeeze the diver into the rigid helmet, which can result in severe trauma. The same effect can result from a large and rapid increase in depth if the air supply is insufficient to keep up with the increase in ambient pressure. On a helmet with a neck dam, the neck dam will allow water to flood the helmet before serious barotrauma can occur. This can happen with helium reclaim helmets if the reclaim regulator system fails, so there is a manual bypass valve, which allows the helmet to be purged so breathing can continue on open circuit.

=== Pulmonary barotrauma ===
Lung over-pressure injury in ambient pressure divers using underwater breathing apparatus is usually caused by breath-holding on ascent. The compressed gas in the lungs expands as the ambient pressure decreases causing the lungs to over-expand and rupture unless the diver allows the gas to escape by maintaining an open airway, as in normal breathing. The lungs do not sense pain when over-expanded giving the diver little warning to prevent the injury. This does not affect breath-hold divers as they bring a lungful of air with them from the surface, which merely re-expands safely to near its original volume on ascent. The problem only arises if a breath of ambient pressure gas is taken at depth, which may then expand on ascent to more than the lung volume. Pulmonary barotrauma may also be caused by explosive decompression of a pressurised aircraft, as occurred on 1 February 2003 to the crew in the Space Shuttle &quot;Columbia&quot; disaster.

== Prevention ==
=== Diving ===
Barotrauma may be caused when diving, either from being crushed, or squeezed, on descent or by stretching and bursting on ascent; both can be avoided by &quot;equalising&quot; the pressures. A negative, unbalanced pressure is known as a squeeze, crushing eardrums, dry suit, lungs or mask inwards and can be equalised by putting air into the squeezed space. A positive unbalanced pressure expands internal spaces rupturing tissue and can be equalised by letting air out, for example by exhaling. Both may cause barotrauma. There are a variety of techniques depending on the affected area and whether the pressure inequality is a squeeze or an expansion:
* Ears and sinuses: There is a risk of stretched or burst eardrums, usually crushed inwards during descent but sometimes stretched outwards on ascent. The diver can use a variety of methods to let air into or out of the middle ears via the Eustachian tubes. Sometimes swallowing will open the Eustachian tubes and equalise the ears.
* Lungs: There is a risk of pneumothorax, arterial gas embolism, and mediastinal and subcutaneous emphysema during ascent, which are commonly called burst lung or lung overpressure injury by divers. To equalise the lungs, all that is necessary is not to hold the breath during ascent. This risk does not occur when breath-hold diving from the surface, unless the diver breathes from an ambient pressure gas source underwater; breath-hold divers do suffer squeezed lungs on descent, crushing in the chest cavity, but, while uncomfortable, this rarely causes lung injury and returns to normal at the surface. Some people have pathology of the lung which prevent rapid flow of excess air through the passages, which can lead to lung barotrauma even if the breath is not held during rapid depressurisation. These people should not dive as the risk is unacceptably high. Most commercial or military diving medical examinations will look specifically for signs of this pathology.
* Diving mask squeeze enclosing the eyes and nose: The main risk is rupture of the capillaries of the eyes and facial skin because of the negative pressure difference between the gas space and blood pressure, or orbital emphysema from higher pressures. This can be avoided by breathing air into the mask through the nose. Goggles covering only the eyes are not suitable for deep diving as they cannot be equalised.
* Dry suit squeeze. The main risk is skin getting pinched and bruised by folds of the dry suit when squeezed on descent. Most dry suits can be equalised against squeeze via a manually operated valve fed from a low pressure gas supply. Air must be manually injected during the descent to avoid squeeze and is manually or automatically vented on the ascent to maintain buoyancy control.
* Diving helmet squeeze: Helmet squeeze will occur if the gas supply hose is severed above the diver and the non-return valve at the helmet gas inlet fails or is not fitted. Severity will depend on the hydrostatic pressure difference. A very rapid descent, usually by accident, may exceed the rate at which the breathing gas supply can equalise the pressure causing a temporary squeeze. The introduction of the non-return valve and high maximum gas supply flow rates have all but eliminated both these risks. In helmets fitted with a neck dam, the dam will admit water into the helmet if the internal pressure gets too low; this is less of a problem than helmet squeeze but the diver may drown if the gas supply is not reinstated quickly. This form of barotrauma is avoidable by controlled descent rate, which is standard practice for commercial divers, who will use shotlines, diving stages and wet bells to control descent and ascent rates.

==== Medical screening ====

Professional divers are screened for risk factors during initial and periodical medical examination for fitness to dive. In most cases recreational divers are not medically screened, but are required to provide a medical statement before acceptance for training in which the most common and easy to identify risk factors must be declared. If these factors are declared, the diver may be required to be examined by a medical practitioner, and may be disqualified from diving if the conditions indicate.

Asthma, Marfan syndrome, and COPD pose a very high risk of pneumothorax. In some countries these may be considered absolute contraindications, while in others the severity may be taken into consideration. Asthmatics with a mild and well controlled condition may be permitted to dive under restricted circumstances.

==== Training ====

A significant part of entry level diver training is focused on understanding the risks and procedural avoidance of barotrauma. Professional divers and recreational divers with rescue training are trained in the basic skills of recognizing and first aid management of diving barotrauma.

=== Mechanical ventilation ===
Isolated mechanical forces may not adequately explain ventilator induced lung injury (VILI). The damage is affected by the interaction of these forces and the pre-existing state of the lung tissues, and dynamic changes in alveolar structure may be involved. Factors such as plateau pressure and positive end-expiratory pressure (PEEP) alone do not adequately predict injury. Cyclic deformation of lung tissue may play a large part in the cause of VILI, and contributory factors probably include tidal volume, positive end-expiratory pressure and respiratory rate. There is no protocol guaranteed to avoid all risk in all applications.

=== Aviation and spaceflight ===
Barotrauma caused during airplane journeys is also referred to as airplane ear. The environmental pressure must be prevented from changing rapidly by large amounts. One should include multiple redundant levels of protection against rapid decompression, and systems allowing non-catastrophic failure with sufficient time to allow comfortable equalization of relevant air spaces, particularly the inner ear. A low internal pressure reduces decompression rate and severity in a catastrophic decompression reduces the risk of barotrauma but can increase the risk of decompression sickness and hypoxia in normal operating conditions.

Some measures for protection against rapid decompression specific to airplanes include:

# Yawn and swallow during ascent and descent
# Use the Valsalva maneuver during ascent and descent
# Avoid sleeping during takeoffs and landings
# Use an over the counter nasal spray
# Using filtered earplugs which slowly equalize the pressure against your eardrum during ascents and descents

Outside of a pressurized cabin environment at very high altitudes, a pressure suit is the usual protective measure and is the definitive protection in decompression and exposure to vacuum, but they are expensive, heavy, bulky, restrict mobility, cause thermal regulatory problems, and reduce comfort. To prevent injury from unavoidable pressure changes, similar equalization techniques and relatively slow pressure changes are required, which in turn require patent Eustachian tubes and sinuses.

== Treatment ==
Treatment of diving barotrauma depends on the symptoms, which depend on the affected tissues. Lung over-pressure injury may require a chest drain to remove air from the pleura or mediastinum. Recompression with hyperbaric oxygen therapy is the definitive treatment for arterial gas embolism, as the raised pressure reduces bubble size, the reduced blood inert gas concentration may accelerate inert gas solution, and high oxygen partial pressure helps oxygenate tissues compromised by the emboli. Care must be taken when recompressing to avoid a tension pneumothorax. Barotraumas that do not involve gas in the tissues are generally treated according to severity and symptoms for similar trauma from other causes.
=== First aid ===
Pre-hospital care for lung barotrauma includes basic life support of maintaining adequate oxygenation and perfusion, assessment of airway, breathing and circulation, neurological assessment, and managing any immediate life-threatening conditions. High-flow oxygen up to 100% is considered appropriate for diving accidents. Large-bore venous access with isotonic fluid infusion is recommended to maintain blood pressure and pulse.

=== Emergency treatment ===
Pulmonary barotrauma:
* Endotracheal intubation may be required if the airway is unstable or hypoxia persists when breathing 100% oxygen.
* Needle decompression or tube thoracostomy may be necessary to drain a pneumothorax or haemothorax
* Foley catheterization may be necessary for spinal cord AGE if the person is unable to urinate.
* Intravenous hydration may be required to maintain adequate blood pressure.
* Therapeutic recompression is indicated for severe AGE. The diving medical practitioner will need to know the vital signs and relevant symptoms, along with the recent pressure exposure and breathing gas history of the patient. Air transport should be below if possible, or in a pressurized aircraft which should be pressurised to as low an altitude as reasonably possible.

Sinus squeeze and middle ear squeeze are generally treated with decongestants to reduce the pressure differential, with anti-inflammatory medications to treat the pain. For severe pain, narcotic analgesics may be appropriate.

Suit, helmet and mask squeeze are treated as trauma according to symptoms and severity.

=== Medication ===
The primary medications for lung barotrauma are hyperbaric and normobaric oxygen, hyperbaric heliox or nitrox, isotonic fluids, anti-inflammatory medications, decongestants, and analgesics.
=== Outcomes ===
Following barotrauma of the ears or lungs from diving the diver should not dive again until cleared by a diving doctor. After ear injury examination will include a hearing test and a demonstration that the middle ear can be autoinflated. Recovery can take weeks to months.

== Epidemiology ==
An estimate of in the order of 1000 dive injuries per year occur in the United States and Canada. Many of these involve barotrauma, with nearly 50% of reported injuries involving middle ear barotrauma. Diving injuries tend to correlate with trait anxiety and a tendency to panic, lack of experience, advancing age and reduction in fitness, alcohol usage, obesity, asthma, chronic sinusitis and otitis.
== Barotrauma in other animals ==
Whales and dolphins develop severely disabling barotrauma when exposed to excessive pressure changes induced by navy sonar, oil industry airguns, explosives, undersea earthquakes and volcanic eruptions. Injury and mortality of fish, marine mammals, including sea otters, seals, dolphins and whales, and birds by underwater explosions has been recorded in several studies.

It has been claimed that bats can suffer fatal barotrauma in the low pressure zones behind the blades of wind turbines due to their more fragile mammalian lung structure in comparison with the more robust avian lungs, which are less affected by pressure change. The claims that have been made that bats can be killed by lung barotrauma when flying in low-pressure regions close to operating wind-turbine blades, have been supported by reports of measurements of the pressures around the turbine blades. The diagnosis and contribution of barotrauma to bat deaths near wind turbine blades have been disputed
by other research comparing dead bats found near wind turbines with bats killed by impact with buildings in areas with no turbines.

=== Swim bladder overexpansion ===
Fish with isolated swim bladders are susceptible to barotrauma of ascent when brought to the surface by fishing. The swim bladder is an organ of buoyancy control which is filled with gas extracted from solution in the blood, and which is normally removed by the reverse process. If the fish is brought upwards in the water column faster than the gas can be resorbed, the gas will expand until the bladder is stretched to its elastic limit, and may rupture.
Barotrauma can be directly fatal or disable the fish rendering it vulnerable to predation, but rockfish are able to recover if they are returned to depths similar to those they were pulled up from, shortly after surfacing. Scientists at NOAA developed the Seaqualizer to quickly return rockfish to depth. The device could increase survival in caught-and-released rockfish.
== See also ==
== References ==
== External links ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q808760" start="0" end="10" title="Barotrauma" label="Barotrauma"/>
<link wikidata="Q1259242" start="38" end="45" title="fluid compartments" label="tissues"/>
<link wikidata="Q39552" start="72" end="80" title="pressure" label="pressure"/>
<link wikidata="Q11432" start="91" end="94" title="gas" label="gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q908584" start="241" end="248" title="tension (physics)" label="tension"/>
<link wikidata="Q657936" start="252" end="257" title="shear stress" label="shear"/>
<link wikidata="Q39552" start="328" end="336" title="pressure" label="pressure"/>
<link wikidata="Q177807" start="348" end="363" title="hydrostatics" label="hydrostatically"/>
<link wikidata="Q12421818" start="514" end="520" title="injury" label="trauma"/>
<link wikidata="Q281473" start="853" end="858" title="Paranasal sinuses" label="sinus"/>
<link wikidata="Q501553" start="862" end="872" title="middle ear" label="middle ear"/>
<link wikidata="Q460591" start="956" end="978" title="Decompression sickness" label="Decompression sickness"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153171" start="1225" end="1246" title="Decompression illness" label="Decompression illness"/>
<link wikidata="Q7886" start="1330" end="1334" title="lung" label="lung"/>
<link wikidata="Q3709266" start="1409" end="1418" title="dysbarism" label="dysbarism"/>
<link wikidata="Q789775" start="1585" end="1601" title="ambient pressure" label="ambient pressure"/>
<link wikidata="Q1096878" start="1618" end="1629" title="Scuba diving" label="scuba diver"/>
<link wikidata="Q392409" start="1633" end="1643" title="free-diving" label="free-diver"/>
<link wikidata="Q1260741" start="1699" end="1725" title="uncontrolled decompression" label="uncontrolled decompression"/>
<link wikidata="Q740460" start="1731" end="1746" title="pressure vessel" label="pressure vessel"/>
<link wikidata="Q549046" start="1757" end="1771" title="diving chamber" label="diving chamber"/>
<link wikidata="Q190688" start="1825" end="1835" title="shock wave" label="shock wave"/>
<link wikidata="Q7920251" start="1837" end="1867" title="Ventilator-induced lung injury" label="Ventilator-induced lung injury"/>
<link wikidata="Q3766250" start="1931" end="1953" title="mechanical ventilation" label="mechanical ventilation"/>
<link wikidata="Q808760" start="2178" end="2188" title="Barotrauma" label="volutrauma"/>
<link wikidata="Q712378" start="2222" end="2228" title="Organ (biology)" label="organs"/>
<link wikidata="Q501553" start="2276" end="2286" title="Middle ear" label="Middle ear"/>
<link wikidata="Q212344" start="2291" end="2300" title="inner ear" label="inner ear"/>
<link wikidata="Q281473" start="2328" end="2343" title="Paranasal sinus" label="Paranasal sinus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3505030" start="2355" end="2368" title="aerosinusitis" label="aerosinusitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7886" start="2372" end="2377" title="Human lung" label="Lungs"/>
<link wikidata="Q430024" start="2485" end="2489" title="Human eyes" label="Eyes"/>
<link wikidata="Q116441" start="2534" end="2545" title="diving mask" label="diving mask"/>
<link wikidata="Q72797" start="2549" end="2565" title="swimming goggles" label="swimming goggles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074" start="2569" end="2573" title="Skin" label="Skin"/>
<link wikidata="Q13450335" start="2590" end="2601" title="diving suit" label="diving suit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073" start="2632" end="2637" title="Brain" label="Brain"/>
<link wikidata="Q13147" start="2642" end="2649" title="cranium" label="cranium"/>
<link wikidata="Q553" start="2710" end="2715" title="Teeth" label="Teeth"/>
<link wikidata="Q4862068" start="2725" end="2738" title="barodontalgia" label="barodontalgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q143925" start="2774" end="2785" title="toothache" label="dental pain"/>
<link wikidata="Q4620674" start="2810" end="2817" title="Genital" label="Genital"/>
<link wikidata="Q181100" start="2841" end="2848" title="urinary" label="urinary"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2872" end="2879" title="Dry suit#The P-valve" label="P-valve"/>
<link wikidata="Q39552" start="2999" end="3007" title="pressure" label="pressure"/>
<link wikidata="Q81809" start="3162" end="3182" title="atmospheric pressure" label="atmospheric pressure"/>
<link wikidata="Q175974" start="3562" end="3578" title="Boyle&amp;#x27;s law" label="Boyle&amp;#x27;s law"/>
<link wikidata="Q39297" start="3618" end="3624" title="volume" label="volume"/>
<link wikidata="Q76005" start="4335" end="4351" title="Ultimate tensile strength" label="tensile strength"/>
<link wikidata="Q731615" start="4374" end="4399" title="hyperbaric oxygen therapy" label="hyperbaric oxygen therapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1260741" start="4516" end="4539" title="Explosive decompression" label="Explosive decompression"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4545" end="4567" title="Diving chamber#Saturation diving life support systems" label="hyperbaric environment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1018503" start="4685" end="4699" title="Byford Dolphin" label="Byford Dolphin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2811" start="4949" end="4958" title="submarine" label="submarine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1570255" start="4960" end="4971" title="submersible" label="submersible"/>
<link wikidata="Q1761969" start="4976" end="4999" title="atmospheric diving suit" label="atmospheric diving suit"/>
<link wikidata="Q179057" start="5306" end="5321" title="Explosion" label="explosive blast"/>
<link wikidata="Q1260741" start="5326" end="5349" title="uncontrolled decompression" label="explosive decompression"/>
<link wikidata="Q626707" start="5359" end="5372" title="Longitudinal wave" label="pressure wave"/>
<link wikidata="Q7886" start="5551" end="5556" title="human lung" label="lungs"/>
<link wikidata="Q11829360" start="5558" end="5580" title="gastrointestinal tract" label="gastrointestinal tract"/>
<link wikidata="Q7362" start="5586" end="5589" title="ear" label="ear"/>
<link wikidata="Q1260741" start="5627" end="5646" title="uncontrolled decompression" label="rapid decompression"/>
<link wikidata="Q3766250" start="5721" end="5743" title="Mechanical ventilation" label="Mechanical ventilation"/>
<link wikidata="Q9530" start="5846" end="5855" title="ventilation (physiology)" label="ventilate"/>
<link wikidata="Q633140" start="5856" end="5869" title="Compliance (physiology)" label="non-compliant"/>
<link wikidata="Q11465" start="5946" end="5954" title="velocity" label="velocity"/>
<link wikidata="Q191341" start="5970" end="5978" title="Pulmonary alveolus" label="alveolar"/>
<link wikidata="Q203601" start="5999" end="6011" title="pneumothorax" label="pneumothorax"/>
<link wikidata="Q7259534" start="6013" end="6045" title="pulmonary interstitial emphysema" label="pulmonary interstitial emphysema"/>
<link wikidata="Q948792" start="6056" end="6073" title="pneumomediastinum" label="pneumomediastinum"/>
<link wikidata="Q3766250" start="6119" end="6141" title="mechanical ventilation" label="mechanical ventilation"/>
<link wikidata="Q344873" start="6243" end="6278" title="acute respiratory distress syndrome" label="acute respiratory distress syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q737510" start="6759" end="6769" title="Pulmonary aspiration" label="aspiration"/>
<link wikidata="Q178069" start="6823" end="6834" title="Necrosis" label="necrotising"/>
<link wikidata="Q12192" start="6835" end="6844" title="pneumonia" label="pneumonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q826759" start="6871" end="6889" title="Status asthmaticus" label="Status asthmaticus"/>
<link wikidata="Q7835341" start="7102" end="7125" title="transpulmonary pressure" label="transpulmonary pressure"/>
<link wikidata="Q2483519" start="7295" end="7303" title="ebullism" label="ebullism"/>
<link wikidata="Q392409" start="7363" end="7373" title="free-diving" label="free-diver"/>
<link wikidata="Q1096878" start="7581" end="7586" title="scuba diver" label="scuba"/>
<link wikidata="Q111363586" start="7590" end="7612" title="surface-supplied diver" label="surface-supplied diver"/>
<link wikidata="Q30715263" start="7641" end="7671" title="underwater breathing apparatus" label="underwater breathing apparatus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1367304" start="8406" end="8427" title="arterial gas embolism" label="arterial gas embolism"/>
<link wikidata="Q203601" start="8429" end="8441" title="pneumothorax" label="pneumothorax"/>
<link wikidata="Q948792" start="8443" end="8454" title="Mediastinal emphysema" label="mediastinal"/>
<link wikidata="Q188605" start="8486" end="8495" title="emphysema" label="emphysema"/>
<link wikidata="Q203601" start="10013" end="10025" title="pneumothorax" label="pneumothorax"/>
<link wikidata="Q192398" start="10066" end="10079" title="pleural space" label="pleural space"/>
<link wikidata="Q7886" start="10092" end="10096" title="lung" label="lung"/>
<link wikidata="Q7796140" start="10105" end="10115" title="chest wall" label="chest wall"/>
<link wikidata="Q693058" start="10177" end="10187" title="chest pain" label="chest pain"/>
<link wikidata="Q188008" start="10192" end="10211" title="dyspnea" label="shortness of breath"/>
<link wikidata="Q40397" start="10285" end="10291" title="Tissue (biology)" label="tissue"/>
<link wikidata="Q105688" start="10443" end="10458" title="Hypoxia (medical)" label="oxygen shortage"/>
<link wikidata="Q275419" start="10463" end="10481" title="hypotension" label="low blood pressure"/>
<link wikidata="Q3959672" start="10520" end="10537" title="obstructive shock" label="obstructive shock"/>
<link wikidata="Q754031" start="10720" end="10731" title="atelectasis" label="atelectasis"/>
<link wikidata="Q179643" start="10733" end="10739" title="Underwater diving" label="Divers"/>
<link wikidata="Q789775" start="10816" end="10832" title="ambient pressure" label="ambient pressure"/>
<link wikidata="Q1096878" start="10961" end="10973" title="scuba diving" label="scuba diving"/>
<link wikidata="Q460591" start="11176" end="11198" title="decompression sickness" label="decompression sickness"/>
<link wikidata="Q549046" start="11226" end="11240" title="diving chamber" label="diving chamber"/>
<link wikidata="Q731615" start="11246" end="11264" title="hyperbaric medicine" label="hyperbaric therapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q835153" start="11386" end="11406" title="physical examination" label="physical examination"/>
<link wikidata="Q1283318" start="11474" end="11485" title="chest radiograph" label="chest X-ray"/>
<link wikidata="Q32566" start="11487" end="11506" title="X-ray computed tomography" label="computed tomography"/>
<link wikidata="Q162564" start="11521" end="11531" title="ultrasound" label="ultrasound"/>
<link wikidata="Q369073" start="11636" end="11646" title="hemothorax" label="hemothorax"/>
<link wikidata="Q7873" start="11659" end="11664" title="blood" label="blood"/>
<link wikidata="Q220570" start="11688" end="11706" title="pulmonary embolism" label="pulmonary embolism"/>
<link wikidata="Q12152" start="11712" end="11724" title="myocardial infarction" label="heart attack"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11734" end="11739" title="Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease#Pathophysiology" label="bulla"/>
<link wikidata="Q948792" start="11848" end="11865" title="pneumomediastinum" label="pneumomediastinum"/>
<link wikidata="Q502704" start="12162" end="12172" title="bronchiole" label="bronchiole"/>
<link wikidata="Q409458" start="13622" end="13637" title="Creatine kinase" label="Creatine kinase"/>
<link wikidata="Q886518" start="13740" end="13760" title="Complete blood count" label="Complete blood count"/>
<link wikidata="Q648497" start="13769" end="13787" title="Arterial blood gas" label="Arterial blood gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q245341" start="13826" end="13837" title="radiography" label="radiography"/>
<link wikidata="Q32566" start="13933" end="13952" title="Computed tomography" label="Computed tomography"/>
<link wikidata="Q216933" start="14258" end="14274" title="Echocardiography" label="Echocardiography"/>
<link wikidata="Q2503223" start="14446" end="14467" title="Middle ear barotrauma" label="Middle ear barotrauma"/>
<link wikidata="Q2929396" start="14587" end="14618" title="Ear clearing" label="equilibration of the middle ear"/>
<link wikidata="Q258328" start="14679" end="14702" title="external auditory canal" label="external auditory canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q179643" start="15595" end="15612" title="Underwater diving" label="underwater divers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2929396" start="16029" end="16040" title="ear squeeze" label="ear squeeze"/>
<link wikidata="Q1581308" start="16874" end="16884" title="conductive hearing loss" label="conductive"/>
<link wikidata="Q928697" start="16889" end="16915" title="sensorineural hearing loss" label="sensorineural hearing loss"/>
<link wikidata="Q10686316" start="16927" end="16934" title="Vertigo (medical)" label="vertigo"/>
<link wikidata="Q113461774" start="17537" end="17569" title="Inner ear decompression sickness" label="Inner ear decompression sickness"/>
<link wikidata="Q581152" start="17769" end="17786" title="Nitrogen narcosis" label="Nitrogen narcosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q125223" start="17788" end="17803" title="oxygen toxicity" label="oxygen toxicity"/>
<link wikidata="Q615759" start="17805" end="17816" title="hypercarbia" label="hypercarbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q105688" start="17822" end="17829" title="Hypoxia (medical)" label="hypoxia"/>
<link wikidata="Q955638" start="17989" end="18019" title="High-pressure nervous syndrome" label="High-pressure nervous syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q905892" start="18027" end="18033" title="heliox" label="heliox"/>
<link wikidata="Q263574" start="18151" end="18163" title="round window" label="round window"/>
<link wikidata="Q1427231" start="18196" end="18213" title="Valsalva maneuver" label="Valsalva maneuver"/>
<link wikidata="Q54196" start="18785" end="18804" title="cerebrospinal fluid" label="cerebrospinal fluid"/>
<link wikidata="Q2378102" start="18904" end="18915" title="tympanotomy" label="tympanotomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q189470" start="18990" end="18997" title="fistula" label="fistula"/>
<link wikidata="Q837512" start="19155" end="19177" title="differential diagnosis" label="differential diagnosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q281473" start="20105" end="20112" title="sinuses" label="sinuses"/>
<link wikidata="Q202013" start="20259" end="20268" title="nosebleed" label="nosebleed"/>
<link wikidata="Q116441" start="20678" end="20695" title="Diving mask" label="diver&amp;#x27;s mask"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412657" start="20780" end="20800" title="petechial hemorrhage" label="petechial hemorrhage"/>
<link wikidata="Q430235" start="20845" end="20871" title="subconjunctival hemorrhage" label="subconjunctival hemorrhage"/>
<link wikidata="Q13562315" start="21782" end="21796" title="reclaim helmet" label="reclaim helmet"/>
<link wikidata="Q97359066" start="21805" end="21822" title="reclaim regulator" label="reclaim regulator"/>
<link wikidata="Q179643" start="22011" end="22034" title="Ambient pressure diving" label="ambient pressure divers"/>
<link wikidata="Q13400765" start="22303" end="22309" title="airway" label="airway"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="22844" end="22871" title="Space Shuttle Columbia disaster#Depressurization" label="occurred on 1 February 2003"/>
<link wikidata="Q580867" start="22891" end="22934" title="Space Shuttle Columbia disaster" label="Space Shuttle &amp;quot;Columbia&amp;quot; disaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q7362" start="23625" end="23628" title="Ear" label="Ear"/>
<link wikidata="Q281473" start="23634" end="23641" title="Paranasal sinus" label="sinuses"/>
<link wikidata="Q173801" start="23681" end="23688" title="eardrum" label="eardrum"/>
<link wikidata="Q2929396" start="23794" end="23812" title="Ear clearing" label="variety of methods"/>
<link wikidata="Q501553" start="23843" end="23853" title="middle ear" label="middle ear"/>
<link wikidata="Q320561" start="23863" end="23878" title="Eustachian tube" label="Eustachian tube"/>
<link wikidata="Q7886" start="23958" end="23963" title="human lung" label="Lungs"/>
<link wikidata="Q203601" start="23984" end="23996" title="pneumothorax" label="pneumothorax"/>
<link wikidata="Q1367304" start="23998" end="24019" title="arterial gas embolism" label="arterial gas embolism"/>
<link wikidata="Q948792" start="24025" end="24036" title="Mediastinal emphysema" label="mediastinal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412866" start="24041" end="24063" title="subcutaneous emphysema" label="subcutaneous emphysema"/>
<link wikidata="Q116441" start="24932" end="24943" title="Diving mask" label="Diving mask"/>
<link wikidata="Q109511272" start="25142" end="25159" title="orbital emphysema" label="orbital emphysema"/>
<link wikidata="Q72797" start="25252" end="25259" title="Goggles" label="Goggles"/>
<link wikidata="Q2340412" start="25347" end="25355" title="Dry suit" label="Dry suit"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="25538" end="25543" title="Dry suit#Valves" label="valve"/>
<link wikidata="Q13562315" start="25732" end="25745" title="Diving helmet" label="Diving helmet"/>
<link wikidata="Q5284386" start="26597" end="26605" title="shotline" label="shotline"/>
<link wikidata="Q25141692" start="26608" end="26620" title="diving stage" label="diving stage"/>
<link wikidata="Q937854" start="26626" end="26634" title="wet bell" label="wet bell"/>
<link wikidata="Q10843474" start="26703" end="26722" title="Professional diving" label="Professional divers"/>
<link wikidata="Q17105443" start="26807" end="26822" title="fitness to dive" label="fitness to dive"/>
<link wikidata="Q1719546" start="26838" end="26857" title="Recreational diving" label="recreational divers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2396652" start="26956" end="26964" title="Recreational diver training" label="training"/>
<link wikidata="Q35869" start="27206" end="27212" title="Asthma" label="Asthma"/>
<link wikidata="Q208562" start="27214" end="27229" title="Marfan syndrome" label="Marfan syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q199804" start="27235" end="27239" title="COPD" label="COPD"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="27369" end="27409" title="Fitness to dive#Conditions which may disqualify or require restrictions depending on severity and management" label="severity may be taken into consideration"/>
<link wikidata="Q17165872" start="27633" end="27643" title="Scuba skills" label="procedural"/>
<link wikidata="Q1427231" start="29303" end="29320" title="Valsalva maneuver" label="Valsalva maneuver"/>
<link wikidata="Q1755275" start="29419" end="29430" title="nasal spray" label="nasal spray"/>
<link wikidata="Q14123862" start="30224" end="30230" title="pleura" label="pleura"/>
<link wikidata="Q337247" start="30234" end="30245" title="mediastinum" label="mediastinum"/>
<link wikidata="Q203601" start="30601" end="30621" title="tension pneumothorax" label="tension pneumothorax"/>
<link wikidata="Q750195" start="31270" end="31293" title="Endotracheal intubation" label="Endotracheal intubation"/>
<link wikidata="Q18394264" start="31415" end="31427" title="thoracostomy" label="thoracostomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3663556" start="31486" end="31500" title="Foley catheter" label="Foley catheter"/>
<link wikidata="Q731615" start="31660" end="31685" title="Therapeutic recompression" label="Therapeutic recompression"/>
<link wikidata="Q430719" start="32097" end="32110" title="decongestants" label="decongestants"/>
<link wikidata="Q581996" start="32153" end="32170" title="anti-inflammatory" label="anti-inflammatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q173235" start="32228" end="32238" title="analgesics" label="analgesics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1988216" start="32442" end="32448" title="Oxygen therapy" label="oxygen"/>
<link wikidata="Q898391" start="32471" end="32477" title="nitrox" label="nitrox"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="32479" end="32487" title="Tonicity#Isotonicity" label="isotonic"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="33702" end="33734" title="Bat#Conservation" label="bats can suffer fatal barotrauma"/>
<link wikidata="Q7886" start="33882" end="33893" title="avian lungs" label="avian lungs"/>
<link wikidata="Q28425" start="33975" end="33978" title="bat" label="bat"/>
<link wikidata="Q49833" start="34068" end="34080" title="wind-turbine" label="wind-turbine"/>
<link wikidata="Q16644043" start="34184" end="34193" title="diagnosis" label="diagnosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q206732" start="34470" end="34482" title="swim bladder" label="swim bladder"/>
<link wikidata="Q149077" start="35003" end="35011" title="Sebastes" label="rockfish"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="464771" wikidata="Q392236" url="?curid=464771" title="White-faced heron">
<text>The white-faced heron (Egretta novaehollandiae) also known as the white-fronted heron, and incorrectly as the grey heron, or blue crane, is a common bird throughout most of Australasia, including New Guinea, the islands of Torres Strait, Indonesia, New Zealand, and all but the driest areas of Australia.

It is a medium-sized heron, pale, slightly bluish-grey, with yellow legs and white facial markings. It can be found almost anywhere near shallow water, fresh or salt, and although it is prompt to depart the scene on long, slow-beating wings if disturbed, it will boldly raid suburban fish ponds.

==Taxonomy==

The white-faced heron was formally described in 1790 by the English ornithologist John Latham. He placed it with the herons in the genus &quot;Ardea&quot; and coined the binomial name &quot;Ardea novaehollandiae&quot;. Latham based his account on the &quot;white-fronted heron&quot; that had been described and illustrated in 1789 by the first Governor of New South Wales Arthur Phillip in his book &quot;The Voyage of Governor Phillip to Botany Bay&quot;.

It was historically considered to be closely related to &quot;Ardea&quot; but for some time it was placed in its own genus—&quot;Notophoyx&quot;—because of the absence of the plumes typical in that genus. In his review of the family Ardeidae, American ornithologist Walter J. Bock placed the white-faced heron into &quot;Ardea&quot;, holding it to be related to the white-necked heron, and synonymised &quot;Notophoyx&quot;. Similarly, Swedish naturalist Kai Curry-Lindahl felt the species was a dwarf member of the genus &quot;Ardea&quot;. Robert B. Payne and Christopher J. Risley placed the white-faced heron in the genus &quot;Egretta&quot; due to its skeletal anatomy resembling egrets more than &quot;Ardea&quot; herons. They noted that Bock had not given reasons why he had placed the species in &quot;Ardea&quot;, and felt its closest relative was the little blue heron (&quot;Egretta caerulea&quot;) on account of plumage and skull similarities. Using DNA-DNA hybridization in a 1987 study, Frederick Sheldon confirmed the white-faced heron was a member of the egret clade.

Subspecies &quot;E. n. novaehollandiae&quot; and &quot;E. n. parryi&quot; in Australia, &quot;E. n. nana&quot; from New Caledonia and &quot;E. n. austera&quot; from Irian Jaya have previously been described, but are now not recognised taxonomically.

Appearance and behaviour are more closely related to those in the genus &quot;Egretta&quot;.

The Ngarrindjeri people of the Lower Murray region in South Australia knew it as &quot;krawli&quot;.

==Description==
The adult white-faced heron is medium-sized for the family and mostly pale blue-grey. The forehead, crown, chin and upper throat are white. The crown pattern is variable, with the white occasionally spreading down the neck; the variability makes identification of individuals possible. The iris may be grey, green, dull yellow or cinnamon. The regions between the eye and bill on the side of the head (lores) are black. The beak is black and often pale grey at the base. During the breeding season pinkish-brown or bronze nuptial plumes appear on the foreneck and breast, with blue-grey plumes appearing on the back.

The adult typically weighs and ranges from in height.

Immature birds are paler grey with only the throat white, and often have a reddish colour on the underparts. Chicks are typically covered with grey down.

==Distribution and habitat==
The white-faced heron is found throughout most of Australasia, including New Guinea, the islands of Torres Strait, Indonesia, New Caledonia, New Zealand, the islands of the Subantarctic, and all but the driest areas of Australia. The species is now resident on Christmas Island but has not yet been recorded breeding there. It is also commonly found on Lombok, Flores and Sumbawa, and has appeared as a vagrant in China, the Cocos Islands and the Solomon Islands. It is mostly a winter visitor to the Northern Territory. It was self-introduced to New Zealand in the late 1940s. It is the only heron recorded breeding in Tasmania.

The white-faced heron is locally nomadic and found in both fresh and salty wetlands, farm dams, pastures, grasslands, crops, shores, saltmarsh, tidal mudflats, boat-harbours, beaches, golf courses, orchards or in garden fish-ponds. It is protected in Australia under the National Parks and Wildlife Act 1974.

==Behaviour==

The white-faced heron typically perches on fence-posts, trees, telephone poles and house roofs. Its flight is slow and bouncing.

===Call===
The most common call of the white-faced heron is a gravelly croak or gobble, &quot;graak&quot; or &quot;graaw&quot; and is typically given in flight, in interactions or in aggressive encounters. Another call, &quot;gow, gow, gow&quot; is typically given upon returning to a nest. High pitched &quot;wrank, oooooooooh&quot; or &quot;aaarrrgh&quot; calls are given as alarm calls.

===Breeding===
Breeding generally takes place in the austral spring, but the birds may breed at other times in response to rainfall. Breeding generally takes place in southern Australia, and birds disperse for long distances at other times of year. Both sexes share the task of building the nest, incubating the eggs and caring for the young. The nest is an untidy shallow bowl, made of sticks and usually placed on a leafy branch 5–12 m high, at altitudes from sea level to over 1000 m. When breeding the birds have long feathers (nuptial plumes) on the neck, head and back. A typical clutch has three to five pale blue eggs. with an average size of 48.5×35 mm. Normally only one brood is raised per year. Incubation lasts approximately 25 days. The parents guard the chicks for 3–4 weeks and fledging takes place 40 days after hatching. Typical nestling predators include kookaburras, Australian magpies, hawks and owls.

===Feeding===
White-faced herons eat most small aquatic creatures and their varied diet is fish, frogs, small reptiles and insects. It uses a variety of techniques to find food including standing still and waiting for prey movement (often employing a peculiarly rhythmic neck movement whether in water or on land), walking slowly in shallow water, wing flicking, foot raking or even chasing prey with open wings. White-faced herons generally feed solitarily or independently in small groups. White-faced herons are generally territorial during breeding season but may feed in groups during non-breeding season, particularly after rain or flooding.

==Gallery==

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q392236" start="4" end="21" title="White-faced heron" label="white-faced heron"/>
<link wikidata="Q392236" start="66" end="85" title="White-faced heron" label="white-fronted heron"/>
<link wikidata="Q25273" start="110" end="120" title="grey heron" label="grey heron"/>
<link wikidata="Q756674" start="125" end="135" title="blue crane" label="blue crane"/>
<link wikidata="Q5113" start="149" end="153" title="bird" label="bird"/>
<link wikidata="Q1077944" start="173" end="184" title="Australasian realm" label="Australasia"/>
<link wikidata="Q40285" start="196" end="206" title="New Guinea" label="New Guinea"/>
<link wikidata="Q179188" start="223" end="236" title="Torres Strait" label="Torres Strait"/>
<link wikidata="Q252" start="238" end="247" title="Indonesia" label="Indonesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q664" start="249" end="260" title="New Zealand" label="New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="294" end="303" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q18789" start="327" end="332" title="heron" label="heron"/>
<link wikidata="Q188509" start="581" end="587" title="suburb" label="suburb"/>
<link wikidata="Q1361864" start="643" end="661" title="species description" label="formally described"/>
<link wikidata="Q334364" start="699" end="710" title="John Latham (ornithologist)" label="John Latham"/>
<link wikidata="Q310853" start="760" end="765" title="Ardea (genus)" label="Ardea"/>
<link wikidata="Q36642" start="787" end="800" title="binomial name" label="binomial name"/>
<link wikidata="Q311548" start="989" end="1003" title="Arthur Phillip" label="Arthur Phillip"/>
<link wikidata="Q310853" start="1137" end="1142" title="Ardea (genus)" label="Ardea"/>
<link wikidata="Q916818" start="1441" end="1459" title="white-necked heron" label="white-necked heron"/>
<link wikidata="Q442002" start="1530" end="1547" title="Kai Curry-Lindahl" label="Kai Curry-Lindahl"/>
<link wikidata="Q7348792" start="1616" end="1631" title="Robert B. Payne" label="Robert B. Payne"/>
<link wikidata="Q371028" start="1935" end="1952" title="little blue heron" label="little blue heron"/>
<link wikidata="Q3845" start="2324" end="2334" title="Irian Jaya" label="Irian Jaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q312272" start="2488" end="2495" title="Egretta" label="Egretta"/>
<link wikidata="Q370543" start="2508" end="2520" title="Ngarrindjeri" label="Ngarrindjeri"/>
<link wikidata="Q41055" start="2712" end="2720" title="forehead" label="forehead"/>
<link wikidata="Q3321195" start="2722" end="2727" title="crown (anatomy)" label="crown"/>
<link wikidata="Q82714" start="2729" end="2733" title="chin" label="chin"/>
<link wikidata="Q16364" start="2744" end="2750" title="throat" label="throat"/>
<link wikidata="Q178748" start="2912" end="2916" title="iris (anatomy)" label="iris"/>
<link wikidata="Q2900272" start="3024" end="3029" title="Lore (anatomy)" label="lores"/>
<link wikidata="Q49836" start="3144" end="3151" title="nuptial" label="nuptial"/>
<link wikidata="Q45256" start="3529" end="3540" title="Australasia" label="Australasia"/>
<link wikidata="Q40285" start="3552" end="3562" title="New Guinea" label="New Guinea"/>
<link wikidata="Q179188" start="3579" end="3592" title="Torres Strait" label="Torres Strait"/>
<link wikidata="Q252" start="3594" end="3603" title="Indonesia" label="Indonesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q33788" start="3605" end="3618" title="New Caledonia" label="New Caledonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q664" start="3620" end="3631" title="New Zealand" label="New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="3698" end="3707" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q31063" start="3740" end="3756" title="Christmas Island" label="Christmas Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q7564" start="3832" end="3838" title="Lombok" label="Lombok"/>
<link wikidata="Q148440" start="3840" end="3846" title="Flores" label="Flores"/>
<link wikidata="Q186367" start="3851" end="3858" title="Sumbawa" label="Sumbawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="3893" end="3898" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q36004" start="3904" end="3917" title="Cocos Islands" label="Cocos Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q685" start="3926" end="3941" title="Solomon Islands" label="Solomon Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q3235" start="3980" end="3998" title="Northern Territory" label="Northern Territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q34366" start="4099" end="4107" title="Tasmania" label="Tasmania"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="4361" end="4370" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6974769" start="4381" end="4417" title="National Parks and Wildlife Act 1974" label="National Parks and Wildlife Act 1974"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137226" start="5303" end="5307" title="bird nest" label="nest"/>
<link wikidata="Q49836" start="5488" end="5495" title="nuptial" label="nuptial"/>
<link wikidata="Q2750820" start="5542" end="5548" title="Clutch (eggs)" label="clutch"/>
<link wikidata="Q954226" start="5637" end="5642" title="Avian incubation" label="brood"/>
<link wikidata="Q5113" start="5803" end="5811" title="nestling" label="nestling"/>
<link wikidata="Q340041" start="5830" end="5840" title="kookaburra" label="kookaburra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140949" start="5843" end="5860" title="Australian magpie" label="Australian magpie"/>
<link wikidata="Q846664" start="5863" end="5867" title="hawk" label="hawk"/>
<link wikidata="Q25222" start="5873" end="5876" title="owl" label="owl"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="464773" wikidata="Q2986397" url="?curid=464773" title="Stasi Commission">
<text>The French commission Stasi is a commission set up to reflect upon the application of the &quot;laïcité&quot; principle. Named after the chair Bernard Stasi, ombudsman of the (French) Republic (&quot;médiateur de la République&quot;) since 1998, and consisting of 20 members, it was set up by the President Jacques Chirac on 3 July 2003. It reported its conclusions on 11 December 2003. The Report denounces &quot;Islamism&quot; as deeply opposed to the mainstream interpretations of French culture. It is portrayed as a dangerous political agenda that will create a major obstacle for Muslims to comply with French secularism or &quot;laïcité &quot;.

==Overview==

Jacques Chirac established the commission to reflect upon the principle of &quot;laïcité&quot; and its application in France. He appointed Bernard Stasi to oversee the commission. During this time, the commission interviewed various representatives from different groups, for example religious leaders such as Cardinal Lustiger, intellectuals such as Régis Debray and Patrick Weil as well school headteachers, political leaders, equal-rights groups and social groups (for example the Ni Putes Ni Soumises).

The commission emerged from public debates concerning the place of the hijab in French public life in relation to the principles of laïcité, in particular whether it was appropriate in state schools. In addition the commission sought to more clearly define the application of laïcité in the workplace, public services and public spaces. To this end the Stasi Commission lead to the introduction of the French law on secularity and conspicuous religious symbols in schools. Despite this apparent resolution to the questions concerning laïcité, the controversy surrounding the wearing of the hijab and the media attention paid to it has meant that it remains a source of disagreement within the political class.

In response to the commission&#x27;s report Jacques Chirac called for the French public to unite around the principle of laïcité.

==Principles==

The report espouses two key stances that emerge from the history of secularism in France: state neutrality in regard to religion and freedom of thought particularly in relation to freedom of worship. The report also acknowledges that tensions arise between these two principles particularly in the spheres of the army, prisons, hospitals and education.

The Commission also called for the incorporation of &#x27;accomodements raisonables&#x27; or reasonable accommodation into the principles of laïcité for problems that are not covered by the 1905 French law on the Separation of the Churches and the State.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2986397" start="11" end="27" title="Stasi Commission" label="commission Stasi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3220111" start="96" end="103" title="laïcité" label="laïcité"/>
<link wikidata="Q822724" start="143" end="156" title="Bernard Stasi" label="Bernard Stasi"/>
<link wikidata="Q169180" start="158" end="167" title="ombudsman" label="ombudsman"/>
<link wikidata="Q2105" start="307" end="321" title="Jacques Chirac" label="Jacques Chirac"/>
<link wikidata="Q3220111" start="609" end="650" title="Secularism in France" label="French secularism or &amp;quot;laïcité &amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q3220111" start="748" end="755" title="laïcité" label="laïcité"/>
<link wikidata="Q168509" start="977" end="994" title="Cardinal Lustiger" label="Cardinal Lustiger"/>
<link wikidata="Q378116" start="1018" end="1030" title="Régis Debray" label="Régis Debray"/>
<link wikidata="Q3369948" start="1035" end="1047" title="Patrick Weil" label="Patrick Weil"/>
<link wikidata="Q1936079" start="1151" end="1171" title="Ni Putes Ni Soumises" label="Ni Putes Ni Soumises"/>
<link wikidata="Q172317" start="1246" end="1251" title="hijab" label="hijab"/>
<link wikidata="Q1784012" start="1577" end="1646" title="French law on secularity and conspicuous religious symbols in schools" label="French law on secularity and conspicuous religious symbols in schools"/>
<link wikidata="Q277569" start="2166" end="2184" title="freedom of thought" label="freedom of thought"/>
<link wikidata="Q751097" start="2480" end="2504" title="reasonable accommodation" label="reasonable accommodation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1518944" start="2577" end="2640" title="1905 French law on the Separation of the Churches and the State" label="1905 French law on the Separation of the Churches and the State"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="464774" wikidata="Q810756" url="?curid=464774" title="Batemans Bay">
<text>Batemans Bay is a town in the South Coast region of the state of New South Wales, Australia. Batemans Bay is administered by the Eurobodalla Shire council. The town is situated on the shores of an estuary formed where the Clyde River meets the southern Pacific Ocean.

Batemans Bay is located on the Princes Highway (Highway 1) about from Sydney and from Melbourne. Canberra is located about to the west of Batemans Bay, via the Kings Highway. At the 2021 census, Batemans Bay had a population of 17,519.

It is the closest seaside town to Canberra, making Batemans Bay a popular holiday destination for residents of Australia&#x27;s national capital. Geologically, it is situated in the far southern reaches of the Sydney Basin. 

Batemans Bay is also a popular retiree haven, but has begun to attract young families seeking affordable housing and a relaxed seaside lifestyle. Other local industries include oyster farming, forestry, eco-tourism and retail services.

== History ==

===Indigenous history===
The traditional custodians of the land surrounding Batemans Bay are the Walbunja people of the Yuin nation.

The language spoken by the Walbunja people is Dhurga, one of the Yuin–Kuric languages.

A number of sites in the region are considered culturally significant to the Walbunja people, such as Bhundoo and Hanging Rock.

The Walbunja name for the bay is Yangary.

====Indigenous population====

According to the 2021 census, there were a total of 8,581 people in the Batemans Bay urban centre. Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people made up 8.3% of the population, significantly higher than the state average of 3.4% and national average of 3.2%.

===European history===
On 22 April 1770 explorer James Cook first sighted and named the bay. Cook gave no reason for the name, which may commemorate either Nathaniel Bateman, the captain of HMS &quot;Northumberland&quot; when Cook was serving as her master from 1760 to 1762, or John Bateman, 2nd Viscount Bateman, a former Lord Commissioner of the Admiralty in the 1750s.

A colonial vessel, &quot;Fly&quot;, was driven into Batemans Bay by bad weather during April 1808. Her crew engaged in a conflict with the local Indigenous peoples, initially firing their muskets from the vessel; after the muskets were fired, spears were thrown in return, resulting in three &quot;Fly&quot; crew fatalities. In 1821, Lt Robert Johnston entered the bay and explored the lower reaches of the Clyde River on board the cutter &quot;Snapper&quot;. Snapper Island within the bay is named after Johnston&#x27;s boat. Johnston returned with Alexander Berry and Hamilton Hume and they traced the river to its source. When the district was surveyed in 1828, a deserted hut and stockyards were found. Cedar getters and land clearers were in the district in the 1820s. From 1820s through to the 1840s, the area to the Moruya River was the southernmost official &quot;limit of location&quot; for the colony of New South Wales.

The Illawarra and South Coast Steam Navigation Co found the Clyde River to be navigable in 1854. Regular services by the company in the 1860s and 1870s contributed to growth of the district.

The village of China Bay was surveyed in 1859. Oyster farming commenced in 1860, and by 1870, there was a fleet of 40 oyster boats. A sawmill was erected in 1870. The port and town was proclaimed in 1885. A ferry service across the Clyde ran from 1891 until the bridge was opened in 1956. In 1942, during World War II, a trawler was attacked by a Japanese submarine between Batemans Bay and Moruya.

====European population====
The change of population of Batemans Bay since 1881.
* 1881 was 266
* 1961 was 
* 1981 was 
* 1996 was 
* 2006 was 
* 2011 was 
* 2021 was 

===2016 flying fox plague===
In May 2016, an estimated 120,000 grey-headed flying fox (bats) suddenly descended upon and swarmed the town, prompting the town to declare a state of emergency. The grey-headed flying fox is listed as a vulnerable species threatened by extinction and is protected by conservation laws; due to this status, they had to be removed using non-lethal methods, including smoke, noise, lights and removal of vegetation. The town received AUS$2.5 million to relocate the bats.

===2019–20 bushfire emergency===
In December 2019, the town was under the threat of a catastrophic bushfire, which ultimately cut Batemans Bay off from all external road links, isolating the town.

The bushfire gradually increased in intensity and severity, peaking on New Year&#x27;s Eve and rapidly moving towards the town. The bushfire resulted in thousands of locals sheltering at beaches around the town, a large number of buildings lost, and lingering economic damage.

Due to the difficult mountainous terrain surrounding Batemans Bay, much of the firefighting efforts could only be fought from the air, with a number of firefighting aircraft tasked to defend the town. With the difficulties of the highway closures cutting the town off from outside links on the ground, Moruya Airport proved to be a vital resource in the protection of the local region from the devastating bushfires.

== Demographics ==

According to the 2021 census of population, there were 8,581 people in the Batemans Bay urban centre.
* Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people made up 8.3% of the population. 
* 77.8% of people were born in Australia. The next most common countries of birth were England 4.9% and New Zealand 1.3%. 
* 88% of people only spoke English at home. 
* The most common responses for religion were No Religion 39.4%, Catholic 20.1% and Anglican 19.4%.

The median age in Batemans Bay is 51 years, compared with the Australian national average of 38 years. For people aged 60 years and above, Batemans Bay is well above the national average, and has twice as many people aged 70 years or over than the national average. Conversely, in all age demographic groups below 60 years, Batemans Bay is below national averages. This is most strongly presented in the categories for ages 19 to 35 years.

This skewed demographic is attributed to Batemans Bay&#x27;s proximity to Canberra, from where it attracts a large number of retirees. In recent years, community concern has grown as hotels and resorts in the region have been purchased and converted to aged care and retirement living, creating a perceived threat to the town&#x27;s primary industry – tourism. In addition, the aged demographic has been said to create a culture were the towns infrastructure is geared towards the aged, resulting in a net migration away from Batemans Bay of younger families exacerbating the imbalance. In 2015, research from Nielsen revealed older people were less likely to support rates funding towards youth focussed infrastructure.

== Arts and culture ==

===River of Art===
The annual River of Art festival was founded in 2004. , the arts festival stretches over 11 days finishing at the end of the October long weekend. Supported by the Shire Council and run by a board of volunteers, it includes all forms of visual art as well as performances, music, and creative workshops. 

===Sculpture on Clyde===
A ten-day art festival celebrating imagination in 3D, debuted in 2017 as a bold and generous new acquisitive art prize. Set along the foreshore of the pristine Clyde River, it is one of Australia&#x27;s richest 3D art prizes. Presented by The Batemans Bay Tourism and Business Chamber, the festival is open to professional, emerging and novice artists worldwide with 2018 prize money to the value of $70,000. The inaugural acquisitive prize was won by Dora A. Rognvaldsdottir for Duet.

===South Tribe and Cultivate Space===
Leading up to 2018, a number of digital creatives and artists moved into Batemans Bay&#x27;s industrial estate, into a space called the South Tribe and Cultivate Space which served as business and arts incubators. On 26 July 2020, the owners of South Tribe and Cultivate Space announced the closure of the centre on their Facebook page, citing difficulties with the COVID-19 pandemic in Australia.

===Bay Pavilions===
In 2018, an indoor aquatic and cultural centre was proposed for Mackay Park precinct, which would include a purpose-built exhibition and performance centre, as well as workshop and storage space that would serve the wider region&#x27;s 18 art, dance, and theatre groups. The -million proposal generated some controversy in the community, as it meant replacing the existing 50-metre pool with a 25-metre one. However, it went ahead and the aquatic facility, which includes water slides, a leisure pool, and a warm water pool, is now part of &quot;Bay Pavilions Art + Aquatic&quot;. 

===South East Arts===
South East Arts is the regional development organisation for arts and culture in the Bega Valley, Eurobodalla and Snowy Monaro.

== Food and produce ==

Batemans Bay sits as the northern gateway to the pristine Eurobodalla Shire - the entire region gaining national recognition for its terroir and as a centre for sustainable agriculture. Most notably for the town itself, are the oysters from the Clyde River. One of Australia&#x27;s cleanest estuaries, the Clyde produces what is considered by a growing number to be Australia&#x27;s best oyster. These are available widely on local menus and at farm gates.

== Buildings and architecture ==
Batemans Bay has many historical buildings, sharing an insight into the areas colourful past. Northcourt Arcade was erected in 1935 as a hospital and operated until the 1960s. During these years the community fought for a more updated structure and all patients were moved to the new location on Pacific Street in 1970.
===Bridge Plaza and Village Centre===

The town&#x27;s two main shopping centres are the Bridge Plaza, which was built in 1984, and Village Centre Batemans Bay, which was built in 2004. The Village Centre is anchored by Coles, Aldi and Kmart, and the Bridge Plaza is anchored by Woolworths.

== Transport ==
=== Highways ===
Batemans Bay is located at the junction of the Princes Highway which runs down the south coast of New South Wales and the Kings Highway, which runs from Canberra to the coast.

==== Batemans Bay Bridge ====

Batemans Bay is the only place where coastal traffic can cross the Clyde River. From 1915 to 1954 a motorised punt allowed traffic to cross the river. The former Batemans Bay Bridge was officially opened in 1956 and became a much loved landmark of the town. It was a steel vertical lift truss bridge with a maximum height of 34 metres. In 2019 work began on a replacement concrete bridge with a clearance of 12 metres. Due to this replacement project, the former steel truss bridge has been disassembled and removed, with parts of the former bridge to be turned into a sculpture on the foreshore. The new concrete bridge formally opened on 27 March 2021, with a public event for the local population that morning. The former bridge is now commemorated in public art throughout the town, including a mural on the new one, a mural on the Boatshed restaurant, and a sculpture made from its material, titled Tides.

=== Moruya Airport ===
Moruya Airport is located approximately 30 km south of the town; flights service the route between Sydney and Moruya.

== Media ==

;Radio stations
*East Coast Radio 2EC (FM 105.9 – commercial)
* Power FM NSW South Coast (FM 104.3 – commercial) – POWER FM from Nowra can also be received in parts of Batemans Bay on FM 94.9.
*2 EAR FM (Eurobodalla Access Radio FM 107.5 – community station)
* Hot Country Radio (87.6FM – commercial – country music format)
* Sky Sports Radio (FM 96.3)
* ABC South East NSW (FM 103.5) – part of the ABC Local Radio network
* Radio National (FM 105.1)
* ABC NewsRadio (FM 100.5)
* ABC Classic FM (FM 101.9) – also on 95.7 from the adjacent Illawarra region.
* Triple J (FM 98.9 – from the adjacent Illawarra region). A local service from Mount Wandera is planned, subject to the clearance of local television stations.

;Television
Batemans Bay and the Eurobodalla region receive five free-to-air television stations (television in Australia) including two government funded networks:

The ABC, the SBS and three commercial networks:

* Seven
* Nine and
* Southern Cross 10

ABC, SBS, Seven, Nine (WIN) and Southern Cross 10 all offer digital high-definition simulcasts of their main channels.

All five networks broadcast additional channels including: 7two, 7mate, 7flix, 7bravo, 9Go!, 9Gem, 9Life, ABC Family, ABC Entertains, ABC News, SBS Viceland, SBS World Movies, SBS Food, 10 Bold Drama, 10 Peach Comedy and Nickelodeon.

;Newspapers
The local newspaper for Batemans Bay and the Eurobodalla region is &quot;The Bay Post&quot;; published by Fairfax Media.

The Beagle Weekly is an independent online newspaper covering the Eurobodalla shire from South Durras to Tilba Tilba. Established in November 2016 it provides a full news service.

Daily newspapers such as &quot;The Canberra Times&quot;, the &quot;Illawarra Mercury&quot; from Wollongong, the &quot;Sydney Morning Herald&quot;, the &quot;Daily Telegraph&quot;, &quot;The Australian&quot;, &quot;The Age&quot;, &quot;Herald Sun&quot; and the &quot;Australian Financial Review&quot; are available in Batemans Bay. Some local newspapers from other NSW South Coast towns such as Bega, Nowra, Ulladulla, Moruya, Merimbula and Narooma are also available.

== Sport ==
The Batemans Bay Tigers compete in the Group 16 Rugby League competition. The club, which was founded in 1897, is the second-oldest known rugby league club in Australia, behind Rockhampton&#x27;s Fitzroy-Gracemere Sharks (founded in 1886), and in fact pre-dates the sport&#x27;s arrival in Australia, as the club initially played rugby union before switching to league. From 1978 until 2013, the club played in the Group 7 Rugby League competition, in which they won 5 titles (1979, 1986, 1988, 1992, 2002). In Group 16 competitions, the club has won 4 titles (1940, 1948, 1953, 1967), for a total of nine senior premierships.

The Batemans Bay Seahawks Australian rules football club (founded 1984) compete in AFL Canberra&#x27;s Community Divisions.

==Climate==
Batemans Bay experiences an oceanic climate (Köppen climate classification &quot;Cfb&quot;). The climate of Batemans Bay is moderated by the sea, with warm summers and mild sunny winters. Nights can be cold in winter, due to its somewhat inland position. Thunderstorms mostly occur between November and March, with rainfall maximums in summer. The town gets 87.3 clear days annually. The town&#x27;s drier winter trend is owed to its position on the leeward side of the dividing range. 

== Notable people ==
* Paul Sidwell, linguist

== See also ==
* List of ports in Australia

== References ==
== Further reading==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q810756" start="0" end="12" title="Batemans Bay" label="Batemans Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069056" start="30" end="41" title="South Coast, New South Wales" label="South Coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q3224" start="65" end="80" title="New South Wales" label="New South Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q753512" start="129" end="146" title="Eurobodalla Shire" label="Eurobodalla Shire"/>
<link wikidata="Q47053" start="197" end="204" title="estuary" label="estuary"/>
<link wikidata="Q1103708" start="222" end="233" title="Clyde River (New South Wales)" label="Clyde River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1478712" start="300" end="315" title="Princes Highway" label="Princes Highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q304864" start="316" end="327" title="Highway 1 (Australia)" label="(Highway 1)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3130" start="339" end="345" title="Sydney" label="Sydney"/>
<link wikidata="Q3141" start="355" end="364" title="Melbourne" label="Melbourne"/>
<link wikidata="Q3114" start="366" end="374" title="Canberra" label="Canberra"/>
<link wikidata="Q494940" start="429" end="442" title="Kings Highway, Australia" label="Kings Highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q2373806" start="716" end="728" title="Sydney Basin" label="Sydney Basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1269448" start="763" end="776" title="Retirement community" label="retiree haven"/>
<link wikidata="Q3947" start="837" end="844" title="house" label="housing"/>
<link wikidata="Q93352" start="859" end="866" title="Coast" label="seaside"/>
<link wikidata="Q780811" start="909" end="923" title="oyster farming" label="oyster farming"/>
<link wikidata="Q38112" start="925" end="933" title="forestry" label="forestry"/>
<link wikidata="Q126793" start="951" end="957" title="retail" label="retail"/>
<link wikidata="Q48789958" start="1081" end="1089" title="Walbanga" label="Walbunja"/>
<link wikidata="Q2601713" start="1104" end="1108" title="Yuin" label="Yuin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3833021" start="1183" end="1203" title="Yuin–Kuric languages" label="Yuin–Kuric languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q1103708" start="1308" end="1315" title="Bhundoo" label="Bhundoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q7324" start="1717" end="1727" title="James Cook" label="James Cook"/>
<link wikidata="Q4040164" start="1858" end="1888" title="HMS Northumberland (1750)" label="HMS &amp;quot;Northumberland&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q16156854" start="1947" end="1981" title="John Bateman, 2nd Viscount Bateman" label="John Bateman, 2nd Viscount Bateman"/>
<link wikidata="Q2333895" start="1992" end="2026" title="Lord Commissioner of the Admiralty" label="Lord Commissioner of the Admiralty"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2379" end="2394" title="Robert Johnston R.N (explorer)" label="Robert Johnston"/>
<link wikidata="Q4718350" start="2592" end="2607" title="Alexander Berry" label="Alexander Berry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1523969" start="2612" end="2625" title="Hamilton Hume" label="Hamilton Hume"/>
<link wikidata="Q646906" start="2865" end="2877" title="Moruya River" label="Moruya River"/>
<link wikidata="Q17000640" start="2899" end="2937" title="Nineteen Counties" label="official &amp;quot;limit of location&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q5998829" start="2978" end="3023" title="Illawarra Steam Navigation Company" label="Illawarra and South Coast Steam Navigation Co"/>
<link wikidata="Q551930" start="3798" end="3820" title="grey-headed flying fox" label="grey-headed flying fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q17562" start="5013" end="5027" title="Moruya Airport" label="Moruya Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q4801521" start="6866" end="6879" title="arts festival" label="arts festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q36649" start="7043" end="7053" title="visual art" label="visual art"/>
<link wikidata="Q83873548" start="8028" end="8058" title="COVID-19 pandemic in Australia" label="COVID-19 pandemic in Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163166" start="8553" end="8564" title="water slide" label="water slide"/>
<link wikidata="Q1108172" start="9870" end="9875" title="Coles Supermarkets" label="Coles"/>
<link wikidata="Q125054" start="9877" end="9881" title="Aldi" label="Aldi"/>
<link wikidata="Q6421682" start="9886" end="9891" title="Kmart Australia" label="Kmart"/>
<link wikidata="Q607272" start="9929" end="9939" title="Woolworths Group (Australia)" label="Woolworths"/>
<link wikidata="Q1898246" start="10456" end="10469" title="Vertical-lift bridge" label="vertical lift"/>
<link wikidata="Q1328068" start="10470" end="10475" title="truss" label="truss"/>
<link wikidata="Q17562" start="11118" end="11132" title="Moruya Airport" label="Moruya Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q4633099" start="11284" end="11287" title="2EC" label="2EC"/>
<link wikidata="Q7236312" start="11314" end="11338" title="Power FM NSW South Coast" label="Power FM NSW South Coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q5909877" start="11511" end="11528" title="Hot Country Radio" label="Hot Country Radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q4633131" start="11576" end="11592" title="Sky Sports Radio" label="Sky Sports Radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q4650236" start="11605" end="11623" title="ABC South East NSW" label="ABC South East NSW"/>
<link wikidata="Q4650184" start="11649" end="11664" title="ABC Local Radio" label="ABC Local Radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q7280922" start="11675" end="11689" title="Radio National" label="Radio National"/>
<link wikidata="Q4650194" start="11703" end="11716" title="ABC NewsRadio" label="ABC NewsRadio"/>
<link wikidata="Q2818999" start="11730" end="11744" title="ABC Classic FM" label="ABC Classic FM"/>
<link wikidata="Q1522899" start="11809" end="11817" title="Triple J" label="Triple J"/>
<link wikidata="Q781365" start="12139" end="12142" title="Australian Broadcasting Corporation" label="ABC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075994" start="12148" end="12151" title="Special Broadcasting Service" label="SBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q908659" start="12186" end="12191" title="Seven Network" label="Seven"/>
<link wikidata="Q3564691" start="12194" end="12198" title="WIN Television" label="Nine"/>
<link wikidata="Q3492309" start="12205" end="12222" title="Southern Cross 10" label="Southern Cross 10"/>
<link wikidata="Q133454" start="12284" end="12307" title="High-definition television" label="digital high-definition"/>
<link wikidata="Q4643793" start="12403" end="12407" title="7two" label="7two"/>
<link wikidata="Q4643923" start="12409" end="12414" title="7mate" label="7mate"/>
<link wikidata="Q23019608" start="12416" end="12421" title="7flix" label="7flix"/>
<link wikidata="Q116213904" start="12423" end="12429" title="7Bravo" label="7bravo"/>
<link wikidata="Q5574515" start="12431" end="12435" title="9Go!" label="9Go!"/>
<link wikidata="Q5513159" start="12437" end="12441" title="9Gem" label="9Gem"/>
<link wikidata="Q22079623" start="12443" end="12448" title="9Life" label="9Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q4650041" start="12450" end="12460" title="ABC Family (Australian TV channel)" label="ABC Family"/>
<link wikidata="Q4650042" start="12462" end="12476" title="ABC Entertains" label="ABC Entertains"/>
<link wikidata="Q4650199" start="12478" end="12486" title="ABC News (Australian TV channel)" label="ABC News"/>
<link wikidata="Q7389006" start="12488" end="12500" title="SBS Viceland" label="SBS Viceland"/>
<link wikidata="Q8035972" start="12502" end="12518" title="SBS World Movies" label="SBS World Movies"/>
<link wikidata="Q22079626" start="12520" end="12528" title="SBS Food" label="SBS Food"/>
<link wikidata="Q7092404" start="12530" end="12543" title="10 Bold Drama" label="10 Bold Drama"/>
<link wikidata="Q5359746" start="12545" end="12560" title="10 Peach Comedy" label="10 Peach Comedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q97453050" start="12565" end="12576" title="Nickelodeon (Australian TV channel)" label="Nickelodeon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1393218" start="12697" end="12710" title="Fairfax Media" label="Fairfax Media"/>
<link wikidata="Q495267" start="12925" end="12943" title="The Canberra Times" label="The Canberra Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q5998827" start="12961" end="12978" title="Illawarra Mercury" label="Illawarra Mercury"/>
<link wikidata="Q187861" start="12990" end="13000" title="Wollongong" label="Wollongong"/>
<link wikidata="Q390216" start="13012" end="13033" title="Sydney Morning Herald" label="Sydney Morning Herald"/>
<link wikidata="Q1819581" start="13051" end="13066" title="The Daily Telegraph (Sydney)" label="Daily Telegraph"/>
<link wikidata="Q1478700" start="13080" end="13094" title="The Australian" label="The Australian"/>
<link wikidata="Q631893" start="13108" end="13115" title="The Age" label="The Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q1634594" start="13129" end="13139" title="Herald Sun" label="Herald Sun"/>
<link wikidata="Q1809545" start="13160" end="13187" title="Australian Financial Review" label="Australian Financial Review"/>
<link wikidata="Q4868772" start="13379" end="13398" title="Batemans Bay Tigers" label="Batemans Bay Tigers"/>
<link wikidata="Q5611074" start="13414" end="13435" title="Group 16 Rugby League" label="Group 16 Rugby League"/>
<link wikidata="Q606162" start="13552" end="13570" title="Rockhampton" label="Rockhampton&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13571" end="13595" title="Queensland Rugby League Central Division#Rockhampton Senior Local Rugby League" label="Fitzroy-Gracemere Sharks"/>
<link wikidata="Q5849" start="13705" end="13716" title="rugby union" label="rugby union"/>
<link wikidata="Q5611106" start="13790" end="13810" title="Group 7 Rugby League" label="Group 7 Rugby League"/>
<link wikidata="Q4651521" start="14086" end="14098" title="AFL Canberra" label="AFL Canberra"/>
<link wikidata="Q182090" start="14168" end="14183" title="oceanic climate" label="oceanic climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q124095" start="14185" end="14214" title="Köppen climate classification" label="Köppen climate classification"/>
<link wikidata="Q2857578" start="14395" end="14407" title="Thunderstorm" label="Thunderstorm"/>
<link wikidata="Q372001" start="14590" end="14597" title="leeward" label="leeward"/>
<link wikidata="Q7153598" start="14651" end="14663" title="Paul Sidwell" label="Paul Sidwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q6634473" start="14692" end="14718" title="List of ports in Australia" label="List of ports in Australia"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="464776" wikidata="Q1583637" url="?curid=464776" title="French battleship Richelieu">
<text>Richelieu was a French fast battleship, the lead ship of the . Built as a response to the Italian , &quot;Richelieu&quot; and its sister ship were based on their immediate predecessors of the : they used the same unconventional arrangement that grouped their main battery forward in two quadruple gun turrets. They were scaled up to accommodate a much more powerful main battery of eight guns (compared to the guns of the &quot;Dunkerque&quot;s), with increased armor to protect them from guns of the same caliber.

&quot;Richelieu&quot; was laid down in 1935 and was launched in 1939, just before the outbreak of World War II in Europe. As war with Germany became increasingly likely, work on the ship was rushed to prepare her for commissioning in April 1940. Completed just days before the Germans won the Battle of France in June, &quot;Richelieu&quot; fled to Dakar in French West Africa to keep her under French control. There, she came under repeated British attacks that had been intended to either compel the battleship to join the Free French Naval Forces or sink her; these included during Operation Catapult in July 1940 and the Battle of Dakar in September.

Damaged in both attacks, the ship was slowly repaired before eventually being turned over to Free French control after the Allied invasion of North Africa in November 1942. After being sent to the United States for repairs and an extensive modernization, the ship served with the British Home Fleet in early 1944 before being deployed to the Eastern Fleet for operations against the Japanese in the Indian Ocean. These included several bombardment operations and in May 1945 she was present during the Battle of the Malacca Strait, though she was too far away to engage the Japanese force.

&quot;Richelieu&quot; was part of the force that liberated Singapore after the Japanese surrender in September, and she later operated in French Indochina as part of the initial effort to restore French colonial rule. Recalled to France in December 1945, she was repaired and modernized slightly in 1946. The ship saw relatively limited training in the immediate postwar years and, in 1952, she was removed from active service for use as a gunnery training ship. In 1956, she was placed in reserve and was thereafter used as a stationary training vessel and barracks ship until 1967, when the French Navy decided to discard her. She was sold for scrap in 1968, and broken up in Italy from 1968 to 1969.

== Design==


When in 1934 Italy announced that it would begin building two s armed with guns, the French Navy immediately began preparations to counter them. The small s that had been ordered provided the template for the next French battleship design, but it needed to be scaled up to match the new Italian vessels, both in terms of offensive and defensive characteristics. The design staff considered 380 and guns, but the latter could not be incorporated in a design that remained within the limit imposed by the Washington Naval Treaty and was quickly discarded. The &quot;Dunkerque&quot;s carried their armament in two quadruple gun turrets arrayed in a superfiring pair forward of the superstructure, and the designers experimented with other arrangements, including combinations of triple and twin turrets, but the need to minimize the length of the armor belt (and thus its weight) necessitated the &quot;Dunkerque&quot; layout.

&quot;Richelieu&quot; displaced standard and fully loaded, with an overall length of , a beam of and a maximum draft of . She was powered by four Parsons geared steam turbines and six oil-fired Sural water-tube boilers, which developed a total of and yielded a maximum speed of . At a cruising speed of , the ship could steam for . Her crew numbered 1,569 officers and men. The ship carried four Loire 130 seaplanes on the quarterdeck, and the aircraft facilities consisted of a steam catapult and a crane to handle the floatplanes.

She was armed with eight 380 mm/45 Modèle (Mle) 1935 guns arranged in two quadruple gun turrets, both of which were placed in a superfiring pair forward of the superstructure. Her secondary armament consisted of nine /55 Mle 1930 guns mounted in three triple turrets, arranged on the rear superstructure. Heavy anti-aircraft (AA) defense consisted of twelve /45 Mle 1930 anti-aircraft guns in twin turrets. Close range anti-aircraft defense was provided by a battery of eight  guns in twin mounts and twenty  machine guns in four quadruple and two twin mounts. The ship&#x27;s belt armor was thick amidships, and the main battery turrets were protected by of armor plate on the faces. The main armored deck was thick, and the conning tower had thick sides.

== Service ==

===Construction===
The contract for &quot;Richelieu&quot; was awarded to the Arsenal de Brest on 31 August 1935, and the keel for the new ship was laid down on 22 October in the No. 4 dock that had recently built . The slipway was not long enough to accommodate the entire length of the new battleship, and so the hull had to be built in pieces. The main section of the hull, which amounted to , was built on the slipway, while a length of the bow and an length of her stern were built elsewhere and attached after the rest of the ship was launched on 17 January 1939. The French decision to lay down &quot;Richelieu&quot; in 1935 put the country in violation of the Washington Treaty, which was to expire on 31 December 1936, as the combined tonnage of the two &quot;Dunkerque&quot;s and &quot;Richelieu&quot; exceeded the that had been allotted to France during the moratorium on new battleship construction. France used the Anglo-German Naval Agreement, which Britain had unilaterally signed with Germany in June 1935 to dismiss British objections to the new ship, though they nevertheless slowed construction of &quot;Richelieu&quot; to ease British concerns. Work was also slowed by strikes in the shipyards for better pay and working conditions.

By the outbreak of World War II in September 1939, the hull had been assembled; the start of the war led the naval command to decide to slow work on other, less complete vessels to focus efforts on &quot;Richelieu&quot; and her sister ship . The ship began initial testing on 15 October while still fitting-out in an effort to rush the ship into service; the same day, the ship&#x27;s first commander, &quot;Capitaine de vaisseau&quot; (&quot;CV&quot;—Ship-of-the-line captain) Marzin came aboard. Engine testing began on 14 January 1940, and a week later her main battery was completed when the last barrel was installed. Further engine testing was carried out between 31 March and 7 April; during this period, she was commissioned on 1 April. Formal acceptance trials began on 14 April. Repair work was conducted in Brest from 19 to 27 May, and fire control equipment for the main and secondary batteries were installed. &quot;Richelieu&quot; conducted full-power trials on 13 June, reaching from , exceeding her design performance. Test firings of the guns were conducted on 13 and 14 June. Work on the ship was completed on 15 June 1940, days before France surrendered to Germany after the Battle of France.

===World War II===
====Under Vichy control: 1940–1942====
With German troops advancing across France by mid-June, the Navy decided to evacuate &quot;Richelieu&quot; to Dakar in French West Africa; while earlier plans had been to send the fleet to British ports to continue the war, when the possibility of a negotiated armistice arose, the government decided that the fleet would be a useful bargaining chip. As a result, vessels should be preserved under French control, away from German occupation. At 06:45, the ship took on a load of ammunition and fuel, though she received only 198 quarter charges of propellant for her main battery, which amounted to powder sufficient for 49 shots. Material that had not yet been installed was also hastily loaded onto the ship, to be fitted once &quot;Richelieu&quot; reached the safety of Dakar. She also took aboard gold reserves from the Bank of France and 250 cadets from the &quot;École Navale&quot; (Naval Academy). There was insufficient time to allow the full complement to assemble and board the ship, and at 04:00 the next morning, &quot;Richelieu&quot; got underway while German troops approached Brest. &quot;Richelieu&quot; steamed in company with the destroyers and while German aircraft made several ineffective attacks against the ships. The battleship&#x27;s anti-aircraft guns returned fire without success. Initially cruising at a speed of , boiler trouble forced the ships to decrease speed to . The motors for her rudder also repeatedly broke down on the voyage, though the crew was able to repair them. While cruising off Casablanca, French Morocco at 17:00 on 20 June, the torpedo boats were detached to refuel, their place being taken by the new destroyer . The two vessels then proceeded on to Dakar, where they arrived at 17:44 on 23 June.

On arriving in Dakar, an uneasy situation confronted &quot;Richelieu&quot; while armistice negotiations were still underway. The commander of French naval forces in the region, &quot;Contre-amiral&quot; (&quot;CA&quot;—Rear Admiral) Plançon and the governor-general of French West Africa, Léon Cayla, were inclined to remain in the war against Germany. Also, significant British naval units were in the area, including the aircraft carrier moored in Dakar and the British South Atlantic Squadron, which was nearby. At the same time, &quot;Richelieu&quot; had used half of her fuel to escape Brest, and she could perform little sustained firing of her main or secondary guns. Admiral François Darlan, the Chief of Staff of the French Navy, sent a telegraph on the night of 23–24 June to warn Marzin that the British might attack the vessel to neutralize it in the event of a French surrender, and ordered him to begin preparations to scuttle the ship if the need arose. Meanwhile, on 23 June, the British heavy cruiser departed Freetown to observe &quot;Richelieu&quot;″s activities in Dakar.

On 25 June, Marzin received word that the French government had signed the Armistice with Germany. Darlan instructed him that the ship was to remain under French control, and if that proved to be impossible, he was to scuttle the ship or attempt to escape to the then-neutral United States. Marzin decided that, given the threat of British warships in the area, the best course of action was to try to escape to Casablanca and join the French fleet there, and so at 14:30 &quot;Richelieu&quot; got underway in company with &quot;Fleuret&quot;. &quot;Hermes&quot; raised anchor as well and began to follow &quot;Richelieu&quot; with her Fairey Swordfish torpedo bombers on her flight deck, but the coastal artillery trained their guns on the ship, convincing &quot;Hermes&quot;″ commander to return to port. &quot;Dorsetshire&quot; nevertheless shadowed &quot;Richelieu&quot; while she was at sea. The next morning, Darlan, who feared that Marzin was trying to defect to the Free French forces, ordered him to return to Dakar. Marzin complied and turned the ships back to port, but while on the way, he received amended orders instructing him to wait some north of Cape Verde to escort the 1st Division of Armed Merchant Cruisers to Dakar, as they were carrying another load of gold reserves from the Bank of France. &quot;Richelieu&quot; failed to make contact at the prescribed rendezvous point, and since she had not embarked any of her floatplanes before fleeing Brest, she could not conduct an aerial search. Marzin instead returned to Dakar on 28 June; the convoy arrived, having been significantly delayed, on 4 July.

After returning to port, work began to prepare the ship for action as quickly as possible. Marzin ordered that a stockpile of 330 mm propellant charges that had been stocked for the battleship before France&#x27;s surrender to be converted into charges that were usable by &quot;Richelieu&quot;. The secondary guns were readied for action ten days later, but they lacked a director capable of tracking aerial targets, so they could be used against surface ships only. Under the terms of the armistice, &quot;Richelieu&quot; was to be returned to Toulon, where she would be demobilized, though the Germans later decided against permitting the move, as they feared the British would try to seize the ship during the passage through the Strait of Gibraltar; the British, meanwhile, were under the mistaken impression that the Germans sought to seize the French fleet for their own use. This led to Operation Catapult, a series of attacks on French warships to neutralize vessels that would not defect to the Free French.

=====British attack on 8 July 1940 and repairs=====

The component of Catapult that targeted &quot;Richelieu&quot; consisted of the carrier &quot;Hermes&quot;, which joined the cruisers and &quot;Dorsetshire&quot; off Dakar. On 4 July, the day after the British had attacked Mers-el-Kébir, Plançon ordered the submarines and to attack &quot;Dorsetshire&quot; while it cruised off the port. He also instructed the coastal batteries to open fire if she closed to within , though &quot;Dorsetshire&quot; remained at a distance. Marzin moved &quot;Richelieu&quot; to a position near the island of Gorée, pointed south so that the ship&#x27;s main battery could aim at any vessels that approached Dakar. The British had intended to send Force H to Dakar after the attack on Mers-el-Kébir, but the need to return to destroy &quot;Dunkerque&quot; forced the British to resort to &quot;Hermes&quot;; on 7 July, the sloop was sent to contact Plançon and issue the ultimatum to either surrender his ship to British control or be sunk.

Marzin prepared his ship to sortie the next morning; he intended to use the eight rounds loaded in his main guns to attack &quot;Hermes&quot;. Other forces in Dakar were put on alert and &quot;Le Héros&quot; again sortied to assist in the attack. While the French preparations were ongoing, the British sent a motorboat from &quot;Milford&quot; to drop four depth charges under &quot;Richelieu&quot;″s stern to disable her screws, though this attempt failed. At 04:15, a group of Swordfish launched from &quot;Hermes&quot; as &quot;Richelieu&quot; was about to get underway. One of their torpedoes struck the ship aft on the starboard side and tore a hole that was between the propeller shafts. The resulting shock disabled many of the ship&#x27;s systems. Two of her fire control directors were knocked off their tracks, the starboard propeller shafts were bent, and the blast caused significant flooding. Damage control teams pumped fuel out of the bunkers to counteract the loss of buoyancy aft and the ship was towed into port for repairs. Anti-torpedo nets were set up around the vessel, which had taken on some of water and at low tide rested on the harbor bottom.

Later that afternoon, tankers came alongside and began pumping oil out of the ship&#x27;s bunkers to reduce her draft, but water continued to leak into the hull through the cable tunnels. Pumps attached to the ship helped to control the flooding, but the hoses repeatedly pulled loose as &quot;Richelieu&quot; rose and fell with the waves. To further complicate the effort to repair the ship, Dakar lacked a dry dock sufficient to accommodate &quot;Richelieu&quot;; the battleship could not simply be drained and plated over. Instead, damaged bulkheads had to be patched and pumped out individually; by 28 August, some of water remained aboard the ship. Heavy use of the pumps caused frequent breakdowns, which further slowed work. In his report on the attack and subsequent repairs, Marzin criticized faulty design and construction practices that hindered damage control efforts, including insufficient pumping equipment, poor quality control for the welding of bulkheads, and a failure to ensure that critical components like the turret trunks were watertight.

While work to control and reverse the flooding was ongoing, other repairs were necessary to return the ship to operational status. The fire-control directors needed to be re-seated in their tracks, wiring that had been damaged by flooding or leaking fuel oil had to be replaced, and several of the electrical generators, which had been badly shaken by the blast, needed to be rebuilt. Given the limited ability to repair the damage to the ship, Marzin focused efforts on ensuring that the main and secondary batteries could be effectively used, even if the ship could only be employed as a static floating battery against an expected second attack from British forces. &quot;Amiral&quot; (Admiral) Jean de Laborde flew to Dakar to conduct an inspection and help to organize the defenses. As part of these preparations, both Plançon and Cayla, who were suspected of being pro-British, were removed from their posts, with Plançon&#x27;s place taken by &quot;CA&quot; Platon and then &quot;CA&quot; Landriau.

Workers in the local shipyard scavenged metal from other ships in the harbor to fabricate an square patch to cover the torpedo hole, which was planned to be installed by 10 September. This would allow the rear magazines for the 152 mm and 37 mm guns to be drained. At the same time, the shipyard began building a steel cofferdam around the ship that was to have been completed by late October, which would allow the rest of the hull to be pumped dry. With the hull pumped out, permanent repairs were to have been completed by January 1941. While this work was being carried out, the crew cleaned and painted the ship and continued to work on readying the armament. A total of 150 complete charges for the main battery were created by remanufacturing the stockpile intended for &quot;Strasbourg&quot;. Parts of the crew were dispersed for other tasks: 106 were sent to man the armed merchant cruisers in the harbor, whose reservist crews had to be demobilized, and the 64-man crew of the forward gun turret were sent to man the coastal battery at Cap Manuel. After another 132 reservists from &quot;Richelieu&quot; were demobilized, a total of 1,039 officers and men were left aboard the ship. The 100-, 37-, and 13.2 mm guns were kept manned continuously given the threat of further British air attacks.

=====Battle of Dakar=====

While repairs were being carried out in August, the British began preparations for another attack, code-named Operation Menace. British Prime Minister Winston Churchill sought to use a contingent of Free French forces led by Charles de Gaulle to invade the colony and seize the ship for use against Germany. By late August, a convoy had been assembled with five ships carrying weapons and supplies got underway, later rendezvousing with a second convoy of six troop ships carrying some 2,400 Free French soldiers and 4,270 British soldiers. The naval support force consisted of the aircraft carrier and the battleships and , along with four cruisers and numerous other warships. The plan called for de Gaulle to use his French forces to attempt to secure the colony, only calling on British support if the Vichy forces resisted him. At the same time, several French colonies in Africa defected to Free France, prompting the Vichy government to secure authorization from the German Armistice Commission to send several light cruisers and destroyers to reinforce their holdings in Africa, designated Force Y. Owing to the risk of encountering British vessels on the passage, the destroyers were temporarily left in Casablanca while the three cruisers, carrying supplies and additional men to crew the coastal batteries, raced south at high speed. They reached Dakar on 14 September, and after disembarking the men and supplies, continued on south to French Equatorial Africa (in what is now present-day Gabon).

The British believed that the arrival of Force Y indicated that the French were aware of Operation Menace, but de Gaulle decided to proceed with the attack regardless. While Force Y steamed south, two of the three cruisers were intercepted by British cruisers and forced to fall back to Dakar, arriving there again on 20 September, by which time the destroyers had arrived. On 22 September, the liner was due to arrive with a load of 380 mm shells, and as a result, French search aircraft were arrayed to the north to cover the liner&#x27;s approach; they were completely surprised by the arrival of the Anglo-Free French force on the morning of 23 September. A small party of Free French troops sent to rally the port to de Gaulle was repulsed with machine-gun fire and &quot;Richelieu&quot;″s 100 mm guns fired warning shots toward the Free French aviso shortly after 07:00. On the approach of the sloops and at 08:10, &quot;Richelieu&quot; again fired warning shots from her 100 mm guns. The British warships approached the port and came under fire from the coastal batteries, leading the Anglo-Free French commanders, de Gaulle and Vice Admiral John Cunningham to conclude that they would have to directly attack the port if the operation was to succeed.

&quot;Barham&quot; and &quot;Resolution&quot; opened fire on &quot;Richelieu&quot; at 11:05, but poor visibility hampered the British shooting and they checked fire after twenty minutes, having inflicted only splinter damage to the cruiser and the destroyer . The French coastal batteries hit several of the cruisers and destroyers, but &quot;Richelieu&quot; was moored facing north, which prevented her from taking part in the initial duel. After the British withdrew, Marzin used tugboats to turn the ship far enough to enable her to bring her main battery to bear. The defenses of Dakar were now alerted. The Free French then attempted to land further east at Rufisque, but were repulsed. The British and Free French withdrew to regroup for another attack the next day. Between 06:25 and 08:00 on 24 September, the British launched three strikes with Swordfish and Blackburn Skua bombers. They scored no hits on &quot;Richelieu&quot; because of poor visibility, and near-misses caused no damage. In return, &quot;Richelieu&quot;″s gunners claimed three of the six aircraft that were shot down, and damaged another. Ninety minutes later, the British battleships and two heavy cruisers approached and fired their 380 mm main batteries at &quot;Richelieu&quot;.

&quot;Richelieu&quot; returned fire at 09:40, but her No. 7 gun was destroyed by a shell that detonated in the barrel and the No. 8 gun was also badly damaged. This was first traced to the use of the remanufactured propellant from &quot;Strasbourg&quot;, but a later inquiry in 1941 found the explosions were caused by a flaw in the design of the shell base. Guns 5 and 6 remained in action but failed to score any hits. At 09:57, one of &quot;Richelieu&quot;″s secondary guns hit &quot;Barham&quot;. In return, the British ships inflicted only minor splinter damage before breaking off at 10:07. The French had counted some 160 shells landing near the ship. The French laid smoke screens to obscure &quot;Richelieu&quot; before the British returned to the action at 12:53, initially targeting a destroyer before bombarding the port for the next 30 minutes. &quot;Richelieu&quot; was not hit and, from 12:56, she fired guns 5 and 6 at the British cruisers, quickly straddling one of them and convincing them to disengage. She fired four 380 mm shells at &quot;Barham&quot; at 13:11–13:12 but failed to score a hit, though both British battleships were hit several times by coastal batteries. After disengaging for the day, de Gaulle decided to abandon the operation, but Cunningham convinced him to allow a final attempt the next morning. In the meantime, Marzin decided to transfer the crews from turret 2 to turret 1, which also required moving the shells and propellant between magazines.

As the British approached on the morning of 25 September, Marzin decided to engage &quot;Barham&quot; with his main battery and &quot;Resolution&quot; with his 152 mm guns. While the British were approaching their bombardment positions, &quot;Richelieu&quot; shot down a reconnaissance plane shortly before 07:00. She opened fire at 09:04 with her main battery, firing two shots that fell short, and the coastal guns and Force Y cruisers followed suit shortly thereafter. While the British battleships were turning to unmask their rear guns, the submarine torpedoed and badly damaged &quot;Resolution&quot;. &quot;Barham&quot; avoided the torpedoes and opened fire, quickly straddling &quot;Richelieu&quot; and at 09:15, she scored a hit amidships that penetrated above the side armor, causing no casualties. In return, &quot;Richelieu&quot; hit &quot;Barham&quot; in the bow, causing minor damage. At 09:25, the British disengaged to cover &quot;Resolution&quot;″s withdrawal. After the British left, the gun crew attempted to clear the shells that had been loaded in guns 5 and 6 and the shell in No. 5 also exploded, leaving No. 6 the only operable gun in the turret. In total, French warships in the harbor lost 100 dead and 182 wounded, with another 84 killed and 197 wounded among the civilian population.

From 29 September, the battlecruiser and escorting destroyers were detached from Force H to patrol off Dakar, as the British believed &quot;Richelieu&quot; would be transferred to metropolitan France for repairs. The British ships remained in the area until 1 October when it became clear the ship would not be moved.

=====Repairs and defection to Free France=====
Repair work resumed immediately. The hit from &quot;Barham&quot; did little serious damage to the ship, but it nevertheless caused extensive deformation of interior bulkheads, the armor deck was forced down where the shell hit it, and the uptakes from the boilers were damaged. Wiring in the area was also cut by fragments and needed to be replaced. On 10 October, the workers attempted to attach the patch that had been manufactured, but it did not work; it did not create a watertight seal, which meant the compartments could not be pumped out. The patch was abandoned in the hopes that the cofferdam, then nearing completion, would work. The cofferdam was modeled to conform to the hull and was built with an interior void that could be used as a ballast tank so it could be floated in position and sunk in place. The cofferdam was ready by late December, which allowed the hull to be pumped dry and then sealed with welded plates and cement; the hull was finally sealed by 28 February 1941. Further repairs were hampered by the German Armistice Commission, which attempted to slow progress to prevent the ship from returning to full operational status. They blocked the shipment of new guns or a new propeller shaft, and severely constrained the transfer of other equipment. During this period, on 27 February, &quot;CV&quot; Deramond replaced Marzin as the ship&#x27;s commander.

As repairs were carried out, the ship saw little activity through late 1942 apart from engaging unidentified aircraft on 28 July and 29 September 1941 and 26 February and 12 May 1942. During this period, in April 1941, the ship received the first radar set installed on a French battleship. And in July, her Loire seaplanes finally arrived; tests with the catapults were conducted in October. On 10 April 1942, the ship conducted a test firing with gun No. 6 to demonstrate that the shell design problem had been corrected; all six shells were fired without incident. On 8 November, American and British forces landed in French North Africa (code-named Operation Torch), which prompted the Germans to invade the rest of Vichy France, which in turn led Darlan to defect to the Allies with the rest of the fleet.

The United States Navy sent a group to evaluate the ships under Darlan&#x27;s control to determine which should be modernized in the United States. The only French battleship still in service, &quot;Richelieu&quot; was an obvious candidate. The US Navy had not initially been interested in repairing &quot;Richelieu&quot;; while the Germans and Italians retained a number of powerful battleships, the United States had recently commissioned or would soon complete eight fast battleships, more than sufficient to cover US requirements for the Pacific War and to send to Europe to reinforce the Royal Navy. In addition, repairing and modernizing a ship the size of &quot;Richelieu&quot; would require significant resources that could be used for other purposes. But pressure from Britain and the Free French convinced the Navy to agree to the project. For France, she was the only surviving modern battleship and thus a major symbol of national prestige, while the British had long sought to acquire the vessel to stiffen the Mediterranean Fleet, which at that time had just two new battleships to oppose their three Italian counterparts.

She ran sea trials from 25 to 29 January 1943 to evaluate the state of her engines, which had not been used since July 1940. Her aircraft facilities and anti-aircraft armament were removed during the evaluation period, as they would be replaced by US equipment. On 30 January, she departed Dakar with &quot;Montcalm&quot;, bound for New York City, where both vessels would be modernized. &quot;Richelieu&quot; steamed at a speed of and her rudder had to be held to seven degrees to account for the hull deformation. The ships arrived on 11 February and on the 18th, &quot;Richelieu&quot; was taken into Dock No. 5 at the Brooklyn Navy Yard to begin the modernization.

====Free-French career: 1943–1945====
=====Refit in New York City=====
Political tensions between the United States and France played a major role in determining how much &quot;Richelieu&quot; would be modernized. The US Navy refused to transfer the latest radar equipment on the basis that it was too sensitive to be released. As a result, much of the improvement was limited to the installation of a new anti-aircraft battery of the latest US weapons and auxiliary equipment in addition to a thorough overhaul and permanent repairs to the torpedo damage. Three shifts of workers, totaling some 2,000 men, worked on the ship twenty-four hours a day, seven days a week, for five months to rush the ship back into service. The modifications to the ship increased her displacement by about . While the ship was being modernized, &quot;CV&quot; Lambert replaced Deramont as the ship&#x27;s commander on 29 April.

The ship&#x27;s armament required extensive repairs and modifications to bring &quot;Richelieu&quot; up to modern standards. First, three of the eight main battery guns had to be replaced, which required removing the turret roof. Since the gun cradles were undamaged, the guns were simply replaced by barrels taken from &quot;Jean Bart&quot;, which had been recovered at Casablanca during Operation Torch. The shell handling equipment of both the primary and secondary guns was thoroughly overhauled, with wiring being replaced and the shell and propellant lifts being rebuilt—the latter had never been made to function correctly while the ship was in Dakar. Ammunition for the primary and secondary guns was now a problem, as the source, factories in France, was occupied by German forces. Drawings of the plans for the 380 mm shells were prepared in Dakar and forwarded to the United States, where a contract to produce 930 shells was ordered from Crucible Steel. American 6-inch/47 Mk 16 shells were used as a starting point to supply the 152 mm guns, as they were the same caliber and required relatively minor modifications for use in the French weapons.

Her 100 mm guns were retained, but her light anti-aircraft battery now consisted of fifty-six Bofors guns in quadruple mounts, all placed with their own Mk 51 gun director. These were arranged with two abreast the superfiring turret, two on either side of the forward tower, another two per side of the aft tower, and the remaining four on the quarterdeck, where the aircraft catapults had been. These guns were supplemented with fifty Oerlikon cannons, all in individual or twin mounts. Nine were placed on the forecastle aft of the , four were mounted on the superfiring turret, nine were placed on the former aircraft hangar, with the rest dispersed around the superstructure, including on the towers and the shelter deck.

&quot;Richelieu&quot;″s tower foremast was heavily reconfigured; the upper main battery director, which had never been operational and had been removed to allow the ship to clear the Brooklyn Bridge, was left off. In its place, the radome for the SF surface search radar was installed, along with the mattress antenna for the SA-2 air search radar; these were short-range sets that had been designed for small craft, the SA-2 intended for PT boats. Most of the command spaces in the tower were converted for other uses. The fire control systems for the main battery had to be replaced and those for the secondary guns were repaired with new wiring and telephones. The ship&#x27;s original Anschütz gyrocompasses were replaced with Sperry models. The ship&#x27;s propulsion system was thoroughly overhauled: the turbines were thoroughly repaired and the boilers were re-tubed. Much of the wiring throughout the ship was replaced, and a degaussing cable was installed.

To repair the hull, the concrete was broken up and removed, the sections that had been most badly damaged by the torpedo were stripped of all fittings, and deformed bulkheads and plating were cut out. After more than two and a half years without being dry-docked in a tropical port, the hull needed maintenance beyond simply repairing the torpedo damage, though given the conditions to which it had been subjected, it was in fairly good condition. It was sandblasted and those sections of plating that exhibited pitting had new plates welded over the top. The starboard propeller shafts also required repairs: the mounting brackets were straightened, but the inboard shaft was too badly damaged and had to be replaced. Bethlehem Steel fabricated a replacement that was installed in June. The bottom row of portholes were closed off, as the increase in displacement pushed them closer to the waterline.
Beginning in late August and continuing into mid-September, &quot;Richelieu&quot; began firing trials in the Chesapeake Bay; firing the main battery forward on 29 August revealed the need for a blast screen to protect the forecastle 20 mm guns, as the test accidentally destroyed two of the guns and their ammunition lockers. With her normal displacement now at and her hull slightly bowed (possibly caused by the torpedo hit), &quot;Richelieu&quot; began machinery trials in late September. On 25 September, the ship reached her new top speed of , cruising at that speed for thirty minutes, despite the deformation of her hull and the significant increase in displacement. The following day, she steamed for six hours at , for two hours at , and finally for fifty minutes at .

As completed, the ship&#x27;s displacement had grown to normally and fully loaded; draft correspondingly increased to and , respectively. Compared to her original wartime crew of 1,569 officers and men, &quot;Richelieu&quot; was now to be manned by a total of 1,930, amounting to 86 officers, 287 petty officers, and 1,557 men. The major increase in complement was largely the result of the additional anti-aircraft guns and radar systems. The ship conducted further trials into October, and on the 14th the ship was finally ready to get underway for European waters.

=====In European waters=====
Escorted by the destroyers and , &quot;Richelieu&quot; departed the US on 14 October, nominally bound for Gibraltar. The destroyers departed while underway, allowing &quot;Richelieu&quot; to keep up a speed of in heavy seas. The ship stopped in the Azores, Portugal, where she met the French destroyers and and the British destroyer , which was limited to a speed of ; &quot;Active&quot; quickly left the group, which proceeded not to Gibraltar, but to Mers El Kébir. There, she replenished supplies; it had been intended to deploy the ship with the Mediterranean Fleet, but Italy had surrendered in September, removing the threat posed by the Italian &quot;Littorio&quot;-class battleships. &quot;Richelieu&quot; was instead sent north to join the Home Fleet, which included the four surviving s. When &quot;Richelieu&quot; departed the Mediterranean, Cunningham, now the commander of the Mediterranean Fleet, recommended to the Admiralty that she be fitted with gunnery radars. The ship was escorted by the destroyers and , and on arrival in Scapa Flow, Admiral Bruce Fraser, the Home Fleet commander, inspected the battleship on 24 November. Work began immediately on installing a Type 284 gunnery radar while the ship began an intensive period of training to acclimate the ship&#x27;s crew to operating with British units.

The ship saw little activity over the winter of 1943–1944 until February 1944, when she took part in Operation Posthorn. &quot;Richelieu&quot;, the battleship , and the carrier departed Scapa Flow on 10 February for a raid on German shipping off occupied Norway. The objective was to lure the German heavy cruisers in the area so that the two battleships could destroy them. The carrier aircraft achieved little, sinking a single freighter of 3,000 tons and damaging a repair ship while trading one of the Supermarine Seafire fighters for a German Bf 109 fighter. The fleet returned to port on the 12th, and &quot;Richelieu&quot; thereafter went to Rosyth for ten days to rest the crew. A repeat sweep was to have taken place at the end of the month, but two of the escorting destroyers collided while leaving Scapa Flow, leading to a postponement that became permanent as a result of bad weather. In March, the Allies determined that five battleships to counter the battleship (which had been damaged in September 1943) was excessive. As a result, &quot;Richelieu&quot; was detached for other operations. The Allied command initially considered employing her to support the invasion of Normandy, but as she was only supplied with armor-piercing shells, she was instead sent to reinforce the British Eastern Fleet, along with a group of escort aircraft carriers.

The ship accordingly steamed to Greenock to take on fuel and ammunition, before cruising south to the Mediterranean with an escort of three British destroyers. She stopped in Algiers on 26 March to take on additional supplies; there, she was visited by General Henri Giraud and Admiral André Lemonnier. &quot;Richelieu&quot; thereafter departed for the Suez Canal, steaming at a speed of ; while underway, she began to experience significant boiler problems. The boiler blowers were not providing sufficient oxygen, so the boilers were not fully burning the fuel. As a result, the boiler tubes quickly became fouled and caused overheating. &quot;Richelieu&quot; stopped in Aden for repairs to the boiler tubes, but the problem was not corrected.

=====First deployment with the British Eastern Fleet=====
On entering the Indian Ocean, &quot;Richelieu&quot; picked up an escort consisting of the destroyers , , and . The four ships arrived in Trincomalee, Ceylon on 10 April, where they joined an Allied fleet that included the carriers and , the battleships and , and numerous cruisers and destroyers, commanded by Admiral James Somerville. On 16 April, the Eastern Fleet got underway for Operation Cockpit, a diversionary raid to distract the Japanese while American forces landed at Hollandia in New Guinea. Somerville divided his fleet into two squadrons; &quot;Richelieu&quot; served in Force 69, the main element, with &quot;Queen Elizabeth&quot; and &quot;Valiant&quot;, while &quot;Renown&quot; operated with the two carriers. The plan for Operation Cockpit called for carrier strikes on the port of Sabang, Netherlands East Indies. The fleet arrived in position early on 19 April, and after the carrier aircraft struck the port, Japanese bombers counter-attacked and &quot;Richelieu&quot; engaged the aircraft with her 100 mm and 40 mm batteries.

The next major operation conducted by the Eastern Fleet, Operation Transom, was timed to coincide with American operations in the Central Pacific to keep the attention of the Japanese fleet based in Singapore focused away from the American fleet. For this operation, the target was the major base at Surabaya, which also had significant oil refinery facilities. The Eastern Fleet got underway on 7 May and stopped to refuel on 15 May before arriving two days later. The strike proceeded uneventfully for &quot;Richelieu&quot; and on 18 May the American contingent detached to rejoin the main American fleet in the Pacific while the Eastern Fleet returned to Trincomalee, arriving on 27 May. Two days later, &quot;Richelieu&quot;, &quot;Queen Elizabeth&quot;, and six destroyers steamed to Colombo to rest their crews. While there, &quot;Richelieu&quot; was visited by Admiral Louis Mountbatten, Supreme Allied Commander of the South-East Asia Theatre. On 31 May, &quot;CV&quot; Merveilleux du Vignaux replaced Marzin as the ship&#x27;s commander.

Somerville planned another raid for mid-June: Operation Pedal, a carrier attack on the harbor of Port Blair in the Andaman Islands. The purpose of the attack was to again distract the Japanese fleet units in Singapore while American forces embarked on Operation Forager, the invasion of the Marianas Islands. For the Anglo-French operation, Somerville took only the fast ships, including &quot;Richelieu&quot;, &quot;Renown&quot;, and &quot;Illustrious&quot; with their accompanying cruiser and destroyer screens. These ships, designated Force 60, sortied on 19 June and two days later, &quot;Illustrious&quot;″ aircraft struck Japanese targets in the port. The ships arrived back in Trincomalee on 23 June. Operation Crimson followed in July, and given the lack of a response from the Japanese fleet to the earlier raids, Somerville decided to use his battleships and battlecruiser to bombard Sabang and Sumatra. &quot;Richelieu&quot; and the other ships conducted shooting practice on 7, 14–15, and 17 July in preparation for the raid. The plan called for &quot;Richelieu&quot;, &quot;Valiant&quot;, &quot;Queen Elizabeth&quot;, and &quot;Renown&quot;, supported by cruisers, to shell the port at longer range while the Dutch cruiser led a group of destroyers in a close-range attack. &quot;Illustrious&quot;, joined by the carrier , which had recently arrived, provided air cover to the fleet.

The Eastern Fleet departed on 22 July and reached the target on the morning of 25 July; the carriers launched their combat air patrols and the surface combatants steamed to approach their targets. &quot;Richelieu&quot; was the last vessel in the line, astern of &quot;Renown&quot;. &quot;Queen Elizabeth&quot;, the leading battleship, opened fire at 06:54 at a range of . The other ships quickly followed suit and F4U Corsair fighters circled overhead to spot for the ships&#x27; guns. &quot;Richelieu&quot; fired four-gun salvos, with two guns per turret, and she scored hits with the second salvo, demolishing several buildings and damaging the power station. Her secondary turrets neutralized a Japanese coastal artillery battery that had been engaging &quot;Tromp&quot;. At 07:15, the ships ceased firing, and in the brief bombardment, &quot;Richelieu&quot; had fired 81 main battery APC shells—this amounted to a rate of fire of a salvo every 50 seconds, nearly twice as fast as the British ships. Japanese aircraft attacked the fleet as it withdrew, but they were kept at bay by the carriers&#x27; fighters and heavy anti-aircraft fire from the ships. The fleet arrived back in Trincomalee on 27 July.

By this time, &quot;Richelieu&quot; was beginning to suffer from reduced speed, the result of continued boiler trouble and biofouling of her hull. Admiral Laurence E. Power, who had replaced Somerville as the fleet commander, detached &quot;Richelieu&quot; for a refit. The British had initially offered the floating dry-dock &quot;AFD-23&quot;, but Merveilleux du Vignaux believed that the dry-dock would not be able to accommodate a vessel the size of his ship (he proved to be correct when on 8 August, &quot;AFD-23&quot; capsized with &quot;Valiant&quot; aboard). &quot;Richelieu&quot; left on 6 September, bound for Algiers with three escorting destroyers. &quot;Le Terrible&quot; and &quot;Le Fantasque&quot; took over escort duties after &quot;Richelieu&quot; passed through the Suez Canal, and on 23 September the three ships arrived in Algiers. &quot;Richelieu&quot; then steamed north to Toulon on 1 October where she was visited again by Lemonnier, but the shipyard there was in ruins, so she moved to Casablanca on 10 October to be refitted. In addition to the hull cleaning and boiler repairs, she had new fire control and search radars installed, including a US SG-1 search radar, British Type-281B air search radar, and Type-285P fire control radars, in addition to other equipment, including an FV1 jammer and high-frequency direction finding gear.

=====Second deployment with the British Eastern Fleet=====
On 23 January 1945, &quot;Richelieu&quot; left Casablanca for Gibraltar, arriving there two days later to have her hull cleaned and repainted. The French sought to deploy an independent task force consisting of &quot;Richelieu&quot;, the four light cruisers still in service, and four destroyers, with a view toward reestablishing French control in Indochina. But the United States opposed the move and refused to allocate the aircraft carriers and support ships that would have been necessary for another independent fleet, and so &quot;Richelieu&quot; could only be sent, alone, back to the Eastern Fleet. The ship conducted trials in February that revealed the problem with her boilers had finally been corrected and she thereafter got underway for Trincomalee, arriving on 20 March. By this time, the modern elements of the Eastern Fleet had been detached to form the British Pacific Fleet, with the Eastern Fleet being renamed the East Indies Fleet. This unit, still under Power&#x27;s command, consisted of &quot;Queen Elizabeth&quot; and &quot;Renown&quot;, nine cruisers, ten escort carriers, and twenty destroyers. Japanese naval strength at Singapore had also significantly decreased to just four heavy cruisers and several destroyers.

For the next few weeks, &quot;Richelieu&quot; was occupied with shooting drills with her primary and secondary batteries and tests for the anti-aircraft radars and command systems. Now assigned to Force 63 of the East Indies Fleet, &quot;Richelieu&quot; sortied on 8 April to take part in Operation Sunfish, another bombardment of Sabang while aircraft scouted possible landing beaches near the city of Padang on the coast of Sumatra. The ships allocated for the operation consisted of &quot;Richelieu&quot;, &quot;Queen Elizabeth&quot;, two heavy cruisers, two escort carriers, and five destroyers. Early on 11 April, the two battleships, one of the cruisers, and three destroyers bombarded the island while the other vessels conducted the reconnaissance operation. &quot;Richelieu&quot; fired seven salvos with her main battery and used her secondary guns to once again silence the coastal battery on the island. Japanese aircraft launched a poorly-coordinated attack on the battleships but they failed to score any hits. After further carrier operations around Padang, the fleet returned to port on 20 April.

The next major operation followed a week later. Operation Bishop, a strike against Japanese airfields in the Nicobar and Andaman Islands, was to cover British Army landings at Rangoon in Burma. The plan called for the East Indies Fleet to be divided into multiple groups, each with escorting cruisers and destroyers: four of the escort carriers were to directly support the landings, &quot;Richelieu&quot; and &quot;Queen Elizabeth&quot; each formed independent surface action groups, and another pair of escort carriers provided air protection for the surface groups. The fleet got underway on 27 April and reached Car Nicobar two days later. &quot;Richelieu&quot; bombarded the airfields at a range of , firing a total of 80 main and 45 secondary shells. She incurred minor damage to her bow 20 mm guns from the blast effects of firing the main battery nearly directly forward. The fleet then proceeded to the Andamans, and at 17:30, &quot;Richelieu&quot; opened fire at Port Blair; poor visibility hampered her shooting, and she ceased fire at 18:07, by now having expended the main battery ammunition that had been allotted for the bombardment. She nevertheless returned on 2 May to shell the harbor with her secondary guns, firing 120 rounds and inflicting significant damage to the harbor facilities. The fleet steamed north to Rangoon to support the landings, but it was discovered that the Japanese had already withdrawn, allowing the fleet to return to Trincomalee on 8 May 1945.

A decrypted Japanese radio signal revealed that the cruiser and the destroyer were to steam from Singapore to Port Blair to evacuate the garrison there on the night of 12–13 May while another transport vessel would pick up the troops at Car Nicobar. On 9 May, a pair of British submarines spotted &quot;Haguro&quot; as it passed through the Malacca Strait, so the East Indies Fleet launched Operation Dukedom to intercept the Japanese ships. &quot;Richelieu&quot; steamed with the heavy cruiser as Group 3 of Force 61. Aware that Allied ships were at sea, &quot;Haguro&quot; and &quot;Kamikaze&quot; turned back, though they were spotted by aircraft from the escort carriers and then sunk by destroyers of the 26th Destroyer Flotilla before &quot;Richelieu&quot; and &quot;Cumberland&quot; could arrive. Japanese aircraft attacked the fleet as it withdrew back to Trincomalee but were, once again, poorly coordinated and they failed to damage the ships. &quot;Richelieu&quot; arrived in port on 18 May.

On arrival, the ship took on additional ammunition and fuel, and over the coming weeks, she underwent repairs to her boilers and took part in shooting practice. The bombardments carried out earlier in the year had revealed excessive dispersion of the main battery shells, particularly if both guns on one side of the turret were fired at the same time. The crew at that time was unable to determine the cause of the problem, though tests with the remanufactured &quot;Strasbourg&quot; charges reduced the problem. On 3 June, the destroyer arrived with spare equipment for &quot;Richelieu&quot;, which was sent to Durban for another refit. Her hull again needed to be scraped and her boilers required a re-tubing. The ship had to stop in Diego Suarez on the way to disembark non-white crewmen at the request of the racist government of South Africa; though this caused resentment among the crew, the French nevertheless complied. &quot;Richelieu&quot; arrived on 18 July and work lasted from 31 July to 10 August. Thirteen of the ship&#x27;s 20 mm guns were replaced with four 40 mm guns, as the lighter weapons had proved to be ineffective against kamikazes. The ship conducted training and trials of South Africa before departing for Diego Suarez, ultimately arriving back in Trincomalee on 18 August, by which time Japan had surrendered.

=== Postwar era===
Immediately after the surrender of Japan, French and British forces began their attempts to reassert control in their Japanese-occupied colonies. On 7 September, &quot;Richelieu&quot; got underway in company with the British battleship to take part in Operation Zipper, the amphibious landing on Sumatra. Two days later, &quot;Richelieu&quot; detonated a magnetic mine, though she suffered only minor damage; the force of the blast pushed in some hull plates by and inflicted minor shock damage to the lighting system, but the vessel remained with the fleet. After landing the troops with no opposition, &quot;Richelieu&quot; moved to Singapore on 11 September to participate in Operation Tiderace, the liberation of the city, the following day. She returned to Trincomalee on 16 September before getting underway again on 27 September, bound for Indochina. She steamed with &quot;Le Triomphant&quot; as escorts for the transport ships and , which carried French soldiers to restore colonial rule in Indochina. French rule was opposed by the Viet Minh, and on arrival &quot;Richelieu&quot; was used to support the forces ashore in a variety of capacities: she served as a staging area, hospital, artillery support, and troop transport. She also contributed a landing party to the forces fighting to reassert French control.

&quot;Richelieu&quot;, &quot;Le Triomphant&quot;, and &quot;Le Fantasque&quot; took part in Operation Mapor at Nha Trang from 20 to 26 November, providing heavy fire support to soldiers fighting in the area. By this time, a French squadron consisting of the aircraft carrier and the cruisers , , and had arrived in mid-October, allowing &quot;Richelieu&quot; to be returned to France. Before leaving, &quot;Richelieu&quot; sent her four single 40 mm guns and most of her 20 mm guns ashore, along with a considerable stockpile of ammunition for the guns and 152 mm shells. She departed on 29 December and arrived in Toulon on 11 February 1946, thereafter taking part in the transport effort to send French soldiers back from France to North Africa. With that completed, she steamed north to Cherbourg, arriving to be dry-docked on 16 March. Repairs lasted until 20 July, and consisted of replacing the starboard propeller, correcting the hull damage from the mine in September 1945, and thoroughly overhauling her boilers.

With the repairs completed, &quot;Richelieu&quot; sailed to Britain to carry the crew for the aircraft carrier , which was to be loaned to the French for five years, serving as &quot;Arromanches&quot;. &quot;Richelieu&quot; thereafter began a training cruise that included stops in Casablanca, Mers-el-Kébir, and Dakar. Later that year, she visited Portugal in company with &quot;Arromanches&quot;. She returned to Brest for modifications to the secondary battery from February to March 1947. The ship thereafter formed the core of a battle group that included three ex-German destroyers, based in Cherbourg. The group, along with a carrier group centered on &quot;Arromanches&quot; and cruiser group, both based in Toulon, were combined to form the &quot;Force d&#x27;Intervention&quot;, with &quot;Richelieu&quot; as the flagship of &quot;Vice Amiral&quot; (Vice Admiral) Robert Jaujard. The unit embarked on a training cruise to Africa in May and June, beginning with the three groups assembling in Casablanca on 8 May. &quot;Richelieu&quot; arrived back in Cherbourg on 13 June and began a period of maintenance and training of new crew members. Another training cruise to North Africa followed late in 1947, and while there she conducted shooting practice to try to determine the cause of the excessive shell dispersion. The subsequent installation of 60-millisecond delays to the firing circuits of the outer guns in the turrets created enough space between the shells that they did not disrupt each other in flight, significantly improving the issue.

The &quot;Force d&#x27;Intervention&quot; was reactivated for another cruise in early 1948; the three constituent groups rendezvoused at Toulon and then conducted training exercises off North Africa. While in Mers-el-Kébir, the ship was slightly damaged while being moored in the port. Following the conclusion of the maneuvers, the force was disbanded and &quot;Richelieu&quot; steamed north to Brest, arriving on 29 May. The ship was in need of a thorough refit, and she was dry-docked in Cherbourg from August to September to survey the work that would be needed to be done. Jaujard left the ship and her crew was reduced to 750 men. Since the French naval budget was in a very limited state owing to the wrecked French economy in the immediate postwar years, &quot;Richelieu&quot;″s refit was postponed to allow the funds to be used to complete &quot;Jean Bart&quot; instead. &quot;Richelieu&quot; was accordingly placed in reserve on 1 April 1949. The refit eventually began on 1 January 1950 and lasted until 24 October 1951, and it included a thorough overhaul of her propulsion machinery, replacement of her worn main and secondary battery guns, and repairs to her anti-aircraft battery, along with other modifications.

During the refit, it was decided that the ship&#x27;s anti-aircraft battery was too dated to allow the ship to operate in the era of jet aircraft; coupled with the need to update the ship&#x27;s radar and electronics and install more capable command spaces, the costs would have been prohibitively high for the French Navy. Instead of fully modernizing the vessel, the navy decided to employ &quot;Richelieu&quot; as a training ship in the gunnery school in February 1951. After completing the refit, the ship underwent trials in November that involved firing nine rounds per gun from the main battery; this would be the last time &quot;Richelieu&quot; fired the 380 mm guns. Beginning in May 1952, the ship was based in Toulon as the flagship of &quot;CA&quot; Champion, and she spent the next few years conducting shooting practice with the secondary and smaller weapons to train the fleet&#x27;s gunners. Another refit followed from October 1953 to February 1954. This involved replacing the British gunnery radar with a French-built set.

For the first and last time of either of their careers, &quot;Richelieu&quot; and &quot;Jean Bart&quot; cruised together on 30 January 1956. The ship&#x27;s career as a sea-going gunnery ship ended in February, when she was laid up in Brest. To prepare &quot;Richelieu&quot; for reserve, dehumidifiers were installed in the secondary turrets to inhibit rust and the 100 mm and 40 mm quad mounts were covered. The single 40 mm guns and all of the 20 mm guns still aboard the vessel were removed. She was thereafter used as a stationary school ship for reserve officers and as a floating barracks until 30 September 1967, when she was struck from the naval register. Renamed &quot;Q432&quot;, she was condemned on 16 January 1968 and sold to the Genoa-based ship breaker Cantieri Navali Santa Maria in September. Before she departed Brest, the four 380 mm guns of Turret I were removed and two were later preserved, one in Brest and the other in Ruelle. &quot;Richelieu&quot; was then towed to La Spezia, where she was broken up for scrap over the course of the following year.

==Footnotes==
===Notes===

===Citations===

==References==
* 
* 
* 

== External links ==
* Maritimequest &quot;Richelieu&quot; photo gallery</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q473094" start="23" end="38" title="fast battleship" label="fast battleship"/>
<link wikidata="Q2095057" start="44" end="53" title="lead ship" label="lead ship"/>
<link wikidata="Q17143625" start="259" end="271" title="main battery" label="main battery"/>
<link wikidata="Q558591" start="297" end="307" title="gun turret" label="gun turret"/>
<link wikidata="Q17143625" start="366" end="378" title="main battery" label="main battery"/>
<link wikidata="Q4031110" start="388" end="392" title="380 mm/45 Modèle 1935 gun" label="guns"/>
<link wikidata="Q14592615" start="542" end="551" title="keel laying" label="laid down"/>
<link wikidata="Q596643" start="568" end="576" title="ceremonial ship launching" label="launched"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="614" end="626" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="650" end="657" title="Nazi Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q14475832" start="733" end="746" title="ship commissioning" label="commissioning"/>
<link wikidata="Q151340" start="809" end="825" title="Battle of France" label="Battle of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q3718" start="865" end="870" title="Dakar" label="Dakar"/>
<link wikidata="Q210682" start="874" end="892" title="French West Africa" label="French West Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2705826" start="1041" end="1065" title="Free French Naval Forces" label="Free French Naval Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q503347" start="1101" end="1119" title="Operation Catapult" label="Operation Catapult"/>
<link wikidata="Q696829" start="1141" end="1156" title="Battle of Dakar" label="Battle of Dakar"/>
<link wikidata="Q194132" start="1295" end="1326" title="Operation Torch" label="Allied invasion of North Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1548213" start="1460" end="1470" title="Home Fleet" label="Home Fleet"/>
<link wikidata="Q99942378" start="1514" end="1527" title="Far East Fleet (United Kingdom)" label="Eastern Fleet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1239" start="1571" end="1583" title="Indian Ocean" label="Indian Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q552392" start="1674" end="1702" title="Battle of the Malacca Strait" label="Battle of the Malacca Strait"/>
<link wikidata="Q334" start="1822" end="1831" title="Singapore" label="Singapore"/>
<link wikidata="Q6540361" start="1842" end="1860" title="Japanese surrender" label="Japanese surrender"/>
<link wikidata="Q185682" start="1901" end="1917" title="French Indochina" label="French Indochina"/>
<link wikidata="Q660668" start="2211" end="2224" title="training ship" label="training ship"/>
<link wikidata="Q1760290" start="2253" end="2260" title="reserve fleet" label="reserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q4364292" start="2321" end="2334" title="barracks ship" label="barracks ship"/>
<link wikidata="Q1378670" start="2409" end="2414" title="scrap" label="scrap"/>
<link wikidata="Q336332" start="2428" end="2437" title="ship breaking" label="broken up"/>
<link wikidata="Q172579" start="2494" end="2499" title="Kingdom of Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q217406" start="2566" end="2577" title="French Navy" label="French Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q696550" start="2984" end="3007" title="Washington Naval Treaty" label="Washington Naval Treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q558591" start="3102" end="3112" title="gun turret" label="gun turret"/>
<link wikidata="Q7643348" start="3127" end="3143" title="superfire" label="superfiring pair"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370583" start="3159" end="3173" title="superstructure" label="superstructure"/>
<link wikidata="Q5636358" start="3438" end="3446" title="Standard displacement" label="standard"/>
<link wikidata="Q5636358" start="3451" end="3463" title="Full-load displacement" label="fully loaded"/>
<link wikidata="Q2358152" start="3473" end="3487" title="length overall" label="overall length"/>
<link wikidata="Q2376482" start="3495" end="3499" title="beam (nautical)" label="beam"/>
<link wikidata="Q244777" start="3517" end="3522" title="draft (hull)" label="draft"/>
<link wikidata="Q197494" start="3552" end="3559" title="Parsons Marine Steam Turbine Company" label="Parsons"/>
<link wikidata="Q189859" start="3567" end="3580" title="steam turbine" label="steam turbine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1358526" start="3606" end="3623" title="water-tube boiler" label="water-tube boiler"/>
<link wikidata="Q2716963" start="3802" end="3811" title="Loire 130" label="Loire 130"/>
<link wikidata="Q115940" start="3812" end="3820" title="seaplane" label="seaplane"/>
<link wikidata="Q10516659" start="3829" end="3840" title="quarterdeck" label="quarterdeck"/>
<link wikidata="Q1031873" start="3891" end="3899" title="aircraft catapult" label="catapult"/>
<link wikidata="Q4031110" start="3965" end="3997" title="380 mm/45 Modèle 1935 gun" label="380 mm/45 Modèle (Mle) 1935 guns"/>
<link wikidata="Q1651001" start="4120" end="4138" title="secondary armament" label="secondary armament"/>
<link wikidata="Q30592981" start="4157" end="4174" title="Canon de 152 mm Modèle 1930" label="/55 Mle 1930 guns"/>
<link wikidata="Q86739852" start="4251" end="4264" title="anti-aircraft" label="anti-aircraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q30642850" start="4416" end="4416" title="Canon de 37 mm Modèle 1925" label=""/>
<link wikidata="Q587366" start="4448" end="4448" title="Hotchkiss M1929 machine gun" label=""/>
<link wikidata="Q422887" start="4517" end="4527" title="belt armor" label="belt armor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1187402" start="4666" end="4679" title="conning tower" label="conning tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q763386" start="4790" end="4806" title="Arsenal de Brest" label="Arsenal de Brest"/>
<link wikidata="Q582062" start="4834" end="4838" title="keel" label="keel"/>
<link wikidata="Q14592615" start="4860" end="4869" title="keel laying" label="laid down"/>
<link wikidata="Q361945" start="4932" end="4939" title="slipway" label="slipway"/>
<link wikidata="Q6750281" start="5027" end="5031" title="hull (watercraft)" label="hull"/>
<link wikidata="Q301897" start="5157" end="5160" title="Bow (watercraft)" label="bow"/>
<link wikidata="Q273062" start="5182" end="5187" title="stern" label="stern"/>
<link wikidata="Q596643" start="5253" end="5261" title="ceremonial ship launching" label="launched"/>
<link wikidata="Q707678" start="5640" end="5668" title="Anglo-German Naval Agreement" label="Anglo-German Naval Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="5713" end="5720" title="Nazi Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q49776" start="5901" end="5908" title="Strike action" label="strikes"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="5985" end="5997" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q923085" start="6194" end="6205" title="sister ship" label="sister ship"/>
<link wikidata="Q5455500" start="6265" end="6276" title="fitting-out" label="fitting-out"/>
<link wikidata="Q163500" start="6368" end="6401" title="Ship-of-the-line captain" label="&amp;quot;Capitaine de vaisseau&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q14475832" start="6686" end="6698" title="ship commissioning" label="commissioned"/>
<link wikidata="Q1988181" start="6718" end="6735" title="sea trial" label="acceptance trials"/>
<link wikidata="Q12193" start="6784" end="6789" title="Brest, France" label="Brest"/>
<link wikidata="Q151340" start="7160" end="7176" title="Battle of France" label="Battle of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q3718" start="7347" end="7352" title="Dakar" label="Dakar"/>
<link wikidata="Q210682" start="7356" end="7374" title="French West Africa" label="French West Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q806950" start="8062" end="8076" title="Bank of France" label="Bank of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q974394" start="8107" end="8119" title="École Navale" label="École Navale"/>
<link wikidata="Q174736" start="8386" end="8395" title="destroyer" label="destroyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q209760" start="8656" end="8662" title="rudder" label="rudder"/>
<link wikidata="Q7903" start="8765" end="8775" title="Casablanca" label="Casablanca"/>
<link wikidata="Q907234" start="8777" end="8791" title="French Morocco" label="French Morocco"/>
<link wikidata="Q13360884" start="9171" end="9184" title="Contre-amiral" label="Contre-amiral"/>
<link wikidata="Q382844" start="9237" end="9253" title="governor-general" label="governor-general"/>
<link wikidata="" start="9277" end="9287" title=":fr:Léon Cayla" label="Léon Cayla"/>
<link wikidata="Q17205" start="9411" end="9427" title="aircraft carrier" label="aircraft carrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q156916" start="9671" end="9686" title="François Darlan" label="François Darlan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2961994" start="9692" end="9725" title="Chief of Staff of the French Navy" label="Chief of Staff of the French Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1786766" start="9921" end="9928" title="scuttling" label="scuttle"/>
<link wikidata="Q3780" start="10015" end="10023" title="Freetown" label="Freetown"/>
<link wikidata="Q170360" start="10156" end="10178" title="Armistice of 22 June 1940" label="Armistice with Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q674079" start="10717" end="10733" title="Fairey Swordfish" label="Fairey Swordfish"/>
<link wikidata="Q753224" start="10734" end="10748" title="torpedo bomber" label="torpedo bomber"/>
<link wikidata="Q622031" start="10757" end="10768" title="flight deck" label="flight deck"/>
<link wikidata="Q152582" start="11055" end="11073" title="Free French forces" label="Free French forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q1011" start="11245" end="11255" title="Cape Verde" label="Cape Verde"/>
<link wikidata="Q36124" start="12440" end="12459" title="Strait of Gibraltar" label="Strait of Gibraltar"/>
<link wikidata="Q503347" start="12601" end="12619" title="Operation Catapult" label="Operation Catapult"/>
<link wikidata="Q503347" start="12991" end="13013" title="attack on Mers-el-Kébir" label="attacked Mers-el-Kébir"/>
<link wikidata="Q2811" start="13035" end="13044" title="submarine" label="submarine"/>
<link wikidata="Q244347" start="13318" end="13323" title="Gorée" label="Gorée"/>
<link wikidata="Q936629" start="13457" end="13464" title="Force H" label="Force H"/>
<link wikidata="Q928235" start="13632" end="13637" title="Sloop-of-war" label="sloop"/>
<link wikidata="Q653260" start="14109" end="14121" title="depth charge" label="depth charge"/>
<link wikidata="Q5089489" start="14376" end="14385" title="starboard" label="starboard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1515853" start="14795" end="14811" title="Anti-torpedo net" label="Anti-torpedo net"/>
<link wikidata="Q14970" start="14945" end="14952" title="Tanker (ship)" label="tankers"/>
<link wikidata="Q12053830" start="15466" end="15475" title="bulkhead (partition)" label="bulkheads"/>
<link wikidata="Q682355" start="16584" end="16600" title="floating battery" label="floating battery"/>
<link wikidata="Q132851" start="16662" end="16668" title="Amiral" label="Amiral"/>
<link wikidata="Q1386071" start="16685" end="16700" title="Jean de Laborde" label="Jean de Laborde"/>
<link wikidata="Q110051611" start="17204" end="17213" title="magazine (artillery)" label="magazines"/>
<link wikidata="Q205077" start="17313" end="17322" title="cofferdam" label="cofferdam"/>
<link wikidata="Q216889" start="18040" end="18050" title="Cap Manuel" label="Cap Manuel"/>
<link wikidata="Q14212" start="18462" end="18476" title="Prime Minister" label="Prime Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q8016" start="18477" end="18494" title="Winston Churchill" label="Winston Churchill"/>
<link wikidata="Q2042" start="18551" end="18568" title="Charles de Gaulle" label="Charles de Gaulle"/>
<link wikidata="Q370330" start="18652" end="18658" title="convoy" label="convoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q671079" start="18786" end="18796" title="troop ship" label="troop ship"/>
<link wikidata="Q2322012" start="19300" end="19327" title="German Armistice Commission" label="German Armistice Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q778129" start="19344" end="19357" title="light cruiser" label="light cruiser"/>
<link wikidata="Q271894" start="19774" end="19798" title="French Equatorial Africa" label="French Equatorial Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q782984" start="20686" end="20691" title="aviso" label="aviso"/>
<link wikidata="Q6227895" start="20985" end="21000" title="John Cunningham (Royal Navy officer)" label="John Cunningham"/>
<link wikidata="Q191826" start="21578" end="21585" title="tugboat" label="tugboat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1019424" start="21759" end="21767" title="Rufisque" label="Rufisque"/>
<link wikidata="Q536742" start="21964" end="21978" title="Blackburn Skua" label="Blackburn Skua"/>
<link wikidata="Q898771" start="22268" end="22281" title="heavy cruiser" label="heavy cruiser"/>
<link wikidata="Q2626877" start="24590" end="24599" title="amidships" label="amidships"/>
<link wikidata="Q214190" start="25188" end="25201" title="battlecruiser" label="battlecruiser"/>
<link wikidata="Q212429" start="25345" end="25364" title="metropolitan France" label="metropolitan France"/>
<link wikidata="Q1242130" start="26281" end="26293" title="ballast tank" label="ballast tank"/>
<link wikidata="Q47528" start="27164" end="27169" title="radar" label="radar"/>
<link wikidata="Q194132" start="27570" end="27585" title="Operation Torch" label="Operation Torch"/>
<link wikidata="Q11220" start="27733" end="27751" title="United States Navy" label="United States Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q184425" start="28271" end="28282" title="Pacific War" label="Pacific War"/>
<link wikidata="Q172771" start="28322" end="28332" title="Royal Navy" label="Royal Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1940268" start="28753" end="28772" title="Mediterranean Fleet" label="Mediterranean Fleet"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="29200" end="29213" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q524435" start="29488" end="29506" title="Brooklyn Navy Yard" label="Brooklyn Navy Yard"/>
<link wikidata="Q17986748" start="31397" end="31411" title="Crucible Industries" label="Crucible Steel"/>
<link wikidata="Q115472839" start="31702" end="31713" title="Bofors 40 mm L/60 gun" label="Bofors guns"/>
<link wikidata="Q10516659" start="31952" end="31963" title="quarterdeck" label="quarterdeck"/>
<link wikidata="Q210670" start="32044" end="32060" title="Oerlikon 20 mm cannon" label="Oerlikon cannons"/>
<link wikidata="Q357447" start="32120" end="32130" title="forecastle" label="forecastle"/>
<link wikidata="Q125006" start="32518" end="32533" title="Brooklyn Bridge" label="Brooklyn Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q659994" start="32567" end="32573" title="radome" label="radome"/>
<link wikidata="Q47528" start="32666" end="32682" title="air search radar" label="air search radar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1888190" start="32774" end="32781" title="PT boat" label="PT boat"/>
<link wikidata="Q68032" start="33024" end="33032" title="Hermann Anschütz-Kaempfe" label="Anschütz"/>
<link wikidata="Q921229" start="33033" end="33044" title="gyrocompass" label="gyrocompass"/>
<link wikidata="Q784567" start="33066" end="33072" title="Sperry Corporation" label="Sperry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345036" start="33270" end="33280" title="degaussing" label="degaussing"/>
<link wikidata="Q27432" start="34022" end="34037" title="Bethlehem Steel" label="Bethlehem Steel"/>
<link wikidata="Q513621" start="34109" end="34117" title="porthole" label="porthole"/>
<link wikidata="Q216868" start="34314" end="34328" title="Chesapeake Bay" label="Chesapeake Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q322749" start="35281" end="35294" title="petty officer" label="petty officer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1410" start="35688" end="35697" title="Gibraltar" label="Gibraltar"/>
<link wikidata="Q25263" start="35831" end="35837" title="Azores" label="Azores"/>
<link wikidata="Q31085" start="36035" end="36048" title="Mers El Kébir" label="Mers El Kébir"/>
<link wikidata="Q1548213" start="36331" end="36341" title="Home Fleet" label="Home Fleet"/>
<link wikidata="Q213965" start="36626" end="36636" title="Scapa Flow" label="Scapa Flow"/>
<link wikidata="Q2072926" start="36646" end="36658" title="Bruce Fraser, 1st Baron Fraser of North Cape" label="Bruce Fraser"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="37011" end="37029" title="Operation Posthorn" label="Operation Posthorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q105999" start="37340" end="37349" title="Cargo ship" label="freighter"/>
<link wikidata="Q4364290" start="37379" end="37390" title="repair ship" label="repair ship"/>
<link wikidata="Q1325845" start="37416" end="37435" title="Supermarine Seafire" label="Supermarine Seafire"/>
<link wikidata="Q127771" start="37436" end="37444" title="fighter aircraft" label="fighters"/>
<link wikidata="Q155639" start="37458" end="37464" title="Messerschmitt Bf 109" label="Bf 109"/>
<link wikidata="Q376329" start="37559" end="37565" title="Rosyth" label="Rosyth"/>
<link wikidata="Q8641370" start="38085" end="38105" title="invasion of Normandy" label="invasion of Normandy"/>
<link wikidata="Q868534" start="38141" end="38161" title="armor-piercing shell" label="armor-piercing shell"/>
<link wikidata="Q99942378" start="38210" end="38223" title="Far East Fleet (United Kingdom)" label="Eastern Fleet"/>
<link wikidata="Q253555" start="38247" end="38270" title="escort aircraft carrier" label="escort aircraft carrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q217831" start="38306" end="38314" title="Greenock" label="Greenock"/>
<link wikidata="Q3561" start="38449" end="38456" title="Algiers" label="Algiers"/>
<link wikidata="Q318122" start="38535" end="38547" title="Henri Giraud" label="Henri Giraud"/>
<link wikidata="Q2848151" start="38560" end="38575" title="André Lemonnier" label="André Lemonnier"/>
<link wikidata="Q899" start="38627" end="38637" title="Suez Canal" label="Suez Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q131694" start="38947" end="38951" title="Aden" label="Aden"/>
<link wikidata="Q1239" start="39095" end="39107" title="Indian Ocean" label="Indian Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q323873" start="39216" end="39227" title="Trincomalee" label="Trincomalee"/>
<link wikidata="Q918153" start="39229" end="39235" title="British Ceylon" label="Ceylon"/>
<link wikidata="Q955867" start="39397" end="39413" title="James Somerville" label="James Somerville"/>
<link wikidata="Q1330937" start="39463" end="39480" title="Operation Cockpit" label="Operation Cockpit"/>
<link wikidata="Q16844223" start="39549" end="39568" title="Battle of Hollandia" label="landed at Hollandia"/>
<link wikidata="Q40285" start="39572" end="39582" title="New Guinea" label="New Guinea"/>
<link wikidata="Q5787" start="39881" end="39887" title="Sabang, Indonesia" label="Sabang"/>
<link wikidata="Q188161" start="39889" end="39912" title="Netherlands East Indies" label="Netherlands East Indies"/>
<link wikidata="Q2855730" start="40187" end="40204" title="Operation Transom" label="Operation Transom"/>
<link wikidata="Q334" start="40329" end="40338" title="Singapore" label="Singapore"/>
<link wikidata="Q11462" start="40430" end="40438" title="Surabaya" label="Surabaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q35381" start="40919" end="40926" title="Colombo" label="Colombo"/>
<link wikidata="Q157068" start="41006" end="41023" title="Louis Mountbatten, 1st Earl Mountbatten of Burma" label="Louis Mountbatten"/>
<link wikidata="Q524272" start="41057" end="41080" title="South-East Asian theatre of World War II" label="South-East Asia Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="41224" end="41239" title="Operation Pedal" label="Operation Pedal"/>
<link wikidata="Q203476" start="41275" end="41285" title="Port Blair" label="Port Blair"/>
<link wikidata="Q40888" start="41293" end="41308" title="Andaman and Nicobar Islands" label="Andaman Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q696168" start="41430" end="41447" title="Operation Forager" label="Operation Forager"/>
<link wikidata="Q153732" start="41469" end="41485" title="Marianas Islands" label="Marianas Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q15837637" start="41886" end="41903" title="Operation Crimson" label="Operation Crimson"/>
<link wikidata="Q3492" start="42083" end="42090" title="Sumatra" label="Sumatra"/>
<link wikidata="Q2164772" start="42692" end="42709" title="combat air patrol" label="combat air patrol"/>
<link wikidata="Q465806" start="42990" end="43001" title="F4U Corsair" label="F4U Corsair"/>
<link wikidata="Q159719" start="43223" end="43236" title="power station" label="power station"/>
<link wikidata="Q753454" start="43494" end="43506" title="rate of fire" label="rate of fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439821" start="43908" end="43918" title="biofouling" label="biofouling"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="43940" end="43957" title="Laurence E. Power" label="Laurence E. Power"/>
<link wikidata="Q1522772" start="44310" end="44317" title="capsize" label="capsize"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128361" start="45100" end="45106" title="Radio jamming" label="jammer"/>
<link wikidata="Q476152" start="45111" end="45143" title="high-frequency direction finding" label="high-frequency direction finding"/>
<link wikidata="Q43467" start="45559" end="45568" title="Indochina" label="Indochina"/>
<link wikidata="Q2417872" start="46082" end="46103" title="British Pacific Fleet" label="British Pacific Fleet"/>
<link wikidata="Q253555" start="46294" end="46308" title="escort carrier" label="escort carrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q28224709" start="46746" end="46763" title="Operation Sunfish" label="Operation Sunfish"/>
<link wikidata="Q7253" start="46860" end="46866" title="Padang" label="Padang"/>
<link wikidata="Q157286" start="47679" end="47686" title="Nicobar Islands" label="Nicobar"/>
<link wikidata="Q186233" start="47691" end="47706" title="Andaman Islands" label="Andaman Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q37995" start="47746" end="47753" title="Rangoon" label="Rangoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1035273" start="48186" end="48197" title="Car Nicobar" label="Car Nicobar"/>
<link wikidata="Q48359" start="49401" end="49415" title="Malacca Strait" label="Malacca Strait"/>
<link wikidata="Q552392" start="49451" end="49468" title="Operation Dukedom" label="Operation Dukedom"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="49770" end="49793" title="26th Destroyer Flotilla" label="26th Destroyer Flotilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q5468" start="50677" end="50683" title="Durban" label="Durban"/>
<link wikidata="Q218928" start="50801" end="50813" title="Diego-Suarez" label="Diego Suarez"/>
<link wikidata="Q193619" start="50899" end="50911" title="Union of South Africa" label="South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q133194" start="51212" end="51220" title="kamikaze" label="kamikaze"/>
<link wikidata="Q6540361" start="51381" end="51402" title="surrender of Japan" label="Japan had surrendered"/>
<link wikidata="Q7097734" start="51676" end="51692" title="Operation Zipper" label="Operation Zipper"/>
<link wikidata="Q7097635" start="52103" end="52121" title="Operation Tiderace" label="Operation Tiderace"/>
<link wikidata="Q190949" start="52466" end="52475" title="Viet Minh" label="Viet Minh"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="52841" end="52856" title="Operation Mapor" label="Operation Mapor"/>
<link wikidata="Q19491" start="52860" end="52869" title="Nha Trang" label="Nha Trang"/>
<link wikidata="Q3667188" start="53539" end="53548" title="Cherbourg" label="Cherbourg"/>
<link wikidata="Q214443" start="54613" end="54624" title="Vice Amiral" label="Vice Amiral"/>
<link wikidata="Q29642102" start="54646" end="54660" title="Robert Jaujard" label="Robert Jaujard"/>
<link wikidata="Q660668" start="56979" end="56992" title="training ship" label="training ship"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="57827" end="57834" title=":wikt:laid up" label="laid up"/>
<link wikidata="Q1760290" start="57882" end="57889" title="reserve fleet" label="reserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q4364292" start="58180" end="58197" title="barracks ship" label="floating barracks"/>
<link wikidata="Q6982656" start="58252" end="58266" title="naval register" label="naval register"/>
<link wikidata="Q336332" start="58359" end="58371" title="ship breaker" label="ship breaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q8611" start="58595" end="58604" title="La Spezia" label="La Spezia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1378670" start="58634" end="58639" title="scrap" label="scrap"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="464779" wikidata="Q206615" url="?curid=464779" title="Building material">
<text>Building material is material used for construction. Many naturally occurring substances, such as clay, rocks, sand, wood, and even twigs and leaves, have been used to construct buildings and other structures, like bridges. Apart from naturally occurring materials, many man-made products are in use, some more and some less synthetic. The manufacturing of building materials is an established industry in many countries and the use of these materials is typically segmented into specific specialty trades, such as carpentry, insulation, plumbing, and roofing work. They provide the make-up of habitats and structures including homes.

==The total cost of building materials==

In history, there are trends in building materials from being natural to becoming more human-made and composite; biodegradable to imperishable; indigenous (local) to being transported globally; repairable to disposable; chosen for increased levels of fire-safety, and improved seismic resistance. These trends tend to increase the &quot;initial&quot; and &quot;long-term&quot; economic, ecological, energy, and social costs of building materials.

===Economic costs===
The initial economic cost of building materials is the purchase price. This is often what governs decision making about what materials to use. Sometimes people take into consideration the energy savings or durability of the materials and see the value of paying a higher initial cost in return for a lower lifetime cost. For example, an asphalt shingle roof costs less than a metal roof to install, but the metal roof will last longer so the lifetime cost is less per year. Some materials may require more care than others, maintaining costs specific to some materials may also influence the final decision. Risks when considering lifetime cost of a material is if the building is damaged such as by fire or wind, or if the material is not as durable as advertised. The cost of materials should be taken into consideration to bear the risk to buy combustive materials to enlarge the lifetime. It is said that, &quot;if it must be done, it must be done well&quot;.

===Ecological costs===

Pollution costs can be macro and micro. The macro, environmental pollution of extraction industries building materials rely on such as mining, petroleum, and logging produce environmental damage at their source and in transportation of the raw materials, manufacturing, transportation of the products, retailing, and installation. An example of the micro aspect of pollution is the off-gassing of the building materials in the building or indoor air pollution. Red List building materials are materials found to be harmful. Also the carbon footprint, the total set of greenhouse gas emissions produced in the life of the material. A life-cycle analysis also includes the reuse, recycling, or disposal of construction waste. Two concepts in building which account for the ecological economics of building materials are green building and sustainable development.

===Energy costs===
The initial energy costs include the amount of energy consumed to produce, deliver and install the material. The long term energy cost is the economic, ecological, and social costs of continuing to produce and deliver energy to the building for its use, maintenance, and eventual removal. The initial embodied energy of a structure is the energy consumed to extract, manufacture, deliver, install, the materials. The lifetime embodied energy continues to grow with the use, maintenance, and reuse/recycling/disposal of the building materials themselves &quot;and&quot; how the materials and design help minimize the life-time energy consumption of the structure.

===Social costs===
Social costs are injury and health of the people producing and transporting the materials and potential health problems of the building occupants if there are problems with the building biology. Globalization has had significant impacts on people both in terms of jobs, skills, and self-sufficiency are lost when manufacturing facilities are closed and the cultural aspects of where new facilities are opened. Aspects of fair trade and labor rights are social costs of global building material manufacturing.

==Naturally occurring substances==

Bio-based materials (especially plant-based materials) are used in a variety of building applications, including load-bearing, filling, insulating, and plastering materials. These materials vary in structure depending on the formulation used. Plant fibres can be combined with binders and then used in construction to provide thermal, hydric or structural functions. The behaviour of concrete based on plant fibre is mainly governed by the amount of the fibre constituting the material. Several studies have shown that increasing the amount of these plant particles increases porosity, moisture buffering capacity, and maximum absorbed water content on the one side, while decreasing density, thermal conductivity, and compressive strength on the other.

Plant-based materials are largely derived from renewable resources and mainly use co-products from agriculture or the wood industry. When used as insulation materials, most bio-based materials exhibit (unlike most other insulation materials) hygroscopic behaviour, combining high water vapour permeability and moisture regulation.

===Brush===

Brush structures are built entirely from plant parts and were used in various cultures such as Native Americans and pygmy peoples in Africa. These are built mostly with branches, twigs and leaves, and bark, similar to a beaver&#x27;s lodge. These were variously named wikiups, lean-tos, and so forth.

An extension on the brush building idea is the wattle and daub process in which clay soils or dung, usually cow, are used to fill in and cover a woven brush structure. This gives the structure more thermal mass and strength. Wattle and daub is one of the oldest building techniques. Many older timber frame buildings incorporate wattle and daub as non load bearing walls between the timber frames.

===Ice and snow===
Snow and occasionally ice, were used by the Inuit peoples for igloos and snow is used to build a shelter called a quinzhee. Ice has also been used for ice hotels as a tourist attraction in northern climates.

===Mud and clay===
Clay based buildings usually come in two distinct types. One being when the walls are made directly with the mud mixture, and the other being walls built by stacking air-dried building blocks called mud bricks.

Other uses of clay in building is combined with straws to create light clay, wattle and daub, and mud plaster.

====Wet-laid clay walls====

Wet-laid, or damp, walls are made by using the mud or clay mixture directly without forming blocks and drying them first. The amount of and type of each material in the mixture used leads to different styles of buildings. The deciding factor is usually connected with the quality of the soil being used. Larger amounts of clay are usually employed in building with &quot;cob&quot;, while low-clay soil is usually associated with &quot;sod house&quot; or &quot;sod roof&quot; construction. The other main ingredients include more or less sand/gravel and straw/grasses. &quot;Rammed earth&quot; is both an old and newer take on creating walls, once made by compacting clay soils between planks by hand; nowadays forms and mechanical pneumatic compressors are used.

Soil, and especially clay, provides good thermal mass; it is very good at keeping temperatures at a constant level. Homes built with earth tend to be naturally cool in the summer heat and warm in cold weather. Clay holds heat or cold, releasing it over a period of time like stone. Earthen walls change temperature slowly, so artificially raising or lowering the temperature can use more resources than in say a wood built house, but the heat/coolness stays longer.

People building with mostly dirt and clay, such as cob, sod, and adobe, created homes that have been built for centuries in western and northern Europe, Asia, as well as the rest of the world, and continue to be built, though on a smaller scale. Some of these buildings have remained habitable for hundreds of years.

====Structural clay blocks and bricks====
&quot;Mud-bricks&quot;, also known by their Spanish name &quot;adobe&quot; are ancient building materials with evidence dating back thousands of years BC. &quot;Compressed earth blocks&quot; are a more modern type of brick used for building more frequently in industrialized society since the building blocks can be manufactured off site in a centralized location at a brickworks and transported to multiple building locations. These blocks can also be monetized more easily and sold.

Structural mud bricks are almost always made using clay, often clay soil and a binder are the only ingredients used, but other ingredients can include sand, lime, concrete, stone and other binders. The formed or compressed block is then air dried and can be laid dry or with a mortar or clay slip.

===Sand===

Sand is used with cement, and sometimes lime, to make mortar for masonry work and plaster. Sand is also used as a part of the concrete mix. An important low-cost building material in countries with high sand content soils is the Sandcrete block, which is weaker but cheaper than fired clay bricks. Sand reinforced polyester composite are used as bricks.

=== Stone or rock ===

Rock structures have existed for as long as history can recall. It is the longest-lasting building material available, and is usually readily available. There are many types of rock, with differing attributes that make them better or worse for particular uses. Rock is a very dense material so it gives a lot of protection; its main drawback as a building material is its weight and the difficulty of working it. Its energy density is both an advantage and disadvantage. Stone is hard to warm without consuming considerable energy but, once warm, its thermal mass means that can retain heat for useful periods of time.

Dry-stone walls and huts have been built for as long as humans have put one stone on top of another. Eventually, different forms of mortar were used to hold the stones together, cement being the most commonplace now.

The granite-strewn uplands of Dartmoor National Park, United Kingdom, for example, provided ample resources for early settlers. Circular huts were constructed from loose granite rocks throughout the Neolithic and early Bronze Age, and the remains of an estimated 5,000 can still be seen today. Granite continued to be used throughout the Medieval period (see Dartmoor longhouse) and into modern times. Slate is another stone type, commonly used as roofing material in the United Kingdom and other parts of the world where it is found.

Stone buildings can be seen in most major cities, and some civilizations built predominantly with stone, such as the Egyptian and Aztec pyramids and the structures of the Inca civilization.

===Thatch===

Thatch is one of the oldest of building materials known. &quot;Thatch&quot; is another word for &quot;grass&quot;; grass is a good insulator and easily harvested. Many African tribes have lived in homes made completely of grasses and sand year-round. In Europe, thatch roofs on homes were once prevalent but the material fell out of favor as industrialization and improved transport increased the availability of other materials. Today, though, the practice is undergoing a revival. In the Netherlands, for instance, many new buildings have thatched roofs with special ridge tiles on top.

=== Wood and timber ===

Wood has been used as a building material for thousands of years in its natural state. Today, engineered wood is becoming very common in industrialized countries.

Wood is a product of trees, and sometimes other fibrous plants, used for construction purposes when cut or pressed into lumber and timber, such as boards, planks and similar materials. It is a generic building material and is used in building just about any type of structure in most climates. Wood can be very flexible under loads, keeping strength while bending, and is incredibly strong when compressed vertically. There are many differing qualities to the different types of wood, even among same tree species. This means specific species are better suited for various uses than others. And growing conditions are important for deciding quality.

&quot;Timber&quot; is the term used for construction purposes except the term &quot;lumber&quot; is used in the United States. Raw wood (a log, trunk, bole) becomes timber when the wood has been &quot;converted&quot; (sawn, hewn, split) in the forms of minimally-processed logs stacked on top of each other, timber frame construction, and light-frame construction. The main problems with timber structures are fire risk and moisture-related problems.

In modern times softwood is used as a lower-value bulk material, whereas hardwood is usually used for finishings and furniture. Historically timber frame structures were built with oak in western Europe, recently douglas fir has become the most popular wood for most types of structural building.

Many families or communities, in rural areas, have a personal woodlot from which the family or community will grow and harvest trees to build with or sell. These lots are tended to like a garden. This was much more prevalent in pre-industrial times, when laws existed as to the amount of wood one could cut at any one time to ensure there would be a supply of timber for the future, but is still a viable form of agriculture.

==Man-made substances==

===Fired bricks and clay blocks===
Bricks are made in a similar way to mud-bricks except without the fibrous binder such as straw and are &quot;fired&quot; (&quot;burned&quot; in a brick clamp or kiln) after they have air-dried to permanently harden them. Kiln fired clay bricks are a ceramic material. Fired bricks can be solid or have hollow cavities to aid in drying and make them lighter and easier to transport. The individual bricks are placed upon each other in courses using mortar. Successive courses being used to build up walls, arches, and other architectural elements. Fired brick walls are usually substantially thinner than cob/adobe while keeping the same vertical strength. They require more energy to create but are easier to transport and store, and are lighter than stone blocks. Romans extensively used fired brick of a shape and type now called Roman bricks. Building with brick gained much popularity in the mid-18th century and 19th centuries. This was due to lower costs with increases in brick manufacturing and fire-safety in increasingly crowded cities.

The cinder block supplemented or replaced fired bricks in the late 20th century often being used for the inner parts of masonry walls and by themselves.

Structural clay tiles (clay blocks) are clay or terracotta and typically are perforated with holes.

===Cement composites===
Cement bonded composites are made of hydrated cement paste that binds wood, particles, or fibers to make pre-cast building components. Various fiberous materials, including paper, fiberglass, and carbon-fiber have been used as binders.

Wood and natural fibers are composed of various soluble organic compounds like carbohydrates, glycosides and phenolics. These compounds are known to retard cement setting. Therefore, before using a wood in making cement bonded composites, its compatibility with cement is assessed.

Wood-cement compatibility is the ratio of a parameter related to the property of a wood-cement composite to that of a neat cement paste. The compatibility is often expressed as a percentage value. To determine wood-cement compatibility, methods based on different properties are used, such as, hydration characteristics, strength, interfacial bond and morphology. Various methods are used by researchers such as the measurement of hydration characteristics of a cement-aggregate mix; the comparison of the mechanical properties of cement-aggregate mixes and the visual assessment of microstructural properties of the wood-cement mixes. It has been found that the hydration test by measuring the change in hydration temperature with time is the most convenient method. Recently, Karade et al. have reviewed these methods of compatibility assessment and suggested a method based on the ‘maturity concept’ i.e. taking in consideration both time and temperature of cement hydration reaction. Recent work on aging of lignocellulosic materials in the cement paste showed hydrolysis of hemicelluloses and lignin that affects the interface between particles or fibers and concrete and causes degradation.

Bricks were laid in lime mortar from the time of the Romans until supplanted by Portland cement mortar in the early 20th century. Cement blocks also sometimes are filled with grout or covered with a parge coat.

===Concrete===
Concrete is a composite building material made from the combination of aggregate and a binder such as cement. The most common form of concrete is Portland cement concrete, which consists of mineral aggregate (generally gravel and sand), portland cement and water.

After mixing, the cement hydrates and eventually hardens into a stone-like material. When used in the generic sense, this is the material referred to by the term &quot;concrete&quot;.

For a concrete construction of any size, as concrete has a rather low tensile strength, it is generally strengthened using steel rods or bars (known as rebars). This strengthened concrete is then referred to as reinforced concrete. In order to minimise any air bubbles, that would weaken the structure, a vibrator is used to eliminate any air that has been entrained when the liquid concrete mix is poured around the ironwork. Concrete has been the predominant building material in the modern age due to its longevity, formability, and ease of transport. Recent advancements, such as insulating concrete forms, combine the concrete forming and other construction steps (installation of insulation). All materials must be taken in required proportions as described in standards.

===Fabric===

The tent is the home of choice among nomadic groups all over the world. Two well-known types include the conical teepee and the circular yurt. The tent has been revived as a major construction technique with the development of tensile architecture and synthetic fabrics. Modern buildings can be made of flexible material such as fabric membranes, and supported by a system of steel cables, rigid or internal, or by air pressure.

===Foam===
Recently, synthetic polystyrene or polyurethane foam has been used in combination with structural materials, such as concrete. It is lightweight, easily shaped, and an excellent insulator. Foam is usually used as part of a structural insulated panel, wherein the foam is sandwiched between wood or cement or insulating concrete forms.

===Glass===

Glassmaking is considered an art form as well as an industrial process or material.

Clear windows have been used since the invention of glass to cover small openings in a building. Glass panes provided humans with the ability to both let light into rooms while at the same time keeping inclement weather outside.

Glass is generally made from mixtures of sand and silicates, in a very hot fire stove called a kiln, and is very brittle. Additives are often included the mixture used to produce glass with shades of colors or various characteristics (such as bulletproof glass or lightbulbs).

The use of glass in architectural buildings has become very popular in the modern culture. Glass &quot;curtain walls&quot; can be used to cover the entire facade of a building, or it can be used to span over a wide roof structure in a &quot;space frame&quot;. These uses though require some sort of frame to hold sections of glass together, as glass by itself is too brittle and would require an overly large kiln to be used to span such large areas by itself.

Glass bricks were invented in the early 20th century.

===Gypsum concrete===

Gypsum concrete is a mixture of gypsum plaster and fibreglass rovings. Although plaster and fibres fibrous plaster have been used for many years, especially for ceilings, it was not until the early 1990s that serious studies of the strength and qualities of a walling system Rapidwall, using a mixture of gypsum plaster and 300mm plus fibreglass rovings, were investigated. With an abundance of gypsum (naturally occurring and by-product chemical FGD and phospho gypsums) available worldwide, Gypsum concrete-based building products, which are fully recyclable, offer significant environmental benefits.

=== Metal ===
Metal is used as structural framework for larger buildings such as skyscrapers, or as an external surface covering. There are many types of metals used for building. Metal figures quite prominently in prefabricated structures such as the Quonset hut, and can be seen used in most cosmopolitan cities. It requires a great deal of human labor to produce metal, especially in the large amounts needed for the building industries. Corrosion is metal&#x27;s prime enemy when it comes to longevity.
* Steel is a metal alloy whose major component is iron, and is the usual choice for metal structural building materials. It is strong, flexible, and if refined well and/or treated lasts a long time.
* The lower density and better corrosion resistance of aluminium alloys and tin sometimes overcome their greater cost.
* Copper is a valued building material because of its advantageous properties (see: Copper in architecture). These include corrosion resistance, durability, low thermal movement, light weight, radio frequency shielding, lightning protection, sustainability, recyclability, and a wide range of finishes. Copper is incorporated into roofing, flashing, gutters, downspouts, domes, spires, vaults, wall cladding, building expansion joints, and indoor design elements.
* Other metals used include chrome, gold, silver, and titanium. Titanium can be used for structural purposes, but it is much more expensive than steel. Chrome, gold, and silver are used as decoration, because these materials are expensive and lack structural qualities such as tensile strength or hardness.

===Plastics===
The term &quot;plastics&quot; covers a range of synthetic or semi-synthetic organic condensation or polymerization products that can be molded or extruded into objects, films, or fibers. Their name is derived from the fact that in their semi-liquid state they are malleable, or have the property of plasticity. Plastics vary immensely in heat tolerance, hardness, and resiliency. Combined with this adaptability, the general uniformity of composition and lightness of plastics ensures their use in almost all industrial applications today. High performance plastics such as ETFE have become an ideal building material due to its high abrasion resistance and chemical inertness. Notable buildings that feature it include: the Beijing National Aquatics Center and the Eden Project biomes.

Around twenty percent of all plastics and seventy percent of all polyvinyl chloride (PVC) produced in the world each year are used by the construction industry. It is predicted that much more will be produced and used in the future. &quot;In Europe, approximately 20% of all plastics produced are used in the construction sector including different classes of plastics, waste and nanomaterials.&quot; There are both direct use (construction materials containing plastics) and indirect use (packaging of construction materials) in different parts of the building processes.

===Papers and membranes===

Building papers and membranes are used for many reasons in construction. One of the oldest building papers is red rosin paper which was known to be in use before 1850 and was used as an underlayment in exterior walls, roofs, and floors and for protecting a jobsite during construction. Tar paper was invented late in the 19th century and was used for similar purposes as rosin paper and for gravel roofs. Tar paper has largely fallen out of use supplanted by asphalt felt paper. Felt paper has been supplanted in some uses by synthetic underlayments, particularly in roofing by synthetic underlayments and siding by housewraps.

There are a wide variety of damp proofing and waterproofing membranes used for roofing, basement waterproofing, and geomembranes.

===Ceramics===
Fired clay bricks have been used since the time of the Romans. Special tiles are used for roofing, siding, flooring, ceilings, pipes, flue liners, and more.

==Living building materials==
A relatively new category of building materials, living building materials are materials that are either composed of, or created by a living organism; or materials that behave in a manner that&#x27;s reminiscent of such. Potential use cases include self-healing materials, and materials that replicate (reproduce) rather than be manufactured.

==Building products==

In the market place, the term &quot;building products&quot; often refers to ready-made particles or sections made from various materials, that are fitted in architectural hardware and decorative hardware parts of a building. The list of building products excludes the building materials used to construct the building architecture and supporting fixtures, like windows, doors, cabinets, millwork components, etc. Building products, rather, support and make building materials work in a modular fashion.

&quot;Building products&quot; may also refer to items used to put such hardware together, such as caulking, glues, paint, and anything else bought for the purpose of constructing a building.

== Research and development ==
To facilitate and optimize the use of new materials and up-to-date technologies, ongoing research is being undertaken to improve efficiency, productivity and competitiveness in world markets.

Material research and development may be commercial, academical or both, and can be conducted at any scale.

Rapid prototyping allows researchers to develop and test materials quickly, making adjustments and solving issues during the process. Rather than developing materials theoretically and then testing them, only to discover fundamental flaws, rapid prototypes allow for comparatively quick development and testing, shortening the time to market for a new materials to a matter of months, rather than years.

== Sustainability ==
In 2017, buildings and construction together consumed 36% of the final energy produced globally while being responsible for 39% of the global energy related CO2 emissions. The shares from the construction industry alone were 6% and 11% respectively. Energy consumption during building material production is a dominant contributor to the construction industry&#x27;s overall share, predominantly due to the use of electricity during production. Embodied energy of relevant building materials in the US are provided in the table below.
==Testing and certification==
* ASTM International
* UL (safety organization)
* ETL SEMKO — Building Product Testing Laboratory in the USA, part of Intertek, based in London
* EU Construction Product Regulation

==See also==
* Alternative natural materials
* Biocidal natural building material
* Glass in green buildings
* Green building and wood
* Greystone
* Hemp as a building material
* Hempcrete
* List of building materials
* Materiality (architecture)
* Natural building
* Phenomenology (architecture)
* Prefabrication
* Thermal emittance
* Thermal mass
==References==
==Further reading==
* Svoboda, Luboš(2018). Stavební hmoty (Building materials), 1000 p.

==External links==

* Materiales de Construcción – Bilingual (Spanish/English) Scientific journal published by Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Científicas, Spain.
* Informes de la Construcción – Scientific journal published by Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Científicas, Spain.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q206615" start="0" end="17" title="Building material" label="Building material"/>
<link wikidata="Q3875186" start="39" end="51" title="construction" label="construction"/>
<link wikidata="Q42302" start="98" end="102" title="clay" label="clay"/>
<link wikidata="Q8063" start="104" end="109" title="rock (geology)" label="rocks"/>
<link wikidata="Q287" start="117" end="121" title="wood" label="wood"/>
<link wikidata="Q41176" start="178" end="186" title="building" label="building"/>
<link wikidata="Q12280" start="215" end="221" title="bridge" label="bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q203605" start="515" end="524" title="carpentry" label="carpentry"/>
<link wikidata="Q2740343" start="526" end="536" title="Building insulation" label="insulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3241671" start="538" end="546" title="plumbing" label="plumbing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156728" start="552" end="559" title="roofing material" label="roofing"/>
<link wikidata="" start="594" end="602" title=":Category:Human habitats" label="habitats"/>
<link wikidata="Q12271" start="607" end="617" title="architecture" label="structures"/>
<link wikidata="Q7743" start="628" end="632" title="home" label="home"/>
<link wikidata="Q181790" start="780" end="789" title="Composite material" label="composite"/>
<link wikidata="Q83371" start="955" end="962" title="seismic" label="seismic"/>
<link wikidata="Q905504" start="2575" end="2595" title="indoor air pollution" label="indoor air pollution"/>
<link wikidata="Q7304544" start="2597" end="2624" title="Red List building materials" label="Red List building materials"/>
<link wikidata="Q310667" start="2669" end="2685" title="carbon footprint" label="carbon footprint"/>
<link wikidata="Q581950" start="2769" end="2788" title="life-cycle analysis" label="life-cycle analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3536388" start="2807" end="2812" title="Deconstruction (building)" label="reuse"/>
<link wikidata="Q811861" start="2840" end="2858" title="construction waste" label="construction waste"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049066" start="2907" end="2927" title="ecological economics" label="ecological economics"/>
<link wikidata="Q242606" start="2954" end="2968" title="green building" label="green building"/>
<link wikidata="Q131201" start="2973" end="2996" title="sustainable development" label="sustainable development"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153531" start="3319" end="3334" title="embodied energy" label="embodied energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q188485" start="4122" end="4132" title="fair trade" label="fair trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q2915476" start="4137" end="4149" title="labor rights" label="labor rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q4914589" start="4247" end="4265" title="Bio-based material" label="Bio-based material"/>
<link wikidata="Q2923673" start="5347" end="5352" title="Branches" label="Brush"/>
<link wikidata="Q171927" start="5463" end="5476" title="pygmy peoples" label="pygmy peoples"/>
<link wikidata="Q47542" start="5567" end="5573" title="beaver" label="beaver"/>
<link wikidata="Q277986" start="5615" end="5621" title="wikiup" label="wikiup"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368940" start="5696" end="5711" title="wattle and daub" label="wattle and daub"/>
<link wikidata="Q496" start="5743" end="5747" title="feces" label="dung"/>
<link wikidata="Q830" start="5757" end="5760" title="cow" label="cow"/>
<link wikidata="Q189975" start="6111" end="6116" title="Inuit" label="Inuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q101805" start="6129" end="6134" title="igloo" label="igloo"/>
<link wikidata="Q660747" start="6181" end="6189" title="quinzhee" label="quinzhee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1317609" start="6218" end="6227" title="ice hotel" label="ice hotel"/>
<link wikidata="Q570116" start="6234" end="6252" title="tourist attraction" label="tourist attraction"/>
<link wikidata="Q2090236" start="6494" end="6504" title="Mudbrick" label="mud bricks"/>
<link wikidata="Q6546161" start="6572" end="6582" title="light clay" label="light clay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368940" start="6584" end="6599" title="wattle and daub" label="wattle and daub"/>
<link wikidata="Q274988" start="6609" end="6616" title="plaster" label="plaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q36133" start="6935" end="6939" title="soil" label="soil"/>
<link wikidata="Q42302" start="6970" end="6974" title="clay" label="clay"/>
<link wikidata="Q2106766" start="7083" end="7092" title="sod house" label="sod house"/>
<link wikidata="Q3359079" start="7108" end="7116" title="sod roof" label="sod roof"/>
<link wikidata="Q34679" start="7185" end="7189" title="sand" label="sand"/>
<link wikidata="Q133833" start="7190" end="7196" title="gravel" label="gravel"/>
<link wikidata="Q160066" start="7201" end="7206" title="straw" label="straw"/>
<link wikidata="Q752323" start="7358" end="7363" title="formwork" label="forms"/>
<link wikidata="Q11019" start="7368" end="7378" title="machine" label="mechanical"/>
<link wikidata="Q211500" start="7379" end="7388" title="pneumatic" label="pneumatic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3150682" start="7453" end="7465" title="thermal mass" label="thermal mass"/>
<link wikidata="Q183496" start="8302" end="8307" title="adobe" label="adobe"/>
<link wikidata="Q202398" start="8499" end="8521" title="industrialized society" label="industrialized society"/>
<link wikidata="Q198632" start="8608" end="8618" title="brickworks" label="brickworks"/>
<link wikidata="Q863583" start="8914" end="8921" title="Binder (material)" label="binders"/>
<link wikidata="Q1971493" start="9012" end="9021" title="clay slip" label="clay slip"/>
<link wikidata="Q34679" start="9036" end="9040" title="Sand" label="Sand"/>
<link wikidata="Q45190" start="9054" end="9060" title="cement" label="cement"/>
<link wikidata="Q250423" start="9076" end="9080" title="Lime (material)" label="lime"/>
<link wikidata="Q189566" start="9090" end="9096" title="mortar (masonry)" label="mortar"/>
<link wikidata="Q272999" start="9101" end="9108" title="masonry" label="masonry"/>
<link wikidata="Q274988" start="9118" end="9125" title="plaster" label="plaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q7416053" start="9265" end="9274" title="Sandcrete" label="Sandcrete"/>
<link wikidata="Q60760371" start="9334" end="9369" title="Sand reinforced polyester composite" label="Sand reinforced polyester composite"/>
<link wikidata="Q828402" start="9831" end="9845" title="energy density" label="energy density"/>
<link wikidata="Q3150682" start="9965" end="9977" title="thermal mass" label="thermal mass"/>
<link wikidata="Q5608878" start="10034" end="10048" title="Dry-stone wall" label="Dry-stone wall"/>
<link wikidata="Q2932238" start="10054" end="10057" title="dry-stone hut" label="hut"/>
<link wikidata="Q189566" start="10166" end="10172" title="mortar (masonry)" label="mortar"/>
<link wikidata="Q45190" start="10212" end="10218" title="cement" label="cement"/>
<link wikidata="Q41177" start="10256" end="10263" title="granite" label="granite"/>
<link wikidata="Q214823" start="10282" end="10290" title="Dartmoor" label="Dartmoor"/>
<link wikidata="Q36422" start="10451" end="10460" title="Neolithic" label="Neolithic"/>
<link wikidata="Q11761" start="10471" end="10481" title="Bronze Age" label="Bronze Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="10590" end="10598" title="Middle Ages" label="Medieval"/>
<link wikidata="Q16828938" start="10611" end="10629" title="Dartmoor longhouse" label="Dartmoor longhouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q207079" start="10654" end="10659" title="Slate" label="Slate"/>
<link wikidata="Q8063" start="10788" end="10793" title="Rock (geology)" label="Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q12516" start="10924" end="10932" title="pyramids" label="pyramids"/>
<link wikidata="Q28573" start="10959" end="10963" title="Inca" label="Inca"/>
<link wikidata="Q874531" start="10993" end="10999" title="Thatch" label="Thatch"/>
<link wikidata="Q287" start="11608" end="11612" title="Wood" label="Wood"/>
<link wikidata="Q1317763" start="11702" end="11717" title="engineered wood" label="engineered wood"/>
<link wikidata="Q10884" start="11793" end="11797" title="tree" label="tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192049" start="11820" end="11827" title="natural fiber" label="fibrous"/>
<link wikidata="Q372561" start="12367" end="12385" title="forest management" label="growing conditions"/>
<link wikidata="Q695207" start="12676" end="12729" title="Log cabin" label="minimally-processed logs stacked on top of each other"/>
<link wikidata="Q629000" start="12731" end="12743" title="timber frame" label="timber frame"/>
<link wikidata="Q2131593" start="12762" end="12786" title="Framing (construction)" label="light-frame construction"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12833" end="12842" title="fire risk" label="fire risk"/>
<link wikidata="Q252108" start="12891" end="12899" title="softwood" label="softwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q2266509" start="12948" end="12956" title="hardwood" label="hardwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q156687" start="13088" end="13099" title="douglas fir" label="douglas fir"/>
<link wikidata="Q8033070" start="13235" end="13242" title="woodlot" label="woodlot"/>
<link wikidata="Q40089" start="13660" end="13665" title="Brick" label="Brick"/>
<link wikidata="Q1402376" start="13806" end="13817" title="brick clamp" label="brick clamp"/>
<link wikidata="Q1724341" start="13821" end="13825" title="kiln" label="kiln"/>
<link wikidata="Q45621" start="13910" end="13917" title="ceramic" label="ceramic"/>
<link wikidata="Q189566" start="14108" end="14114" title="Mortar (masonry)" label="mortar"/>
<link wikidata="Q12277" start="14165" end="14169" title="arch" label="arch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055957" start="14492" end="14503" title="Roman brick" label="Roman brick"/>
<link wikidata="Q766952" start="14712" end="14724" title="cinder block" label="cinder block"/>
<link wikidata="Q7625016" start="14862" end="14882" title="Structural clay tile" label="Structural clay tile"/>
<link wikidata="Q60424" start="14910" end="14920" title="terracotta" label="terracotta"/>
<link wikidata="Q45190" start="14987" end="14993" title="Cement" label="Cement"/>
<link wikidata="Q11472" start="15160" end="15165" title="paper" label="paper"/>
<link wikidata="Q7224880" start="15167" end="15177" title="fiberglass" label="fiberglass"/>
<link wikidata="Q910977" start="15183" end="15195" title="carbon-fiber" label="carbon-fiber"/>
<link wikidata="Q11358" start="15303" end="15315" title="carbohydrate" label="carbohydrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q192639" start="15318" end="15327" title="glycoside" label="glycoside"/>
<link wikidata="Q911999" start="16725" end="16736" title="lime mortar" label="lime mortar"/>
<link wikidata="Q189566" start="16801" end="16807" title="mortar (masonry)" label="mortar"/>
<link wikidata="Q766952" start="16835" end="16848" title="Concrete masonry unit" label="Cement blocks"/>
<link wikidata="Q4580104" start="16880" end="16885" title="grout" label="grout"/>
<link wikidata="Q7314101" start="16904" end="16914" title="parge coat" label="parge coat"/>
<link wikidata="Q22657" start="16932" end="16940" title="Concrete" label="Concrete"/>
<link wikidata="Q181790" start="16946" end="16955" title="composite material" label="composite"/>
<link wikidata="Q866298" start="17003" end="17012" title="aggregate (composite)" label="aggregate"/>
<link wikidata="Q45190" start="17034" end="17040" title="cement" label="cement"/>
<link wikidata="Q133833" start="17151" end="17157" title="gravel" label="gravel"/>
<link wikidata="Q34679" start="17162" end="17166" title="sand" label="sand"/>
<link wikidata="Q844123" start="17169" end="17184" title="portland cement" label="portland cement"/>
<link wikidata="Q283" start="17189" end="17194" title="water (molecule)" label="water"/>
<link wikidata="Q13107540" start="17222" end="17230" title="Hydration reaction" label="hydrates"/>
<link wikidata="Q76005" start="17452" end="17468" title="tensile strength" label="tensile strength"/>
<link wikidata="Q150425" start="17534" end="17539" title="rebar" label="rebar"/>
<link wikidata="Q184190" start="17593" end="17612" title="reinforced concrete" label="reinforced concrete"/>
<link wikidata="Q3799251" start="17966" end="17990" title="insulating concrete form" label="insulating concrete form"/>
<link wikidata="Q134932" start="18288" end="18294" title="teepee" label="teepee"/>
<link wikidata="Q15680" start="18312" end="18316" title="yurt" label="yurt"/>
<link wikidata="Q145765" start="18402" end="18422" title="tensile architecture" label="tensile architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q28823" start="18504" end="18510" title="Textile" label="fabric"/>
<link wikidata="Q146243" start="18636" end="18647" title="polystyrene" label="polystyrene"/>
<link wikidata="Q146322" start="18651" end="18663" title="polyurethane" label="polyurethane"/>
<link wikidata="Q811195" start="18839" end="18865" title="structural insulated panel" label="structural insulated panel"/>
<link wikidata="Q785222" start="18965" end="18976" title="Glassmaking" label="Glassmaking"/>
<link wikidata="Q7130787" start="19330" end="19338" title="silicate" label="silicate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1724341" start="19375" end="19379" title="kiln" label="kiln"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133376" start="19523" end="19540" title="bulletproof glass" label="bulletproof glass"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370962" start="19661" end="19674" title="curtain wall (architecture)" label="curtain walls"/>
<link wikidata="Q578444" start="19799" end="19810" title="space frame" label="space frame"/>
<link wikidata="Q1529373" start="20020" end="20031" title="Glass brick" label="Glass brick"/>
<link wikidata="Q5625310" start="20098" end="20113" title="Gypsum concrete" label="Gypsum concrete"/>
<link wikidata="Q82658" start="20130" end="20136" title="gypsum" label="gypsum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1174191" start="20160" end="20166" title="roving" label="roving"/>
<link wikidata="Q572879" start="20197" end="20212" title="fibrous plaster" label="fibrous plaster"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20373" end="20382" title="Rapidwall" label="Rapidwall"/>
<link wikidata="Q11426" start="20717" end="20722" title="Metal" label="Metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q11303" start="20784" end="20794" title="skyscraper" label="skyscraper"/>
<link wikidata="Q4787059" start="20857" end="20863" title="Architectural metals" label="metals"/>
<link wikidata="Q2086008" start="20918" end="20931" title="prefabricated" label="prefabricated"/>
<link wikidata="Q1627026" start="20955" end="20966" title="Quonset hut" label="Quonset hut"/>
<link wikidata="Q137056" start="21144" end="21153" title="Corrosion" label="Corrosion"/>
<link wikidata="Q11427" start="21212" end="21217" title="Steel" label="Steel"/>
<link wikidata="Q37756" start="21229" end="21234" title="alloy" label="alloy"/>
<link wikidata="Q677" start="21260" end="21264" title="iron" label="iron"/>
<link wikidata="Q137056" start="21382" end="21389" title="Corrosion prevention" label="treated"/>
<link wikidata="Q29539" start="21421" end="21428" title="density" label="density"/>
<link wikidata="Q137056" start="21440" end="21449" title="corrosion" label="corrosion"/>
<link wikidata="Q663" start="21464" end="21473" title="aluminium" label="aluminium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1096" start="21485" end="21488" title="tin" label="tin"/>
<link wikidata="Q240673" start="21522" end="21526" title="cost" label="cost"/>
<link wikidata="Q753" start="21530" end="21536" title="Copper" label="Copper"/>
<link wikidata="Q5168785" start="21612" end="21634" title="Copper in architecture" label="Copper in architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1506986" start="22020" end="22026" title="Chrome plating" label="chrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q897" start="22028" end="22032" title="gold" label="gold"/>
<link wikidata="Q1090" start="22034" end="22040" title="silver" label="silver"/>
<link wikidata="Q716" start="22046" end="22054" title="titanium" label="titanium"/>
<link wikidata="Q11351" start="22391" end="22398" title="organic chemistry" label="organic"/>
<link wikidata="Q910058" start="22399" end="22411" title="condensation reaction" label="condensation"/>
<link wikidata="Q181898" start="22415" end="22429" title="polymerization" label="polymerization"/>
<link wikidata="Q5856" start="22494" end="22500" title="synthetic fiber" label="fibers"/>
<link wikidata="Q472074" start="22614" end="22624" title="plasticity (physics)" label="plasticity"/>
<link wikidata="Q15740972" start="22855" end="22880" title="High performance plastics" label="High performance plastics"/>
<link wikidata="Q244877" start="23040" end="23072" title="Beijing National Aquatics Center" label="Beijing National Aquatics Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q596642" start="23081" end="23093" title="Eden Project" label="Eden Project"/>
<link wikidata="Q146368" start="23168" end="23186" title="polyvinyl chloride" label="polyvinyl chloride"/>
<link wikidata="Q17130610" start="23815" end="23830" title="red rosin paper" label="red rosin paper"/>
<link wikidata="Q1971625" start="23991" end="24000" title="Tar paper" label="Tar paper"/>
<link wikidata="Q149292" start="24096" end="24108" title="built-up roof" label="gravel roofs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156751" start="24172" end="24182" title="felt paper" label="felt paper"/>
<link wikidata="Q1286170" start="24321" end="24330" title="housewrap" label="housewrap"/>
<link wikidata="Q1628165" start="24362" end="24375" title="damp proofing" label="damp proofing"/>
<link wikidata="Q2326110" start="24380" end="24393" title="waterproofing" label="waterproofing"/>
<link wikidata="Q4866705" start="24422" end="24444" title="basement waterproofing" label="basement waterproofing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1971985" start="24450" end="24461" title="geomembrane" label="geomembrane"/>
<link wikidata="Q40089" start="24491" end="24496" title="brick" label="brick"/>
<link wikidata="Q468402" start="24551" end="24555" title="tile" label="tile"/>
<link wikidata="Q85781791" start="24717" end="24741" title="living building material" label="living building material"/>
<link wikidata="Q330284" start="25042" end="25054" title="market place" label="market place"/>
<link wikidata="Q17141333" start="25422" end="25430" title="Millwork (building material)" label="millwork"/>
<link wikidata="Q912009" start="25521" end="25528" title="Modularity" label="modular"/>
<link wikidata="Q1411795" start="25637" end="25645" title="caulking" label="caulking"/>
<link wikidata="Q131790" start="25647" end="25651" title="glue" label="glue"/>
<link wikidata="Q276099" start="25964" end="25988" title="research and development" label="research and development"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128971" start="26064" end="26081" title="Rapid prototyping" label="Rapid prototyping"/>
<link wikidata="Q4468919" start="26647" end="26660" title="Carbon dioxide in Earth&amp;#x27;s atmosphere" label="CO2 emissions"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153531" start="26935" end="26950" title="Embodied energy" label="Embodied energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="26989" end="26991" title="United States" label="US"/>
<link wikidata="Q621977" start="27057" end="27075" title="ASTM International" label="ASTM International"/>
<link wikidata="Q1324421" start="27078" end="27102" title="UL (safety organization)" label="UL (safety organization)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5324469" start="27105" end="27114" title="ETL SEMKO" label="ETL SEMKO"/>
<link wikidata="Q7309644" start="27201" end="27235" title="Regulation (EU) No. 305/2011" label="EU Construction Product Regulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q4736537" start="27252" end="27281" title="Alternative natural materials" label="Alternative natural materials"/>
<link wikidata="Q4914722" start="27284" end="27318" title="Biocidal natural building material" label="Biocidal natural building material"/>
<link wikidata="Q17076774" start="27321" end="27345" title="Glass in green buildings" label="Glass in green buildings"/>
<link wikidata="Q5603458" start="27348" end="27371" title="Green building and wood" label="Green building and wood"/>
<link wikidata="Q5608488" start="27374" end="27383" title="Greystone (architecture)" label="Greystone"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="27386" end="27413" title="Hemp#Building material" label="Hemp as a building material"/>
<link wikidata="Q2023630" start="27416" end="27425" title="Hempcrete" label="Hempcrete"/>
<link wikidata="Q6608318" start="27428" end="27454" title="List of building materials" label="List of building materials"/>
<link wikidata="Q17131147" start="27457" end="27483" title="Materiality (architecture)" label="Materiality (architecture)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2920737" start="27486" end="27502" title="Natural building" label="Natural building"/>
<link wikidata="Q7181385" start="27505" end="27533" title="Phenomenology (architecture)" label="Phenomenology (architecture)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2086008" start="27536" end="27550" title="Prefabrication" label="Prefabrication"/>
<link wikidata="Q3369825" start="27553" end="27570" title="Thermal emittance" label="Thermal emittance"/>
<link wikidata="Q3150682" start="27573" end="27585" title="Thermal mass" label="Thermal mass"/>
<link wikidata="Q5633421" start="27770" end="27788" title="Scientific journal" label="Scientific journal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1024362" start="27802" end="27849" title="Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Científicas" label="Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Científicas"/>
<link wikidata="Q5633421" start="27890" end="27908" title="Scientific journal" label="Scientific journal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1024362" start="27922" end="27969" title="Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Científicas" label="Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Científicas"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="464780" wikidata="Q702411" url="?curid=464780" title="Rheydt">
<text>Rheydt () is a borough of the German city Mönchengladbach, located in the west of North Rhine-Westphalia. Until 1918 and then again from 1933 (due to a split from Mönchengladbach arranged by Joseph Goebbels, who was born there) through 1975 it was an independent city.
After merging with Mönchengladbach, the central station (Rheydt Hauptbahnhof) kept its original name, making Mönchengladbach the only city in Germany to have two stations called Hauptbahnhof.

Schloss Rheydt, one of the best-preserved palaces of the Renaissance period, is located in Rheydt.

== Mayors 1808–1974 ==
*1808–1823: Dietrich Lenßen
*1823–1857: Johann David Büschgens
*1857–1877: Carl Theodorf von Velsen
*1877–1893: Emil Pahlke
*1893–1901: Dr. Wilhelm Strauß
*1901–1905: Dr. Karl August Tettenborn
*1906–1920: Paul Lehwald
*1920–1929: Dr. Oskar Graemer
*1929–1930: Franz Gielen
*1930–1933: Dr. Johannes Handschumacher
*1933: Wilhelm Pelzer
*1934–1936: Edwin Renatus Robert August Hasenjaeger
*1936–1940: Heinz Gebauer
*1940–1945: Dr. Alexander Doemens
*1945: August Brocher
*1945–1948: Dr. Carl Marcus
*1948–1950: Heinrich Pesch
*1950–1956: Johannes Scheulen
*1956–1961: Wilhelm Schiffer
*1961–1963: Dr. Friedrich Hinnah
*1963–1964: Fritz Rahmen
*1964–1969: Wilhelm Schiffer
*1969–1974: Fritz Rahmen

== Demographic development ==
Note: ¹ - census

== Notable residents ==
*1815, May 15, Friedrich Beckenbach, renamed Brookland + Jan 28 1892 in Rheydt, textile entrepreneur in Prussia, Holland and Yorkshire England, son of Johann Heinrich Beckenbach of Lenssen &amp; Beckenbach, Rheydt
*1859, February 3, Hugo Junkers, † February 3, 1935 in Gauting, engineer
*1863, May 30, Klara Hechtenberg Collitz, † November 22, 1944 in Baltimore, German philologist
*1876, September 4, Ernst Jakob Christoffel, † April 23, 1955 in Isfahan, founder of the Christoffel-Blindenmission
*1894, August 29, Werner Gilles, † June 22, 1961 in Essen, artist
*1894, February 24, Josef Arndgen, † September 20, 1966 in Wiesbaden, German politician (CDU)
*1897, October 29, Joseph Goebbels, † May 1, 1945 in Berlin, Minister for Public Enlightenment and Propaganda during the Nazi regime
*1898, July 24, Peter Erkens, † October 22, 1972 in Mönchengladbach, politician
*1910, Emil Vorster, † 1976, race driver
*1913, December 18, Wilhelm Schmitter, † November 8, 1943 in action over London, World War II Luftwaffe bomber pilot
*1917, June 2, Heinz Sielmann, † October 6, 2006 in Munich, film maker
*1918, May 6, Ruth Lommel,† 22 June 2012, actress
*1919, June 3, Herbert Huppertz † June 8, 1944 Caen, Killed in Airbattle with American fighters. German Ace on FW 190 with 78 kills 
*1925, A. Edward Nussbaum, † 31 October 2009 in St. Louis, Missouri, theoretical mathematician
*1928, April 1, Hermin Esser, tenor, † 2009 in Wiesbaden, 
*1930, May 16, Karl Heinz Beckurts, † July 9, 1986 in Straßlach, Munich, physicist, killed by Red Army Faction
*1932, August 25, Alexander Arnz, † September 30, 2004 in Cologne, director
*1936, August 9, Uwe Erichsen, author
*1949, November 24, Christa Muth, systems scientist
*1967, May 18, Heinz-Harald Frentzen, race driver
*1973, February 24, Sonja Oberem, marathon runner
*1977, May 10, Nick Heidfeld, race driver

==References==
==External links==
*
*Rheydt-Online - a city guide to Rheydt</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q702411" start="0" end="6" title="Rheydt" label="Rheydt"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="30" end="36" title="Germany" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q2758" start="42" end="57" title="Mönchengladbach" label="Mönchengladbach"/>
<link wikidata="Q1198" start="82" end="104" title="North Rhine-Westphalia" label="North Rhine-Westphalia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2758" start="163" end="178" title="Mönchengladbach" label="Mönchengladbach"/>
<link wikidata="Q41749" start="191" end="206" title="Joseph Goebbels" label="Joseph Goebbels"/>
<link wikidata="Q130508" start="326" end="345" title="Rheydt Hauptbahnhof" label="Rheydt Hauptbahnhof"/>
<link wikidata="Q18543139" start="447" end="459" title="Hauptbahnhof" label="Hauptbahnhof"/>
<link wikidata="Q883459" start="462" end="476" title="Schloss Rheydt" label="Schloss Rheydt"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="985" end="998" title="Heinz Gebauer" label="Heinz Gebauer"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1369" end="1389" title="Friedrich Beckenbach" label="Friedrich Beckenbach"/>
<link wikidata="Q60363" start="1587" end="1599" title="Hugo Junkers" label="Hugo Junkers"/>
<link wikidata="Q74057" start="1623" end="1630" title="Gauting" label="Gauting"/>
<link wikidata="Q65659122" start="1656" end="1681" title="Klara Hechtenberg Collitz" label="Klara Hechtenberg Collitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q5092" start="1706" end="1715" title="Baltimore" label="Baltimore"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1756" end="1779" title="Ernst Jakob Christoffel" label="Ernst Jakob Christoffel"/>
<link wikidata="Q321021" start="1870" end="1883" title="Werner Gilles" label="Werner Gilles"/>
<link wikidata="Q49762" start="2007" end="2010" title="Christian Democratic Union (Germany)" label="CDU"/>
<link wikidata="Q41749" start="2031" end="2046" title="Joseph Goebbels" label="Joseph Goebbels"/>
<link wikidata="Q101276" start="2232" end="2244" title="Emil Vorster" label="Emil Vorster"/>
<link wikidata="Q6576103" start="2286" end="2303" title="Wilhelm Schmitter" label="Wilhelm Schmitter"/>
<link wikidata="Q2564009" start="2360" end="2369" title="Luftwaffe" label="Luftwaffe"/>
<link wikidata="Q77844" start="2398" end="2412" title="Heinz Sielmann" label="Heinz Sielmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q2177680" start="2468" end="2479" title="Ruth Lommel" label="Ruth Lommel"/>
<link wikidata="Q5734564" start="2519" end="2535" title="Herbert Huppertz" label="Herbert Huppertz"/>
<link wikidata="Q4647739" start="2644" end="2662" title="A. Edward Nussbaum" label="A. Edward Nussbaum"/>
<link wikidata="Q38022" start="2685" end="2704" title="St. Louis, Missouri" label="St. Louis, Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q1319351" start="2748" end="2760" title="Hermin Esser" label="Hermin Esser"/>
<link wikidata="Q88895" start="2806" end="2825" title="Karl Heinz Beckurts" label="Karl Heinz Beckurts"/>
<link wikidata="Q102734" start="2885" end="2901" title="Red Army Faction" label="Red Army Faction"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2920" end="2934" title="Alexander Arnz" label="Alexander Arnz"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2995" end="3007" title="Uwe Erichsen" label="Uwe Erichsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q89586" start="3036" end="3048" title="Christa Muth" label="Christa Muth"/>
<link wikidata="Q76720" start="3083" end="3104" title="Heinz-Harald Frentzen" label="Heinz-Harald Frentzen"/>
<link wikidata="Q463314" start="3138" end="3150" title="Sonja Oberem" label="Sonja Oberem"/>
<link wikidata="Q75810" start="3183" end="3196" title="Nick Heidfeld" label="Nick Heidfeld"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="464781" wikidata="Q214675" url="?curid=464781" title="Blue1">
<text>Blue1 [[Osakeyhtiö|Oy]] was a Finnish airline owned by CityJet. It was a subsidiary of the SAS Group and flew to around 28 destinations in Europe, mainly from its base at Helsinki Airport. It carried over 1.7 million passengers in 2011. The airline was a member of Star Alliance and had its head office in Vantaa.

== History ==

===Early years===
The airline was established in 1987 and started operations in 1988 as Air Botnia, flying Embraer EMB-110 Bandeirantes on night cargo flights and on passenger services from Helsinki to Kauhajoki and Seinäjoki. It started to supplement its unpressurised Bandeirantes with leased British Aerospace Jetstream 31s in 1993, but cash flow problems in the summer of 1995 caused British Aerospace to repossess the Jetstreams and brought Air Botnia to the point of bankruptcy, but it continued operations in a reduced scale.

The airline was purchased by SAS Group in January 1998, who replaced its Jetstreams with Saab 340s later that year. Air Botnia received its first jets, Fokker F28 Fellowships, in 1999. The elderly F28s were soon replaced as their high noise levels restricted operations, with Avro RJ85s being received in 2001. The Saab 340s were replaced by larger Saab 2000s at the same time.

===Development since 2004===
Air Botnia was renamed Blue1 in January 2004, and joined Star Alliance as its first regional member on 3 November 2004. Blue1 became a full member of Star Alliance on 1 January 2009. Blue1 left Star Alliance in November 2012 and became an affiliate of Scandinavian Airlines.

In 2005 Blue1 became the second-largest Finnish airline with more than 100 daily flights and the biggest operator between Finland and the Nordic nations Sweden, Denmark and Norway. In 2006 Blue1 started 10 new non-stop routes to Europe increasing its total capacity by more than 50%. In 2008 Blue1 moved its London operations from Stansted to Heathrow Airport, and expanded its domestic business routes. In 2009 new routes to Lapland, including Paris-Kittilä were opened for the winter season and routes to Biarritz, Dubrovnik and Split for summer travel.

Blue1 was the first network airline in Northern Europe to be granted ISO 14001 environmental certificate. On 1 November 2012, Blue1 became a service producer for SAS. This means that marketing and sales were then handled by SAS and its flights carried the SAS flight prefix &quot;SK&quot;.

In March 2015, it was announced that Blue1 was to sell their entire fleet of Boeing 717-200s to Volotea and Delta Air Lines and was to replace them with Boeing 737-600s from its parent, Scandinavian Airlines, however Scandinavian Airlines later cancelled the plan and considered to transfer some Bombardier CRJ900 from Cimber.

In October 2015, Scandinavian Airlines (SAS) announced the sale of Blue1 to CityJet, which was to operate the company on behalf of SAS as part of a larger relationship. In December 2015, Blue1 did not operate any aircraft and its own website has been redirected to SAS&#x27;s website. In 2016, Blue1 was dissolved and merged into its new parent CityJet.

== Fleet ==


===Last fleet===
As of December 2015 - before its actual dissolution - Blue1 did not operate any aircraft as the Boeing 717-200s previously operated had been phased out without replacement.

===Retired fleet===
Previously Blue1 also operated the following aircraft types:

==Onboard services==
Blue1 offered two service classes, Economy and Economy Extra (previously Blue1 Premium).

*Economy Class: Coffee and tea were included on all Blue1 operated flights. Sandwiches and other drinks were available for purchase from &quot;Cafe1&quot;. Flights with short flight time had reduced service.
*Economy Extra: Fast Track security and Business Class check-in was included where available.

==References==
===Citations===
===Bibliography===
* Pagiola, Stefano. (October 2004) &quot;Stars in Their Eyes: Finland&#x27;s Blue 1 Regional Airline&quot;. &quot;Air International&quot;, Vol 67 No 4. pp. 42–45.

==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q214675" start="0" end="23" title="Blue1" label="Blue1 [[Osakeyhtiö|Oy]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q33" start="30" end="37" title="Finland" label="Finnish"/>
<link wikidata="Q46970" start="38" end="45" title="airline" label="airline"/>
<link wikidata="Q163625" start="55" end="62" title="CityJet" label="CityJet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345441" start="91" end="100" title="SAS Group" label="SAS Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q215327" start="171" end="187" title="Helsinki Airport" label="Helsinki Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q189709" start="265" end="278" title="Star Alliance" label="Star Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q127623" start="306" end="312" title="Vantaa" label="Vantaa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1335137" start="437" end="464" title="Embraer EMB-110 Bandeirante" label="Embraer EMB-110 Bandeirante"/>
<link wikidata="Q1757" start="520" end="528" title="Helsinki" label="Helsinki"/>
<link wikidata="Q5992" start="532" end="541" title="Kauhajoki" label="Kauhajoki"/>
<link wikidata="Q6157" start="546" end="555" title="Seinäjoki" label="Seinäjoki"/>
<link wikidata="Q647915" start="625" end="655" title="British Aerospace Jetstream 31" label="British Aerospace Jetstream 31"/>
<link wikidata="Q277491" start="953" end="961" title="Saab 340" label="Saab 340"/>
<link wikidata="Q725319" start="1016" end="1037" title="Fokker F28 Fellowship" label="Fokker F28 Fellowship"/>
<link wikidata="Q589498" start="1140" end="1149" title="British Aerospace 146" label="Avro RJ85"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136382" start="1213" end="1222" title="Saab 2000" label="Saab 2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q189709" start="1329" end="1342" title="Star Alliance" label="Star Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q189709" start="1422" end="1435" title="Star Alliance" label="Star Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q187854" start="1524" end="1545" title="Scandinavian Airlines" label="Scandinavian Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q8691" start="1891" end="1907" title="Heathrow Airport" label="Heathrow Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q5700" start="1974" end="1981" title="Lapland (Finland)" label="Lapland"/>
<link wikidata="Q6401" start="2473" end="2487" title="Boeing 717-200" label="Boeing 717-200"/>
<link wikidata="Q2296193" start="2492" end="2499" title="Volotea" label="Volotea"/>
<link wikidata="Q188920" start="2504" end="2519" title="Delta Air Lines" label="Delta Air Lines"/>
<link wikidata="Q1084919" start="2549" end="2563" title="Boeing 737-600" label="Boeing 737-600"/>
<link wikidata="Q187854" start="2582" end="2603" title="Scandinavian Airlines" label="Scandinavian Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q962677" start="2692" end="2709" title="Bombardier CRJ900" label="Bombardier CRJ900"/>
<link wikidata="Q94559" start="2715" end="2721" title="Cimber (airline)" label="Cimber"/>
<link wikidata="Q187854" start="2741" end="2762" title="Scandinavian Airlines" label="Scandinavian Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q163625" start="2800" end="2807" title="CityJet" label="CityJet"/>
<link wikidata="Q187854" start="2989" end="2992" title="Scandinavian Airlines" label="SAS"/>
<link wikidata="Q6401" start="3206" end="3220" title="Boeing 717-200" label="Boeing 717-200"/>
<link wikidata="Q2828207" start="3944" end="3961" title="Air International" label="Air International"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="464786" wikidata="Q61235" url="?curid=464786" title="Vladimir Kuts">
<text>Volodymyr Petrovych Kuts (, , 7 February 1927 – 16 August 1975) was a Soviet long-distance runner. He won the 5000 and 10000 m races at the 1956 Olympics, setting Olympic records in both events.

==Biography==
Kuts was born in Oleksyne, Ukrainian SSR, USSR. His father died due to alcoholism when Kuts was five years old. During World War II he falsified his age and served two years with the Soviet Army as a courier. He took up running after the war, while continuing his military service as a navy sniper. In 1951 he won his first national titles, in the 5000 and 10000 m, an achievement he repeated in 1953–1956. His first international success came in 1954, when he defeated the favourites – Emil Zátopek and Christopher Chataway – in the 5000 m at the European Championships, setting a new world record. He lost the world record months later to Chataway (who beat him narrowly), only to take it back 10 days later.

Having lost his world record again in 1955, Kuts was still one of the favourites for the 1956 Summer Olympics in Melbourne. His chief opponent in the 5000 m was British runner Gordon Pirie, who had broken the world record earlier that year. However, Kuts had set a new 10,000 metres world record shortly before the Games. In the first final, the 10,000 m, Kuts – as always – led from the start, finally breaking Pirie&#x27;s spirit 4 laps from the end and winning by a wide margin. He broke away from Pirie with a final, desperate sprint, and admitted later that had Pirie stayed with him on that sprint, he might have dropped out due to fatigue. The 5,000 m final 5 days later ended in a similar fashion, with Kuts leading from start to finish. His winning margin of 11 seconds was the largest ever for this event in Olympic history.

Kuts improved the 5000 m world record in 1957 to 13:35.0 minutes, a time which would remain unbeaten until 1965, when it was bettered by Australia&#x27;s Ron Clarke. Although he was only beaten on a couple of occasions, Kuts retired at the age of 32 in 1959. He had often suffered from pains in his stomach and legs, which he once froze while serving in the Navy. These problems severely hindered his training in 1957–1959 and followed him for the rest of his life.

After retiring from competitions Kuts worked as an athletics coach. He suffered a stroke after a traffic accident in 1972, and hence was not allowed to accompany his several trainees at the 1972 Olympics. He died in 1975, in an apparent suicide from mixing sleeping pills and alcohol. Near the end of his life he weighed about 120 kg, approximately 50 kg heavier than usual.

Kuts was married twice, first to Raisa Andreyevna Kuts and then to Raisa Timofeyevna Kuts. He met his first wife in 1953, when she was taking his interviews as a journalist. She later taught him Russian grammar, as Kuts completed only six years of school before the start of World War II, and often mixed up Russian and Ukrainian languages. They had a son Yuri, who became a scientist. After a second divorce in 1973, Kuts didn&#x27;t remarry.

==Legacy==
In 1985 in the city of Trostianets was erected a monument in his name near the Kuts Stadium.

==References==
==Sources==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q61235" start="0" end="24" title="Vladimir Kuts" label="Volodymyr Petrovych Kuts"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="70" end="76" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet"/>
<link wikidata="Q917206" start="77" end="97" title="long-distance runner" label="long-distance runner"/>
<link wikidata="Q2388859" start="227" end="235" title="Trostianets Raion, Sumy Oblast" label="Oleksyne"/>
<link wikidata="Q133356" start="237" end="250" title="Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic" label="Ukrainian SSR"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="329" end="341" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q201948" start="501" end="507" title="sniper" label="sniper"/>
<link wikidata="Q52589" start="697" end="709" title="Emil Zátopek" label="Emil Zátopek"/>
<link wikidata="Q333431" start="714" end="734" title="Christopher Chataway" label="Christopher Chataway"/>
<link wikidata="Q8411" start="1011" end="1031" title="1956 Summer Olympics" label="1956 Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q3141" start="1035" end="1044" title="Melbourne" label="Melbourne"/>
<link wikidata="Q596587" start="1098" end="1110" title="Gordon Pirie" label="Gordon Pirie"/>
<link wikidata="Q16714855" start="1191" end="1217" title="10,000 metres world record progression" label="10,000 metres world record"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="1895" end="1904" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q549365" start="1912" end="1922" title="Ron Clarke" label="Ron Clarke"/>
<link wikidata="Q606706" start="3080" end="3091" title="Trostianets" label="Trostianets"/>
<link wikidata="Q126003369" start="3136" end="3148" title="Kuts Stadium" label="Kuts Stadium"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="464793" wikidata="Q1143090" url="?curid=464793" title="Dead-code elimination">
<text>In compiler theory, dead-code elimination (DCE, dead-code removal, dead-code stripping, or dead-code strip) is a compiler optimization to remove dead code (code that does not affect the program results). Removing such code has several benefits: it shrinks program size, an important consideration in some contexts, it reduces resource usage such as the number of bytes to be transferred and it allows the running program to avoid executing irrelevant operations, which reduces its running time. It can also enable further optimizations by simplifying program structure. Dead code includes code that can never be executed (unreachable code), and code that only affects dead variables (written to, but never read again), that is, irrelevant to the program.

==Examples==
Consider the following example written in C.

int foo(void) {
 int a = 24;
 int b = 25; /* Assignment to dead variable */
 int c;
 c = a * 4;
 return c;
 b = 24; /* Unreachable code */
 return 0;


Simple analysis of the uses of values would show that the value of codice_1 after the first assignment is not used inside codice_2. Furthermore, codice_1 is declared as a local variable inside codice_2, so its value cannot be used outside codice_2. Thus, the variable codice_1 is &quot;dead&quot; and an optimizer can reclaim its storage space and eliminate its initialization.

Furthermore, because the first return statement is executed unconditionally and there is no label after it which a &quot;goto&quot; could reach, no feasible execution path reaches the second assignment to codice_1. Thus, the assignment is &quot;unreachable&quot; and can be removed.
If the procedure had a more complex control flow, such as a label after the return statement and a codice_8 elsewhere in the procedure, then a feasible execution path might exist to the assignment to codice_1.

Also, even though some calculations are performed in the function, their values are not stored in locations accessible outside the scope of this function. Furthermore, given the function returns a static value (96), it may be simplified to the value it returns (this simplification is called constant folding).

Most advanced compilers have options to activate dead-code elimination, sometimes at varying levels. A lower level might only remove instructions that cannot be executed. A higher level might also not reserve space for unused variables. A yet higher level might determine instructions or functions that serve no purpose and eliminate them.

A common use of dead-code elimination is as an alternative to optional code inclusion via a preprocessor. Consider the following code.

int main(void) {
 int a = 5;
 int b = 6;
 int c;
 c = a * (b / 2);
 if (0) { /* DEBUG */
 printf(&quot;%d\n&quot;, c);
 return c;


Because the expression 0 will always evaluate to false, the code inside the if statement can never be executed, and dead-code elimination would remove it entirely from the optimized program. This technique is common in debugging to optionally activate blocks of code; using an optimizer with dead-code elimination eliminates the need for using a preprocessor to perform the same task.

In practice, much of the dead code that an optimizer finds is created by other transformations in the optimizer. For example, the classic techniques for operator strength reduction insert new computations into the code and render the older, more expensive computations dead. Subsequent dead-code elimination removes those calculations and completes the effect (without complicating the strength-reduction algorithm).

Historically, dead-code elimination was performed using information derived from data-flow analysis. An algorithm based on static single-assignment form (SSA) appears in the original journal article on &quot;SSA&quot; form by Ron Cytron et al. Robert Shillingsburg (aka Shillner) improved on the algorithm and developed a companion algorithm for removing useless control-flow operations.

==Dynamic dead-code elimination==
Dead code is normally considered dead &quot;unconditionally&quot;. Therefore, it is reasonable attempting to remove dead code through dead-code elimination at compile time.

However, in practice it is also common for code sections to represent dead or unreachable code only &quot;under certain conditions&quot;, which may not be known at the time of compilation or assembly. Such conditions may be imposed by different runtime environments (for example different versions of an operating system, or different sets and combinations of drivers or services loaded in a particular target environment), which may require different sets of special cases in the code, but at the same time become conditionally dead code for the other cases. Also, the software (for example, a driver or resident service) may be configurable to include or exclude certain features depending on user preferences, rendering unused code portions useless in a particular scenario. While modular software may be developed to dynamically load libraries on demand only, in most cases, it is not possible to load only the relevant routines from a particular library, and even if this would be supported, a routine may still include code sections which can be considered dead code in a given scenario, but could not be ruled out at compile time, already.

The techniques used to dynamically detect demand, identify and resolve dependencies, remove such conditionally dead code, and to recombine the remaining code at load or runtime are called dynamic dead-code elimination or dynamic dead-instruction elimination.

Most programming languages, compilers and operating systems offer no or little more support than dynamic loading of libraries and late linking, therefore software utilizing dynamic dead-code elimination is very rare in conjunction with languages compiled ahead-of-time or written in assembly language. However, language implementations doing just-in-time compilation may dynamically optimize for dead-code elimination.

Although with a rather different focus, similar approaches are sometimes also utilized for dynamic software updating and hot patching.

==See also==
* Redundant code
* Simplification (symbolic computation)
* Partial-redundancy elimination
* Conjunction elimination
* Dynamic software updating
* Dynamic coupling (computing)
* Self-relocation
* Software cruft
* Tree shaking
* Post-pass optimization
* Profile-guided optimization
* Superoptimizer
* Function multi-versioning

==References==
==Further reading==
* 
* 
* 

==External links==
* How to trick C/C++ compilers into generating terrible code?</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q47506" start="3" end="18" title="compiler theory" label="compiler theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143090" start="20" end="41" title="Dead-code elimination" label="dead-code elimination"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143090" start="43" end="46" title="Dead-code elimination" label="DCE"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143090" start="48" end="65" title="Dead-code elimination" label="dead-code removal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143090" start="67" end="86" title="Dead-code elimination" label="dead-code stripping"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143090" start="91" end="106" title="Dead-code elimination" label="dead-code strip"/>
<link wikidata="Q1325106" start="113" end="134" title="compiler optimization" label="compiler optimization"/>
<link wikidata="Q1770035" start="145" end="154" title="dead code" label="dead code"/>
<link wikidata="Q778586" start="256" end="263" title="executable" label="program"/>
<link wikidata="Q55813" start="451" end="461" title="CPU instruction" label="operations"/>
<link wikidata="Q1077724" start="481" end="493" title="execution (computing)" label="running time"/>
<link wikidata="Q2482534" start="622" end="638" title="unreachable code" label="unreachable code"/>
<link wikidata="Q3207945" start="668" end="681" title="dead variable" label="dead variable"/>
<link wikidata="Q15777" start="811" end="812" title="C (programming language)" label="C"/>
<link wikidata="Q868299" start="1665" end="1677" title="control flow" label="control flow"/>
<link wikidata="Q1034415" start="1971" end="1976" title="scope (programming)" label="scope"/>
<link wikidata="Q2342581" start="2132" end="2148" title="constant folding" label="constant folding"/>
<link wikidata="Q918333" start="2585" end="2597" title="preprocessor" label="preprocessor"/>
<link wikidata="Q5432619" start="2810" end="2815" title="False (logic)" label="false"/>
<link wikidata="Q845566" start="2980" end="2989" title="debugging" label="debugging"/>
<link wikidata="Q918333" start="3107" end="3119" title="preprocessor" label="preprocessor"/>
<link wikidata="Q4371846" start="3309" end="3327" title="strength reduction" label="strength reduction"/>
<link wikidata="Q1172416" start="3646" end="3664" title="data-flow analysis" label="data-flow analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2667487" start="3688" end="3717" title="static single-assignment form" label="static single-assignment form"/>
<link wikidata="Q333707" start="4147" end="4159" title="compile time" label="compile time"/>
<link wikidata="Q1004415" start="4407" end="4426" title="runtime environment" label="runtime environment"/>
<link wikidata="Q650550" start="5471" end="5475" title="load time" label="load"/>
<link wikidata="Q1077724" start="5479" end="5486" title="runtime (computing)" label="runtime"/>
<link wikidata="Q3502426" start="5667" end="5682" title="dynamic loading" label="dynamic loading"/>
<link wikidata="Q2916124" start="5700" end="5712" title="late linking" label="late linking"/>
<link wikidata="Q56248162" start="5816" end="5838" title="ahead-of-time compilation" label="compiled ahead-of-time"/>
<link wikidata="Q165436" start="5853" end="5870" title="assembly language" label="assembly language"/>
<link wikidata="Q110546" start="5912" end="5936" title="just-in-time compilation" label="just-in-time compilation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5318928" start="6081" end="6106" title="dynamic software updating" label="dynamic software updating"/>
<link wikidata="Q208218" start="6111" end="6123" title="hot patching" label="hot patching"/>
<link wikidata="Q1251793" start="6141" end="6155" title="Redundant code" label="Redundant code"/>
<link wikidata="Q2670846" start="6158" end="6195" title="Simplification (symbolic computation)" label="Simplification (symbolic computation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7140383" start="6198" end="6228" title="Partial-redundancy elimination" label="Partial-redundancy elimination"/>
<link wikidata="Q9289849" start="6231" end="6254" title="Conjunction elimination" label="Conjunction elimination"/>
<link wikidata="Q5318928" start="6257" end="6282" title="Dynamic software updating" label="Dynamic software updating"/>
<link wikidata="Q253448" start="6285" end="6313" title="Dynamic coupling (computing)" label="Dynamic coupling (computing)"/>
<link wikidata="Q17093906" start="6316" end="6331" title="Self-relocation" label="Self-relocation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5189918" start="6334" end="6348" title="Software cruft" label="Software cruft"/>
<link wikidata="Q30692758" start="6351" end="6363" title="Tree shaking" label="Tree shaking"/>
<link wikidata="Q17082826" start="6366" end="6388" title="Post-pass optimization" label="Post-pass optimization"/>
<link wikidata="Q4047424" start="6391" end="6418" title="Profile-guided optimization" label="Profile-guided optimization"/>
<link wikidata="Q7644079" start="6421" end="6435" title="Superoptimizer" label="Superoptimizer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1397886" start="6438" end="6463" title="Function multi-versioning" label="Function multi-versioning"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="464795" wikidata="Q1347249" url="?curid=464795" title="Asahi, Yamagata (Nishimurayama)">
<text>is a town located in Yamagata Prefecture, Japan. , the town had an estimated population of 6,366 and a population density of 32,35 persons per km2. The total area of the town is .

==Geography==
Asahi is located in mountainous central Yamagata, and contains Mount Asahi within its borders. The Mogami River forms the western border of the town.

===Neighboring municipalities===
*Yamagata Prefecture
**Nagai
**Nishikawa
**Ōe
**Oguni
**Shirataka
**Yamanobe

===Climate===
Asahi has a Humid continental climate (Köppen climate classification &quot;Dfa&quot;) with large seasonal temperature differences, with warm to hot (and often humid) summers and cold (sometimes severely cold) winters. Precipitation is significant throughout the year, but is heaviest from August to October. The average annual temperature in Asahi is 8.9 °C. The average annual rainfall is 1715 mm with September as the wettest month. The temperatures are highest on average in August, at around 22.7 °C, and lowest in January, at around -3.7 °C.

==Demographics==
Per Japanese census data, the population of Asahi has declined over the past 60 years.

==History==
The area of present-day Asahi was part of ancient Dewa Province. After the start of the Meiji period, the area became part of Nishimurayama District, Yamagata Prefecture. The town of Asahi was established on November 1, 1954, by the merger of the town of Miyajuku with the villages of Oya, and Nishiimogawa.

==Economy==
The economy of Asahi is based on agriculture.

==Education==
Asahi has three public elementary schools and one public middle school operated by the town government. The town does not have a high school.

==Transportation==
===Railway===
Asahi does not have any passenger railway service. The nearest station is Aterazawa Station in the neighboring town of Ōe.

===Highway===

==Local attractions==
*Mount Asahi

==References==
==External links==

*Official Website </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q48103755" start="5" end="9" title="Towns of Japan" label="town"/>
<link wikidata="Q125863" start="21" end="40" title="Yamagata Prefecture" label="Yamagata Prefecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="42" end="47" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2625603" start="77" end="87" title="population" label="population"/>
<link wikidata="Q22856" start="103" end="121" title="population density" label="population density"/>
<link wikidata="Q3072106" start="258" end="269" title="Mount Asahi (Yamagata)" label="Mount Asahi"/>
<link wikidata="Q596120" start="294" end="306" title="Mogami River" label="Mogami River"/>
<link wikidata="Q847557" start="402" end="407" title="Nagai, Yamagata" label="Nagai"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348988" start="410" end="419" title="Nishikawa, Yamagata" label="Nishikawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q377816" start="422" end="424" title="Ōe, Yamagata" label="Ōe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1347411" start="427" end="432" title="Oguni, Yamagata" label="Oguni"/>
<link wikidata="Q1354787" start="435" end="444" title="Shirataka" label="Shirataka"/>
<link wikidata="Q1347748" start="447" end="455" title="Yamanobe, Yamagata" label="Yamanobe"/>
<link wikidata="Q10856115" start="483" end="508" title="Humid continental climate" label="Humid continental climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q124095" start="510" end="539" title="Köppen climate classification" label="Köppen climate classification"/>
<link wikidata="Q876032" start="1186" end="1199" title="Dewa Province" label="Dewa Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q3125096" start="1224" end="1236" title="Meiji period" label="Meiji period"/>
<link wikidata="Q1155585" start="1262" end="1284" title="Nishimurayama District, Yamagata" label="Nishimurayama District"/>
<link wikidata="Q4813118" start="1768" end="1785" title="Aterazawa Station" label="Aterazawa Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q3072106" start="1856" end="1867" title="Mount Asahi (Yamagata)" label="Mount Asahi"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="464796" wikidata="Q2866286" url="?curid=464796" title="Asahi, Yamagata (Higashitagawa)">
<text>was a village located in Higashitagawa District, Yamagata Prefecture, Japan. The village was not related to the town of Asahi in the same prefecture or the adjacent Asahi in Niigata Prefecture.

On October 1, 2005, Asahi, along with the towns of Fujishima, Haguro and Kushibiki (all from Higashitagawa District), and the town of Atsumi (from Nishitagawa District), was merged into the expanded city of Tsuruoka, and no longer exists as an independent municipality.

Asahi literally means &quot;morning sun&quot;. The village is named after Asahi Mountains, which shine bright in the morning light.

The village was established in 1954 by the merger of the villages of Oizumi, Hongo and Azuma.

== References ==
==External links==
* Tsuruoka official website </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q41911880" start="6" end="13" title="List of villages of Japan" label="village"/>
<link wikidata="Q1155781" start="25" end="47" title="Higashitagawa District, Yamagata" label="Higashitagawa District"/>
<link wikidata="Q125863" start="49" end="68" title="Yamagata Prefecture" label="Yamagata Prefecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="70" end="75" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1347249" start="120" end="125" title="Asahi, Yamagata (Nishimurayama)" label="Asahi"/>
<link wikidata="Q4803346" start="165" end="170" title="Asahi, Niigata" label="Asahi"/>
<link wikidata="Q132705" start="174" end="192" title="Niigata Prefecture" label="Niigata Prefecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q3090607" start="246" end="255" title="Fujishima, Yamagata" label="Fujishima"/>
<link wikidata="Q3125724" start="257" end="263" title="Haguro, Yamagata" label="Haguro"/>
<link wikidata="Q3200648" start="268" end="277" title="Kushibiki, Yamagata" label="Kushibiki"/>
<link wikidata="Q1155781" start="288" end="310" title="Higashitagawa District, Yamagata" label="Higashitagawa District"/>
<link wikidata="Q4817782" start="329" end="335" title="Atsumi, Yamagata" label="Atsumi"/>
<link wikidata="Q7040718" start="342" end="362" title="Nishitagawa District, Yamagata" label="Nishitagawa District"/>
<link wikidata="Q734416" start="402" end="410" title="Tsuruoka, Yamagata" label="Tsuruoka"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054813" start="451" end="463" title="Municipalities of Japan" label="municipality"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="540" end="555" title="Asahi Mountains" label="Asahi Mountains"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="464797" wikidata="Q3000932" url="?curid=464797" title="Tax Court of Canada">
<text>The Tax Court of Canada (TCC; ), established in 1983 by the &quot;Tax Court of Canada Act&quot;, is a federal superior court which deals with matters involving companies or individuals and tax issues with the Government of Canada.

== Jurisdiction ==
Appeals of decisions of the Tax Court of Canada are exclusively within the jurisdiction of the Federal Court of Appeal. On occasion, the Supreme Court of Canada grants leave to appeal a federal tax case from a decision of the Federal Court of Appeal where the question involved is considered to be of public importance.

== Procedure ==
The litigation of a federal tax dispute is commenced by a taxpayer filing a Notice of Appeal in the Tax Court of Canada. Cases may proceed either by way of Informal or General Procedure. The Informal Procedure is a simplified process available to taxpayers where the total tax and penalties (but not interest) at issue is CAD$25,000 or less per taxation year ($50,000 in the case of GST).

In General Procedure cases, discoveries are held by exchange of documents followed by the examination, without a judge, of one witness on behalf of each party. One or both parties may then apply for a hearing date where witnesses will be examined and cross-examined before a judge and documents formally entered into evidence. Trials in the Tax Court of Canada typically take one day or less, particularly where the parties have agreed on all or substantially all of the facts, but in more complex and contentious cases the trial may not be completed for several weeks or even months.

In the Tax Court of Canada, the onus is generally on the taxpayer to prove its case on a balance of probabilities, except in respect of civil penalties where the Canada Revenue Agency carries the burden of proof. Generally, the Minister of National Revenue is represented by specialized tax litigation counsel from the Department of Justice.

The decision whether, and on what basis, to settle any particular case is made on a collaborative basis between the Canada Revenue Agency and the Department of Justice. Settlements are generally based on a principled approach to the matter rather than strictly as a percentage of the dollar amount at stake. This differs from the rules of general civil litigation, but it does offer the opportunity to develop creative settlement strategies particularly where multiple taxation years or issues are involved.

In granting judgment in favour of a taxpayer, the Tax Court of Canada may order the Minister of National Revenue to reassess on the basis described by the judge in the reasons for judgment or, where the assessment or reassessment is wholly incorrect, the assessment or reassessment may be vacated entirely.

Costs are recoverable by the successful party in accordance with rather modest tariff amounts, but reasonable disbursements incurred by the successful party (including expert witness costs) are generally fully recoverable.

==Judges==
;Chief Judge
The Honourable Eugene Rossiter
;Associate Chief Judge
The Honourable Anick Pelletier
;Judges (in order of seniority):

* The Honourable Pierre Archambault (supernumerary)
* The Honourable Alain Tardif (supernumerary)
* The Honourable Diane Campbell (supernumerary)
* The Honourable Campbell J. Miller (supernumerary)
* The Honourable Brent Paris
* The Honourable Judith Woods
* The Honourable Réal Favreau
* The Honourable Gaston Jorré
* The Honourable Patrick J. Boyle
* The Honourable Valerie Miller
* The Honourable Robert J. Hogan
* The Honourable Steven K. D&#x27;Arcy
* The Honourable Frank J. Pizzitelli
* The Honourable Johanne D&#x27;Auray
* The Honourable David Graham
* The Honourable Kathleen T. Lyons
* The Honourable John R. Owen
* The Honourable Dominique Lafleur
* The Honourable Sylvain Ouimet
* The Honourable Don R. Sommerfeldt
* The Honourable Henry A. Visser
* The Honourable Guy R. Smith
* The Honourable Bruce Russell
;Deputy Judges (alphabetical order):

* The Honourable D.W. Rowe
* The Honourable N. Weisman

==Former judges==

* Eric A. Bowie, Judge (1995-2019)
* Alban Garon, Chief Justice (1988-2004)
* Joe E. Hershfield, Judge (2000–2016)
* Terrence O&#x27;Connor
* Louise Lamarre Proulx, Judge (retired 2008)
* The Honourable Lucie Lamarre (retired 2021)

==References==
==External links==
* Tax Court of Canada </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3000932" start="4" end="23" title="Tax Court of Canada" label="Tax Court of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q3000932" start="25" end="28" title="Tax Court of Canada" label="TCC"/>
<link wikidata="Q7689368" start="66" end="89" title="Tax Court of Canada Act" label="Tax Court of Canada Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q3001081" start="102" end="124" title="Federal Court (Canada)" label="federal superior court"/>
<link wikidata="Q783794" start="160" end="169" title="companies" label="companies"/>
<link wikidata="Q795052" start="173" end="183" title="individual" label="individual"/>
<link wikidata="Q8161" start="189" end="192" title="tax" label="tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q422404" start="209" end="229" title="Government of Canada" label="Government of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q3000992" start="346" end="369" title="Federal Court of Appeal" label="Federal Court of Appeal"/>
<link wikidata="Q196615" start="388" end="411" title="Supreme Court of Canada" label="Supreme Court of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q329777" start="664" end="680" title="Notice of Appeal" label="Notice of Appeal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1104069" start="910" end="913" title="Canadian dollar" label="CAD"/>
<link wikidata="Q9012745" start="1653" end="1677" title="balance of probabilities" label="balance of probabilities"/>
<link wikidata="Q1032002" start="1726" end="1747" title="Canada Revenue Agency" label="Canada Revenue Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q9012745" start="1760" end="1775" title="Legal burden of proof" label="burden of proof"/>
<link wikidata="Q6866264" start="1792" end="1820" title="Minister of National Revenue" label="Minister of National Revenue"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058376" start="1883" end="1904" title="Department of Justice (Canada)" label="Department of Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q1032002" start="2023" end="2044" title="Canada Revenue Agency" label="Canada Revenue Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058376" start="2053" end="2074" title="Department of Justice (Canada)" label="Department of Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q6866264" start="2500" end="2528" title="Minister of National Revenue" label="Minister of National Revenue"/>
<link wikidata="Q5407701" start="2987" end="3002" title="Eugene Rossiter" label="Eugene Rossiter"/>
<link wikidata="Q7192052" start="3108" end="3126" title="Pierre Archambault" label="Pierre Archambault"/>
<link wikidata="Q28136290" start="3128" end="3141" title="Supernumerary judge" label="supernumerary"/>
<link wikidata="Q2830307" start="3160" end="3172" title="Alain Tardif" label="Alain Tardif"/>
<link wikidata="Q28136290" start="3174" end="3187" title="Supernumerary judge" label="supernumerary"/>
<link wikidata="Q5271413" start="3206" end="3220" title="Diane Campbell" label="Diane Campbell"/>
<link wikidata="Q28136290" start="3222" end="3235" title="Supernumerary judge" label="supernumerary"/>
<link wikidata="Q5028103" start="3254" end="3272" title="Campbell J. Miller" label="Campbell J. Miller"/>
<link wikidata="Q28136290" start="3274" end="3287" title="Supernumerary judge" label="supernumerary"/>
<link wikidata="Q16244407" start="3306" end="3317" title="Brent Paris" label="Brent Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q16244772" start="3335" end="3347" title="Judith Woods" label="Judith Woods"/>
<link wikidata="Q7386082" start="3365" end="3377" title="Réal Favreau" label="Réal Favreau"/>
<link wikidata="Q5526741" start="3395" end="3407" title="Gaston Jorré" label="Gaston Jorré"/>
<link wikidata="Q7146793" start="3425" end="3441" title="Patrick J. Boyle" label="Patrick J. Boyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q7911312" start="3459" end="3473" title="Valerie Miller" label="Valerie Miller"/>
<link wikidata="Q7345549" start="3491" end="3506" title="Robert Hogan (judge)" label="Robert J. Hogan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7614887" start="3524" end="3545" title="Steven K. D&amp;#x27;Arcy" label="Steven K. D&amp;#x27;Arcy"/>
<link wikidata="Q21063418" start="3800" end="3818" title="Don R. Sommerfeldt" label="Don R. Sommerfeldt"/>
<link wikidata="Q5385971" start="4028" end="4041" title="Eric A. Bowie" label="Eric A. Bowie"/>
<link wikidata="Q4709002" start="4063" end="4074" title="Alban Garon" label="Alban Garon"/>
<link wikidata="Q6209645" start="4104" end="4121" title="Joe E. Hershfield" label="Joe E. Hershfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q7703501" start="4143" end="4165" title="Terrence O&amp;#x27;Connor" label="Terrence O&amp;#x27;Connor"/>
<link wikidata="Q16244464" start="4168" end="4189" title="Louise Lamarre Proulx" label="Louise Lamarre Proulx"/>
<link wikidata="Q6696976" start="4229" end="4242" title="Lucie Lamarre" label="Lucie Lamarre"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="464799" wikidata="Q7689368" url="?curid=464799" title="Tax Court of Canada Act">
<text>The Tax Court of Canada Act () was a 1983 Act of the Parliament of Canada concerning the Tax Court of Canada.

==External links==
* Tax Court of Canada Act</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1076579" start="42" end="45" title="Act of Parliament" label="Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q475689" start="53" end="73" title="Parliament of Canada" label="Parliament of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q3000932" start="89" end="108" title="Tax Court of Canada" label="Tax Court of Canada"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="464801" wikidata="Q125819" url="?curid=464801" title="Eric Laithwaite">
<text>Eric Roberts Laithwaite (14 June 1921 – 27 November 1997) was an English electrical engineer, known as the &quot;Father of Maglev&quot; for his development of the linear induction motor and maglev rail system after Hermann Kemper&#x27;s theories and after Charles Wheatstone&#x27;s pioneering.

== Biography ==
Eric Roberts Laithwaite was born in Atherton, Lancashire on 14 June 1921, raised in the Fylde, Lancashire and educated at Kirkham Grammar School. He joined the Royal Air Force in 1941. Through his service in World War II, he rose to the rank of Flying Officer, becoming a test engineer for autopilot technology at the Royal Aircraft Establishment in Farnborough.

On demobilization in 1946, he attended the University of Manchester to study electrical engineering. His work on the Manchester Mark I computer earned him his master&#x27;s degree. His subsequent doctoral work started his interest in linear induction motors. He derived an equation for &quot;goodness&quot; which parametrically describes the efficiency of a motor in general terms, and showed that it tended to imply that large motors are more efficient. 

He became professor of heavy electrical engineering at Imperial College London in 1964 where he continued his successful development of the linear motor. He was involved in creating a self-stable magnetic levitation system called Magnetic river which appeared in the film &quot;The Spy Who Loved Me&quot; where it levitated and propelled a tray along a table to decapitate a seated dummy.
He also worked at applying linear motors on the Tracked Hovercraft until its cancellation.

In the 1980s, he was involved in creating a device to extract energy from sea waves. Although the technology was successful in trials, it could not be made storm proof, so it never became a commercial success.

Laithwaite was an able communicator who made many television appearances. Notable among these were his Royal Institution Christmas Lectures to young people in 1966 and 1974. The latter of these made much of the surprising properties of the gyroscope.

In 1974, Laithwaite was invited by the Royal Institution to give a talk on a subject of his own choosing. He decided to lecture about gyroscopes, a subject in which he had only recently become interested. His interest had been aroused by an amateur inventor named Alex Jones, who contacted Laithwaite about a reactionless propulsion drive he (Jones) had invented. 

After seeing a demonstration of Jones&#x27;s small prototype (a small wagon with a swinging pendulum which advanced intermittently along a table top), Laithwaite became convinced that &quot;he had seen something impossible&quot;. In his lecture before the Royal Institution he claimed that gyroscopes weigh less when spinning and, to demonstrate this, he showed that he could lift a spinning gyroscope mounted on the end of a rod easily with one hand but could not do so when the gyroscope was not spinning. This was discussed in the BBC science series &quot;Horizon - 2015-2016: 2. Project Greenglow - The Quest for Gravity Control&quot;. 

In his 1974 lectures, Laithwaite suggested that Newton&#x27;s laws of motion could not account for the behaviour of gyroscopes and that they could be used as a means of reactionless propulsion. The members of the Royal Institution rejected his ideas and his lectures were not published at the time, a first for the Royal Institution. His lectures were subsequently published independently as &quot;Engineer Through The Looking-Glass&quot; and also on the Royal Institution website.

Despite this rejection and the fact that Laithwaite later acknowledged that gyroscopes behave fully in accord with Newtonian mechanics, he continued to explore gyroscopic behaviour, maintaining the belief that some form of reactionless propulsion could be derived from them. Laithwaite set up Gyron Ltd with William Dawson and, in 1993, applied for a patent entitled &quot;Propulsion System&quot;. A United States Patent, Number 5860317, was granted in 1999.

Although Laithwaite is best known for his ideas concerning gyroscopes, he also held an idea concerning moths. He proposed that they communicate via ultra short wave electromagnetic phenomena (Inventor in the Garden of Eden, E R Laithwaite 1994 page 199). He persisted in this belief even after the pheromone which they actually use had been isolated and could even be bought &quot;over-the-counter&quot; – seemingly contradicting his account. However, he had argued in 1960 that there must be &quot;two different mechanisms&quot; for detecting pheromones: (i) The orthodox account of chemical-gradients (effective only at short-range), and (ii) some method for long-distance detection (&gt; &quot;100 yards&quot;) even when the wind was in an unfavourable direction – and the only credible solution then had to be electromagnetic (probably infrared). This explanation did not account for where the necessary energy might come from – a matter later taken up by P. S. Callahan, though he too suffered considerable controversy (largely due to Laithwaite&#x27;s detractors overlooking his &quot;(i)/(ii)&quot; distinction).
Laithwaite retired from Imperial College in 1986, but was offered no other research post until 1990, when he became Visiting Professor at the University of Sussex. He was persuaded by George Scelzo of PRT Maglev Systems in Chicago to submit a proposal to NASA for an electromagnetic launch assist track originally inspired by John C. Mankins of NASA. He died within weeks of the contract being awarded. 

The initial stage has been successfully continued by William Dawson and the contract with PRT for this development is still active. The track uses both levitation coils and linear induction motors and it can be seen in the &quot;Magnets&quot; episode of &quot;Modern Marvels&quot; on the History Channel.

== Personal life ==
Laithwaite was also a keen entomologist and the co-author of &quot;The Dictionary of Butterflies and Moths&quot; (1975); he had one of the finest British collections of specimens. He married Sheila Gooddie in 1951; they had two sons and two daughters.

He died at Falmer, East Sussex on 27 November 1997.

== Published works ==

=== Articles ===
* &quot;A Radiation Theory of the Assembling of Moths&quot; The Entomologist, June–July 1960, vol. 93 (1166–1167), pp. 113–117, 133–137 +plate (III)
* Eric Laithwaite, &quot;Linear motors for high-speed vehicles&quot;, &quot;New Scientist&quot;, 28 June 1973, p. 802-805
* &quot;Eric Laithwaite defies Newton&quot;, &quot;New Scientist&quot;, 14 November 1974, p470
* &quot;The multiplication of bananas by umbrellas&quot; &quot;Electrical Review&quot;, 20–27 December 1974, pp. 822–824
* &quot;The bigger they are, the harder they fall&quot; &quot;Electrical Review&quot;, 14 February 1975, pp. 40–42
* &quot;1975 – A space odyssey&quot; &quot;Electrical Review&quot;, 28 March – 4 April 1975, pp. 398–400
* &quot;Roll Isaac, roll – Part I&quot; &quot;Electrical Review&quot;, Vol. 204, No. 7, 16 February 1979, pp. 38–41
* &quot;Roll Isaac, roll – Part II&quot; &quot;Electrical Review&quot;, Vol. 204, No. 11, 16 March 1979, pp. 31–33
* &quot;Give us a sign&quot; &quot;Electrical Review&quot;, Vol. 207, No. 3, 18 July 1980, pp. 40–42
* &quot;Gaze in wonder: an engineer looks at biology&quot;, (1988), &quot;Speculations in Science and Technology&quot;, vol.11(4), 341–345.
* &quot;The influence of Michael Faraday on power engineering&quot;. &quot;Power engineering journal&quot;, Vol.5, No. 5, September 1991, pp. 209–219

=== Books ===
* &quot;Propulsion without wheels&quot; (1965)
* &quot;Induction machines for special purposes&quot; (1966)
* &quot;The engineer in wonderland&quot; (1967) — The Royal Institution of Great Britain Christmas lectures, 1966/67. With illustrations, including a portrait.
* &quot;The linear motor and its application to tracked hovercraft&quot; (1971)
* &quot;Linear electric motors&quot; (1971) Mills &amp; Boon Monographs and Technical Library
* &quot;Experiments with a linear induction motor&quot; (1971)
* &quot;Exciting electrical machines&quot; (1974)
* &quot;All things are possible: an engineer looks at research and development&quot; (1976)
* &quot;Transport without wheels&quot; ed. (1977)
* &quot;How to invent&quot; (1977) co-written by Meredith Thring
* &quot;Why does a glow-worm glow?&quot; (1977) illustrated by Mike Jackson
* &quot;Electric energy: its generation, transmission and use&quot; (1980) co-written by L.L. Freris
* &quot;Engineer through the looking glass&quot; (1980)— a revised and expanded version of his Royal Institution of Great Britain Christmas lectures, 1974/75. With illustrations, including a portrait.
* &quot;Invitation to engineering&quot; (1984)
* &quot;Shape is important&quot; (1986)
* &quot;Force: a basic ingredient&quot; (1986)
* &quot;A history of linear electric motors&quot; (1986)
* &quot;Using materials&quot; (1987)
* &quot;Size is vital&quot; (1987)
* &quot;An inventor in the Garden of Eden&quot; (1994)

== Honours ==
* S. G. Brown Medal of the Royal Society (1966)
* IEEE Nikola Tesla Award of the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers
* Fellow of Imperial College London (1991)
* Honorary Fellow of the Institution of Electrical Engineers (1992)

== See also ==
* List of maglev train proposals
* UK Ultraspeed

== References ==
== External links ==

* Obituary at Keelynet 
* &quot;NASA Breakthrough Propulsion Physics Project: COMMON ERRORS: Gyroscopic Antigravity&quot; a NASA page discussing Laithwaite&#x27;s demonstration.
* The Foster-Miller Maglifter project, which has a picture of their linear motor subscale system.
* The Royal Institution’s 1974-75 Christmas Lecture video
* This is the Heretic program about Eric Laithewaite towards the end of his career. It explains the battle he had trying to get the scientific community to accept or even investigate his ideas.
* Repetition of Laithwaite&#x27;s experiments, with explanations
* &quot;How Popperian positivism killed a good-but-poorly-presented theory — Insect Communication by Infrared&quot;. Ondwelle: Melbourne. (Dec.2005) — a critique of a &quot;debate&quot; over insects and infrared, in which Laithwaite was cited, and yet partly ignored!
* &quot;Critique of the 1977 debate on infra-red &#x27;olfaction&#x27; in insects — (Diesendorf v. P.S.Callahan)&quot;; Conference of the Australian Entomological Society; at Orange, NSW, (30 September 2008).
* Imperial college 1984 video of Laithwaite&#x27;s magnetic river in operation</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q125819" start="0" end="23" title="Eric Laithwaite" label="Eric Roberts Laithwaite"/>
<link wikidata="Q43035" start="73" end="92" title="electrical engineer" label="electrical engineer"/>
<link wikidata="Q4120059" start="113" end="122" title="List of people considered father or mother of a field" label="Father of"/>
<link wikidata="Q160047" start="123" end="129" title="Maglev" label="Maglev"/>
<link wikidata="Q16928416" start="163" end="185" title="linear induction motor" label="linear induction motor"/>
<link wikidata="Q160047" start="190" end="196" title="Maglev (transport)" label="maglev"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="215" end="292" title="Hermann Kemper&amp;#x27;s theories and after Charles Wheatstone&amp;#x27;s pioneering" label="Hermann Kemper&amp;#x27;s theories and after Charles Wheatstone&amp;#x27;s pioneering"/>
<link wikidata="Q755504" start="347" end="355" title="Atherton, Greater Manchester" label="Atherton"/>
<link wikidata="Q3307455" start="395" end="404" title="the Fylde" label="the Fylde"/>
<link wikidata="Q6415669" start="433" end="455" title="Kirkham Grammar School" label="Kirkham Grammar School"/>
<link wikidata="Q165862" start="471" end="486" title="Royal Air Force" label="Royal Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="519" end="531" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q10753609" start="556" end="570" title="Comparative military ranks" label="Flying Officer"/>
<link wikidata="Q220858" start="601" end="610" title="autopilot" label="autopilot"/>
<link wikidata="Q1419175" start="629" end="657" title="Royal Aircraft Establishment" label="Royal Aircraft Establishment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1231271" start="661" end="672" title="Farnborough Airfield" label="Farnborough"/>
<link wikidata="Q934433" start="678" end="692" title="demobilization" label="demobilization"/>
<link wikidata="Q230899" start="718" end="742" title="University of Manchester" label="University of Manchester"/>
<link wikidata="Q43035" start="752" end="774" title="electrical engineering" label="electrical engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q1463814" start="792" end="809" title="Manchester Mark I" label="Manchester Mark I"/>
<link wikidata="Q5583492" start="967" end="975" title="Goodness factor" label="goodness"/>
<link wikidata="Q189022" start="1187" end="1210" title="Imperial College London" label="Imperial College London"/>
<link wikidata="Q1164566" start="1272" end="1284" title="linear motor" label="linear motor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061251" start="1328" end="1347" title="magnetic levitation" label="magnetic levitation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3016121" start="1362" end="1376" title="Magnetic river" label="Magnetic river"/>
<link wikidata="Q320423" start="1410" end="1430" title="The Spy Who Loved Me (film)" label="The Spy Who Loved Me"/>
<link wikidata="Q12071362" start="1569" end="1587" title="Tracked Hovercraft" label="Tracked Hovercraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q208554" start="1675" end="1696" title="Wave power" label="energy from sea waves"/>
<link wikidata="Q289" start="1874" end="1884" title="television" label="television"/>
<link wikidata="Q600467" start="1927" end="1963" title="Royal Institution Christmas Lectures" label="Royal Institution Christmas Lectures"/>
<link wikidata="Q483400" start="2064" end="2073" title="gyroscope" label="gyroscope"/>
<link wikidata="Q2171086" start="2115" end="2132" title="Royal Institution" label="Royal Institution"/>
<link wikidata="Q4200967" start="2385" end="2408" title="Reactionless drive" label="reactionless propulsion"/>
<link wikidata="Q38433" start="3132" end="3160" title="Newton&amp;#x27;s laws of motion" label="Newton&amp;#x27;s laws of motion"/>
<link wikidata="Q38433" start="3682" end="3701" title="Newtonian mechanics" label="Newtonian mechanics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1725788" start="4130" end="4135" title="moths" label="moths"/>
<link wikidata="Q11388" start="4867" end="4875" title="infrared" label="infrared"/>
<link wikidata="Q1161297" start="5289" end="5309" title="University of Sussex" label="University of Sussex"/>
<link wikidata="Q1297" start="5370" end="5377" title="Chicago" label="Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q59006614" start="5473" end="5488" title="John C. Mankins" label="John C. Mankins"/>
<link wikidata="Q23548" start="5492" end="5496" title="NASA" label="NASA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1621107" start="5840" end="5855" title="History Channel" label="History Channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q39286" start="5905" end="5917" title="entomologist" label="entomologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1005234" start="6142" end="6148" title="Falmer" label="Falmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q25099331" start="7960" end="8009" title="Mills &amp;amp; Boon Monographs and Technical Library" label="Mills &amp;amp; Boon Monographs and Technical Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q6818986" start="8314" end="8329" title="Meredith Thring" label="Meredith Thring"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9043" end="9060" title="S. G. Brown Medal" label="S. G. Brown Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q123885" start="9068" end="9081" title="Royal Society" label="Royal Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q5970434" start="9091" end="9114" title="IEEE Nikola Tesla Award" label="IEEE Nikola Tesla Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q131566" start="9122" end="9171" title="Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers" label="Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers"/>
<link wikidata="Q189022" start="9184" end="9207" title="Imperial College London" label="Imperial College London"/>
<link wikidata="Q1524579" start="9240" end="9275" title="Institution of Electrical Engineers" label="Institution of Electrical Engineers"/>
<link wikidata="Q6626850" start="9301" end="9331" title="List of maglev train proposals" label="List of maglev train proposals"/>
<link wikidata="Q1329621" start="9334" end="9347" title="UK Ultraspeed" label="UK Ultraspeed"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="464804" wikidata="Q1432778" url="?curid=464804" title="Social cognition">
<text>Social cognition is a topic within psychology that focuses on how people process, store, and apply information about other people and social situations. It focuses on the role that cognitive processes play in social interactions.

More technically, social cognition refers to how people deal with conspecifics (members of the same species) or even across species (such as pet) information, include four stages: encoding, storage, retrieval, and processing. In the area of social psychology, social cognition refers to a specific approach in which these processes are studied according to the methods of cognitive psychology and information processing theory. According to this view, social cognition is a level of analysis that aims to understand social psychological phenomena by investigating the cognitive processes that underlie them. The major concerns of the approach are the processes involved in the perception, judgment, and memory of social stimuli; the effects of social and affective factors on information processing; and the behavioral and interpersonal consequences of cognitive processes. This level of analysis may be applied to any content area within social psychology, including research on intrapersonal, interpersonal, intragroup, and intergroup processes.

The term &quot;social cognition&quot; has been used in multiple areas in psychology and cognitive neuroscience, most often to refer to various social abilities disrupted in autism, schizophrenia and psychopathy. In cognitive neuroscience the biological basis of social cognition is investigated. Developmental psychologists study the development of social cognition abilities.

==History==
Social cognition came to prominence with the rise of cognitive psychology in the late 1960s and early 1970s and is now the dominant model and approach in mainstream social psychology. Common to social cognition theories is the idea that information is represented in the brain as &quot;cognitive elements&quot; such as schemas, attributions, or stereotypes. A focus on how these cognitive elements are processed is often employed. Social cognition therefore applies and extends many themes, theories, and paradigms from cognitive psychology that can be identified in reasoning (representativeness heuristic, base rate fallacy and confirmation bias), attention (automaticity and priming) and memory (schemas, primacy and recency). It is likely that social psychology has always had a more cognitive than general psychology approach, as it traditionally discussed internal mental states such as beliefs and desires when mainstream psychology was dominated by behaviorism.

It has been suggested that other disciplines in social psychology such as social identity theory and social representations may be seeking to explain largely the same phenomena as social cognition, and that these different disciplines might be merged into a &quot;coherent integrated whole&quot;. A parallel paradigm has arisen in the study of action, termed motor cognition, which is concerned with understanding the representation of action and the associated process.

==Development==
According to the received view in cognitive sciences, the development of the human ability to process, store, and apply information about others begins in social learning at the onset of life. Very young organisms cognize social situations in social interaction with their caregivers when knowledge is developing yet limited. The essential question in studying Social cognition is how this ability appears and what neurophysiological processes underlie it in organisms in the sensorimotor stage of development with only simple reflexes which do not maintain bilateral communication. 
Professor Michael Tomasello introduced the psychological construct of shared intentionality to explain cognition beginning in the earlier developmental stage through unaware collaboration in mother-child dyads. Other researchers developed the notion, by observing this collaborative interaction from different perspectives, e.g., psychophysiology, and neurobiology. 

Currently, only one hypothesis attempts to explain neurophysiological processes occurring during shared intentionality in all its integral complexity, from the level of interpersonal dynamics to interaction at the neuronal level. By establishing the neurophysiological hypothesis of shared intentionality, Latvian Prof. Igor Val Danilov expanded the use of the term shared intentionality to include consideration of the interaction between an embryo and her mother. From this perspective, abilities to process, store, and apply information about others develop from the prenatal period. This insight continues the reflections of great thinkers (e.g., Kant) and leading child development theorists (beginning from Montessori and Vygotsky) about the beginning of cognition in interactions with the environment. Based on experimental data from research on child behavior in the prenatal period, and advances in inter-brain neuroscience research, this neurophysiological hypothesis introduced the notion of non-local neuronal coupling of the mother and fetus neuronal networks. The notion of non-local neuronal coupling filled a gap in knowledge – both in the Core Knowledge Theory and the group of positions in Externalism – about the beginning of cognition, the gap that the binding problem has also shown. This insight also shed light on neurophysiological processes that underlie the human ability to process, store, and apply information about other people and social situations beginning from the reflexes stage of development, when even aware goal-directed behavior is questioned. While exactly due to the ability of shared intentionality, very young babies express social behavior. This ability manifests in recognizing and selectively responding to social stimuli. From this perspective, Social cognition contributes to cognitive development of newborns and even embryos when communication is still impossible. A development of the human ability to process, store, and apply information about others begins in the prenatal period.

==Social schemas==
One theory of social cognition is social schema theory, although it is not the basis of all social cognition studies (for example, see attribution theory). Social schema theory builds on and uses terminology from schema theory in cognitive psychology, which describes how ideas or &quot;concepts&quot; are represented in the mind and how they are categorized. According to this view, when we see or think of a concept a mental representation or schema is &quot;activated&quot; bringing to mind other information which is linked to the original concept by association. This activation often happens unconsciously. As a result of activating such schemas, judgements are formed which go beyond the information actually available, since many of the associations the schema evokes extend outside the given information. This may influence social cognition and behaviour regardless of whether these judgements are accurate or not. For example, if an individual is introduced as a teacher, then a &quot;teacher schema&quot; may be activated. Subsequently, we might associate this person with wisdom or authority, or past experiences of teachers that we remember and consider important.

When a schema is more accessible it can be more quickly activated and used in a particular situation. Two cognitive processes that increase accessibility of schemas are salience and priming. Salience is the degree to which a particular social object stands out relative to other social objects in a situation. The higher the salience of an object the more likely that schemas for that object will be made accessible. For example, if there is one female in a group of seven males, female gender schemas may be more accessible and influence the group&#x27;s thinking and behavior toward the female group member. Priming refers to any experience immediately prior to a situation that causes a schema to be more accessible. For example, watching a scary movie late at night might increase the accessibility of frightening schemas, increasing the likelihood that a person will perceive shadows and background noises as potential threats.

Social cognition researchers are interested in how new information is integrated into pre-established schemas, especially when the information contrasts with the existing schema. For example, a student may have a pre-established schema that all teachers are assertive and bossy. After encountering a teacher who is timid and shy, a social cognition researcher might be interested in how the student will integrate this new information with his/her existing teacher schema. Pre-established schemas tend to guide attention to new information, as people selectively attend to information that is consistent with the schema and ignore information that is inconsistent. This is referred to as a confirmation bias. Sometimes inconsistent information is sub-categorized and stored away as a special case, leaving the original schema intact without any alterations. This is referred to as subtyping.

Social cognition researchers are also interested in the regulation of activated schemas. It is believed that the situational activation of schemas is automatic, meaning that it is outside individual conscious control. In many situations however, the schematic information that has been activated may be in conflict with the social norms of the situation in which case an individual is motivated to inhibit the influence of the schematic information on their thinking and social behavior. Whether a person will successfully regulate the application of the activated schemas is dependent on individual differences in self-regulatory ability and the presence of situational impairments to executive control. High self-regulatory ability and the lack of situational impairments on executive functioning increase the likelihood that individuals will successfully inhibit the influence of automatically activated schemas on their thinking and social behavior. When people stop suppressing the influence of the unwanted thoughts, a rebound effect can occur where the thought becomes hyper-accessible.

==Centrality==

Social cognition refers to the cognitive processes involved in perceiving, interpreting, and responding to social information. It plays a central role in human behavior and is critical for navigating social interactions and relationships. There are several examples that demonstrate the centrality of social cognition in human experience.

===Perceiving faces everywhere===

Humans are highly attuned to detecting and recognizing faces, even in inanimate objects. This phenomenon, known as pareidolia, is thought to be an evolutionary adaptation that helps humans quickly identify potential threats and allies in their environment. Research has shown that the fusiform gyrus, a region of the brain involved in face processing, is particularly sensitive to perceiving faces in non-face objects.

===Point-light walkers===

Point-light walkers are animations of people walking that are created by attaching small lights to their joints and recording their movements in a dark room. Despite lacking details such as clothing or facial features, humans are able to accurately perceive the gender, emotion, and identity of the walker from these animations. This ability highlights the importance of social cognition in recognizing and interpreting human movement and behavior.

===Data on social-brain evolution===

Research has shown that the evolution of the human brain is closely tied to the development of social cognition. The prefrontal cortex, a region of the brain involved in higher-level cognitive processes such as decision-making and social behavior, has undergone significant expansion in humans compared to other primates. This expansion is thought to reflect the increased importance of social cognition in human evolution.

===Pain of social exclusion===

Social exclusion is a powerful social stressor that can elicit emotional and physiological responses similar to physical pain. This response highlights the importance of social connections and acceptance for human well-being and underscores the centrality of social cognition in regulating social behavior.

==Cultural differences==
Social psychologists have become increasingly interested in the influence of culture on social cognition. Although people of all cultures use schemas to understand the world, the content of schemas has been found to differ for individuals based on their cultural upbringing. For example, one study interviewed a Scottish settler and a Bantu herdsman from Swaziland and compared their schemas about cattle. Because cattle are essential to the lifestyle of the Bantu people, the Bantu herdsman&#x27;s schemas for cattle were far more extensive than the schemas of the Scottish settler. The Bantu herdsman was able to distinguish his cattle from dozens of others, while the Scottish settler was not.

Cultural influences have been found to shape some of the basic ways in which people automatically perceive and think about their environment. For example, a number of studies have found that people who grow up in East Asian cultures such as China and Japan tend to develop holistic thinking styles, whereas people brought up in Western cultures like Australia and the USA tend to develop analytic thinking styles. The typically Eastern holistic thinking style is a type of thinking in which people focus on the overall context and the ways in which objects relate to each other. For example, if an Easterner was asked to judge how a classmate is feeling then he/she might scan everyone&#x27;s face in the class, and then use this information to judge how the individual is feeling. On the other hand, the typically Western analytic thinking style is a type of thinking style in which people focus on individual objects and neglect to consider the surrounding context. For example, if a Westerner was asked to judge how a classmate is feeling, then he or she might focus only on the classmate&#x27;s face in order to make the judgment.

Nisbett (2003) suggested that cultural differences in social cognition may stem from the various philosophical traditions of the East (i.e. Confucianism and Buddhism) versus the Greek philosophical traditions (i.e. of Aristotle and Plato) of the West. Other research indicates that differences in social cognition may originate from physical differences in the environments of the two cultures. One study found that scenes from Japanese cities were &#x27;busier&#x27; than those in the US as they contain more objects which compete for attention. In this study, the Eastern holistic thinking style (and focus on the overall context) was attributed to the busier nature of the Japanese physical environment.

Later studies find that these differences in cognitive style can be explained by differences in relational mobility. Relational mobility is a measure of how much choice individuals have in terms of whom to form relationships with, including friendships, romantic partnerships, and work relations. Relational mobility is low in cultures with a subsistence economy that requires tight cooperation and coordination, such as farming, while it is high in cultures based on nomadic herding and in urban industrial cultures. 
A cross-cultural study found that the relational mobility is lowest in East Asian countries where rice farming is common, and highest in South American countries.

==Social cognitive neuroscience==

Early interest in the relationship between brain function and social cognition includes the case of Phineas Gage, whose behaviour was reported to have changed after an accident damaged one or both of his frontal lobes. More recent neuropsychological studies have shown that brain injuries disrupt social cognitive processes. For example, damage to the frontal lobes can affect emotional responses to social stimuli and performance on theory of mind tasks. In the temporal lobe, damage to the fusiform gyrus can lead to the inability to recognize faces. 

People with psychological disorders such as autism, psychosis, mood disorder, posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD), Williams syndrome, antisocial personality disorder, Fragile X, Turner&#x27;s syndrome and ADHD show differences in social behavior compared to their unaffected peers. Parents with PTSD show disturbances in at least one aspect of social cognition: namely, joint attention with their young children only after a laboratory-induced relational stressor as compared to healthy parents without PTSD. However, whether social cognition is underpinned by domain-specific neural mechanisms is still an open issue. There is now an expanding research field examining how such conditions may bias cognitive processes involved in social interaction, or conversely, how such biases may lead to the symptoms associated with the condition.

The development of social cognitive processes in infants and children has also been researched extensively (see developmental psychology). For example, it has been suggested that some aspects of psychological processes that promote social behavior (such as facial recognition) may be innate. Consistent with this, very young babies recognize and selectively respond to social stimuli such as the voice, face and scent of their mother. From the perspective of the shared intentionality hypothesis, social behavior of these organisms with simple reflexes emerges due to social cognition in social interaction with caregivers. Numerous hyper-scanning research studies in adults and mother-child dyads support the shared intentionality nature of social behavior in young children (see the section Development).

==See also==

* Behavioral sink
* Cognitive dissonance
* Distributed cognition
* Empathy
* Joint attention
* Language
* Neurodevelopmental framework for learning
* Observational learning
* Online participation
* Paranoid social cognition
* Relational mobility
* Embodied cognition
* Shared intentionality
* Situated cognition
* Social cognitive theory
* Social cognitive theory of morality
* Social emotion
* Social intelligence
* Social neuroscience
==References==
==Further reading==

* Bless, Herbert. &quot;Social Cognition: How Individuals Construct Reality: Social Psychology&quot;. Psychology Press, 2004. , 9780863778292
* Brewer, Marilynn B. &amp; Miles Hewstone. &quot;Social Cognition: Perspectives on Social Psychology&quot;. Wiley, 2004. , 
* Donaghue, Ngaire, Iain Walker, Martha Augoustinos. &quot;Social Cognition: An Integrated Introduction&quot;. Pine Forge Press, 2006. , 
* Fiske, Susan. &quot;Social Beings: A Core Motives approach to Social Psychology&quot;. New York: Wiley, 2004.
* Fiske, Susan &amp; Taylor, Shelley E. &quot;Social Cognition: From Brains to Culture&quot;. 3rd ed. New York: McGraw-Hill, 2008.
* Kunda, Ziva. &quot;Social Cognition: Making Sense of People&quot;. MIT Press, 1999. , 
* Malle, B.. &quot;How the Mind Explains Behavior: Folk Explanations, Meaning, and Social Interaction&quot;. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 2004.
* Malle, B. &amp; Hodges, S. D. &quot;Other Minds: How Humans Bridge the Divide Between Self and Others&quot;. New York: Guilford Press, 2005.
* Pennington, Dona. &quot;Social Cognition&quot;. Routledge, 2000. , 
* Valsiner, Jaan. &quot;Social Organization of Cognitive Development, Internalization and Externalization of Constraint Systems&quot;. In Demetriou, &quot;et al.&quot;, (1992, eds.), &quot;Neo-Piagetian Theories of Cognitive Development&quot;. New York, Routledge.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1432778" start="0" end="16" title="Social cognition" label="Social cognition"/>
<link wikidata="Q9418" start="35" end="45" title="psychology" label="psychology"/>
<link wikidata="Q2200417" start="181" end="200" title="cognitive processes" label="cognitive processes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1782625" start="297" end="309" title="conspecifics" label="conspecifics"/>
<link wikidata="Q161272" start="472" end="489" title="social psychology" label="social psychology"/>
<link wikidata="Q23373" start="603" end="623" title="cognitive psychology" label="cognitive psychology"/>
<link wikidata="Q2910843" start="628" end="657" title="information processing theory" label="information processing theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q9418" start="1353" end="1363" title="psychology" label="psychology"/>
<link wikidata="Q60755461" start="1368" end="1390" title="Social cognitive neuroscience" label="cognitive neuroscience"/>
<link wikidata="Q38404" start="1453" end="1459" title="autism" label="autism"/>
<link wikidata="Q41112" start="1461" end="1474" title="schizophrenia" label="schizophrenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q366886" start="1479" end="1490" title="psychopathy" label="psychopathy"/>
<link wikidata="Q175002" start="1576" end="1602" title="Developmental psychologist" label="Developmental psychologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q23373" start="1723" end="1743" title="cognitive psychology" label="cognitive psychology"/>
<link wikidata="Q161272" start="1835" end="1852" title="social psychology" label="social psychology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1983667" start="1956" end="1974" title="mentalism (psychology)" label="cognitive elements"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051200" start="1989" end="1996" title="schema (psychology)" label="schemas"/>
<link wikidata="Q900584" start="1998" end="2010" title="attribution theory" label="attributions"/>
<link wikidata="Q167172" start="2015" end="2025" title="stereotype" label="stereotype"/>
<link wikidata="Q1127759" start="2237" end="2246" title="cognitive bias" label="reasoning"/>
<link wikidata="Q20203288" start="2248" end="2276" title="representativeness heuristic" label="representativeness heuristic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1859747" start="2278" end="2295" title="base rate fallacy" label="base rate fallacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q431498" start="2300" end="2317" title="confirmation bias" label="confirmation bias"/>
<link wikidata="Q6501338" start="2320" end="2329" title="attention" label="attention"/>
<link wikidata="Q4826617" start="2331" end="2343" title="automaticity" label="automaticity"/>
<link wikidata="Q18619" start="2348" end="2355" title="priming (psychology)" label="priming"/>
<link wikidata="Q492" start="2361" end="2367" title="memory" label="memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1426477" start="2378" end="2397" title="primacy effect" label="primacy and recency"/>
<link wikidata="Q2200417" start="2458" end="2467" title="cognitive" label="cognitive"/>
<link wikidata="Q34394" start="2563" end="2569" title="belief" label="belief"/>
<link wikidata="Q168338" start="2627" end="2638" title="behaviorism" label="behaviorism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1540351" start="2715" end="2737" title="social identity theory" label="social identity theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q2779687" start="2742" end="2764" title="social representations" label="social representations"/>
<link wikidata="Q6918184" start="3000" end="3015" title="motor cognition" label="motor cognition"/>
<link wikidata="Q147638" start="3163" end="3180" title="cognitive science" label="cognitive science"/>
<link wikidata="Q660910" start="3544" end="3562" title="Neurophysiology" label="neurophysiological"/>
<link wikidata="Q179405" start="3656" end="3662" title="reflex" label="reflex"/>
<link wikidata="Q11024" start="3697" end="3710" title="communication" label="communication"/>
<link wikidata="Q659390" start="3756" end="3779" title="psychological construct" label="psychological construct"/>
<link wikidata="Q124054204" start="3783" end="3804" title="shared intentionality" label="shared intentionality"/>
<link wikidata="Q1428943" start="4043" end="4059" title="psychophysiology" label="psychophysiology"/>
<link wikidata="Q207011" start="4065" end="4077" title="neurobiology" label="neurobiology"/>
<link wikidata="Q900584" start="6272" end="6290" title="attribution theory" label="attribution theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051200" start="6350" end="6363" title="schema theory" label="schema theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q151885" start="6424" end="6431" title="concept" label="concept"/>
<link wikidata="Q2145290" start="6443" end="6466" title="representation (psychology)" label="represented in the mind"/>
<link wikidata="Q13582682" start="6484" end="6495" title="categorized" label="categorized"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051200" start="6582" end="6588" title="schema (psychology)" label="schema"/>
<link wikidata="Q1469792" start="7485" end="7493" title="salience (neuroscience)" label="salience"/>
<link wikidata="Q18619" start="7498" end="7505" title="priming (psychology)" label="priming"/>
<link wikidata="Q9332" start="7885" end="7893" title="behavior" label="behavior"/>
<link wikidata="Q431498" start="8940" end="8957" title="confirmation bias" label="confirmation bias"/>
<link wikidata="Q428148" start="9199" end="9209" title="regulation" label="regulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q205665" start="9467" end="9479" title="social norms" label="social norms"/>
<link wikidata="Q644302" start="9528" end="9536" title="motivate" label="motivate"/>
<link wikidata="Q7551193" start="9541" end="9548" title="social inhibition" label="inhibit"/>
<link wikidata="Q921513" start="9614" end="9629" title="social behavior" label="social behavior"/>
<link wikidata="Q5853064" start="12021" end="12037" title="Social exclusion" label="Social exclusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q7551393" start="12052" end="12065" title="social stress" label="social stress"/>
<link wikidata="Q25047901" start="12418" end="12458" title="Culture and social cognition" label="influence of culture on social cognition"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="13293" end="13298" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="13303" end="13308" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q9581" start="14328" end="14340" title="Confucianism" label="Confucianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q748" start="14345" end="14353" title="Buddhism" label="Buddhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q109536337" start="14992" end="15011" title="relational mobility" label="relational mobility"/>
<link wikidata="Q9056738" start="15364" end="15379" title="Pastoralism" label="nomadic herding"/>
<link wikidata="Q842623" start="15513" end="15525" title="Paddy rice" label="rice farming"/>
<link wikidata="Q316742" start="15714" end="15726" title="Phineas Gage" label="Phineas Gage"/>
<link wikidata="Q3872" start="15845" end="15863" title="neuropsychological" label="neuropsychological"/>
<link wikidata="Q4674782" start="15888" end="15902" title="acquired brain injury" label="brain injuries"/>
<link wikidata="Q639219" start="16048" end="16062" title="theory of mind" label="theory of mind"/>
<link wikidata="Q744385" start="16077" end="16090" title="temporal lobe" label="temporal lobe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1464932" start="16106" end="16120" title="fusiform gyrus" label="fusiform gyrus"/>
<link wikidata="Q244438" start="16137" end="16165" title="prosopagnosia" label="inability to recognize faces"/>
<link wikidata="Q12135" start="16181" end="16203" title="psychological disorder" label="psychological disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q38404" start="16213" end="16219" title="autism" label="autism"/>
<link wikidata="Q170082" start="16221" end="16230" title="psychosis" label="psychosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q188638" start="16232" end="16245" title="mood disorder" label="mood disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q202387" start="16247" end="16276" title="posttraumatic stress disorder" label="posttraumatic stress disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q558077" start="16285" end="16302" title="Williams syndrome" label="Williams syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q118418" start="16304" end="16335" title="antisocial personality disorder" label="antisocial personality disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q221472" start="16337" end="16346" title="Fragile X" label="Fragile X"/>
<link wikidata="Q202849" start="16348" end="16370" title="Turner&amp;#x27;s syndrome" label="Turner&amp;#x27;s syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q181923" start="16375" end="16379" title="ADHD" label="ADHD"/>
<link wikidata="Q9636076" start="16540" end="16555" title="joint attention" label="joint attention"/>
<link wikidata="Q175002" start="17121" end="17145" title="developmental psychology" label="developmental psychology"/>
<link wikidata="Q529895" start="17266" end="17284" title="Face perception" label="facial recognition"/>
<link wikidata="Q392512" start="17293" end="17299" title="psychological nativism" label="innate"/>
<link wikidata="Q2979464" start="17833" end="17848" title="Behavioral sink" label="Behavioral sink"/>
<link wikidata="Q209722" start="17851" end="17871" title="Cognitive dissonance" label="Cognitive dissonance"/>
<link wikidata="Q7551870" start="17874" end="17895" title="Distributed cognition" label="Distributed cognition"/>
<link wikidata="Q182263" start="17898" end="17905" title="Empathy" label="Empathy"/>
<link wikidata="Q9636076" start="17908" end="17923" title="Joint attention" label="Joint attention"/>
<link wikidata="Q315" start="17926" end="17934" title="Language" label="Language"/>
<link wikidata="Q13012240" start="17937" end="17978" title="Neurodevelopmental framework for learning" label="Neurodevelopmental framework for learning"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143725" start="17981" end="18003" title="Observational learning" label="Observational learning"/>
<link wikidata="Q7094107" start="18006" end="18026" title="Online participation" label="Online participation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1229994" start="18029" end="18054" title="Paranoid social cognition" label="Paranoid social cognition"/>
<link wikidata="Q109536337" start="18057" end="18076" title="Relational mobility" label="Relational mobility"/>
<link wikidata="Q1335050" start="18079" end="18097" title="Embodied cognition" label="Embodied cognition"/>
<link wikidata="Q124054204" start="18100" end="18121" title="Shared intentionality" label="Shared intentionality"/>
<link wikidata="Q7532125" start="18124" end="18142" title="Situated cognition" label="Situated cognition"/>
<link wikidata="Q383646" start="18145" end="18168" title="Social cognitive theory" label="Social cognitive theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q7550991" start="18171" end="18206" title="Social cognitive theory of morality" label="Social cognitive theory of morality"/>
<link wikidata="Q7551084" start="18209" end="18223" title="Social emotion" label="Social emotion"/>
<link wikidata="Q2273844" start="18226" end="18245" title="Social intelligence" label="Social intelligence"/>
<link wikidata="Q3111072" start="18248" end="18267" title="Social neuroscience" label="Social neuroscience"/>
<link wikidata="Q6763653" start="18448" end="18467" title="Marilynn Brewer" label="Brewer, Marilynn B."/>
<link wikidata="Q6851411" start="18474" end="18488" title="Miles Hewstone" label="Miles Hewstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q7647829" start="18711" end="18723" title="Susan Fiske" label="Fiske, Susan"/>
<link wikidata="Q769477" start="18842" end="18860" title="Shelley E. Taylor" label="Taylor, Shelley E."/>
<link wikidata="Q17447358" start="19400" end="19414" title="Jaan Valsiner" label="Valsiner, Jaan"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="464806" wikidata="Q1326777" url="?curid=464806" title="Electroacoustic music">
<text>Electroacoustic music is a genre of popular and Western art music in which composers use technology to manipulate the timbres of acoustic sounds, sometimes by using audio signal processing, such as reverb or harmonizing, on acoustical instruments. It originated around the middle of the 20th century, following the incorporation of electric sound production into compositional practice. The initial developments in electroacoustic music composition to fixed media during the 20th century are associated with the activities of the at the ORTF in Paris, the home of musique concrète, the Studio for Electronic Music in Cologne, where the focus was on the composition of &quot;elektronische Musik,&quot; and the Columbia-Princeton Electronic Music Center in New York City, where tape music, electronic music, and computer music were all explored. Practical electronic music instruments began to appear in the early 20th century.

==Tape music==

Tape music is an integral part of &quot;musique concrète&quot;, which uses the tape recorder as its central musical source. The music can utilise pre-recorded sound fragments and the creation of loops, which can be altered and manipulated through techniques such as editing and playback speed manipulation. The work of Halim El-Dabh is perhaps the earliest example of tape (or, in this case, Wire recording) music. El-Dabh&#x27;s &quot;The Expression of Zaar&quot;, first presented in Cairo, Egypt, in 1944, was an early work using &quot;musique concrète&quot;–like techniques similar to those developed in Paris during the same period. El-Dabh would later become more famous for his work at the Columbia-Princeton Electronic Music Center, where in 1959 he composed the influential piece &quot;Leiyla and the Poet&quot;.

Composer John Cage&#x27;s assembly of the &quot;Williams Mix&quot; serves as an example of the rigors of tape music. First, Cage created a 192-page score. Over the course of a year, 600 sounds were assembled and recorded. Cut tape segments for each occurrence of each sound were accumulated on the score. Then the cut segments were spliced to one of eight tapes, work finished on January 16, 1953. The premiere performance (realization) of the 4&#x27;15&quot; work was given on March 21, 1953, at the University of Illinois, Urbana.

==Electronic music==

In Cologne, &quot;elektronische Musik&quot;, pioneered in 1949–51 by the composer Herbert Eimert and the physicist Werner Meyer-Eppler, was based solely on electronically generated (synthetic) sounds, particularly sine waves. The beginning of the development of electronic music has been traced back to &quot;the invention of the valve [vacuum tube] in 1906&quot;. The precise control afforded by the studio allowed for what Eimert considered to be the subjection of everything, &quot;to the last element of the single note&quot;, to serial permutation, &quot;resulting in a completely new way of composing sound&quot;; in the studio, serial operations could be applied to elements such as timbre and dynamics. The common link between the two schools is that the music is recorded and performed through loudspeakers, without a human performer. The majority of electroacoustic pieces use a combination of recorded sound and synthesized or processed sounds, and the schism between Schaeffer&#x27;s and Eimert&#x27;s approaches has been overcome, the first major example being Karlheinz Stockhausen&#x27;s &quot;Gesang der Jünglinge&quot; of 1955–56.

==Circuit bending==
Circuit bending is the creative short-circuiting of low voltage, battery-powered electronic audio devices such as guitar effects, children&#x27;s toys and small synthesizers to create new musical instruments and sound generators. Emphasizing spontaneity and randomness, the techniques of circuit bending have been commonly associated with noise music, though many more conventional contemporary musicians and musical groups have been known to experiment with &quot;bent&quot; instruments.

==Examples of notable works==
* Milton Babbitt – &quot;Philomel&quot; (1964)
* Luciano Berio – &quot;Thema (Omaggio a Joyce)&quot; (1958–59)
* Johanna Beyer – &quot;Music of the Spheres&quot; (1938)
* Konrad Boehmer – &quot;Aspekt&quot; (1964–66), &quot;Apocalipsis cum figuris&quot; (1984)
* Pierre Boulez – &quot;Répons&quot; (1981–84)
* John Cage – &quot;Imaginary Landscape No. 1&quot; (1939)
* Mario Davidovsky – &quot;Synchronisms No. 6&quot; for Piano and Electronic Sound (1970)
* Halim El-Dabh – &quot;Leiyla and the Poet&quot; (1961)
* Karel Goeyvaerts – &quot;Nummer 5 met zuivere tonen&quot; (1953)
* Tim Hecker – &quot; Virgins&quot; (2013)
* Jean-Michel Jarre – &quot;Deserted Palace&quot; (1972)
* Phil Kline – &quot;Unsilent Night&quot; (1992), for cassettes in boomboxes
* Gottfried Michael Koenig – &quot;Project 1&quot; (1964), &quot;Project 2&quot; (1966)
* Alvin Lucier – &quot;I Am Sitting in a Room&quot; (1969)
* Ivo Malec – &quot;Triola, ou Symphonie pour moi-même&quot; (1977–78)
* Luigi Nono – &quot;La fabbrica illuminata&quot; (1964), &quot;A floresta é jovem e cheia de vida&quot; (1966), &quot;Contrappunto dialettico alla mente&quot; (1968), &quot;Como una ola de fuerza y luz&quot; (1971–72)
* Pauline Oliveros – &quot;Sonic Meditations, &quot;Teach Yourself to Fly&quot;&quot; (1961)
* Daphne Oram - &quot;Still Point&quot; (1948)
* Else Marie Pade – &quot;Symphonie Magnétophonique&quot; (1958)
* Henri Pousseur – &quot;Scambi&quot; (1957), &quot;Trois Visages de Liège&quot; (1961), &quot;Paraboles-Mix&quot; (1972), &quot;Seize Paysages planétairesl&quot; (2000)
* Steve Reich – &quot;Pendulum Music&quot; (1968), for microphones, amplifiers, speakers and performers
* Pierre Schaeffer – &quot;Cinq études de bruits&quot; (1948)
* Karlheinz Stockhausen – &quot;Gesang der Jünglinge&quot; (1955–56), &quot;Kontakte&quot; (1958–60), &quot;Mixtur&quot; (1964), &quot;Mikrophonie I &amp; II&quot; (1964 and 1965), &quot;Telemusik&quot; (1966), &quot;Hymnen&quot; (1966–67), &quot;Oktophonie&quot; (1991), &quot;Cosmic Pulses&quot; (2006–2007)
* James Tenney – &quot;For Ann (rising)&quot; (1969)
* Edgard Varèse – &quot;Poème électronique&quot; (1958)
* Charles Wuorinen – &quot;Time&#x27;s Encomium&quot; (1969)
* Iannis Xenakis – &quot;Persepolis&quot; (1971)

==Electronic and electroacoustic instruments==

* Birotron (1974), Dave Biro
* Buchla 100 and 200 serie (1960s–70s), Buchla Lightning I (1991) and Buchla Lightning II (1995) by Don Buchla
* Cembaphon (1951), Harald Bode
* Chamberlin (1946)
* Clavinet (1964)
* Clavioline (early 1950s) and Concert Clavioline (1953), Harald Bode
* Clavivox, Circle Machine, Bass Line Generator, Rhythm Modulator, Bandito the Bongo Artist, and Electronium (1950s–60s), Raymond Scott
* DX7 (1983), Yamaha
* Elektronium (in German)
* EMS Synthi AKS (1972)
* Fairlight CMI (1978)
* Gravikord (1986), Robert Grawi
* Kraakdoos / Cracklebox (1960s–70s), Michel Waisvisz
* Mellotron (1960s)
* Melochord (1947–49), Harald Bode
* Melodium (1938), Harald Bode
* Moog synthesizer (1965), Robert Moog
* Ondioline (1939), Georges Jenny
* Optigan (1971)
* Orchestron (1975), Vako Synthesizers
* Polychord (1950) and Polychord III (1951), Harald Bode
* Electronic Sackbut (1945), Hugh Le Caine
* Sampler (musical instrument)
* Synclavier (1975), Jon Appleton, Sydney A. Alonso and Cameron Jones
* Telharmonium (1897), Thaddeus Cahill
* Theremin (1928), Leon Theremin
* Tuttivox (1953), Harald Bode
* UPIC (1977), Iannis Xenakis and CEMAMu
* Warbo Formant organ (1937), Harald Bode
==Centers, associations and events for electroacoustics and related arts==
Important centers of research and composition can be found around the world, and there are numerous conferences and festivals which present electroacoustic music, notably the International Computer Music Conference, the international conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression, the Electroacoustic Music Studies Conference, and the Ars Electronica Festival (Linz, Austria).

A number of national associations promote the art form, notably the Canadian Electroacoustic Community (CEC) in Canada, the Society for Electro-Acoustic Music in the United States (SEAMUS) in the US, the Australasian Computer Music Association in Australia and New Zealand, and Sound and Music (previously the Sonic Arts Network) in the UK. The &quot;Computer Music Journal&quot; and &quot;Organised Sound&quot; are the two most important peer-reviewed journals dedicated to electroacoustic studies, while several national associations produce print and electronic publications.

===Festivals===

There have been a number of festivals that feature electroacoustic music. Early festivals, such as Donaueschingen Festival, founded in 1921, were some of the first to include electroacoustic instruments and pieces. This was followed by ONCE Festival of New Music in the 1950s, and since the 1960s, there has been a growth of festivals that focus exclusively on electroacoustic music.
*60x60 (Intl.)
*Akousma (Canada)
*Ars Electronica (Austria)
*Berlin Atonal (Germany)
*Cybersonica (UK)
*Dias de Música Electroacústica (Intl.)
*Electro-music (UK)
*Electroacoustic Music Days (Greece)
*Electronic Music Midwest (US)
*Electrofringe (Australia)
*Expo &#x27;70 (Japan)
*International Computer Music Conference (Intl.)
*International Electroacoustic Music Festival (Cuba)
*L&#x27;espace du son (Belgium)
*Les Siestes Electroniques (France)
*Music For People &amp; Thingamajigs Festival (US)
*New Interfaces for Musical Expression (Int.)
*Numusic (Norway)
*NWEAMO (US)
*Olympia Experimental Music Festival (US)
*ONCE Festival of New Music (US)
*Présences Électroniques (France)
*Pro Musica Nova (Germany)
*Spark Festival (US)
*TodaysArt (The Netherlands)
===Conferences and symposiums===
Alongside paper presentations, workshops and seminars, many of these events also feature concert performances or sound installations created by those attending or which are related to the theme of the conference / symposium.

==See also==
*Acousmatic music
*Computer music
*Digital signal processing
*Experimental music
*International Documentation of Electroacoustic Music
*Japanoise
*List of acousmatic-music composers
*Live electronic music
*Sonology
*Sound recording and reproduction
*Sound art

==References==
===Works cited===
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
==Further reading==

* Anon. 2007. &quot;Untitled&quot;. &quot;The Wire&quot; 275–280.
*Beecroft, Norma. 2009. &quot;Electronic Music in Toronto and Canada in the Analogue Era.&quot; &quot;eContact! 11.2 – Figures canadiennes (2) / Canadian Figures (2)&quot; (July 2009). Montréal: CEC.
*Chadabe, Joel. 1997. &quot;Electric Sound: The Past and Promise of Electronic Music&quot;. Upper Saddle River, New Jersey: Prentice Hall. .
*Doornbusch, P. 2015. &quot;A Chronology / History of Electronic and Computer Music and Related Events 1906 – 2015&quot; http://www.doornbusch.net/chronology/ 
*Emmerson, Simon (ed.). 1986. &quot;The Language of Electroacoustic Music&quot;. London: Macmillan. (cased); (pbk).
*Emmerson, Simon (ed.). 2000. &quot;Music, Electronic Media and Culture&quot;. Aldershot (UK) and Burlington, Vermont (US): Ashgate Publishing. .
*Gann, Kyle. 2000a. &quot;It&#x27;s Sound, It&#x27;s Art, and Some Call It Music.&quot; &quot;The New York Times&quot; (January 9).
*Gann, Kyle. 2000. &quot;Music; Electronic Music, Always Current.&quot; &quot;The New York Times&quot; (July 9).
*Griffiths, Paul. 1995. &quot;Modern Music and After: Directions Since 1945&quot;. Oxford: Oxford University Press. (cloth) (pbk).
*Guérin, François. 1983. &quot;Les musiques électroacoustiques&quot;. À l&#x27;écoute de la musique d&#x27;ici 2. Montréal: Centre de musique canadienne. [&quot;N.B&quot;.: Bibliographical list of Canadian electro-acoustic works.] Without ISBN.
*Heifetz, Robin Julian. 1989. &quot;On the Wires of Our Nerves: The Art of Electroacoustic Music&quot;. Cranbury, New Jersey: Associated University Presses. .
*Kahn, Douglas. 2001. &quot;Noise, Water, Meat: A History of Sound in the Arts&quot;. Cambridge, Massachusetts: MIT Press. .
*Licata, Thomas (ed.). 2002. &quot;Electroacoustic Music: Analytical Perspectives&quot;. Contributions to the Study of Music and Dance, 0193-9041; no. 63. Westport, Conn.: Greenwood Press. .
*Manning, Peter. 2004. &quot;Electronic and Computer Music&quot;. Oxford and New York: Oxford University Press. (hardback) (pbk).
* Normandeau, Robert. n.d. &quot;Robert Normandeau Interview&quot;. Interview with Robert Normandeau On Outsight Radio Hours about electroacoustic compositions and if they are &quot;music&quot;.
*Roads, Curtis. 1996. &quot;The Computer Music Tutorial&quot;. Cambridge, Massachusetts: MIT Press. (cloth) (pbk).
* Smalley, Denis. 1997. &quot;Spectromorphology: Explaining Sound-Shapes.&quot; &quot;Organised Sound&quot; 2, no. 2:107–126.
* Wishart, Trevor. 1996. &quot;On Sonic Art&quot;. New and revised edition. Contemporary Music Studies 12. Amsterdam: Harwood Academic Publishers. (cloth) (pbk) (CD).
*Wright, Edward. 2010. &quot;Symbiosis: A Portfolio of Work Focusing on the Tensions Between Electroacoustic and Instrumental Music&quot;. PhD diss. Bangor: Bangor University.
===External links===
*&quot;eContact!&quot;. Freely available online, four themed issues published each year by the Canadian Electroacoustic Community.
*&quot;Electroacoustic Bibliography&quot; published in &quot;eContact! 8.4 – Ressources éducatives / Educational Resources&quot; (Montréal: CEC), an annotated list of journals publishing articles related to electroacoustics.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1326777" start="0" end="21" title="Electroacoustic music" label="Electroacoustic music"/>
<link wikidata="Q188451" start="27" end="32" title="Music genre" label="genre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1583807" start="56" end="65" title="art music" label="art music"/>
<link wikidata="Q176501" start="118" end="124" title="timbre" label="timbre"/>
<link wikidata="Q82811" start="129" end="143" title="acoustics" label="acoustic sound"/>
<link wikidata="Q2719318" start="165" end="188" title="audio signal processing" label="audio signal processing"/>
<link wikidata="Q468809" start="198" end="204" title="reverb" label="reverb"/>
<link wikidata="Q60630" start="208" end="219" title="harmonizer" label="harmonizing"/>
<link wikidata="Q207628" start="363" end="385" title="music composition" label="compositional practice"/>
<link wikidata="Q1226101" start="537" end="541" title="Radiodiffusion-Télévision Française" label="ORTF"/>
<link wikidata="Q823560" start="564" end="580" title="musique concrète" label="musique concrète"/>
<link wikidata="Q2358704" start="586" end="613" title="Studio for Electronic Music (WDR)" label="Studio for Electronic Music"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="674" end="693" title="Electronic music#Elektronische Musik" label="elektronische Musik"/>
<link wikidata="Q2984573" start="709" end="751" title="Columbia-Princeton Electronic Music Center" label="Columbia-Princeton Electronic Music Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q1122550" start="810" end="824" title="computer music" label="computer music"/>
<link wikidata="Q823560" start="983" end="999" title="musique concrète" label="musique concrète"/>
<link wikidata="Q213777" start="1022" end="1035" title="tape recorder" label="tape recorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q3109811" start="1262" end="1275" title="Halim El-Dabh" label="Halim El-Dabh"/>
<link wikidata="Q123529209" start="1335" end="1349" title="Wire recording" label="Wire recording"/>
<link wikidata="Q2984573" start="1639" end="1681" title="Columbia-Princeton Electronic Music Center" label="Columbia-Princeton Electronic Music Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q180727" start="1774" end="1783" title="John Cage" label="John Cage"/>
<link wikidata="Q8021067" start="1813" end="1825" title="Williams Mix" label="Williams Mix"/>
<link wikidata="Q457281" start="2266" end="2288" title="University of Illinois at Urbana–Champaign" label="University of Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q9778" start="2339" end="2358" title="Electronic music" label="elektronische Musik"/>
<link wikidata="Q318631" start="2403" end="2417" title="Herbert Eimert" label="Herbert Eimert"/>
<link wikidata="Q98043" start="2436" end="2455" title="Werner Meyer-Eppler" label="Werner Meyer-Eppler"/>
<link wikidata="Q207527" start="2535" end="2544" title="sine wave" label="sine wave"/>
<link wikidata="Q9778" start="2583" end="2599" title="electronic music" label="electronic music"/>
<link wikidata="Q3574371" start="2651" end="2656" title="Vacuum tube" label="valve"/>
<link wikidata="Q507246" start="2855" end="2861" title="serialism" label="serial"/>
<link wikidata="Q161519" start="2862" end="2873" title="permutation" label="permutation"/>
<link wikidata="Q154556" start="3395" end="3416" title="Karlheinz Stockhausen" label="Karlheinz Stockhausen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129735" start="3430" end="3450" title="Gesang der Jünglinge" label="Gesang der Jünglinge"/>
<link wikidata="Q518192" start="3490" end="3505" title="Circuit bending" label="Circuit bending"/>
<link wikidata="Q206907" start="3522" end="3538" title="short circuit" label="short-circuiting"/>
<link wikidata="Q25428" start="3546" end="3553" title="voltage" label="voltage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1327500" start="3571" end="3595" title="Electronic musical instrument" label="electronic audio devices"/>
<link wikidata="Q862880" start="3604" end="3618" title="guitar effects" label="guitar effects"/>
<link wikidata="Q11422" start="3636" end="3639" title="toy" label="toy"/>
<link wikidata="Q163829" start="3651" end="3663" title="synthesizers" label="synthesizers"/>
<link wikidata="Q726239" start="3829" end="3840" title="noise music" label="noise music"/>
<link wikidata="Q318518" start="4012" end="4026" title="Milton Babbitt" label="Milton Babbitt"/>
<link wikidata="Q7186114" start="4035" end="4043" title="Philomel (Babbitt)" label="Philomel"/>
<link wikidata="Q221450" start="4059" end="4072" title="Luciano Berio" label="Luciano Berio"/>
<link wikidata="Q7781177" start="4081" end="4104" title="Thema (Omaggio a Joyce)" label="Thema (Omaggio a Joyce)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4163817" start="4123" end="4136" title="Johanna Beyer" label="Johanna Beyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q382893" start="4181" end="4195" title="Konrad Boehmer" label="Konrad Boehmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q156193" start="4273" end="4286" title="Pierre Boulez" label="Pierre Boulez"/>
<link wikidata="Q3456312" start="4295" end="4301" title="Répons" label="Répons"/>
<link wikidata="Q180727" start="4320" end="4329" title="John Cage" label="John Cage"/>
<link wikidata="Q55614330" start="4338" end="4363" title="Imaginary Landscape No. 1" label="Imaginary Landscape No. 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q322790" start="4379" end="4395" title="Mario Davidovsky" label="Mario Davidovsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q7662140" start="4404" end="4422" title="Synchronisms No. 6" label="Synchronisms No. 6"/>
<link wikidata="Q3109811" start="4469" end="4482" title="Halim El-Dabh" label="Halim El-Dabh"/>
<link wikidata="Q5149958" start="4491" end="4510" title="Columbia–Princeton Electronic Music Center (album)" label="Leiyla and the Poet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153170" start="4526" end="4542" title="Karel Goeyvaerts" label="Karel Goeyvaerts"/>
<link wikidata="Q7069696" start="4551" end="4577" title="Nummer 5" label="Nummer 5 met zuivere tonen"/>
<link wikidata="Q3068648" start="4593" end="4603" title="Tim Hecker" label="Tim Hecker"/>
<link wikidata="Q17066337" start="4613" end="4620" title="Virgins (Tim Hecker album)" label="Virgins"/>
<link wikidata="Q104326" start="4636" end="4653" title="Jean-Michel Jarre" label="Jean-Michel Jarre"/>
<link wikidata="Q7182092" start="4693" end="4703" title="Phil Kline" label="Phil Kline"/>
<link wikidata="Q60741004" start="4712" end="4726" title="Unsilent Night" label="Unsilent Night"/>
<link wikidata="Q873670" start="4770" end="4794" title="Gottfried Michael Koenig" label="Gottfried Michael Koenig"/>
<link wikidata="Q449171" start="4858" end="4870" title="Alvin Lucier" label="Alvin Lucier"/>
<link wikidata="Q5976062" start="4879" end="4901" title="I Am Sitting in a Room" label="I Am Sitting in a Room"/>
<link wikidata="Q360834" start="4917" end="4926" title="Ivo Malec" label="Ivo Malec"/>
<link wikidata="Q160451" start="4988" end="4998" title="Luigi Nono" label="Luigi Nono"/>
<link wikidata="Q60768435" start="5105" end="5139" title="Contrappunto dialettico alla mente" label="Contrappunto dialettico alla mente"/>
<link wikidata="Q60767072" start="5160" end="5188" title="Como una ola de fuerza y luz" label="Como una ola de fuerza y luz"/>
<link wikidata="Q444857" start="5207" end="5223" title="Pauline Oliveros" label="Pauline Oliveros"/>
<link wikidata="Q49277" start="5300" end="5311" title="Daphne Oram" label="Daphne Oram"/>
<link wikidata="Q4971624" start="5347" end="5362" title="Else Marie Pade" label="Else Marie Pade"/>
<link wikidata="Q739405" start="5412" end="5426" title="Henri Pousseur" label="Henri Pousseur"/>
<link wikidata="Q48834806" start="5435" end="5441" title="Scambi" label="Scambi"/>
<link wikidata="Q262791" start="5582" end="5593" title="Steve Reich" label="Steve Reich"/>
<link wikidata="Q3374700" start="5602" end="5616" title="Pendulum Music" label="Pendulum Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q315744" start="5686" end="5702" title="Pierre Schaeffer" label="Pierre Schaeffer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5121079" start="5711" end="5732" title="Cinq études de bruits" label="Cinq études de bruits"/>
<link wikidata="Q154556" start="5748" end="5769" title="Karlheinz Stockhausen" label="Karlheinz Stockhausen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129735" start="5778" end="5798" title="Gesang der Jünglinge" label="Gesang der Jünglinge"/>
<link wikidata="Q7245671" start="5822" end="5830" title="Kontakte" label="Kontakte"/>
<link wikidata="Q3317287" start="5854" end="5860" title="Mixtur" label="Mixtur"/>
<link wikidata="Q6850220" start="5881" end="5903" title="Mikrophonie (Stockhausen)" label="Mikrophonie I &amp;amp; II"/>
<link wikidata="Q7696378" start="5933" end="5942" title="Telemusik" label="Telemusik"/>
<link wikidata="Q651868" start="5963" end="5969" title="Hymnen" label="Hymnen"/>
<link wikidata="Q17059568" start="5993" end="6003" title="Oktophonie" label="Oktophonie"/>
<link wikidata="Q5174093" start="6024" end="6037" title="Cosmic Pulses" label="Cosmic Pulses"/>
<link wikidata="Q715379" start="6058" end="6070" title="James Tenney" label="James Tenney"/>
<link wikidata="Q5466669" start="6079" end="6095" title="For Ann (rising)" label="For Ann (rising)"/>
<link wikidata="Q57247" start="6111" end="6124" title="Edgard Varèse" label="Edgard Varèse"/>
<link wikidata="Q2104151" start="6133" end="6151" title="Poème électronique" label="Poème électronique"/>
<link wikidata="Q961861" start="6167" end="6183" title="Charles Wuorinen" label="Charles Wuorinen"/>
<link wikidata="Q107586649" start="6192" end="6212" title="Time&amp;#x27;s Encomium" label="Time&amp;#x27;s Encomium"/>
<link wikidata="Q152880" start="6228" end="6242" title="Iannis Xenakis" label="Iannis Xenakis"/>
<link wikidata="Q865832" start="6326" end="6334" title="Birotron" label="Birotron"/>
<link wikidata="Q4676716" start="6355" end="6379" title="Buchla Electronic Musical Instruments" label="Buchla 100 and 200 serie"/>
<link wikidata="Q4982719" start="6393" end="6411" title="Buchla Lightning" label="Buchla Lightning I"/>
<link wikidata="Q4982719" start="6423" end="6442" title="Buchla Lightning" label="Buchla Lightning II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1238976" start="6453" end="6463" title="Don Buchla" label="Don Buchla"/>
<link wikidata="Q86204" start="6484" end="6495" title="Harald Bode" label="Harald Bode"/>
<link wikidata="Q960650" start="6498" end="6508" title="Chamberlin" label="Chamberlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1099153" start="6518" end="6526" title="Clavinet" label="Clavinet"/>
<link wikidata="Q86204" start="6592" end="6603" title="Harald Bode" label="Harald Bode"/>
<link wikidata="Q593794" start="6606" end="6614" title="Clavivox" label="Clavivox"/>
<link wikidata="Q5358503" start="6701" end="6712" title="Electronium" label="Electronium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1334617" start="6726" end="6739" title="Raymond Scott" label="Raymond Scott"/>
<link wikidata="Q139300" start="6742" end="6745" title="Yamaha DX7" label="DX7"/>
<link wikidata="" start="6763" end="6774" title=":de:Elektronium" label="Elektronium"/>
<link wikidata="Q3717397" start="6789" end="6803" title="EMS Synthi AKS" label="EMS Synthi AKS"/>
<link wikidata="Q512222" start="6813" end="6826" title="Fairlight CMI" label="Fairlight CMI"/>
<link wikidata="Q1543978" start="6836" end="6845" title="Gravikord" label="Gravikord"/>
<link wikidata="Q2212859" start="6869" end="6878" title="Kraakdoos" label="Kraakdoos"/>
<link wikidata="Q1930958" start="6905" end="6920" title="Michel Waisvisz" label="Michel Waisvisz"/>
<link wikidata="Q212483" start="6923" end="6932" title="Mellotron" label="Mellotron"/>
<link wikidata="Q86204" start="6964" end="6975" title="Harald Bode" label="Harald Bode"/>
<link wikidata="Q86204" start="6995" end="7006" title="Harald Bode" label="Harald Bode"/>
<link wikidata="Q426035" start="7009" end="7025" title="Moog synthesizer" label="Moog synthesizer"/>
<link wikidata="Q200883" start="7034" end="7045" title="Robert Moog" label="Robert Moog"/>
<link wikidata="Q490054" start="7048" end="7057" title="Ondioline" label="Ondioline"/>
<link wikidata="Q26263357" start="7066" end="7079" title="Georges Jenny" label="Georges Jenny"/>
<link wikidata="Q1764288" start="7082" end="7089" title="Optigan" label="Optigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2102668" start="7099" end="7109" title="Orchestron" label="Orchestron"/>
<link wikidata="Q86204" start="7181" end="7192" title="Harald Bode" label="Harald Bode"/>
<link wikidata="Q5931464" start="7222" end="7235" title="Hugh Le Caine" label="Hugh Le Caine"/>
<link wikidata="Q320002" start="7238" end="7266" title="Sampler (musical instrument)" label="Sampler (musical instrument)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1557633" start="7269" end="7279" title="Synclavier" label="Synclavier"/>
<link wikidata="Q3183173" start="7288" end="7300" title="Jon Appleton" label="Jon Appleton"/>
<link wikidata="Q133506" start="7339" end="7351" title="Telharmonium" label="Telharmonium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1897946" start="7360" end="7375" title="Thaddeus Cahill" label="Thaddeus Cahill"/>
<link wikidata="Q207691" start="7378" end="7386" title="Theremin" label="Theremin"/>
<link wikidata="Q333265" start="7395" end="7408" title="Leon Theremin" label="Leon Theremin"/>
<link wikidata="Q86204" start="7428" end="7439" title="Harald Bode" label="Harald Bode"/>
<link wikidata="Q3131599" start="7442" end="7446" title="UPIC" label="UPIC"/>
<link wikidata="Q152880" start="7455" end="7469" title="Iannis Xenakis" label="Iannis Xenakis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5009640" start="7474" end="7480" title="CCMIX" label="CEMAMu"/>
<link wikidata="Q86204" start="7511" end="7522" title="Harald Bode" label="Harald Bode"/>
<link wikidata="Q4288208" start="7773" end="7812" title="International Computer Music Conference" label="International Computer Music Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q4326497" start="7846" end="7883" title="New Interfaces for Musical Expression" label="New Interfaces for Musical Expression"/>
<link wikidata="Q678361" start="7939" end="7954" title="Ars Electronica" label="Ars Electronica"/>
<link wikidata="Q5029962" start="8050" end="8084" title="Canadian Electroacoustic Community" label="Canadian Electroacoustic Community"/>
<link wikidata="Q7552117" start="8106" end="8161" title="Society for Electro-Acoustic Music in the United States" label="Society for Electro-Acoustic Music in the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q4823419" start="8186" end="8225" title="Australasian Computer Music Association" label="Australasian Computer Music Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q7564741" start="8260" end="8275" title="Sound and Music" label="Sound and Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q7561786" start="8292" end="8310" title="Sonic Arts Network" label="Sonic Arts Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q4036477" start="8333" end="8355" title="Computer Music Journal" label="Computer Music Journal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7101911" start="8372" end="8387" title="Organised Sound" label="Organised Sound"/>
<link wikidata="Q690934" start="8678" end="8701" title="Donaueschingen Festival" label="Donaueschingen Festival"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8815" end="8841" title="ONCE Festival of New Music" label="ONCE Festival of New Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q4641733" start="8964" end="8969" title="60x60" label="60x60"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8979" end="8986" title="Akousma" label="Akousma"/>
<link wikidata="Q678361" start="8997" end="9012" title="Ars Electronica" label="Ars Electronica"/>
<link wikidata="Q16951295" start="9024" end="9037" title="Berlin Atonal" label="Berlin Atonal"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9049" end="9060" title="Cybersonica" label="Cybersonica"/>
<link wikidata="Q20011166" start="9107" end="9120" title="Electro-music" label="Electro-music"/>
<link wikidata="Q5707202" start="9127" end="9153" title="Electroacoustic Music Days" label="Electroacoustic Music Days"/>
<link wikidata="Q5358282" start="9164" end="9188" title="Electronic Music Midwest" label="Electronic Music Midwest"/>
<link wikidata="Q1119956" start="9222" end="9235" title="Expo &amp;#x27;70" label="Expo &amp;#x27;70"/>
<link wikidata="Q4288208" start="9245" end="9284" title="International Computer Music Conference" label="International Computer Music Conference"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9294" end="9338" title="International Electroacoustic Music Festival" label="International Electroacoustic Music Festival"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9347" end="9367" title="L&amp;#x27;espace du son" label="L&amp;#x27;espace du son"/>
<link wikidata="Q1125644" start="9379" end="9404" title="Les Siestes Electroniques" label="Les Siestes Electroniques"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9415" end="9459" title="Music For People &amp;amp; Thingamajigs Festival" label="Music For People &amp;amp; Thingamajigs Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q4326497" start="9466" end="9503" title="New Interfaces for Musical Expression" label="New Interfaces for Musical Expression"/>
<link wikidata="Q6955954" start="9530" end="9536" title="NWEAMO" label="NWEAMO"/>
<link wikidata="Q7088948" start="9543" end="9578" title="Olympia Experimental Music Festival" label="Olympia Experimental Music Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q1395136" start="9652" end="9667" title="Pro Musica Nova" label="Pro Musica Nova"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9679" end="9693" title="Spark Festival" label="Spark Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q7812230" start="9700" end="9709" title="TodaysArt" label="TodaysArt"/>
<link wikidata="Q423918" start="10001" end="10017" title="Acousmatic music" label="Acousmatic music"/>
<link wikidata="Q1122550" start="10019" end="10033" title="Computer music" label="Computer music"/>
<link wikidata="Q173142" start="10035" end="10060" title="Digital signal processing" label="Digital signal processing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1640319" start="10062" end="10080" title="Experimental music" label="Experimental music"/>
<link wikidata="Q28869500" start="10082" end="10134" title="International Documentation of Electroacoustic Music" label="International Documentation of Electroacoustic Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q2456019" start="10136" end="10145" title="Japanoise" label="Japanoise"/>
<link wikidata="Q6604900" start="10147" end="10181" title="List of acousmatic-music composers" label="List of acousmatic-music composers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1866223" start="10183" end="10204" title="Live electronic music" label="Live electronic music"/>
<link wikidata="Q2895031" start="10206" end="10214" title="Sonology" label="Sonology"/>
<link wikidata="Q20077126" start="10216" end="10248" title="Sound recording and reproduction" label="Sound recording and reproduction"/>
<link wikidata="Q1744327" start="10250" end="10259" title="Sound art" label="Sound art"/>
<link wikidata="Q937350" start="10372" end="10380" title="The Wire (magazine)" label="The Wire"/>
<link wikidata="Q5029962" start="10591" end="10594" title="Canadian Electroacoustic Community" label="CEC"/>
<link wikidata="Q15432389" start="10597" end="10610" title="Joel Chadabe" label="Chadabe, Joel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1795042" start="11160" end="11170" title="Kyle Gann" label="Gann, Kyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="11253" end="11271" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q7151019" start="11405" end="11420" title="Paul Griffiths (writer)" label="Griffiths, Paul"/>
<link wikidata="Q5301673" start="11940" end="11953" title="Douglas Kahn" label="Kahn, Douglas"/>
<link wikidata="Q129469" start="12468" end="12485" title="Robert Normandeau" label="Robert Normandeau"/>
<link wikidata="Q7101911" start="12781" end="12796" title="Organised Sound" label="Organised Sound"/>
<link wikidata="Q3538614" start="12823" end="12838" title="Trevor Wishart" label="Wishart, Trevor"/>
<link wikidata="Q5029962" start="13280" end="13314" title="Canadian Electroacoustic Community" label="Canadian Electroacoustic Community"/>
<link wikidata="Q5029962" start="13456" end="13459" title="Canadian Electroacoustic Community" label="CEC"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="464810" wikidata="Q77269" url="?curid=464810" title="Georg Elser">
<text>Johann Georg Elser (; 4 January 1903 – 9 April 1945) was a German worker who planned and carried out an elaborate assassination attempt on Adolf Hitler and other high-ranking Nazi leaders on 8 November 1939 at the Bürgerbräukeller in Munich (known as the Bürgerbräukeller Bombing). Elser constructed and placed a bomb near the platform from which Hitler was to deliver a speech. It did not kill Hitler, who left earlier than expected, but it did kill 8 people and injured 62 others. Elser was held as a prisoner for more than five years until he was executed at Dachau concentration camp less than a month before the surrender of Nazi Germany.

==Background==
===Family and early life===
Georg Elser (the name normally used to refer to him) was born in Hermaringen, Württemberg, to Ludwig Elser (1872–1942) and Maria Müller (1879–1960). His parents married one year after his birth, and Maria moved to Königsbronn to live with Ludwig on his smallholding. His father was a timber merchant, while his mother worked on the farm. Georg was often left to care for his five younger siblings: Friederike (born 1904), Maria (born 1906), Ludwig (born 1909), Anna (born 1910) and Leonhard (born 1913). He attended elementary school in Königsbronn from 1910 to 1917 and showed ability in drawing, penmanship and mathematics. His childhood was marred by his father&#x27;s heavy drinking. Elser recalled in his interrogation by the Gestapo in 1939 how his father habitually came home late from work drunk.

===Career and social life===
In 1917, Elser worked for half a year assisting in his father&#x27;s business. Seeking independence, he started an apprenticeship as a lathe operator at the smelter in Königsbronn, but had to quit for health reasons. Between 1919 and 1922, he was apprenticed to master woodworker Robert Sapper in Königsbronn. After topping his class at Heidenheim Trade School, he worked in the furniture factory of Paul Rieder in Aalen. In 1925, he left home to briefly work at the Wachter woodworking company in the small community of Bernried, near Tettnang. Exploring along Lake Constance on foot, he arrived at Friedrichshafen, where he found employment shaping wooden propellers for the fledgling aircraft-manufacturer Dornier.
In August 1925, a work-friend enticed Elser to go with him to Konstanz to work in a clock factory. Due to lack of work, the clock factory closed down, was sold, then reopened as the Schuckmann Clock Factory. Elser was re-employed, but, along with the other employees, he was dismissed when the factory mysteriously burned down after the owner had unsuccessfully tried to sell the failing business. During this period, Elser shared a room with a Communist co-worker who convinced him to join the Red Front-Fighters League. He also joined traditional dress and dance groups (). In 1929, he found work with Schönholzer, a small woodworking company in Bottighofen; this required Elser to cross the border daily into Switzerland. The work ran out within six months, however, and he was let go.

Around this time Elser met a waitress, Mathilde Niedermann. When she became pregnant, he drove her to Geneva in Switzerland. Mathilde was found to be in the fourth month of pregnancy, precluding a legal abortion. The child was born, a boy named Manfred. When Elser left Mathilde, he was left with child-support payments that often surpassed his weekly wage.

In 1930, Elser began commuting daily by ferry from Konstanz to work in the small Rothmund clock factory in Meersburg where he made housings for wall and table clocks. At the Kreuzlingen Free Temperance Union he started a friendship with a seamstress, Hilda Lang. Between May and August 1932, after Rothmund closed down, he lived with several families in Meersburg doing odd carpentry jobs.

In August 1932, Elser returned to Königsbronn after receiving a call for help from his mother. His alcoholic father, often violent and abusive towards her, was now heavily in debt. Elser assisted his parents in their work and supplemented his income by making furniture in a home workshop until his father was forced to sell the family property in late 1935. Elser escaped the grim family situation with music, playing flute, accordion, bass and the zither. He joined the Zither Club in Königsbronn in early 1933.

At around this time, Elser joined a hiking club where he met Elsa Härlen. He moved to lodge in the Härlens&#x27; basement, building kitchen cabinets, kitchen chairs and a doll&#x27;s house for Elsa. Their love affair in the spring of 1936 led to her separation from her husband in 1937 and divorce in 1938.

In 1936, Elser worked with a carpenter named Grupp in Königsbronn, making desks and installing windows, but soon gave up the job, believing the pay was too low. He began working as a labourer at the Waldenmaier armament factory in Heidenheim, commuting by train or by bike from Königsbronn. While working there, he began a friendship with a fellow employee, Maria Schmauder.

In 1938, Elser&#x27;s parents bought half of a double house together with their son Leonhard and his wife. Elser felt cheated, and was forced to move out of the house, severing ties with his family except for his sister Maria in Stuttgart. In May 1939, he moved in with the Schmauder family in nearby Schnaitheim.

At Waldenmaier, Elser worked in the shipping department and had access to many parts of the plant, including the &quot;special department&quot; where fuses and detonators were produced. After his arrest and confession, Elser told the Gestapo: &quot;Before the decision to take my action in the fall of 1938, I had stolen neither parts nor powder from the factory.&quot;

===Ideology and religion===
Elser, a carpenter and cabinet-maker by trade, became a member of the left-leaning Federation of Woodworkers Union. He also joined the Red Front-Fighters&#x27; Association, although he told his interrogators in 1939 that he attended a political assembly no more than three times while a member. He also stated that he voted for the Communist Party until 1933, as he considered the KPD the best defender of workers&#x27; interests. There is evidence that Elser opposed Nazism from the beginning of the regime in 1933; he refused to perform the Hitler salute, did not join others in listening to Hitler&#x27;s speeches broadcast on the radio, and did not vote in the elections or referendums during the Nazi era.

Elser met Josef Schurr, a Communist from Schnaitheim, at a Woodworkers&#x27; Union meeting in Königsbronn in 1933. Elser had antifascist views, supported by a letter that Schurr sent to a newspaper in Ulm in 1947 which stated that Elser &quot;was always extremely interested in some act of violence against Hitler and his cronies. He always called Hitler a &#x27;gypsy&#x27;—one just had to look at his criminal face.&quot;

Elser&#x27;s parents were Protestant, and he attended church with his mother as a child, though his attendance lapsed. His church attendance increased during 1939 – after he had decided to carry out the assassination attempt – either at a Protestant or Roman Catholic church. He claimed that church attendance and the recitation of the Lord&#x27;s Prayer calmed him. He told his arresting officers: &quot;I believe in the survival of the soul after death, and I also believed that I would not go to heaven if I had not had an opportunity to prove that I wanted good. I also wanted to prevent by my act even greater bloodshed.&quot;

==Prelude==
===Motive===
During four days of interrogation in Berlin (19–22 November 1939), Elser articulated his motive to his interrogators:

Five years later in Dachau concentration camp, SS officer Lechner claimed Elser revealed his motive to him:

==Plot==
In order to find out how best to implement his assassination plan, Elser travelled to Munich by train on 8 November 1938, the day of Hitler&#x27;s annual speech on the anniversary of the Beer Hall Putsch. Elser was not able to enter the Bürgerbräukeller until 10:30 p.m., when the crowd had dispersed. He stayed until midnight before going back to his lodging. The next morning, he returned to Königsbronn. On the following day, 10 November, the anti-Jewish violence of the Kristallnacht took place in Munich.
&quot;In the following weeks I slowly concocted in my mind that it was best to pack explosives in the pillar directly behind the speaker&#x27;s podium,&quot; Elser told his interrogators a year later. He continued to work in the Waldenmaier armament factory in Heidenheim and systematically stole explosives, hiding packets of powder in his bedroom. Realising he needed the exact dimensions of the column to build his bomb he returned to Munich, staying 4–12 April 1939. He took a camera with him, a Christmas gift from Maria Schmauder. He had just become unemployed due to an argument with a factory supervisor.

In April–May 1939, Elser found a labouring job at the Vollmer quarry in Königsbronn. While there, he collected an arsenal of 105 blasting cartridges and 125 detonators, causing him to admit to his interrogators, &quot;I knew two or three detonators were sufficient for my purposes, but I thought the surplus will increase the explosive effect.&quot; Living with the Schmauder family in Schnaitheim he made many sketches, telling his hosts he was working on an &quot;invention&quot;.

In July, in a secluded orchard owned by his parents, Elser tested several prototypes of his bomb. Clock movements given to him in lieu of wages when leaving Rothmund in Meersburg in 1932 and a car indicator &quot;winker&quot; were incorporated into the &quot;infernal machine&quot;. In August, after a bout of sickness, he left for Munich. Powder, explosives, a battery and detonators filled the false bottom of his wooden suitcase. Other boxes contained his clothes, clock movements and the tools of his trade.

===The Bürgerbräukeller===
Elser arrived in Munich on 5 August 1939. Using his real name, he rented a room in the apartments of two unsuspecting couples, at first staying with the Baumanns and from 1 September, Alfons and Rosa Lehmann. He soon became a regular at the Bürgerbräukeller restaurant for his evening meal. As before, he was able to enter the adjoining Bürgerbräukeller Hall before the doors were locked at about 10:30 p.m.

Over the next two months, Elser stayed all night inside the Bürgerbräukeller 30 to 35 times. Working on the gallery level and using a flashlight dimmed with a blue handkerchief, he started by installing a secret door in the timber panelling to a pillar behind the speaker&#x27;s rostrum. After removing the plaster behind the door, he hollowed out a chamber in the brickwork for his bomb. Normally completing his work around 2:00–3:00 a.m., he dozed in the storeroom off the gallery until the doors were unlocked at about 6:30 a.m. He then left via a rear door, often carrying a small suitcase filled with debris.

Security was relatively lax at the Bürgerbräukeller. Christian Weber, a veteran from the Beer Hall Putsch and the Munich city councillor, was responsible. However, from the beginning of September, after the outbreak of war with Poland, Elser was aware of the presence of air raid wardens and two &quot;free-running dogs&quot; in the building.

While he worked at night in the Bürgerbräukeller, Elser built his device during the day. He purchased extra parts, including sound insulation, from local hardware stores and became friends with the local master woodworker, Brög, who allowed him use of his workshop.

On the nights of 1–2 November, Elser installed the explosives in the pillar. On 4–5 November, which were Saturday and Sunday dance nights, he had to buy a ticket and wait in the gallery until after 1 a.m. before he could install the twin-clock mechanism that would trigger the detonator. To celebrate the completion of his work, Elser recalled later, &quot;I left by the back road and went to the Isartorplatz where at the kiosk I drank two cups of coffee.&quot;

On 6 November, Elser left Munich for Stuttgart to stay overnight with his sister, Maria Hirth, and her husband. Leaving them his tool boxes and baggage, he returned to Munich the next day for a final check. Arriving at the Bürgerbräukeller at 10 p.m., he waited for an opportunity to open the bomb chamber and satisfy himself the clock mechanism was correctly set. The next morning he departed Munich by train for Friedrichshafen via Ulm. After a shave at a hairdresser, he took the 6:30 p.m. steamer to Konstanz.

==Bombing==
===Hitler&#x27;s escape===
The high-ranking Nazis who accompanied Adolf Hitler to the anniversary of the Beer Hall Putsch on 8 November 1939 were Joseph Goebbels, Reinhard Heydrich, Rudolf Hess, Robert Ley, Alfred Rosenberg, Julius Streicher, August Frank, Hermann Esser and Heinrich Himmler. Hitler was welcomed to the platform by Christian Weber.

Unknown to Elser, Hitler had initially cancelled his speech at the Bürgerbräukeller to devote his attention to planning the imminent war with France, but changed his mind and attended after all. As fog was forecast, possibly preventing him from flying back to Berlin the next morning, Hitler decided to return to Berlin the same night by his private train. With the departure from Munich&#x27;s main station set for 9:30 p.m., the start time of the reunion was brought forward half an hour to 8 p.m. and Hitler cut his speech from the planned two hours to a one-hour duration.

Hitler ended his address to the 3000-strong audience of the party faithful at 9:07 p.m., 13 minutes before Elser&#x27;s bomb exploded at 9:20 p.m. By that time, Hitler and his entourage had left the Bürgerbräukeller. The bomb brought down part of the ceiling and roof and caused the gallery and an external wall to collapse, leaving a mountain of rubble. Hitler did not learn of the attempt on his life until later that night on a stop in Nuremberg. When told of the bombing by Goebbels, Hitler responded, &quot;A man has to be lucky.&quot; A little later Hitler had a different spin, saying, &quot;Now I am completely at peace! My leaving the Bürgerbräukeller earlier than usual is proof to me that Providence wants me to reach my goal.&quot;

=== Casualties ===
Of the 120 people that were still in the hall at the time, sixty-three were injured, sixteen seriously. Seven were killed at the scene while one injured person died a few days later. All but one of those killed were members of the Nazi Party, of which all but one had been longtime supporters of the ideology.

* Maria Henle (30), cashier and waitress at the Bürgerbräukeller
* Franz Lutz (53), SA-&quot;Sturmhauptführer&quot;
* Wilhem Kaiser (50), SA-&quot;Sturmhauptführer&quot;, deputy leader of NSKK Regiment 86 
* Wilhelm Weber (37), SA-&quot;Mann&quot;, radio equipment technician
* Leonhardt Reindl (57), Nazi member since 1923, awarded with the Honour Chevron for the Old Guard for being part of &quot;Alte Kämpfer&quot;
* Emil Kasberger (54), long-time Nazi member, flautist in &quot;Traditionsgaus München-Oberbayern&quot;
* Eugen Schachta (32), SA-&quot;Mann&quot;, radio equipment technician, &quot;Haupteinsatzleiter&quot; for 
* Michael Schmeidl (73), Nazi member since before 1930 and retired &quot;Oberamtmann&quot;; died 13 November from arm injuries

===Honoring the victims===
In Munich on 9 November, the annual guard of honour for the sixteen &quot;blood martyrs&quot; of the NSDAP who died in the Beer Hall Putsch of 1923 was held at the Feldherrnhalle as usual. Two days later, at the same location, an official ceremony for the victims of the Bürgerbräukeller bombing took place. Hitler returned from Berlin to stand before seven flag-draped coffins as Rudolf Hess addressed the SA guard, the onlookers, and listeners to &quot;Grossdeutsche Rundfunk&quot; (&quot;Greater German Radio&quot;). In his half-hour oration, Hess was not short on hyperbole:

After &quot;Der gute Kamerad&quot; was played, Hitler placed a wreath of chrysanthemums on each coffin, then stepped back to lift his arm in the Nazi salute. The very slow playing of &quot;&quot;Deutschland über alles&quot;&quot; ended the solemn ceremony.

===Arrest===
At 8:45 p.m. on the night of 8 November, Elser was apprehended by two border guards, from the Swiss border fence in Konstanz. When taken to the border control post and asked to empty his pockets he was found to be carrying wire cutters, numerous notes and sketches pertaining to explosive devices, firing pins and a blank colour postcard of the interior of the Bürgerbräukeller. At 11 p.m., during Elser&#x27;s interrogation by the Gestapo in Konstanz, news of the bombing in Munich arrived by teleprinter. The next day, Elser was transferred by car to Munich Gestapo Headquarters.

===Investigation===
While still returning to Berlin by train, Hitler ordered Heinrich Himmler to put Arthur Nebe, head of Kripo (Criminal Police), in charge of the investigation into the Munich bombing. Himmler did this, but also assigned total control of the investigation to the chief of the Gestapo, Heinrich Müller. Müller immediately ordered the arrest of all Bürgerbräukeller personnel, while Nebe ran the onsite investigation, sifting through the debris.

Nebe had early success, finding the remains of brass plates bearing patent numbers of a clock maker in Schwenningen, Baden-Würtemberg. Despite the clear evidence of the German make, Himmler released to the press that the metal parts pointed to &quot;foreign origin&quot;.

Himmler offered a reward of 500,000 marks for information leading to the capture of the culprits, and the Gestapo was soon deluged with hundreds of suspects. When one suspect was reported to have detonator parts in his pockets, Otto Rappold of the counter-espionage arm of the Gestapo sped to Königsbronn and neighbouring towns. Every family member and possible acquaintance of Elser was rounded up for interrogation.

At the Schmauder residence in Schnaitheim, 16-year-old Maria Schmauder told of her family&#x27;s recent boarder who was working on an &quot;invention&quot;, had a false bottom in his suitcase, and worked at the Vollmer quarry.

===Interrogation in Munich===
On 9 November, as only one of many suspects being held at Munich Gestapo Headquarters, Elser did not attract much attention for a few days, but when face-to-face meetings took place with Bürgerbräukeller staff, waitress Maria Strobl identified Elser as the odd customer who never ordered more than one drink. Later, on the basis of his Swabian accent, Elser was identified by a storekeeper as the man to whom he had sold a &quot;sound proofing insulation plate&quot; to deaden the sound of ticking clocks.

Nebe called in Franz Josef Huber, head of the Gestapo in Vienna, to assist. Huber had the idea of asking Elser to bare his knees. When he did, they were found to be badly bruised, the apparent result of working at low level during his night work at the Bürgerbräukeller.

Dr Albrecht Böhme, head of the Munich Kripo, was witness to a severe and prolonged beating of Elser, in which he said Himmler participated. He later recalled: &quot;But Elser, who was groaning and bleeding profusely from the mouth and nose, made no confession; he would probably not have been physically able to, even if he had wanted to.&quot; However, on 15 November, Elser made a full written confession, though the document did not survive the war.

===Interrogation in Berlin===
Elser was transferred to Berlin Gestapo Headquarters on Prinz Albrecht Strasse, possibly on 18 November. His parents, siblings and their spouses, together with his former girlfriend Elsa Härlen, were taken by train to Berlin to be held in Moabit prison and then in the grand Hotel Kaiserhof. His mother, sister Maria Hirth, brother-in-law Karl Hirth and Elsa Härlen were interrogated in the presence of Elser.

In 1950, Elsa Härlen recollected:

Härlen was left in no doubt that Elser was only repeating what his interrogators wanted him to say. Apart from Maria Hirth and her husband, who were considered accomplices and imprisoned for over one year, the family members and Härlen were allowed to return home. While in Berlin, Härlen received special attention, being interviewed by Heinrich Himmler, having an audience with Adolf Hitler, and being quizzed by Martin Bormann. However, she did not help their cause, which was to find some fragment of evidence that Elser had not acted alone.

While in Berlin, Elser made five full-size drawings of the design of his bomb in order to persuade his interrogators that he was the sole instigator of the assassination attempt. These drawings are referred to in the Gestapo interrogation report, but have not survived.

===Interrogation report===
Five days of torture, 19–23 November, produced the Gestapo Protokoll (interrogation report). The document was signed off by Kappler, Schmidt and Seibold for the &quot;Kriminalkommissare&quot;. Buried in the German archives in Koblenz until 1964, this report is now considered the most important source of information on Elser. The report did not mention the interrogation of Elser&#x27;s family members and Elsa Härlen in Berlin, as the report contains only the answers Elser gave to his interrogators. On the vital question that he was the sole instigator, Elser had this to say:

When Himmler read the final report, he flew into a rage and scrawled in green ink on the red cover: &quot;What idiot wrote this?&quot;

===Nazi propaganda===
Discarding the interrogation report that found Elser solely responsible, Hitler proceeded to use the Bürgerbräukeller bombing for propaganda purposes. On 22 November, German newspapers were filled with the story that the assassin, Georg Elser, had been funded by the British Intelligence Service, while the organiser of the crime was Otto Strasser. Photos of two British SIS officers, Richard Henry Stevens and Sigismund Payne Best, captured in the Venlo Incident on 9 November 1939, shared the front page of &quot;Deutsche Allgemeine Zeitung&quot; with a photo of Georg Elser.

SS officer Walter Schellenberg later wrote in his memoirs (&quot;The Labyrinth&quot;):

The Swiss magazine &quot;Appenzeller Zeitung&quot; reported on 23 November 1939 that Otto Strasser had denied any knowledge of Elser, Best or Stevens in an interview in Paris. On 13 November, Swiss authorities had expelled Strasser from Switzerland, after he was found to have made disparaging remarks about Hitler in a foreign newspaper in October.

===Torture, drugs and hypnosis===
The basement cells of the Berlin Gestapo Headquarters were notorious for the inhumane treatment of prisoners. It was rumoured Elser was kept imprisoned on the top floor until January or February 1941.

Arthur Nebe told Hans Gisevius of Elser&#x27;s frayed state during this period. Gisevius wrote later,

Walter Schellenberg wrote of a conversation with Heinrich Müller, who told him,

Three days later, Schellenberg heard from Müller that three doctors had worked on Elser for twenty-four hours, injecting him with &quot;sizable quantities of Pervitin&quot;, but he continued to say the same thing. Four hypnotists were summoned. Only one could put Elser into a trance, but the prisoner stuck to the same story. The psychologist wrote in his report that Elser was a &quot;fanatic&quot; and had a pathological desire for recognition. He concluded by saying pointedly: Elser had the &quot;drive to achieve fame by eliminating Hitler and simultaneously liberating Germany from the evil of Hitler.&#x27;&quot;

===Reconstruction of the bomb===
While at Berlin Gestapo Headquarters, Müller put Elser into a workshop and ordered him to reconstruct the explosive device he used at the Bürgerbräukeller. When Reinhard Heydrich and Walter Schellenberg visited Elser in the workshop, Schellenberg noted, &quot;He [Elser] responded to questioning only with reluctance but opened up when he was praised for his craftsmanship. Then he would comment on his reconstructed model in detail and with great enthusiasm.&quot;

Elser&#x27;s reconstruction of his Bürgerbräukeller bomb was held in such high regard by the Gestapo, they adopted it into their field manuals for training purposes.

==Aftermath==
===Consequences for associates===
The day after the bombing at the Bürgerbräukeller, outraged SS guards at Buchenwald Concentration Camp took revenge. Twenty-one Jews were killed by firing squad, and all Jews in the camp suffered three days of food deprivation.

The Gestapo descended on the village of Königsbronn to interrogate the inhabitants, asking the same questions over and over for months on end. The village was stigmatized as a nest of criminals and became known as &quot;Assassinville&quot;. Elsewhere, everyone who might have had contact with Elser was hunted down and interrogated by the Gestapo.

The quarry owner Georg Vollmer and his employees were severely beaten during Gestapo interrogations. Sentenced to 20 years in Welzheim concentration camp for negligence in dealing with explosive materials, Vollmer was released in 1941 after his wife petitioned Rudolf Hess through old connections. Losing her mind in fear her husband would be taken away again, she died six months after his release. Prior to her death she started a rumor that Karl Kuch, a Zürich music dealer who had died in a car accident in July 1939, had put Elser up to the assassination attempt. The theory alleged that Kuch was the leader of a three-man Communist group, nicknamed &quot;Troika&quot; by Gestapo, who claimed the supposed trio had connections to Otto Strasser and the Soviet NKVD. Elser was questioned about Kuch by Gestapo, who were only able to connect the two through their shared communist leanings and hometown of Königsbronn. The theory became public in 1964, following a three-part report by journalists Günter Peis and Erich Petry of &quot;Stern&quot; magazine.

Waldenmaier, the owner of the Waldenmaier armaments factory in Heidenheim, was more fortunate than Vollmer. With the backing of the Abwehr in 1944, he received the War Service Cross First Class for significant contributions to the war effort. In 1940, a Gestapo man had told him: &quot;In spite of repeated torture, Elser had stuck to his story that he had carried out the attack in order to save the working people and the entire world from war.&quot;

The Munich locksmith Max Niederholer, who had unwittingly supplied Elser with metal parts, was bound and beaten and detained for two weeks by the Gestapo. Being born in London did not help his case. Maria Schmauder&#x27;s father was subjected to lengthy interrogation, particularly as Elser had admitted to listening to foreign radio stations in his house—even though that practice was not banned until 1 September 1939. Mathilde Niedermann was interrogated over several nights by the Gestapo in 1939. She maintained that Elser was &quot;completely uninterested in politics&quot;, even though it was in Konstanz that he became friendly with Communists. Almost sixty years later, Mathilde and Elser&#x27;s son, Manfred Buhl, spoke at the dedication of the Georg-Elser-Platz in Munich in 1997—the same year he died.

Elser&#x27;s lover Elsa Härlen said Elser &quot;led a double life and completely separated his political life from his private life&quot;. In an interview in 1959, she said she did not want any restitution from the government of the Federal Republic, as &quot;it was those gypsies that were there before&quot; — meaning the Nazis — that had brought her harm. Generally his family had difficulty coming to terms with his confession as the sole instigator. In 1950, his mother continued to lay the blame on others saying: &quot;I don&#x27;t think my son would come up with anything like that on his own&quot;.

===Imprisonment===
Elser never faced a trial for the bombing of the Bürgerbräukeller. After his year of torment at Berlin Gestapo Headquarters, he was kept in special custody in Sachsenhausen concentration camp between early 1941 and early 1945. At Sachsenhausen, Elser was held in isolation in a T-shaped building reserved for protected prisoners. Accommodated in three joined cells, each 9.35 m2, there was space for his two full-time guards and a work space to make furniture and other things, including several zithers.

Elser&#x27;s apparent preferential treatment, which included extra rations and daily visits to the camp barber for a shave, aroused interest amongst other prisoners, including British SIS officer Payne Best. He wrote later that Elser was also allowed regular visits to the camp brothel. Martin Niemöller was also a special inmate in the Sachsenhausen &quot;bunker&quot; and believed the rumours that Elser was an SS man and an agent of Hitler and Himmler. Elser kept a photo of Elsa Härlen in his cell. In early 1945, Elser was transferred to the bunker at Dachau concentration camp.

===Death===

In April 1945, with German defeat imminent, the Nazis&#x27; intention of staging a show trial over the Bürgerbräukeller bombing had become futile. Hitler ordered the execution of special security prisoner &quot;Eller&quot; — the name used for Elser in Dachau — along with Wilhelm Canaris, Dietrich Bonhoeffer and others who had plotted against him. The order, dated 5 April 1945, from the Gestapo HQ in Berlin, was addressed to the Commandant of the Dachau concentration camp, SS-Obersturmbannführer Eduard Weiter.

The order came into the possession of Captain S. Payne Best in May 1945, and appeared in Best&#x27;s book, &quot;The Venlo Incident&quot;. That part of the order relating to Elser reads:

The signature on the order was illegible, according to Best.

In his 1947 book, &quot;To The Bitter End&quot;, Hans Bernd Gisevius commented on the order:

On 9 April 1945, four weeks before the end of the war in Europe, Georg Elser was shot dead and his fully dressed body immediately burned in the crematorium of Dachau Concentration Camp. He was 42 years old.

In 1954, SS-Oberscharführer Theodor Bongartz, the man in charge of the crematorium at Dachau, was determined to have been the murderer of Georg Elser, during a German court proceeding in which SS-Unterscharführer Edgar Stiller was on trial as an accessory to murder. As the SS man in charge of the special prisoners at Dachau from 1943 to 1945, Stiller was accused of escorting Elser to the crematorium where he was allegedly shot by Bongartz. Theodor Bongartz was not brought to account as he had died of an illness in 1945.

A plaque dedicated to Elser&#x27;s memory in Königsbronn says:

===Conspiracy theories===
Elser has been the subject of rumours and various conspiracy theories since the Bürgerbräukeller bombing. After the war, Protestant pastor and theologian Martin Niemöller, also in custody in the &quot;bunker&quot; at Sachsenhausen, gave credence to the rumour that Elser had been a member of the SS and that the whole assassination attempt had been staged by the Nazis to portray Hitler as being protected by Providence. Many others, like quarry owner Georg Vollmer, building on his dead wife&#x27;s contribution, weighed in with their version of the truth. In 1948, Allen Welsh Dulles, the future Director of Central Intelligence (de facto head of the U.S. Central Intelligence Agency) summed up a range of conspiracy theories when he wrote:

In 1969, historical research by Anton Hoch based on The Gestapo Protokoll (interrogation report) dated 19–23 November 1939, found that Elser had acted alone and there was no evidence to involve the Nazi regime or any outside group in the assassination attempt.

==Memorials==

In contrast to the conspirators of the 20 July 1944 assassination attempt on Hitler, Elser was barely acknowledged in the official commemorative culture of the Federal Republic of Germany until the 1990s. A breakthrough to a positive way of looking at Elser came with the publication of a biography by Hellmut G. Haasis in 1999 followed by an expanded and revised edition in 2009. Since 2001, every two years the Georg-Elser Prize is awarded for courage, and on the occasion of Elser&#x27;s 100th Birthday in January 2003, Deutsche Post issued a special stamp.

There are at least 60 streets and places named after Elser in Germany and several monuments. &quot;Welt&quot; journalist wrote in 2005: &quot;That he was for so long ignored by the historians of both East and West Germany, merely goes to show just how long it took Germany to become comfortable with honestly confronting its own history. Johann Georg Elser, though, defied ideological categorization—and for that reason, he is a true German hero.&quot;

In 2008, a music venue called Georg Elser Hallen was demolished in Munich. However, as of 2014, there were five venues in Munich bearing the name Georg Elser Hallen. In 2011, a steel sculpture of Georg Elser was unveiled in Berlin, by German playwright Rolf Hochhuth. The memorial, which cost 200,000 euros, was built on Hochhuth&#x27;s initiative, after the city authorities dismissed the project as too expensive. In the end, the Berlin state senate financed the Elser sculpture, alongside a 50,000 euro donation by an anonymous benefactor. In September 1979, the Bürgerbräukeller was demolished. On its site now stands the GEMA Building, the Gasteig Cultural Centre and the Munich City Hilton Hotel. A plaque in the pavement at the entrance to the GEMA Building marks the position of the pillar that concealed Elser&#x27;s bomb. 8. November 1939 is the name of the Johann Georg Elser Memorial in Munich to commemorate the resistance fighters fighting against the Nazis. The monument is located in the Maxvorstadt district.

The story of Elser is commemorated in the 1989 film &quot;Seven Minutes&quot; () directed by Klaus Maria Brandauer, and the 2015 film &quot;13 Minutes&quot; (), directed by Oliver Hirschbiegel.

The &quot;Georg Elser Prize&quot; was established in 2001. It is awarded every two years to individuals who have demonstrated civil courage or civil disobedience against injustice committed by the state.

==See also==
* List of assassination attempts on Adolf Hitler

==References==
;Notes
==Further reading==
* Evans, Richard J., &quot;The Third Reich at War&quot;. Penguin Press, 2008, pp. 109–111. 
* Moorhouse, Roger, &quot;Killing Hitler: The Third Reich and the Plots against the Führer&quot;. Jonathan Cape, 2006, pp. 36–58. 
* Steinbach, Peter and Tuchel, Johannes, &quot;Georg Elser. Der Hitler-Attentäter&quot;. Berlin: Be.bra-Wissenschafts-Verlag, 2008, .
* Tom Ferry, &quot;GEORG ELSER: The Zither Player&quot;, 2016, 

==External links==

* Tom Ferry, Georg Elser Detailed documentation at georgelser.info

* Georg Elser und das Attentat vom Bürgerbräukeller 1939 at shoa.de 
* Heilige – Selige – Ehrwürdige – Namen – Geschichten – Ökumenisches Heiligenlexikon at heiligenlexikon.de 
* &quot;The Carpenter Elser Versus the Führer Hitler&quot; &quot;Der Spiegel,&quot; 8 November 2005
* Mike Dash, One Man Against Tyranny , 18 August 2011</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q77269" start="0" end="18" title="Georg Elser" label="Johann Georg Elser"/>
<link wikidata="Q352" start="139" end="151" title="Adolf Hitler" label="Adolf Hitler"/>
<link wikidata="Q592281" start="214" end="230" title="Bürgerbräukeller" label="Bürgerbräukeller"/>
<link wikidata="Q1726" start="234" end="240" title="Munich" label="Munich"/>
<link wikidata="Q77269" start="255" end="279" title="Georg Elser" label="Bürgerbräukeller Bombing"/>
<link wikidata="Q151198" start="562" end="587" title="Dachau concentration camp" label="Dachau concentration camp"/>
<link wikidata="Q83025" start="753" end="764" title="Hermaringen" label="Hermaringen"/>
<link wikidata="Q159626" start="766" end="777" title="Württemberg" label="Württemberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1796326" start="902" end="913" title="Königsbronn" label="Königsbronn"/>
<link wikidata="Q2827199" start="941" end="953" title="smallholding" label="smallholding"/>
<link wikidata="Q43250" start="1419" end="1426" title="Gestapo" label="Gestapo"/>
<link wikidata="Q6869" start="1860" end="1870" title="Heidenheim an der Brenz" label="Heidenheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q3951" start="1938" end="1943" title="Aalen" label="Aalen"/>
<link wikidata="Q260902" start="2044" end="2052" title="Bernried" label="Bernried"/>
<link wikidata="Q506323" start="2059" end="2067" title="Tettnang" label="Tettnang"/>
<link wikidata="Q4051" start="2123" end="2138" title="Friedrichshafen" label="Friedrichshafen"/>
<link wikidata="Q165765" start="2232" end="2239" title="Dornier Flugzeugwerke" label="Dornier"/>
<link wikidata="Q3834" start="2303" end="2311" title="Konstanz" label="Konstanz"/>
<link wikidata="Q6186" start="2686" end="2695" title="Communist" label="Communist"/>
<link wikidata="Q702302" start="2736" end="2761" title="Roter Frontkämpferbund" label="Red Front-Fighters League"/>
<link wikidata="Q65962" start="2889" end="2900" title="Bottighofen" label="Bottighofen"/>
<link wikidata="Q71" start="3133" end="3139" title="Geneva" label="Geneva"/>
<link wikidata="Q498212" start="3497" end="3506" title="Meersburg" label="Meersburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q63905" start="3564" end="3575" title="Kreuzlingen" label="Kreuzlingen"/>
<link wikidata="Q11405" start="4200" end="4205" title="flute" label="flute"/>
<link wikidata="Q79838" start="4207" end="4216" title="accordion" label="accordion"/>
<link wikidata="Q76239" start="4231" end="4237" title="zither" label="zither"/>
<link wikidata="Q6869" start="5281" end="5292" title="Schnaitheim" label="Schnaitheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q702302" start="5829" end="5865" title="Rotfrontkämpferbund" label="Red Front-Fighters&amp;#x27; Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q153401" start="6026" end="6041" title="Communist Party of Germany" label="Communist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q7310" start="6162" end="6168" title="Nazism" label="Nazism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="6195" end="6201" title="Third Reich" label="regime"/>
<link wikidata="Q153271" start="6237" end="6250" title="Hitler salute" label="Hitler salute"/>
<link wikidata="Q3012" start="6607" end="6610" title="Ulm" label="Ulm"/>
<link wikidata="Q23393" start="7167" end="7185" title="Lord&amp;#x27;s Prayer" label="Lord&amp;#x27;s Prayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q36749" start="7913" end="7929" title="Beer Hall Putsch" label="Beer Hall Putsch"/>
<link wikidata="Q36756" start="8200" end="8213" title="Kristallnacht" label="Kristallnacht"/>
<link wikidata="Q6869" start="9236" end="9247" title="Heidenheim an der Brenz" label="Schnaitheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q49709" start="10951" end="10966" title="Christian Weber (SS general)" label="Christian Weber"/>
<link wikidata="Q1726" start="11999" end="12005" title="Munich" label="Munich"/>
<link wikidata="Q1022" start="12010" end="12019" title="Stuttgart" label="Stuttgart"/>
<link wikidata="Q3012" start="12407" end="12410" title="Ulm" label="Ulm"/>
<link wikidata="Q3834" start="12477" end="12485" title="Konstanz" label="Konstanz"/>
<link wikidata="Q41749" start="12646" end="12661" title="Joseph Goebbels" label="Joseph Goebbels"/>
<link wikidata="Q60039" start="12663" end="12680" title="Reinhard Heydrich" label="Reinhard Heydrich"/>
<link wikidata="Q75866" start="12682" end="12693" title="Rudolf Hess" label="Rudolf Hess"/>
<link wikidata="Q58645" start="12695" end="12705" title="Robert Ley" label="Robert Ley"/>
<link wikidata="Q75849" start="12707" end="12723" title="Alfred Rosenberg" label="Alfred Rosenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q76984" start="12725" end="12741" title="Julius Streicher" label="Julius Streicher"/>
<link wikidata="Q102182" start="12743" end="12755" title="August Frank" label="August Frank"/>
<link wikidata="Q64747" start="12757" end="12770" title="Hermann Esser" label="Hermann Esser"/>
<link wikidata="Q43067" start="12775" end="12791" title="Heinrich Himmler" label="Heinrich Himmler"/>
<link wikidata="Q49709" start="12832" end="12847" title="Christian Weber (SS general)" label="Christian Weber"/>
<link wikidata="Q64" start="13110" end="13116" title="Berlin" label="Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2090" start="13867" end="13876" title="Nuremberg" label="Nuremberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q7320" start="14423" end="14433" title="Nazi Party" label="Nazi Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q150793" start="14587" end="14589" title="Sturmabteilung" label="SA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1969023" start="14596" end="14612" title="Sturmhauptführer" label="Sturmhauptführer"/>
<link wikidata="Q301856" start="14691" end="14695" title="National Socialist Motor Corps" label="NSKK"/>
<link wikidata="Q575041" start="14734" end="14750" title="Mann (paramilitary rank)" label="&amp;quot;Mann&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q570683" start="14845" end="14877" title="Honour Chevron for the Old Guard" label="Honour Chevron for the Old Guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q438070" start="14902" end="14914" title="Alter Kämpfer" label="Alte Kämpfer"/>
<link wikidata="Q11405" start="14967" end="14975" title="Flute" label="flautist"/>
<link wikidata="Q7320" start="15389" end="15394" title="Nazi Party" label="NSDAP"/>
<link wikidata="Q251712" start="15452" end="15466" title="Feldherrnhalle" label="Feldherrnhalle"/>
<link wikidata="Q212330" start="15880" end="15896" title="Ich hatt&amp;#x27; einen Kameraden" label="Der gute Kamerad"/>
<link wikidata="Q59882" start="15941" end="15954" title="chrysanthemum" label="chrysanthemum"/>
<link wikidata="Q153271" start="16013" end="16024" title="Nazi salute" label="Nazi salute"/>
<link wikidata="Q44042" start="16057" end="16091" title="Deutschlandlied" label="&amp;quot;Deutschland über alles&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q66196" start="16633" end="16644" title="teleprinter" label="teleprinter"/>
<link wikidata="Q57742" start="16823" end="16834" title="Arthur Nebe" label="Arthur Nebe"/>
<link wikidata="Q684093" start="16844" end="16849" title="Kripo" label="Kripo"/>
<link wikidata="Q58030" start="17025" end="17040" title="Heinrich Müller (Gestapo)" label="Heinrich Müller"/>
<link wikidata="Q3865" start="17288" end="17300" title="Villingen-Schwenningen" label="Schwenningen"/>
<link wikidata="Q72774" start="18657" end="18674" title="Franz Josef Huber" label="Franz Josef Huber"/>
<link wikidata="Q1741" start="18699" end="18705" title="Vienna" label="Vienna"/>
<link wikidata="Q895577" start="19454" end="19476" title="Niederkirchnerstraße" label="Prinz Albrecht Strasse"/>
<link wikidata="Q699800" start="19637" end="19643" title="Moabit" label="Moabit"/>
<link wikidata="Q320591" start="19673" end="19688" title="Hotel Kaiserhof (Berlin)" label="Hotel Kaiserhof"/>
<link wikidata="Q76367" start="20259" end="20273" title="Martin Bormann" label="Martin Bormann"/>
<link wikidata="Q76640" start="21763" end="21776" title="Otto Strasser" label="Otto Strasser"/>
<link wikidata="Q467822" start="21814" end="21835" title="Richard Henry Stevens" label="Richard Henry Stevens"/>
<link wikidata="Q467782" start="21840" end="21860" title="Sigismund Payne Best" label="Sigismund Payne Best"/>
<link wikidata="Q605575" start="21878" end="21892" title="Venlo Incident" label="Venlo Incident"/>
<link wikidata="Q567313" start="21944" end="21971" title="Deutsche Allgemeine Zeitung" label="Deutsche Allgemeine Zeitung"/>
<link wikidata="Q57781" start="22019" end="22038" title="Walter Schellenberg" label="Walter Schellenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q57742" start="22683" end="22694" title="Arthur Nebe" label="Arthur Nebe"/>
<link wikidata="Q65385" start="22700" end="22713" title="Hans Gisevius" label="Hans Gisevius"/>
<link wikidata="Q57781" start="22786" end="22805" title="Walter Schellenberg" label="Walter Schellenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q58030" start="22835" end="22850" title="Heinrich Müller (Gestapo)" label="Heinrich Müller"/>
<link wikidata="Q191924" start="23025" end="23033" title="Methamphetamine" label="Pervitin"/>
<link wikidata="Q60039" start="23683" end="23700" title="Reinhard Heydrich" label="Reinhard Heydrich"/>
<link wikidata="Q57781" start="23705" end="23724" title="Walter Schellenberg" label="Walter Schellenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q82421" start="24908" end="24916" title="Welzheim" label="Welzheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q72" start="25239" end="25245" title="Zurich" label="Zürich"/>
<link wikidata="Q182449" start="25546" end="25550" title="NKVD" label="NKVD"/>
<link wikidata="Q158322" start="25813" end="25839" title="Stern (magazine)" label="&amp;quot;Stern&amp;quot; magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q152993" start="25974" end="25980" title="Abwehr" label="Abwehr"/>
<link wikidata="Q154498" start="27898" end="27930" title="Sachsenhausen concentration camp" label="Sachsenhausen concentration camp"/>
<link wikidata="Q552801" start="28518" end="28530" title="German camp brothels in World War II" label="camp brothel"/>
<link wikidata="Q153839" start="28532" end="28548" title="Martin Niemöller" label="Martin Niemöller"/>
<link wikidata="Q57129" start="29115" end="29130" title="Wilhelm Canaris" label="Wilhelm Canaris"/>
<link wikidata="Q76326" start="29132" end="29151" title="Dietrich Bonhoeffer" label="Dietrich Bonhoeffer"/>
<link wikidata="Q96450" start="29343" end="29356" title="Eduard Weiter" label="Eduard Weiter"/>
<link wikidata="Q467782" start="29397" end="29418" title="Payne Best" label="Captain S. Payne Best"/>
<link wikidata="Q65385" start="29658" end="29677" title="Hans Bernd Gisevius" label="Hans Bernd Gisevius"/>
<link wikidata="Q1796326" start="30483" end="30494" title="Königsbronn" label="Königsbronn"/>
<link wikidata="Q153839" start="30682" end="30698" title="Martin Niemöller" label="Martin Niemöller"/>
<link wikidata="Q44687" start="30824" end="30826" title="SS" label="SS"/>
<link wikidata="Q317243" start="31095" end="31113" title="Allen Welsh Dulles" label="Allen Welsh Dulles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1227524" start="31126" end="31158" title="Director of Central Intelligence" label="Director of Central Intelligence"/>
<link wikidata="Q37230" start="31186" end="31213" title="Central Intelligence Agency" label="Central Intelligence Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q105570" start="31588" end="31632" title="20 July plot" label="20 July 1944 assassination attempt on Hitler"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="31709" end="31736" title="Federal Republic of Germany" label="Federal Republic of Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q5266289" start="32072" end="32085" title="Deutsche Post" label="Deutsche Post"/>
<link wikidata="Q1959672" start="32210" end="32214" title="Welt (TV channel)" label="Welt"/>
<link wikidata="Q60820" start="32818" end="32831" title="Rolf Hochhuth" label="Rolf Hochhuth"/>
<link wikidata="Q481497" start="33191" end="33195" title="Gesellschaft für musikalische Aufführungs- und mechanische Vervielfältigungsrechte" label="GEMA"/>
<link wikidata="Q529345" start="33210" end="33217" title="Gasteig" label="Gasteig"/>
<link wikidata="Q78533" start="33685" end="33706" title="Klaus Maria Brandauer" label="Klaus Maria Brandauer"/>
<link wikidata="Q18977471" start="33732" end="33742" title="13 Minutes (2015 film)" label="13 Minutes"/>
<link wikidata="Q60634" start="33765" end="33784" title="Oliver Hirschbiegel" label="Oliver Hirschbiegel"/>
<link wikidata="Q573487" start="34007" end="34053" title="List of assassination attempts on Adolf Hitler" label="List of assassination attempts on Adolf Hitler"/>
<link wikidata="Q607427" start="34099" end="34116" title="Richard J. Evans" label="Evans, Richard J."/>
<link wikidata="Q656858" start="34191" end="34207" title="Roger Moorhouse" label="Moorhouse, Roger"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="464811" wikidata="Q1848900" url="?curid=464811" title="Contraindication">
<text>In medicine, a contraindication is a condition (a situation or factor) that serves as a reason not to take a certain medical treatment due to the harm that it would cause the patient. Contraindication is the opposite of indication, which is a reason to use a certain treatment.

Absolute contraindications are contraindications for which there are no reasonable circumstances for undertaking a course of action (that is, overriding the prohibition). For example:
* Children and teenagers with viral infections should not be given aspirin because of the risk of Reye syndrome.
* A person with an anaphylactic food allergy should never eat the food to which they are allergic.
* A person with hemochromatosis should not be administered iron preparations.
* Some medications are so teratogenic that they are absolutely contraindicated in pregnancy; examples include thalidomide and isotretinoin.

Relative contraindications are contraindications for circumstances in which the patient is at higher risk of complications from treatment, but these risks may be outweighed by other considerations or mitigated by other measures. For example, pregnant women should normally avoid getting X-rays, but the risk from radiography may be outweighed by the benefit of diagnosing (and then treating) a serious condition such as tuberculosis.

Another principal pair of terms for relative contraindications&quot; versus &quot;absolute contraindications is cautions&quot; versus &quot;contraindications, or (similarly) precautions&quot; versus &quot;contraindications: these pairs of terms are respectively synonymous. Which pair is used depends on nomenclature enforced by each organization&#x27;s style. For example, the &quot;British National Formulary&quot; uses the &quot;cautions versus contraindications&quot; pair, and various U.S. CDC webpages use &quot;precautions&quot; versus &quot;contraindications&quot;. The logic of the latter two styles is the idea that readers must never be confused: the word &quot;contraindication&quot; in that usage &quot;always&quot; is meant in its absolute sense, providing unmistakable word-sense disambiguation.

== See also ==
* &quot;Classification of Pharmaco-Therapeutic Referrals&quot;
* Drug reaction testing
* Indication (medicine)
* Never events

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q11190" start="3" end="11" title="medicine" label="medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1848900" start="15" end="31" title="Contraindication" label="contraindication"/>
<link wikidata="Q496997" start="220" end="230" title="Indication (medicine)" label="indication"/>
<link wikidata="Q1848900" start="279" end="305" title="Contraindication" label="Absolute contraindications"/>
<link wikidata="Q18216" start="530" end="537" title="aspirin" label="aspirin"/>
<link wikidata="Q826103" start="561" end="574" title="Reye syndrome" label="Reye syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q168800" start="595" end="607" title="Anaphylaxis" label="anaphylactic"/>
<link wikidata="Q769815" start="608" end="620" title="food allergy" label="food allergy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2025687" start="691" end="706" title="hemochromatosis" label="hemochromatosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q631521" start="779" end="790" title="teratology" label="teratogenic"/>
<link wikidata="Q203174" start="863" end="874" title="thalidomide" label="thalidomide"/>
<link wikidata="Q287029" start="879" end="891" title="isotretinoin" label="isotretinoin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1848900" start="894" end="920" title="Contraindication" label="Relative contraindications"/>
<link wikidata="Q34777" start="1181" end="1186" title="X-ray" label="X-ray"/>
<link wikidata="Q245341" start="1207" end="1218" title="radiography" label="radiography"/>
<link wikidata="Q12204" start="1314" end="1326" title="tuberculosis" label="tuberculosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1725664" start="1355" end="1360" title="terminology" label="terms"/>
<link wikidata="Q863247" start="1633" end="1645" title="nomenclature" label="nomenclature"/>
<link wikidata="Q198614" start="1683" end="1688" title="style guide" label="style"/>
<link wikidata="Q1756347" start="1713" end="1739" title="British National Formulary" label="British National Formulary"/>
<link wikidata="Q583725" start="1824" end="1827" title="Centers for Disease Control and Prevention" label="CDC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047050" start="2033" end="2038" title="usage (language)" label="usage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1570700" start="2083" end="2088" title="word sense" label="sense"/>
<link wikidata="Q48522" start="2113" end="2138" title="word-sense disambiguation" label="word-sense disambiguation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5128396" start="2164" end="2212" title="Classification of Pharmaco-Therapeutic Referrals" label="Classification of Pharmaco-Therapeutic Referrals"/>
<link wikidata="Q5308918" start="2221" end="2242" title="Drug reaction testing" label="Drug reaction testing"/>
<link wikidata="Q496997" start="2245" end="2266" title="Indication (medicine)" label="Indication (medicine)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7004357" start="2269" end="2281" title="Never events" label="Never events"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="464812" wikidata="Q688561" url="?curid=464812" title="Landsgemeinde">
<text>The Landsgemeinde (&quot;cantonal assembly&quot;; , plural Landsgemeinden) is a public, non-secret ballot voting system operating by majority rule. Still in use – in a few places – at the subnational political level in Switzerland, it was formerly practiced in eight cantons. For practical reasons , the &quot;Landsgemeinde&quot; has been abolished at the cantonal level in all but two cantons where it still holds the highest political authority: Appenzell Innerrhoden and Glarus. The &quot;Landsgemeinde&quot; is also convened in some districts of Appenzell Innerrhoden, Grisons and Schwyz to vote on local questions.

The German term &quot;Landsgemeinde&quot; itself is attested from at least the 16th century, in the 1561 dictionary of Pictorius.
It is a compound from &quot;Land&quot; &quot;land, canton; rural canton&quot; and &quot;Gemeinde&quot; &quot;community, commune&quot;.

Eligible citizens of the canton or district meet on a certain day in the open air to decide on specific issues. Voting is accomplished by raising one&#x27;s hand in favor of a motion. Historically, the only proof of citizenship necessary for men to enter the voting area was to show their ceremonial sword or Swiss military sidearm (bayonet); this gave proof that they were a freeman allowed to bear arms and to vote. While voting cards have been introduced, in Appenzell presenting a sidearm is still a valid alternative to the voting card for men.

The &quot;Landsgemeinde&quot; has been the sovereign institution of the Swiss rural cantons since the late Middle Ages, while in the city-cantons such as Lucerne, Schaffhausen, or Bern, a general assembly of all citizens was never established.

Similar assemblies in dependent territories were known under terms such as &quot;Talgemeinde&quot; (for &quot;Talschaften&quot;, used in Ursern, Hasli, Obersimmental), &quot;Teding&quot; (Engelberg), &quot;Parlamento&quot; (Leventina), and &quot;Zendgemeinden&quot; (for the &quot;Zenden&quot; or districts of Valais), but also as &quot;Landsgemeinde&quot; in Toggenburg and in parts of Grisons.

==Definition==

===Structure===

At the &quot;Landsgemeinde&quot;, citizens of a district or canton assemble annually in a public space under open sky to vote on a series of ballot questions. Depending on the canton, they raise their hand or voter identification card to either accept or reject the motion, which constitutes a &quot;non-secret ballot&quot;. 
Decision is taken by majority rule, and in case of incertitude, the Landammann estimates on which side the majority falls with the help of his colleagues from the communal council.

The duration of the &quot;Landsgemeinde&quot; varies significantly between the two cantons that still convene it. In Glarus, because of the high level of deliberation and possibility for citizens to propose an amendment of an existing law article or the introduction of a new one, the &quot;Landsgemeinde&quot; lasts between 2 and 4.5 hours on average. In Appenzell Innerrhoden on the other hand, deliberation is limited, thus the &quot;Landsgemeinden&quot; usually end after 1 to 2.5 hours.

===Subject of the votes===

Symptomatic of the federalist system of Switzerland, the &quot;Landsgemeinde&quot; differs in the scope of its usage from canton to canton. The legislative power is concerned both in Appenzell Innerrhoden and Glarus, where the &quot;Landsgemeinde&quot; can be used to implement laws or modify the cantonal constitution. In Appenzell Innerrhoden, the &quot;Landsgemeinde&quot; can also cover governmental issues, while in Glarus tax laws are regulated by &quot;Landsgemeinde&quot; decision and alternative legislative counterproposals (&#x27;constructive referendums&#x27;) can be formulated by the citizens and voted on this occasion. In neither of the two cantons is the &quot;Landsgemeinde&quot; used to elect the parliament.

==History==

===Origin===
The &quot;Landsgemeinde&quot; assembly is a tradition with continuity back to the later Middle Ages, first recorded in the context of the formation of the Old Swiss Confederacy. The tradition ultimately continues the Germanic &quot;thing&quot;, although not uninterruptedly, as the Alamanni had lost their independence to the Frankish Empire in the 8th century but re-emerging in territories with imperial immediacy since the 13th century.

The first &quot;Landsgemeinde&quot; proper is attested for Uri in 1231; however, these early assemblies grew seamlessly out of the older institution of blood courts (assemblies with the purpose of dispensing judgement on criminal offenses, see high justice).
The Middle Latin texts when recording a &quot;Landsgemeinde&quot; usually express this by making &quot;universitas&quot; &quot;the universality&quot;, or &quot;communitas hominum&quot; &quot;the community of men&quot; of a certain canton the subject of a sentence (see, for example, the Federal Charter of 1291), in order to emphasize that the decision was made by the community (direct democracy) rather than by a political elite.

In the Old Swiss Confederacy, the existence of a &quot;Landsgemeinde&quot; was the defining feature of the rural cantons (&quot;Länderorte&quot;, as opposed to the city-cantons).
These Cantons were: Uri, Schwyz, Unterwalden (the forest-cantons), Glarus and Appenzell and Zug.
Zug took an intermediate position, as it was a city-canton which due to the existence of a &quot;Landsgemeinde&quot; was also counted under the rural cantons.

With the formation of Switzerland as a federal state, the formerly sovereign cantonal assemblies became subject to federal law, and the &quot;Landsgemeinden&quot; came to be seen as anachronisms.

===Evolution and current situation===

The usage of the &quot;Landsgemeinde&quot; was progressively abandoned at the cantonal level through the 19th and 20th century. Zug and Schwyz jettisoned it in 1848, followed by Uri in 1928.

Nidwalden in 1996, Appenzell Ausserrhoden in 1997 and Obwalden in 1998 abolished their cantonal &quot;Landsgemeinde&quot; by secret ballot votes.

Currently, Appenzell Innerrhoden, which rejected in 1991 by &quot;Landsgemeinde&quot; the abolition of this institution, and Glarus are the only remaining cantons to use this form of direct democracy. Beside the 1991 vote of Appenzell Innerrhoden, the usage of the &quot;Landsgemeinde&quot; has since then never been questioned in these two cantons, which suggests that citizens are attached to their institution. Moreover, turnout rates remained constant in the last 50 years both in Appenzell Innerrhoden and in Glarus. In the latter canton a participation record of 50% was even recorded in 2001.

Glarus recently introduced measures to encourage participation at the &quot;Landsgemeinde&quot;. In 2007, participation was extended to citizens aged 16 and older, which constitutes an exception in Switzerland. Likewise, each year on the day of the &quot;Landsgemeinde&quot;, participants can use all public transports of the canton for free.

In Appenzell Innerrhoden and Glarus, the modernization of the institution, for example through the potential introduction of electronic vote-counting systems is debated, but no political party is opposed to the maintenance of the &quot;Landsgemeinden&quot;.

Besides the cantonal assemblies, the Swiss Confederation is supporting various projects inspired by the &quot;Landsgemeinden&quot; and built on the same ideas. For instance, the 4th &quot;Cyber-Landsgemeinde&quot; was organised on April 6, 2016 in Bern, with the aim to use democratic deliberation to foster reflections and find solutions related to the topic of cyber-security. Likewise, the urban municipality of Kloten implemented in 2012 a version of the &quot;Landsgemeinde&quot; to deliberate on the allocation of funds to local projects, which enabled for example the construction of a new Kindergarten.

==Related political paradigms and criticisms==

===Direct democracy===

The &quot;Landsgemeinde&quot; forms one of the pillars of the direct democratic core of the Swiss political structure. Even if its use has sharply decreased in the past century, it is still considered as a characteristic institution of the Swiss democracy and is generally considered as a participative and inclusive democratic practice. However, while participation is according to the &quot;cantonal constitutions&quot; not only encouraged but also required as part of the civic duty of the concerned individuals, it is unclear if the &quot;Landsgemeinde&quot; offers better inclusivity and fosters a higher level of participation than the more traditional secret-ballot voting methods. Paul Lucardie (2014) notes for example that:

&quot;Evidence suggests that attendance at assemblies in Appenzell and Glarus, as well as most town meetings in Vermont and possibly also in ancient Athens, has always been limited to roughly twenty per cent of the citizenry.&quot;

Moreover, the inclusion of women was until recently one of the main concerns for the inclusivity of the &quot;Landsgemeinde&quot;. Up to 1991, women were not allowed in the &quot;Landsgemeinde&quot; in the canton of Appenzell Innerrhoden, which was the last canton of Switzerland to grant women the right to vote, making it an exceptionally late introduction of women&#x27;s suffrage for a European country.

===Ochlocracy===
There have been suggestions placing the &quot;Landsgemeinde&quot; system in the vicinity of &quot;ochlocracy&quot; or &quot;tyranny of the majority&quot;. Blum and Köhler (2006) suggested there might only be a &quot;limited level of preliminary debate&quot; possible leading to a failure to consider minority opinions.

The open ballot system ostensibly fails to assure the secrecy of the vote. Switzerland has explicitly introduced an exception to article 25 of its International Pact on Civil and Political Rights in order to protect the &quot;Landsgemeinde&quot;, avoiding complying with the letter of article 21.3 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights protecting the secrecy of the vote. Switzerland has never ratified the first convention protocol of the European Convention on Human Rights for a similar reason.

Under such conditions, social control and other crowd manipulation processes might then prevent citizens from voting according to their own preferences and mislead rational decisions. On the other hand, according to the ancient Greek tradition of parrhesia, literally &quot;saying everything&quot;, a public assembly could teach individuals to express their opinions with frankness and collective responsibility.

Studies of outcomes of the &quot;Landsgemeinde&quot; in various administrative divisions (Schaub 2012, Gerber &amp; Mueller 2014) seem to suggest that proper preliminary deliberation can help reach better decisions defined by the &quot;unforced force of the better argument&quot; (Habermas, 1992).

==See also==
* Voting in Switzerland
* Direct democracy
* Inclusive Democracy
* Participatory democracy

==References==
==Bibliography==
* Marabello, Thomas Quinn (February 2023). &quot;The Origins of Democracy in Switzerland,&quot; &quot;Swiss American Historical Society Review&quot;, Vol. 59: No. 1. Available at: https://scholarsarchive.byu.edu/sahs_review/vol59/iss1/4
* T. Favre-Bulle. (2015) The Urban Diffusion of Local Direct Democracy between Switzerland and the United States.
* H. Ryffel. (1903) Die schweizerische Landsgemeinde nach geltendem Rechte.
* W.-A. Liebeskind. (1971) L. et suffrage féminin, pp. 371–375.
* S. Duroy. (1987) «Les &quot;Landsgemeinden suisses&quot;», in Les procédés de la démocratie semi-directe dans l&#x27;administration locale en Suisse, pp. 1-94.
*Schaub, Hans-Peter. (2012) &quot;Maximising Direct Democracy – by Popular Assemblies or by Ballot Votes?&quot; Swiss Political Science Association.
* H.R. Stauffacher. (1989) Herrschaft und Landsgemeinde.
* P. Blickle. (1990) «Friede und Verfassung, Voraussetzungen und Folgen der Eidgenossenschaft von 1291», in Innerschweiz und frühe Eidgenossenschaft 1, pp. 15–202.
* U. Kälin. (1991) Die Urner Magistratenfamilien.
* L. Carlen. (1996) «Die Landsgemeinde», in Die Ursprünge der schweizerischen direkten Demokratie, ed. A. Auer, pp. 15–25 (with Bibl.).
* F. Brändle. (2005) Demokratie und Charisma.
* B. Adler. (2006) Die Entstehung der direkten Demokratie.
* B. Wickli. (2006) Politische Kultur und die &quot;reine Demokratie&quot;.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q27636" start="133" end="146" title="majority rule" label="majority rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q7631075" start="188" end="199" title="Subdivisions of Switzerland" label="subnational"/>
<link wikidata="Q23058" start="267" end="274" title="cantons of Switzerland" label="cantons"/>
<link wikidata="Q12094" start="448" end="469" title="Canton of Appenzell Innerrhoden" label="Appenzell Innerrhoden"/>
<link wikidata="Q11922" start="474" end="480" title="Canton of Glarus" label="Glarus"/>
<link wikidata="Q662914" start="537" end="546" title="Districts of Switzerland" label="districts"/>
<link wikidata="Q12094" start="550" end="571" title="Canton of Appenzell Innerrhoden" label="Appenzell Innerrhoden"/>
<link wikidata="Q11925" start="573" end="580" title="Grisons" label="Grisons"/>
<link wikidata="Q12433" start="585" end="591" title="Canton of Schwyz" label="Schwyz"/>
<link wikidata="Q117240" start="740" end="749" title="Josua Maaler" label="Pictorius"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="779" end="783" title=":wikt:Land" label="Land"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="839" end="847" title=":wikt:Gemeinde" label="Gemeinde"/>
<link wikidata="Q23058" start="912" end="918" title="Cantons of Switzerland" label="canton"/>
<link wikidata="Q662914" start="922" end="930" title="Districts of Switzerland" label="district"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051051" start="1282" end="1291" title="bear arms" label="bear arms"/>
<link wikidata="Q12094" start="1349" end="1358" title="Canton of Appenzell Innerrhoden" label="Appenzell"/>
<link wikidata="Q4191" start="1592" end="1599" title="Lucerne" label="Lucerne"/>
<link wikidata="Q9009" start="1601" end="1613" title="Schaffhausen" label="Schaffhausen"/>
<link wikidata="Q70" start="1618" end="1622" title="Bern" label="Bern"/>
<link wikidata="Q688385" start="1793" end="1802" title="Talschaft" label="Talschaft"/>
<link wikidata="Q675685" start="1820" end="1826" title="Ursern" label="Ursern"/>
<link wikidata="Q4847188" start="1828" end="1833" title="Oberhasli" label="Hasli"/>
<link wikidata="Q666196" start="1835" end="1848" title="Obersimmental" label="Obersimmental"/>
<link wikidata="Q387834" start="1857" end="1863" title="Thing (assembly)" label="Teding"/>
<link wikidata="Q64108" start="1871" end="1880" title="Engelberg" label="Engelberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q539271" start="1907" end="1916" title="Leventina" label="Leventina"/>
<link wikidata="Q834" start="1993" end="1999" title="Valais" label="Valais"/>
<link wikidata="Q693185" start="2043" end="2053" title="Toggenburg" label="Toggenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q11925" start="2070" end="2077" title="Grisons" label="Grisons"/>
<link wikidata="Q43109" start="2254" end="2269" title="ballot question" label="ballot question"/>
<link wikidata="Q27636" start="2460" end="2473" title="majority rule" label="majority rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q667579" start="2507" end="2517" title="Landammann" label="Landammann"/>
<link wikidata="Q11922" start="2738" end="2744" title="Canton of Glarus" label="Glarus"/>
<link wikidata="Q12094" start="2977" end="2998" title="Canton of Appenzell Innerrhoden" label="Appenzell Innerrhoden"/>
<link wikidata="Q204886" start="3161" end="3171" title="Federalism" label="federalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q12094" start="3325" end="3346" title="Canton of Appenzell Innerrhoden" label="Appenzell Innerrhoden"/>
<link wikidata="Q11922" start="3351" end="3357" title="Canton of Glarus" label="Glarus"/>
<link wikidata="Q12094" start="3465" end="3486" title="Canton of Appenzell Innerrhoden" label="Appenzell Innerrhoden"/>
<link wikidata="Q11922" start="3563" end="3569" title="Canton of Glarus" label="Glarus"/>
<link wikidata="Q668589" start="4035" end="4073" title="formation of the Old Swiss Confederacy" label="formation of the Old Swiss Confederacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q387834" start="4114" end="4140" title="Thing (assembly)" label="Germanic &amp;quot;thing&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q132990" start="4179" end="4187" title="Alamanni" label="Alamanni"/>
<link wikidata="Q31929" start="4223" end="4238" title="Frankish Empire" label="Frankish Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1341156" start="4294" end="4312" title="imperial immediacy" label="imperial immediacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q12404" start="4397" end="4400" title="Canton of Uri" label="Uri"/>
<link wikidata="Q66768692" start="4490" end="4501" title="blood court" label="blood court"/>
<link wikidata="Q66768692" start="4582" end="4594" title="high justice" label="high justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163234" start="4601" end="4613" title="Middle Latin" label="Middle Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q662637" start="4884" end="4907" title="Federal Charter of 1291" label="Federal Charter of 1291"/>
<link wikidata="Q171174" start="4977" end="4993" title="direct democracy" label="direct democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q435583" start="5037" end="5058" title="Old Swiss Confederacy" label="Old Swiss Confederacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q12404" start="5229" end="5232" title="Canton of Uri" label="Uri"/>
<link wikidata="Q68155" start="5234" end="5240" title="Schwyz" label="Schwyz"/>
<link wikidata="Q214069" start="5242" end="5253" title="Unterwalden" label="Unterwalden"/>
<link wikidata="Q677596" start="5259" end="5273" title="forest-cantons" label="forest-cantons"/>
<link wikidata="Q11922" start="5276" end="5282" title="Canton of Glarus" label="Glarus"/>
<link wikidata="Q688257" start="5287" end="5296" title="Appenzell" label="Appenzell"/>
<link wikidata="Q68144" start="5301" end="5304" title="Zug" label="Zug"/>
<link wikidata="Q355857" start="5488" end="5518" title="Switzerland as a federal state" label="Switzerland as a federal state"/>
<link wikidata="Q68144" start="5830" end="5833" title="Zug" label="Zug"/>
<link wikidata="Q68155" start="5838" end="5844" title="Schwyz" label="Schwyz"/>
<link wikidata="Q12404" start="5880" end="5883" title="Canton of Uri" label="Uri"/>
<link wikidata="Q12592" start="5894" end="5903" title="Nidwalden" label="Nidwalden"/>
<link wikidata="Q12079" start="5913" end="5935" title="Appenzell Ausserrhoden" label="Appenzell Ausserrhoden"/>
<link wikidata="Q12573" start="5948" end="5956" title="Obwalden" label="Obwalden"/>
<link wikidata="Q337987" start="6019" end="6032" title="secret ballot" label="secret ballot"/>
<link wikidata="Q12094" start="6052" end="6073" title="Canton of Appenzell Innerrhoden" label="Appenzell Innerrhoden"/>
<link wikidata="Q11922" start="6166" end="6172" title="Canton of Glarus" label="Glarus"/>
<link wikidata="Q12094" start="6266" end="6287" title="Canton of Appenzell Innerrhoden" label="Appenzell Innerrhoden"/>
<link wikidata="Q12094" start="6526" end="6547" title="Canton of Appenzell Innerrhoden" label="Appenzell Innerrhoden"/>
<link wikidata="Q11922" start="6555" end="6561" title="Canton of Glarus" label="Glarus"/>
<link wikidata="Q12094" start="6989" end="7010" title="Canton of Appenzell Innerrhoden" label="Appenzell Innerrhoden"/>
<link wikidata="Q11922" start="7015" end="7021" title="Canton of Glarus" label="Glarus"/>
<link wikidata="Q70" start="7493" end="7497" title="Bern" label="Bern"/>
<link wikidata="Q284289" start="7519" end="7542" title="deliberative democracy" label="democratic deliberation"/>
<link wikidata="Q68165" start="7660" end="7666" title="Kloten" label="Kloten"/>
<link wikidata="Q310988" start="8218" end="8231" title="Participatory Democracy" label="participative"/>
<link wikidata="Q1335814" start="8236" end="8245" title="Inclusive Democracy" label="inclusive"/>
<link wikidata="Q42138" start="8404" end="8414" title="Citizenship" label="civic duty"/>
<link wikidata="Q205204" start="8911" end="8929" title="Women&amp;#x27;s suffrage" label="inclusion of women"/>
<link wikidata="Q12094" start="9103" end="9134" title="canton of Appenzell Innerrhoden" label="canton of Appenzell Innerrhoden"/>
<link wikidata="Q191031" start="9421" end="9431" title="ochlocracy" label="ochlocracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q922903" start="9447" end="9470" title="tyranny of the majority" label="tyranny of the majority"/>
<link wikidata="Q337987" start="9693" end="9716" title="secret ballot" label="the secrecy of the vote"/>
<link wikidata="Q7813" start="9948" end="9985" title="Universal Declaration of Human Rights" label="Universal Declaration of Human Rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q183191" start="10090" end="10125" title="European Convention on Human Rights" label="European Convention on Human Rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q623971" start="10172" end="10186" title="social control" label="social control"/>
<link wikidata="Q796105" start="10197" end="10215" title="crowd manipulation" label="crowd manipulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q384975" start="10396" end="10405" title="parrhesia" label="parrhesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7942192" start="10877" end="10898" title="Voting in Switzerland" label="Voting in Switzerland"/>
<link wikidata="Q171174" start="10901" end="10917" title="Direct democracy" label="Direct democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1335814" start="10920" end="10939" title="Inclusive Democracy" label="Inclusive Democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q310988" start="10942" end="10965" title="Participatory democracy" label="Participatory democracy"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="464814" wikidata="Q1090708" url="?curid=464814" title="The Specials (album)">
<text>Specials is the debut album by British ska revival band the Specials. Released on 19 October 1979 on Jerry Dammers&#x27; 2 Tone label, the album is seen by some as the defining moment in the UK ska scene. Produced by Elvis Costello, the album captures the disaffection and anger felt by the youth of the UK&#x27;s &quot;concrete jungle&quot;—a phrase borrowed from Bob Marley&#x27;s 1973 album &quot;Catch a Fire&quot;—used to describe the grim, violent inner cities of 1970s Britain. The album features a mixture of original material and several covers of classic Jamaican ska tracks.

A live version of &quot;Too Much Too Young&quot; was later released on a five-track EP, &quot;The Special AKA Live!&quot;, which went to number one on the UK charts. &quot;&#x27;A Message to You, Rudy&quot; was also released as a single. A digitally remastered edition also featuring promotional videos to &quot;Gangsters&quot; and &quot;Too Much Too Young&quot; as enhanced content was released by EMI in 2002. The album was included in the book &quot;1001 Albums You Must Hear Before You Die&quot;.

==Composition==
Musically, &quot;The Specials&quot; encapsulates the first wave of British ska, greatly reworking the original sound of 1960s Jamaican ska. The music shares the infectious energy and humour of the original sound, but injects new-found anger and punk sensibility. The resulting sound is considerably less laid-back and &quot;Caribbean&quot; sounding than original ska, and dispensed with much of the percussion and the larger horn sections used in the older variety. The Specials also brought guitar to the front of the mix; it had often been a secondary instrument in Jamaican ska.

Several of the album&#x27;s songs are covers of older Jamaican songs. &quot;Monkey Man&quot; had been a hit for Toots &amp; the Maytals in 1969, &quot;Too Hot&quot; was a Prince Buster original from 1966, and the opening track, &quot;A Message to You, Rudy&quot; was a Dandy Livingstone single in 1967. &quot;You&#x27;re Wondering Now&quot; was originally performed by duo Andy &amp; Joey and later covered by The Skatalites; the vocal version was recorded by Andy &amp; Joey in 1964. Other tracks are reworkings of Jamaican originals: &quot;Too Much Too Young&quot; was based on Lloyd Charmers&#x27; &quot;Birth Control&quot; and &quot;Stupid Marriage&quot; draws heavily on the Prince Buster hit &quot;Judge 400 Years&quot; (also known as &quot;Judge Dread&quot;).

Trombonist Rico Rodriguez, who performed on many &#x27;50s and &#x27;60s Jamaican recordings before moving to London in 1962, played on the band&#x27;s version of &quot;A Message to You, Rudy&quot;, as he had on the original recording 15 years previously. Rodriguez&#x27;s appearance on the album considerably added to the album&#x27;s credentials.

==Critical reception==
Reviews of the album in the UK music press were mixed. &quot;NME&quot; praised the album, saying, &quot;Although the predominant musical influence is black (ska, bluebeat, reggae and soul), it&#x27;s wrapped in ferocious rock&#x27;n&#x27;roll: the kind of hybrid that so many other British bands have tried to contrive but, in comparison, failed to make convincing ... This album embraces two decades of black and white music, gives it perspective and then goes on to reflect the modern rock&#x27;n&#x27;roll culture ... It&#x27;s the kind of album that&#x27;s musically fathomless and it will probably establish The Specials as true hopes for the &#x27;80s. At the very least this debut is essential for anybody who wants to know what&#x27;s going on in rock&#x27;n&#x27;roll today&quot;. &quot;Smash Hits&quot; was also positive, saying it had &quot;some excellent original touches&quot; and that the lyrics were &quot;very strong&quot;. The reviewer went on to praise Costello&#x27;s &quot;first rate production&quot; and finished his review by saying that the album was a &quot;very promising debut and highly recommended&quot;.

On the other hand, Vivien Goldman in &quot;Melody Maker&quot; was disappointed, observing that &quot;this album&#x27;s drawbacks are exposed all the more vividly in the light of its missed potential ... producer Elvis Costello seems incapable of producing a rhythm—by that I mean pop, as well as reggae&quot;. The review expanded upon this comment, saying, &quot;A key word is pace. The Specials—a great band to party to—can&#x27;t sustain the shock of having the speed of certain numbers halved. When the pace on record doubles—as in &#x27;Too Much Too Young&#x27;—The Specials suddenly make sense&quot;. Goldman also criticised the lack of understanding of a female point of view in certain songs, but concluded on a positive note: &quot;Perhaps I&#x27;m extra critical, because I (still) have great hopes for the future of The Specials&quot;. &quot;Sounds&quot; agreed that the album had not fulfilled its potential, saying, &quot;There are no rough edges to upset you, nothing new to shock you ... The Specials seem to have lost the attacking, forward-looking, forward moving, almost militant momentum that was witnessed and promised from the beginning&quot;.

&quot;The Specials&quot; was ranked among the top ten albums of the year for 1979 by &quot;NME&quot;.

===Legacy===
In a retrospective review, AllMusic described the record as &quot;a perfect moment in time captured on vinyl forever... It was an utter revelation—except for anyone who had seen the band on-stage, for the album was at its core a studio recording of their live set, and at times even masquerades as a gig&quot;. It felt the album captured the feeling of &quot;Britain in late 1979, an unhappy island about to explode&quot;, and that &quot;The Specials managed to distill all the anger, disenchantment, and bitterness of the day straight into their music&quot;. In 2008, BBC Music agreed that the economic and political conditions of the day had heightened the record&#x27;s impact, saying, &quot;To understand the impact of this spearhead of the ska revival on early Thatcherite Britain you have to imagine something so left field and yet so apt occurring today. It was as if depression-era dustbowl ballads suddenly became hip again in this era of global economic meltdown. Hardly anyone would have predicted that a musical form so tied to its Afro-Caribbean heritage (as well as its less cool skinhead connections) could, almost overnight, become the trendiest thing across the nation&quot;. It concluded that &quot;The Specials&quot; &quot;was a classic example of a band making an almost perfect first album, acting as both a mission statement (the rise of right wing groups opposed by the message of Two Tone equality) and as an alternative way to have fun without having to pogo or spit ...&quot;The Specials&quot; remains a snapshot of a bleaker time, and a wrily comical antidote to political and cultural indifference anywhere&quot;. However, &quot;Mojo&quot;″s David Hutcheon, reviewing the reissue, felt that &quot;&quot;Specials&quot; doesn&#x27;t feel quite as exciting as it did 23 years ago&quot;.

In June 2000, &quot;Q&quot; placed &quot;The Specials&quot; at number 38 on its list of the 100 greatest British albums ever. &quot;Pitchfork&quot; featured &quot;The Specials&quot; at number 42 on its list of the 100 best albums of the 1970s. &quot;Rolling Stone&quot; listed the album at number 68 on its list of the 100 best albums of the 1980s, as the album was not released in the US until 1980. In 2013, &quot;NME&quot; ranked &quot;The Specials&quot; at number 260 on its list of &quot;The 500 Greatest Albums of All Time&quot;.

==Track listing==
; Side one
# &quot;A Message to You Rudy&quot; (Dandy Livingstone) – 2:53
# &quot;Do the Dog&quot; (Rufus Thomas; arrangement by Jerry Dammers) – 2:09
# &quot;It&#x27;s Up to You&quot; (Dammers, The Specials) – 3:25
# &quot;Nite Klub&quot; (Dammers, The Specials) – 3:22
# &quot;Doesn&#x27;t Make It Alright&quot; (Dammers, Dave Goldberg, Mark Harrison) – 3:26
# &quot;Concrete Jungle&quot; (Roddy Byers) – 3:18
# &quot;Too Hot&quot; (Cecil Campbell) – 3:09

; Side two
# &quot;Monkey Man&quot; (Toots Hibbert) – 2:45
# &quot;(Dawning of A) New Era&quot; (Dammers) – 2:24
# &quot;Blank Expression&quot; (Dammers, The Specials) – 2:43
# &quot;Stupid Marriage&quot; (Dammers, Mark Harrison, Neville Staple, Cecil Campbell) – 3:49
# &quot;Too Much Too Young&quot; (Dammers, acknowledgment to Lloyd Charmers) – 6:06*
# &quot;Little Bitch&quot; (Dammers)† – 2:31
# &quot;You&#x27;re Wondering Now&quot; (Clement Seymour) – 2:36

* Canadian and some US pressings of the album have a shorter, 2:16 version of this song.

† On some US releases, the song &quot;Gangsters&quot; (Dammers, Cecil Campbell) appears between &quot;Too Much Too Young&quot; and &quot;Little Bitch&quot;. In Australia and New Zealand, &quot;Gangsters&quot; was included between &quot;Do the Dog&quot; and &quot;It&#x27;s Up to You&quot;.

==Personnel==
; The Specials
* Terry Hall – vocals
* Neville Staple – vocals
* Lynval Golding – rhythm guitar, harmonica, vocals
* Roddy Radiation (Roderick Byers) – lead guitar, vocals (on &quot;Concrete Jungle&quot;)
* Horace Panter – bass guitar
* John Bradbury – drums
* Jerry Dammers – keyboards
; Guest musicians
* Rico Rodriguez – trombone
* Dick Cuthell – horns
* Chrissie Hynde – vocals on &quot;Nite Klub&quot;
; Technical
* Dave Jordan – engineer
* Carol Starr, Chalkie Davies – sleeve design

==Charts==
===Weekly charts===
===Year-end charts===
==Certifications==


==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q209498" start="39" end="50" title="Two-tone (music genre)" label="ska revival"/>
<link wikidata="Q19057" start="56" end="68" title="the Specials" label="the Specials"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365476" start="101" end="114" title="Jerry Dammers" label="Jerry Dammers"/>
<link wikidata="Q222885" start="121" end="127" title="2 Tone Records" label="2 Tone"/>
<link wikidata="Q206939" start="217" end="231" title="Elvis Costello" label="Elvis Costello"/>
<link wikidata="Q409" start="365" end="375" title="Bob Marley" label="Bob Marley"/>
<link wikidata="Q369980" start="400" end="412" title="Catch a Fire" label="Catch a Fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1739536" start="454" end="466" title="inner city" label="inner cities"/>
<link wikidata="Q7765734" start="611" end="629" title="Too Much Too Young (EP)" label="Too Much Too Young"/>
<link wikidata="Q7765734" start="681" end="702" title="The Special AKA Live!" label="The Special AKA Live!"/>
<link wikidata="Q25218660" start="899" end="908" title="Gangsters (song)" label="Gangsters"/>
<link wikidata="Q183412" start="986" end="989" title="EMI" label="EMI"/>
<link wikidata="Q164932" start="1040" end="1080" title="1001 Albums You Must Hear Before You Die" label="1001 Albums You Must Hear Before You Die"/>
<link wikidata="Q3071" start="1350" end="1354" title="punk rock" label="punk"/>
<link wikidata="Q845465" start="1800" end="1823" title="Toots &amp;amp; the Maytals" label="Toots &amp;amp; the Maytals"/>
<link wikidata="Q441161" start="1859" end="1872" title="Prince Buster" label="Prince Buster"/>
<link wikidata="Q4658222" start="1922" end="1944" title="A Message to You, Rudy" label="A Message to You, Rudy"/>
<link wikidata="Q734195" start="1957" end="1974" title="Dandy Livingstone" label="Dandy Livingstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q845449" start="2098" end="2112" title="The Skatalites" label="The Skatalites"/>
<link wikidata="Q6662333" start="2268" end="2282" title="Lloyd Charmers" label="Lloyd Charmers"/>
<link wikidata="Q441161" start="2368" end="2381" title="Prince Buster" label="Prince Buster"/>
<link wikidata="Q954614" start="2467" end="2481" title="Rico Rodriguez (musician)" label="Rico Rodriguez"/>
<link wikidata="Q192632" start="2890" end="2893" title="NME" label="NME"/>
<link wikidata="Q54365" start="2986" end="2989" title="ska" label="ska"/>
<link wikidata="Q9794" start="3001" end="3007" title="reggae" label="reggae"/>
<link wikidata="Q131272" start="3012" end="3016" title="soul music" label="soul"/>
<link wikidata="Q7749" start="3050" end="3071" title="rock&amp;#x27;n&amp;#x27;roll" label="rock&amp;#x27;n&amp;#x27;roll"/>
<link wikidata="Q3071032" start="3625" end="3635" title="Smash Hits" label="Smash Hits"/>
<link wikidata="Q3561603" start="3982" end="3996" title="Vivien Goldman" label="Vivien Goldman"/>
<link wikidata="Q580896" start="4006" end="4018" title="Melody Maker" label="Melody Maker"/>
<link wikidata="Q37073" start="4243" end="4246" title="pop music" label="pop"/>
<link wikidata="Q265718" start="4815" end="4821" title="Sounds (magazine)" label="Sounds"/>
<link wikidata="Q31181" start="5271" end="5279" title="AllMusic" label="AllMusic"/>
<link wikidata="Q15975575" start="5473" end="5489" title="studio recording" label="studio recording"/>
<link wikidata="Q182832" start="5499" end="5507" title="live music" label="live set"/>
<link wikidata="Q4834855" start="5813" end="5822" title="BBC Music" label="BBC Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q877530" start="6010" end="6021" title="Thatcherite" label="Thatcherite"/>
<link wikidata="Q8698" start="6119" end="6133" title="Great Depression" label="depression-era"/>
<link wikidata="Q726501" start="6134" end="6142" title="dustbowl" label="dustbowl"/>
<link wikidata="Q2050339" start="6288" end="6302" title="Afro-Caribbean" label="Afro-Caribbean"/>
<link wikidata="Q485417" start="6338" end="6346" title="skinhead" label="skinhead"/>
<link wikidata="Q942830" start="6573" end="6590" title="mission statement" label="mission statement"/>
<link wikidata="Q840880" start="6723" end="6727" title="pogo (dance)" label="pogo"/>
<link wikidata="Q261633" start="6901" end="6905" title="Mojo (magazine)" label="Mojo"/>
<link wikidata="Q217629" start="7077" end="7078" title="Q (magazine)" label="Q"/>
<link wikidata="Q721140" start="7189" end="7198" title="Pitchfork (website)" label="Pitchfork"/>
<link wikidata="Q33511" start="7307" end="7320" title="Rolling Stone" label="Rolling Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q18378807" start="7550" end="7585" title="NME&amp;#x27;s The 500 Greatest Albums of All Time" label="The 500 Greatest Albums of All Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q4658222" start="7631" end="7652" title="A Message to You Rudy" label="A Message to You Rudy"/>
<link wikidata="Q734195" start="7660" end="7677" title="Dandy Livingstone" label="Dandy Livingstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1805782" start="7712" end="7724" title="Rufus Thomas" label="Rufus Thomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q379755" start="7726" end="7737" title="arrangement" label="arrangement"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365476" start="7741" end="7754" title="Jerry Dammers" label="Jerry Dammers"/>
<link wikidata="Q19057" start="7807" end="7819" title="The Specials" label="The Specials"/>
<link wikidata="Q7356506" start="8004" end="8015" title="Roddy Radiation" label="Roddy Byers"/>
<link wikidata="Q441161" start="8047" end="8061" title="Prince Buster" label="Cecil Campbell"/>
<link wikidata="Q16953156" start="8090" end="8100" title="Monkey Man (Toots &amp;amp; the Maytals song)" label="Monkey Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q360348" start="8108" end="8121" title="Toots Hibbert" label="Toots Hibbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q1949960" start="8301" end="8315" title="Neville Staple" label="Neville Staple"/>
<link wikidata="Q441161" start="8317" end="8331" title="Prince Buster" label="Cecil Campbell"/>
<link wikidata="Q4674287" start="8383" end="8397" title="Acknowledgment (creative arts)" label="acknowledgment"/>
<link wikidata="Q6662333" start="8401" end="8415" title="Lloyd Charmers" label="Lloyd Charmers"/>
<link wikidata="Q542292" start="8511" end="8526" title="Coxsone Dodd" label="Clement Seymour"/>
<link wikidata="Q441161" start="8690" end="8704" title="Prince Buster" label="Cecil Campbell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1728388" start="8948" end="8958" title="Terry Hall (singer)" label="Terry Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q1949960" start="8970" end="8984" title="Neville Staple" label="Neville Staple"/>
<link wikidata="Q6709528" start="8996" end="9010" title="Lynval Golding" label="Lynval Golding"/>
<link wikidata="Q7356506" start="9048" end="9063" title="Roddy Radiation" label="Roddy Radiation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5902039" start="9138" end="9151" title="Horace Panter" label="Horace Panter"/>
<link wikidata="Q6222827" start="9168" end="9181" title="John Bradbury (drummer)" label="John Bradbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365476" start="9192" end="9205" title="Jerry Dammers" label="Jerry Dammers"/>
<link wikidata="Q954614" start="9238" end="9252" title="Rico Rodriguez (musician)" label="Rico Rodriguez"/>
<link wikidata="Q8350" start="9255" end="9263" title="trombone" label="trombone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1924910" start="9266" end="9278" title="Dick Cuthell" label="Dick Cuthell"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9281" end="9286" title="Horn section #Popular_music" label="horns"/>
<link wikidata="Q239202" start="9289" end="9303" title="Chrissie Hynde" label="Chrissie Hynde"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="464816" wikidata="Q533632" url="?curid=464816" title="E. B. Ford">
<text>Edmund Brisco &quot;Henry&quot; Ford (23 April 1901 – 2 January 1988) was a British ecological geneticist. He was a leader among those British biologists who investigated the role of natural selection in nature. As a schoolboy Ford became interested in lepidoptera, the group of insects which includes butterflies and moths. He went on to study the genetics of natural populations, and invented the field of ecological genetics. Ford was awarded the Royal Society&#x27;s Darwin Medal in 1954. In the wider world his best known work is &quot;Butterflies&quot; (1945). Ford was a member of the UK Eugenics Society, of which he was a council member in 1933-1934, also contributing to its publications.

==Education==
Ford was born in Dalton-in-Furness, near Ulverston, in Lancashire, England, in 1901. He was the only child of Harold Dodsworth Ford (1864–1943), a classics teacher turned Anglican clergyman, and his wife (and second cousin) Gertrude Emma Bennett. His paternal grandfather, Dr Henry Edmund Ford (1821–1909), was a professor of music at Carlisle and the organist of Carlisle Cathedral from 1842 to 1902. Ford was educated at St Bees School, Cumberland (now Cumbria), and read zoology at Wadham College, Oxford, (where his father had also studied), graduating B.A. in 1924, upgraded to M.A. 1927, B.Sc. (a research degree) in 1927, and taking a D.Sc in 1943.

== Career and research ==
Ford&#x27;s career was based entirely at the University of Oxford. The biologist Arthur Cain said Ford took a degree in classics before turning to zoology. Ford read zoology at Oxford, and was taught genetics by Julian Huxley. &quot;The lecturer whose interests most closely reflected mine was Julian Huxley. I owe him a great debt, especially for inspiration... Even though Huxley was... only at Oxford from 1919 to 1925, he was the most powerful voice in developing the selectionist attitude there... I met Ray Lankester through E.B. Poulton. He was already an old man... but talked to me a good deal of Charles Darwin and Pasteur, both of whom he knew.&quot;

Ford was appointed University Demonstrator in Zoology in 1927 and Lecturer at University College, Oxford, in 1933. Specialising in genetics, he was appointed University Reader in Genetics in 1939 and was the Director of the Genetics Laboratory, 1952–1969, and Professor of Ecological Genetics 1963–1969. Ford was one of the first scientists to be elected a Fellow of All Souls College since the seventeenth century. He was among those opposed to the admission of women fellows beginning in 1981; once, upon encountering one such, he swung his umbrella at her and shouted &quot;Out of my way, henbird!&quot;.

Ford had a long working relationship with R.A. Fisher. By the time Ford had developed his formal definition of genetic polymorphism, Fisher had got accustomed to high selection values in nature. He was most impressed by the fact that polymorphism concealed powerful selective forces (Ford gave human blood groups as an example). Like Fisher, he continued the natural selection versus genetic drift debate with Sewall Wright, whom Ford believed put too much emphasis on genetic drift. It was as a result of Ford&#x27;s work, as well as his own, that Dobzhansky changed the emphasis in the third edition of his famous text from drift to selection.

Ford was an experimental naturalist who wanted to test evolution in nature. He virtually invented the field of research known as ecological genetics. His work on the wild populations of butterflies and moths was the first to show that the predictions made by R.A. Fisher were correct. He was the first to describe and define genetic polymorphism, and predicted that human blood group polymorphisms might be maintained in the population by providing some protection against disease. Six years after this prediction it was found to be so, and furthermore, heterozygous advantage was decisively established by a study of AB x AB crosses. His magnum opus was &quot;Ecological Genetics&quot;, which ran to four editions and was widely influential. He laid much of the groundwork for subsequent studies in this field, and was invited as a consultant to help set up similar research groups in several other countries.

Amongst Ford&#x27;s many publications, perhaps the most popularly successful was the first book in the New Naturalist series, &quot;Butterflies&quot;. Ford also went on in 1955 to write &quot;Moths&quot; in the same series, one of only a few to have authored more than one book in the series.

Ford became Professor, and then Emeritus Professor of Ecological Genetics, University of Oxford. He was a Fellow of All Souls College, and Honorary Fellow of Wadham College. He was elected FRS in 1946, and awarded the Darwin Medal in 1954.

=== Ecological genetics ===
E.B. Ford worked for many years on genetic polymorphism. Polymorphism in natural populations is frequent; the key feature is the occurrence together of two or more discontinuous forms of a species in some kind of balance. So long as the proportions of each form is above mutation rate, then selection must be the cause. As early as 1930 Fisher had discussed a situation where, with alleles at a single locus, the heterozygote is more viable than either homozygote. That is a typical genetic mechanism for causing this type of polymorphism. The work involves a synthesis of field observations, taxonomy, and laboratory genetics.

=== Melanism in the peppered moth ===

Ford was the supervisor of Bernard Kettlewell during Kettlewell&#x27;s famous experiments on the evolution of melanism in the peppered moth, &quot;Biston betularia&quot;.

The entomologist Michael Majerus discussed criticisms that had been made of Kettlewell&#x27;s experimental methods in his 1998 book &quot;&quot;. This book was misrepresented in reviews, and the story was picked up by creationist campaigners. In her controversial book &quot;Of Moths and Men&quot;, Judith Hooper (2002) gave a critical account of Ford&#x27;s supervision and relationship with Kettlewell, and implied that the work was fraudulent or at least incompetent. Careful studies of Kettlewell&#x27;s surviving papers by Rudge (2005) and Young (2004) found Hooper&#x27;s suggestion of fraud to be unjustified, and that &quot;Hooper does not provide one shred of evidence to support this serious allegation&quot;. Majerus himself described &quot;Of Moths and Men&quot; as &quot;littered with errors, misrepresentations, misinterpretations and falsehoods&quot;. He concludes

:&quot;If you wade through the 200+ papers written about melanism in the peppered moth, it is difficult to come to any conclusion other than that natural selection through the agent of differential bird predation is largely responsible for the rise and fall of &quot;carbonaria&quot;&quot;.

Kettlewell and Helen Spurway, then the graduate student (and later the wife) of J.B.S. Haldane, were known to have shocked Ford by catching live moths as they flitted around a light, popping them in their mouths, and eating them whole. Haldane, who did not like Ford, was of the opinion that Ford and Kettlewell had attempted to capitalise on the supposed evolutionary adaptation of the main two variants of the peppered moth, for which Haldane, as early as 1924, had predicted the statistical probability of rate of change from light to melanic forms as an example of classic Mendelian genetics. In 1961, Haldane and Spurway talked to Canadian lepidopterist Gary Botting about the peppered moth and the unlikelihood of Ford and Kettlewell obtaining results that approximated Haldane&#x27;s 1924 statistical calculations so closely, but the reasoning behind this view is far from clear. Botting already regarded the case of the peppered moth as tantamount to belief in Lamarckian evolution, and was of the opinion that some genetic mechanism other than bird predation was at work.

===Bibliography===
* Clarke B 1995. Edmund Brisco Ford. &quot;Biographical Memoirs of Fellows of the Royal Society of London.&quot;
* 
* (jointly dedicated to Ford and the Nuffield Foundation)
* Teän, Isles of Scilly: the site of Ford&#x27;s Common Blue (&quot;Polyommatus icarus&quot;) population study.

===Works by Ford===

* Ford E.B. (1931, 8th ed 1965). &quot;Mendelism and evolution&quot;. Methuen, London.
* Carpenter, G.D. Hale and E.B. Ford (1933) &quot;Mimicry&quot;. Methuen, London.
* Ford E.B. (1938, 2nd ed 1950). &quot;The study of heredity&quot;. Butterworth, London. 2nd edn: Oxford University Press.
* Ford E.B. (1940). Polymorphism and taxonomy. In Huxley J. &quot;The new systematics&quot;. Oxford.
* Ford E.B. (1942, 7th edn 1973). &quot;Genetics for medical students&quot; Chapman and Hall, London.
* Ford E.B. (1945, 3rd edn 1977). &quot;Butterflies&quot;. New Naturalist No. 1 Collins, London.
* Ford E.B. (1951). &quot;British butterflies&quot;. Penguin Books, London.
* Ford E.B. (1954, 3rd edn 1972). &quot;Moths&quot;. New Naturalist No. 30 Collins, London.
* Ford E.B. (1964, 4th edn 1975). &quot;Ecological genetics&quot;. Chapman and Hall, London.
* Ford E.B. (1965). &quot;Genetic polymorphism&quot;. All Souls Studies, Faber &amp; Faber, London.
* Ford E.B. (1976). &quot;Genetics and adaptation&quot;. Institute of Biology studies, Edward Arnold, London.
* Ford E.B. (1979). &quot;Understanding genetics&quot;. Faber and Faber, London.
* Ford E.B. (1980). Some recollections pertaining to the evolutionary synthesis. In Mayr E. and Provine W.B. (eds) &quot;The evolutionary synthesis: perspectives on the unification of biology&quot;. Harvard 1980; 1998. [effectively, this is an intellectual autobiography]
* Ford E.B. (1981). &quot;Taking genetics into the countryside&quot;. Weidenfeld &amp; Nicolson, London.
* Ford E.B. and J.S. Haywood (1984). &quot;Church treasures of the Oxford district&quot;. Alan Sutton, Gloucester.

==Personal life==
Ford never married, had no children, and was considered decidedly eccentric, although his eccentricity was said to be more prominent when he knew he had an audience; he was also fond of slightly surrealist practical joking. He could be markedly generous to his friends: it was &quot;an open secret&quot; that he made a handsome contribution to the grant of £350000 given by the Nuffield Foundation for the establishment of a Unit of Medical Genetics at the University of Liverpool; this greatly boosted the research of Cyril Clarke and Philip Sheppard.

Professor Ford would come into first year biology lectures at Oxford University – which were quite large, with about 150 students, and address the mixed group “good morning gentlemen”, ignoring the ladies, who even at that time were maybe 30% of student numbers – they are now 48%. The students thought that was amusing, and decided that, for one lecture in 1965, no men would attend. So he walked in to the lecture theatre with about 50 women sitting there waiting attentively, but no men. He put his notes on the lectern and looked up. “Oh dear, nobody here today I see, might as well go home”! Picked up his notes and walked out. .

Non-academic information on his life is hard to come by, mostly consisting of scattered remarks made by colleagues. He campaigned strenuously against the admission of female Fellows to All Souls College. Miriam Rothschild, an outstanding zoologist, was one of the few women with whom Ford was on good terms. Rothschild and Ford campaigned for the legalisation of male homosexuality in Britain. Ford was on good terms with Theodosius Dobzhansky, who did ground-breaking work on ecological genetics with &quot;Drosophila&quot; species: they exchanged letters and visits. Within the Department of Zoology at Oxford were a number of colleagues such as Arthur Cain with similar interests in investigating the role of natural selection; but Ford avoided the departmental teatime discussions and indeed most scientific discussion with these colleagues other than via the printed word.

Bryan Clarke wrote Ford&#x27;s obituary in the &quot;Biographical Memoirs of Fellows of the Royal Society&quot;, but there are few other sources on his life. 

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q533632" start="0" end="13" title="E. B. Ford" label="Edmund Brisco"/>
<link wikidata="Q533632" start="20" end="25" title="E. B. Ford" label="Henry"/>
<link wikidata="Q533632" start="32" end="36" title="E. B. Ford" label="Ford"/>
<link wikidata="Q295031" start="84" end="105" title="ecological genetics" label="ecological geneticist"/>
<link wikidata="Q43478" start="183" end="200" title="natural selection" label="natural selection"/>
<link wikidata="Q28319" start="253" end="264" title="lepidoptera" label="lepidoptera"/>
<link wikidata="Q11946202" start="302" end="313" title="butterfly" label="butterflies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1725788" start="318" end="322" title="moth" label="moth"/>
<link wikidata="Q295031" start="408" end="427" title="ecological genetics" label="ecological genetics"/>
<link wikidata="Q123885" start="450" end="463" title="Royal Society" label="Royal Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q756994" start="471" end="483" title="Darwin Medal" label="Darwin Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q5519377" start="592" end="611" title="Eugenics_Society_(UK)" label="UK Eugenics Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q1158089" start="731" end="748" title="Dalton-in-Furness" label="Dalton-in-Furness"/>
<link wikidata="Q979357" start="755" end="764" title="Ulverston" label="Ulverston"/>
<link wikidata="Q23077" start="769" end="779" title="Lancashire" label="Lancashire"/>
<link wikidata="Q7587252" start="1137" end="1151" title="St Bees School" label="St Bees School"/>
<link wikidata="Q2537765" start="1199" end="1221" title="Wadham College, Oxford" label="Wadham College, Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q34433" start="1442" end="1462" title="University of Oxford" label="University of Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q4798179" start="1478" end="1489" title="Arthur Cain" label="Arthur Cain"/>
<link wikidata="Q243419" start="1609" end="1622" title="Julian Huxley" label="Julian Huxley"/>
<link wikidata="Q704696" start="1906" end="1919" title="Ray Lankester" label="Ray Lankester"/>
<link wikidata="Q2135978" start="1928" end="1940" title="E.B. Poulton" label="E.B. Poulton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1035" start="2003" end="2017" title="Charles Darwin" label="Charles Darwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q529" start="2022" end="2029" title="Pasteur" label="Pasteur"/>
<link wikidata="Q81087" start="2138" end="2164" title="University College, Oxford" label="University College, Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q1404101" start="2417" end="2423" title="Fellow" label="Fellow"/>
<link wikidata="Q81092" start="2427" end="2444" title="All Souls College" label="All Souls College"/>
<link wikidata="Q780" start="2652" end="2659" title="Chicken" label="henbird"/>
<link wikidata="Q216723" start="2711" end="2722" title="R.A. Fisher" label="R.A. Fisher"/>
<link wikidata="Q3395645" start="2780" end="2800" title="genetic polymorphism" label="genetic polymorphism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1024817" start="2969" end="2981" title="blood groups" label="blood groups"/>
<link wikidata="Q43478" start="3028" end="3045" title="natural selection" label="natural selection"/>
<link wikidata="Q486420" start="3053" end="3066" title="genetic drift" label="genetic drift"/>
<link wikidata="Q221061" start="3079" end="3092" title="Sewall Wright" label="Sewall Wright"/>
<link wikidata="Q246731" start="3218" end="3228" title="Theodosius Dobzhansky" label="Dobzhansky"/>
<link wikidata="Q295031" start="3445" end="3464" title="ecological genetics" label="ecological genetics"/>
<link wikidata="Q216723" start="3575" end="3586" title="R.A. Fisher" label="R.A. Fisher"/>
<link wikidata="Q3395645" start="3641" end="3661" title="genetic polymorphism" label="genetic polymorphism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1024817" start="3682" end="3713" title="Human blood group systems" label="human blood group polymorphisms"/>
<link wikidata="Q5333212" start="3977" end="3996" title="Ecological Genetics (book)" label="Ecological Genetics"/>
<link wikidata="Q7010583" start="4331" end="4345" title="New Naturalist" label="New Naturalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q34433" start="4597" end="4617" title="University of Oxford" label="University of Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q2537765" start="4680" end="4694" title="Wadham College" label="Wadham College"/>
<link wikidata="Q15631401" start="4711" end="4714" title="Fellow of the Royal Society" label="FRS"/>
<link wikidata="Q756994" start="4740" end="4752" title="Darwin Medal" label="Darwin Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q485680" start="4826" end="4846" title="polymorphism (biology)" label="genetic polymorphism"/>
<link wikidata="Q13048280" start="5204" end="5216" title="heterozygote" label="heterozygote"/>
<link wikidata="Q13048280" start="5244" end="5254" title="homozygote" label="homozygote"/>
<link wikidata="Q822510" start="5486" end="5504" title="Bernard Kettlewell" label="Bernard Kettlewell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1662088" start="5556" end="5598" title="Peppered moth evolution" label="evolution of melanism in the peppered moth"/>
<link wikidata="Q865651" start="5606" end="5622" title="Biston betularia" label="Biston betularia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6832454" start="5648" end="5663" title="Michael Majerus" label="Michael Majerus"/>
<link wikidata="Q130352" start="5849" end="5860" title="creationism" label="creationist"/>
<link wikidata="Q7078789" start="5906" end="5922" title="Of Moths and Men" label="Of Moths and Men"/>
<link wikidata="Q6303469" start="5930" end="5943" title="Judith Hooper" label="Judith Hooper"/>
<link wikidata="Q16008288" start="6819" end="6832" title="Helen Spurway" label="Helen Spurway"/>
<link wikidata="Q156333" start="6884" end="6898" title="J.B.S. Haldane" label="J.B.S. Haldane"/>
<link wikidata="Q185055" start="7381" end="7399" title="Mendelian genetics" label="Mendelian genetics"/>
<link wikidata="Q5524731" start="7463" end="7475" title="Gary Botting" label="Gary Botting"/>
<link wikidata="Q208800" start="7773" end="7783" title="Lamarckian" label="Lamarckian"/>
<link wikidata="Q170430" start="7862" end="7871" title="predation" label="predation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7068708" start="8058" end="8077" title="Nuffield Foundation" label="Nuffield Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1352476" start="8081" end="8085" title="Teän" label="Teän"/>
<link wikidata="Q161533" start="8147" end="8165" title="Polyommatus icarus" label="Polyommatus icarus"/>
<link wikidata="Q5534568" start="8302" end="8322" title="Carpenter, G.D. Hale" label="Carpenter, G.D. Hale"/>
<link wikidata="Q243419" start="8555" end="8564" title="Julian Huxley" label="Huxley J."/>
<link wikidata="Q7010583" start="8767" end="8781" title="New Naturalist" label="New Naturalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1336200" start="8858" end="8871" title="Penguin Books" label="Penguin Books"/>
<link wikidata="Q7010583" start="8934" end="8948" title="New Naturalist" label="New Naturalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q5354" start="9441" end="9448" title="Ernst Mayr" label="Mayr E."/>
<link wikidata="Q8003027" start="9453" end="9465" title="William Provine" label="Provine W.B."/>
<link wikidata="Q1530484" start="10387" end="10399" title="Cyril Clarke" label="Cyril Clarke"/>
<link wikidata="Q3494005" start="10404" end="10419" title="Philip Sheppard (biologist)" label="Philip Sheppard"/>
<link wikidata="Q81092" start="11243" end="11260" title="All Souls College" label="All Souls College"/>
<link wikidata="Q442167" start="11262" end="11279" title="Miriam Rothschild" label="Miriam Rothschild"/>
<link wikidata="Q1656146" start="11421" end="11439" title="Sodomy laws" label="male homosexuality"/>
<link wikidata="Q246731" start="11480" end="11501" title="Theodosius Dobzhansky" label="Theodosius Dobzhansky"/>
<link wikidata="Q312154" start="11566" end="11576" title="Drosophila" label="Drosophila"/>
<link wikidata="Q4798179" start="11706" end="11717" title="Arthur Cain" label="Arthur Cain"/>
<link wikidata="Q4980019" start="11937" end="11949" title="Bryan Clarke" label="Bryan Clarke"/>
<link wikidata="Q4914871" start="11990" end="12042" title="Biographical Memoirs of Fellows of the Royal Society" label="Biographical Memoirs of Fellows of the Royal Society"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="464820" wikidata="Q492735" url="?curid=464820" title="Fuengirola">
<text>Fuengirola () is a city on the Costa del Sol in the province of Málaga in the autonomous community of Andalusia in southern Spain. It is located on the central coast of the province and integrated into the region of the Costa del Sol and the Commonwealth of Municipalities of the Costa del Sol Occidental.

It is a major tourist resort, with more than 8 km (5 miles) of beaches and a medieval Moorish fortress. In common with much of this coast, it has been the subject of considerable urban development.

The area has a subtropical Mediterranean climate, with annual average temperatures of 18 °C (65 °F) and average summer temperatures of over 30 °C (86 °F).

==History==
The town has its origins in Phoenician, Roman, and Moorish civilisations.

The foothills of the mountain range behind the town to the south are the site of Sohail Castle, which contains remains of an early Phoenician settlement, later occupied by the Romans, which became a town known in antiquity as Suel. Suel was identified by the Roman historian Pomponius Mela as one of the towns of the coast, and was cited by Pliny in the 1st century AD as a fortified town or oppidum. A later historian, Ptolemy, identified it during the 2nd century as being located in the region of the bastulo-penos or Phoenicians.

The inscription on the pedestal of a statue found near the castle mentions Suel as being a Roman &quot;municipium&quot;. A funeral urn found in the same area has an inscription containing the word &quot;Suelitana&quot;. Roman baths were discovered in 1961 and, close by, the remains of a Roman villa containing two sculptures, one of which is known as the &quot;Venus of Fuengirola&quot;, exhibited in the town&#x27;s museum. A series of architectural components, probably transported from the Mijas quarry during the Roman era, were discovered in Los Boliches in 1984; these have now been mounted to form a temple entrance, and are on the promenade at Los Boliches.

The castle was built by Abd-ar-Rahman III in the mid-10th century. The city of Suel ceased to be mentioned at the beginning of the Middle Ages. After several centuries, the name of the settlement changed from Suel to Suhayl, which became the name of the castle and surroundings during the Moorish era. Suhayl became a fairly large settlement, which included farmland and small villages. Most of the surrounding area seems to have been used as pasture for the Moorish rulers&#x27; camels. Writer and scholar Abdul Rahman bin Abdullah bin Ahmed (known as Al-Allama Abdul Qasim Al-suhayli) Al-Suhayli (&quot;the man from Suhayl&quot;) lived there from 1130 to 1203, and later became known as one of the seven saints of Marrakesh, where he was buried.

In the early Middle Ages the town was set on fire and its inhabitants fled to Mijas. Suhayl became a mound of ruins, and even its name was changed to the Romanised Font-Jirola, after the spring arising at the foot of the castle, according to historian Alonso de Palencia.

In 1485, when only the fortress remained, the settlement, along with the rest of the Kingdom of Granada, fell into the hands of the Christian Monarchs in the final phase of the Reconquista (reconquest). An attempt to repopulate the site with 30 people failed, and in 1511 it was registered as uninhabited, apart from the fortress and a watchtower. Land originally set aside for Fuengirola was reallocated to Mijas.

In the 17th century, once the threat from Turkish and Moroccan pirates had disappeared, a new urban settlement developed; at the beginning of the 18th century, an inn was opened near the beach, offering accommodation to travellers, muleteers and seafarers. A few huts were built nearby, forming a small village.

The Battle of Fuengirola took place in the area during the Peninsular War, on October 15, 1810, when approximately 200 Polish soldiers of the Duchy of Warsaw defeated a mixed British-Spanish force numbering some 3,000 soldiers under Lord Blayney.

In May 1841, Fuengirola was administratively detached from Mijas; at the time its inhabitants were mainly engaged in fishing, agriculture and trading with ships that dropped anchor in the bay. For over a century, fishing and agriculture remained the main activities.

==Modern Fuengirola==
In the 1960s Fuengirola started to become a leading tourist centre, eventually having the expected facilities for eating, sleeping, and entertainment. The town has broad beaches along a promenade extending east and west from the town, that includes smaller adjacent villages.

Of the approximately 82,226 (2022) permanent inhabitants registered in the municipality, 25% come from other countries, mainly European, including the United Kingdom, Ireland and Scandinavia, and also from Morocco and Latin America. In the summer months the town is visited by large numbers of holidaymakers from Spain and abroad, amongst whom are many from the UK. The English-speaking community in particular is large enough to support a fully developed programme of activities and local groups.

&quot;Bioparc Fuengirola&quot; is a zoo that specializes in captive breeding for endangered species, research on chimpanzee groups and in tropical forest education. It has a series of natural habitats for different species.

Fuengirola has a number of historical sites and open parks. The old port is still used by the local Spanish fisherman. The Moorish castle of Suhayl, or Suhail, remained an abandoned ruin until renovations began in 1995. In 2000 the interior of the castle was completely renovated and the Suhail castle began to host festivals and concerts throughout the summer. Additional landscaping was completed in 2002.

The town is largely urban in character, with many high-rise apartment blocks, particularly near the seafront. There are some narrow streets with many low-rise villas. Considerable commercial and housing development is underway further inland.

==Main sights ==
*Sohail Castle (Moorish castle)
*Harbour
*Fuengirola Bullring
*&quot;Bioparc Fuengirola&quot; (zoo)
*Fuengirola museum
*Roman ruins
*&quot;TSD&quot; (Mijas)

== Transportation ==
Cities on the coast are accessible by bus from Fuengirola, including Málaga, Estepona, Torremolinos, Marbella, Benálmadena and Gibraltar. The area is also served by the A7 motorway; the closest airport is Málaga-Costa Del Sol.

=== Rail ===
Fuengirola is the end of the C-1 commuter rail service from central Málaga, run by Cercanías Málaga. There are two train stations within city lines, Fuengirola and Los Boliches. The C-1 line connects some of the intervening villages along the coast and Malaga/ Costa del Sol Airport.

The railway station is located centre of the city on Paseo Jesús Santos Rein, 5, within 50m from the bus station.

== Culture ==

=== Cultural events ===
Most cultural activities in Fuengirola take place during the summer. In June, the festival of music and dance is celebrated in the Sohail castle. In this same place is also organized the Medieval market, the Festival of the town of Fuengirola and the Beer Party. Other noteworthy events are: the Cinema Festival of Fuengirola, The International Faire and the International Faire of the Villages, the last two being celebrated between the last days of April and the first days of May, and the International Festival of Latin Rhythms in September. There is a second hand street market every Saturday in the premises of the faire. It is a very famous market in the Costa del Sol where almost any object can be found. On Sundays there is also another market in the Doña Sofía park.

=== Cultural amenities ===
*History museum: is the only museum of the town, inaugurated in 2003. It has a collection of remains which are mostly part of the Cerro de Suel field, the castle and the house of the secretary. It is located in the old house of the Official veterinary surgeon, in the Spain Square. The exhibition is organized in two sections: one focused on the old history, made up of Phoenician, Roman and Moorish pieces. The other is based on ethnographic contents such as traditional fishing and crafts...
*Open museum: a project launched in 1988, it is part of the large walls displayed in the façade of diverse buildings of the town. Among others, these painters&#x27; works are exhibited: Manuel Barbadillo, Joaquín Peinado, Enrique Brinkmann, Escalona y José María Córdoba.
*Peace Palace: a multi-purpose space for theatrical performances and musical shows, exhibitions and speeches.
*Salon Varietés Theatre: a small theatre that offers an exclusive program in English. It is the only one in Andalucia that is managed by foreign residents.
*The Culture House: it contains an exhibition room and a function room with a capacity to hold 165 people. It is a venue for conferences, concerts, theaters, recitals, etc.
*The Fuengirola Bullring has various activities besides bullfights. 
*Fuengirola has 3 municipal libraries: the Central library named for Miguel de Cervantes, another named after the writer Francisco Quevedo in the Boliches district and the Lope de Vega Library in the neighbourhood of El Boqutillo; and a fourth state-owned one, situated in the old Oceanographic center of Malaga, at the harbor, specializing in geological studies of the Mediterranean coast, marine biology, sea pollution and other marine issues.

== Shopping ==
Miramar, a shopping and leisure complex, which opened in early 2004 (and was restyled in 2013) and is situated on the west side of Fuengirola, with direct access to the A-7 motorway. It has an area of 119,000 m2, making it one of the Costa del Sol&#x27;s largest retail areas and is home to national and international retailers, in the fields of fashion, accessories, decoration and services as well as a 12-screen multi-cinema complex and many cafes and restaurants.

==Suburbs==
*Los Boliches (in full: Santa Fé de los Boliches)
*Torreblanca
*Carvajal
*El Boquetillo
*Los Pacos

==Twin towns==
* New Iberia, United States
==See also==
* List of municipalities in Málaga

==References==
==External links==
* Battle of Fuengirola 1810
* Folk festivals and events at Fuengirola</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q492735" start="0" end="10" title="Fuengirola" label="Fuengirola"/>
<link wikidata="Q215254" start="31" end="44" title="Costa del Sol" label="Costa del Sol"/>
<link wikidata="Q95028" start="52" end="70" title="province of Málaga" label="province of Málaga"/>
<link wikidata="Q10742" start="78" end="98" title="autonomous communities of Spain" label="autonomous community"/>
<link wikidata="Q5783" start="102" end="111" title="Andalusia" label="Andalusia"/>
<link wikidata="Q29" start="124" end="129" title="Spain" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="384" end="392" title="Middle Ages" label="medieval"/>
<link wikidata="Q169260" start="393" end="400" title="Moors" label="Moorish"/>
<link wikidata="Q16305538" start="521" end="532" title="subtropical" label="subtropical"/>
<link wikidata="Q41642" start="702" end="711" title="Phoenicia" label="Phoenicia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747689" start="714" end="719" title="Ancient Rome" label="Roman"/>
<link wikidata="Q842129" start="830" end="843" title="Sohail Castle" label="Sohail Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q297515" start="1024" end="1038" title="Pomponius Mela" label="Pomponius Mela"/>
<link wikidata="Q82778" start="1090" end="1095" title="Pliny the Elder" label="Pliny"/>
<link wikidata="Q192601" start="1141" end="1148" title="oppidum" label="oppidum"/>
<link wikidata="Q34943" start="1169" end="1176" title="Ptolemy" label="Ptolemy"/>
<link wikidata="Q492744" start="1778" end="1783" title="Mijas" label="Mijas"/>
<link wikidata="Q190418" start="1976" end="1993" title="Abd-ar-Rahman III" label="Abd-ar-Rahman III"/>
<link wikidata="Q123559" start="2241" end="2248" title="Al-Andalus" label="Moorish"/>
<link wikidata="Q4703267" start="2539" end="2549" title="Al-Suhayli" label="Al-Suhayli"/>
<link wikidata="Q101625" start="2668" end="2677" title="Marrakesh" label="Marrakesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q238445" start="3059" end="3077" title="Kingdom of Granada" label="Kingdom of Granada"/>
<link wikidata="Q186851" start="3106" end="3124" title="Christian Monarchs" label="Christian Monarchs"/>
<link wikidata="Q79791" start="3151" end="3162" title="Reconquista" label="Reconquista"/>
<link wikidata="Q4871068" start="3707" end="3727" title="Battle of Fuengirola" label="Battle of Fuengirola"/>
<link wikidata="Q152499" start="3762" end="3776" title="Peninsular War" label="Peninsular War"/>
<link wikidata="Q152115" start="3845" end="3860" title="Duchy of Warsaw" label="Duchy of Warsaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q2846748" start="3936" end="3948" title="Andrew Thomas Blayney, 11th Baron Blayney" label="Lord Blayney"/>
<link wikidata="Q11394" start="5098" end="5116" title="endangered species" label="endangered species"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5530" end="5543" title="Suhail castle" label="Suhail castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q6692780" start="5801" end="5809" title="low-rise" label="low-rise"/>
<link wikidata="Q842129" start="5913" end="5926" title="Sohail Castle" label="Sohail Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q24023883" start="5954" end="5973" title="Fuengirola Bullring" label="Fuengirola Bullring"/>
<link wikidata="Q8851" start="6160" end="6166" title="Málaga" label="Málaga"/>
<link wikidata="Q492748" start="6168" end="6176" title="Estepona" label="Estepona"/>
<link wikidata="Q492737" start="6178" end="6190" title="Torremolinos" label="Torremolinos"/>
<link wikidata="Q484799" start="6192" end="6200" title="Marbella" label="Marbella"/>
<link wikidata="Q488869" start="6202" end="6213" title="Benalmádena" label="Benálmadena"/>
<link wikidata="Q1410" start="6218" end="6227" title="Gibraltar" label="Gibraltar"/>
<link wikidata="Q126603" start="6260" end="6262" title="A7 (Spain)" label="A7"/>
<link wikidata="Q690894" start="6296" end="6316" title="Málaga Airport" label="Málaga-Costa Del Sol"/>
<link wikidata="Q167503" start="6415" end="6431" title="Cercanías Málaga" label="Cercanías Málaga"/>
<link wikidata="Q24023883" start="8787" end="8806" title="Fuengirola Bullring" label="Fuengirola Bullring"/>
<link wikidata="Q991355" start="9911" end="9921" title="New Iberia" label="New Iberia"/>
<link wikidata="Q93238" start="9952" end="9984" title="List of municipalities in Málaga" label="List of municipalities in Málaga"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="464821" wikidata="Q161503" url="?curid=464821" title="Butadiene">
<text>1,3-Butadiene () is the organic compound with the formula CH2=CH-CH=CH2. It is a colorless gas that is easily condensed to a liquid. It is important industrially as a precursor to synthetic rubber. The molecule can be viewed as the union of two vinyl groups. It is the simplest conjugated diene.

Although butadiene breaks down quickly in the atmosphere, it is nevertheless found in ambient air in urban and suburban areas as a consequence of its constant emission from motor vehicles.

The name butadiene can also refer to the isomer, 1,2-butadiene, which is a cumulated diene with structure H2C=C=CH−CH3. This allene has no industrial significance.

==History==
In 1863, French chemist E. Caventou isolated butadiene from the pyrolysis of amyl alcohol. This hydrocarbon was identified as butadiene in 1886, after Henry Edward Armstrong isolated it from among the pyrolysis products of petroleum. In 1910, the Russian chemist Sergei Lebedev polymerized butadiene and obtained a material with rubber-like properties. This polymer was, however, found to be too soft to replace natural rubber in many applications, notably automobile tires.

The butadiene industry originated in the years before World War II. Many of the belligerent nations realized that in the event of war, they could be cut off from rubber plantations controlled by the British Empire, and sought to reduce their dependence on natural rubber. In 1929, Eduard Tschunker and Walter Bock, working for IG Farben in Germany, made a copolymer of styrene and butadiene that could be used in automobile tires. Worldwide production quickly ensued, with butadiene being produced from grain alcohol in the Soviet Union and the United States, and from coal-derived acetylene in Germany.

==Production==
In 2020, 14.2 million tons were estimated to have been produced.
===Extraction from C4 hydrocarbons===
In the United States, western Europe, and Japan, butadiene is produced as a byproduct of the steam cracking process used to produce ethylene and other alkenes. When mixed with steam and briefly heated to very high temperatures (often over 900 °C), aliphatic hydrocarbons give up hydrogen to produce a complex mixture of unsaturated hydrocarbons, including butadiene. The quantity of butadiene produced depends on the hydrocarbons used as feed. Light feeds, such as ethane, give primarily ethylene when cracked, but heavier feeds favor the formation of heavier olefins, butadiene, and aromatic hydrocarbons.

Butadiene is typically isolated from the other four-carbon hydrocarbons produced in steam cracking by extractive distillation using a polar aprotic solvent such as acetonitrile, &quot;N&quot;-methyl-2-pyrrolidone, furfural, or dimethylformamide, from which it is then stripped by distillation.

===From dehydrogenation of &quot;n&quot;-butane===
Butadiene can also be produced by the catalytic dehydrogenation of normal butane (&quot;n&quot;-butane). The first such post-war commercial plant, producing 65,000 tons per year of butadiene, began operations in 1957 in Houston, Texas. Prior to that, in the 1940s the Rubber Reserve Company, a part of the United States government, constructed several plants in Borger, Texas, Toledo, Ohio, and El Segundo, California, to produce synthetic rubber for the war effort as part of the United States Synthetic Rubber Program. Total capacity was 68 KMTA (Kilo Metric Tons per Annum).

Today, butadiene from &quot;n&quot;-butane is commercially produced using the Houdry Catadiene process, which was developed during World War II. This entails treating butane over alumina and chromia at high temperatures.

===From ethanol===
In other parts of the world, including South America, Eastern Europe, China, and India, butadiene is also produced from ethanol. While not competitive with steam cracking for producing large volumes of butadiene, lower capital costs make production from ethanol a viable option for smaller-capacity plants. Two processes were in use.

In the single-step process developed by Sergei Lebedev, ethanol is converted to butadiene, hydrogen, and water at 400–450 °C over any of a variety of metal oxide catalysts:

This process was the basis for the Soviet Union&#x27;s synthetic rubber industry during and after World War II, and it remained in limited use in Russia and other parts of eastern Europe until the end of the 1970s. At the same time this type of manufacture was canceled in Brazil. As of 2017, no butadiene was produced industrially from ethanol.

In the other, two-step process, developed by the Russian emigre chemist Ivan Ostromislensky, ethanol is oxidized to acetaldehyde, which reacts with additional ethanol over a tantalum-promoted porous silica catalyst at 325–350 °C to yield butadiene:

This process was one of the three used in the United States to produce &quot;government rubber&quot; during World War II, although it is less economical than the butane or butene routes for the large volumes. Still, three plants with a total capacity of 200,000 tons per year were constructed in the U.S. (Institute, West Virginia, Louisville, Kentucky, and Kobuta, Pennsylvania) with start-ups completed in 1943, the Louisville plant initially created butadiene from acetylene generated by an associated calcium carbide plant. The process remains in use today in China and India.

===From butenes===
1,3-Butadiene can also be produced by catalytic dehydrogenation of normal butenes. This method was also used by the U.S. Synthetic Rubber Program (USSRP) during World War II. The process was much more economical than the alcohol or n-butane route but competed with aviation gasoline for available butene molecules (butenes were plentiful thanks to catalytic cracking). The USSRP constructed several plants in Baton Rouge and Lake Charles, Louisiana; Houston, Baytown, and Port Neches, Texas; and Torrance, California. Total annual production was 275 KMTA.

In the 1960s, a Houston company known as &quot;Petro-Tex&quot; patented a process to produce butadiene from normal butenes by oxidative dehydrogenation using a proprietary catalyst. It is unclear if this technology is practiced commercially.

After World War II, the production from butenes became the major type of production in USSR.

===For laboratory use===
1,3-Butadiene is inconvenient for laboratory use because it is gas. Laboratory procedures have been optimized for its generation from nongaseous precursors. It can be produced by the retro-Diels-Alder reaction of cyclohexene. Sulfolene is a convenient solid storable source for 1,3-butadiene in the laboratory. It releases the diene and sulfur dioxide upon heating.

==Uses==
Most butadiene (75% of the manufactured 1,3-butadiene) is used to make synthetic rubbers for the manufacture of tyres and components of many consumer items.

The conversion of butadiene to synthetic rubbers is called polymerization, a process by which small molecules (monomers) are linked to make large ones (polymers). The mere polymerization of butadiene gives polybutadiene, which is a very soft, almost liquid material. The polymerization of butadiene &quot;and&quot; other monomers gives copolymers, which are more valued. The polymerization of butadiene and styrene and/or acrylonitrile, such as acrylonitrile butadiene styrene (ABS), nitrile-butadiene (NBR), and styrene-butadiene (SBR). These copolymers are tough and/or elastic depending on the ratio of the monomers used in their preparation. SBR is the material most commonly used for the production of automobile tyres. Precursors to still other synthetic rubbers are prepared from butadiene. One is chloroprene.

Smaller amounts of butadiene are used to make adiponitrile, a precursor to some nylons. The conversion of butadiene to adiponitrile entails the addition of hydrogen cyanide to each of the double bonds in butadiene. The process is called hydrocyanation.

Butadiene is used to make the solvent sulfolane.

Butadiene is also useful in the synthesis of cycloalkanes and cycloalkenes, as it reacts with double and triple carbon-carbon bonds through Diels-Alder reactions. The most widely used such reactions involve reactions of butadiene with one or two other molecules of butadiene, i.e., dimerization and trimerization respectively. Via dimerization butadiene is converted to 4-vinylcyclohexene and cyclooctadiene. In fact, vinylcyclohexene is a common impurity that accumulates when butadiene is stored. Via trimerization, butadiene is converted to cyclododecatriene. Some of these processes employ nickel- or titanium-containing catalysts.

Butadiene is also a precursor to 1-octene via palladium catalyzed telomerization with methanol. This reaction produces 1-methoxy-2,7-octadiene as an intermediate.

== Structure, conformation, and stability ==

The most stable conformer of 1,3-butadiene is the &quot;s&quot;-&quot;trans&quot; conformation, in which the molecule is planar, with the two pairs of double bonds facing opposite directions. This conformation is most stable because orbital overlap between double bonds is maximized, allowing for maximum conjugation, while steric effects are minimized. Conventionally, the &quot;s-trans&quot; conformation is considered to have a C2-C3 dihedral angle of 180°. In contrast, the &quot;s&quot;-&quot;cis&quot; conformation, in which the dihedral angle is 0°, with the pair of double bonds facing the same direction is approximately 16.5 kJ/mol (3.9 kcal/mol) higher in energy, due to steric hindrance. This geometry is a local energy maximum, so in contrast to the &quot;s-trans&quot; geometry, it is not a conformer. The &quot;gauche&quot; geometry, in which the double bonds of the &quot;s-cis&quot; geometry are twisted to give a dihedral angle of around 38°, is a second conformer that is around 12.0 kJ/mol (2.9 kcal/mol) higher in energy than the &quot;s-trans&quot; conformer. Overall, there is a barrier of 24.8 kJ/mol (5.9 kcal/mol) for isomerization between the two conformers. This increased rotational barrier and strong overall preference for a near-planar geometry is evidence for a delocalized π system and a small degree of partial double bond character in the C–C single bond, in accord with resonance theory.

Despite the high energy of the &quot;s-cis&quot; conformation, 1,3-butadiene needs to assume this conformation (or one very similar) before it can participate as the four-electron component in concerted cycloaddition reactions like the Diels-Alder reaction.

Similarly, a combined experimental and computational study has found that the double bond of &quot;s-trans-&quot;butadiene has a length of 133.8 pm, while that for ethylene has a length of 133.0 pm. This was taken as evidence of a π-bond weakened and lengthened by delocalization, as depicted by the resonance structures shown below.

A qualitative picture of the molecular orbitals of 1,3-butadiene is readily obtained by applying Hückel theory. (The article on Hückel theory gives a derivation for the butadiene orbitals.)

1,3-Butadiene is also thermodynamically stabilized. While a monosubstituted double bond releases about 30.3 kcal/mol of heat upon hydrogenation, 1,3-butadiene releases slightly less (57.1 kcal/mol) than twice this energy (60.6 kcal/mol), expected for two isolated double bonds. That implies a stabilization energy of 3.5 kcal/mol. Similarly, the hydrogenation of the terminal double bond of 1,4-pentadiene releases 30.1 kcal/mol of heat, while hydrogenation of the terminal double bond of conjugated (&quot;E&quot;)-1,3-pentadiene releases only 26.5 kcal/mol, implying a very similar value of 3.6 kcal/mol for the stabilization energy. The ~3.5 kcal/mol difference in these heats of hydrogenation can be taken to be the resonance energy of a conjugated diene.

==Reactions==

The industrial uses illustrate the tendency of butadiene to polymerize. Its susceptibility to 1,4-addition reactions is illustrated by its hydrocyanation. Like many dienes, it undergoes Pd-catalyzed reactions that proceed via allyl complexes. It is a partner in Diels–Alder reactions, e.g. with maleic anhydride to give tetrahydrophthalic anhydride.

Like other dienes, butadiene is a ligand for low-valent metal complexes, e.g. the derivatives Fe(butadiene)(CO)3 and Mo(butadiene)3.

==Environmental health and safety==

Butadiene is of low acute toxicity. LC50 is 12.5–11.5 vol% for inhalation by rats and mice.

Long-term exposure has been associated with cardiovascular disease. There is a consistent association with leukemia, as well as a significant association with other cancers.

IARC has designated 1,3-butadiene as a Group 1 carcinogen (&#x27;carcinogenic to humans&#x27;), and the Agency for Toxic Substances Disease Registry and the US EPA also list the chemical as a carcinogen. The American Conference of Governmental Industrial Hygienists (ACGIH) lists the chemical as a suspected carcinogen. The Natural Resource Defense Council (NRDC) lists some disease clusters that are suspected to be associated with this chemical. Some researchers have concluded it is the most potent carcinogen in cigarette smoke, twice as potent as the runner up acrylonitrile

1,3-Butadiene is also a suspected human teratogen. Prolonged and excessive exposure can affect many areas in the human body; blood, brain, eye, heart, kidney, lung, nose and throat have all been shown to react to the presence of excessive 1,3-butadiene. Animal data suggest that women have a higher sensitivity to possible carcinogenic effects of butadiene over men when exposed to the chemical. This may be due to estrogen receptor impacts. While these data reveal important implications to the risks of human exposure to butadiene, more data are necessary to draw conclusive risk assessments. There is also a lack of human data for the effects of butadiene on reproductive and development shown to occur in mice, but animal studies have shown breathing butadiene during pregnancy can increase the number of birth defects, and humans have the same hormone systems as animals.

1,3-Butadiene is recognized as a highly reactive volatile organic compound (HRVOC) for its potential to readily form ozone, and as such, emissions of the chemical are highly regulated by TCEQ in parts of the Houston-Brazoria-Galveston Ozone Non-Attainment Area.

==Data sheet==

==See also==
*Cyclobutadiene
*Polybutadiene
*Hydroxyl-terminated polybutadiene

==References==
==External links==
* 1,3-Butadiene – Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry
* 1,3-Butadiene – CDC - NIOSH Pocket Guide to Chemical Hazards
* National Pollutant Inventory – 1,3-Butadiene</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q161503" start="0" end="13" title="Butadiene" label="1,3-Butadiene"/>
<link wikidata="Q174211" start="24" end="40" title="organic compound" label="organic compound"/>
<link wikidata="Q6714735" start="180" end="196" title="synthetic rubber" label="synthetic rubber"/>
<link wikidata="Q503100" start="245" end="256" title="vinyl group" label="vinyl group"/>
<link wikidata="Q192678" start="278" end="294" title="conjugated diene" label="conjugated diene"/>
<link wikidata="Q192036" start="316" end="327" title="chemical degradation" label="breaks down"/>
<link wikidata="Q320173" start="456" end="464" title="Exhaust gas" label="emission"/>
<link wikidata="Q752870" start="470" end="483" title="motor vehicle" label="motor vehicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q127950" start="528" end="534" title="isomer" label="isomer"/>
<link wikidata="Q161451" start="536" end="549" title="1,2-butadiene" label="1,2-butadiene"/>
<link wikidata="Q192678" start="562" end="577" title="diene" label="cumulated diene"/>
<link wikidata="Q411369" start="612" end="618" title="allene" label="allene"/>
<link wikidata="Q176848" start="728" end="737" title="pyrolysis" label="pyrolysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q248797" start="741" end="753" title="amyl alcohol" label="amyl alcohol"/>
<link wikidata="Q749041" start="815" end="837" title="Henry Edward Armstrong" label="Henry Edward Armstrong"/>
<link wikidata="Q289805" start="927" end="941" title="Sergei Vasilyevich Lebedev" label="Sergei Lebedev"/>
<link wikidata="Q8680" start="1339" end="1353" title="British Empire" label="British Empire"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1421" end="1437" title="Eduard Tschunker" label="Eduard Tschunker"/>
<link wikidata="Q15990398" start="1442" end="1453" title="Walter Bock" label="Walter Bock"/>
<link wikidata="Q156152" start="1467" end="1476" title="IG Farben" label="IG Farben"/>
<link wikidata="Q28917" start="1509" end="1516" title="styrene" label="styrene"/>
<link wikidata="Q153" start="1643" end="1656" title="ethanol" label="grain alcohol"/>
<link wikidata="Q133145" start="1722" end="1731" title="acetylene" label="acetylene"/>
<link wikidata="Q2335334" start="1956" end="1970" title="steam cracking" label="steam cracking"/>
<link wikidata="Q151313" start="1995" end="2003" title="ethylene" label="ethylene"/>
<link wikidata="Q81406" start="2014" end="2020" title="alkene" label="alkene"/>
<link wikidata="Q52858" start="2328" end="2334" title="ethane" label="ethane"/>
<link wikidata="Q151313" start="2351" end="2359" title="ethylene" label="ethylene"/>
<link wikidata="Q19834818" start="2447" end="2467" title="aromatic hydrocarbon" label="aromatic hydrocarbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q43648" start="2530" end="2541" title="hydrocarbon" label="hydrocarbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q27949284" start="2605" end="2626" title="polar aprotic solvent" label="polar aprotic solvent"/>
<link wikidata="Q408047" start="2635" end="2647" title="acetonitrile" label="acetonitrile"/>
<link wikidata="Q33103" start="2649" end="2683" title="N-Methyl-2-pyrrolidone" label="&amp;quot;N&amp;quot;-methyl-2-pyrrolidone"/>
<link wikidata="Q412429" start="2685" end="2693" title="furfural" label="furfural"/>
<link wikidata="Q409298" start="2698" end="2715" title="dimethylformamide" label="dimethylformamide"/>
<link wikidata="Q101017" start="2751" end="2763" title="distillation" label="distillation"/>
<link wikidata="Q898262" start="2865" end="2880" title="dehydrogenation" label="dehydrogenation"/>
<link wikidata="Q11247037" start="2981" end="2984" title="ton" label="ton"/>
<link wikidata="Q16555" start="3037" end="3044" title="Houston" label="Houston"/>
<link wikidata="Q14708402" start="3085" end="3107" title="Rubber Reserve Company" label="Rubber Reserve Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q893540" start="3179" end="3192" title="Borger, Texas" label="Borger, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q49239" start="3194" end="3206" title="Toledo, Ohio" label="Toledo, Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q983859" start="3212" end="3234" title="El Segundo, California" label="El Segundo, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q177342" start="3575" end="3582" title="alumina" label="alumina"/>
<link wikidata="Q407905" start="3587" end="3594" title="Chromium(III) oxide" label="chromia"/>
<link wikidata="Q153" start="3757" end="3764" title="ethanol" label="ethanol"/>
<link wikidata="Q289805" start="4012" end="4026" title="Sergei Vasilyevich Lebedev" label="Sergei Lebedev"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="4181" end="4193" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q6097127" start="4565" end="4584" title="Ivan Ostromislensky" label="Ivan Ostromislensky"/>
<link wikidata="Q82682" start="4597" end="4605" title="oxidation" label="oxidized"/>
<link wikidata="Q61457" start="4609" end="4621" title="acetaldehyde" label="acetaldehyde"/>
<link wikidata="Q1123" start="4667" end="4675" title="tantalum" label="tantalum"/>
<link wikidata="Q116269" start="4692" end="4698" title="silica" label="silica"/>
<link wikidata="Q6039090" start="5049" end="5073" title="Institute, West Virginia" label="Institute, West Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q43668" start="5075" end="5095" title="Louisville, Kentucky" label="Louisville, Kentucky"/>
<link wikidata="Q6424534" start="5101" end="5121" title="Kobuta, Pennsylvania" label="Kobuta, Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q82264" start="5382" end="5391" title="catalytic" label="catalytic"/>
<link wikidata="Q898262" start="5392" end="5407" title="dehydrogenation" label="dehydrogenation"/>
<link wikidata="Q151335" start="5418" end="5424" title="butene" label="butene"/>
<link wikidata="Q14708402" start="5460" end="5489" title="U.S. Synthetic Rubber Program" label="U.S. Synthetic Rubber Program"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="5505" end="5517" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q340142" start="5609" end="5626" title="aviation gasoline" label="aviation gasoline"/>
<link wikidata="Q900812" start="5692" end="5710" title="catalytic cracking" label="catalytic cracking"/>
<link wikidata="Q28218" start="5753" end="5764" title="Baton Rouge, Louisiana" label="Baton Rouge"/>
<link wikidata="Q864106" start="5769" end="5792" title="Lake Charles, Louisiana" label="Lake Charles, Louisiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q16555" start="5794" end="5801" title="Houston" label="Houston"/>
<link wikidata="Q812646" start="5803" end="5810" title="Baytown, Texas" label="Baytown"/>
<link wikidata="Q431631" start="5816" end="5834" title="Port Neches, Texas" label="Port Neches, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q489197" start="5840" end="5860" title="Torrance, California" label="Torrance, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q16555" start="5917" end="5924" title="Houston" label="Houston"/>
<link wikidata="Q151335" start="6016" end="6022" title="butene" label="butene"/>
<link wikidata="Q898262" start="6037" end="6052" title="dehydrogenation" label="dehydrogenation"/>
<link wikidata="Q375669" start="6452" end="6472" title="Diels-Alder reaction" label="Diels-Alder reaction"/>
<link wikidata="Q413328" start="6476" end="6487" title="cyclohexene" label="cyclohexene"/>
<link wikidata="Q601018" start="6489" end="6498" title="Sulfolene" label="Sulfolene"/>
<link wikidata="Q5282" start="6600" end="6614" title="sulfur dioxide" label="sulfur dioxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q181898" start="6856" end="6870" title="polymerization" label="polymerization"/>
<link wikidata="Q143668" start="7003" end="7016" title="polybutadiene" label="polybutadiene"/>
<link wikidata="Q421281" start="7133" end="7142" title="copolymer" label="copolymer"/>
<link wikidata="Q28917" start="7204" end="7211" title="styrene" label="styrene"/>
<link wikidata="Q342968" start="7219" end="7232" title="acrylonitrile" label="acrylonitrile"/>
<link wikidata="Q143496" start="7242" end="7273" title="acrylonitrile butadiene styrene" label="acrylonitrile butadiene styrene"/>
<link wikidata="Q145246" start="7281" end="7298" title="Nitrile rubber" label="nitrile-butadiene"/>
<link wikidata="Q146429" start="7310" end="7327" title="styrene-butadiene" label="styrene-butadiene"/>
<link wikidata="Q410871" start="7602" end="7613" title="chloroprene" label="chloroprene"/>
<link wikidata="Q84062" start="7662" end="7674" title="adiponitrile" label="adiponitrile"/>
<link wikidata="Q26075" start="7772" end="7788" title="hydrogen cyanide" label="hydrogen cyanide"/>
<link wikidata="Q903938" start="7853" end="7867" title="hydrocyanation" label="hydrocyanation"/>
<link wikidata="Q416239" start="7908" end="7917" title="sulfolane" label="sulfolane"/>
<link wikidata="Q188862" start="7965" end="7977" title="cycloalkanes" label="cycloalkanes"/>
<link wikidata="Q413343" start="7982" end="7994" title="cycloalkenes" label="cycloalkenes"/>
<link wikidata="Q4637205" start="8290" end="8308" title="4-vinylcyclohexene" label="4-vinylcyclohexene"/>
<link wikidata="Q867322" start="8313" end="8327" title="cyclooctadiene" label="cyclooctadiene"/>
<link wikidata="Q61739965" start="8464" end="8481" title="cyclododecatriene" label="cyclododecatriene"/>
<link wikidata="Q161664" start="8590" end="8598" title="1-octene" label="1-octene"/>
<link wikidata="Q740399" start="8623" end="8637" title="telomerization" label="telomerization"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128023" start="8783" end="8792" title="Conformational isomerism" label="conformer"/>
<link wikidata="Q725417" start="10816" end="10833" title="molecular orbital" label="molecular orbital"/>
<link wikidata="Q901357" start="10915" end="10928" title="Hückel method" label="Hückel theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q27292510" start="12074" end="12102" title="tetrahydrophthalic anhydride" label="tetrahydrophthalic anhydride"/>
<link wikidata="Q711849" start="12312" end="12316" title="LC50" label="LC50"/>
<link wikidata="Q552168" start="12544" end="12548" title="International Agency for Research on Cancer" label="IARC"/>
<link wikidata="Q2983535" start="12583" end="12590" title="List of IARC Group 1 Agents - Carcinogenic to humans" label="Group 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q187661" start="12591" end="12601" title="carcinogen" label="carcinogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q5136675" start="12919" end="12935" title="Disease cluster" label="disease clusters"/>
<link wikidata="Q2386268" start="13060" end="13075" title="cigarette smoke" label="cigarette smoke"/>
<link wikidata="Q342968" start="13110" end="13123" title="acrylonitrile" label="acrylonitrile"/>
<link wikidata="Q631521" start="13165" end="13174" title="teratogen" label="teratogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q910267" start="14052" end="14077" title="volatile organic compound" label="volatile organic compound"/>
<link wikidata="Q36933" start="14120" end="14125" title="ozone" label="ozone"/>
<link wikidata="Q7707592" start="14190" end="14194" title="Texas Commission on Environmental Quality" label="TCEQ"/>
<link wikidata="Q426435" start="14211" end="14237" title="Greater Houston" label="Houston-Brazoria-Galveston"/>
<link wikidata="Q7048842" start="14238" end="14263" title="Non-Attainment Area" label="Ozone Non-Attainment Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q415302" start="14296" end="14310" title="Cyclobutadiene" label="Cyclobutadiene"/>
<link wikidata="Q143668" start="14312" end="14325" title="Polybutadiene" label="Polybutadiene"/>
<link wikidata="Q3115617" start="14327" end="14360" title="Hydroxyl-terminated polybutadiene" label="Hydroxyl-terminated polybutadiene"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="464824" wikidata="Q237987" url="?curid=464824" title="Theresa, Countess of Portugal">
<text>Theresa (Portuguese: &quot;Teresa&quot;; Galician-Portuguese: &quot;Tareja&quot; or &quot;Tareixa&quot;; Latin: &quot;Tarasia&quot;) ( 1080 – 11 November 1130) was Countess of Portugal, and for a time claimant to be its independent Queen. She rebelled against her half-sister Queen Urraca of León. She was recognised as Queen by Pope Paschal II in 1116, but was captured and forced to accept Portugal&#x27;s vassalage to León in 1121, being allowed to keep her royal title. Her political alliance and amorous liaison with Galician nobleman Fernando Pérez de Traba led to her being ousted by her son, Afonso Henriques, who with the support of the Portuguese nobility and clergy, defeated her at the Battle of São Mamede in 1128.

== Birth and marriage ==

Theresa was the illegitimate daughter of King Alfonso VI of León by Jimena Muñoz. In 1093, her father married her to a French nobleman, Henry of Burgundy, who was a nephew of Queen Constance, a brother of the Duke of Burgundy, and a descendant of the kings of France in the male line. Henry was providing military assistance to his father-in-law against the Muslims on the Portuguese march.

Between the years 1096 and 1105, Henry and his cousin Raymond of Burgundy, husband of Queen Urraca, reached an agreement whereby each swore under oath that Raymond would give Henry the kingdom of Toledo and one-third of the royal treasury after King Alfonso&#x27;s death and, if that was not possible, Henry would receive the kingdom of Galicia, while Henry, in turn, promised to support his cousin Raymond in securing all of the king&#x27;s dominions and two-thirds of the treasury.

Alfonso VI had entrusted Theresa and Henry with the county of Portugal in 1096. Historians who date the pact closer to 1096 hypothesize that King Alfonso, after becoming aware of this covenant, appointed Henry governor of all the land between the Minho River and Santarém, governed until then by Raymond, thereby limiting his son-in-law&#x27;s government to Galicia. The two cousins then, instead of being allies, would have become rivals, each vying to obtain the king&#x27;s favor.

Other historians, however, have showed that the pact could not have been made before 1103, several years after the two counts had been granted their respective title, with Henry&#x27;s appointment answering the need for military command in the southwest.

Upon the death of King Alfonso, Henry and Theresa continued governing these lands south of the Minho and extending to the Mondego river and valley, and, later, in December 1111, under the reign of Queen Urraca, were also governing Zamora.

==Reign==
=== Struggle with sister ===
At first, Theresa and Henry were vassals of her father, but Alfonso VI died in 1109, leaving his legitimate daughter, Queen Urraca of Léon as the heir to the throne. As a daughter Theresa could be a vector of royal authority; as a wife she bestowed that authority to her husband. As a widow it was accepted that she might continue to exercise authority on behalf of her (male) children. Henry invaded León, hoping to add it to his lands. When he died in 1112, Theresa was left to deal with the military and political situation. She took on the responsibility of government, and occupied herself at first mainly with her southern lands, that had only recently been reconquered from the Moors as far as the Mondego River. In recognizing her victory in defending Coimbra, she was called &quot;Queen&quot; by Pope Paschal II and in light of this recognition, she appears in her documents as &quot;Daughter of Alphonso and elected by God&quot;, explicitly being called queen in an 1117 document, leading some to refer to her as the first monarch of Portugal. Pope Paschal II referred to her as queen in the papal bull &quot;FRATRUM NOSTRUM&quot; issued on 18 June 1116.

In 1116, in an effort to expand her power, Theresa fought her half-sister, Queen Urraca. They fought again in 1120, as she continued to pursue a larger share in the Leonese inheritance, and allied herself as a widow to the most powerful Galician nobleman for that effect. This was Fernando Pérez, Count of Traba, who had rejected his first wife to openly marry her, and served her on her southern border of the Mondego. In 1121, she was besieged and captured at Lanhoso, on her northern border with Galicia, while fighting her sister Urraca. A negotiated peace (Treaty of Lanhoso) was coordinated with aid from the Archbishops of Santiago de Compostela and Braga. The terms included that Theresa could go free only if she held the County of Portugal as a vassal of the Kingdom of León as she had received it initially.

=== Rebellions ===

By 1128, the Archbishop of Braga and the main Portuguese feudal nobles had had enough of her persistent Galician alliance, which the first feared could favour the ecclesiastical pretensions of his new rival, the Galician Archbishop of Santiago de Compostela, Diego Gelmírez, who had just started to assert his pretensions to an alleged discovery of relics of Saint James in his town, as his way to gain power and riches over the other cathedrals in the Iberian Peninsula.

The Portuguese nobles and warlords rebelled, and the Queen was deposed after a short civil war. Her son and heir, Afonso, defeated Theresa&#x27;s troops at the Battle of São Mamede near Guimarães and led her, along with the Count of Traba and their children, into exile in the Kingdom of Galicia, near the Portuguese border, where the Traba had founded the monastery of Toxos Outos. Theresa died soon afterwards in 1130. She was succeeded by her son, who would eventually lead Portugal into becoming a fully independent kingdom, and, later, nation state.

== Issue ==

By Henry, Count of Portugal, Theresa had:

* Urraca Henriques (c. 1095/1097 – c. 1173), wife of Bermudo Pérez de Traba, son of count Pedro Fróilaz, tenente in Trastámara, Viseu, Seia, and Faro in A Coruña, with issue; 
* Sancha Henriques (c. 1097–1163), married firstly Sancho Nunes de Celanova, with issue. After being widowed, married secondly Fernando Mendes de Bragança, without any issue from this marriage;
* Teresa Henriques (born c. 1098);
* Afonso Henriques (1109–1185), the first king of Portugal, named after his maternal grandfather, perhaps as &quot;a reminder that the blood of the Emperor of all Hispania also ran through the veins of this grandson&quot;.

She had two daughters with count Fernando Pérez de Traba:
* Teresa Fernández de Traba (d. 1180) wife of count Nuño Pérez de Lara and, when widowed, the second wife of King Ferdinand II of León; 
* Sancha Fernández de Traba (d. after March 1181). Married before 1150 count Álvaro Rodríguez de Sarria, with issue. After being widowed, she became the second wife of count Pedro Alfonso and, widowed again, married count Gonzalo Ruiz; without any issue from these two marriages.

==See also==
* Siege of Coimbra (1117)
* Portugal in the Middle Ages
** Portugal in the Reconquista

== References ==

== Bibliography ==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q237987" start="0" end="7" title="Theresa, Countess of Portugal" label="Theresa"/>
<link wikidata="Q5146" start="9" end="19" title="Portuguese language" label="Portuguese"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072111" start="41" end="60" title="Galician-Portuguese" label="Galician-Portuguese"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="105" end="110" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139807" start="176" end="184" title="County of Portugal" label="Portugal"/>
<link wikidata="Q128701" start="276" end="296" title="Urraca of León and Castile" label="Queen Urraca of León"/>
<link wikidata="Q227967" start="329" end="344" title="Pope Paschal II" label="Pope Paschal II"/>
<link wikidata="Q175276" start="421" end="425" title="Kingdom of León" label="León"/>
<link wikidata="Q3327207" start="540" end="563" title="Fernando Pérez de Traba" label="Fernando Pérez de Traba"/>
<link wikidata="Q587697" start="600" end="616" title="Afonso Henriques" label="Afonso Henriques"/>
<link wikidata="Q2733432" start="698" end="718" title="Battle of São Mamede" label="Battle of São Mamede"/>
<link wikidata="Q378505" start="771" end="783" title="illegitimate" label="illegitimate"/>
<link wikidata="Q235080" start="801" end="819" title="Alfonso VI of León" label="Alfonso VI of León"/>
<link wikidata="Q8196664" start="823" end="835" title="Jimena Muñoz" label="Jimena Muñoz"/>
<link wikidata="Q319625" start="891" end="908" title="Henry, Count of Portugal" label="Henry of Burgundy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2745448" start="930" end="945" title="Constance of Burgundy" label="Queen Constance"/>
<link wikidata="Q687324" start="964" end="980" title="Duke of Burgundy" label="Duke of Burgundy"/>
<link wikidata="Q79868" start="1006" end="1021" title="List of French monarchs" label="kings of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q169260" start="1113" end="1120" title="Moors" label="Muslims"/>
<link wikidata="Q562630" start="1201" end="1220" title="Raymond of Burgundy" label="Raymond of Burgundy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2301372" start="1332" end="1349" title="Kingdom of Toledo (Crown of Castile)" label="kingdom of Toledo"/>
<link wikidata="Q303421" start="1473" end="1491" title="kingdom of Galicia" label="kingdom of Galicia"/>
<link wikidata="Q14554" start="1879" end="1890" title="Minho River" label="Minho River"/>
<link wikidata="Q273877" start="1895" end="1903" title="Santarém, Portugal" label="Santarém"/>
<link wikidata="Q15656" start="2495" end="2508" title="Mondego River" label="Mondego river"/>
<link wikidata="Q15696" start="2604" end="2610" title="Zamora, Spain" label="Zamora"/>
<link wikidata="Q223266" start="2685" end="2691" title="vassal" label="vassal"/>
<link wikidata="Q45412" start="3412" end="3419" title="Coimbra" label="Coimbra"/>
<link wikidata="Q45" start="3696" end="3704" title="Portugal" label="Portugal"/>
<link wikidata="Q189867" start="3754" end="3764" title="papal bull" label="papal bull"/>
<link wikidata="Q3394207" start="4115" end="4129" title="House of Traba" label="Count of Traba"/>
<link wikidata="Q1805492" start="4280" end="4287" title="Lanhoso" label="Lanhoso"/>
<link wikidata="Q10384343" start="4380" end="4397" title="Treaty of Lanhoso" label="Treaty of Lanhoso"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365537" start="4433" end="4470" title="Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Santiago de Compostela" label="Archbishops of Santiago de Compostela"/>
<link wikidata="Q1784994" start="4475" end="4480" title="Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Braga" label="Braga"/>
<link wikidata="Q783595" start="4917" end="4931" title="Diego Gelmírez" label="Diego Gelmírez"/>
<link wikidata="Q43999" start="5017" end="5028" title="James, son of Zebedee" label="Saint James"/>
<link wikidata="Q12837" start="5111" end="5128" title="Iberian Peninsula" label="Iberian Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q587697" start="5245" end="5251" title="Afonso I of Portugal" label="Afonso"/>
<link wikidata="Q170903" start="5317" end="5326" title="Guimarães" label="Guimarães"/>
<link wikidata="Q20546958" start="5488" end="5512" title="Monastery of San Xusto" label="monastery of Toxos Outos"/>
<link wikidata="Q319625" start="5703" end="5727" title="Henry, Count of Portugal" label="Henry, Count of Portugal"/>
<link wikidata="Q10388281" start="5745" end="5761" title="Urraca Henriques" label="Urraca Henriques"/>
<link wikidata="Q15728413" start="5796" end="5818" title="Bermudo Pérez de Traba" label="Bermudo Pérez de Traba"/>
<link wikidata="Q3327274" start="5833" end="5846" title="Pedro Fróilaz de Traba" label="Pedro Fróilaz"/>
<link wikidata="Q3518201" start="5848" end="5855" title="Tenant-in-chief" label="tenente"/>
<link wikidata="Q14546" start="5859" end="5869" title="Tambre (river)" label="Trastámara"/>
<link wikidata="Q117676" start="5871" end="5876" title="Viseu" label="Viseu"/>
<link wikidata="Q76017" start="5878" end="5882" title="Seia" label="Seia"/>
<link wikidata="Q8757" start="5896" end="5904" title="A Coruña" label="A Coruña"/>
<link wikidata="Q10367517" start="5970" end="5994" title="Sancho Nunes de Barbosa" label="Sancho Nunes de Celanova"/>
<link wikidata="Q587697" start="6150" end="6166" title="Afonso Henriques" label="Afonso Henriques"/>
<link wikidata="Q45670" start="6190" end="6206" title="Kingdom of Portugal" label="king of Portugal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3327207" start="6405" end="6428" title="Fernando Pérez de Traba" label="Fernando Pérez de Traba"/>
<link wikidata="Q4747288" start="6432" end="6457" title="Teresa Fernández de Traba" label="Teresa Fernández de Traba"/>
<link wikidata="Q4886371" start="6482" end="6500" title="Nuño Pérez de Lara" label="Nuño Pérez de Lara"/>
<link wikidata="Q316768" start="6544" end="6564" title="Ferdinand II of León" label="Ferdinand II of León"/>
<link wikidata="Q4025166" start="6644" end="6670" title="Álvaro Rodríguez (nobleman)" label="Álvaro Rodríguez de Sarria"/>
<link wikidata="Q7159430" start="6741" end="6754" title="Pedro Alfonso" label="Pedro Alfonso"/>
<link wikidata="Q5582251" start="6789" end="6801" title="Gonzalo Ruiz" label="Gonzalo Ruiz"/>
<link wikidata="Q121065824" start="6863" end="6886" title="Siege of Coimbra (1117)" label="Siege of Coimbra (1117)"/>
<link wikidata="Q16796091" start="6889" end="6916" title="Portugal in the Middle Ages" label="Portugal in the Middle Ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q123413965" start="6920" end="6947" title="Portugal in the Reconquista" label="Portugal in the Reconquista"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="464825" wikidata="Q481547" url="?curid=464825" title="USCGC Eagle (WIX-327)">
<text>USCGC &quot;Eagle&quot; (WIX-327), formerly Horst Wessel and also known as Barque &quot;Eagle&quot;, is a barque used as a training cutter for future officers of the United States Coast Guard. She is one of only two active commissioned sailing vessels in the United States military today, along with which is ported in Boston Harbor. She is the seventh Coast Guard cutter to bear the name in a line dating back to 1792, including the Revenue Cutter &quot;Eagle&quot;.

Each summer, &quot;Eagle&quot; deploys with cadets from the United States Coast Guard Academy and candidates from the Officer Candidate School for periods ranging from a week to two months. These voyages fulfill multiple roles. The primary mission is training the cadets and officer candidates, but the ship also performs a public relations role for the Coast Guard and the United States. Often, &quot;Eagle&quot; makes calls at foreign ports as a goodwill ambassador.

The ship was built as the German sail training ship &quot;Horst Wessel&quot; in 1936; it served to train German sailors in sail techniques until decommissioned at the start of World War II. The vessel was given anti-aircraft armament and re-commissioned in 1942. At the end of the war, &quot;Horst Wessel&quot; was taken by the U.S. as war reparations.

== Origin as &quot;Horst Wessel&quot; ==

&quot;Eagle&quot; commenced its existence in Nazi Germany as &quot;Horst Wessel&quot;, a ship of the &quot;Gorch Fock&quot; class. &quot;Horst Wessel&quot; was an improvement on the original design. She was larger in dimension and her spars were all steel, unlike &quot;Gorch Fock&quot;″s wooden yards. SSS &quot;Horst Wessel&quot; began life as &quot;Schiff&quot; (&quot;ship&quot;) 508 at Blohm &amp; Voss in Hamburg, Germany in 1936. Her keel was laid on 15 February, she was launched on 13 June, completed on 16 September, and commissioned on 17 September. She was the second ship in the class to be built, following the class namesake &quot;Gorch Fock&quot;. Rudolf Hess gave the speech at her launch in the presence of Adolf Hitler, and Horst Wessel&#x27;s mother christened the new ship with a bottle of champagne. The name was given in tribute to SA leader Horst Wessel, who had been accorded martyr status by the Nazi Party. He also wrote the song which came to be known as &quot;Horst-Wessel-Lied&quot;, which was later used as the Nazi party&#x27;s anthem. Shortly after work began on &quot;Horst Wessel&quot;, the Blohm &amp; Voss shipyard laid the keel of the , which was labeled &quot;Schiff&quot; 509.

SSS &quot;Horst Wessel&quot; served as the flagship of the &quot;Kriegsmarine&quot; sail training fleet, which consisted of &quot;Gorch Fock&quot;, , and &quot;Horst Wessel&quot;. ( was also built in 1937 for the Romanian Navy, and work began on a fifth ship called &quot;Herbert Norkus&quot;, but was stopped with the outbreak of war.) &quot;Horst Wessel&quot; was commanded by Captain August Thiele, a previous Captain of &quot;Gorch Fock&quot;, and it was homeported in Kiel. In the three years before World War II, she undertook numerous training cruises in the North Atlantic waters, sailing with trainee groups consisting of both future officers and future petty officers. On 21 August 1938, Adolf Hitler visited the ship and sailed for approximately one hour before departing. Later that year, &quot;Horst Wessel&quot; and &quot;Albert Leo Schlageter&quot; undertook a four-month voyage to the Caribbean and visited St. Thomas and Venezuela. Along the way, they caught numerous sharks and turtles at sea and kept ducks enclosed on deck to provide fresh eggs.
&quot;Horst Wessel&quot; was decommissioned in 1939 with the onset of World War II, but served as a docked training ship in Stralsund for the marine branch of the Hitler Youth until her recommissioning as an active Navy sail training vessel in 1942. Numerous weapons were installed throughout the decks, including two 20 mm anti-aircraft guns on the bridge wings, two on the foredeck, and two 20 mm &quot;Flakvierling&quot; quad mounts on the waist. From late 1942 through early 1945, she sailed on numerous training deployments in the Baltic sea with cadets fresh out of basic training. On 14 November 1944, accompanied by &quot;Albert Leo Schlageter&quot;, &quot;Horst Wessel&quot; was sailing in rough weather, when, near the island of Rügen, &quot;Albert Leo Schlageter&quot; hit a mine that caused extensive damage to its starboard bow. &quot;Horst Wessel&quot; took &quot;Albert Leo Schlageter&quot; in a stern tow to keep her from running aground until larger ships could arrive the next day to assist.

In April 1945, after the last German cadet class had departed, &quot;Horst Wessel&quot; departed Rügen with a group of German refugees on board. She sailed to Flensburg where Kapitänleutnant Barthold Schnibbe surrendered to the British, and the ship ran up the Union Jack. &quot;Horst Wessel&quot; was ordered to Bremerhaven and tied to a temporary pier, and much of its equipment was stripped. At the end of World War II, the four German sailing vessels then extant were distributed to various nations as war reparations. &quot;Horst Wessel&quot; was won by the United States in a drawing of lots with the Soviet and British navies, and requested by the United States Coast Guard Academy&#x27;s Superintendent. The ship&#x27;s sails, masts, and other equipment were stripped from the Russian sister ship according to Command Master Chief William Bodine, Jr. who was the senior enlisted man on the voyage and in charge of rigging the ship for sail. On 15 May 1946, she was commissioned by CDR Gordon McGowan into the United States Coast Guard as the U.S. Coast Guard Cutter &quot;Eagle&quot;. In June 1946, a U.S. Coast Guard crew sailed her from Bremerhaven to Orangeburg, New York—through a hurricane—assisted by Kapitänleutnant Schnibbe and many of his crew who were still aboard. The German volunteer crew was disembarked at Camp Shanks and &quot;Eagle&quot; proceeded to her new home port of New London, Connecticut.

== Early afloat training at the U.S. Coast Guard Academy ==
Training at sea on a sailing vessel has always been a part of the Coast Guard Academy curriculum. In 1877, the first cadets to enroll in the United States Revenue Cutter Service, the predecessor to the U.S. Coast Guard, undertook their training on board the Revenue Cutter &quot;James C. Dobbin&quot;. In 1878, &quot;James C. Dobbin&quot; was replaced by the Revenue Cutter &quot;Salmon P. Chase&quot;. Cadets lived on board the ships (physical classrooms were not even established on shore until 1900), took classes on board in the winters when tied to a pier in New Bedford, Massachusetts or Arundel Cove, Maryland, and sailed on training deployments during the summers. During this time, &quot;Salmon P. Chase&quot; undertook numerous voyages to Europe. From 1890 to 1894, &quot;Salmon P. Chase&quot; suspended operations as there was a surplus of graduates from the United States Naval Academy. In 1907, &quot;Salmon P. Chase&quot; was decommissioned and transferred to the Marine Hospital Service. She was replaced by the Revenue Cutter &quot;Itasca&quot;, a former Naval Academy training vessel.

In 1922, &quot;Itasca&quot; was determined to be too small for the cadet corps, and was decommissioned and scrapped. She was then replaced by the three-masted barquentine &quot;Alexander Hamilton&quot;, a former Navy gunboat from the Spanish–American War. &quot;Alexander Hamilton&quot; was in service at the Coast Guard Academy until 1930; after her decommissioning in 1944, &quot;Alexander Hamilton&quot;″s mainmast was returned to New London and served as the Academy&#x27;s flagpole until 1954. During the 1930s, the Academy did not have a resident sailing vessel for cadet training. In 1939, the Danish Navy&#x27;s sail training vessel was in New York City to take part in the 1939 World&#x27;s Fair. After World War II broke out, the ship was offered to the U.S. government and transferred to the Coast Guard Academy, where she was commissioned as USCGC &quot;Danmark&quot; and served as the cadet training ship until 26 September 1945, when she was returned to the Danish government.

Sail training during these early years of the Coast Guard Academy is remarkably similar to the program on board &quot;Eagle&quot; today. An 1886 contemporary described the training experience on board &quot;Salmon P. Chase&quot; as such:

== Training at sea on board &quot;Eagle&quot; ==
&quot;Eagle&quot;″s primary mission is to develop the future officers of the U.S. Coast Guard. Since 1946, she has deployed each summer with cadets on board as part of their Academy curriculum. As soon as the cadets complete their final examinations in May of each year, &quot;Eagle&quot; departs with roughly half of the third class cadets (the rising sophomores) and a small contingent of first class cadet cadre (rising seniors who lead the third class cadets). Six weeks later, the cadets on board rotate to other training locations while the second half of the third class cadets meet the ship and begin their training. After their five weeks on board, the third and first class cadets depart for their summer leave, and the fourth class cadets (the rising freshmen; also known as swabs) report aboard in two or three groups for one week of sail training each. Like the third class cadets, the fourth class cadets are led by a group of second class cadet cadre (the rising juniors). &quot;Eagle&quot; typically returns to New London at the end of the summer, returning the cadets to the Coast Guard Academy one or two weeks before the academic school year begins. All cadets at the Academy will normally complete a minimum of six weeks on board &quot;Eagle&quot; during their fourth and third class years, and have the opportunity to return as cadre if they chose to do so during their second and first class years. The current schedule also includes two 2-3 week voyages in the Spring and Fall with the semiannual Coast Guard Officer Candidate School classes.

&quot;Eagle&quot; has a standing permanent crew of seven officers and 50 enlisted members; on training missions, she takes on a variety of temporary crew and sails with an average complement of 12 officers, 68 crew, and up to 150 trainees. While on board, cadets and officer candidates receive a large amount of instruction from the crew. They take classes on numerous subjects that are key to life at sea, including navigation, seamanship, ship and boat maneuvering, line handling, sailing, first aid, weather patterns, damage control, engineering, career development, and more. They also stand watches in the engine room, on the bridge, on deck, in the and galley, and during port calls, they assist the public by giving tours. The trainees are expected to qualify in a variety of watchstations applicable to their level of experience; for example, third class cadets complete their &#x27;helm and lookout&#x27; qualification while upper-class cadets work to qualify in leadership positions on the bridge and in the engine room. At the same time, trainees are given a rigorous set of nautical tasks they must complete. One common training task involves the &quot;Eagle&quot; crew covering all Global Positioning System receivers on board and requiring trainees to navigate between ports using sextants, a compass, and the tools of celestial navigation.


On a normal training day, &quot;Eagle&quot; will set &#x27;sail stations&#x27; once or twice and all cadets and crew members will take their positions on deck to set or douse sail, or conduct a sailing maneuver such as tacking or wearing. At the beginning of a deployment with a new group of trainees, these complicated maneuvers are closely managed and led by the crew, but as the trainees become more experienced and learn how to work the sails and lines, they slowly take over leadership of these and other evolutions and begin to lead themselves. The goal of the crew is to help the trainees develop and mold into a cohesive team and a group of leaders, enabling the crew to take a step back, assist where needed, and ensure all personnel are kept safe.

In March 1998 &quot;Eagle&quot; trained her first and only class of future Coast Guard enlisted members, taking on the boot camp company November-152. The members flew from the United States Coast Guard Training Center Cape May in Cape May, New Jersey to Roosevelt Roads Naval Station in Puerto Rico. After just three days of training on shore, &quot;Eagle&quot; sailed to Fort-de-France, Martinique; La Guaira, Venezuela; and Cartagena, Colombia. The future seamen and firemen then finally returned home to New London for boot camp graduation. In recent years, when able to do so, &quot;Eagle&quot; has supplemented the officer candidate deployments with future petty officers undergoing training classes at Coast Guard Training Center Yorktown to become Boatswain&#x27;s mates. Additionally, since 2013, when the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) moved its Officer Candidate Training program to the Coast Guard Academy, NOAA Officer Candidates have taken part in the Spring and Fall Officer Candidate deployments.

== &quot;America&#x27;s Tall Ship&quot; ==
&quot;Eagle&quot;″s secondary mission is to represent the U.S. Coast Guard and the United States to the public and the international community. In this role, she has earned the nickname of &quot;America&#x27;s Tall Ship.&quot; During her many years of service as a Coast Guard cutter, she has traveled to harbors throughout the United States and around the world. Among her various training deployments, &quot;Eagle&quot; has participated in various Tall Ship races and events, including the Operation Sail events of 1964, 1976, 1986, 1992, 2000 and 2012. Most notably, &quot;Eagle&quot; led the parade of ships into New York Harbor during the American Bicentennial OpSail of 1976. In the summer of 1974, during the kick-off race for OpSail 1976 (from Newport, Rhode Island to Boston, Massachusetts), the participating ships encountered heavy weather and a number of other ships dropped out. Off Cape Cod, &quot;Eagle&quot; maintained a speed of on a broad reach under sail alone for a number of hours.

In 1972, at the request of the West German government, &quot;Eagle&quot; returned to Germany for the first time since 1946 and visited the port of Kiel where she had formerly moored on numerous occasions as &quot;Horst Wessel&quot;. The visit included a five-day race against &quot;Gorch Fock II&quot;, Germany&#x27;s replacement for the &quot;Gorch Fock&quot; built in 1958, and the Polish sail training vessel &quot;Dar Pomorza&quot;. Three days into the race, numerous sails onboard &quot;Eagle&quot; ripped and had to be removed, and &quot;Eagle&quot; lost the race. &quot;Eagle&quot; again returned to Germany in 1977, 1988, 1996 (her 60th anniversary), 2005, and 2011 (her 75th anniversary).

In 1975, &quot;Eagle&quot; transported the remains of Hopley Yeaton, the first Revenue Cutter Service officer commissioned by President George Washington, from Lubec, Maine to the Coast Guard Academy where he was laid to rest at the Captain Hopley Yeaton Memorial.

In 1984, under the leadership of Captain Ernst Cummings and Boatswain Richard &#x27;Red&#x27; Shannon, &quot;Eagle&quot; took part in a tall ship&#x27;s race with the Dar Pomorza, the Venezuelan ship Simón Bolívar, and the British barque &quot;Marques&quot;. On 2 June, after the weather worsened, Captain Cummings ordered sail taken in. As the deck watch prepared to go aloft to furl sail, &quot;Eagle&quot; was hit by a squall with winds, forcing her into a 45-50 degree heel. Boatswain Shannon ordered the rudder to &#x27;right full&#x27; and the ship slowly righted herself.

At the personal invitation of Australian Prime Minister Robert Hawke, in September 1987, &quot;Eagle&quot; undertook a yearlong deployment to Australia from her home at the Coast Guard Academy. During this voyage Academy instructors were embarked to conduct the cadets&#x27; classes while underway. The trip involved stops at numerous Pacific islands and visits to the Australian ports of Lord Howe Island, Newcastle, Brisbane, Hobart, Sydney, and Manly, encompassing more than eight months away from her homeport of New London, Connecticut.

From 1996 to 1999, &quot;Eagle&quot; was commanded by Captain Robert J. Papp Jr., who went on to serve as the Commandant of the Coast Guard from 2010 to 2014.

In 2005, as part of the Trafalgar 200 International Fleet Review in the Solent off southern England celebrating the 200 year anniversary of Admiral Horatio Nelson&#x27;s victory at the Battle of Trafalgar, &quot;Eagle&quot; was one of a number of tall ships from several nations to be reviewed by Queen Elizabeth II, along with the U.S. Navy warship . Later that summer, &quot;Eagle&quot; returned to Bremerhaven for the fifth time since World War II and received an enthusiastic welcome.

In 2010 she participated in Velas Sudamerica 2010, a historical Latin American tour by eleven tall ships to celebrate the bicentennial of the first national governments of Argentina and Chile.

In 2012, as part of the Tall Ships Challenge hosted by Tall Ships America in conjunction with Operation Sail 2012, &quot;Eagle&quot; took part in a nail-biting two-day race off the coast of Nova Scotia with a large group of tall ships from all over North America. After 32 hours of calm waters, the wind freshened and then began to blow, and &quot;Eagle&quot; won the race in a dramatic fashion.

== Design ==

&quot;Eagle&quot; is slightly larger than her sister ship &quot;Gorch Fock&quot;. Overall &quot;Eagle&quot; displaces 1,824 tons. The hull is riveted Krupp steel four-tenths of an inch thick (10 mm). There are two full-length steel decks with a platform deck below. The raised forecastle and quarterdeck are made of quarter inch steel overlaid with of teak, as are the weather decks. 

Auxiliary propulsion was originally provided by a single Burmeister &amp; Wain diesel with reduction gear producing horsepower. She was refitted with a Caterpillar D399 V16 diesel engine in 1980, and again with a MTU 8V 4000 in 2018, providing speeds up to 17 knots (19.5 mph/31 km/h) under power.

There are two Caterpillar generators that can be run by themselves or in parallel together. &quot;Eagle&quot; has a range of at her cruising speed of under diesel power. She carries a reverse osmosis system that replenishes the ship&#x27;s fresh water supply at sea.

&quot;Eagle&quot; has a three-masted barque sailing rig, with two masts fully rigged with &#x27;square sails&#x27; and one mast with only &#x27;fore-and-aft&#x27; sails. The large sail area of the &#x27;square sails&#x27; provide much of the power while the &#x27;fore-and-aft&#x27; sails enable superior maneuverability. The ship has over of running rigging and approximately of sail area. To protect sails from chafing, &quot;Eagle&quot; uses baggywrinkle extensively. The top three yards of the fore- and main masts are moveable, and are kept lowered when not sailing to lower the ship&#x27;s center of gravity. In addition, the top portion of the fore- and main masts, known as the topgallant masts, may be housed (lowered) by 13 ft when not under sail in order to sail underneath low bridges. &quot;Eagle&quot;″s fastest point of sail is when her yards are braced sharp (or pivoted as much as they can be) and the relative wind (the wind you feel standing on the ship as it moves) is approximately 5-10 degrees aft of the windward leech of the sail. When fully braced, &quot;Eagle&quot; can sail about 75 degrees off of the true wind. &quot;Eagle&quot;″s propeller shaft can also be de-clutched from the engine so the propeller can freewheel, thus lessening drag while under sail.

The main helm station, also known as the triple helm, is connected via mechanical shaft linkage to the steering gear located in the &quot;captain&#x27;s coffin&quot; on the fantail along with the emergency, or &quot;trick&quot; wheel (also referred to as aft steering). Three turns of the main helm station equal one degree of rudder turn. That is why six persons are used to steer during heavy weather and while operating in restricted waterways. The emergency, or &quot;trick&quot; wheel is a single wheel that turns at a rate of one revolution to one degree of rudder turn. It thus requires more force to turn.

The ship has undergone numerous refits since she was acquired by the Coast Guard in 1946. Sometime during the 1950s, Captain Carl Bowman replaced &quot;Eagle&quot;″s split spanker on the mizzenmast with a single sail. During the 1980s, under Captain David Wood, the split spanker was returned as it afforded reduced weather helm and allowed the helmsman to turn away (or &#x27;fall off&#x27;) from the wind more easily.

On 27 January 1967, &quot;Eagle&quot; departed the Coast Guard Yard maintenance facility at Curtis Bay (near Baltimore, Maryland). On a foggy afternoon with little visibility, she traveled toward the Chesapeake Bay at . Shortly after 1:30 PM &quot;Eagle&quot; collided with the motor vessel &quot;Philippine Jose Abad Santos&quot;. Fortunately, nobody on either ship was injured. &quot;Eagle&quot; returned to the shipyard and underwent repairs.

On 1 July 1972, the ship was returning to her berth at the Coast Guard Academy in New London at the midpoint of her annual summer cadet training deployment when she was involved in another serious accident. Despite extensive precautions, as the ship passed below the Gold Star Memorial Bridge and a new twin bridge being built parallel to it, her foremast and mainmast caught on some safety netting slung below the new bridge that had not been fully secured. Both masts were snapped off above the crosstrees (about seven-eighths of the way up each mast), and the upper parts were left hanging from the remaining upright parts of the masts. As a result, the ship had to undergo emergency repairs. The Electric Boat facility in Groton, Connecticut was able to repair the masts in time for &quot;Eagle&quot;″s planned deployment to Europe; she set sail just three and a half weeks later on 24 July.

The year 1976 brought significant changes to &quot;Eagle&quot;. The Coast Guard added their &quot;racing stripe&quot; and the words &#x27;Coast Guard&#x27; to her otherwise unadorned white hull. In addition, the eagle figurehead on the bowsprit of the ship was replaced. The original eagle figurehead now resides on display in the U.S. Coast Guard Museum in Waesche Hall at the Coast Guard Academy. Finally, in 1976, &quot;Eagle&quot; received Captain Paul Welling, her first permanent Commanding Officer since Captain Barthold Schnibbe of the German Navy. Previous Commanding Officers had been drawn temporarily from officers assigned to the Academy.

By 1979, the Coast Guard had developed plans for an extensive refit at the Coast Guard Yard facility. From 1979 to 1983, &quot;Eagle&quot; visited the yard all four winters between summer deployments. During these maintenance availability periods her original 1936 Burmeister &amp; Wain diesel engine, known affectionately as &#x27;Elmer,&#x27; along with the generators and evaporators, were replaced by modern equipment (&#x27;Elmer&#x27; was given to the Portuguese vessel , the former &quot;Albert Leo Schlageter&quot;, to provide spare parts for her engine). This made the engine room more spacious, less noisy, and far cooler in temperature. The new engine could be controlled directly from the bridge through a pressurized air line and responded instantly, rather than after a 30-second delay common with the original engine. Additional watertight compartmentalization was also added (previously, there had been only seven). This compartmentalization included closing in cadet berthing areas, eliminating separate upper-class (fixed three-tier bunks) and lower-class (hammock) berthing and made the ship better able to accommodate male and female cadets. Crew habitability was greatly improved with the installation of new ventilation and air conditioning systems, fresh water showers, and fresh water clothes washing machines. An enclosed pilothouse was built around the exhaust funnel on the quarterdeck. Electronic equipment (e.g., radar, navigation, and radio equipment) was updated as well, and much of it was moved from the radio room into the new pilothouse. The helm station remained unsheltered and unchanged. Finally, the entire teak deck was replaced, and the steel beneath it was found to be badly corroded and had to be repaired as well. For two summers, &quot;Eagle&quot; sailed without parts of her teak deck. It was discovered that the teak deck is one of the keys to &#x27;stiffening&#x27; the longitudinal strength of the ship.

In 2014, &quot;Eagle&quot; began a similar refit. The ship&#x27;s crew temporarily shifted its administrative homeport to Baltimore and began an extensive four-year service life extension project. Each year, &quot;Eagle&quot; spent six months in the yard and six months sailing with trainees. The goal of this maintenance overhaul was for the ship to remain safe and viable as the Coast Guard&#x27;s premier training vessel well into the 21st century. Significant work was conducted on the HVAC system, engine room, hull, and other systems. Its auxiliary propulsion unit was replaced in the winter of 2017–2018. After the refit was completed, &quot;Eagle&quot; returned to her traditional homeport of New London, Connecticut.

== Eagle commanding officers ==

CAPT Jessica Rozzi-Ochs serves as &quot;Eagle&quot;″s first female and 30th overall Commanding Officer, assuming command from CAPT Michael Turdo on 24 June, 2022. Turdo oversaw Eagle and her valuable diplomatic and training mission during the COVID-19 pandemic, limiting cruise opportunities and ports of call. 

CDR Gordon P. McGowan served as the first American commanding officer of &quot;Eagle&quot;, relieving German Kapitänleutnant Berthold Schnibbe and commissioning her in the US Coast Guard as &quot;Cutter Eagle&quot; on May 15, 1946. McGowan and his crew of 6 USCG officers and 55 enlisted sailors would become Eagle&#x27;s plankowners, responsible for making her seaworthy for trans-Atlantic passage, and deliver her to New London with a combined American and former Horst Wessel crew who volunteered to help train the American sailors in traditional rigged sailing.

Rozzi-Ochs joins a distinguished list of &quot;Eagle&quot; commanders such as ADM Robert J. Papp Jr., who went on to serve as the 24th Commandant of the Coast Guard from 2010 to 2014, and VADM James C. Irwin, who served as vice commandant from 1986 to 1988. Horst Wessel&#x27;s first commander, German VADM August Thiele would go on to earn the Knight&#x27;s Cross for his command of Kampfgruppe V.

== In popular culture ==
&quot;Eagle&quot; has a significant presence in the &quot;Nantucket&quot; series of books by S. M. Stirling, in which she is visiting the island of Nantucket when a mysterious &quot;Event&quot; transports the entire island, including &quot;Eagle&quot; and her crew, back in time from 17 March 1998 to the year 1250 BC. Sent across the Atlantic Ocean to barter for the grain and livestock the time-lost Nantucketers need to survive through their first winter, her arrival off the south coast of Bronze Age England leads the natives to name her crew (and, by extension, the rest of the Island&#x27;s population) as &#x27;The Eagle People&#x27;. Although the &quot;Eagle&quot; described in the books is based on the real-world ship, the named crew members are all fictional.

== Cruises by the USCGC &quot;Eagle&quot; ==
As part of its training mission, the &quot;Eagle&quot; embarks on annual cruises around the world, primarily to locations in the Americas and Europe. The following is a list of cruises conducted between 1946 and 2022.


== See also ==
* &quot;Gorch Fock&quot; (1958), training ship of the German Navy
* Kiel Week
* List of large sailing vessels
* NRP &quot;Sagres&quot;, &quot;Gorch Fock I&quot;, and &quot;Mircea&quot;, sister ships to &quot;Eagle&quot;
* August Landmesser

== Citations ==
== General and cited references ==
* 
* 

== Further reading ==
* 

== External links ==

* &quot;Eagle&quot; homepage by the U.S. Coast Guard Academy
* &quot;On the Wings of Eagle&quot;, 1999 video documentary on YouTube</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q481547" start="0" end="33" title="USCGC Eagle (WIX-327)" label="USCGC &amp;quot;Eagle&amp;quot; (WIX-327)"/>
<link wikidata="Q481547" start="75" end="93" title="USCGC Eagle (WIX-327)" label="Barque &amp;quot;Eagle"/>
<link wikidata="Q216057" start="106" end="112" title="barque" label="barque"/>
<link wikidata="Q7889620" start="132" end="138" title="United States Coast Guard Cutter" label="cutter"/>
<link wikidata="Q11224" start="166" end="191" title="United States Coast Guard" label="United States Coast Guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q7866859" start="434" end="466" title="USRC Eagle" label="Revenue Cutter &amp;quot;Eagle&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q650935" start="529" end="562" title="United States Coast Guard Academy" label="United States Coast Guard Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7400159" start="972" end="985" title="sail training" label="sail training"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="1115" end="1127" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q194181" start="1275" end="1290" title="war reparations" label="war reparations"/>
<link wikidata="Q557286" start="1436" end="1458" title="Gorch Fock (1933)" label="&amp;quot;Gorch Fock&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q218715" start="1726" end="1742" title="Blohm &amp;amp; Voss" label="Blohm &amp;amp; Voss"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055" start="1746" end="1753" title="Hamburg" label="Hamburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q582062" start="1776" end="1780" title="keel" label="keel"/>
<link wikidata="Q596643" start="1814" end="1822" title="Ship naming and launching" label="launched"/>
<link wikidata="Q14475832" start="1866" end="1878" title="Ship commissioning" label="commissioned"/>
<link wikidata="Q75866" start="1999" end="2010" title="Rudolf Hess" label="Rudolf Hess"/>
<link wikidata="Q352" start="2060" end="2072" title="Adolf Hitler" label="Adolf Hitler"/>
<link wikidata="Q150793" start="2190" end="2192" title="Sturmabteilung" label="SA"/>
<link wikidata="Q57163" start="2200" end="2212" title="Horst Wessel" label="Horst Wessel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7320" start="2257" end="2267" title="Nazi Party" label="Nazi Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q154059" start="2324" end="2341" title="Horst-Wessel-Lied" label="Horst-Wessel-Lied"/>
<link wikidata="Q151701" start="2618" end="2630" title="Kriegsmarine" label="Kriegsmarine"/>
<link wikidata="Q99311" start="2940" end="2953" title="August Thiele" label="August Thiele"/>
<link wikidata="Q14475832" start="3648" end="3662" title="Ship decommissioning" label="decommissioned"/>
<link wikidata="Q4065" start="3743" end="3752" title="Stralsund" label="Stralsund"/>
<link wikidata="Q38791" start="3782" end="3794" title="Hitler Youth" label="Hitler Youth"/>
<link wikidata="Q86739852" start="3943" end="3960" title="Anti-aircraft warfare" label="anti-aircraft gun"/>
<link wikidata="Q846929" start="3969" end="3975" title="Bridge (nautical)" label="bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q357447" start="3994" end="4002" title="foredeck" label="foredeck"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4012" end="4042" title="2 cm Flak 30/38/Flakvierling#2 cm Flakvierling 38" label="20 mm &amp;quot;Flakvierling&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q3237" start="4358" end="4363" title="Rügen" label="Rügen"/>
<link wikidata="Q3798" start="4789" end="4798" title="Flensburg" label="Flensburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q3173323" start="4891" end="4901" title="Union Jack" label="Union Jack"/>
<link wikidata="Q2706" start="4943" end="4954" title="Bremerhaven" label="Bremerhaven"/>
<link wikidata="Q2706" start="5777" end="5788" title="Bremerhaven" label="Bremerhaven"/>
<link wikidata="Q5027576" start="5959" end="5970" title="Camp Shanks" label="Camp Shanks"/>
<link wikidata="Q49146" start="6027" end="6050" title="New London, Connecticut" label="New London, Connecticut"/>
<link wikidata="Q2391541" start="6254" end="6290" title="United States Revenue Cutter Service" label="United States Revenue Cutter Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q7866875" start="6371" end="6413" title="USRC James C. Dobbin (1853)" label="Revenue Cutter &amp;quot;James C. Dobbin&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q7866898" start="6472" end="6514" title="USRC Salmon P. Chase (1878)" label="Revenue Cutter &amp;quot;Salmon P. Chase&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q49147" start="6677" end="6703" title="New Bedford, Massachusetts" label="New Bedford, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q559549" start="6983" end="7010" title="United States Naval Academy" label="United States Naval Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6764148" start="7091" end="7114" title="Marine Hospital Service" label="Marine Hospital Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q4847899" start="7375" end="7386" title="barquentine" label="barquentine"/>
<link wikidata="Q12583" start="7450" end="7470" title="Spanish–American War" label="Spanish–American War"/>
<link wikidata="Q35" start="7817" end="7823" title="Denmark" label="Danish"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="7864" end="7877" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q207420" start="7898" end="7920" title="1939 New York World&amp;#x27;s Fair" label="1939 World&amp;#x27;s Fair"/>
<link wikidata="Q189290" start="10120" end="10127" title="Commissioned officer" label="officer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1694456" start="10659" end="10666" title="Watch system" label="watches"/>
<link wikidata="Q497741" start="10722" end="10728" title="galley (kitchen)" label="galley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1980202" start="10954" end="10958" title="Ship&amp;#x27;s wheel" label="helm"/>
<link wikidata="Q2572947" start="10963" end="10970" title="lookout" label="lookout"/>
<link wikidata="Q1415781" start="11081" end="11092" title="engine room" label="engine room"/>
<link wikidata="Q18822" start="11258" end="11283" title="Global Positioning System" label="Global Positioning System"/>
<link wikidata="Q179430" start="11358" end="11365" title="sextant" label="sextant"/>
<link wikidata="Q34735" start="11370" end="11377" title="compass" label="compass"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063512" start="11396" end="11416" title="celestial navigation" label="celestial navigation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1787896" start="11639" end="11646" title="tacking (sailing)" label="tacking"/>
<link wikidata="Q1503652" start="11650" end="11657" title="Jibe" label="wearing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1550460" start="12298" end="12307" title="recruit training" label="boot camp"/>
<link wikidata="Q7889625" start="12356" end="12406" title="United States Coast Guard Training Center Cape May" label="United States Coast Guard Training Center Cape May"/>
<link wikidata="Q138548" start="12410" end="12430" title="Cape May, New Jersey" label="Cape May, New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q3850219" start="12434" end="12463" title="Roosevelt Roads Naval Station" label="Roosevelt Roads Naval Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q81621" start="12552" end="12566" title="Fort-de-France" label="Fort-de-France"/>
<link wikidata="Q873405" start="12580" end="12589" title="La Guaira" label="La Guaira"/>
<link wikidata="Q657461" start="12606" end="12615" title="Cartagena, Colombia" label="Cartagena"/>
<link wikidata="Q707995" start="12638" end="12644" title="Seaman (rank)" label="seamen"/>
<link wikidata="Q707995" start="12649" end="12656" title="fireman (Seaman)" label="firemen"/>
<link wikidata="Q322749" start="12842" end="12855" title="petty officer" label="petty officer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7832937" start="12900" end="12924" title="Training Center Yorktown" label="Training Center Yorktown"/>
<link wikidata="Q4931542" start="12935" end="12957" title="Boatswain&amp;#x27;s mate (United States Coast Guard)" label="Boatswain&amp;#x27;s mates"/>
<link wikidata="Q214700" start="12994" end="13041" title="National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration" label="National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q1417393" start="13710" end="13719" title="Tall ship" label="Tall Ship"/>
<link wikidata="Q2026340" start="13752" end="13766" title="Operation Sail" label="Operation Sail"/>
<link wikidata="Q54264" start="14012" end="14033" title="Newport, Rhode Island" label="Newport, Rhode Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q100" start="14037" end="14058" title="Boston, Massachusetts" label="Boston, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q119781" start="14211" end="14222" title="broad reach" label="broad reach"/>
<link wikidata="Q713750" start="14295" end="14317" title="West Germany" label="West German government"/>
<link wikidata="Q1707" start="14411" end="14415" title="Kiel" label="Kiel"/>
<link wikidata="Q777321" start="14540" end="14565" title="Gorch Fock (1958)" label="&amp;quot;Gorch Fock II&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q936582" start="14682" end="14693" title="Dar Pomorza" label="Dar Pomorza"/>
<link wikidata="Q16230547" start="15017" end="15030" title="Hopley Yeaton" label="Hopley Yeaton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2391541" start="15042" end="15064" title="Revenue Cutter Service" label="Revenue Cutter Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q1817030" start="15123" end="15135" title="Lubec, Maine" label="Lubec, Maine"/>
<link wikidata="Q936582" start="15396" end="15407" title="Dar Pomorza" label="Dar Pomorza"/>
<link wikidata="Q717" start="15413" end="15422" title="Venezuela" label="Venezuela"/>
<link wikidata="Q1575040" start="15429" end="15442" title="Simón Bolívar (barque)" label="Simón Bolívar"/>
<link wikidata="Q4860863" start="15473" end="15480" title="Bark Marques" label="Marques"/>
<link wikidata="Q269372" start="15865" end="15877" title="Robert Hawke" label="Robert Hawke"/>
<link wikidata="Q104784" start="16198" end="16214" title="Lord Howe Island" label="Lord Howe Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q820325" start="16216" end="16225" title="City of Newcastle" label="Newcastle"/>
<link wikidata="Q34932" start="16227" end="16235" title="Brisbane" label="Brisbane"/>
<link wikidata="Q40191" start="16237" end="16243" title="Hobart" label="Hobart"/>
<link wikidata="Q3130" start="16245" end="16251" title="Sydney" label="Sydney"/>
<link wikidata="Q509716" start="16257" end="16262" title="Manly, New South Wales" label="Manly"/>
<link wikidata="Q912110" start="16414" end="16432" title="Robert J. Papp Jr." label="Robert J. Papp Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q688856" start="16462" end="16491" title="Commandant of the Coast Guard" label="Commandant of the Coast Guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q171416" start="16536" end="16549" title="Trafalgar 200" label="Trafalgar 200"/>
<link wikidata="Q6050603" start="16550" end="16576" title="International Fleet Review 2005" label="International Fleet Review"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143832" start="16584" end="16590" title="Solent" label="Solent"/>
<link wikidata="Q83235" start="16660" end="16674" title="Horatio Nelson" label="Horatio Nelson"/>
<link wikidata="Q171416" start="16697" end="16716" title="Battle of Trafalgar" label="Battle of Trafalgar"/>
<link wikidata="Q9682" start="16815" end="16827" title="Elizabeth II" label="Elizabeth II"/>
<link wikidata="Q2817288" start="17030" end="17051" title="Velas Sudamerica 2010" label="Velas Sudamerica 2010"/>
<link wikidata="Q12585" start="17066" end="17079" title="Latin America" label="Latin America"/>
<link wikidata="Q3753045" start="17124" end="17183" title="Bicentennial of Argentina" label="bicentennial of the first national governments of Argentina"/>
<link wikidata="Q4903577" start="17188" end="17193" title="Bicentennial of Chile" label="Chile"/>
<link wikidata="Q7679960" start="17220" end="17240" title="Tall Ships Challenge" label="Tall Ships Challenge"/>
<link wikidata="Q4744866" start="17251" end="17269" title="American Sail Training Association" label="Tall Ships America"/>
<link wikidata="Q1952" start="17386" end="17397" title="Nova Scotia" label="Nova Scotia"/>
<link wikidata="Q923085" start="17653" end="17664" title="sister ship" label="sister ship"/>
<link wikidata="Q679201" start="17757" end="17762" title="Krupp" label="Krupp"/>
<link wikidata="Q357447" start="17884" end="17894" title="forecastle" label="forecastle"/>
<link wikidata="Q10516659" start="17899" end="17910" title="quarterdeck" label="quarterdeck"/>
<link wikidata="Q156938" start="17959" end="17963" title="teak" label="teak"/>
<link wikidata="Q1016699" start="18050" end="18071" title="Burmeister &amp;amp; Wain" label="Burmeister &amp;amp; Wain"/>
<link wikidata="Q459965" start="18145" end="18156" title="Caterpillar Inc." label="Caterpillar"/>
<link wikidata="Q174174" start="18166" end="18179" title="diesel engine" label="diesel engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q548006" start="18206" end="18209" title="MTU Friedrichshafen" label="MTU"/>
<link wikidata="Q272175" start="18476" end="18491" title="reverse osmosis" label="reverse osmosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q216057" start="18597" end="18603" title="barque" label="barque"/>
<link wikidata="Q2397363" start="19005" end="19017" title="baggywrinkle" label="baggywrinkle"/>
<link wikidata="Q681991" start="19422" end="19428" title="brace (sailing)" label="braced"/>
<link wikidata="Q7310811" start="19479" end="19492" title="relative wind" label="relative wind"/>
<link wikidata="Q372001" start="19587" end="19595" title="windward" label="windward"/>
<link wikidata="Q352376" start="19596" end="19601" title="Parts of a sail" label="leech"/>
<link wikidata="Q109000849" start="20634" end="20641" title="Spanker (sail)" label="spanker"/>
<link wikidata="Q331744" start="20649" end="20659" title="Mast (sailing)" label="mizzenmast"/>
<link wikidata="Q364213" start="20778" end="20790" title="weather helm" label="weather helm"/>
<link wikidata="Q2309900" start="20807" end="20815" title="helmsman" label="helmsman"/>
<link wikidata="Q7889627" start="20934" end="20950" title="Coast Guard Yard" label="Coast Guard Yard"/>
<link wikidata="Q5092" start="20992" end="21011" title="Baltimore, Maryland" label="Baltimore, Maryland"/>
<link wikidata="Q650935" start="21389" end="21408" title="Coast Guard Academy" label="Coast Guard Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5578868" start="21597" end="21622" title="Gold Star Memorial Bridge" label="Gold Star Memorial Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364480" start="21827" end="21837" title="crosstrees" label="crosstrees"/>
<link wikidata="Q1325893" start="22030" end="22043" title="Electric Boat" label="Electric Boat"/>
<link wikidata="Q10385027" start="22056" end="22075" title="Groton, Connecticut" label="Groton, Connecticut"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="22325" end="22338" title="United States Coast Guard#Service Mark (&amp;quot;Racing Stripe&amp;quot;)" label="racing stripe"/>
<link wikidata="Q729329" start="22445" end="22455" title="Figurehead (object)" label="figurehead"/>
<link wikidata="Q523831" start="22463" end="22471" title="bowsprit" label="bowsprit"/>
<link wikidata="Q7889627" start="22955" end="22971" title="Coast Guard Yard" label="Coast Guard Yard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1016699" start="23145" end="23166" title="Burmeister &amp;amp; Wain" label="Burmeister &amp;amp; Wain"/>
<link wikidata="Q124441" start="24197" end="24213" title="washing machines" label="washing machines"/>
<link wikidata="Q846929" start="24227" end="24237" title="pilothouse" label="pilothouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q10516659" start="24281" end="24292" title="quarterdeck" label="quarterdeck"/>
<link wikidata="Q81068910" start="25837" end="25854" title="COVID-19 pandemic" label="COVID-19 pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q151701" start="26009" end="26015" title="Kriegsmarine" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q131370339" start="26016" end="26031" title="Kapitänleutnant" label="Kapitänleutnant"/>
<link wikidata="Q14475832" start="26054" end="26067" title="Ship commissioning" label="commissioning"/>
<link wikidata="Q7201318" start="26229" end="26239" title="plankowner" label="plankowner"/>
<link wikidata="Q1417393" start="26445" end="26463" title="tall ship" label="traditional rigged"/>
<link wikidata="Q912110" start="26556" end="26574" title="Robert J. Papp Jr." label="Robert J. Papp Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q688856" start="26609" end="26638" title="Commandant of the Coast Guard" label="Commandant of the Coast Guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q16091221" start="26667" end="26681" title="James C. Irwin" label="James C. Irwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q151701" start="26769" end="26775" title="Kriegsmarine" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q19254761" start="26776" end="26780" title="Vizeadmiral" label="VADM"/>
<link wikidata="Q99311" start="26781" end="26794" title="August Thiele" label="August Thiele"/>
<link wikidata="Q165558" start="26819" end="26838" title="Knight&amp;#x27;s Cross of the Iron Cross" label="Knight&amp;#x27;s Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q6964380" start="26951" end="26979" title="Nantucket series" label="&amp;quot;Nantucket&amp;quot; series"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368527" start="26992" end="27006" title="S. M. Stirling" label="S. M. Stirling"/>
<link wikidata="Q49149" start="27047" end="27056" title="Nantucket" label="Nantucket"/>
<link wikidata="Q2995529" start="27267" end="27272" title="grain" label="grain"/>
<link wikidata="Q103459" start="27277" end="27286" title="livestock" label="livestock"/>
<link wikidata="Q182154" start="27291" end="27300" title="time travel" label="time-lost"/>
<link wikidata="Q11761" start="27393" end="27403" title="Bronze Age" label="Bronze Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q21" start="27404" end="27411" title="England" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q777321" start="27954" end="27983" title="Gorch Fock (1958)" label="&amp;quot;Gorch Fock&amp;quot; (1958)"/>
<link wikidata="Q153606" start="28020" end="28029" title="Kiel Week" label="Kiel Week"/>
<link wikidata="Q835403" start="28032" end="28061" title="List of large sailing vessels" label="List of large sailing vessels"/>
<link wikidata="Q604597" start="28064" end="28086" title="NRP Sagres (1937)" label="NRP &amp;quot;Sagres&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q557286" start="28088" end="28112" title="Gorch Fock (1933)" label="&amp;quot;Gorch Fock I&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q560984" start="28118" end="28136" title="Mircea (ship)" label="&amp;quot;Mircea&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q62936" start="28174" end="28191" title="August Landmesser" label="August Landmesser"/>
<link wikidata="Q650935" start="28335" end="28359" title="United States Coast Guard Academy" label="U.S. Coast Guard Academy"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="464831" wikidata="Q461758" url="?curid=464831" title="Lorraine Hansberry">
<text>Lorraine Vivian Hansberry (May 19, 1930 – January 12, 1965) was an American playwright and writer. She was the first African-American female author to have a play performed on Broadway. Her best-known work, the play &quot;A Raisin in the Sun&quot;, highlights the lives of black Americans in Chicago living under racial segregation. The title of the play was taken from the poem &quot;Harlem&quot; by Langston Hughes: &quot;What happens to a dream deferred? Does it dry up like a raisin in the sun?&quot; At the age of 29, she won the New York Drama Critics&#x27; Circle Award – making her the first African-American dramatist, the fifth woman, and the youngest playwright to do so. Hansberry&#x27;s family had struggled against segregation, challenging a restrictive covenant in the 1940 U.S. Supreme Court case &quot;Hansberry v. Lee&quot;.

After she moved to New York City, Hansberry worked at the Pan-Africanist newspaper &quot;Freedom&quot;, where she worked with other black intellectuals such as Paul Robeson and W. E. B. Du Bois. Much of her work during this time concerned the African struggles for liberation and their impact on the world. Hansberry also wrote about being a lesbian and the oppression of gay people. She died of pancreatic cancer at the age of 34 during the Broadway run of her play &quot;The Sign in Sidney Brustein&#x27;s Window&quot; in 1965. Hansberry inspired the Nina Simone song &quot;To Be Young, Gifted and Black&quot;, whose title-line came from Hansberry&#x27;s autobiographical play.

==Early life and family==
Lorraine Hansberry was the youngest of four children born to Carl Augustus Hansberry, a successful real-estate broker and Nannie Louise (born Perry), a driving school teacher and ward committeewoman.

In 1938, her father bought a house in the Washington Park Subdivision of the South Side of Chicago, incurring the wrath of some of their white neighbors. The latter&#x27;s legal efforts to force the Hansberry family out culminated in the U.S. Supreme Court&#x27;s decision in &quot;Hansberry v. Lee&quot;, . The restrictive covenant was ruled contestable, though not inherently invalid; the enforcement of such covenants were eventually ruled unconstitutional in &quot;Shelley v. Kraemer&quot;, .

Carl Hansberry was also a supporter of the Urban League and NAACP in Chicago. Both Hansberrys were active in the Chicago Republican Party. Carl died in 1946 when Lorraine was fifteen years old; &quot;American racism helped kill him,&quot; she later said.

The Hansberrys were routinely visited by prominent black people, including sociology professor W. E. B. Du Bois, poet Langston Hughes, singer, actor, and political activist Paul Robeson, musician Duke Ellington, and Olympic gold medalist Jesse Owens. Carl Hansberry&#x27;s brother, William Leo Hansberry, founded the African Civilization section of the History Department at Howard University. Lorraine was taught: &quot;Above all, there were two things which were never to be betrayed: the family and the race.&quot;

Lorraine Hansberry has many notable relatives, including director and playwright Shauneille Perry, whose eldest child is named after her. Her grandniece is the actress Taye Hansberry. Her cousin is the flautist, percussionist, and composer Aldridge Hansberry.

Hansberry was the godmother to Nina Simone&#x27;s daughter Lisa.

==Education and political involvement==

Hansberry graduated from Betsy Ross Elementary in 1944 and from Englewood High School in 1948. She attended the University of Wisconsin–Madison, where she immediately became politically active with the Communist Party USA and integrated a dormitory. Hansberry&#x27;s classmate Bob Teague remembered her as &quot;the only girl I knew who could whip together a fresh picket sign with her own hands, at a moment&#x27;s notice, for any cause or occasion&quot;.

She worked on Henry A. Wallace&#x27;s Progressive Party presidential campaign in 1948, despite her mother&#x27;s disapproval. She spent the summer of 1949 in Mexico, studying painting at the University of Guadalajara.

==Move to New York==

In 1950, Hansberry decided to leave Madison and pursue her career as a writer in New York City, where she attended The New School. She moved to Harlem in 1951 and became involved in activist struggles such as the fight against evictions.

===&quot;Freedom&quot; newspaper and activism===

In 1951, Hansberry joined the staff of the black newspaper &quot;Freedom&quot;, edited by Louis E. Burnham and published by Paul Robeson. At &quot;Freedom&quot;, she worked with W. E. B. Du Bois, whose office was in the same building, and other black Pan-Africanists. At the newspaper, she worked as a &quot;subscription clerk, receptionist, typist, and editorial assistant&quot; besides writing news articles and editorials.

Additionally, she wrote scripts at &quot;Freedom&quot;. To celebrate the newspaper&#x27;s first birthday, Hansberry wrote the script for a rally at Rockland Palace, a then-famous Harlem hall, on &quot;the history of the Negro newspaper in America and its fighting role in the struggle for a people&#x27;s freedom, from 1827 to the birth of FREEDOM.&quot; Performers in this pageant included Paul Robeson, his longtime accompanist Lawrence Brown, the multi-discipline artist Asadata Dafora, and numerous others. The following year, she collaborated with the already produced playwright Alice Childress, who also wrote for &quot;Freedom&quot;, on a pageant for its Negro History Festival, with Harry Belafonte, Sidney Poitier, Douglas Turner Ward, and John O. Killens. This is her earliest remaining theatrical work.

Like Robeson and many black civil rights activists, Hansberry understood the struggle against white supremacy to be interlinked with the program of the Communist Party. One of her first reports covered the Sojourners for Truth and Justice convened in Washington, D.C., by Mary Church Terrell. Hansberry traveled to Georgia to cover the case of Willie McGee, and was inspired to write the poem &quot;Lynchsong&quot; about his case.

Hansberry worked on not only the US civil rights movement, but also global struggles against colonialism and imperialism. She wrote in support of the Mau Mau Uprising in Kenya, criticizing the mainstream press for its biased coverage.

Hansberry often explained these global struggles in terms of female participants. She was particularly interested in the situation of Egypt, &quot;the traditional Islamic &#x27;cradle of civilization,&#x27; where women had led one of the most important fights anywhere for the equality of their sex.&quot;

In 1952, Hansberry attended a peace conference in Montevideo, Uruguay, in place of Robeson, who had been denied travel rights by the State Department.

===Marriage and personal life===

On June 20, 1953, Hansberry married Robert Nemiroff, a Jewish publisher, songwriter, and political activist. Hansberry and Nemiroff moved to Greenwich Village, the setting of her second Broadway play, &quot;The Sign in Sidney Brustein&#x27;s Window&quot;. On the night before their wedding in 1953, Nemiroff and Hansberry protested against the execution of Julius and Ethel Rosenberg in New York City. 

The success of the hit pop song &quot;Cindy, Oh Cindy&quot;, co-authored by Nemiroff, enabled Hansberry to start writing full-time. Although the couple separated in 1957 and divorced in 1962, their professional relationship lasted until Hansberry&#x27;s death.

Hansberry lived for many years as a closeted lesbian. Before her marriage, she had written in her personal notebooks about her attraction to women. In 1957, around the time she separated from Nemiroff, Hansberry contacted the Daughters of Bilitis, the San Francisco-based lesbian rights organization, contributing two letters to their magazine, &quot;The Ladder&quot;, both of which were published under her initials, first &quot;L.H.N.&quot; and then &quot;L.N.&quot; Pointing to these letters as evidence, some gay and lesbian writers credited Hansberry as having been involved in the homophile movement or as having been an activist for gay rights. According to Kevin J. Mumford, however, beyond reading homophile magazines and corresponding with their creators, &quot;no evidence has surfaced&quot; to support claims that Hansberry was directly involved in the movement for gay and lesbian civil equality. 

Mumford stated that Hansberry&#x27;s lesbianism left her feeling isolated while &quot;A Raisin in the Sun&quot; catapulted her to fame; still, while &quot;her impulse to cover evidence of her lesbian desires sprang from other anxieties of respectability and conventions of marriage, Hansberry was well on her way to coming out.&quot; Near the end of her life, she declared herself &quot;committed [to] this homosexuality thing&quot; and vowed to &quot;create my lifenot just accept it&quot;. Before her death, she built a circle of gay and lesbian friends, took several lovers, vacationed in Provincetown (where she enjoyed, in her words, &quot;a gathering of the clan&quot;), and subscribed to several homophile magazines. Hansberry&#x27;s atheist views were expressed within her dramas, particularly &quot;A Raisin in the Sun&quot;. Critics and historians have contextualised the humanist themes of her work within a broader history of black atheist literature and a wider English language humanist tradition.

In 1964, Hansberry and Nemiroff divorced but continued to work together. Upon his ex-wife&#x27;s death, Robert Nemiroff donated all of Hansberry&#x27;s personal and professional effects to the New York Public Library. In doing so, he blocked access to all materials related to Hansberry&#x27;s lesbianism, meaning that no scholars or biographers had access for more than 50 years. In 2013, Nemiroff&#x27;s daughter released the restricted materials to Kevin J. Mumford, who explored Hansberry&#x27;s self-identification in subsequent work.

==Success as playwright==

Written and completed in 1957, &quot;A Raisin in the Sun&quot; opened at the Ethel Barrymore Theatre on March 11, 1959, becoming the first play by an African American woman to be produced on Broadway. The 29-year-old author became the youngest American playwright and only the fifth woman to receive the New York Drama Critics Circle Award for Best Play. She was also nominated for the Tony Award for Best Play, among the four Tony Awards that the play was nominated for in 1960. Over the next two years, &quot;Raisin&quot; was translated into 35 languages and was being performed all over the world.

In April 1959, as a sign of her sudden fame just one month after &quot;A Raisin in the Sun&quot; premiered on Broadway, photographer David Attie did an extensive photo-shoot of Hansberry for &quot;Vogue&quot; magazine, in the apartment at 337 Bleecker Street where she had written &quot;Raisin&quot;, which produced many of the best-known images of her today. In her award-winning Hansberry biography &quot;Looking for Lorraine: The Radiant and Radical Life of Lorraine Hansberry&quot;, Imani Perry writes that in his &quot;gorgeous&quot; images, &quot;Attie captured her intellectual confidence, armour, and remarkable beauty.&quot;

In 1960, during Delta Sigma Theta&#x27;s 26th national convention in Chicago, Hansberry was made an honorary member.

Hansberry&#x27;s screenplay of &quot;A Raisin in the Sun&quot; was produced by Columbia Pictures and released in 1961. The film starred Sidney Poitier and Ruby Dee, and was directed by Daniel Petrie. 

In 1961, Hansberry was set to replace Vinnette Carroll as the director of the musical &quot;Kicks and Co&quot;, after its try-out at Chicago&#x27;s McCormick Place. Written by Oscar Brown, Jr., the show featured an interracial cast including Lonnie Sattin, Nichelle Nichols, Vi Velasco, Al Freeman, Jr., Zabeth Wilde, and Burgess Meredith in the title role of Mr. Kicks. A satire involving miscegenation, the $400,000 production was co-produced by her husband Robert Nemiroff. Despite a warm reception in Chicago, the show never made it to Broadway.

In 1963, Hansberry participated in a meeting with Attorney General Robert F. Kennedy, set up by James Baldwin. Also in 1963, Hansberry was diagnosed with pancreatic cancer. She underwent two operations, on June 24 and August 2. Neither of the surgeries was successful in removing the cancer.

Hansberry agreed to speak to the winners of a creative writing conference on May 1, 1964: &quot;Though it is a thrilling and marvelous thing to be merely young and gifted in such times, it is doubly so, doubly dynamicto be young, gifted and black.&quot;

While many of her other writings were published in her lifetimeessays, articles, and the text for the SNCC book &quot;The Movement: Documentary of a Struggle for Equality&quot;the only other play given a contemporary production was &quot;The Sign in Sidney Brustein&#x27;s Window&quot;. It ran for 101 performances on Broadway and closed the night she died.

==Beliefs==
According to historian Fanon Che Wilkins, &quot;Hansberry believed that gaining civil rights in the United States and obtaining independence in colonial Africa were two sides of the same coin that presented similar challenges for Africans on both sides of the Atlantic.&quot; In response to the independence of Ghana, led by Kwame Nkrumah, Hansberry wrote: &quot;The promise of the future of Ghana is that of all the colored peoples of the world; it is the promise of freedom.&quot;

Regarding tactics, Hansberry said blacks &quot;must concern themselves with every single means of struggle: legal, illegal, passive, active, violent and non-violent... They must harass, debate, petition, give money to court struggles, sit-in, lie-down, strike, boycott, sing hymns, pray on stepsand shoot from their windows when the racists come cruising through their communities.&quot;

James Baldwin described Hansberry&#x27;s 1963 meeting with Robert F. Kennedy, in which Hansberry asked for a &quot;moral commitment&quot; on civil rights from Kennedy. According to Baldwin, Hansberry stated: &quot;I am not worried about black menwho have done splendidly, it seems to me, all things considered...But I am very worried...about the state of the civilization which produced that photograph of the white cop standing on that Negro woman&#x27;s neck in Birmingham.&quot;

In a Town Hall debate on June 15, 1964, Hansberry criticized white liberals who could not accept civil disobedience, expressing a need to &quot;encourage the white liberal to stop being a liberal and become an American radical.&quot; At the same time, she said, &quot;some of the first people who have died so far in this struggle have been white men.&quot;

Hansberry was a critic of existentialism, which she considered too distant from the world&#x27;s economic and geopolitical realities. Along these lines, she wrote a critical review of Richard Wright&#x27;s &quot;The Outsider&quot; and went on to style her final play &quot;Les Blancs&quot; as a foil to Jean Genet&#x27;s absurdist &quot;Les Nègres&quot;. However, Hansberry admired Simone de Beauvoir&#x27;s &quot;The Second Sex&quot;.

In 1959, Hansberry commented that women who are &quot;twice oppressed&quot; may become &quot;twice militant&quot;. She held out some hope for male allies of women, writing in an unpublished essay: &quot;If by some miracle women should not ever utter a single protest against their condition there would still exist among men those who could not endure in peace until her liberation had been achieved.&quot;

Hansberry was appalled by the nuclear bombing of Hiroshima and Nagasaki, which took place while she was in high school. She expressed a desire for a future in which &quot;Nobody fights. We get rid of all the little bombsand the big bombs,&quot; though she also believed in the right of people to defend themselves with force against their oppressors.

The FBI began surveillance of Hansberry when she prepared to go to the Montevideo peace conference. The Washington, D.C., office searched her passport files &quot;in an effort to obtain all available background material on the subject, any derogatory information contained therein, and a photograph and complete description,&quot; while officers in Milwaukee and Chicago examined her life history. Later, an FBI reviewer of &quot;Raisin in the Sun&quot; highlighted its Pan-Africanist themes as &quot;dangerous&quot;.

==Death==
Hansberry died of pancreatic cancer on January 12, 1965, aged 34. In his introduction to Hansberry&#x27;s posthumously released autobiography, &quot;To Be Young, Gifted and Black: An Informal Autobiography&quot;, James Baldwin wrote that &quot;it is not at all farfetched to suspect that what she saw contributed to the strain which killed her, for the effort to which Lorraine was dedicated is more than enough to kill a man.&quot;

Hansberry&#x27;s funeral was held in Harlem on January 15, 1965. Paul Robeson and SNCC organizer James Forman gave eulogies. The presiding minister, Eugene Callender, recited a message from Baldwin, and also a message from the Reverend Martin Luther King Jr. that read: &quot;Her creative ability and her profound grasp of the deep social issues confronting the world today will remain an inspiration to generations yet unborn.&quot; The 15th was also Dr. King&#x27;s birthday. She is buried at Asbury United Methodist Church Cemetery in Croton-on-Hudson, New York.

==Posthumous works==
Hansberry&#x27;s ex-husband, Robert Nemiroff, became the executor for several unfinished manuscripts. He added minor changes to complete the play &quot;Les Blancs&quot;, which Julius Lester termed her best work, and he adapted many of her writings into the play &quot;To Be Young, Gifted and Black&quot;, which was the longest-running Off Broadway play of the 1968–69 season. It appeared in book form the following year under the title &quot;To Be Young, Gifted and Black: Lorraine Hansberry in Her Own Words&quot;. She left behind an unfinished novel and several other plays, including &quot;The Drinking Gourd&quot; and &quot;What Use Are Flowers?&quot;, with a range of content, from slavery to a post-apocalyptic future.

When Nemiroff donated Hansberry&#x27;s personal and professional effects to the New York Public Library, he &quot;separated out the lesbian-themed correspondence, diaries, unpublished manuscripts, and full runs of the homophile magazines and restricted them from access to researchers.&quot; In 2013, more than twenty years after Nemiroff&#x27;s death, the new executor released the restricted material to scholar Kevin J. Mumford.

==Legacy==

In 1973, a musical based on &quot;A Raisin in the Sun&quot;, entitled &quot;Raisin,&quot; opened on Broadway, with music by Judd Woldin, lyrics by Robert Brittan, and a book by Nemiroff and Charlotte Zaltzberg. The show ran for more than two years and won two Tony Awards, including Best Musical.

In 2004, &quot;A Raisin in the Sun&quot; was revived on Broadway in a production starring Sean &quot;P. Diddy&quot; Combs, Phylicia Rashad, and Audra McDonald, and directed by Kenny Leon. The production won Tony Awards for Best Actress in a Play for Rashad and Best Featured Actress in a Play for McDonald, and received a nomination for Best Revival of a Play. In 2008, the production was adapted for television with the same cast, winning two NAACP Image Awards. 

In 2014, the play was revived on Broadway again in a production starring Denzel Washington, directed again by Kenny Leon; it won three Tony Awards, for Best Revival of a Play, Best Featured Actress in a Play for Sophie Okonedo, and Best Direction of a Play.

In 1969, Nina Simone first released a song about Hansberry called &quot;To Be Young, Gifted and Black.&quot; The title of the song refers to the title of Hansberry&#x27;s autobiography, which Hansberry first coined when speaking to the winners of a creative writing conference on May 1, 1964: &quot;Though it is a thrilling and marvelous thing to be merely young and gifted in such times, it is doubly so, doubly dynamicto be young, gifted and black.&quot; Simone wrote the song with the poet Weldon Irvine and told him that she wanted lyrics that would &quot;make black children all over the world feel good about themselves forever.&quot; When Irvine read the lyrics after it was finished, he thought, &quot;I didn&#x27;t write this. God wrote it through me.&quot; A studio recording by Simone was released as a single and the first live recording on October 26, 1969, was captured on &quot;Black Gold&quot; (1970). The single reached the top 10 of the R&amp;B charts. In the introduction of the live version, Simone explains the difficulty of losing a close friend and talented artist.

Patricia and Fredrick McKissack wrote a children&#x27;s biography of Hansberry, &quot;Young, Black, and Determined&quot;, in 1998.

In 1999 Hansberry was posthumously inducted into the Chicago Gay and Lesbian Hall of Fame.

In 2002, scholar Molefi Kete Asante listed Hansberry in the biographical dictionary &quot;100 Greatest African Americans&quot;.

&quot;The Lorraine Hansberry Theatre&quot; of San Francisco, which specializes in original stagings and revivals of African-American theatre, is named in her honor.

Lincoln University&#x27;s first-year female dormitory is named Lorraine Hansberry Hall. There is a school in the Bronx called Lorraine Hansberry Academy, and an elementary school in St. Albans, Queens, New York, named after Hansberry as well.

On the eightieth anniversary of Hansberry&#x27;s birth, Adjoa Andoh presented a BBC Radio 4 program entitled &quot;Young, Gifted and Black&quot; in tribute to her life.

Founded in 2004 and officially launched in 2006, The Hansberry Project of Seattle, Washington was created as an African-American theatre lab, led by African-American artists and was designed to provide the community with consistent access to the African-American artistic voice. A Contemporary Theatre (ACT) was their first incubator and in 2012 they became an independent organization. The Hansberry Project is rooted in the convictions that black artists should be at the center of the artistic process, that the community deserves excellence in its art, and that theatre&#x27;s fundamental function is to put people in a relationship with one another. Their goal is to create a space where the entire community can be enriched by the voices of professional black artists, reflecting autonomous concerns, investigations, dreams, and artistic expression.

In 2010, Hansberry was inducted into the Chicago Literary Hall of Fame.

In 2013, Hansberry was inducted into the Legacy Walk, an outdoor public display that celebrates LGBT history and people. This made her the first Chicago native to be honored along the North Halsted corridor.

Also in 2013, Hansberry was inducted into the American Theatre Hall of Fame.

Lorraine Hansberry Elementary School was located in the Ninth Ward of New Orleans. Heavily damaged by Hurricane Katrina in 2005, it has since closed.

In 2017, Hansberry was inducted into the National Women&#x27;s Hall of Fame.

In January 2018, the PBS series &quot;American Masters&quot; released a new documentary, &quot;Lorraine Hansberry: Sighted Eyes/Feeling Heart&quot;, directed by Tracy Heather Strain.

On September 18, 2018, the biography &quot;Looking for Lorraine: The Radiant and Radical Life of Lorraine Hansberry&quot;, written by scholar Imani Perry, was published by Beacon Press.

Through the efforts of the NYC LGBT Historic Sites Project, Hansberry&#x27;s apartment on Bleecker Street was listed on the New York State Register of Historic Places and the National Register of Historic Places in 2021.

On June 9, 2022, the Lilly Awards Foundation unveiled a statue of Hansberry in Times Square. The statue was sent on a tour of major US cities. On August 23, 2024 it was unveiled at its permanent home on Chicago&#x27;s Navy Pier with a special ceremony, including an outdoor screening of the 1961 movie, &quot;A Raisin in the Sun&quot;. The sculpture, by Alison Saar, is entitled &quot;To Sit A While,&quot; and features Hansberry surrounded by five life-sized bronze chairs representing different aspects of her life and work.

==Works==
* &quot;A Raisin in the Sun&quot; (1959)
* &quot;A Raisin in the Sun&quot;, screenplay (1961)
* &quot;On Summer&quot; (essay) (1960)
* &quot;The Drinking Gourd&quot; (1960)
* &quot;What Use Are Flowers?&quot; (written c. 1962)
* &quot;The Arrival of Mr. Todog&quot; – a parody of &quot;Waiting for Godot&quot;
* &quot;The Movement: Documentary of a Struggle for Equality&quot; (1964)
* &quot;The Sign in Sidney Brustein&#x27;s Window&quot; (1965)
* &quot;To Be Young, Gifted and Black: Lorraine Hansberry in Her Own Words&quot; (1969)
* &quot;Les Blancs: The Collected Last Plays / by Lorraine Hansberry&quot;. Edited by Robert Nemiroff (1994)
* &quot;Toussaint&quot;. This fragment from a work in progress, unfinished at the time of Hansberry&#x27;s untimely death, deals with a Haitian plantation owner and his wife whose lives are soon to change drastically as a result of the revolution of Toussaint L&#x27;Ouverture. (From the Samuel French, Inc. catalog of plays.)

==See also==
* African American literature
* &quot;Clybourne Park&quot;
* Existentialist feminism

==References==
===Sources===
* Anderson, Michael. &quot;Lorraine Hansberry&#x27;s Freedom Family&quot;. &quot;American Communist History&quot; 7(2), 2008.
* Carter, Stephen R. &quot;Commitment amid Complexity: Lorraine Hansberry&#x27;s Life in Action&quot;. &quot;MELUS&quot; 7(3), Autumn 1980. Accessed December 25, 2013, 
* Wilkins, Fanon Che, &quot;Beyond Bandung: The Critical Nationalism of Lorraine Hansberry, 1950 – 1965&quot;. &quot;Radical History Review&quot; 95, Spring 2006. Accessed December 24, 2013 via Duke University Press.
* Higashida, Cheryl. &quot;Black Internationalist Feminism: Women Writers of the Black Left, 1955–1995&quot;. Urbana: University of Illinois Press, 2011.

==Further reading==
* Adalet, Begüm (2024). &quot;&quot;. &quot;American Political Science Review.&quot;
* Soyica Diggs Colbert, &quot;Radical Vision: A Biography of Lorraine Hansberry&quot; (Yale University Press, 2021)
*Higashida, Cheryl, &quot;To Be (come) Young, Gay, and Black: Lorraine Hansberry&#x27;s Existentialist Routes to Anticolonialism&quot;, &quot;American Quarterly&quot;, 60 (December 2008), 899–924.
* Perry, Imani (2018). &quot;Looking for Lorraine: The Radiant and Radical Life of Lorraine Hansberry&quot;. Beacon Press. .
* Tripp, Janet (1997). &quot;Lorraine Hansberry&quot;. Lucent Books (Young Adult). .

==External links==

* Lorraine Hansberry Literary Trust with extensive bibliography, numerous quotations, photograph gallery, biography 
* Guide to the Lorraine Hansberry papers at the New York Public Library
* &quot;The Black Revolution and the White Backlash&quot; (audio with transcript) – speech by Lorraine Hansberry, Forum at Town Hall sponsored by The Association of Artists for Freedom, New York City, June 15, 1964
*Voices from the Gaps: Women Writers of Color – Lorraine Hansberry, University of Minnesota
*Twice Militant: Lorraine Hansberry&#x27;s Letters to &quot;The Ladder&quot; – Brooklyn Museum exhibition, November 2013 – March 2014
* 
* &quot;Sighted Eyes/Feeling Heart&quot; documentary on Hansberry
* &quot;Freedom&quot;, 1951–55, New York University digital archive. Monthly newspaper published by Paul Robeson and Louis Burnham. Lorraine Hansberry, &quot;subscription clerk, receptionist, typist, and editorial assistant.&quot;
*Materials about Lorraine Hansberry in the Richard Hoffman - Lorraine Hansberry collection held by Special Collections, University of Delaware Library
*Subversives: Stories from the Red Scare. Lesson by Ursula Wolfe-Rocca (Lorraine Hansberry is featured in this lesson).</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q461758" start="0" end="25" title="Lorraine Hansberry" label="Lorraine Vivian Hansberry"/>
<link wikidata="Q49085" start="117" end="133" title="African-American" label="African-American"/>
<link wikidata="Q235065" start="176" end="184" title="Broadway theatre" label="Broadway"/>
<link wikidata="Q300532" start="222" end="241" title="A Raisin in the Sun" label="A Raisin in the Sun"/>
<link wikidata="Q16197373" start="273" end="299" title="History of African Americans in Chicago" label="black Americans in Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q2652357" start="313" end="331" title="Racial segregation in the United States" label="racial segregation"/>
<link wikidata="Q105676692" start="385" end="391" title="Harlem (poem)" label="Harlem"/>
<link wikidata="Q188093" start="401" end="416" title="Langston Hughes" label="Langston Hughes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2711507" start="535" end="576" title="New York Drama Critics&amp;#x27; Circle Award" label="New York Drama Critics&amp;#x27; Circle Award"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="756" end="776" title="Covenant (law)#History" label="restrictive covenant"/>
<link wikidata="Q11201" start="789" end="807" title="U.S. Supreme Court" label="U.S. Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q5650974" start="819" end="835" title="Hansberry v. Lee" label="Hansberry v. Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q282739" start="902" end="916" title="Pan-Africanist" label="Pan-Africanist"/>
<link wikidata="Q104844813" start="927" end="946" title="Freedom (American newspaper)" label="&amp;quot;Freedom&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q273233" start="1004" end="1016" title="Paul Robeson" label="Paul Robeson"/>
<link wikidata="Q158060" start="1021" end="1037" title="W. E. B. Du Bois" label="W. E. B. Du Bois"/>
<link wikidata="Q55719239" start="1186" end="1193" title="lesbian" label="lesbian"/>
<link wikidata="Q212961" start="1240" end="1257" title="pancreatic cancer" label="pancreatic cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7764156" start="1317" end="1358" title="The Sign in Sidney Brustein&amp;#x27;s Window" label="The Sign in Sidney Brustein&amp;#x27;s Window"/>
<link wikidata="Q174957" start="1397" end="1408" title="Nina Simone" label="Nina Simone"/>
<link wikidata="Q7810855" start="1420" end="1449" title="To Be Young, Gifted and Black" label="To Be Young, Gifted and Black"/>
<link wikidata="Q18157240" start="1501" end="1522" title="To Be Young, Gifted and Black (play)" label="autobiographical play"/>
<link wikidata="Q5039841" start="1612" end="1635" title="Carl Augustus Hansberry" label="Carl Augustus Hansberry"/>
<link wikidata="Q7972119" start="1794" end="1821" title="Washington Park Subdivision" label="Washington Park Subdivision"/>
<link wikidata="Q3492277" start="1829" end="1850" title="South Side of Chicago" label="South Side of Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q11201" start="1990" end="2008" title="U.S. Supreme Court" label="U.S. Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q5650974" start="2034" end="2050" title="Hansberry v. Lee" label="Hansberry v. Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q7493848" start="2221" end="2239" title="Shelley v. Kraemer" label="Shelley v. Kraemer"/>
<link wikidata="Q777636" start="2293" end="2305" title="Urban League" label="Urban League"/>
<link wikidata="Q502044" start="2310" end="2315" title="NAACP" label="NAACP"/>
<link wikidata="Q29468" start="2371" end="2387" title="Republican Party (United States)" label="Republican Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q158060" start="2601" end="2617" title="W. E. B. Du Bois" label="W. E. B. Du Bois"/>
<link wikidata="Q188093" start="2624" end="2639" title="Langston Hughes" label="Langston Hughes"/>
<link wikidata="Q273233" start="2679" end="2691" title="Paul Robeson" label="Paul Robeson"/>
<link wikidata="Q4030" start="2702" end="2716" title="Duke Ellington" label="Duke Ellington"/>
<link wikidata="Q52651" start="2744" end="2755" title="Jesse Owens" label="Jesse Owens"/>
<link wikidata="Q8014486" start="2788" end="2809" title="William Leo Hansberry" label="William Leo Hansberry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068752" start="2881" end="2898" title="Howard University" label="Howard University"/>
<link wikidata="Q7491043" start="3106" end="3122" title="Shauneille Perry" label="Shauneille Perry"/>
<link wikidata="Q174957" start="3317" end="3328" title="Nina Simone" label="Nina Simone"/>
<link wikidata="Q7520242" start="3345" end="3349" title="Lisa Simone" label="Lisa"/>
<link wikidata="Q7250746" start="3418" end="3439" title="Prospect Heights School District 23" label="Betsy Ross Elementary"/>
<link wikidata="Q5378133" start="3457" end="3478" title="Englewood Technical Prep Academy" label="Englewood High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q838330" start="3505" end="3536" title="University of Wisconsin–Madison" label="University of Wisconsin–Madison"/>
<link wikidata="Q308714" start="3595" end="3614" title="Communist Party USA" label="Communist Party USA"/>
<link wikidata="Q15993560" start="3670" end="3680" title="Bob Teague" label="Bob Teague"/>
<link wikidata="Q251666" start="3865" end="3881" title="Henry A. Wallace" label="Henry A. Wallace"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364562" start="3889" end="3906" title="Progressive Party (United States, 1948)" label="Progressive Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q568973" start="3932" end="3936" title="1948 United States presidential election" label="1948"/>
<link wikidata="Q96" start="4009" end="4015" title="Mexico" label="Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q164028" start="4042" end="4067" title="University of Guadalajara" label="University of Guadalajara"/>
<link wikidata="Q599316" start="4207" end="4221" title="The New School" label="The New School"/>
<link wikidata="Q189074" start="4236" end="4242" title="Harlem" label="Harlem"/>
<link wikidata="Q104844813" start="4446" end="4453" title="Freedom (American newspaper)" label="Freedom"/>
<link wikidata="Q55720955" start="4471" end="4487" title="Louis E. Burnham" label="Louis E. Burnham"/>
<link wikidata="Q273233" start="4505" end="4517" title="Paul Robeson" label="Paul Robeson"/>
<link wikidata="Q158060" start="4559" end="4575" title="W. E. B. Du Bois" label="W. E. B. Du Bois"/>
<link wikidata="Q273233" start="5199" end="5211" title="Paul Robeson" label="Paul Robeson"/>
<link wikidata="Q19561168" start="5238" end="5252" title="Lawrence Benjamin Brown" label="Lawrence Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q4803269" start="5282" end="5296" title="Asadata Dafora" label="Asadata Dafora"/>
<link wikidata="Q1513826" start="5393" end="5408" title="Alice Childress" label="Alice Childress"/>
<link wikidata="Q214959" start="5500" end="5515" title="Harry Belafonte" label="Harry Belafonte"/>
<link wikidata="Q104049" start="5517" end="5531" title="Sidney Poitier" label="Sidney Poitier"/>
<link wikidata="Q5302045" start="5533" end="5552" title="Douglas Turner Ward" label="Douglas Turner Ward"/>
<link wikidata="Q6251244" start="5558" end="5573" title="John O. Killens" label="John O. Killens"/>
<link wikidata="Q19467721" start="5830" end="5862" title="Sojourners for Truth and Justice" label="Sojourners for Truth and Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q3296160" start="5896" end="5915" title="Mary Church Terrell" label="Mary Church Terrell"/>
<link wikidata="Q2919433" start="5968" end="5980" title="Willie McGee (convict)" label="Willie McGee"/>
<link wikidata="Q476855" start="6206" end="6222" title="Mau Mau Uprising" label="Mau Mau Uprising"/>
<link wikidata="Q114" start="6226" end="6231" title="Kenya" label="Kenya"/>
<link wikidata="Q1335" start="6649" end="6659" title="Montevideo" label="Montevideo"/>
<link wikidata="Q56248056" start="6821" end="6836" title="Robert B. Nemiroff" label="Robert Nemiroff"/>
<link wikidata="Q7325" start="6840" end="6846" title="Jews" label="Jewish"/>
<link wikidata="Q205380" start="6926" end="6943" title="Greenwich Village" label="Greenwich Village"/>
<link wikidata="Q7764156" start="6992" end="7033" title="The Sign in Sidney Brustein&amp;#x27;s Window" label="The Sign in Sidney Brustein&amp;#x27;s Window"/>
<link wikidata="Q769097" start="7142" end="7168" title="Julius and Ethel Rosenberg" label="Julius and Ethel Rosenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q5120468" start="7227" end="7242" title="Cindy, Oh Cindy" label="Cindy, Oh Cindy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2574320" start="7487" end="7495" title="closeted" label="closeted"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145872" start="7677" end="7697" title="Daughters of Bilitis" label="Daughters of Bilitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2412357" start="7802" end="7812" title="The Ladder (magazine)" label="The Ladder"/>
<link wikidata="Q5891541" start="8038" end="8056" title="homophile movement" label="homophile movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q17898" start="8091" end="8101" title="gay rights" label="gay rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q300532" start="8449" end="8468" title="A Raisin in the Sun" label="A Raisin in the Sun"/>
<link wikidata="Q49154" start="8955" end="8967" title="Provincetown" label="Provincetown"/>
<link wikidata="Q7066" start="9104" end="9111" title="atheism" label="atheist"/>
<link wikidata="Q312226" start="9245" end="9253" title="secular humanism" label="humanist"/>
<link wikidata="Q219555" start="9569" end="9592" title="New York Public Library" label="New York Public Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q5403074" start="10021" end="10044" title="Ethel Barrymore Theatre" label="Ethel Barrymore Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q235065" start="10135" end="10143" title="Broadway theatre" label="Broadway"/>
<link wikidata="Q2711507" start="10248" end="10283" title="New York Drama Critics Circle Award" label="New York Drama Critics Circle Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q1799442" start="10330" end="10354" title="Tony Award for Best Play" label="Tony Award for Best Play"/>
<link wikidata="Q191874" start="10371" end="10382" title="Tony Awards" label="Tony Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q19668637" start="10679" end="10690" title="David Attie" label="David Attie"/>
<link wikidata="Q154008" start="10743" end="10748" title="Vogue (magazine)" label="Vogue"/>
<link wikidata="Q2724557" start="10789" end="10804" title="Bleecker Street" label="Bleecker Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q27663694" start="11033" end="11044" title="Imani Perry" label="Imani Perry"/>
<link wikidata="Q5254747" start="11197" end="11214" title="Delta Sigma Theta" label="Delta Sigma Theta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1304498" start="11336" end="11355" title="A Raisin in the Sun (1961 film)" label="A Raisin in the Sun"/>
<link wikidata="Q104049" start="11435" end="11449" title="Sidney Poitier" label="Sidney Poitier"/>
<link wikidata="Q234360" start="11454" end="11462" title="Ruby Dee" label="Ruby Dee"/>
<link wikidata="Q705572" start="11484" end="11497" title="Daniel Petrie" label="Daniel Petrie"/>
<link wikidata="Q7932632" start="11539" end="11555" title="Vinnette Carroll" label="Vinnette Carroll"/>
<link wikidata="Q2072805" start="11649" end="11664" title="McCormick Place" label="McCormick Place"/>
<link wikidata="Q2032688" start="11677" end="11693" title="Oscar Brown" label="Oscar Brown, Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q254038" start="11758" end="11774" title="Nichelle Nichols" label="Nichelle Nichols"/>
<link wikidata="Q2118140" start="11788" end="11803" title="Al Freeman, Jr." label="Al Freeman, Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q343633" start="11823" end="11839" title="Burgess Meredith" label="Burgess Meredith"/>
<link wikidata="Q2090033" start="11891" end="11904" title="miscegenation" label="miscegenation"/>
<link wikidata="Q16206968" start="12071" end="12096" title="Baldwin–Kennedy meeting" label="participated in a meeting"/>
<link wikidata="Q25310" start="12119" end="12136" title="Robert F. Kennedy" label="Robert F. Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q273210" start="12148" end="12161" title="James Baldwin" label="James Baldwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q212961" start="12206" end="12223" title="pancreatic cancer" label="pancreatic cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7764156" start="12838" end="12879" title="The Sign in Sidney Brustein&amp;#x27;s Window" label="The Sign in Sidney Brustein&amp;#x27;s Window"/>
<link wikidata="Q117" start="13282" end="13287" title="Ghana" label="Ghana"/>
<link wikidata="Q8620" start="13296" end="13309" title="Kwame Nkrumah" label="Kwame Nkrumah"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14388" end="14402" title="Liberalism in America#Liberals and civil rights" label="white liberals"/>
<link wikidata="Q47217" start="14424" end="14442" title="civil disobedience" label="civil disobedience"/>
<link wikidata="Q38066" start="14712" end="14726" title="existentialism" label="existentialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q319820" start="14870" end="14884" title="Richard Wright (author)" label="Richard Wright"/>
<link wikidata="Q3786016" start="14898" end="14910" title="The Outsider (Wright novel)" label="The Outsider"/>
<link wikidata="Q6529242" start="14959" end="14969" title="Les Blancs" label="Les Blancs"/>
<link wikidata="Q184622" start="14989" end="14999" title="Jean Genet" label="Jean Genet"/>
<link wikidata="Q3234313" start="15023" end="15033" title="The Blacks (play)" label="Les Nègres"/>
<link wikidata="Q7197" start="15068" end="15086" title="Simone de Beauvoir" label="Simone de Beauvoir"/>
<link wikidata="Q470098" start="15100" end="15114" title="The Second Sex" label="The Second Sex"/>
<link wikidata="Q34664" start="15580" end="15589" title="Hiroshima" label="Hiroshima"/>
<link wikidata="Q38234" start="15594" end="15602" title="Nagasaki" label="Nagasaki"/>
<link wikidata="Q8333" start="15887" end="15890" title="Federal Bureau of Investigation" label="FBI"/>
<link wikidata="Q212961" start="16430" end="16447" title="pancreatic cancer" label="pancreatic cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q273210" start="16625" end="16638" title="James Baldwin" label="James Baldwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q704746" start="16943" end="16955" title="James Forman" label="James Forman"/>
<link wikidata="Q15379128" start="16995" end="17011" title="Eugene Callender" label="Eugene Callender"/>
<link wikidata="Q8027" start="17082" end="17104" title="Martin Luther King Jr." label="Martin Luther King Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q4803759" start="17341" end="17380" title="Asbury United Methodist Church and Bethel Chapel and Cemetery" label="Asbury United Methodist Church Cemetery"/>
<link wikidata="Q2876630" start="17384" end="17410" title="Croton-on-Hudson, New York" label="Croton-on-Hudson, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q6529242" start="17586" end="17596" title="Les Blancs" label="Les Blancs"/>
<link wikidata="Q6309936" start="17610" end="17623" title="Julius Lester" label="Julius Lester"/>
<link wikidata="Q18157240" start="17702" end="17731" title="To Be Young, Gifted and Black (play)" label="To Be Young, Gifted and Black"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058828" start="17769" end="17781" title="Off Broadway" label="Off Broadway"/>
<link wikidata="Q219555" start="18240" end="18263" title="New York Public Library" label="New York Public Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q7285130" start="18681" end="18687" title="Raisin (musical)" label="Raisin"/>
<link wikidata="Q191874" start="18865" end="18876" title="Tony Awards" label="Tony Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q1780176" start="18888" end="18900" title="Tony Award for Best Musical" label="Best Musical"/>
<link wikidata="Q216936" start="18993" end="19024" title="Sean Combs" label="Sean &amp;quot;P. Diddy&amp;quot; Combs"/>
<link wikidata="Q242739" start="19026" end="19041" title="Phylicia Rashad" label="Phylicia Rashad"/>
<link wikidata="Q267676" start="19047" end="19061" title="Audra McDonald" label="Audra McDonald"/>
<link wikidata="Q6391125" start="19079" end="19089" title="Kenny Leon" label="Kenny Leon"/>
<link wikidata="Q185299" start="19126" end="19148" title="Tony Award for Best Actress in a Play" label="Best Actress in a Play"/>
<link wikidata="Q627778" start="19164" end="19195" title="Tony Award for Best Featured Actress in a Play" label="Best Featured Actress in a Play"/>
<link wikidata="Q7821798" start="19240" end="19262" title="Tony Award for Best Revival of a Play" label="Best Revival of a Play"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153257" start="19347" end="19364" title="NAACP Image Award" label="NAACP Image Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q42101" start="19442" end="19459" title="Denzel Washington" label="Denzel Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q238864" start="19581" end="19595" title="Sophie Okonedo" label="Sophie Okonedo"/>
<link wikidata="Q640374" start="19601" end="19625" title="Tony Award for Best Direction of a Play" label="Best Direction of a Play"/>
<link wikidata="Q7810855" start="19700" end="19729" title="To Be Young, Gifted and Black" label="To Be Young, Gifted and Black"/>
<link wikidata="Q7980906" start="20121" end="20134" title="Weldon Irvine" label="Weldon Irvine"/>
<link wikidata="Q3640715" start="20521" end="20531" title="Black Gold (Nina Simone album)" label="Black Gold"/>
<link wikidata="Q45981" start="20583" end="20590" title="Rhythm and blues" label="R&amp;amp;B"/>
<link wikidata="Q7145736" start="20718" end="20726" title="Patricia McKissack" label="Patricia"/>
<link wikidata="Q15430533" start="20731" end="20749" title="Fredrick McKissack" label="Fredrick McKissack"/>
<link wikidata="Q131539" start="20758" end="20773" title="Children&amp;#x27;s literature" label="children&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q30078209" start="20804" end="20832" title="Young, Black, and Determined" label="Young, Black, and Determined"/>
<link wikidata="Q5095618" start="20903" end="20939" title="Chicago Gay and Lesbian Hall of Fame" label="Chicago Gay and Lesbian Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q1512329" start="20959" end="20977" title="Molefi Kete Asante" label="Molefi Kete Asante"/>
<link wikidata="Q4546133" start="21032" end="21062" title="100 Greatest African Americans" label="100 Greatest African Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q4570781" start="21237" end="21255" title="Lincoln University (Pennsylvania)" label="Lincoln University"/>
<link wikidata="Q847950" start="21281" end="21290" title="dormitory" label="dormitory"/>
<link wikidata="Q24259771" start="21300" end="21323" title="Lorraine Hansberry Hall" label="Lorraine Hansberry Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q18426" start="21346" end="21355" title="the Bronx" label="the Bronx"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="21363" end="21389" title="Lorraine Hansberry Academy" label="Lorraine Hansberry Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q62295" start="21419" end="21437" title="St. Albans, Queens" label="St. Albans, Queens"/>
<link wikidata="Q2824489" start="21537" end="21548" title="Adjoa Andoh" label="Adjoa Andoh"/>
<link wikidata="Q795598" start="21561" end="21572" title="BBC Radio 4" label="BBC Radio 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q17031265" start="22622" end="22633" title="Legacy Walk" label="Legacy Walk"/>
<link wikidata="Q17884" start="22677" end="22681" title="LGBT" label="LGBT"/>
<link wikidata="Q467050" start="22836" end="22865" title="American Theatre Hall of Fame" label="American Theatre Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q34404" start="22938" end="22949" title="New Orleans" label="New Orleans"/>
<link wikidata="Q16422" start="22970" end="22987" title="Hurricane Katrina" label="Hurricane Katrina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1967852" start="23060" end="23094" title="National Women&amp;#x27;s Hall of Fame" label="National Women&amp;#x27;s Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q2842976" start="23135" end="23151" title="American Masters" label="American Masters"/>
<link wikidata="Q27663694" start="23423" end="23434" title="Imani Perry" label="Imani Perry"/>
<link wikidata="Q4875979" start="23453" end="23465" title="Beacon Press" label="Beacon Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q11259" start="23769" end="23781" title="Times Square" label="Times Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q300532" start="24236" end="24255" title="A Raisin in the Sun" label="A Raisin in the Sun"/>
<link wikidata="Q1304498" start="24277" end="24296" title="A Raisin in the Sun (1961 film)" label="A Raisin in the Sun"/>
<link wikidata="Q19871" start="24514" end="24531" title="Waiting for Godot" label="Waiting for Godot"/>
<link wikidata="Q7764156" start="24620" end="24661" title="The Sign in Sidney Brustein&amp;#x27;s Window" label="The Sign in Sidney Brustein&amp;#x27;s Window"/>
<link wikidata="Q6529242" start="24771" end="24781" title="Les Blancs" label="Les Blancs"/>
<link wikidata="Q205783" start="25122" end="25148" title="Toussaint L&amp;#x27;Ouverture" label="Toussaint L&amp;#x27;Ouverture"/>
<link wikidata="Q388170" start="25215" end="25242" title="African American literature" label="African American literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q303084" start="25251" end="25265" title="Clybourne Park" label="Clybourne Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q3567192" start="25274" end="25297" title="Existentialist feminism" label="Existentialist feminism"/>
<link wikidata="Q255147" start="26187" end="26208" title="Yale University Press" label="Yale University Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q4744777" start="26358" end="26376" title="American Quarterly" label="American Quarterly"/>
<link wikidata="Q27663694" start="26415" end="26427" title="Imani Perry" label="Perry, Imani"/>
<link wikidata="Q4875979" start="26522" end="26534" title="Beacon Press" label="Beacon Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q7368507" start="26593" end="26605" title="Greenhaven Press" label="Lucent Books"/>
<link wikidata="Q632682" start="27219" end="27234" title="Brooklyn Museum" label="Brooklyn Museum"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="464833" wikidata="Q738358" url="?curid=464833" title="John Bagot Glubb">
<text>Lieutenant-General Sir John Bagot Glubb, KCB, CMG, DSO, OBE, MC, KStJ, KPM (16 April 1897 – 17 March 1986), known as Glubb Pasha (; and known as Abu Hunaik by the Jordanians), was a British military officer who led and trained Transjordan&#x27;s Arab Legion between 1939 and 1956 as its commanding general. During the First World War, he served in France. Glubb has been described as an &quot;integral tool in the maintenance of British control.&quot;

==Early life and start of military service==
Glubb was born in Preston, Lancashire and educated at Cheltenham College. Glubb&#x27;s father was Major-General Sir Frederic Manley Glubb, of Lancashire, who had been chief engineer in the British Second Army during the First World War; his mother was Letitia Bagot from County Roscommon. He was a brother of the racing driver Gwenda Hawkes.

Glubb gained a commission in the Royal Engineers in 1915. On the Western Front of World War I, he suffered a shattered jaw. In later years, this would lead to his Arab nickname of &quot;Abu Hunaik&quot;, meaning &quot;the father of the little jaw&quot;. He was then transferred to Iraq in 1920, which Britain had started governing under a League of Nations Mandate following war, and was posted to Ramadi in 1922 &quot;to maintain a rickety floating bridge over the river [Euphrates], carried on boats made of reeds daubed with bitumen&quot;, as he later put it. 

==The Arab Legion==
He became an officer of the Arab Legion (subsequently known as the Jordanian Armed Forces) in 1930. The next year he formed the Desert Patrol – a force consisting exclusively of Bedouin – to curb the raiding problem that plagued the southern part of the country. Within a few years he had persuaded the Bedouin to abandon their habit of raiding neighbouring tribes. He also took part in suppressing the Ikhwan revolt.

In 1939, Glubb succeeded Frederick G. Peake as the commander of the Arab Legion. During this period, he transformed the Legion into the best-trained force in the Arab world. During World War II he led attacks on Axis-aligned Arab forces in Iraq, and on Vichy forces in Lebanon and Syria.

In 1938, Glubb married Muriel Rosemary Forbes, the daughter of physician James Graham Forbes. The couple had a son, Godfrey Peter Manley (named after the Crusader King Godfrey of Bouillon) born in Jerusalem in 1939, and another son was born in May 1940 but lived only a few days. In 1944, they adopted Naomi, a Bedouin girl who was then three months old, and in 1948 they adopted two Palestinian refugee children called Atalla, renamed John and Mary.

During the 1948 Arab–Israeli War, the Arab Legion was considered the strongest Arab army involved in the war. Glubb led the Arab Legion across the River Jordan to occupy the West Bank (May 1948). Despite some negotiation and understanding between the Jewish Agency and King Abdullah, severe fighting took place in Kfar Etzion (May 1948), Jerusalem and Latrun (May–July 1948). According to Avi Shlaim,


Glubb remained in charge of the defence of the West Bank following the armistice in March 1949. In 1952, differences emerged between Glubb and the newly acceded King Hussein I, especially over defence arrangements, the promotion of Arab officers and the funding of the Legion. Arab nationalists believed that Glubb&#x27;s first loyalty was to the United Kingdom and that he had attempted to pressure Hussein into joining the Baghdad Pact. Hussein, wanting to distance himself from the British and to disprove the contention that Glubb was the actual ruler of Jordan, dismissed Glubb and several other British senior officers from the Arab Legion on 1 March 1956. Despite his decommission, which was forced upon him by public opinion, Glubb remained a close friend of the King. 

==Later life==
He spent the remainder of his life writing books and articles, mostly on the Middle East and on his experiences with the Arabs. 

He served on the Board of Governors of Monkton Combe School from 1956 to 1966.

Glubb died in 1986 at his home in Mayfield, East Sussex. King Hussein gave the eulogy at the service of thanksgiving for Glubb&#x27;s life, held in Westminster Abbey on 17 April 1986. A stained glass window in his local church, St Dunstan&#x27;s Church, Mayfield, celebrates his life and legacy. 

His widow died in 2006, whereupon his papers were deposited with the Middle East Centre Archive at St Antony&#x27;s College, Oxford.

==Honours==
Glubb was appointed OBE in 1925; CMG in 1946; and KCB in 1956.

==Autobiography==
===Reception===
Glubb&#x27;s autobiographical story &quot;A Soldier with the Arabs&quot; was reviewed in &quot;The Atlantic Monthly&quot;, April 1958; &quot;The National Review&quot;, May 1958; &quot;The Saturday Review&quot;, February 1958; &quot;The Reporter&quot;, April 1958; &quot;The New Yorker&quot;, October 1958; and &quot;Foreign Affairs&quot;, April 1958.

Writing in &quot;The Reporter&quot;, Ray Alan commented that the book was more than just an &quot;apologia&quot;; while it provided &quot;no serious political analysis or social observation&quot;, it did offer interesting insights into the period, even if Glubb was out of touch with later trends in Middle Eastern politics. What Alan found more surprising was that Glubb also had hardly anything new to say about the 1948 Palestine war &quot;in which he had star billing,&quot; instead lapsing into self-justifying propaganda. Alan ends his review with a long quotation from T. E. Lawrence, in which he reflects on what role a foreigner may play, and prays to God that &quot;men will not, for love of the glamour of strangeness, go out to prostitute themselves and their talents in serving another race&quot;, but will let them &quot;take what action or reaction they please from [his] silent example&quot;.

Writing in the &quot;Saturday Review&quot;, Carl Hermann Voss commented that Glubb served with and for the Arabs for 36 years, 17 of them for King Abdullah of Jordan. The portrait photograph is captioned &quot;Glubb Pasha—&#x27;I ... failed hopelessly.&#x27;&quot; Voss calls the book well written no matter how subjective.

==Legacy==
In his 1993 poetry collection, &quot;Out of Danger&quot;, James Fenton mentions Glubb Pasha in &quot;Here Come the Drum Majorettes!&quot;: 
&lt;poem&gt;
There&#x27;s a Gleb on a steppe in a dacha. 
There&#x27;s a Glob on a dig on the slack side. 
There&#x27;s a Glubb in the sand (he&#x27;s a pasha).&lt;/poem&gt;

==Writings==
The source for the following bibliography is
Contemporary Authors Online, Gale, 2005. Reproduced in Biography Resource Center. Farmington Hills, Mich.: Thomson Gale. 2005, except *.
* (With Henry Field) &quot;The Yezidis, Sulubba, and Other Tribes of Iraq and Adjacent Regions&quot;, G. Banta, 1943.
* &quot;, Hodder &amp; Stoughton, 1948, Da Capo Press, 1976.
* &quot;, Hodder &amp; Stoughton, 1957.
* &quot;Britain and the Arabs: A Study of Fifty Years, 1908 to 1958&quot;, Hodder &amp; Stoughton, 1959.
* &quot;War in the Desert: An R.A.F. Frontier Campaign&quot;, Hodder &amp; Stoughton, 1960, Norton, 1961.
* &quot;The Great Arab Conquests&quot;, Hodder &amp; Stoughton, 1963, Prentice-Hall, 1964. (vol. 1; 630-680)
* &quot;The Empire of the Arabs&quot;, Hodder &amp; Stoughton, 1963, Prentice-Hall, 1964. (vol. 2; 680-860)
* &quot;The Course of Empire: The Arabs and Their Successors&quot;, Hodder &amp; Stoughton, 1965, Prentice-Hall, 1966. (vol. 3; 860 onwards)
* &quot;The Lost Centuries: From the Muslim Empires to the Renaissance of Europe&quot;, Hodder &amp; Stoughton, 1966, Prentice-Hall, 1967. (vol. 4; 1145–1453)
* &quot;Syria, Lebanon and Jordan&quot;, Walker &amp; Co., 1967.
* &quot;The Middle East Crisis: A Personal Interpretation&quot;, Hodder &amp; Stoughton, 1967.
* &quot;A Short History of the Arab Peoples&quot;, Stein &amp; Day, 1969.
* &quot;The Life and Times of Muhammad&quot;, Stein &amp; Day, 1970.
* &quot;&quot;, Hodder &amp; Stoughton, 1971 (unavailable on line 8 Aug. 2021).
* &quot;Soldiers of Fortune: The Story of the Mamlukes&quot;, Stein &amp; Day, 1973.
* &quot; The Way of Love: Lessons from a Long Life&quot;, Hodder &amp; Stoughton, 1974.
* &quot;Haroon Al Rasheed and the Great Abbasids&quot;, Hodder &amp; Stoughton, 1976.
* &quot;Into Battle: A Soldier&#x27;s Diary of the Great War&quot;, Cassell, 1977.
* &quot;&quot;, Blackwood (Edinburgh), 1978.
* &quot;Arabian Adventures: Ten Years of Joyful Service&quot;, Cassell (London), 1978.
* &quot;The Changing Scenes of Life: An Autobiography&quot;, Quartet Books (London), 1983.

==See also==
* Kfar Etzion massacre
* Hadassah medical convoy massacre

==References==
==Further reading==

* Alon, Yoav. &quot;British Colonialism and Orientalism in Arabia: Glubb Pasha in Transjordan, 1930-1946.&quot; &quot;British Scholar&quot; 3.1 (2010): 105–126.
* Bradshaw, Tancred. &quot;The Glubb Reports: Glubb Pasha and Britain&#x27;s Empire Project in the Middle East 1920-1956&quot; (Springer, 2016).
* Hughes, Matthew. &quot;The Conduct of Operations: Glubb Pasha, the Arab Legion, and the First Arab–Israeli War, 1948–49.&quot; &quot;War in History&quot; 26.4 (2019): 539–562. online
* Jevon, Graham. &quot;Glubb Pasha and the Arab Legion: Britain, Jordan and the End of Empire in the Middle East&quot; (2017).
**Jevon, Graham. Jordan, &quot;Palestine and the British World System, 1945-57: Glubb Pasha and the Arab Legion&quot; (PhD. Diss. Oxford University, 2014) online.
* Lunt, James, &quot;Glubb, Sir John Bagot (1897–1986)&quot;, rev., &quot;Oxford Dictionary of National Biography&quot;, Oxford University Press, 2004, 
* Lunt, James D. &quot;Glubb Pasha, a Biography: Lieutenant-General Sir John Bagot Glubb, Commander of the Arab Legion, 1939-1956&quot; (Harvill Press, 1984).
* Meyer, Karl E.; Brysac, Shareen Blair, &quot;Kingmakers: the Invention of the Modern Middle East&quot;, W.W. Norton, 2008, pp 259–92.
* Morris, Benny, &quot;The Road to Jerusalem: Glubb Pasha, Palestine and the Jews&quot;, 
* Royle, Trevor. &quot;Glubb Pasha: The Life and Times of Sir John Bagot Glubb, Commander of the Arab Legion&quot; (Little, Brown, 1991).
* Shlaim, A. (2001). &quot;Israel and the Arab Coalition in 1948&quot; in E. L. Rogan, A. Shlaim, C. Tripp, J. A. Clancy-Smith, I. Gershoni, R. Owen, Y. Sayigh &amp; J. E. Tucker (Eds.), &quot;The War for Palestine: Rewriting the History of 1948&quot; (pp. 79–103). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 

==External links==
* 1956 – King of Jordan sacks British general (BBC article and video)
* Review: The Road to Jerusalem by Benny Morris, &quot;The Guardian&quot;
* 
* THE FATE OF EMPIRES and SEARCH FOR SURVIVAL, by Sir John Glubb (Archive)
* Imperial War Museum Interview
* Obituary in &quot;New York Times&quot;

===Photos===
* Glubb Pasha on the right with King Abdullah in the middle
* The Desert Patrol</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q152951" start="0" end="18" title="Lieutenant-General" label="Lieutenant-General"/>
<link wikidata="Q209690" start="19" end="22" title="Sir" label="Sir"/>
<link wikidata="Q738358" start="23" end="39" title="John Bagot Glubb" label="John Bagot Glubb"/>
<link wikidata="Q506369" start="41" end="44" title="Knight Commander of the Order of the Bath" label="KCB"/>
<link wikidata="Q585087" start="46" end="49" title="Order of St Michael and St George" label="CMG"/>
<link wikidata="Q615838" start="51" end="54" title="Distinguished Service Order" label="DSO"/>
<link wikidata="Q14420" start="56" end="59" title="Order of the British Empire" label="OBE"/>
<link wikidata="Q1335064" start="61" end="63" title="Military Cross" label="MC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1465984" start="65" end="69" title="Order of Saint John (chartered 1888)" label="KStJ"/>
<link wikidata="Q2792177" start="71" end="74" title="King&amp;#x27;s Police Medal" label="KPM"/>
<link wikidata="Q738358" start="117" end="128" title="John Bagot Glubb" label="Glubb Pasha"/>
<link wikidata="Q738358" start="145" end="155" title="John Bagot Glubb" label="Abu Hunaik"/>
<link wikidata="Q1121819" start="227" end="238" title="Emirate of Transjordan" label="Transjordan"/>
<link wikidata="Q44202" start="246" end="257" title="Arab Legion" label="Arab Legion"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="318" end="333" title="First World War" label="First World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q184090" start="516" end="535" title="Preston, Lancashire" label="Preston, Lancashire"/>
<link wikidata="Q467269" start="552" end="570" title="Cheltenham College" label="Cheltenham College"/>
<link wikidata="Q15971200" start="610" end="635" title="Frederic Manley Glubb" label="Sir Frederic Manley Glubb"/>
<link wikidata="Q23077" start="640" end="650" title="Lancashire" label="Lancashire"/>
<link wikidata="Q209514" start="687" end="706" title="Second Army (United Kingdom)" label="British Second Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="718" end="733" title="First World War" label="First World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q179437" start="769" end="785" title="County Roscommon" label="County Roscommon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5623472" start="825" end="838" title="Gwenda Hawkes" label="Gwenda Hawkes"/>
<link wikidata="Q3098650" start="874" end="889" title="Royal Engineers" label="Royal Engineers"/>
<link wikidata="Q152989" start="906" end="934" title="Western Front (World War I)" label="Western Front of World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q146720" start="1122" end="1126" title="Mandatory Iraq" label="Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q426759" start="1180" end="1205" title="League of Nations Mandate" label="League of Nations Mandate"/>
<link wikidata="Q192961" start="1239" end="1245" title="Ramadi" label="Ramadi"/>
<link wikidata="Q167510" start="1369" end="1376" title="bitumen" label="bitumen"/>
<link wikidata="Q44202" start="1454" end="1465" title="Arab Legion" label="Arab Legion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075753" start="1493" end="1515" title="Jordanian Armed Forces" label="Jordanian Armed Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q5263928" start="1554" end="1567" title="Desert Patrol" label="Desert Patrol"/>
<link wikidata="Q180688" start="1604" end="1611" title="Bedouin" label="Bedouin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3938020" start="1829" end="1842" title="Ikhwan revolt" label="Ikhwan revolt"/>
<link wikidata="Q551146" start="1870" end="1888" title="Frederick G. Peake" label="Frederick G. Peake"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="2026" end="2038" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q43056" start="2057" end="2061" title="Axis powers" label="Axis"/>
<link wikidata="Q16839559" start="2062" end="2069" title="Golden Square (Iraq)" label="aligned"/>
<link wikidata="Q149805" start="2085" end="2089" title="Kingdom of Iraq" label="Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q69808" start="2098" end="2103" title="Vichy France" label="Vichy"/>
<link wikidata="Q130842" start="2114" end="2121" title="Greater Lebanon" label="Lebanon"/>
<link wikidata="Q26234937" start="2126" end="2131" title="Mandatory Syrian Republic" label="Syria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1330695" start="2250" end="2270" title="Faris Glubb" label="Godfrey Peter Manley"/>
<link wikidata="Q76721" start="2302" end="2321" title="Godfrey of Bouillon" label="Godfrey of Bouillon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1218" start="2331" end="2340" title="Jerusalem" label="Jerusalem"/>
<link wikidata="Q180688" start="2445" end="2452" title="Bedouin" label="Bedouin"/>
<link wikidata="Q49092" start="2597" end="2618" title="1948 Arab–Israeli War" label="1948 Arab–Israeli War"/>
<link wikidata="Q36678" start="2760" end="2769" title="West Bank" label="West Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q41189" start="2837" end="2850" title="Jewish Agency" label="Jewish Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q192780" start="2855" end="2868" title="Abdullah I of Jordan" label="King Abdullah"/>
<link wikidata="Q2027138" start="2900" end="2911" title="Kfar Etzion massacre" label="Kfar Etzion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1218" start="2924" end="2933" title="Jerusalem" label="Jerusalem"/>
<link wikidata="Q2096397" start="2938" end="2944" title="Battle of Latrun" label="Latrun"/>
<link wikidata="Q790712" start="2975" end="2985" title="Avi Shlaim" label="Avi Shlaim"/>
<link wikidata="Q999143" start="3060" end="3069" title="1949 Armistice Agreements" label="armistice"/>
<link wikidata="Q146906" start="3150" end="3164" title="Hussein of Jordan" label="King Hussein I"/>
<link wikidata="Q379850" start="3414" end="3426" title="Baghdad Pact" label="Baghdad Pact"/>
<link wikidata="Q6752119" start="3556" end="3613" title="Arabization of the Jordanian Army command" label="dismissed Glubb and several other British senior officers"/>
<link wikidata="Q6901005" start="3952" end="3972" title="Monkton Combe School" label="Monkton Combe School"/>
<link wikidata="Q2684761" start="4027" end="4048" title="Mayfield, East Sussex" label="Mayfield, East Sussex"/>
<link wikidata="Q5933" start="4141" end="4158" title="Westminster Abbey" label="Westminster Abbey"/>
<link wikidata="Q5117216" start="4221" end="4255" title="St Dunstan&amp;#x27;s Church, Mayfield" label="St Dunstan&amp;#x27;s Church, Mayfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035359" start="4390" end="4422" title="St Antony&amp;#x27;s College, Oxford" label="St Antony&amp;#x27;s College, Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q14420" start="4457" end="4460" title="Order of the British Empire" label="OBE"/>
<link wikidata="Q585087" start="4470" end="4473" title="Order of St Michael and St George" label="CMG"/>
<link wikidata="Q506369" start="4487" end="4490" title="Knight Commander of the Order of the Bath" label="KCB"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542536" start="4630" end="4650" title="The Atlantic Monthly" label="The Atlantic Monthly"/>
<link wikidata="Q1699649" start="4676" end="4695" title="The National Review" label="The National Review"/>
<link wikidata="Q15846515" start="4719" end="4738" title="Saturday Review (US magazine)" label="The Saturday Review"/>
<link wikidata="Q217305" start="4805" end="4819" title="The New Yorker" label="The New Yorker"/>
<link wikidata="Q170596" start="5463" end="5477" title="T. E. Lawrence" label="T. E. Lawrence"/>
<link wikidata="Q449235" start="6191" end="6203" title="James Fenton" label="James Fenton"/>
<link wikidata="Q15130478" start="6651" end="6662" title="Henry Field (anthropologist)" label="Henry Field"/>
<link wikidata="Q14175176" start="6771" end="6793" title="Hodder &amp;amp; Stoughton" label="Hodder &amp;amp; Stoughton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2027138" start="8554" end="8574" title="Kfar Etzion massacre" label="Kfar Etzion massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1929123" start="8577" end="8609" title="Hadassah medical convoy massacre" label="Hadassah medical convoy massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q374803" start="9878" end="9891" title="Benny Morris" label="Morris, Benny"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="10704" end="10718" title="New York Times" label="New York Times"/>
</links>
</doc>
