<doc id="461026" wikidata="Q419529" url="?curid=461026" title="Ordination of women">
<text>The ordination of women to ministerial or priestly office is an increasingly common practice among some contemporary major religious groups. It remains a controversial issue in certain religious groups in which ordination was traditionally reserved for men.

In some cases, women have been permitted to be ordained, but not to hold higher positions, such as (until July 2014) that of bishop in the Church of England. Where laws prohibit sex discrimination in employment, exceptions are often made for clergy (for example, in the United States) on grounds of separation of church and state.

==Ancient pagan religions==

===Sumer and Akkad===

* Sumerian and Akkadian &quot;EN&quot; were top-ranking priestesses distinguished by special ceremonial attire and holding equal status to high priests. They owned property, transacted business, and initiated the &quot;hieros gamos&quot; ceremony with priests and kings. Enheduanna (2285–2250 BC), an Akkadian princess, was the first known holder of the title &quot;EN Priestess&quot;.
* &quot;Ishtaritu&quot; were temple prostitutes who specialized in the arts of dancing, music, and singing and served in the temples of Ishtar.
* Puabi was a &quot;NIN&quot;, an Akkadian priestess of Ur in the 26th century BC.
* &quot;Nadītu&quot;, sometimes described as priestesses in modern literature, are attested from various cities from the Old Babylonian period. They were recruited from various social groups, ranging from craftsmen to royal families, and were supposed to remain childless; they owned property and transacted business.
* In Sumerian epic texts such as Enmerkar and the Lord of Aratta, &quot;Nu-Gig&quot; were priestesses in temples dedicated to Inanna, or may be a reference to the goddess herself.
* &quot;Qadishtu&quot;, Hebrew &quot;Qedesha&quot; (קדשה) or &quot;Kedeshah&quot;, derived from the root Q-D-Š, are mentioned in the Hebrew Bible as sacred prostitutes usually associated with the goddess Asherah.

=== Ancient Egypt ===
In Ancient Egyptian religion, God&#x27;s Wife of Amun was the highest ranking priestess; this title was held by a daughter of the High Priest of Amun, during the reign of Hatshepsut, while the capital of Egypt was in Thebes during the second millennium BC (circa 2160 BC).

Later, Divine Adoratrice of Amun was a title created for the chief priestess of Amun. During the first millennium BC, when the holder of this office exercised her largest measure of influence, her position was an important appointment facilitating the transfer of power from one pharaoh to the next, when his daughter was &quot;adopted&quot; to fill it by the incumbent office holder. The Divine Adoratrice ruled over the extensive temple duties and domains, controlling a significant part of the ancient Egyptian economy.

Ancient Egyptian priestesses:
* Gautseshen
* Henutmehyt
* Henuttawy
* Hui
* Iset
* Karomama Meritmut
* Maatkare Mutemhat
* Meritamen
* Neferhetepes is the earliest attested priestess of Hathor.
* Neferure
* Tabekenamun a priestess of Hathor as well as a priestess of Neith.

===Ancient Greece===
In ancient Greek religion, some important observances, such as the Thesmophoria, were made by women. Priestesses, Hiereiai, served in many different cults of many divinities, with their duties varying depending on the cult and the divinity in which they served.

Priestesses played a major role in the Eleusinian Mysteries, in which they served on many levels, from the High Priestess of Demeter and Dadouchousa Prietess to the Panageis and Hierophantides. The Gerarai were priestesses of Dionysus who presided over festivals and rituals associated with the god.

A body of priestesses might also maintain the cult at a particular holy site, such as the Peleiades at the oracle of Dodona. The &quot;Arrephoroi&quot; were young girls ages seven to twelve who worked as servants of Athena Polias on the Athenian Acropolis and were charged with conducting unique rituals under the surveillance of the High Priestess of Athena Polias. The Priestess of Hera at Argos served at the Heraion of Argos and enjoyed great prestige in all Greece.

At several sites women priestesses served as oracles, the most famous of which is the Oracle of Delphi. The priestess of the Temple of Apollo at Delphi was the Pythia, credited throughout the Greco-Roman world for her prophecies, which gave her a prominence unusual for a woman in male-dominated ancient Greece. The Phrygian Sibyl presided over an oracle of Apollo in Anatolian Phrygia. The inspired speech of divining women, however, was interpreted by male priests; a woman might be a mantic &quot;(mantis)&quot; who became the mouthpiece of a deity through possession, but the &quot;prophecy of interpretation&quot; required specialized knowledge and was considered a rational process suited only to a male &#x27;&quot;prophet&quot; (&quot;prophētēs&quot;).

=== Ancient Rome ===

The Latin word &quot;sacerdos&quot;, &quot;priest&quot;, is the same for both the grammatical genders. In Roman state religion, the Vestal Virgins were responsible for the continuance and security of Rome as embodied by the sacred fire that they were required to tend on pain of extreme punishment. The Vestals were a college of six &quot;sacerdotes&quot; (plural) devoted to Vesta, goddess of the hearth, both the focus of a private home &quot;(domus)&quot; and the state hearth that was the center of communal religion. Freed of the usual social obligations to marry and rear children, the Vestals took a vow of chastity in order to devote themselves to the study and correct observance of state rituals that were off-limits to the male colleges of priests. They retained their religious authority until the Christian emperor Gratian confiscated their revenues and his successor Theodosius I closed the Temple of Vesta permanently.

The Romans also had at least two priesthoods that were each held jointly by a married couple, the &quot;rex&quot; and &quot;regina sacrorum&quot;, and the &quot;flamen&quot; and &quot;flaminica Dialis&quot;. The &quot;regina sacrorum&quot; (&quot;queen of the sacred rites&quot;) and the &quot;flaminica Dialis&quot; (high priestess of Jupiter) each had her own distinct duties and presided over public sacrifices, the &quot;regina&quot; on the first day of every month, and the &quot;flaminica&quot; every nundinal cycle (the Roman equivalent of a week). The highly public nature of these sacrifices, like the role of the Vestals, indicates that women&#x27;s religious activities in ancient Rome were not restricted to the private or domestic sphere. So essential was the gender complement to these priesthoods that if the wife died, the husband had to give up his office. This is true of the flaminate, and probably true of the &quot;rex&quot; and &quot;regina&quot;.

The title &quot;sacerdos&quot; was often specified in relation to a deity or temple, such as a &quot;sacerdos Cereris&quot; or &quot;Cerealis&quot;, &quot;priestess of Ceres&quot;, an office never held by men. Female &quot;sacerdotes&quot; played a leading role in the sanctuaries of Ceres and Proserpina in Rome and throughout Italy that observed so-called &quot;Greek rite&quot; (&quot;ritus graecus&quot;). This form of worship had spread from Sicily under Greek influence, and the Aventine cult of Ceres in Rome was headed by male priests. Only women celebrated the rites of the Bona Dea (&quot;Good Goddess&quot;), for whom &quot;sacerdotes&quot; are recorded. The Temple of Ceres in Rome was surved by the Priestess of Ceres, Sacerdos Cereris, and the Temple of Bona Dea by the Priestess of Bona Dea, Sacerdos Bonae Deae. Other Priestesses were the Sacerdos Liberi, Sacerdos Fortunae Muliebris and the Sacerdos Matris Deum Magnae Idaeae; sacerdos also served as priestesses of the Imperial cult.

From the Mid Republic onward, religious diversity became increasingly characteristic of the city of Rome. Many religions that were not part of Rome&#x27;s earliest state religion offered leadership roles as priests for women, among them the imported cult of Isis and of the &quot;Magna Mater&quot; (&quot;Great Mother&quot;, or Cybele). An epitaph preserves the title &quot;sacerdos maxima&quot; for a woman who held the highest priesthood of the Magna Mater&#x27;s temple near the current site of St. Peter&#x27;s Basilica. Inscriptions for the Imperial era record priestesses of Juno Populona and of deified women of the Imperial household.

Under some circumstances, when cults such as mystery religions were introduced to Romans, it was preferred that they be maintained by women. Although it was Roman practice to incorporate other religions instead of trying to eradicate them, the secrecy of some mystery cults was regarded with suspicion. In 189 BCE, the senate attempted to suppress the Bacchanals, claiming the secret rites corrupted morality and were a hotbed of political conspiracy. One provision of the senatorial decree was that only women should serve as priests of the Dionysian religion, perhaps to guard against the of the cult, since even Roman women who were citizens lacked the right to vote or hold political office. Priestesses of Liber, the Roman god identified with Dionysus, are mentioned by the 1st-century BC scholar Varro, as well as indicated by epigraphic evidence.

Other religious titles for Roman women include &quot;magistra&quot;, a high priestess, female expert or teacher; and &quot;ministra&quot;, a female assistant, particularly one in service to a deity. A &quot;magistra&quot; or &quot;ministra&quot; would have been responsible for the regular maintenance of a cult. Epitaphs provide the main evidence for these priesthoods, and the woman is often not identified in terms of her marital status.

== Buddhism ==

The tradition of the ordained monastic community in Buddhism (the sangha) began with the Buddha, who established an order of monks. According to the scriptures, later, after an initial reluctance, he also established an order of nuns. Fully ordained Buddhist nuns are called bhikkhunis. Mahapajapati Gotami, the aunt and foster mother of Buddha, was the first bhikkhuni; she was ordained in the sixth century BCE.

Prajñādhara is the twenty-seventh Indian Patriarch of Zen Buddhism and is believed to have been a woman.

In the Mahayana tradition during the 13th century, the Japanese Mugai Nyodai became the first female Zen master in Japan.

However, the bhikkhuni ordination once existing in the countries where Theravada is more widespread died out around the 10th century, and novice ordination has also disappeared in those countries. Therefore, women who wish to live as nuns in those countries must do so by taking eight or ten precepts. Neither laywomen nor formally ordained, these women do not receive the recognition, education, financial support or status enjoyed by Buddhist men in their countries. These &quot;precept-holders&quot; live in Burma, Cambodia, Laos, Nepal, and Thailand. In particular, the governing council of Burmese Buddhism has ruled that there can be no valid ordination of women in modern times, though some Burmese monks disagree. However, in 2003, Saccavadi and Gunasari were ordained as bhikkhunis in Sri Lanka, thus becoming the first female Burmese novices in modern times to receive higher ordination in Sri Lanka. Japan is a special case as, although it has neither the bhikkhuni nor novice ordinations, the precept-holding nuns who live there do enjoy a higher status and better training than their precept-holder sisters elsewhere, and can even become Zen priests. In Tibet there is currently no bhikkhuni ordination, but the Dalai Lama has authorized followers of the Tibetan tradition to be ordained as nuns in traditions that have such ordination.

The bhikkhuni ordination of Buddhist nuns has always been practiced in East Asia. In 1996, through the efforts of Sakyadhita, an International Buddhist Women Association, ten Sri Lankan women were ordained as bhikkhunis in Sarnath, India. Also, bhikkhuni ordination of Buddhist nuns began again in Sri Lanka in 1998 after a lapse of 900 years. In 2003 Ayya Sudhamma became the first American-born woman to receive bhikkhuni ordination in Sri Lanka.
Furthermore, on February 28, 2003, Dhammananda Bhikkhuni, formerly known as Chatsumarn Kabilsingh, became the first Thai woman to receive bhikkhuni ordination as a Theravada nun (Theravada is a school of Buddhism).
Dhammananda Bhikkhuni was ordained in Sri Lanka. Dhammananda Bhikkhuni&#x27;s mother Venerable Voramai, also called Ta Tao Fa Tzu, had become the first fully ordained Thai woman in the Mahayana lineage in Taiwan in 1971.

A 55-year-old Thai Buddhist 8-precept white-robed maechee nun, Varanggana Vanavichayen, became the first woman ordained as a monk in Thailand, in 2002. Since then, the Thai Senate has reviewed and revoked the secular law passed in 1928 banning women&#x27;s full ordination in Buddhism as unconstitutional for being counter to laws protecting freedom of religion. However Thailand&#x27;s two main Theravada Buddhist orders, the Mahanikaya and Dhammayutika Nikaya, have yet to officially accept fully ordained women into their ranks.

In 2009 in Australia four women received bhikkhuni ordination as Theravada nuns, the first time such ordination had occurred in Australia. It was performed in Perth, Australia, on 22 October 2009 at Bodhinyana Monastery. Abbess Vayama together with Venerables Nirodha, Seri, and Hasapanna were ordained as Bhikkhunis by a dual Sangha act of Bhikkhus and Bhikkhunis in full accordance with the Pali Vinaya.

In 1997 Dhamma Cetiya Vihara in Boston was founded by Ven. Gotami of Thailand, then a 10 precept nun; when she received full ordination in 2000, her dwelling became America&#x27;s first Theravada Buddhist bhikkhuni vihara. In 1998 Sherry Chayat, born in Brooklyn, became the first American woman to receive transmission in the Rinzai school of Buddhism. In 2006 Merle Kodo Boyd, born in Texas, became the first African-American woman ever to receive Dharma transmission in Zen Buddhism.
Also in 2006, for the first time in American history, a Buddhist ordination was held where an American woman (Sister Khanti-Khema) took the Samaneri (novice) vows with an American monk (Bhante Vimalaramsi) presiding. This was done for the Buddhist American Forest Tradition at the Dhamma Sukha Meditation Center in Missouri. In 2010 the first Tibetan Buddhist nunnery in America (Vajra Dakini Nunnery in Vermont) was officially consecrated. It offers novice ordination and follows the Drikung Kagyu lineage of Buddhism. The abbot of the Vajra Dakini nunnery is Khenmo Drolma, an American woman, who is the first bhikkhuni in the Drikung Kagyu lineage of Buddhism, having been ordained in Taiwan in 2002. She is also the first westerner, male or female, to be installed as an abbot in the Drikung Kagyu lineage of Buddhism, having been installed as the abbot of the Vajra Dakini Nunnery in 2004. The Vajra Dakini Nunnery does not follow The Eight Garudhammas. Also in 2010, in Northern California, four novice nuns were given the full bhikkhuni ordination in the Thai Theravada tradition, which included the double ordination ceremony. Bhante Gunaratana and other monks and nuns were in attendance. It was the first such ordination ever in the Western hemisphere. The following month, more bhikkhuni ordinations were completed in Southern California, led by Walpola Piyananda and other monks and nuns. The bhikkhunis ordained in Southern California were Lakshapathiye Samadhi (born in Sri Lanka), Cariyapanna, Susila, Sammasati (all three born in Vietnam), and Uttamanyana (born in Myanmar).

The first bhikkhuni ordination in Germany, the Theravada bhikkhuni ordination of German nun Samaneri Dhira, occurred on June 21, 2015, at Anenja Vihara.

The first Theravada ordination of bhikkhunis in Indonesia after more than a thousand years occurred in 2015 at Wisma Kusalayani in Lembang, Bandung. Those ordained included Vajiradevi Sadhika Bhikkhuni from Indonesia, Medha Bhikkhuni from Sri Lanka, Anula Bhikkhuni from Japan, Santasukha Santamana Bhikkhuni from Vietnam, Sukhi Bhikkhuni and Sumangala Bhikkhuni from Malaysia, and Jenti Bhikkhuni from Australia.

The official lineage of Tibetan Buddhist bhikkhunis recommenced on 23 June 2022 in Bhutan when 144 nuns, most of them Butanese, were fully ordained.

== Christianity ==
In the liturgical traditions of Christianity, including the Roman Catholic Church, Eastern and Oriental Orthodoxy, Lutheranism and Anglicanism, the term ordination refers more narrowly to the means by which a person is included in one of the orders of bishops, priests or deacons. Among these historic branches of Christianity, the episcopacy and priesthood have been reserved for men, although some argue that women have served as deacons in their own right and as apostles, though this is disputed by the Roman Catholic and other historic Christian churches. This is distinguished from the process of consecration to religious orders, namely nuns and monks, which are typically open to women and men. Some Protestant denominations understand ordination more generally as the acceptance of a person for pastoral work.

Historians Gary Macy, Kevin Madigan and Carolyn Osiek report having identified documented instances of ordained women in the early Church. In 2021, excavations at the site of a 1600-year-old Byzantine basilica revealed mosaics that provided evidence of women serving primarily as diaconal ministers in early Christendom, although there has been speculation of other females in ministry as leaders of convents. Additionally, Paul&#x27;s letter to the Romans, written in the first century AD, mentions a woman deacon:

In the late second century AD, the Montanist movement ordained women priests and bishops.

In 494 AD, in response to reports that women were serving at the altar in the south of Italy, Pope Gelasius I wrote a letter condemning female participation in the celebration of the Eucharist. However, according to O&#x27;Brien, he never specified the scriptural or theological foundation for restricting priesthood to men only. Several textual ambiguities and silences have resulted in a variety of contrasting interpretations. Roger Gryson asserts that it is &quot;difficult to form an idea of the situation which Pope Gelasius opposed&quot; and observes that &quot;it is regrettable that more details&quot; about the situation are not available.

The Protestant Reformation introduced the dogma that the authority of the Bible exceeds that of Roman Catholic popes and other church figures. Once the Roman Catholic hierarchy was no longer accepted as the sole authority, some denominations allowed women to preach. For example, George Fox founded the Quaker movement after stating he felt the &quot;inner light&quot; of Christ living in the believer was discovered in 1646. He believed that the inner light worked in women as well as in men, and said:

The ordination of women has once again been a controversial issue in more recent years with societal focus on social justice movements. Still, some Christians believe in an interpretation of the New Testament which would promote a division between roles of men and women in the Christian Church. Evangelical Christians who place emphasis on the infallibility of the Bible base their opposition to women&#x27;s ordination as deacons and pastors partly upon the writings of the Apostle Paul, such as Ephesians 5:23, 1 Timothy 2:11–15, and 1 Timothy 3:1–7, which they interpret as demanding male leadership in the Church. Some Evangelicals also look to the levitical priesthood and historic rabbinate, being male only. Other evangelical denominations officially authorize the full ordination of women in churches. Catholics may allude to Jesus Christ&#x27;s choice of disciples as evidence of his intention for an exclusively male apostolic succession, as laid down by early Christian writers such as Tertullian and reiterated in the 1976 &quot;Vatican Declaration on the Question of the Admission of Women to the Ministerial Priesthood&quot;.

Supporters of women&#x27;s ordination interpret the above-mentioned New Testament texts as being specific to certain social and church contexts and locations and addressing problems of church order in the early Church period. They regard Jesus as setting the example of treating women with respect, commending their faith and tasking them to tell others about him and Paul as treating women as his equals and co-workers. They point to notable female figures in the Bible such as Phoebe, Junia (considered an apostle by Paul) and others in Romans 16:1, the female disciples of Jesus, and the women at the crucifixion who were the first witnesses to the Resurrection of Christ, as supporting evidence of the importance of women as pastoral or episcopal leaders in the early Church.

=== Roman Catholic ===

The teaching of the Roman Catholic Church, as emphasized by Pope John Paul II in the apostolic letter , is &quot;that the Church has no authority whatsoever to confer priestly ordination on women and that this judgement is to be definitively held by all the Church&#x27;s faithful&quot;.

This teaching is embodied in the current canon law (1024) and the &quot;Catechism of the Catholic Church&quot; (1992), by the canonical statement: &quot;Only a baptized man () validly receives sacred ordination.&quot; Insofar as priestly and episcopal ordination are concerned, the Roman Catholic Church teaches that this requirement is a matter of divine law; it belongs to the deposit of faith and is unchangeable.

In 2007, the Holy See issued a decree stating that attempted ordination of a woman would result in automatic excommunication for the women and bishops attempting to ordain them, and in 2010, that attempted ordination of women is a &quot;grave delict&quot;.

An official Papal Commission ordered by Pope Francis in 2016 was charged with determining whether the ancient practice of having female deacons (deaconesses) is possible, provided they are non-ordained and that certain reserved functions of ordained male permanent or transitional deacons—proclaiming the Gospel at Mass, giving a homily, and performing non-emergency baptisms—would not be permitted for the discussed female diaconate. In October 2019, the Synod of Bishops for the Pan-Amazon region called for &quot;married priests, pope to reopen women deacons commission.&quot; Pope Francis later omitted discussion of the issue from the ensuing documents.

====Dissenters====

Various Catholics have written in favor of ordaining women. Dissenting groups advocating women&#x27;s ordination in opposition to Catholic teaching include Women&#x27;s Ordination Worldwide, Catholic Women&#x27;s Ordination, Roman Catholic Womenpriests, and Women&#x27;s Ordination Conference. Some cite the alleged ordination of Ludmila Javorová in Communist Czechoslovakia in 1970 by Bishop Felix Davídek (1921–1988), himself clandestinely consecrated due to the shortage of priests caused by state persecution, as a precedent. The Catholic Church treats attempted ordinations of women as invalid and automatically excommunicates all participants.&lt;ref name=&quot;http://www.catholicnewsagency.com&quot;&gt;&lt;/ref&gt;

=====Mariavites=====
Inspired by a mystically inclined nun, Feliksa Kozłowska, the Mariavite movement originally began as a response to the perceived corruption of the Roman Catholic Church in the Russian Partition of 19th century Poland. The Mariavites, so named for their devotion to the Virgin Mary, attracted numerous parishes across Mazovia and the region around Łódź and at their height numbered some 300,000 people. Fearing a schism, the established church authorities asked for intervention from the Vatican. The Mariavites were eventually excommunicated by Papal Bull in 1905 and 1906. Their clergy, cut loose from the Catholic Church, found sanctuary with the Old Catholic Church and in 1909 the first Mariavite bishop, Michael Kowalski, was consecrated in Utrecht. Twenty years later, the now constituted Mariavite Church was riven by policy differences and a leadership struggle. Nevertheless, Archbishop Kowalski ordained the first 12 nuns as priests in 1929. He also introduced priestly marriage. The split in the church took effect, in part, over the place of the feminine in theology and the role of women in the life of the church. By 1935, Kowalski had introduced a &quot;universal priesthood&quot; that extended the priestly office to selected members of the laity. The two Mariavite churches survive to this day. The successors of Kowalski, who are known as the Catholic Mariavite Church and are based in the town of Felicjanów in the Płock region of Poland, are headed by a bishop who is a woman, although their numbers are dwarfed by the adherents of the more conventionally patriarchal Mariavites of Płock.

=== Eastern Orthodox ===
The Eastern Orthodox Church follows a line of reasoning similar to that of the Roman Catholic Church with respect to the ordination of bishops and priests, and does not allow women&#x27;s ordination to those orders.

Thomas Hopko and Evangelos Theodorou have contended that female deacons were fully ordained in antiquity. K. K. Fitzgerald has followed and amplified Theodorou&#x27;s research. Metropolitan Kallistos Ware wrote:

On October 8, 2004, the Holy Synod of the Orthodox Church of Greece voted to permit the appointment of monastic deaconesses—women to minister and assist at the liturgy within their own monasteries. The document however does not use the term , although the rites that are to be used are rites of ordination of clergy.

=== Protestant ===

A justification given by many Protestants for female ministry is the fact that Mary Magdalene was chosen by Jesus to announce his resurrection to the apostles.

A key theological doctrine for Reformed and most other Protestants is the priesthood of all believers—a doctrine considered by them so important that it has been dubbed by some as &quot;a clarion truth of Scripture&quot;:

Most Protestant denominations require pastors, ministers, deacons, and elders to be formally ordained. The early Protestant reformer Martin Bucer, for instance, cited Ephesians 4 and other Pauline letters in support of this. While the process of ordination varies among the denominations and the specific church office to be held, it may require preparatory training such as seminary or Bible college, election by the congregation or appointment by a higher authority, and expectations of a lifestyle that requires a higher standard. For example, the &quot;Good News Translation&quot; of James 3:1 says, &quot;My friends, not many of you should become teachers. As you know, we teachers will be judged with greater strictness than others.&quot;
Usually, these roles were male preserves. However, Quakers, who have no ordained clergy, have had women preachers and leaders from their founding in the mid-17th century. Women&#x27;s ministry has been part of Methodist tradition in the UK for over 200 years. In the late 18th century in England, John Wesley allowed for female office-bearers and preachers. The Salvation Army has allowed the ordination of women since its beginning in 1865, although it was a hotly disputed topic between William and Catherine Booth. The fourth, thirteenth, and nineteenth Generals of the Salvation Army were women. Similarly, the Church of the Nazarene has ordained women since its foundation in 1908, at which time a full 25% of its ordained ministers were women.

Many Protestant denominations are committed to congregational governance and reserve the power to ordain ministers to local congregations. Because of this, if there is no denomination-wide prohibition on ordaining women, congregations may do so while other congregations of the same denomination might not consider doing likewise.

Since the 20th century an increasing number of Protestant Christian denominations have begun ordaining women. The Church of England appointed female lay readers during the First World War. Later the United Church of Canada in 1936 (Lydia Emelie Gruchy) and the American United Methodist Church in 1956 also began to ordain women. The first female Moderator of the United Church of Canada—a position open to both ministers and laypeople—was the Rev. Lois Miriam Wilson, who served 1980–1982.

In 1918, Alma Bridwell White, head of the Pillar of Fire Church, became the first woman to be ordained bishop in the United States.

Today, over half of all American Protestant denominations ordain women, but some restrict the official positions a woman can hold. For instance, some ordain women for the military or hospital chaplaincy but prohibit them from serving in congregational roles. Over one-third of all seminary students (and in some seminaries nearly half) are female.

====Lutheranism====

The Church of Denmark became the first Lutheran body to ordain women in 1948. The largest Lutheran churches in the United States and Canada, The Evangelical Lutheran Church in America (ELCA) and the Evangelical Lutheran Church in Canada (ELCIC), have been ordaining women since 1970. The Lutheran Church Missouri Synod, which also encompasses the Lutheran Church-Canada, does not ordain women; neither do the Lutheran Church - International, Wisconsin Evangelical Lutheran Synod or the Evangelical Lutheran Synod. The first local woman cleric ordained in the Holy Land was Sally Azar of the Lutheran church in 2023.

==== Anglican ====

In 1917 the Church of England licensed women as lay readers called bishop&#x27;s messengers, many of whom ran churches, but did not go as far as to ordain them.

From 1930 to 1978 the Anglican Group for the Ordination of Women to the Historic Ministry promoted the ordination of women in the Church of England.

Within Anglicanism the majority of provinces now ordain women as deacons and priests.

The first three women ordained as priests in the Anglican Communion were in Hong Kong: Li Tim-Oi in 1944 and Jane Hwang and Joyce M. Bennett in 1971.

On July 29, 1974, Bishops Daniel Corrigan, Robert L. DeWitt, and Edward R. Welles II of the U.S. Episcopal Church, with Bishop Antonio Ramos of Costa Rica, ordained eleven women as priests in a ceremony that was widely considered &quot;irregular&quot; because the women lacked &quot;recommendation from the standing committee&quot;, a canonical prerequisite for ordination. The &quot;Philadelphia Eleven&quot;, as they became known, were Merrill Bittner, Alison Cheek, Alla Bozarth (Campell), Emily C. Hewitt, Carter Heyward, Suzanne R. Hiatt (d. 2002), Marie Moorefield, Jeannette Piccard (d. 1981), Betty Bone Schiess, Katrina Welles Swanson ( 2006), and Nancy Hatch Wittig. Initially opposed by the House of Bishops, the ordinations received approval from the General Convention of the Episcopal Church in September 1976. This General Convention approved the ordination of women to both the priesthood and the episcopate.

Reacting to the action of the General Convention, clergy and laypersons opposed to the ordination of women to the priesthood met in convention at the Congress of St. Louis and attempted to form a rival Anglican church in the US and Canada. Despite the plans for a united North American church, the result was division into several Continuing Anglican churches, which now make up part of the Continuing Anglican movement.

The first woman to become a bishop in the Anglican Communion was Barbara Harris, who was elected a suffragan bishop in the Episcopal Diocese of Massachusetts in 1988 and ordained on February 11, 1989. The majority of Anglican provinces now permit the ordination of women as bishops, and as of 2014, women have served or are serving as bishops in the United States, Canada, New Zealand, Australia, Ireland, South Africa, South India, Wales, and in the extra provincial Episcopal Church of Cuba.

In the Church of England, Libby Lane became the first woman consecrated a bishop in 2015. It had ordained 32 women as its first female priests in March 1994. In 2015 Rachel Treweek was consecrated as the first female diocesan bishop in the Church of England (Diocese of Gloucester). She and Sarah Mullally, Bishop of Crediton, were the first women to be consecrated and ordained bishop in Canterbury Cathedral. Also that year Treweek became the first woman to sit in the House of Lords as a Lord Spiritual, thus making her at the time the most senior ordained woman in the Church of England.

On June 18, 2006, the Episcopal Church became the first Anglican province to elect a woman, the Most Rev. Katharine Jefferts Schori, as a primate (leader of an Anglican province), called the &quot;Presiding Bishop&quot; in the United States.

==== Methodism ====

Methodist views on the ordination of women in the rite of holy orders are diverse.

Today some Methodist denominations practice the ordination of women, such as in the United Methodist Church (UMC), in which the ordination of women has occurred since its creation in 1968, as well as in the Free Methodist Church (FMC), which ordained its first woman elder in 1911, in the Methodist Church of Great Britain, which ordained its first female deacon in 1890 and ordained its first female elders (that is, presbyters) in 1974, and in the Allegheny Wesleyan Methodist Connection, which ordained its first female elder in 1853, as well as the Bible Methodist Connection of Churches, which has always ordained women to the presbyterate and diaconate.

Other Methodist denominations do not ordain women, such as the Southern Methodist Church (SMC), Evangelical Methodist Church of America, Fundamental Methodist Conference, Evangelical Wesleyan Church (EWC), and Primitive Methodist Church (PMC), the latter two of which do not ordain women as elders nor do they license them as pastors or local preachers; the EWC and PMC do, however, consecrate women as deaconesses. Independent Methodist parishes that are registered with the Association of Independent Methodists do not permit the ordination of women to holy orders.

=====Church of the Nazarene=====
The Church of the Nazarene has ordained women since its foundation as a denomination in 1908, at which time fully 25% of its ordained ministers were women. According to the Church of the Nazarene Manual, &quot;The Church of the Nazarene supports the right of women to use their God-given spiritual gifts within the church, affirms the historic right of women to be elected and appointed to places of leadership within
the Church of the Nazarene, including the offices of both elder and deacon.&quot;

==== Religious Society of Friends ====
From their founding in the mid-17th century, Quakers have allowed women to preach. They believed that both genders are equally capable of inspiration by the Holy Spirit and thus there is a tradition of women preachers in Quaker Meetings from their earliest days. In order to be a preacher, a Friend had to obtain recognition by a Quaking Meeting. In the 18th century, ministers typically sat at the front of the meeting house, with women on one side and men on the other, all on the same raised platform.

Women ministers were active from the earliest days. In 1657, Mary Howgill, one of the Valiant Sixty (an early group of Quaker preachers), rebuked Oliver Cromwell for persecuting Quakers, saying, &quot;When thou givest account of all those actions, which have been acted by thee,[...] as my soul lives, these things will be laid to thy charge.&quot; Later, in 1704, Esther Palmer of Flushing, Long Island, and Susanna Freeborn of Newport, Rhode Island, set out on a 3,230 mile journey across eight colonies of North America, including visits to preach in Pennsylvania, Maryland, Virginia, and North Carolina.

Other well-known Quaker women preachers were Mary Lawson of Philadelphia, Mary Bannister of London, England, Mary Ellerton of York, England, Rachel Wilson of Virginia, Catharine Payton of Pennsylvania, Ann Moore of New York, Susanna Hatton of Delaware, and Mary Dyer of Boston.

====Baptist====
American Clarissa Danforth, a member of the Free Will Baptist tradition, was ordained a pastor in 1815, being the first woman Baptist pastor. Other ordinations of women pastors took place thereafter. In 1882 in the American Baptist Churches USA, in 1922 in the Baptist Union of Great Britain, in 1965 in the National Baptist Convention, USA, in 1969 in the Progressive National Baptist Convention, in 1978 in the Australian Baptist Ministries, and in 1980 in the Convention of Philippine Baptist Churches.

====Pentecostal====
The Assemblies of God of the United States accepted women&#x27;s ordination in 1927. In 1975, the ordination of women began in the International Church of the Foursquare Gospel, founded by female evangelist Aimee Semple McPherson. As Pentecostal churches are often independent, there is a variety of differing positions on the issue, with some of them appointing women as pastors and in other missional roles, and others not.

====Seventh-day Adventist====
According to its Working Policy, the Seventh-day Adventist (SDA) Church restricts certain positions of service and responsibility to those who have been ordained to the gospel ministry. The General Conference (GC) in session, the highest decision-making body of the church, has never approved the ordination of women as ministers, despite the significant foundational role and ongoing influence of a woman, Ellen G. White. Adventists have found no clear mandate or precedent for or against the practice of ordaining women in Scripture or in White&#x27;s writings. In recent years the ordination of women has been the subject of heated debate, especially in North America and Europe. In the Adventist church, candidates for ordination are recommended by local conferences (which usually administer 50–150 local congregations) and approved by union conferences (which administer 6–12 local conferences). The church&#x27;s Fundamental Beliefs and its worldwide practice as set forth in its Church Manual, including the worldwide qualifications for ordination currently restricted to men, can be revised only at a GC session.

In 1990, the GC session voted against a motion to establish a worldwide policy permitting the ordination of women. In 1995, GC delegates voted not to authorize any of the 13 world divisions to establish policies for ordaining women within its territory. After a delegate at the 2010 GC session recommended it, the GC administration on September 20, 2011 established the Theology of Ordination Study Committee, which included representatives from each of its 13 world division biblical research committees, to study the issue and prepare a recommendation for 2015 GC session. In October 2011 at its Annual Council meeting, the GC Executive Committee voted 167–117 against a request from the North American Division (NAD)—supported by the Trans-European Division—to permit persons (including women) with commissioned minister credentials to serve as local conference presidents. Later that month, the NAD ignored the GC action and voted to permit women with commissioned minister credentials to serve as conference presidents.

In the wake of the Annual Council vote, a small group of Adventists in the Southeastern California Conference (SECC) organized the Ordination Political Action Committee (OPAC) with the goal of bringing political pressure on the SECC leadership to unilaterally adopt the policy of pastoral ordination without regard to gender. The group launched the OPAC on January 1, 2012 with the stated intention of achieving its objective by March 31, 2012. After creating a comprehensive web site, a widely distributed petition, and a presence on various social media platforms and after holding multiple meetings with various groups, including SECC officials, the OPAC reached its goal on March 22, 2012, when the SECC Executive voted 19–2 to immediately implement the policy of ordaining pastors without regard to gender.

Meanwhile, early in 2012, the GC issued an analysis of church history and policy, demonstrating that worldwide divisions of the GC do not have the authority to establish policy different from that of the GC. However, in their analysis, the GC confirmed that the &quot;final responsibility and authority&quot; for approving candidates for ordination resides at the union conference level. Several union conferences subsequently voted to approve ordinations without regard to gender.

After achieving its initial objective in the SECC, the OPAC shifted its focus to the Pacific Union Conference (PUCon), which, by policy, must review and act on all ordination recommendations from its local conferences. For many years the PUCon had supported the concept of ordaining women pastors. It took up the matter again on March 15, 2012 but tabled any action until May 9, 2012, when it voted 42–2 to begin processing ministerial ordinations without regard to gender as soon as it could amend its bylaws. The vote also included the call for a constituency meeting on August 19, 2012, when it would consider such a bylaws change. The PUCon constituents voted 79% (334–87) to support this recommendation and amend the bylaws accordingly. Some local conferences within the PUCon began to implement the new policy immediately. By mid-2013, about 25 women had been ordained to the ministry in the Pacific Union Conference.

Stimulated at least in part by the international reach of the OPAC and even before it achieved its ultimate objective with the PUCon, other church administrative entities took similar actions. On April 23, 2012, the North German Union voted to ordain women as ministers but by late 2013 had not yet ordained a woman. On July 29, 2012, the Columbia Union Conference voted to &quot;authorize ordination without respect to gender&quot;. On May 12, 2013, the Danish Union voted to treat men and women ministers the same and to suspend all ordinations until after the topic would be considered at the next GC session in 2015. On May 30, 2013, the Netherlands Union voted to ordain female pastors, recognizing them as equal to their male colleagues and ordained its first female pastor on September 1, 2013. When Sandra Roberts was elected president of the SECC on October 27, 2013, she became the first SDA woman to serve as president of a local conference, However, the GC never recognized her in that role. Eight years later, Roberts was elected executive secretary of the Pacific Union Conference on August 16, 2021. On September 12, 2021, the Mid-America Union Conference Constituency voted 82% to authorize the ordination of women in ministry, becoming the third union conference in the NAD to do so.

At the 60th GC session in San Antonio on July 8, 2015, Seventh-day Adventists voted not to permit regional church bodies to ordain women pastors. The President of the GC, Ted N. C. Wilson, opened the morning session on the day of the vote with an appeal for all church members to abide by the vote&#x27;s outcome and underscored before and after the vote that decisions made by the GC in session carry the highest authority in the Adventist Church. Prior to the GC vote, dozens of delegates spoke for and against the question: &quot;After your prayerful study on ordination from the Bible, the writings of Ellen G. White, and the reports of the study commissions; and after your careful consideration of what is best for the church and the fulfillment of its mission, is it acceptable for division executive committees, as they may deem it appropriate in their territories, to make provision for the ordination of women to the gospel ministry?&quot; By secret ballot, the delegates passed the motion 1,381 to 977, with 5 abstentions, thus ending a five-year study process characterized by open, vigorous, and, sometimes, acrimonious debate.

===Philippine Independent Church===

The Philippine Independent Church is an independent Catholic church in the Philippines founded in 1902. It has approved women&#x27;s ordination since 1996. In 1997, it ordained its first female priest in the person of Rev. Rosalina Rabaria. , it has 30 women priests and 9 women deacons. On May 5, 2019, the church consecrated its first female bishop in the person of The Right Reverend Emelyn G. Dacuycuy and installed her as an ordinary of Batac Diocese, Ilocos Norte. According to Obispo Maximo XIII Rhee Timbang, the ordination of women has enabled the church to become more relevant to its time and to society.

=== Jehovah&#x27;s Witnesses ===
Jehovah&#x27;s Witnesses consider qualified public baptism to represent the baptizand&#x27;s ordination, following which he or she is immediately considered an ordained minister. In 1941, the Supreme Court of Vermont recognized the validity of this ordination for a female Jehovah&#x27;s Witness minister. The majority of Witnesses actively preaching from door to door are female. Women are commonly appointed as full-time ministers, either to evangelize as &quot;pioneers&quot; or missionaries, or to serve at their branch offices. Nevertheless, Witness deacons (&quot;ministerial servants&quot;) and elders must be male, and only a baptized adult male may perform a Jehovah&#x27;s Witness baptism, funeral, or wedding. Within the congregation, a female Witness minister may only lead prayer and teaching when there is a special need, and must do so wearing a head covering.

=== Mormonism ===
==== Community of Christ ====
The Community of Christ adopted the practice of women&#x27;s ordination in 1984, which was one of the reasons for the schism between the Community of Christ and the newly formed Restoration Branches movement, which was largely composed of members of the Community of Christ church (then known as the RLDS church) who refused to accept this development and other doctrinal changes taking place during this same period. For example, the Community of Christ also changed the name of one of its priesthood offices from evangelist-patriarch to evangelist, and its associated sacrament, the patriarchal blessing, to the evangelist&#x27;s blessing. In 1998, Gail E. Mengel and Linda L. Booth became the first two women apostles in the Community of Christ. At the 2007 World Conference of the church, Becky L. Savage was ordained as the first woman to serve in the First Presidency. In 2013, Booth became the first woman elected to serve as president of the Council of Twelve.

==== The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ====
The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints (LDS Church) does not ordain women. Some (most notably former LDS Church members D. Michael Quinn and Margaret Toscano) have argued that the church ordained women in the past and that therefore the church currently has the power to ordain women and should do so; however, there are no known records of any women having been ordained to the priesthood. Women do hold a prominent place in the church, including their work in the Relief Society, which is one of the largest and longest-lasting women&#x27;s organizations in the world. Women thus serve, as do men, in unpaid positions involving teaching, administration, missionary service, humanitarian efforts, and other capacities. Women often offer prayers and deliver sermons during Sunday services. Ordain Women, an activist group of mostly LDS Church women founded by feminist Kate Kelly in March 2013, supports extending priesthood ordinations to women.

=== Liberal Catholic ===
Of all the churches in the Liberal Catholic movement, only the original church, the Liberal Catholic Church under Bishop Graham Wale, does not ordain women. The position held by the Liberal Catholic Church is that the Church, even if it wanted to ordain women, does not have the authority to do so and that it would not be possible for a woman to become a priest even if she went through the ordination ceremony. The reasoning behind this belief is that the female body does not effectively channel the masculine energies of Christ, the true minister of all the sacraments. The priest has to be able to channel Christ&#x27;s energies to validly confect the sacrament; therefore the sex of the priest is a central part of the ceremony hence all priests must be male. When discussing the sacrament of Holy Orders in his book &quot;Science of the Sacraments&quot;, Second Presiding Bishop Leadbeater also opined that women could not be ordained; he noted that Christ left no indication that women can become priests and that only Christ can change this arrangement.

=== Old Catholic ===
On 19 February 2000, Denise Wyss became the first woman to be ordained as a priest in the Old Catholic Church.

== Hinduism ==

Female ascetics are referred as Sannyasinis, Yoginis, Brahmacharinis, Parivajikas, Pravrajitas, Sadhvis, Pravrajikas.

Bhairavi Brahmani is a guru of Sri Ramakrishna. She initiated Ramakrishna into Tantra. Under her guidance, Ramakrishna went through sixty four major tantric sadhanas which were completed in 1863.

Ramakrishna Sarada Mission is the modern 21st century monastic order for women. The order was conducted under the guidance of the Ramakrishna monks until 1959, at which time it became entirely independent. It currently has centers in various parts of India, and also in Sydney, Australia.

Furthermore, both men and women are Hindu gurus. Shakti Durga, formerly known as Kim Fraser, was Australia&#x27;s first female guru.

== Islam ==

Although Muslims do not formally ordain religious leaders, the imam serves as a spiritual leader and religious authority. There is a current controversy among Muslims on the circumstances in which women may act as imams—that is, lead a congregation in salat (prayer). Three of the four Sunni schools, as well as many Shia, agree that a woman may lead a congregation consisting of women alone in prayer, although the Maliki school does not allow this. According to all currently existing traditional schools of Islam, a woman cannot lead a mixed gender congregation in salat (prayer). Some schools make exceptions for Tarawih (optional Ramadan prayers) or for a congregation consisting only of close relatives. Certain medieval scholars—including Al-Tabari (838–932), Abu Thawr (764–854), Al-Muzani (791–878), and Ibn Arabi (1165–1240)—considered the practice permissible at least for optional (nafila) prayers; however, their views are not accepted by any major surviving group. Islamic feminists have begun to protest this.

Women&#x27;s mosques, called nusi, and female imams have existed since the 19th century in China and continue today.

In 1994, Amina Wadud (an Islamic studies professor at Virginia Commonwealth University, born in the United States), became the first woman in South Africa to deliver the jum&#x27;ah khutbah (Friday sermon), which she did at the Claremont Main Road Mosque in Cape Town, South Africa.

In 2004 20-year-old Maryam Mirza delivered the second half of the &quot;Eid al-Fitr&quot; khutbah at the Etobicoke mosque in Toronto, Ontario, Canada, run by the United Muslim Association.

In 2004, in Canada, Yasmin Shadeer led the night &#x27;Isha prayer for a mixed-gender (men as well as women praying and hearing the sermon) congregation. This is the first recorded occasion in modern times where a woman led a congregation in prayer in a mosque.

On March 18, 2005, Amina Wadud gave a sermon and led Friday prayers for a Muslim congregation consisting of men as well as women, with no curtain dividing the men and women. Another woman, Suheyla El-Attar, sounded the call to prayer while not wearing a headscarf at that same event. This was done in the Synod House of the Cathedral of St. John the Divine in New York after mosques refused to host the event. This was the first known time that a woman had led a mixed-gender Muslim congregation in prayer in American history.

In April 2005, Raheel Raza, born in Pakistan, led Toronto&#x27;s first woman-led mixed-gender Friday prayer service, delivering the sermon and leading the prayers of the mixed-gender congregation organized by the Muslim Canadian Congress to celebrate Earth Day in the backyard of the downtown Toronto home of activist Tarek Fatah.

On July 1, 2005, Pamela Taylor, co-chair of the New York-based Progressive Muslim Union and a Muslim convert since 1986, became the first woman to lead Friday prayers in a Canadian mosque, and did so for a congregation of both men and women. In addition to leading the prayers, Taylor also gave a sermon on the importance of equality among people regardless of gender, race, sexual orientation and disability.

In October 2005, Amina Wadud led a mixed gender Muslim congregational prayer in Barcelona.

In 2008, Pamela Taylor gave the Friday &quot;khutbah&quot; and led the mixed-gender prayers in Toronto at the UMA mosque at the invitation of the Muslim Canadian Congress on Canada Day.&lt;ref name=&quot;Source: 12/02/2008 4:30 pm&quot;&gt;&lt;/ref&gt;

On 17 October 2008, Amina Wadud became the first woman to lead a mixed-gender Muslim congregation in prayer in the United Kingdom when she performed the Friday prayers at Oxford&#x27;s Wolfson College.

In 2010, Raheel Raza became the first Muslim-born woman to lead a mixed-gender British congregation through Friday prayers.

In 2014, Afra Jalabi, a Syrian Canadian journalist and peace advocate delivered &quot;Eid ul-Adha&quot; khutbah at Noor cultural centre in Toronto, Canada.

== Judaism ==


While several women engaged in the Torah and Talmudic study associated with rabbinic study in the middle ages, women were not ordained until the twentieth century. A possible exception is Asenath Barzani of Iraq, who is considered by some scholars as the first woman rabbi of Jewish history. The title referred to Barzani by the Jews of Afghanistan was &quot;Tannit&quot;, the feminine equivalent of Tanna, the title for a Jewish sage of the early Talmudic rabbis. According to some researchers, the origin of the Barzani story is the travelogue of Rabbi Petachiah of Regensburg. Another exception is the female Hasidic rebbe, Hannah Rachel Verbermacher, also known as the Maiden of Ludmir, active in the 19th century.

In 1935 Regina Jonas was ordained privately by a German rabbi and became the world&#x27;s first female rabbi. In the mid-20th century, American Jewish movements began ordaining women. Sally Priesand became the first female rabbi in Reform Judaism in 1972; 
Sandy Eisenberg Sasso became the first female rabbi in Reconstructionist Judaism in 1974; Lynn Gottlieb became the first female rabbi in Jewish Renewal in 1981;
Amy Eilberg became the first female rabbi in Conservative Judaism in 1985;
and Tamara Kolton became the very first rabbi of either sex (and therefore, since she was female, the first female rabbi) in Humanistic Judaism in 1999. Women in Conservative, Reform, Reconstructionist, Renewal, and Humanistic Judaism are routinely granted semicha (ordination) on an equal basis with men.

In June 2009, Avi Weiss ordained Sara Hurwitz with the title &quot;maharat&quot; (an acronym of &quot;manhiga hilkhatit rukhanit Toranit&quot;) rather than &quot;Rabbi&quot;. In February 2010, Weiss announced that he was changing Maharat to a more familiar-sounding title &quot;Rabba&quot;. The goal of this shift was to clarify Hurwitz&#x27;s position as a full member of the Hebrew Institute of Riverdale rabbinic staff. The change was criticised by both Agudath Yisrael and the Rabbinical Council of America, who called the move &quot;beyond the pale of Orthodox Judaism&quot;. Weiss announced amidst criticism that the term &quot;Rabba&quot; would not be used anymore for his future students. Also in 2009, Weiss founded Yeshivat Maharat, a school which &quot;is dedicated to giving Orthodox women proficiency in learning and teaching Talmud, understanding Jewish law and its application to everyday life as well as the other tools necessary to be Jewish communal leaders&quot;. Maharat alumnae take a variety of titles upon ordination, including Maharat, Rabba, and Rabbanit. In 2015, Lila Kagedan was ordained as Rabbi by that same organization, making her their first graduate to take the title Rabbi. Hurwitz continues to use the title Rabba and is considered by some to be the first female Orthodox rabbi.

In the fall of 2015 Rabbinical Council of America passed a resolution which states, &quot;RCA members with positions in Orthodox institutions may not ordain women into the Orthodox rabbinate, regardless of the title used; or hire or ratify the hiring of a woman into a rabbinic position at an Orthodox institution; or allow a title implying rabbinic ordination to be used by a teacher of Limudei Kodesh in an Orthodox institution.&quot; Similarly in the fall of 2015 Agudath Israel of America denounced moves to ordain women, and went even further, declaring Yeshivat Maharat, Yeshivat Chovevei Torah, Open Orthodoxy, and other affiliated entities to be similar to other dissident movements throughout Jewish history in having rejected basic tenets of Judaism.

Only men can become cantors (also called hazzans) in most of Orthodox Judaism, but all other types of Judaism allow and have female cantors. In 1955 Betty Robbins, born in Greece, became the world&#x27;s first female cantor when she was appointed cantor of the Reform congregation of Temple Avodah in Oceanside, New York, in July.
Barbara Ostfeld-Horowitz became the first female cantor to be ordained in Reform Judaism in 1975.
Erica Lippitz and Marla Rosenfeld Barugel became the first female cantors in Conservative Judaism in 1987.
However, the Cantors Assembly, a professional organization of cantors associated with Conservative Judaism, did not allow women to join until 1990. In 2001 Deborah Davis became the first cantor of either sex (and therefore, since she was female, the first female cantor) in Humanistic Judaism, although Humanistic Judaism has since stopped graduating cantors. Sharon Hordes became the first cantor of either sex (and therefore, since she was female, the first female cantor) in Reconstructionist Judaism in 2002. Avitall Gerstetter, who lives in Germany, became the first female cantor in Jewish Renewal (and the first female cantor in Germany) in 2002. Susan Wehle became the first American female cantor in Jewish Renewal in 2006; however, she died in 2009. The first American women to be ordained as cantors in Jewish Renewal after Wehle&#x27;s ordination were Michal Rubin and Abbe Lyons, both ordained on January 10, 2010.

In 2019, Jewish Orthodox Feminist Alliance created an initiative to support the hiring of female Jewish spiritual leaders and has released a statement supporting the ordination and hiring of women with the title Rabbi at Orthodox synagogues. Open Orthodox Jewish women can become cantors and rabbis.

== Ryukyuan religion ==
The indigenous religion of the Ryukyuan Islands in Japan is led by female priests; this makes it the only known official mainstream religion of a society led by women.

== Shinto ==
In Shintoism, &quot;Saiin&quot; (斎院, saiin?) were unmarried female relatives of the Japanese emperor who served as high priestesses at Ise Grand Shrine from the late 7th century until the 14th century. Ise Grand Shrine is a Shinto shrine dedicated to the goddess Amaterasu-ōmikami. &quot;Saiin&quot; priestesses were usually elected from royalty (内親王, &quot;naishinnō&quot;) such as princesses (女王, &quot;joō&quot;). In principle, &quot;Saiin&quot; remained unmarried, but there were exceptions. Some &quot;Saiin&quot; became consorts of the Emperor, called Nyōgo in Japanese. According to the Man&#x27;yōshū (The Anthology of Ten Thousand Leaves), the first &quot;Saiō&quot; to serve at Ise Grand Shrine was Princess Ōku, daughter of Emperor Tenmu, during the Asuka period of Japanese history.

Female Shinto priests were largely pushed out of their positions in 1868. The ordination of women as Shinto priests arose again during World War II. See also Miko.

== Sikhism ==
Sikhism does not have priests, which were abolished by Guru Gobind Singh, as the guru had seen that institution become corrupt in society during his time. Instead, he appointed the Guru Granth Sahib, the Sikh holy book, as his successor as Guru instead of a possibly fallible human. Due to the faith&#x27;s belief in complete equality, women can participate in any religious function, perform any Sikh ceremony or lead the congregation in prayer. A Sikh woman has the right to become a &quot;Granthi&quot;, &quot;Ragi&quot;, and one of the &quot;Panj Piare&quot; (five beloved) and both men and women are considered capable of reaching the highest levels of spirituality.

== Taoism ==

Taoists ordain both men and women as priests. In 2009 Wu Chengzhen became the first female &quot;fangzhang&quot; (principal abbot) in Taoism&#x27;s 1,800-year history after being enthroned at Changchun Temple in Wuhan, capital of Hubei province, in China. &quot;Fangzhang&quot; is the highest position in a Taoist temple.

== Wicca ==
In Wicca, as many women are ordained as men. Many traditions elevate the importance of women over that of men and women are frequently leaders of covens. Members are typically considered Priests and Priestesses when they are given the rite of Initiation within the coven, though some may choose to undergo additional training to become High Priestess who often has the final say in matters and who may choose who can be her High Priest. Some, who have gone through enough experience, may leave to create their own coven.

== Yoruba ==
The Yoruba people of western Nigeria practice an indigenous religion with a religious hierarchy of priests and priestesses that dates to 800–1000 CE. Ifá Oracle priests and priestesses bear the titles &quot;Babalawo&quot; and &quot;Iyanifa&quot; respectively. Priests and priestesses of the varied &quot;Orisha&quot;, when not already bearing the higher ranked oracular titles mentioned above, are referred to as &quot;babalorisa&quot; when male and &quot;iyalorisa&quot; when female. Initiates are also given an Orisa or Ifá name that signifies under which deity they are initiated; for example a priestess of Oshun may be named &quot;Osunyemi&quot; and a priest of &quot;Ifá&quot; may be named &quot;Ifáyemi&quot;.

== Zoroastrianism ==
Zoroastrian priests in India are required to be male. However, women have been ordained in Iran and North America as mobedyars, meaning women mobeds (Zoroastrian priests). In 2011 the Tehran Mobeds Anjuman (Anjoman-e-Mobedan) announced that for the first time in Iran and of the Zoroastrian communities worldwide, women had joined the group of mobeds (priests) in Iran as mobedyars (women priests); the women hold official certificates and can perform the lower-rung religious functions including initiating people into the religion.
==See also==

* Buddhist feminism
* Christian views of women
* Christian feminism
* Deaconess
* Feminist theology
* Islamic feminism
* Jewish feminism
* List of ordained Christian women
* List of the first 32 women ordained as Church of England priests
* List of the first women ordained as priests in the Anglican Church of Australia in 1992
* Mormon feminism
* Ordination of women in Protestant denominations
* Timeline of women hazzans in America
* Timeline of women hazzans
*Timeline of women in religion
* Timeline of women in religion in the United States
* Timeline of women rabbis in America
* Timeline of women rabbis
* Women as imams
* Women as theological figures
* Women in the Bible
* Women in Judaism
* Women rabbis

== Notes ==
==References==
==Further reading==
* Canon Law Society of America. &quot;The Canonical Implications of Ordaining Women to the Permanent Diaconate,&quot; 1995. .
* Davies, J. G. &quot;Deacons, Deaconesses, and Minor Orders in the Patristic Period,&quot; &quot;Journal of Ecclesiastical History,&quot; 1963, v. 14, p. 1–23.
* Elsen, Ute E. &quot;Women Officeholders in Early Christianity: Epigraphical and Literary Studies,&quot; Liturgical Press, 2000. .
* Grudem, Wayne. &quot;Evangelical Feminism and Biblical Truth: An Analysis of Over 100 Disputed Questions&quot;, Multnomah Press, 2004. 1-57673-840-X.
* Gryson, Roger. &quot;The Ministry of Women in the Early Church,&quot; Liturgical Press, 1976. . Translation of: &quot;Le ministère des femmes dans l&#x27;Église ancienne,&quot; J. Duculot, 1972.
* LaPorte, Jean. &quot;The Role of Women in Early Christianity,&quot; Edwin Mellen Press, 1982. .
* Madigan, Kevin, and Carolyn Osiek. &quot;Ordained Women in the Early Church: A Documentary History,&quot; Johns Hopkins University Press, 2005. .
* Martimort, Aimé Georges, &quot;Deaconesses: An Historical Study,&quot; Ignatius Press, 1986, . Translation of: &quot;Les Diaconesses: Essai Historique,&quot; Edizioni Liturgiche, 1982.
* McGrath, Elsie Hainz (Editor), Meehan, Bridget Mary (Editor), and Raming, Ida (Editor). &quot;Women Find a Way: The Movement and Stories of Roman Catholic Womenpriests,&quot; Virtualbookworm.com Publishing, 2008. .
* Miller, Patricia Cox. &quot;Women in Early Christianity: Translations from Greek Texts,&quot; Catholic University America Press, 2005. .
* Nadell, Pamela. &quot;Women Who Would Be Rabbis: A History of Women&#x27;s Ordination, 1889–1985,&quot; Beacon Press, 1998. .
* Sered, Susan. &quot;Women of the Sacred Groves: Divine Priestesses of Okinawa,&quot; Oxford University Press, 1999. .
* Spaeth, Barbette Stanley. &quot;The Roman goddess Ceres&quot;, University of Texas Press, 1996.
* Tisdale, Sallie. &quot;Women of the Way: Discovering 2,500 Years of Buddhist Wisdom,&quot; HarperOne, 2006. 
* Weaver, Mary Jo. &quot;New Catholic Women,&quot; Harper and Row, 1985, 1986. .
* Wijngaards, John, &quot;The Ordination of Women in the Catholic Church. Unmasking a Cuckoo&#x27;s Egg Tradition&quot;, Darton, Longman &amp; Todd, 2001. ; Continuum, New York, 2001. .
* Wijngaards, John. &quot;Women Deacons in the Early Church: Historical Texts and Contemporary Debates,&quot; Herder &amp; Herder, 2002, 2006. .**NO WOMEN IN HOLY ORDERS? The women deacons of the Early Church
* Winter, Miriam. &quot;Out of the Depths: The Story of Ludmila Javorova, Ordained Roman Catholic Priest,&quot; Crossroad General Interest, 2001. .
* Zagano, Phyllis. &quot;Holy Saturday: An Argument for the Restoration of the Female Diaconate in the Catholic Church,&quot; Herder &amp; Herder, 2000. .
* Zagano, Phyllis. &quot;Catholic Women Deacons: Present Tense,&quot; &quot; Worship&quot; 77:5 (September 2003) 386–408.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q419529" start="4" end="23" title="Ordination of women" label="ordination of women"/>
<link wikidata="Q1423891" start="27" end="38" title="Minister of religion" label="ministerial"/>
<link wikidata="Q42603" start="42" end="48" title="priest" label="priest"/>
<link wikidata="Q6957341" start="117" end="139" title="major religious groups" label="major religious groups"/>
<link wikidata="Q7519600" start="211" end="221" title="ordination" label="ordination"/>
<link wikidata="Q29182" start="384" end="390" title="bishop" label="bishop"/>
<link wikidata="Q82708" start="398" end="415" title="Church of England" label="Church of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q221810" start="437" end="469" title="Anti-discrimination law" label="sex discrimination in employment"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="529" end="542" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q17166064" start="558" end="588" title="Separation of church and state in the United States" label="separation of church and state"/>
<link wikidata="Q35355" start="645" end="650" title="Sumer" label="Sumer"/>
<link wikidata="Q4461035" start="658" end="666" title="Akkadian Empire" label="Akkadian"/>
<link wikidata="Q938705" start="673" end="675" title="EN (cuneiform)" label="EN"/>
<link wikidata="Q1334402" start="862" end="874" title="hieros gamos" label="hieros gamos"/>
<link wikidata="Q232505" start="914" end="924" title="Enheduanna" label="Enheduanna"/>
<link wikidata="Q272523" start="1165" end="1171" title="Ishtar" label="Ishtar"/>
<link wikidata="Q258078" start="1175" end="1180" title="Puabi" label="Puabi"/>
<link wikidata="Q749679" start="1193" end="1196" title="NIN (cuneiform)" label="NIN"/>
<link wikidata="Q5699" start="1229" end="1231" title="Ur" label="Ur"/>
<link wikidata="Q390970" start="1264" end="1270" title="Nadītu" label="Nadītu"/>
<link wikidata="Q989784" start="1607" end="1638" title="Enmerkar and the Lord of Aratta" label="Enmerkar and the Lord of Aratta"/>
<link wikidata="Q272523" start="1700" end="1706" title="Inanna" label="Inanna"/>
<link wikidata="Q205985" start="1737" end="1744" title="goddess" label="goddess"/>
<link wikidata="Q3412273" start="1859" end="1864" title="Q-D-Š" label="Q-D-Š"/>
<link wikidata="Q732870" start="1887" end="1899" title="Hebrew Bible" label="Hebrew Bible"/>
<link wikidata="Q1413317" start="1903" end="1921" title="sacred prostitution" label="sacred prostitutes"/>
<link wikidata="Q83975" start="1958" end="1965" title="Asherah" label="Asherah"/>
<link wikidata="Q447131" start="1993" end="2018" title="Ancient Egyptian religion" label="Ancient Egyptian religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q14942945" start="2020" end="2043" title="God&amp;#x27;s Wife of Amun" label="God&amp;#x27;s Wife of Amun"/>
<link wikidata="Q42603" start="2068" end="2074" title="priest" label="priest"/>
<link wikidata="Q376262" start="2120" end="2139" title="High Priest of Amun" label="High Priest of Amun"/>
<link wikidata="Q129234" start="2161" end="2171" title="Hatshepsut" label="Hatshepsut"/>
<link wikidata="Q79" start="2194" end="2199" title="Egypt" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q101583" start="2207" end="2213" title="Thebes (Egypt)" label="Thebes"/>
<link wikidata="Q897988" start="2271" end="2296" title="Divine Adoratrice of Amun" label="Divine Adoratrice of Amun"/>
<link wikidata="Q58373" start="2344" end="2348" title="Amun" label="Amun"/>
<link wikidata="Q37110" start="2543" end="2550" title="pharaoh" label="pharaoh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1008578" start="2820" end="2830" title="Gautseshen" label="Gautseshen"/>
<link wikidata="Q5731481" start="2833" end="2843" title="Henutmehyt" label="Henutmehyt"/>
<link wikidata="Q367338" start="2846" end="2855" title="Henuttawy (priestess)" label="Henuttawy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1056277" start="2858" end="2861" title="Hui (priestess)" label="Hui"/>
<link wikidata="Q478519" start="2864" end="2868" title="Iset (priestess)" label="Iset"/>
<link wikidata="Q1104959" start="2871" end="2888" title="Karomama Meritmut" label="Karomama Meritmut"/>
<link wikidata="Q460961" start="2891" end="2908" title="Maatkare Mutemhat" label="Maatkare Mutemhat"/>
<link wikidata="Q719318" start="2911" end="2920" title="Meritamen (daughter of Thutmose III)" label="Meritamen"/>
<link wikidata="Q946490" start="2923" end="2935" title="Neferhetepes" label="Neferhetepes"/>
<link wikidata="Q105036655" start="2961" end="2980" title="priestess of Hathor" label="priestess of Hathor"/>
<link wikidata="Q242405" start="2984" end="2992" title="Neferure" label="Neferure"/>
<link wikidata="Q3512749" start="2995" end="3006" title="Tabekenamun" label="Tabekenamun"/>
<link wikidata="Q191815" start="3042" end="3060" title="priestess of Neith" label="priestess of Neith"/>
<link wikidata="Q855270" start="3087" end="3109" title="ancient Greek religion" label="ancient Greek religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1029939" start="3151" end="3163" title="Thesmophoria" label="Thesmophoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q52581815" start="3198" end="3206" title="Hiereiai" label="Hiereiai"/>
<link wikidata="Q26314" start="3386" end="3406" title="Eleusinian Mysteries" label="Eleusinian Mysteries"/>
<link wikidata="Q108917605" start="3454" end="3479" title="High Priestess of Demeter" label="High Priestess of Demeter"/>
<link wikidata="Q26314" start="3484" end="3504" title="Dadouchousa Prietess" label="Dadouchousa Prietess"/>
<link wikidata="Q26314" start="3512" end="3520" title="Panageis" label="Panageis"/>
<link wikidata="Q26314" start="3525" end="3539" title="Hierophantides" label="Hierophantides"/>
<link wikidata="Q5549897" start="3545" end="3552" title="Gerarai" label="Gerarai"/>
<link wikidata="Q41680" start="3573" end="3581" title="Dionysus" label="Dionysus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2524852" start="3738" end="3747" title="Peleiades" label="Peleiades"/>
<link wikidata="Q382317" start="3765" end="3771" title="Dodona" label="Dodona"/>
<link wikidata="Q699467" start="3783" end="3793" title="Arrephoroi" label="Arrephoroi"/>
<link wikidata="Q54128" start="3852" end="3860" title="servants" label="servants"/>
<link wikidata="Q37122" start="3864" end="3877" title="Athena Polias" label="Athena Polias"/>
<link wikidata="Q131013" start="3885" end="3903" title="Athenian Acropolis" label="Athenian Acropolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q76444992" start="3982" end="4013" title="High Priestess of Athena Polias" label="High Priestess of Athena Polias"/>
<link wikidata="Q85373960" start="4019" end="4045" title="Priestess of Hera at Argos" label="Priestess of Hera at Argos"/>
<link wikidata="Q1607754" start="4060" end="4076" title="Heraion of Argos" label="Heraion of Argos"/>
<link wikidata="Q217123" start="4165" end="4171" title="oracle" label="oracle"/>
<link wikidata="Q220344" start="4206" end="4222" title="Oracle of Delphi" label="Oracle of Delphi"/>
<link wikidata="Q75459" start="4265" end="4271" title="Delphi" label="Delphi"/>
<link wikidata="Q220344" start="4280" end="4286" title="Pythia" label="Pythia"/>
<link wikidata="Q937284" start="4312" end="4329" title="Greco-Roman world" label="Greco-Roman world"/>
<link wikidata="Q214267" start="4338" end="4348" title="prophecies" label="prophecies"/>
<link wikidata="Q11772" start="4416" end="4430" title="ancient Greece" label="ancient Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q928835" start="4436" end="4450" title="Phrygian Sibyl" label="Phrygian Sibyl"/>
<link wikidata="Q51614" start="4488" end="4496" title="Anatolia" label="Anatolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q32579" start="4498" end="4505" title="Phrygia" label="Phrygia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4925" end="4933" title="Glossary of ancient Roman religion#sacerdos" label="sacerdos"/>
<link wikidata="Q162378" start="4986" end="5004" title="grammatical gender" label="grammatical gender"/>
<link wikidata="Q337547" start="5010" end="5030" title="Religion in ancient Rome" label="Roman state religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q188761" start="5036" end="5050" title="Vestal Virgins" label="Vestal Virgins"/>
<link wikidata="Q2237621" start="5222" end="5229" title="Collegium (ancient Rome)" label="college"/>
<link wikidata="Q178710" start="5280" end="5285" title="Vesta (god)" label="Vesta"/>
<link wikidata="Q205985" start="5287" end="5294" title="goddess" label="goddess"/>
<link wikidata="Q782970" start="5350" end="5355" title="domus" label="domus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3756454" start="5371" end="5424" title="sacred fire of Vesta" label="state hearth that was the center of communal religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q207894" start="5518" end="5526" title="chastity" label="chastity"/>
<link wikidata="Q189108" start="5732" end="5739" title="Gratian" label="Gratian"/>
<link wikidata="Q46696" start="5785" end="5797" title="Theodosius I" label="Theodosius I"/>
<link wikidata="Q753791" start="5809" end="5824" title="Temple of Vesta" label="Temple of Vesta"/>
<link wikidata="Q427972" start="5943" end="5946" title="rex sacrorum" label="rex"/>
<link wikidata="Q427972" start="5963" end="5978" title="regina sacrorum" label="regina sacrorum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1426927" start="6000" end="6006" title="flamen Dialis" label="flamen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1426927" start="6023" end="6039" title="flaminica Dialis" label="flaminica Dialis"/>
<link wikidata="Q4649" start="6175" end="6182" title="Jupiter (mythology)" label="Jupiter"/>
<link wikidata="Q282162" start="6284" end="6308" title="Kalends" label="first day of every month"/>
<link wikidata="Q2066849" start="6346" end="6360" title="nundinal cycle" label="nundinal cycle"/>
<link wikidata="Q85109905" start="6911" end="6927" title="sacerdos Cereris" label="sacerdos Cereris"/>
<link wikidata="Q32102" start="6978" end="6983" title="Ceres (mythology)" label="Ceres"/>
<link wikidata="Q14515330" start="7104" end="7114" title="Proserpina" label="Proserpina"/>
<link wikidata="Q3373229" start="7198" end="7211" title="ritus graecus" label="ritus graecus"/>
<link wikidata="Q790520" start="7295" end="7308" title="Aventine Triad" label="Aventine cult"/>
<link wikidata="Q724896" start="7393" end="7401" title="Bona Dea" label="Bona Dea"/>
<link wikidata="Q85109905" start="7542" end="7558" title="Sacerdos Cereris" label="Sacerdos Cereris"/>
<link wikidata="Q105036663" start="7617" end="7636" title="Sacerdos Bonae Deae" label="Sacerdos Bonae Deae"/>
<link wikidata="Q105036656" start="7665" end="7680" title="Sacerdos Liberi" label="Sacerdos Liberi"/>
<link wikidata="Q105036658" start="7682" end="7709" title="Sacerdos Fortunae Muliebris" label="Sacerdos Fortunae Muliebris"/>
<link wikidata="Q105069774" start="7718" end="7752" title="Sacerdos Matris Deum Magnae Idaeae" label="Sacerdos Matris Deum Magnae Idaeae"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7822" end="7834" title="Roman Republic#Mid-Republic (274–148 BC)" label="Mid Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q756820" start="8063" end="8067" title="Cult (religious practice)" label="cult"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8071" end="8075" title="Isis#In the Greco-Roman world" label="Isis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8093" end="8104" title="Glossary of ancient Roman religion#Magna Mater" label="Magna Mater"/>
<link wikidata="Q188236" start="8141" end="8147" title="Cybele" label="Cybele"/>
<link wikidata="Q1772" start="8153" end="8160" title="epitaph" label="epitaph"/>
<link wikidata="Q12512" start="8311" end="8336" title="St. Peter&amp;#x27;s Basilica" label="St. Peter&amp;#x27;s Basilica"/>
<link wikidata="Q691007" start="8338" end="8350" title="Corpus Inscriptionum Latinarum" label="Inscriptions"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277" start="8359" end="8371" title="Imperial era" label="Imperial era"/>
<link wikidata="Q125046" start="8394" end="8407" title="Juno (mythology)" label="Juno Populona"/>
<link wikidata="Q3271557" start="8415" end="8454" title="Imperial cult" label="deified women of the Imperial household"/>
<link wikidata="Q505821" start="8502" end="8519" title="mystery religions" label="mystery religions"/>
<link wikidata="Q130614" start="8776" end="8782" title="Roman senate" label="senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q331341" start="8809" end="8819" title="Bacchanals" label="Bacchanals"/>
<link wikidata="Q740228" start="8930" end="8947" title="Senatus consultum de Bacchanalibus" label="senatorial decree"/>
<link wikidata="Q696284" start="8999" end="9017" title="Dionysian mysteries" label="Dionysian religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1438918" start="9072" end="9083" title="Roman women" label="Roman women"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145491" start="9168" end="9173" title="Liber" label="Liber"/>
<link wikidata="Q1209773" start="9179" end="9188" title="List of Roman deities" label="Roman god"/>
<link wikidata="Q125587" start="9189" end="9204" title="interpretatio graeca" label="identified with"/>
<link wikidata="Q41680" start="9205" end="9213" title="Dionysus" label="Dionysus"/>
<link wikidata="Q206119" start="9259" end="9264" title="Varro" label="Varro"/>
<link wikidata="Q193944" start="9836" end="9842" title="sangha" label="sangha"/>
<link wikidata="Q854979" start="10045" end="10054" title="bhikkhuni" label="bhikkhuni"/>
<link wikidata="Q613944" start="10057" end="10076" title="Mahapajapati Gotami" label="Mahapajapati Gotami"/>
<link wikidata="Q3401297" start="10185" end="10196" title="Prajñādhara" label="Prajñādhara"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10204" end="10235" title="Dharma transmission#Indian Patriarchs" label="twenty-seventh Indian Patriarch"/>
<link wikidata="Q7953" start="10239" end="10242" title="Zen" label="Zen"/>
<link wikidata="Q748" start="10243" end="10251" title="Buddhism" label="Buddhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q48362" start="10298" end="10306" title="Mahayana" label="Mahayana"/>
<link wikidata="Q4305714" start="10355" end="10367" title="Mugai Nyodai" label="Mugai Nyodai"/>
<link wikidata="Q1998748" start="10392" end="10402" title="Zen master" label="Zen master"/>
<link wikidata="Q132265" start="10485" end="10494" title="Theravada" label="Theravada"/>
<link wikidata="Q854" start="11208" end="11217" title="Sri Lanka" label="Sri Lanka"/>
<link wikidata="Q37349" start="11639" end="11649" title="Dalai Lama" label="Dalai Lama"/>
<link wikidata="Q1387312" start="11879" end="11889" title="Sakyadhita" label="Sakyadhita"/>
<link wikidata="Q538931" start="12249" end="12270" title="Dhammananda Bhikkhuni" label="Dhammananda Bhikkhuni"/>
<link wikidata="Q132265" start="12378" end="12387" title="Theravada" label="Theravada"/>
<link wikidata="Q108084680" start="13444" end="13451" title="Bhikkhuni Ayya Nirodha" label="Nirodha"/>
<link wikidata="Q6819700" start="13953" end="13968" title="Merle Kodo Boyd" label="Merle Kodo Boyd"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051498" start="14218" end="14226" title="Samaneri" label="Samaneri"/>
<link wikidata="Q24055733" start="14264" end="14282" title="Bhante Vimalaramsi" label="Bhante Vimalaramsi"/>
<link wikidata="Q737235" start="14563" end="14576" title="Drikung Kagyu" label="Drikung Kagyu"/>
<link wikidata="Q737235" start="14707" end="14720" title="Drikung Kagyu" label="Drikung Kagyu"/>
<link wikidata="Q4923429" start="15014" end="15035" title="The Eight Garudhammas" label="The Eight Garudhammas"/>
<link wikidata="Q724405" start="15213" end="15230" title="Bhante Gunaratana" label="Bhante Gunaratana"/>
<link wikidata="Q483889" start="16263" end="16279" title="Tibetan Buddhist" label="Tibetan Buddhist"/>
<link wikidata="Q917" start="16322" end="16328" title="Bhutan" label="Bhutan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043" start="16440" end="16452" title="Christianity" label="Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="16468" end="16489" title="Roman Catholic Church" label="Roman Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q3333484" start="16491" end="16498" title="Eastern Orthodoxy" label="Eastern"/>
<link wikidata="Q49377" start="16503" end="16521" title="Oriental Orthodoxy" label="Oriental Orthodoxy"/>
<link wikidata="Q75809" start="16523" end="16534" title="Lutheranism" label="Lutheranism"/>
<link wikidata="Q6423963" start="16539" end="16550" title="Anglicanism" label="Anglicanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q29182" start="16660" end="16666" title="bishop" label="bishop"/>
<link wikidata="Q42603" start="16669" end="16675" title="priest" label="priest"/>
<link wikidata="Q161944" start="16680" end="16686" title="deacon" label="deacon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2061186" start="17027" end="17042" title="religious order" label="religious order"/>
<link wikidata="Q191808" start="17052" end="17055" title="nun" label="nun"/>
<link wikidata="Q733786" start="17061" end="17065" title="monk" label="monk"/>
<link wikidata="Q22073844" start="17250" end="17263" title="Kevin Madigan" label="Kevin Madigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q235329" start="17353" end="17365" title="History of Christianity" label="early Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q12544" start="17419" end="17428" title="Byzantine" label="Byzantine"/>
<link wikidata="Q163687" start="17429" end="17437" title="basilica" label="basilica"/>
<link wikidata="Q161944" start="17508" end="17525" title="diaconal minister" label="diaconal minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q641707" start="17536" end="17547" title="Christendom" label="Christendom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128397" start="17628" end="17635" title="convent" label="convent"/>
<link wikidata="Q48203" start="17664" end="17684" title="letter to the Romans" label="letter to the Romans"/>
<link wikidata="Q138681" start="17780" end="17798" title="Montanism" label="Montanist movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q162135" start="17930" end="17945" title="Pope Gelasius I" label="Pope Gelasius I"/>
<link wikidata="Q66086" start="18019" end="18028" title="Eucharist" label="Eucharist"/>
<link wikidata="Q12562" start="18491" end="18513" title="Protestant Reformation" label="Protestant Reformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q310439" start="18767" end="18777" title="George Fox" label="George Fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q170208" start="18790" end="18796" title="Quaker" label="Quaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q11393844" start="18838" end="18849" title="inner light" label="inner light"/>
<link wikidata="Q264892" start="19102" end="19116" title="social justice" label="social justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q18813" start="19187" end="19200" title="New Testament" label="New Testament"/>
<link wikidata="Q3235794" start="19337" end="19363" title="Biblical infallibility" label="infallibility of the Bible"/>
<link wikidata="Q9200" start="19468" end="19480" title="Apostle Paul" label="Apostle Paul"/>
<link wikidata="Q6386590" start="19646" end="19666" title="Levite" label="levitical priesthood"/>
<link wikidata="Q133485" start="19671" end="19689" title="Rabbi" label="historic rabbinate"/>
<link wikidata="Q194253" start="19714" end="19725" title="evangelical" label="evangelical"/>
<link wikidata="Q302" start="19827" end="19839" title="Jesus Christ" label="Jesus Christ"/>
<link wikidata="Q49482" start="19920" end="19940" title="apostolic succession" label="apostolic succession"/>
<link wikidata="Q174929" start="19990" end="20000" title="Tertullian" label="Tertullian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1665827" start="20034" end="20125" title="Inter Insigniores" label="Vatican Declaration on the Question of the Admission of Women to the Ministerial Priesthood"/>
<link wikidata="Q302" start="20372" end="20377" title="Jesus" label="Jesus"/>
<link wikidata="Q9200" start="20502" end="20506" title="Paul the Apostle" label="Paul"/>
<link wikidata="Q291547" start="20613" end="20619" title="Phoebe (Bible)" label="Phoebe"/>
<link wikidata="Q262766" start="20621" end="20626" title="Junia (New Testament person)" label="Junia"/>
<link wikidata="Q43412" start="20642" end="20649" title="Apostles in the New Testament" label="apostle"/>
<link wikidata="Q11241519" start="20690" end="20715" title="female disciples of Jesus" label="female disciples of Jesus"/>
<link wikidata="Q8031385" start="20725" end="20749" title="women at the crucifixion" label="women at the crucifixion"/>
<link wikidata="Q51624" start="20786" end="20808" title="Resurrection of Christ" label="Resurrection of Christ"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="20959" end="20980" title="Roman Catholic Church" label="Roman Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q989" start="20999" end="21016" title="Pope John Paul II" label="Pope John Paul II"/>
<link wikidata="Q7341605" start="21269" end="21278" title="Canon law (Catholic Church)" label="canon law"/>
<link wikidata="Q75561" start="21300" end="21332" title="Catechism of the Catholic Church" label="Catechism of the Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q159583" start="21659" end="21667" title="Holy See" label="Holy See"/>
<link wikidata="Q2571972" start="21677" end="21683" title="decree" label="decree"/>
<link wikidata="Q25210856" start="21755" end="21770" title="Excommunication (Catholic Church)" label="excommunication"/>
<link wikidata="Q450675" start="21944" end="21956" title="Pope Francis" label="Pope Francis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2298145" start="22049" end="22058" title="deaconess" label="deaconess"/>
<link wikidata="Q48727485" start="22360" end="22402" title="Synod of Bishops for the Pan-Amazon region" label="Synod of Bishops for the Pan-Amazon region"/>
<link wikidata="Q3440838" start="22809" end="22836" title="Roman Catholic Womenpriests" label="Roman Catholic Womenpriests"/>
<link wikidata="Q8031015" start="22842" end="22876" title="Women&amp;#x27;s Ordination Conference" label="Women&amp;#x27;s Ordination Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q3178391" start="22914" end="22930" title="Ludmila Javorová" label="Ludmila Javorová"/>
<link wikidata="Q853348" start="22934" end="22943" title="Czechoslovak Socialist Republic" label="Communist"/>
<link wikidata="Q33946" start="22944" end="22958" title="Czechoslovakia" label="Czechoslovakia"/>
<link wikidata="Q722153" start="22977" end="22990" title="Felix Davídek" label="Felix Davídek"/>
<link wikidata="Q431315" start="23369" end="23386" title="Feliksa Kozłowska" label="Feliksa Kozłowska"/>
<link wikidata="Q819290" start="23392" end="23401" title="Mariavite" label="Mariavite"/>
<link wikidata="Q129797" start="23506" end="23523" title="Russian Partition" label="Russian Partition"/>
<link wikidata="Q643843" start="23647" end="23654" title="Mazovia" label="Mazovia"/>
<link wikidata="Q580" start="23677" end="23681" title="Łódź" label="Łódź"/>
<link wikidata="Q126287984" start="23742" end="23748" title="schism" label="schism"/>
<link wikidata="Q159583" start="23817" end="23824" title="Holy See" label="Vatican"/>
<link wikidata="Q189867" start="23875" end="23885" title="Papal Bull" label="Papal Bull"/>
<link wikidata="Q5169816" start="23979" end="23998" title="Old Catholic Church" label="Old Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q828200" start="24039" end="24055" title="Jan Maria Michał Kowalski" label="Michael Kowalski"/>
<link wikidata="Q819290" start="24125" end="24141" title="Mariavite Church" label="Mariavite Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q1736372" start="24691" end="24716" title="Catholic Mariavite Church" label="Catholic Mariavite Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q5441820" start="24746" end="24756" title="Felicjanów, Płock County" label="Felicjanów"/>
<link wikidata="Q104725" start="24764" end="24769" title="Płock" label="Płock"/>
<link wikidata="Q35032" start="24969" end="24992" title="Eastern Orthodox Church" label="Eastern Orthodox Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q4499807" start="25182" end="25194" title="Thomas Hopko" label="Thomas Hopko"/>
<link wikidata="Q1722505" start="25372" end="25386" title="Kallistos Ware" label="Kallistos Ware"/>
<link wikidata="Q63070" start="25812" end="25826" title="Mary Magdalene" label="Mary Magdalene"/>
<link wikidata="Q34178" start="25900" end="25911" title="theological" label="theological"/>
<link wikidata="Q23540" start="25949" end="25960" title="Protestants" label="Protestants"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156551" start="25968" end="25995" title="priesthood of all believers" label="priesthood of all believers"/>
<link wikidata="Q318622" start="26250" end="26262" title="Martin Bucer" label="Martin Bucer"/>
<link wikidata="Q233324" start="26492" end="26500" title="seminary" label="seminary"/>
<link wikidata="Q576603" start="26504" end="26517" title="Bible college" label="Bible college"/>
<link wikidata="Q188307" start="27224" end="27238" title="Salvation Army" label="Salvation Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q847768" start="27419" end="27449" title="Generals of the Salvation Army" label="Generals of the Salvation Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q1189165" start="27477" end="27499" title="Church of the Nazarene" label="Church of the Nazarene"/>
<link wikidata="Q82708" start="28059" end="28076" title="Church of England" label="Church of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="28117" end="28132" title="First World War" label="First World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q198745" start="28144" end="28167" title="United Church of Canada" label="United Church of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q21996996" start="28177" end="28196" title="Lydia Emelie Gruchy" label="Lydia Emelie Gruchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q329646" start="28215" end="28238" title="United Methodist Church" label="United Methodist Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q3318182" start="28292" end="28332" title="Moderator of the United Church of Canada" label="Moderator of the United Church of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q6668321" start="28394" end="28412" title="Lois Miriam Wilson" label="Lois Miriam Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2839061" start="28446" end="28465" title="Alma Bridwell White" label="Alma Bridwell White"/>
<link wikidata="Q7194136" start="28479" end="28500" title="Pillar of Fire Church" label="Pillar of Fire Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q855585" start="28944" end="28961" title="Church of Denmark" label="Church of Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q693844" start="29228" end="29258" title="Lutheran Church Missouri Synod" label="Lutheran Church Missouri Synod"/>
<link wikidata="Q16987095" start="29349" end="29380" title="Lutheran Church - International" label="Lutheran Church - International"/>
<link wikidata="Q1379931" start="29382" end="29418" title="Wisconsin Evangelical Lutheran Synod" label="Wisconsin Evangelical Lutheran Synod"/>
<link wikidata="Q5415714" start="29426" end="29452" title="Evangelical Lutheran Synod" label="Evangelical Lutheran Synod"/>
<link wikidata="Q48175" start="29499" end="29508" title="Holy Land" label="Holy Land"/>
<link wikidata="Q130133" start="29644" end="29667" title="bishop&amp;#x27;s messenger" label="bishop&amp;#x27;s messenger"/>
<link wikidata="Q24952224" start="29761" end="29828" title="Anglican Group for the Ordination of Women to the Historic Ministry" label="Anglican Group for the Ordination of Women to the Historic Ministry"/>
<link wikidata="Q8646" start="30052" end="30061" title="Hong Kong" label="Hong Kong"/>
<link wikidata="Q510312" start="30063" end="30072" title="Li Tim-Oi" label="Li Tim-Oi"/>
<link wikidata="Q20063725" start="30100" end="30116" title="Joyce M. Bennett" label="Joyce M. Bennett"/>
<link wikidata="Q23584603" start="30153" end="30168" title="Daniel Corrigan" label="Daniel Corrigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q24285735" start="30170" end="30186" title="Robert L. DeWitt" label="Robert L. DeWitt"/>
<link wikidata="Q106315163" start="30192" end="30211" title="Edward R. Welles II" label="Edward R. Welles II"/>
<link wikidata="Q682443" start="30219" end="30240" title="U.S. Episcopal Church" label="U.S. Episcopal Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q16932716" start="30511" end="30530" title="Philadelphia Eleven" label="Philadelphia Eleven"/>
<link wikidata="Q2837150" start="30582" end="30594" title="Alison Cheek" label="Alison Cheek"/>
<link wikidata="Q5372089" start="30620" end="30635" title="Emily C. Hewitt" label="Emily C. Hewitt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1045851" start="30637" end="30651" title="Carter Heyward" label="Carter Heyward"/>
<link wikidata="Q6172302" start="30699" end="30716" title="Jeannette Piccard" label="Jeannette Piccard"/>
<link wikidata="Q16795990" start="30728" end="30746" title="Betty Bone Schiess" label="Betty Bone Schiess"/>
<link wikidata="Q5160898" start="31203" end="31224" title="Congress of St. Louis" label="Congress of St. Louis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2944747" start="31444" end="31472" title="Continuing Anglican movement" label="Continuing Anglican movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q274590" start="31540" end="31554" title="Barbara Harris (bishop)" label="Barbara Harris"/>
<link wikidata="Q994899" start="31598" end="31632" title="Episcopal Diocese of Massachusetts" label="Episcopal Diocese of Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q682443" start="31825" end="31838" title="Episcopal Church (United States)" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q540782" start="31840" end="31846" title="Anglican Church of Canada" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q540754" start="31848" end="31859" title="Anglican Church in Aotearoa, New Zealand and Polynesia" label="New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q540766" start="31861" end="31870" title="Anglican Church of Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q875668" start="31872" end="31879" title="Church of Ireland" label="Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q540785" start="31881" end="31893" title="Anglican Church of Southern Africa" label="South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1089816" start="31895" end="31906" title="Church of South India" label="South India"/>
<link wikidata="Q1089788" start="31908" end="31913" title="Church in Wales" label="Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q1385389" start="31926" end="31942" title="extra-provincial Anglican churches" label="extra provincial"/>
<link wikidata="Q1347350" start="31943" end="31967" title="Episcopal Church of Cuba" label="Episcopal Church of Cuba"/>
<link wikidata="Q82708" start="31977" end="31994" title="Church of England" label="Church of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q18643416" start="31996" end="32006" title="Libby Lane" label="Libby Lane"/>
<link wikidata="Q7279429" start="32136" end="32150" title="Rachel Treweek" label="Rachel Treweek"/>
<link wikidata="Q7422628" start="32261" end="32275" title="Sarah Mullally" label="Sarah Mullally"/>
<link wikidata="Q29265" start="32359" end="32379" title="Canterbury Cathedral" label="Canterbury Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q2915459" start="32461" end="32475" title="Lord Spiritual" label="Lord Spiritual"/>
<link wikidata="Q263272" start="32669" end="32694" title="Katharine Jefferts Schori" label="Katharine Jefferts Schori"/>
<link wikidata="Q49703" start="32877" end="32881" title="Sacrament" label="rite"/>
<link wikidata="Q662862" start="32885" end="32896" title="holy orders" label="holy orders"/>
<link wikidata="Q33203" start="32922" end="32931" title="Methodist" label="Methodist"/>
<link wikidata="Q329646" start="32995" end="33018" title="United Methodist Church" label="United Methodist Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q3066164" start="33118" end="33139" title="Free Methodist Church" label="Free Methodist Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q769691" start="33200" end="33233" title="Methodist Church of Great Britain" label="Methodist Church of Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q161944" start="33267" end="33273" title="deacon" label="deacon"/>
<link wikidata="Q831474" start="33329" end="33338" title="presbyter" label="presbyter"/>
<link wikidata="Q7984055" start="33361" end="33400" title="Allegheny Wesleyan Methodist Connection" label="Allegheny Wesleyan Methodist Connection"/>
<link wikidata="Q30588282" start="33464" end="33502" title="Bible Methodist Connection of Churches" label="Bible Methodist Connection of Churches"/>
<link wikidata="Q7570131" start="33635" end="33660" title="Southern Methodist Church" label="Southern Methodist Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q28402962" start="33668" end="33707" title="Evangelical Methodist Church of America" label="Evangelical Methodist Church of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q5508946" start="33709" end="33741" title="Fundamental Methodist Conference" label="Fundamental Methodist Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q55611209" start="33743" end="33770" title="Evangelical Wesleyan Church" label="Evangelical Wesleyan Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q3309308" start="33782" end="33808" title="Primitive Methodist Church" label="Primitive Methodist Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q5353927" start="33863" end="33869" title="Elder (Methodism)" label="elders"/>
<link wikidata="Q6823854" start="33909" end="33924" title="Methodist local preacher" label="local preachers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2298145" start="33975" end="33986" title="deaconesses" label="deaconesses"/>
<link wikidata="Q4809851" start="34048" end="34085" title="Association of Independent Methodists" label="Association of Independent Methodists"/>
<link wikidata="Q26997581" start="35281" end="35293" title="Mary Howgill" label="Mary Howgill"/>
<link wikidata="Q7911644" start="35306" end="35319" title="Valiant Sixty" label="Valiant Sixty"/>
<link wikidata="Q26997587" start="35629" end="35645" title="Susanna Freeborn" label="Susanna Freeborn"/>
<link wikidata="Q232899" start="36086" end="36095" title="Mary Dyer" label="Mary Dyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5500154" start="36168" end="36185" title="Free Will Baptist" label="Free Will Baptist"/>
<link wikidata="Q463455" start="36339" end="36368" title="American Baptist Churches USA" label="American Baptist Churches USA"/>
<link wikidata="Q30188468" start="36385" end="36415" title="Baptist Union of Great Britain" label="Baptist Union of Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q496651" start="36432" end="36464" title="National Baptist Convention, USA" label="National Baptist Convention, USA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1248425" start="36481" end="36520" title="Progressive National Baptist Convention" label="Progressive National Baptist Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q4823875" start="36537" end="36566" title="Australian Baptist Ministries" label="Australian Baptist Ministries"/>
<link wikidata="Q5166271" start="36587" end="36628" title="Convention of Philippine Baptist Churches" label="Convention of Philippine Baptist Churches"/>
<link wikidata="Q494890" start="36655" end="36672" title="Assemblies of God" label="Assemblies of God"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="36680" end="36693" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q163218" start="36782" end="36827" title="International Church of the Foursquare Gospel" label="International Church of the Foursquare Gospel"/>
<link wikidata="Q104319" start="37145" end="37179" title="Seventh-day Adventist Church" label="Seventh-day Adventist (SDA) Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q292290" start="37515" end="37529" title="Ellen G. White" label="Ellen G. White"/>
<link wikidata="Q6634846" start="42930" end="42939" title="List of Presidents of the General Conference of Seventh-day Adventists" label="President"/>
<link wikidata="Q1027106" start="42951" end="42967" title="Ted N. C. Wilson" label="Ted N. C. Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q771902" start="43963" end="43992" title="Philippine Independent Church" label="Philippine Independent Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q159108" start="43999" end="44026" title="independent Catholic church" label="independent Catholic church"/>
<link wikidata="Q39711" start="44401" end="44406" title="Batac" label="Batac"/>
<link wikidata="Q13813" start="44416" end="44428" title="Ilocos Norte" label="Ilocos Norte"/>
<link wikidata="Q7644806" start="44443" end="44461" title="Supreme Bishop" label="Obispo Maximo XIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q60677022" start="44462" end="44474" title="Rhee Timbang" label="Rhee Timbang"/>
<link wikidata="Q35269" start="44609" end="44633" title="Jehovah&amp;#x27;s Witnesses" label="Jehovah&amp;#x27;s Witnesses"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="44643" end="44667" title="Baptism#Jehovah&amp;#x27;s Witnesses" label="qualified public baptism"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="44702" end="44712" title="Ordination#Jehovah&amp;#x27;s Witnesses" label="ordination"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="44769" end="44786" title="Minister (Christianity)#JW" label="ordained minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q3001121" start="44801" end="44825" title="Supreme Court of Vermont" label="Supreme Court of Vermont"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="45073" end="45081" title="Organizational structure of Jehovah&amp;#x27;s Witnesses#Pioneer" label="pioneers"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="45120" end="45140" title="Organizational structure of Jehovah&amp;#x27;s Witnesses#Branch offices" label="their branch offices"/>
<link wikidata="Q161944" start="45164" end="45171" title="Ministerial servant" label="deacons"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="45179" end="45199" title="Organizational structure of Jehovah&amp;#x27;s Witnesses#Ministerial servants" label="ministerial servants"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="45211" end="45217" title="Organizational structure of Jehovah&amp;#x27;s Witnesses#Elders" label="elders"/>
<link wikidata="Q201676" start="45309" end="45316" title="funeral" label="funeral"/>
<link wikidata="Q49836" start="45321" end="45328" title="wedding" label="wedding"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="45470" end="45483" title="Christian headcovering#Jehovah&amp;#x27;s Witnesses" label="head covering"/>
<link wikidata="Q625363" start="45538" end="45557" title="Community of Christ" label="Community of Christ"/>
<link wikidata="Q7316204" start="45712" end="45732" title="Restoration Branches" label="Restoration Branches"/>
<link wikidata="Q6551727" start="46204" end="46218" title="Linda L. Booth" label="Linda L. Booth"/>
<link wikidata="Q4878847" start="46327" end="46342" title="Becky L. Savage" label="Becky L. Savage"/>
<link wikidata="Q5453720" start="46391" end="46407" title="First Presidency (Community of Christ)" label="First Presidency"/>
<link wikidata="Q42504" start="46562" end="46609" title="The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints" label="The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints"/>
<link wikidata="Q286135" start="46691" end="46707" title="D. Michael Quinn" label="D. Michael Quinn"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="46712" end="46728" title="September Six#Paul Toscano" label="Margaret Toscano"/>
<link wikidata="Q3044511" start="47037" end="47051" title="Relief Society" label="Relief Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q16202139" start="47361" end="47373" title="Ordain Women" label="Ordain Women"/>
<link wikidata="Q17306140" start="47440" end="47450" title="Kate Kelly (feminist)" label="Kate Kelly"/>
<link wikidata="Q1468349" start="47628" end="47651" title="Liberal Catholic Church" label="Liberal Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q1187798" start="48650" end="48661" title="Denise Wyss" label="Denise Wyss"/>
<link wikidata="Q5169816" start="48719" end="48738" title="Old Catholic Church" label="Old Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q183126" start="48907" end="48922" title="Sri Ramakrishna" label="Sri Ramakrishna"/>
<link wikidata="Q484260" start="49405" end="49409" title="guru" label="guru"/>
<link wikidata="Q432" start="49519" end="49526" title="Islam" label="Muslims"/>
<link wikidata="Q125482" start="49573" end="49577" title="imam" label="imam"/>
<link wikidata="Q467" start="49707" end="49712" title="women" label="women"/>
<link wikidata="Q234869" start="49762" end="49767" title="salat" label="salat"/>
<link wikidata="Q483654" start="49796" end="49801" title="Sunni" label="Sunni"/>
<link wikidata="Q9585" start="49827" end="49831" title="Shia" label="Shia"/>
<link wikidata="Q48221" start="49926" end="49932" title="Maliki" label="Maliki"/>
<link wikidata="Q432" start="50020" end="50025" title="Islam" label="Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q693604" start="50127" end="50134" title="Tarawih" label="Tarawih"/>
<link wikidata="Q41662" start="50145" end="50152" title="Ramadan" label="Ramadan"/>
<link wikidata="Q192124" start="50256" end="50265" title="Al-Tabari" label="Al-Tabari"/>
<link wikidata="Q4670395" start="50277" end="50286" title="Abu Thawr" label="Abu Thawr"/>
<link wikidata="Q48703" start="50298" end="50307" title="Al-Muzani" label="Al-Muzani"/>
<link wikidata="Q46420" start="50323" end="50332" title="Ibn Arabi" label="Ibn Arabi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1518629" start="50489" end="50505" title="Islamic feminist" label="Islamic feminist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425141" start="50536" end="50556" title="Women&amp;#x27;s mosques" label="Women&amp;#x27;s mosques"/>
<link wikidata="Q265133" start="50663" end="50674" title="Amina Wadud" label="Amina Wadud"/>
<link wikidata="Q464458" start="51010" end="51021" title="Eid al-Fitr" label="Eid al-Fitr"/>
<link wikidata="Q172" start="51063" end="51070" title="Toronto" label="Toronto"/>
<link wikidata="Q265133" start="51410" end="51421" title="Amina Wadud" label="Amina Wadud"/>
<link wikidata="Q7283355" start="51934" end="51945" title="Raheel Raza" label="Raheel Raza"/>
<link wikidata="Q639756" start="52928" end="52938" title="Canada Day" label="Canada Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="53123" end="53137" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q514400" start="53422" end="53433" title="Eid ul-Adha" label="Eid ul-Adha"/>
<link wikidata="Q460640" start="53697" end="53712" title="Asenath Barzani" label="Asenath Barzani"/>
<link wikidata="Q975574" start="53909" end="53914" title="Tannaim" label="Tanna"/>
<link wikidata="Q679640" start="54064" end="54087" title="Petachiah of Regensburg" label="Petachiah of Regensburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q171201" start="54121" end="54128" title="Hasidic" label="Hasidic"/>
<link wikidata="Q359351" start="54129" end="54134" title="rebbe" label="rebbe"/>
<link wikidata="Q4530047" start="54182" end="54198" title="Maiden of Ludmir" label="Maiden of Ludmir"/>
<link wikidata="Q63517" start="54237" end="54249" title="Regina Jonas" label="Regina Jonas"/>
<link wikidata="Q533207" start="54413" end="54427" title="Sally Priesand" label="Sally Priesand"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133485" start="54461" end="54475" title="Reform Judaism" label="Reform Judaism"/>
<link wikidata="Q3472099" start="54486" end="54507" title="Sandy Eisenberg Sasso" label="Sandy Eisenberg Sasso"/>
<link wikidata="Q339284" start="54541" end="54566" title="Reconstructionist Judaism" label="Reconstructionist Judaism"/>
<link wikidata="Q6709039" start="54576" end="54589" title="Lynn Gottlieb" label="Lynn Gottlieb"/>
<link wikidata="Q27712" start="54623" end="54637" title="Jewish Renewal" label="Jewish Renewal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2844555" start="54647" end="54658" title="Amy Eilberg" label="Amy Eilberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q205644" start="54692" end="54712" title="Conservative Judaism" label="Conservative Judaism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7680802" start="54726" end="54739" title="Tamara Kolton" label="Tamara Kolton"/>
<link wikidata="Q951353" start="54847" end="54865" title="Humanistic Judaism" label="Humanistic Judaism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1788287" start="54979" end="54986" title="semicha" label="semicha"/>
<link wikidata="Q1968969" start="55043" end="55052" title="Avi Weiss" label="Avi Weiss"/>
<link wikidata="Q7421662" start="55062" end="55074" title="Sara Hurwitz" label="Sara Hurwitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q20154599" start="55096" end="55103" title="maharat" label="maharat"/>
<link wikidata="Q398134" start="55486" end="55501" title="Agudath Yisrael" label="Agudath Yisrael"/>
<link wikidata="Q3569750" start="55510" end="55539" title="Rabbinical Council of America" label="Rabbinical Council of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q20154599" start="55754" end="55770" title="Yeshivat Maharat" label="Yeshivat Maharat"/>
<link wikidata="Q22278489" start="56119" end="56131" title="Lila Kagedan" label="Lila Kagedan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3569750" start="56365" end="56394" title="Rabbinical Council of America" label="Rabbinical Council of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q4694525" start="56812" end="56837" title="Agudath Israel of America" label="Agudath Israel of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q20154599" start="56904" end="56920" title="Yeshivat Maharat" label="Yeshivat Maharat"/>
<link wikidata="Q8052877" start="56922" end="56945" title="Yeshivat Chovevei Torah" label="Yeshivat Chovevei Torah"/>
<link wikidata="Q24905591" start="56947" end="56961" title="Open Orthodoxy" label="Open Orthodoxy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067977" start="57127" end="57134" title="Hazzan" label="cantors"/>
<link wikidata="Q4898956" start="57256" end="57269" title="Betty Robbins" label="Betty Robbins"/>
<link wikidata="Q4859204" start="57438" end="57462" title="Barbara Ostfeld-Horowitz" label="Barbara Ostfeld-Horowitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q5387897" start="57536" end="57549" title="Erica Lippitz" label="Erica Lippitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q6771583" start="57554" end="57577" title="Marla Rosenfeld Barugel" label="Marla Rosenfeld Barugel"/>
<link wikidata="Q5034038" start="57656" end="57672" title="Cantors Assembly" label="Cantors Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="57799" end="57812" title="#Judaism" label="Deborah Davis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7490095" start="58003" end="58016" title="Sharon Hordes" label="Sharon Hordes"/>
<link wikidata="Q791160" start="58156" end="58174" title="Avitall Gerstetter" label="Avitall Gerstetter"/>
<link wikidata="Q7648518" start="58297" end="58308" title="Susan Wehle" label="Susan Wehle"/>
<link wikidata="Q4663920" start="58524" end="58534" title="Abbe Lyons" label="Abbe Lyons"/>
<link wikidata="Q16850153" start="58581" end="58614" title="Jewish Orthodox Feminist Alliance" label="Jewish Orthodox Feminist Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q24905591" start="58814" end="58827" title="Open Orthodox" label="Open Orthodox"/>
<link wikidata="Q892785" start="58901" end="58944" title="Ryukyuan religion" label="indigenous religion of the Ryukyuan Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q812767" start="59082" end="59091" title="Shintoism" label="Shintoism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7400102" start="59099" end="59104" title="Saiin (priestess)" label="Saiin"/>
<link wikidata="Q208233" start="59163" end="59179" title="Japanese emperor" label="Japanese emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q687168" start="59214" end="59230" title="Ise Grand Shrine" label="Ise Grand Shrine"/>
<link wikidata="Q455602" start="59342" end="59359" title="Amaterasu-ōmikami" label="Amaterasu-ōmikami"/>
<link wikidata="Q834321" start="59673" end="59687" title="Man&amp;#x27;yōshū" label="Man&amp;#x27;yōshū"/>
<link wikidata="Q985739" start="59788" end="59800" title="Princess Ōku" label="Princess Ōku"/>
<link wikidata="Q335181" start="59814" end="59827" title="Emperor Tenmu" label="Emperor Tenmu"/>
<link wikidata="Q210688" start="59840" end="59852" title="Asuka period" label="Asuka period"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047139" start="60033" end="60037" title="Miko" label="Miko"/>
<link wikidata="Q9316" start="60054" end="60061" title="Sikhism" label="Sikhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q312967" start="60109" end="60126" title="Guru Gobind Singh" label="Guru Gobind Singh"/>
<link wikidata="Q203249" start="60235" end="60252" title="Guru Granth Sahib" label="Guru Granth Sahib"/>
<link wikidata="Q5596649" start="60546" end="60553" title="Granthi" label="Granthi"/>
<link wikidata="Q15621011" start="60567" end="60571" title="Ragi (Sikhism)" label="Ragi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3694958" start="60600" end="60610" title="Panj Piare" label="Panj Piare"/>
<link wikidata="Q9598" start="60741" end="60748" title="Taoists" label="Taoists"/>
<link wikidata="Q9185514" start="60795" end="60807" title="Wu Chengzhen" label="Wu Chengzhen"/>
<link wikidata="Q103163" start="60865" end="60870" title="abbot" label="abbot"/>
<link wikidata="Q59774" start="61079" end="61084" title="Wicca" label="Wicca"/>
<link wikidata="Q1086440" start="61660" end="61679" title="Yoruba religion" label="indigenous religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1426922" start="61761" end="61764" title="Ifá" label="Ifá"/>
<link wikidata="Q217123" start="61765" end="61771" title="Oracle" label="Oracle"/>
<link wikidata="Q637324" start="61818" end="61826" title="Babalawo" label="Babalawo"/>
<link wikidata="Q22905939" start="61843" end="61850" title="Iyanifa" label="Iyanifa"/>
<link wikidata="Q290460" start="61915" end="61921" title="Orisha" label="Orisha"/>
<link wikidata="Q1851943" start="62222" end="62227" title="Oshun" label="Oshun"/>
<link wikidata="Q9601" start="62350" end="62361" title="Zoroastrian" label="Zoroastrian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1858526" start="62492" end="62497" title="mobed" label="mobed"/>
<link wikidata="Q4984270" start="62900" end="62917" title="Buddhist feminism" label="Buddhist feminism"/>
<link wikidata="Q5531006" start="62920" end="62944" title="Christian views of women" label="Christian views of women"/>
<link wikidata="Q582677" start="62947" end="62965" title="Christian feminism" label="Christian feminism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2298145" start="62968" end="62977" title="Deaconess" label="Deaconess"/>
<link wikidata="Q1330520" start="62980" end="62997" title="Feminist theology" label="Feminist theology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1518629" start="63000" end="63016" title="Islamic feminism" label="Islamic feminism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2892079" start="63019" end="63034" title="Jewish feminism" label="Jewish feminism"/>
<link wikidata="Q6645525" start="63037" end="63069" title="List of ordained Christian women" label="List of ordained Christian women"/>
<link wikidata="Q6643058" start="63072" end="63136" title="List of the first 32 women ordained as Church of England priests" label="List of the first 32 women ordained as Church of England priests"/>
<link wikidata="Q119840941" start="63139" end="63226" title="List of the first women ordained as priests in the Anglican Church of Australia in 1992" label="List of the first women ordained as priests in the Anglican Church of Australia in 1992"/>
<link wikidata="Q17512374" start="63229" end="63244" title="Mormon feminism" label="Mormon feminism"/>
<link wikidata="Q3315501" start="63247" end="63294" title="Ordination of women in Protestant denominations" label="Ordination of women in Protestant denominations"/>
<link wikidata="Q16147821" start="63297" end="63333" title="Timeline of women hazzans in America" label="Timeline of women hazzans in America"/>
<link wikidata="Q16147821" start="63336" end="63361" title="Timeline of women hazzans" label="Timeline of women hazzans"/>
<link wikidata="Q28439722" start="63363" end="63392" title="Timeline of women in religion" label="Timeline of women in religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q17013997" start="63395" end="63445" title="Timeline of women in religion in the United States" label="Timeline of women in religion in the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q85816104" start="63448" end="63483" title="Timeline of women rabbis in America" label="Timeline of women rabbis in America"/>
<link wikidata="Q85816104" start="63486" end="63510" title="Timeline of women rabbis" label="Timeline of women rabbis"/>
<link wikidata="Q511322" start="63513" end="63527" title="Women as imams" label="Women as imams"/>
<link wikidata="Q8031379" start="63530" end="63558" title="Women as theological figures" label="Women as theological figures"/>
<link wikidata="Q8031542" start="63561" end="63579" title="Women in the Bible" label="Women in the Bible"/>
<link wikidata="Q4220428" start="63582" end="63598" title="Women in Judaism" label="Women in Judaism"/>
<link wikidata="Q3068266" start="63601" end="63613" title="Women rabbis" label="Women rabbis"/>
<link wikidata="Q6235116" start="63790" end="63803" title="J. G. Davies" label="Davies, J. G."/>
<link wikidata="None" start="63951" end="63964" title="Ute E. Elsen" label="Elsen, Ute E."/>
<link wikidata="Q3290222" start="64083" end="64096" title="Wayne Grudem" label="Grudem, Wayne"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="64235" end="64248" title="Roger Gryson" label="Gryson, Roger"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="64432" end="64445" title="Jean LaPorte" label="LaPorte, Jean"/>
<link wikidata="Q22073844" start="64530" end="64544" title="Kevin Madigan" label="Madigan, Kevin"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="64550" end="64563" title="Carolyn Osiek" label="Carolyn Osiek"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="64678" end="64701" title="Aimé Georges Martimort" label="Martimort, Aimé Georges"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="64865" end="64885" title="McGrath, Elsie Hainz" label="McGrath, Elsie Hainz"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="64896" end="64916" title="Meehan, Bridget Mary" label="Meehan, Bridget Mary"/>
<link wikidata="Q92489" start="64931" end="64942" title="Ida Raming" label="Raming, Ida"/>
<link wikidata="Q36874037" start="65082" end="65102" title="Patricia Cox Miller" label="Miller, Patricia Cox"/>
<link wikidata="Q63441599" start="65221" end="65235" title="Pamela Nadell" label="Nadell, Pamela"/>
<link wikidata="Q7648417" start="65349" end="65361" title="Susan Sered" label="Sered, Susan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4859646" start="65469" end="65493" title="Spaeth, Barbette Stanley" label="Spaeth, Barbette Stanley"/>
<link wikidata="Q54810179" start="65567" end="65582" title="Sallie Tisdale" label="Tisdale, Sallie"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="65678" end="65693" title="Mary Jo Weaver" label="Weaver, Mary Jo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321945" start="65759" end="65775" title="Wijngaards, John" label="Wijngaards, John"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321945" start="65945" end="65961" title="Wijngaards, John" label="Wijngaards, John"/>
<link wikidata="Q6873449" start="66154" end="66168" title="Miriam Winter" label="Winter, Miriam"/>
<link wikidata="Q7188640" start="66302" end="66317" title="Phyllis Zagano" label="Zagano, Phyllis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7188640" start="66457" end="66472" title="Phyllis Zagano" label="Zagano, Phyllis"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="461032" wikidata="Q191897" url="?curid=461032" title="Argolis">
<text>Argolis or Argolida ( , ; , in ancient Greek and Katharevousa) is one of the regional units of Greece. It is part of the region of Peloponnese, situated in the eastern part of the Peloponnese peninsula and part of the tripoint area of Argolis, Arcadia and Corinthia. Much of the territory of this region is situated in the Argolid Peninsula.

==Geography==
Most arable land lies in the central part of Argolis. Its primary agricultural resources are oranges and olives. Argolis has a coastline on the Saronic Gulf in the northeast and on the Argolic Gulf in the south and southeast. Notable mountains ranges are the Oligyrtos in the northwest, Lyrkeio and Ktenia in the west, and Arachnaio and Didymo in the east.

Argolis has land borders with Arcadia to the west and southwest, Corinthia to the north, and the Islands regional unit (Troezen area) to the east. Ancient Argolis included Troezen.

==History==



Parts of the history of the area can be found in the articles on Argos, Mycenae, Epidaurus, Nafplio, Troezen, Ermioni, Kranidi, Tiryns and Tolo.

===Modern history===
From 1833 to 1899, Argolis was part of Argolidocorinthia, which included present Corinthia, Hydra, Spetses and Kythira. It joined Corinthia to form Argolidocorinthia again in 1909. Forty years later, in 1949, Argolis was finally separated from Corinthia.

==Administration==
The regional unit Argolis is subdivided into 4 municipalities. These are (number as in the map in the infobox):
* Argos-Mykines (2)
* Epidaurus (&quot;Epidavros&quot;, 3)
* Ermionida (4)
* Nafplio (1)

===Prefecture===
As a part of the 2011 Kallikratis government reform, the regional unit Argolis was created out of the former prefecture Argolis (). The prefecture had the same territory as the present regional unit. At the same time, the municipalities were reorganised, according to the table below.

===Provinces===
The provinces of Argolis were:
* Argos Province – Argos
* Ermionida Province – Kranidi
* Nafplia Province – Nafplio

==Transport==
The area is connected by highways:
* E65 (northwest)
* Greek National Road 7
* Greek National Road 70 (east)

==Communications==
===Newspapers===

* Argeiakon Bima – Argos
* Ta Nea tis Argolidos – Nafplio

===Radio===

* Argaiki Radiofonia – Argos
* Argos Radio Deejay – Argos – 96.2 FM
* Cool FM – Argos, Kefalari – 90.7 FM
* Dimotiko Radiofoniou Nafpliou – Nafplio
* Orange FM – Argos – 91.1 FM
* Radio Argolida – Nafplio – 90.2 FM
* Radio Ermionida – Ermioni
* Radio Kranidi – Kranidi
* Style 89.6 – Argos – 89.6 FM

===Television===
==See also==
* List of settlements in Argolis
* List of traditional Greek place names

==References==
==Sources==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q191897" start="0" end="7" title="Argolis" label="Argolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q191897" start="11" end="19" title="Argolis" label="Argolida"/>
<link wikidata="Q35497" start="31" end="44" title="ancient Greek" label="ancient Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q35961" start="49" end="61" title="Katharevousa" label="Katharevousa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1234255" start="77" end="101" title="regional units of Greece" label="regional units of Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q207299" start="121" end="127" title="modern regions of Greece" label="region"/>
<link wikidata="Q202484" start="131" end="142" title="Peloponnese (region)" label="Peloponnese"/>
<link wikidata="Q78967" start="180" end="191" title="Peloponnese" label="Peloponnese"/>
<link wikidata="Q316655" start="218" end="226" title="tripoint" label="tripoint"/>
<link wikidata="Q12898802" start="244" end="251" title="Arcadia (ancient region)" label="Arcadia"/>
<link wikidata="Q208306" start="256" end="265" title="Corinthia" label="Corinthia"/>
<link wikidata="Q25044670" start="323" end="340" title="Argolid Peninsula" label="Argolid Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q13191" start="450" end="457" title="orange (fruit)" label="oranges"/>
<link wikidata="Q37083" start="462" end="467" title="olive" label="olive"/>
<link wikidata="Q211779" start="501" end="513" title="Saronic Gulf" label="Saronic Gulf"/>
<link wikidata="Q648317" start="542" end="554" title="Argolic Gulf" label="Argolic Gulf"/>
<link wikidata="Q7086865" start="616" end="625" title="Oligyrtos" label="Oligyrtos"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="644" end="651" title="Lyrkeio" label="Lyrkeio"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="656" end="662" title="Ktenia" label="Ktenia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="680" end="689" title="Arachnaio" label="Arachnaio"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="694" end="700" title="Didymo (mountain)" label="Didymo"/>
<link wikidata="Q170054" start="745" end="752" title="Arcadia (regional unit)" label="Arcadia"/>
<link wikidata="Q208306" start="780" end="789" title="Corinthia" label="Corinthia"/>
<link wikidata="Q631048" start="812" end="833" title="Islands (regional unit)" label="Islands regional unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q581494" start="835" end="842" title="Troezen" label="Troezen"/>
<link wikidata="Q189901" start="977" end="982" title="Argos, Peloponnese" label="Argos"/>
<link wikidata="Q132564" start="984" end="991" title="Mycenae" label="Mycenae"/>
<link wikidata="Q233576" start="993" end="1002" title="Epidaurus" label="Epidaurus"/>
<link wikidata="Q202337" start="1004" end="1011" title="Nafplio" label="Nafplio"/>
<link wikidata="Q581494" start="1013" end="1020" title="Troezen" label="Troezen"/>
<link wikidata="Q994564" start="1022" end="1029" title="Ermioni" label="Ermioni"/>
<link wikidata="Q743420" start="1031" end="1038" title="Kranidi" label="Kranidi"/>
<link wikidata="Q389998" start="1051" end="1055" title="Tolo, Greece" label="Tolo"/>
<link wikidata="Q4789649" start="1118" end="1135" title="Argolidocorinthia" label="Argolidocorinthia"/>
<link wikidata="Q208306" start="1160" end="1169" title="Corinthia" label="Corinthia"/>
<link wikidata="Q208319" start="1171" end="1176" title="Hydra, Saronic Islands" label="Hydra"/>
<link wikidata="Q368275" start="1178" end="1185" title="Spetses" label="Spetses"/>
<link wikidata="Q207239" start="1190" end="1197" title="Kythira" label="Kythira"/>
<link wikidata="Q649278" start="1468" end="1481" title="Argos-Mykines" label="Argos-Mykines"/>
<link wikidata="Q233576" start="1488" end="1497" title="Epidaurus" label="Epidaurus"/>
<link wikidata="Q616733" start="1527" end="1536" title="Ermionida" label="Ermionida"/>
<link wikidata="Q202337" start="1543" end="1550" title="Nafplio" label="Nafplio"/>
<link wikidata="Q202595" start="1682" end="1692" title="prefectures of Greece" label="prefecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860467" start="1879" end="1888" title="provinces of Greece" label="provinces"/>
<link wikidata="Q649278" start="1908" end="1922" title="Argos Province" label="Argos Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q189901" start="1925" end="1930" title="Argos, Peloponnese" label="Argos"/>
<link wikidata="Q616733" start="1933" end="1951" title="Ermionida Province" label="Ermionida Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q743420" start="1954" end="1961" title="Kranidi" label="Kranidi"/>
<link wikidata="Q6958206" start="1964" end="1980" title="Nafplia Province" label="Nafplia Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q202337" start="1983" end="1990" title="Nafplio" label="Nafplio"/>
<link wikidata="Q911135" start="2043" end="2046" title="European route E65" label="E65"/>
<link wikidata="Q487890" start="2061" end="2082" title="Greek National Road 7" label="Greek National Road 7"/>
<link wikidata="Q5601827" start="2085" end="2107" title="Greek National Road 70" label="Greek National Road 70"/>
<link wikidata="Q189901" start="2172" end="2177" title="Argos, Peloponnese" label="Argos"/>
<link wikidata="Q202337" start="2203" end="2210" title="Nafplio" label="Nafplio"/>
<link wikidata="Q202337" start="2365" end="2372" title="Nafplio" label="Nafplio"/>
<link wikidata="Q16821545" start="2558" end="2588" title="List of settlements in Argolis" label="List of settlements in Argolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q6572457" start="2591" end="2628" title="List of traditional Greek place names" label="List of traditional Greek place names"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="461035" wikidata="Q5326173" url="?curid=461035" title="Earl Winterton">
<text>Earl Winterton, in the County of Galway, is a title in the Peerage of Ireland. It was created in 1766 for Edward Turnour, 1st Baron Winterton, who represented Bramber in the House of Commons. Turnour had already been created Baron Winterton, of Gort in the County of Galway, in 1761, and was made Viscount Turnour, of Gort in the County of Galway, at the same time as he was given the earldom. These titles are also in the Peerage of Ireland. Born Edward Turnour Garth, Lord Winterton was the son of Joseph Garth and Sarah Garth (died 1744), daughter of Francis Gee and his wife Sarah, daughter of Sir Edward Turnour, Member of Parliament for Orford, elder son of Sir Edward Turnour, Speaker of the House of Commons from 1661 to 1671. His mother was sole heiress to the Turnor (or Turnour) estates and on her death in 1744 he assumed by Royal licence the surname of Turnour.

Lord Winterton&#x27;s great-great-great-grandson (the titles having descended from father to son), the sixth Earl, was a Conservative politician. He represented Horsham in the House of Commons for almost fifty years and served as Under-Secretary of State for India and as Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster. In 1952 he was created Baron Turnour, of Shillinglee in the County of Sussex, in the Peerage of the United Kingdom. This title became extinct on his death in 1962. He was succeeded in the Irish titles by his third cousin once removed, the seventh Earl, who lived in Canada, as does his nephew, the eighth Earl, who succeeded him in 1991. He is the eldest son of Noel Turnour, the seventh Earl&#x27;s younger brother.

The ancestral seat of the Turnour family was Shillinglee, West Sussex. The titles of the earldom and original barony (despite being in the Peerage of Ireland) referred to the village of Winterton-on-Sea in Norfolk, where the Turnour family also owned land.

==Earls Winterton (1766)==
*Edward Garth-Turnour, 1st Earl Winterton (1734–1788)
*Edward Turnour, 2nd Earl Winterton (1758–1831)
*Edward Turnour, 3rd Earl Winterton (1784–1833)
*Edward Turnour, 4th Earl Winterton (1810–1879)
*Edward Turnour, 5th Earl Winterton (1837–1907)
*Edward Turnour, 6th Earl Winterton (1883–1962)
*Robert Chad Turnour, 7th Earl Winterton (1915–1991)
*(Donald) David Turnour, 8th Earl Winterton (b. 1943)
==Present peer==
Donald David Turnour, 8th Earl Winterton (born 13 October 1943) is the son of Cecil Noel Turnour and his wife Evelyn Isobel Oulton. He was educated at Waterloo Lutheran University, where he graduated BA. In 1968, he married Jill Pauline Esplen, a daughter of John George Esplen, and they were divorced in 1997, then having two daughters, Michele Susan Turnour (born 1973) and Amy Elizabeth Turnour (born 1976).

On 2 June 1991, Turnour succeeded as Earl Winterton, Viscount Turnour of Gort, and Baron Winterton, all in the peerage of Ireland, so that he did not inherit a seat in the House of Lords. A Canadian, in 2003 he was living in Canada.

The heir presumptive is the present holder&#x27;s younger brother Robert Charles Turnour (born 1950), whose heir presumptive is their younger brother Murray John Turnour (born 1951), whose heir apparent is his son Jonathan Winterton Behan Turnour (born 1985).

==Line of succession==

* &quot;Edward Garth-Turnour, 1st Earl Winterton (1734–1788)&quot;
** &quot;Edward Turnour, 2nd Earl Winterton (1758–1831)&quot;
*** &quot;Edward Turnour, 3rd Earl Winterton (1784–1833)&quot;
**** &quot;Edward Turnour, 4th Earl Winterton (1810–1879)&quot;
***** &quot;Edward Turnour, 5th Earl Winterton (1837–1907)&quot;
****** &quot;Edward Turnour, 6th Earl Winterton (1883–1962)&quot;
***&quot;The Revd and Hon. Adolphus Turnour&quot; (1789–1857)
****&quot;Charles Turnour&quot; (1815–1878)
*****&quot;Charles Turnour&quot; (1853–1885)
******&quot;Cecil Turnour&quot; (1880–1953)
******* &quot;Robert Turnour, 7th Earl Winterton (1915–1991)&quot;
*******&quot;Cecil Turnour&quot; (1919–1987)
******** David Turnour, 8th Earl Winterton (b. 1943)
********(1) Robert Turnour (b. 1950)
********(2) Murray Turnour (b. 1951)
*********(3) Jonathan Turnour (b. 1985)
==Notes==
==References==
*Kidd, Charles, Williamson, David (editors). &quot;Debrett&#x27;s Peerage and Baronetage&quot; (1990 edition). New York: St Martin&#x27;s Press, 1990, 
*</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5326173" start="0" end="14" title="Earl Winterton" label="Earl Winterton"/>
<link wikidata="Q169923" start="23" end="39" title="County Galway" label="County of Galway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1859616" start="59" end="77" title="Peerage of Ireland" label="Peerage of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q5343070" start="106" end="141" title="Edward Turnour, 1st Earl Winterton" label="Edward Turnour, 1st Baron Winterton"/>
<link wikidata="Q4956101" start="159" end="166" title="Bramber (UK Parliament constituency)" label="Bramber"/>
<link wikidata="Q11005" start="174" end="190" title="British House of Commons" label="House of Commons"/>
<link wikidata="Q5326173" start="225" end="240" title="Earl Winterton" label="Baron Winterton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1538454" start="245" end="249" title="Gort" label="Gort"/>
<link wikidata="Q5326173" start="297" end="313" title="Earl Winterton" label="Viscount Turnour"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="598" end="616" title="Edward Turnour (died 1721)" label="Sir Edward Turnour"/>
<link wikidata="Q486839" start="618" end="638" title="Member of Parliament" label="Member of Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q7101721" start="643" end="649" title="Orford (UK Parliament constituency)" label="Orford"/>
<link wikidata="Q5345668" start="664" end="682" title="Edward Turnour (speaker)" label="Sir Edward Turnour"/>
<link wikidata="Q464103" start="684" end="715" title="Speaker of the House of Commons (United Kingdom)" label="Speaker of the House of Commons"/>
<link wikidata="Q9626" start="997" end="1009" title="Conservative Party (UK)" label="Conservative"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075944" start="1037" end="1044" title="Horsham (UK Parliament constituency)" label="Horsham"/>
<link wikidata="Q3965295" start="1106" end="1140" title="Under-Secretary of State for India" label="Under-Secretary of State for India"/>
<link wikidata="Q162754" start="1148" end="1184" title="Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster" label="Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q5326173" start="1209" end="1222" title="Earl Winterton" label="Baron Turnour"/>
<link wikidata="Q7496674" start="1227" end="1238" title="Shillinglee" label="Shillinglee"/>
<link wikidata="Q23346" start="1246" end="1262" title="County of Sussex" label="County of Sussex"/>
<link wikidata="Q863009" start="1271" end="1300" title="Peerage of the United Kingdom" label="Peerage of the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q16" start="1452" end="1458" title="Canada" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q7496674" start="1649" end="1660" title="Shillinglee" label="Shillinglee"/>
<link wikidata="Q23287" start="1662" end="1673" title="West Sussex" label="West Sussex"/>
<link wikidata="Q2323366" start="1790" end="1806" title="Winterton-on-Sea" label="Winterton-on-Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q23109" start="1810" end="1817" title="Norfolk" label="Norfolk"/>
<link wikidata="Q5343070" start="1890" end="1930" title="Edward Garth-Turnour, 1st Earl Winterton" label="Edward Garth-Turnour, 1st Earl Winterton"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1944" end="1978" title="Edward Turnour, 2nd Earl Winterton" label="Edward Turnour, 2nd Earl Winterton"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1992" end="2026" title="Edward Turnour, 3rd Earl Winterton" label="Edward Turnour, 3rd Earl Winterton"/>
<link wikidata="Q5345666" start="2040" end="2074" title="Edward Turnour, 4th Earl Winterton" label="Edward Turnour, 4th Earl Winterton"/>
<link wikidata="Q5345667" start="2088" end="2122" title="Edward Turnour, 5th Earl Winterton" label="Edward Turnour, 5th Earl Winterton"/>
<link wikidata="Q333382" start="2136" end="2170" title="Edward Turnour, 6th Earl Winterton" label="Edward Turnour, 6th Earl Winterton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2166701" start="2458" end="2486" title="Waterloo Lutheran University" label="Waterloo Lutheran University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1765120" start="2507" end="2509" title="Bachelor of Arts" label="BA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1859616" start="2830" end="2848" title="peerage of Ireland" label="peerage of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370385" start="2957" end="2973" title="heir presumptive" label="heir presumptive"/>
<link wikidata="Q2762318" start="3142" end="3155" title="heir apparent" label="heir apparent"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="461036" wikidata="Q912402" url="?curid=461036" title="Occupational Safety and Health Act (United States)">
<text>The Occupational Safety and Health Act of 1970 is a US labor law governing the federal law of occupational health and safety in the private sector and federal government in the United States. It was enacted by Congress in 1970 and was signed by President Richard Nixon on December 29, 1970. Its main goal is to ensure that employers provide employees with an environment free from recognized hazards, such as exposure to toxic chemicals, excessive noise levels, mechanical dangers, heat or cold stress, or unsanitary conditions. The Act created the Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) and the National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH).

The Act can be found in the United States Code at title 29, chapter 15.

==History of federal workplace safety legislation==
Few workplace health and safety protections were available through the federal government before the passage of OSHA. The American system of mass production encouraged the use of machinery, while the statutory regime did nothing to protect workplace safety. For most employers, it was cheaper to replace a dead or injured worker than it was to introduce safety measures. Tort law provided little recourse for relief for the survivors of dead workers or for injured employees. After the Civil War, some improvements were made through the establishment of state railroad and factory commissions, the adoption of new technology (such as the railway air brake), and more widespread availability of life insurance. But the overall impact of these improvements was minimal.

The first federal safety legislation was enacted in the Progressive period. In 1893, Congress passed the Safety Appliance Act, the first federal statute to require safety equipment in the workplace (the law applied only to railroad equipment, however). In 1910, in response to a series of highly publicized and deadly mine explosions and collapses, Congress established the United States Bureau of Mines to conduct research into mine safety (although the Bureau had no authority to regulate mine safety). Backed by trade unions, many states also enacted workers&#x27; compensation laws which discouraged employers from permitting unsafe workplaces. These laws, as well as the growing power of labor unions and public anger toward poor workplace safety, led to significant reductions in worker accidents for a time.

Industrial production increased significantly in the United States during World War II, and industrial accidents soared. Winning the war took precedence over safety, and most labor unions were more concerned with maintaining wages in the face of severe inflation than with workplace health and safety. After the war ended, however, workplace accident rates remained high and began to rise. In the two years preceding OSHA&#x27;s enactment, 14,000 workers died each year from workplace hazards, and another 2 million were disabled or harmed. Additionally, the &quot;chemical revolution&quot; introduced a vast array of new chemical compounds to the manufacturing environment. The health effects of these chemicals were poorly understood, and workers received few protections against prolonged or high levels of exposure. While a few states, such as California and New York, had enacted workplace safety as well as workplace health legislation, most states had not changed their workplace protection laws since the turn of the century.

==Passage==

In the mid-1960s, growing awareness of the environmental impact of many chemicals had led to a politically powerful environmental movement. Some labor leaders seized on the public&#x27;s growing unease over chemicals in the environment, arguing that the effect of these compounds on worker health was even worse than the low-level exposure plants and animals received in the wild. On January 23, 1968, President Lyndon B. Johnson submitted a comprehensive occupational health and safety bill to Congress. Led by the United States Chamber of Commerce and the National Association of Manufacturers, the legislation was widely opposed by business. Many labor leaders, including the leadership of the AFL–CIO, supported the legislation, including testifying in support at congressional hearings. The legislation died in committee.

On April 14, 1969, President Richard Nixon introduced two bills into Congress which would have also protected worker health and safety. The Nixon legislation was much less prescriptive than the Johnson bill, and workplace health and safety regulation would be advisory rather than mandatory. However, Representative James G. O&#x27;Hara and Senator Harrison A. Williams introduced a much stricter bill similar to the Johnson legislation of the year before.

Companion legislation introduced in the House also imposed an all-purpose &quot;general duty&quot; clause on the enforcing agency as well. With the stricter approach of the Democratic bill apparently favored by a majority of both chambers, and unions now strongly supporting a bill, Republicans introduced a new, competing bill. The compromise bill established the independent research and standard-setting board favored by Nixon, while creating a new enforcement agency. The compromise bill also gave the Department of Labor the power to litigate on the enforcement agency&#x27;s behalf (as in the Democratic bill). In November 1970, both chambers acted: The House passed the Republican compromise bill, while the Senate passed the stricter Democratic bill (which now included the general duty clause).

A conference committee considered the final bill in early December 1970. Union leaders pressured members of the conference committee to place the standard-setting function in the Department of Labor rather than an independent board. In return, unions agreed to let an independent review commission have veto power over enforcement actions. Unions also agreed to removal of a provision in the legislation which would have let the Secretary of Labor shut down plants or stop manufacturing procedures which put workers in &quot;imminent danger&quot; of harm. In exchange for a Republican proposal to establish an independent occupational health and safety research agency, Democrats won inclusion of the &quot;general duty&quot; clause and the right for union representatives to accompany a federal inspector during inspections. The conference committee bill passed both chambers on December 17, 1970, and President Nixon signed the bill on December 29, 1970. According to the &quot;New York Times&quot;, labor and environment activist Tony Mazzocchi was a &quot;principal force behind the legislation&quot;.

The Act went into effect on April 28, 1971 (now celebrated as Workers&#x27; Memorial Day by American labor unions).

==Description==

In passing the Act, Congress declared its intent &quot;to assure so far as possible every working man and woman in the Nation safe and healthful working conditions and to preserve our human resources.&quot;

The Act created the Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA), an agency of the Department of Labor. OSHA was given the authority both to set and enforce workplace health and safety standards. The Act also created the independent Occupational Safety and Health Review Commission to review enforcement priorities, actions and cases.

The Act also established the National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH), an independent research institute in the then Department of Health, Education &amp; Welfare now under-Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.

The Act defines an employer to be any &quot;person engaged in a business affecting commerce who has employees, but does not include the United States or any state or political subdivision of a State.&quot; The Act applies to employers as diverse as manufacturers, construction companies, law firms, hospitals, charities, labor unions and private schools.

Churches and other religious organizations are covered if they employ workers for secular purposes. The Act excludes the self-employed, family farms, workplaces covered by other federal laws (such as mining, nuclear weapons manufacture, railroads and airlines) and state and local governments (unless state law permits otherwise). The Act covers federal agencies and the United States Postal Service.

Section 5 of the Act contains the &quot;general duty clause.&quot; The &quot;general duty clause&quot; requires employers to 1) Maintain conditions or adopt practices reasonably necessary and appropriate to protect workers on the job; 2) Be familiar with and comply with standards applicable to their establishments; and 3) Ensure that employees have and use personal protective equipment when required for safety and health. OSHA has established regulations for when it may act under the &quot;general duty clause.&quot; The four criteria are 1) There must be a hazard; 2) The hazard must be a recognized hazard (e.g., the employer knew or should have known about the hazard, the hazard is obvious, or the hazard is a recognized one within the industry); 3) The hazard could cause or is likely to cause serious harm or death; and 4) The hazard must be correctable (OSHA recognizes not all hazards are correctable).

Although theoretically a powerful tool against workplace hazards, it is difficult to meet all four criteria. Therefore, OSHA has engaged in extensive regulatory rule-making to meet its obligations under the law.

Due to the difficulty of the rule-making process (which is governed by the Administrative Procedures Act), OSHA has focused on basic mechanical and chemical hazards rather than procedures. Major areas which its standards currently cover are: Toxic substances, harmful physical agents, electrical hazards, fall hazards, hazards associated with trenches and digging, hazardous waste, infectious disease, fire and explosion dangers, dangerous atmospheres, machine hazards, and confined spaces.

Section 8 of the Act covers reporting requirements. All employers must report to OSHA within eight hours if an employee dies from a work-related incident, or three or more employees are hospitalized as a result of a work-related incident. Additionally, all fatal on-the-job heart attacks must also be reported. Section 8 permits OSHA inspectors to enter, inspect and investigate, during regular working hours, any workplace covered by the Act. Employers must also communicate with employees about hazards in the workplace. By regulation, OSHA requires that employers keep a record of every non-consumer chemical product used in the workplace. Detailed technical bulletins called material safety data sheets (MSDSs) must be posted and available for employees to read and use to avoid chemical hazards. OSHA also requires employers to report on every injury or job-related illness requiring medical treatment (other than first aid) on OSHA Form 300, &quot;Log of Work-Related Injuries and Illnesses&quot; (known as an &quot;OSHA Log&quot; or &quot;Form 300&quot;). An annual summary is also required and must be posted for three months, and records must be kept for at least five years.

Section 11(c) of the Act prohibits any employer from discharging, retaliating or discriminating against any employee because the worker has exercised rights under the Act. These rights include complaining to OSHA and seeking an OSHA inspection, participating in an OSHA inspection, and participating or testifying in any proceeding related to an OSHA inspection.

Section 18 of the Act permits and encourages states to adopt their own occupational safety and health plans, so long as the state standards and enforcement &quot;are or will be at least as effective in providing safe and healthful employment&quot; as the federal OSH Act. States that have such plans are known as &quot;OSHA States.&quot; As of 2007, 22 states and territories operated complete plans and four others had plans that covered only the public sector.

==See also==
*United States labor law
*Factory Acts (UK)
*Occupational Safety and Health Act 1994 (Malaysia)
*Hazard prevention
*Health and Safety at Work etc. Act 1974 (UK)
*Occupational fatality

==Notes==
==Further reading==
* David Rosner, Gerald Markowitz. 2020. , American Journal of Public Health;
* De Lia A., Safety at workplace: un’introduzione al tema della sicurezza sui luoghi di lavoro negli Stati Uniti d’America, in www.quotidianolegale.it, dec. 2024, ISSN 2975-1985 (pp. 1–20).

==External links==
* As codified in 29 U.S.C. chapter 15 of the United States Code from the LII
* As codified in 29 U.S.C. chapter 15 of the United States Code from the US House of Representatives
* Occupational Safety and Health Act of 1970 (PDF/details) as amended in the GPO Statute Compilations collection
* The official OSHA web site
* The official NIOSH web site
* &quot;The Job Safety Law of 1970: Its Passage Was Perilous&#x27; Official DOL website</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q912402" start="4" end="46" title="Occupational Safety and Health Act (United States)" label="Occupational Safety and Health Act of 1970"/>
<link wikidata="Q3039782" start="52" end="64" title="US labor law" label="US labor law"/>
<link wikidata="Q692218" start="79" end="90" title="United States federal law" label="federal law"/>
<link wikidata="Q629029" start="94" end="124" title="occupational health and safety" label="occupational health and safety"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="177" end="190" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q9588" start="255" end="268" title="Richard Nixon" label="Richard Nixon"/>
<link wikidata="Q746186" start="549" end="594" title="Occupational Safety and Health Administration" label="Occupational Safety and Health Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q60346" start="610" end="663" title="National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health" label="National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196092" start="702" end="720" title="United States Code" label="United States Code"/>
<link wikidata="Q158970" start="1170" end="1178" title="Tort law" label="Tort law"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="1285" end="1294" title="American Civil War" label="Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196198" start="1437" end="1454" title="railway air brake" label="railway air brake"/>
<link wikidata="Q626608" start="1493" end="1507" title="life insurance" label="life insurance"/>
<link wikidata="Q4379869" start="1624" end="1642" title="Progressivism in the United States" label="Progressive period"/>
<link wikidata="Q758662" start="1673" end="1693" title="Safety Appliance Act" label="Safety Appliance Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q7889588" start="1942" end="1971" title="United States Bureau of Mines" label="United States Bureau of Mines"/>
<link wikidata="Q178790" start="2083" end="2094" title="trade union" label="trade union"/>
<link wikidata="Q1184466" start="2122" end="2148" title="workers&amp;#x27; compensation" label="workers&amp;#x27; compensation"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="2458" end="2470" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q501353" start="2949" end="2968" title="History of chemistry" label="chemical revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q8189417" start="3548" end="3570" title="environmental movement" label="environmental movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q9640" start="3844" end="3861" title="Lyndon B. Johnson" label="Lyndon B. Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1800288" start="3948" end="3981" title="United States Chamber of Commerce" label="United States Chamber of Commerce"/>
<link wikidata="Q3336837" start="3990" end="4027" title="National Association of Manufacturers" label="National Association of Manufacturers"/>
<link wikidata="Q464271" start="4129" end="4136" title="AFL–CIO" label="AFL–CIO"/>
<link wikidata="Q11701" start="4561" end="4575" title="United States House of Representatives" label="Representative"/>
<link wikidata="Q1668187" start="4576" end="4596" title="James G. O&amp;#x27;Hara" label="James G. O&amp;#x27;Hara"/>
<link wikidata="Q66096" start="4601" end="4608" title="United States Senate" label="Senator"/>
<link wikidata="Q1586255" start="4609" end="4629" title="Harrison A. Williams" label="Harrison A. Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q29552" start="4891" end="4901" title="Democratic Party (United States)" label="Democratic"/>
<link wikidata="Q29468" start="5001" end="5012" title="Republican Party (United States)" label="Republicans"/>
<link wikidata="Q628807" start="5224" end="5243" title="United States Department of Labor" label="Department of Labor"/>
<link wikidata="Q460567" start="5525" end="5545" title="United States Congress Conference committee" label="conference committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q7822915" start="6556" end="6570" title="Tony Mazzocchi" label="Tony Mazzocchi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058840" start="6692" end="6718" title="Workers&amp;#x27; Memorial Day" label="Workers&amp;#x27; Memorial Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q746186" start="6992" end="7037" title="Occupational Safety and Health Administration" label="Occupational Safety and Health Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q7075792" start="7213" end="7261" title="Occupational Safety and Health Review Commission" label="Occupational Safety and Health Review Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q60346" start="7345" end="7398" title="National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health" label="National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health"/>
<link wikidata="Q583725" start="7510" end="7537" title="Centers for Disease Control and Prevention" label="Centers for Disease Control"/>
<link wikidata="Q668687" start="8282" end="8310" title="United States Postal Service" label="United States Postal Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q5532340" start="8353" end="8372" title="general duty clause" label="general duty clause"/>
<link wikidata="Q3649511" start="9133" end="9138" title="occupational fatality" label="death"/>
<link wikidata="Q25344901" start="9518" end="9547" title="Administrative Procedure Act (United States)" label="Administrative Procedures Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q222067" start="10614" end="10641" title="material safety data sheets" label="material safety data sheets"/>
<link wikidata="Q133981" start="10854" end="10863" title="first aid" label="first aid"/>
<link wikidata="Q112983147" start="11174" end="11216" title="whistleblower" label="discharging, retaliating or discriminating"/>
<link wikidata="Q3039782" start="11963" end="11986" title="United States labor law" label="United States labor law"/>
<link wikidata="Q1390816" start="11988" end="12000" title="Factory Acts" label="Factory Acts"/>
<link wikidata="Q7075788" start="12007" end="12046" title="Occupational Safety and Health Act 1994" label="Occupational Safety and Health Act 1994"/>
<link wikidata="Q189447" start="12059" end="12076" title="Hazard prevention" label="Hazard prevention"/>
<link wikidata="Q208934" start="12078" end="12117" title="Health and Safety at Work etc. Act 1974" label="Health and Safety at Work etc. Act 1974"/>
<link wikidata="Q3649511" start="12124" end="12145" title="Occupational fatality" label="Occupational fatality"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196092" start="12509" end="12527" title="United States Code" label="United States Code"/>
<link wikidata="Q6517400" start="12537" end="12540" title="Legal Information Institute" label="LII"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196092" start="12586" end="12604" title="United States Code" label="United States Code"/>
<link wikidata="Q11701" start="12614" end="12641" title="United States House of Representatives" label="US House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q2928358" start="12719" end="12722" title="United States Government Publishing Office" label="GPO"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="461051" wikidata="Q11723827" url="?curid=461051" title="Evrytania">
<text>Evrytania ( ; ) is one of the regional units of Greece. It is part of the region of Central Greece. Its capital is Karpenisi (approx. 8,000 inhabitants).

==Geography==


Evrytania is almost entirely formed of mountains, including the Tymfristos and the Panaitoliko in the south. Its rivers include the Acheloos in the west, Agrafiotis to the east, and Megdova in the east flowing down to the Ionian Sea. It is one of the least populated regional units in Greece. The area borders Aetolia-Acarnania to the west, southwest and south (west over the Acheloos river), Karditsa regional unit to the north, and Phthiotis to the east. Evrytania also features a famous skiing resort located near Karpenisi on the Tymfristos mountain.

===Climate===
Its climate is a mixture of Mediterranean and mountainous in the western portion. Much of the area receives snow in winter and is warm during the summer months.

===Transport===

The Greek National Road 38 from Agrinio to Lamia passes through the southern part of Evrytania and the town Karpenisi. On the border with Phthiotis, the GR-38 passes through the 1.4 km-long Tymfristos Tunnel since 2004.

==History==
Evrytania dates to ancient times, the area was first settled around 6000 to 5000 BC. In classical antiquity, the Greek Eurytanes () resided in the region. In the 2nd century BC it fell into Roman hands, and became part of the Roman province of Macedonia. At the division of the Roman Empire in the 3rd century it joined the eastern part, also known as the Byzantine Empire. In the aftermath of the Fourth Crusade in 1204 it became part of the Despotate of Epirus, which was conquered by the Ottoman Empire around 1450. Unlike other parts of Greece at the time, while the eastern and the southern parts were definitively ruled by the Ottomans, the area around Agrafa managed to sustain complete autonomy due to the difficulties experienced in conquest of the region. After 400 years, Evrytania finally became part of Greece following the Greek War of Independence. As in all of Greece, the area was affected by World War II, and later the Greek Civil War. Peace finally returned to Evrytania at the end of the 1940s and its economy expanded, though there was significant migration from the villages to cities.

==Administration==
The regional unit Evrytania is subdivided into 2 municipalities. These are (number as in the map in the infobox):
*Agrafa (2)
*Karpenisi (1)

===Prefecture===

Evrytania was created as a prefecture in 1947 out of the Aetolia-Acarnania prefecture. As a part of the 2011 Kallikratis government reform, the regional unit Evrytania was created out of the former prefecture Evrytania (). The prefecture had the same territory as the present regional unit. At the same time, the municipalities were reorganised, according to the table below.

==Persons==
*Pavlos Bakoyannis (1935-1989), Liberal Greek politician
*Markos Giolias, artist
*Demosthenis Goulas, artist
*Stefanos Granitsas (1880-1915), artist, writer and journalist
*Georgios Kafantaris (1873-1946), politician
*Spyros Paliouras (1875-1957), a Greek artist and writer
*Zacharias Papantoniou (1877-1940), artist, writer and journalist
*Michael Stafylas (1920-2018), artist
*Lefteris Theodorou, painter
*Spyridon Papadimitriou, General Greek Army,

==See also==
*List of settlements in Evrytania
*Evrytania (constituency)

==References==
==External links==
*Prefecture of Evrytania official website: www.evrytania.gr
*Evrytania</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q11723827" start="0" end="9" title="Evrytania" label="Evrytania"/>
<link wikidata="Q1234255" start="30" end="54" title="regional units of Greece" label="regional units of Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q207299" start="74" end="80" title="modern regions of Greece" label="region"/>
<link wikidata="Q199580" start="84" end="98" title="Central Greece (administrative region)" label="Central Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q771781" start="115" end="124" title="Karpenisi" label="Karpenisi"/>
<link wikidata="Q391510" start="235" end="245" title="Tymfristos" label="Tymfristos"/>
<link wikidata="Q2010642" start="254" end="265" title="Panaitoliko" label="Panaitoliko"/>
<link wikidata="Q203923" start="303" end="311" title="Acheloos River" label="Acheloos"/>
<link wikidata="Q395923" start="325" end="335" title="Agrafiotis" label="Agrafiotis"/>
<link wikidata="Q734838" start="353" end="360" title="Megdova" label="Megdova"/>
<link wikidata="Q37495" start="393" end="403" title="Ionian Sea" label="Ionian Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q202624" start="481" end="498" title="Aetolia-Acarnania" label="Aetolia-Acarnania"/>
<link wikidata="Q203923" start="547" end="555" title="Achelous River" label="Acheloos"/>
<link wikidata="Q212810" start="564" end="586" title="Karditsa (regional unit)" label="Karditsa regional unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q207554" start="605" end="614" title="Phthiotis" label="Phthiotis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371299" start="924" end="946" title="Greek National Road 38" label="Greek National Road 38"/>
<link wikidata="Q396807" start="952" end="959" title="Agrinio" label="Agrinio"/>
<link wikidata="Q192980" start="963" end="968" title="Lamia (city)" label="Lamia"/>
<link wikidata="Q771781" start="1028" end="1037" title="Karpenisi" label="Karpenisi"/>
<link wikidata="Q207554" start="1058" end="1067" title="Phthiotis" label="Phthiotis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1110" end="1127" title="Tymfristos Tunnel" label="Tymfristos Tunnel"/>
<link wikidata="Q11723827" start="1272" end="1281" title="Eurytanes" label="Eurytanes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2497438" start="1343" end="1348" title="Roman Greece" label="Roman"/>
<link wikidata="Q207497" start="1397" end="1406" title="Macedonia (Roman province)" label="Macedonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q12544" start="1509" end="1525" title="Byzantine Empire" label="Byzantine Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q51656" start="1551" end="1565" title="Fourth Crusade" label="Fourth Crusade"/>
<link wikidata="Q187684" start="1596" end="1615" title="Despotate of Epirus" label="Despotate of Epirus"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="1644" end="1658" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1230182" start="1812" end="1818" title="Agrafa" label="Agrafa"/>
<link wikidata="Q41" start="1969" end="1975" title="Greece" label="Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q182062" start="1990" end="2015" title="Greek War of Independence" label="Greek War of Independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="2063" end="2075" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q188972" start="2091" end="2106" title="Greek Civil War" label="Greek Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1241397" start="2397" end="2403" title="Agrafa (municipality)" label="Agrafa"/>
<link wikidata="Q771781" start="2409" end="2418" title="Karpenisi" label="Karpenisi"/>
<link wikidata="Q202595" start="2469" end="2479" title="prefectures of Greece" label="prefecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q202624" start="2499" end="2516" title="Aetolia-Acarnania" label="Aetolia-Acarnania"/>
<link wikidata="Q2040292" start="2832" end="2849" title="Pavlos Bakoyannis" label="Pavlos Bakoyannis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2889" end="2903" title="Markos Giolias" label="Markos Giolias"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2913" end="2931" title="Demosthenis Goulas" label="Demosthenis Goulas"/>
<link wikidata="Q7606513" start="2941" end="2959" title="Stefanos Granitsas" label="Stefanos Granitsas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1243858" start="3004" end="3023" title="Georgios Kafantaris" label="Georgios Kafantaris"/>
<link wikidata="Q7581807" start="3049" end="3065" title="Spyros Paliouras" label="Spyros Paliouras"/>
<link wikidata="Q8063919" start="3106" end="3127" title="Zacharias Papantoniou" label="Zacharias Papantoniou"/>
<link wikidata="Q6835934" start="3172" end="3188" title="Michael Stafylas" label="Michael Stafylas"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3210" end="3228" title="Lefteris Theodorou" label="Lefteris Theodorou"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3239" end="3261" title="Spyridon Papadimitriou" label="Spyridon Papadimitriou"/>
<link wikidata="Q6638202" start="3298" end="3330" title="List of settlements in Evrytania" label="List of settlements in Evrytania"/>
<link wikidata="Q5418807" start="3332" end="3356" title="Evrytania (constituency)" label="Evrytania (constituency)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="461052" wikidata="Q2991012" url="?curid=461052" title="Earl of Desmond">
<text>Earl of Desmond ( meaning Earl of South Munster) is a title of nobility created by the English monarch in the peerage of Ireland. The title has been created four times. It was first awarded in 1329 to Maurice FitzGerald, 4th Baron Desmond, a Hiberno-Norman lord in Southwest Ireland, and it was held by his descendants until 1583 when they rose against the English crown in the Desmond Rebellions. Following two short-lived recreations of the title in the early 1600s, the title has been held since 1628 by the Feilding family of Warwickshire, England. The current holder is Alexander Feilding, 12th Earl of Denbigh and 11th Earl of Desmond (4th creation).

== Summary of history of the title ==
The Munster Desmonds were a cadet (junior) branch of the powerful FitzGerald dynasty who came to Ireland from Wales as part of the 12th century Anglo-Norman invasion. Over the following centuries, the FitzGeralds famously assimilated themselves in Ireland, and, in the late 16th century Tudor conquest of Ireland, they took arms against the Protestant English Crown in the Desmond Rebellions. As a result, the family&#x27;s estates were confiscated, the earl beheaded and the title suppressed.

The English government imprisoned James FitzGerald, the eldest son of the last earl, in the Tower of London for decades. However, in 1600, during the Nine Years War, in an attempt to pacify the people of Munster, James was freed and title recreated for him though without right of inheritance. The people of Munster refused to accept the new Earl - a Protestant - and James died a year later in obscurity.

The third creation was in 1619 for Richard Preston, a favourite of James I: Preston had married the daughter and heiress of the 10th Earl of Ormond, neighbour, relative and enemy of the Munster Desmonds. Preston died without male heir and - before Preston&#x27;s death - James I decided the Desmond title should be subsequently awarded to George Feilding, a nephew of another of the King&#x27;s favourites. The idea was that George would marry Preston&#x27;s daughter Elizabeth and thereby inherit lands in Ireland.

Charles I confirmed George Feilding as Earl of Desmond on Preston&#x27;s death in 1628 (the fourth creation) but George never got to marry the independent-minded Elizabeth. Since 1675 the title, shorn of its traditional Irish estate, has been held by Feilding&#x27;s descendants as a secondary title to that of the Earl of Denbigh.

==The FitzGerald Barons and Earls of Desmond==

===The Territory of Desmond===

Desmond (Irish: Deasmhumhain, meaning &#x27;South Munster&#x27;) was a historic kingdom in southwestern Ireland, founded in 1118. It comprised all of what is now County Cork and most of County Kerry. The eastern half of Desmond was conquered by the Anglo-Normans and became the Earldom of Desmond, but the western half of Desmond lived on as a semi-independent Gaelic kingdom until 1596.

===Barony of Desmond===

The House of Desmond was a branch of the famous FitzGerald Dynasty (Geraldines) in Ireland which had been founded by Maurice FitzGerald, Lord of Lanstephan in Wales ( c.1105 – c.1176). Maurice was of Anglo-Norman and Welsh descent.

Though the House of Desmond branch was founded by the eldest of Maurice FitzGeralds&#x27;s sons, Thomas FitzMaurice, Lord OConnello, it became the cadet or junior branch of the family: the senior branch, the House of Kildare, was founded by Thomas&#x27;s younger brother Gerald, 1st Lord of Offally.

Thomas, Lord OConello was a key supporter of the Lord of Pembroke known as (&quot;Strongbow&quot;) in his 1169 invasion of Ireland. Thomas&#x27;s son, John FitzThomas, became the first Baron Desmond upon receiving, for his homage and service, a grant in 1259 of the lands of Decies (today&#x27;s County Waterford) and Desmond from Prince Edward of England. Before passing to Edward, these lands had been held by Thomas FitzAnthony, the father of John&#x27;s wife Margery FitzAnthony.

===Earl of Desmond: first creation===

The title Earl of Desmond was first created for Maurice FitzGerald, 4th Baron Desmond in about 1329.

Gerald FitzGerald, 3rd Earl of Desmond, married Eleanor Butler. Through her, John FitzGerald, 4th Earl of Desmond and all subsequent Geraldine earls of Desmond could trace descent through Eleanor de Bohun to Elizabeth of Rhuddlan, daughter of King Edward I of England of the House of Plantagenet by his queen, Eleanor of Castile of the House of Burgundy.

Over time, according to English sources, the FitzGerald family became highly assimilated to the local Irish culture. The final Earl of Desmond of this creation was Gerald FitzGerald, the 14th Earl. The FitzGeralds and Fitzmaurices had resisted the Protestant Reformation of King Henry VIII and, after the failure of the first and second Desmond Rebellions, the 14th Earl was defeated and killed by forces loyal to Queen Elizabeth I on 11 November 1583. His title, along with the enormous estates of his family, were forfeit to the English Crown.

====Numbering of Earls of the first creation====
Authors have numbered the earls of the first creation from 1 to 14, 1 to 15, or 1 to 16, depending on whether Nicholas, an &quot;idiot&quot;, is included as 3rd Earl, and whether John, the &quot;de facto&quot; 12th Earl (died 1536) and James FitzGerald, de jure 12th Earl of Desmond (died 1540), are both numbered 12 or are numbered 12 and 13. Wikipedia numbers the earls 1 to 14 omitting the &quot;idiot&quot; and numbering John &quot;de facto&quot; and James &quot;de jure&quot; both as 12, following Cokayne (1916) and the Oxford Dictionary of National Biography (2004). Burke (1866), Webb (1878) and the Dictionary of national Biography (1889) admit 15, and Bagwell (1885) 16 earls of the first creation.

===Earl of Desmond: Second Creation===

The second creation was in 1600 for James FitzGerald the &quot;Tower Earl&quot;, son of the last (14th Earl) of the first creation. He spent much of his life in captivity in the Tower of London, and was obliged to convert to Protestantism. He was temporarily, but unsuccessfully, restored to the earldom in 1600–01 by the English in an attempt to pacify Munster during the Nine Years War, and to combat rise of the &quot;Súgán&quot; (pretender, see below) Earl but the people rejected the new Protestant Earl.
James was not restored to the lands associated with the title, and was only given the right to the title of Earl of Desmond for life; he was also created Baron Inchiquin with the right to pass that title to his successors, but he did not have heirs and died in obscurity in 1601.

===Pretenders to the title===
James FitzThomas FitzGerald, the &quot;Súgán&quot; (Irish: &quot;straw&quot;, i.e. pretender) Earl, attempted, but failed, to regain the title during the Nine Years War.James&#x27;s claim was based on the fact he was the eldest grandson of the 13th Earl, but he was illegitimate by descent. The 13th Earl&#x27;s first marriage had to been to his own great-niece: the marriage had been declared invalid due to consanguinity and James&#x27;s father, the child of the union, had been declared illegitimate (the 14th Earl was the child of a second, legitimate marriage).

James had not joined the rebellion of the 14th Earl and following the 14th Earl&#x27;s death, James lobbied the English - at first with some success - to be restored to the title. When that failed in 1598 he joined the rebellion and assumed the title of Earl of Desmond, leading eight thousand clansmen. He was captured in 1601 and is believed to have died in the Tower of London in 1608.

James&#x27;s younger brother John had joined him in rebellion but escaped to Spain. Following the &quot;Súgán&quot; Earl&#x27;s death John and his son Gerald continued the pretence to the title. John died in Barcelona and Gerald - &quot;Conde de Desmond&quot; in Spanish - entered the service of the Emperor Ferdinand, and was killed in 1632. As Gerald left no issue, with him ended the male heirs of the four eldest sons of Thomas FitzGerald, 7th Earl of Desmond: this was the effective extinction of the line of the Fitzgerald House of Desmond.

===Desmond Geraldine arms and motto ===
The coat of arms of the Geraldine Earls of Desmond, blazoned &quot;ermine a saltire gules&quot;, where the ermine tincture is a mark of cadency relative to the senior Kildare branch of the Geraldines (whose arms are more simply blazoned &quot;argent, a saltire gules&quot;). The crest shows a man in armour on horseback, facing to the right.

The motto appearing beneath the Desmond arms was (Shanid to victory) a reference to the Desmond stronghold of Shanid Castle.

==Earl of Desmond: third and fourth creation==
The third creation was in 1619 for Richard Preston, 1st Lord Dingwall, who was also created Baron Dunmore.

The fourth creation happened while Preston was still alive, in 1622 for George Feilding, 1st Viscount Callan, second son of the Earl of Denbigh and nephew of James I&#x27;s favourite and lover, George Villiers. The eight-year-old Feilding was given the right to the title Earl of Desmond as and when Preston died without a male heir. Preston had also been a favourite and probably lover of James I; he had a daughter who, the plan was, George Feilding would marry, but this did not happen. In 1628 Preston died and George was made Earl of Desmond by Charles I (Preston&#x27;s Scottish Lordship of Dingwall passed to his daughter Elizabeth, the Duchess of Ormond).
George Feilding&#x27;s eldest son, the second Earl of Desmond, also inherited the title of third Earl of Denbigh after his uncle, the second Earl of Denbigh, died childless. The title Earl of Desmond has descended subsequently with the title Earl of Denbigh and the current holder is the twelfth Earl of Denbigh and eleventh Earl of Desmond.

==List of Barons and Earls of Desmond==

=== Barons Desmond (1259) ===
*John FitzThomas FitzGerald, 1st Baron Desmond (died 1261) (son of Thomas FitzMaurice FitzGerald)
*Thomas FitzMaurice FitzGerald, 2nd Baron Desmond (died 1298) (grandson of preceding)
*Thomas FitzThomas FitzGerald, 3rd Baron Desmond (1290–1307) (son of preceding)
*Maurice FitzThomas FitzGerald, 4th Baron Desmond (died 1356) (brother of preceding; created Earl of Desmond in 1329)

=== Earls of Desmond, first creation (1329) ===

*Maurice FitzGerald, 1st Earl of Desmond (died 1356) (new creation)
*Maurice FitzGerald, 2nd Earl of Desmond (1336–1358) (son of preceding)
*Gerald FitzGerald, 3rd Earl of Desmond (died 1398) (half-brother of preceding)
*John FitzGerald, 4th Earl of Desmond (died 1399) (son of preceding)
*Thomas FitzGerald, 5th Earl of Desmond (–1420) (son of preceding)
*James FitzGerald, 6th Earl of Desmond (died 1463) (the &quot;Usurper,&quot; paternal uncle of preceding)
*Thomas FitzGerald, 7th Earl of Desmond (died 1468) (son of preceding)
*James FitzGerald, 8th Earl of Desmond (1459–1487) (son of preceding)
*Maurice FitzGerald, 9th Earl of Desmond (died 1520) (brother of preceding)
*James FitzGerald, 10th Earl of Desmond (died 1529) (son of preceding)
*Thomas FitzGerald, 11th Earl of Desmond (1454–1534) (paternal uncle of preceding)
*John FitzGerald, de facto 12th Earl of Desmond (died 1536) (brother of preceding, paternal granduncle of James FitzGerald, de jure 12th Earl of Desmond)
*James FitzGerald, de jure 12th Earl of Desmond (died 1540) (grandson of Thomas FitzGerald, 11th Earl of Desmond, grandnephew of John FitzGerald, de facto 12th Earl of Desmond)
*James FitzGerald, 13th Earl of Desmond (died 1558) (son of the &quot;de facto&quot; 12th Earl and legitimate heir of the &quot;de jure&quot; 12th Earl.
*Gerald FitzGerald, 14th Earl of Desmond ( – 1583) (son of preceding; forfeit 1582)

=== Pretenders to the first creation (1598-1632) ===
* James FitzThomas FitzGerald, the &quot;Súgán Earl&quot;, died in Tower of London (illegitimate grandson of 13th Earl)
* John FitzThomas FitzGerald - brother of the &quot;Súgán Earl&quot;, died Barcelona (brother of preceding)
* Gerald FitzJohn FitzGerald - son of John, known as &quot;Conde de Desmond&quot;, died in service of the King of Spain, 1632 (son of preceding - no heirs)

=== Earls of Desmond, second creation (1600) ===
*James FitzGerald, 1st Earl of Desmond (1571–1601) The &quot;Tower Earl.&quot; (son of the 14th Earl). Title created as a life peerage.

=== Earls of Desmond, third creation (1619) ===
*Richard Preston, 1st Earl of Desmond (died 1628) married the great-granddaughter of 10th Earl of the first creation. (extinct)

=== Earls of Desmond, fourth creation (1622/28)===
* George Feilding, 1st Earl of Desmond(died 1665) granted right to title on reversion, 1622; possession of title, 1628.
* William Feildng, 2nd Earl of Desmond (died 1685) inherited superior title of Earl of Denbigh in 1675.
For subsequent Earls of Desmond (title held with the title Earl of Denbigh), see List of Earls of Denbigh and Earls of Desmond.

== Notes ==
== References ==
* – Dacre to Dysart
*</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2991012" start="0" end="15" title="Earl of Desmond" label="Earl of Desmond"/>
<link wikidata="Q131438" start="40" end="47" title="Munster" label="Munster"/>
<link wikidata="Q1859616" start="110" end="128" title="peerage of Ireland" label="peerage of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q6793089" start="201" end="238" title="Maurice FitzGerald, 1st Earl of Desmond" label="Maurice FitzGerald, 4th Baron Desmond"/>
<link wikidata="Q921901" start="242" end="256" title="Normans in Ireland" label="Hiberno-Norman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1200808" start="378" end="396" title="Desmond Rebellions" label="Desmond Rebellions"/>
<link wikidata="Q3687851" start="511" end="526" title="Earl of Denbigh" label="Feilding family"/>
<link wikidata="Q23140" start="530" end="542" title="Warwickshire" label="Warwickshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q4718831" start="575" end="655" title="Alexander Feilding, 12th Earl of Denbigh" label="Alexander Feilding, 12th Earl of Denbigh and 11th Earl of Desmond (4th creation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1158144" start="762" end="780" title="FitzGerald dynasty" label="FitzGerald dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q901714" start="840" end="861" title="Anglo-Norman invasion of Ireland" label="Anglo-Norman invasion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088784" start="983" end="1008" title="Tudor conquest of Ireland" label="Tudor conquest of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1200808" start="1069" end="1087" title="Desmond Rebellions" label="Desmond Rebellions"/>
<link wikidata="Q6133925" start="1225" end="1241" title="James FitzGerald, 1st Earl of Desmond" label="James FitzGerald"/>
<link wikidata="Q1361354" start="1341" end="1355" title="Nine Years War (Ireland)" label="Nine Years War"/>
<link wikidata="Q7328504" start="1633" end="1648" title="Richard Preston, 1st Earl of Desmond" label="Richard Preston"/>
<link wikidata="Q79972" start="1665" end="1672" title="James VI and I" label="James I"/>
<link wikidata="Q208922" start="1726" end="1745" title="Thomas Butler, 10th Earl of Ormond" label="10th Earl of Ormond"/>
<link wikidata="Q18759265" start="2066" end="2075" title="Elizabeth Butler, Duchess of Ormond" label="Elizabeth"/>
<link wikidata="Q81506" start="2115" end="2124" title="Charles I of England" label="Charles I"/>
<link wikidata="Q3687851" start="2430" end="2445" title="Earl of Denbigh" label="Earl of Denbigh"/>
<link wikidata="Q162475" start="2690" end="2701" title="County Cork" label="County Cork"/>
<link wikidata="Q184469" start="2714" end="2726" title="County Kerry" label="County Kerry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1158144" start="2990" end="3021" title="FitzGerald dynasty" label="FitzGerald Dynasty (Geraldines)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4302750" start="3059" end="3077" title="Maurice FitzGerald, Lord of Lanstephan" label="Maurice FitzGerald"/>
<link wikidata="Q7789620" start="3272" end="3306" title="Thomas FitzMaurice FitzGerald" label="Thomas FitzMaurice, Lord OConnello"/>
<link wikidata="Q3760858" start="3446" end="3473" title="Gerald FitzMaurice, 1st Lord of Offaly" label="Gerald, 1st Lord of Offally"/>
<link wikidata="Q437952" start="3521" end="3541" title="Richard de Clare, the 2nd Earl of Pembroke" label="the Lord of Pembroke"/>
<link wikidata="Q901714" start="3587" end="3595" title="Norman invasion of Ireland" label="invasion"/>
<link wikidata="Q6233267" start="3627" end="3642" title="John FitzGerald, 1st Baron Desmond" label="John FitzThomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2991012" start="3661" end="3674" title="Baron Desmond" label="Baron Desmond"/>
<link wikidata="Q184594" start="3751" end="3757" title="Decies" label="Decies"/>
<link wikidata="Q184594" start="3772" end="3788" title="County Waterford" label="County Waterford"/>
<link wikidata="Q57798" start="3814" end="3820" title="Edward I of England" label="Edward"/>
<link wikidata="Q6233267" start="3922" end="3933" title="John FitzGerald, 1st Baron Desmond" label="John&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q6793089" start="4048" end="4085" title="Maurice FitzGerald, 1st Earl of Desmond" label="Maurice FitzGerald, 4th Baron Desmond"/>
<link wikidata="Q5549125" start="4102" end="4140" title="Gerald FitzGerald, 3rd Earl of Desmond" label="Gerald FitzGerald, 3rd Earl of Desmond"/>
<link wikidata="Q193985" start="4158" end="4164" title="Earl of Ormond (Ireland)" label="Butler"/>
<link wikidata="Q6233271" start="4179" end="4215" title="John FitzGerald, 4th Earl of Desmond" label="John FitzGerald, 4th Earl of Desmond"/>
<link wikidata="Q2548323" start="4290" end="4306" title="Eleanor de Bohun" label="Eleanor de Bohun"/>
<link wikidata="Q2435894" start="4310" end="4331" title="Elizabeth of Rhuddlan" label="Elizabeth of Rhuddlan"/>
<link wikidata="Q57798" start="4350" end="4369" title="Edward I of England" label="Edward I of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q106151" start="4377" end="4397" title="House of Plantagenet" label="House of Plantagenet"/>
<link wikidata="Q59604" start="4412" end="4430" title="Eleanor of Castile" label="Eleanor of Castile"/>
<link wikidata="Q1642657" start="4438" end="4455" title="House of Burgundy" label="House of Burgundy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2746331" start="4535" end="4546" title="More Irish than the Irish themselves" label="assimilated"/>
<link wikidata="Q954251" start="4622" end="4639" title="Gerald FitzGerald, 14th Earl of Desmond" label="Gerald FitzGerald"/>
<link wikidata="Q1645505" start="4706" end="4728" title="English Reformation" label="Protestant Reformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q38370" start="4732" end="4747" title="Henry VIII of England" label="King Henry VIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q1200808" start="4795" end="4813" title="Desmond Rebellions" label="Desmond Rebellions"/>
<link wikidata="Q7207" start="4872" end="4889" title="Elizabeth I of England" label="Queen Elizabeth I"/>
<link wikidata="Q739941" start="4989" end="5002" title="King of England" label="English Crown"/>
<link wikidata="Q6233272" start="5233" end="5273" title="John FitzGerald, de facto 12th Earl of Desmond" label="John, the &amp;quot;de facto&amp;quot; 12th Earl"/>
<link wikidata="Q16198237" start="5290" end="5336" title="James FitzGerald, de jure 12th Earl of Desmond" label="James FitzGerald, de jure 12th Earl of Desmond"/>
<link wikidata="Q1238190" start="5557" end="5564" title="George Edward Cokayne" label="Cokayne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1210343" start="5580" end="5619" title="Oxford Dictionary of National Biography" label="Oxford Dictionary of National Biography"/>
<link wikidata="Q4892968" start="5628" end="5633" title="Bernard Burke" label="Burke"/>
<link wikidata="Q1210343" start="5662" end="5694" title="Dictionary of national Biography" label="Dictionary of national Biography"/>
<link wikidata="Q7323911" start="5716" end="5723" title="Richard Bagwell" label="Bagwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q6133925" start="5840" end="5856" title="James FitzGerald, 1st Earl of Desmond" label="James FitzGerald"/>
<link wikidata="Q62378" start="5982" end="5997" title="Tower of London" label="Tower of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q4862513" start="6468" end="6483" title="Baron Inchiquin" label="Baron Inchiquin"/>
<link wikidata="Q6133936" start="6625" end="6652" title="James FitzThomas FitzGerald" label="James FitzThomas FitzGerald"/>
<link wikidata="Q1361354" start="6779" end="6793" title="Nine Years War (Ireland)" label="Nine Years War"/>
<link wikidata="Q6133923" start="6869" end="6878" title="James FitzGerald, 13th Earl of Desmond" label="13th Earl"/>
<link wikidata="Q774347" start="7034" end="7047" title="consanguinity" label="consanguinity"/>
<link wikidata="Q150599" start="7883" end="7900" title="Ferdinand II, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Emperor Ferdinand"/>
<link wikidata="Q16198242" start="8008" end="8046" title="Thomas FitzGerald, 7th Earl of Desmond" label="Thomas FitzGerald, 7th Earl of Desmond"/>
<link wikidata="Q14659" start="8175" end="8187" title="coat of arms" label="coat of arms"/>
<link wikidata="Q120083528" start="8223" end="8231" title="blazoned" label="blazoned"/>
<link wikidata="Q384324" start="8238" end="8244" title="Ermine (heraldry)" label="ermine"/>
<link wikidata="Q201960" start="8247" end="8254" title="saltire" label="saltire"/>
<link wikidata="Q858055" start="8255" end="8260" title="gules" label="gules"/>
<link wikidata="Q4658963" start="8307" end="8314" title="cadency" label="cadency"/>
<link wikidata="Q180306" start="8338" end="8345" title="Duke of Leinster" label="Kildare"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8378" end="8382" title="Duke of Leinster#Coat of arms" label="arms"/>
<link wikidata="Q936472" start="8414" end="8420" title="argent" label="argent"/>
<link wikidata="Q668732" start="8450" end="8455" title="Crest (heraldry)" label="crest"/>
<link wikidata="Q4520000" start="8624" end="8637" title="Shanagolden, County Limerick" label="Shanid Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q7328504" start="8722" end="8756" title="Richard Preston, 1st Earl of Desmond" label="Richard Preston, 1st Lord Dingwall"/>
<link wikidata="Q5539225" start="8867" end="8903" title="George Feilding, 1st Earl of Desmond" label="George Feilding, 1st Viscount Callan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1869904" start="9380" end="9388" title="Lord of Parliament" label="Lordship"/>
<link wikidata="Q18759265" start="9424" end="9456" title="Elizabeth Butler, Duchess of Ormond" label="Elizabeth, the Duchess of Ormond"/>
<link wikidata="Q4867155" start="9589" end="9615" title="Basil Feilding, 2nd Earl of Denbigh" label="the second Earl of Denbigh"/>
<link wikidata="Q6233267" start="9874" end="9919" title="John FitzGerald, 1st Baron Desmond" label="John FitzThomas FitzGerald, 1st Baron Desmond"/>
<link wikidata="Q7789620" start="9940" end="9969" title="Thomas FitzMaurice FitzGerald" label="Thomas FitzMaurice FitzGerald"/>
<link wikidata="Q7789610" start="9972" end="10020" title="Thomas FitzGerald, 2nd Baron Desmond" label="Thomas FitzMaurice FitzGerald, 2nd Baron Desmond"/>
<link wikidata="Q7789611" start="10058" end="10105" title="Thomas FitzGerald, 3rd Baron Desmond" label="Thomas FitzThomas FitzGerald, 3rd Baron Desmond"/>
<link wikidata="Q6793089" start="10138" end="10186" title="Maurice FitzGerald, 1st Earl of Desmond" label="Maurice FitzThomas FitzGerald, 4th Baron Desmond"/>
<link wikidata="Q6793089" start="10306" end="10345" title="Maurice FitzGerald, 1st Earl of Desmond" label="Maurice FitzGerald, 1st Earl of Desmond"/>
<link wikidata="Q6793090" start="10374" end="10413" title="Maurice FitzGerald, 2nd Earl of Desmond" label="Maurice FitzGerald, 2nd Earl of Desmond"/>
<link wikidata="Q5549125" start="10446" end="10484" title="Gerald FitzGerald, 3rd Earl of Desmond" label="Gerald FitzGerald, 3rd Earl of Desmond"/>
<link wikidata="Q6233271" start="10526" end="10562" title="John FitzGerald, 4th Earl of Desmond" label="John FitzGerald, 4th Earl of Desmond"/>
<link wikidata="Q7789612" start="10595" end="10633" title="Thomas FitzGerald, 5th Earl of Desmond" label="Thomas FitzGerald, 5th Earl of Desmond"/>
<link wikidata="Q6133926" start="10662" end="10699" title="James FitzGerald, 6th Earl of Desmond" label="James FitzGerald, 6th Earl of Desmond"/>
<link wikidata="Q16198242" start="10768" end="10806" title="Thomas FitzGerald, 7th Earl of Desmond" label="Thomas FitzGerald, 7th Earl of Desmond"/>
<link wikidata="Q6133928" start="10839" end="10876" title="James FitzGerald, 8th Earl of Desmond" label="James FitzGerald, 8th Earl of Desmond"/>
<link wikidata="Q6793095" start="10909" end="10948" title="Maurice FitzGerald, 9th Earl of Desmond" label="Maurice FitzGerald, 9th Earl of Desmond"/>
<link wikidata="Q16198229" start="10985" end="11023" title="James FitzGerald, 10th Earl of Desmond" label="James FitzGerald, 10th Earl of Desmond"/>
<link wikidata="Q7789609" start="11056" end="11095" title="Thomas FitzGerald, 11th Earl of Desmond" label="Thomas FitzGerald, 11th Earl of Desmond"/>
<link wikidata="Q6233272" start="11139" end="11185" title="John FitzGerald, de facto 12th Earl of Desmond" label="John FitzGerald, de facto 12th Earl of Desmond"/>
<link wikidata="Q16198237" start="11244" end="11290" title="James FitzGerald, de jure 12th Earl of Desmond" label="James FitzGerald, de jure 12th Earl of Desmond"/>
<link wikidata="Q16198237" start="11293" end="11339" title="James FitzGerald, de jure 12th Earl of Desmond" label="James FitzGerald, de jure 12th Earl of Desmond"/>
<link wikidata="Q7789609" start="11365" end="11404" title="Thomas FitzGerald, 11th Earl of Desmond" label="Thomas FitzGerald, 11th Earl of Desmond"/>
<link wikidata="Q6233272" start="11421" end="11467" title="John FitzGerald, de facto 12th Earl of Desmond" label="John FitzGerald, de facto 12th Earl of Desmond"/>
<link wikidata="Q6133923" start="11470" end="11508" title="James FitzGerald, 13th Earl of Desmond" label="James FitzGerald, 13th Earl of Desmond"/>
<link wikidata="Q6233272" start="11533" end="11563" title="John FitzGerald, de facto 12th Earl of Desmond" label="&amp;quot;de facto&amp;quot; 12th Earl"/>
<link wikidata="Q16198237" start="11591" end="11620" title="James FitzGerald, de jure 12th Earl of Desmond" label="&amp;quot;de jure&amp;quot; 12th Earl"/>
<link wikidata="Q954251" start="11623" end="11662" title="Gerald FitzGerald, 14th Earl of Desmond" label="Gerald FitzGerald, 14th Earl of Desmond"/>
<link wikidata="Q6133936" start="11762" end="11789" title="James FitzThomas FitzGerald" label="James FitzThomas FitzGerald"/>
<link wikidata="Q62378" start="11827" end="11842" title="Tower of London" label="Tower of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q6133925" start="12195" end="12232" title="James FitzGerald, 1st Earl of Desmond" label="James FitzGerald, 1st Earl of Desmond"/>
<link wikidata="Q7328504" start="12380" end="12416" title="Richard Preston, 1st Earl of Desmond" label="Richard Preston, 1st Earl of Desmond"/>
<link wikidata="Q5539225" start="12561" end="12597" title="George Feilding, 1st Earl of Desmond" label="George Feilding, 1st Earl of Desmond"/>
<link wikidata="Q7608140" start="12681" end="12717" title="William Feilding, 3rd Earl of Denbigh" label="William Feildng, 2nd Earl of Desmond"/>
<link wikidata="Q3687851" start="12758" end="12773" title="Earl of Denbigh" label="Earl of Denbigh"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12864" end="12909" title="Earl of Denbigh#Earls of Denbigh (1st creation) and Earls of Desmond (4th creation)" label="List of Earls of Denbigh and Earls of Desmond"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="461054" wikidata="Q65962015" url="?curid=461054" title="Earl of Orrery">
<text>Earl of Orrery is a title in the Peerage of Ireland that has been united with the earldom of Cork since 1753. It was created in 1660 for the soldier, statesman and dramatist Roger Boyle, 1st Baron Boyle, third but eldest surviving son of Richard Boyle, 1st Earl of Cork. He had already been created Lord Boyle, Baron of Broghill, in the Peerage of Ireland in 1628 (at the age of only six). He was succeeded by his son, the second Earl. He represented County Cork in the Irish House of Commons and served as Vice-President of Munster. On his death, the titles passed to his eldest son, the third Earl. He represented East Grinstead in the English House of Commons. He was succeeded by his younger brother, the fourth Earl. He was a Lieutenant-General in the Army and a prominent diplomat. In 1711 he was created Baron Boyle of Marston, in the County of Somerset, in the Peerage of Great Britain. His son, the fifth Earl, succeeded his third cousin as fifth Earl of Cork in 1753. See the latter title for further history of the peerages.

Henry Boyle, son and namesake of the Hon. Henry Boyle, the younger son of the first Earl of Orrery, was created Earl of Shannon in 1756.

The Irish placename Orrery (c 1300) came from Gaelic &quot;Orbhraighe&quot;, which was at first the name of a tribe (&quot;Orbh-raighe&quot; = &quot;Orb&#x27;s people&quot;), and then of a territory and a barony in County Cork

==Earls of Orrery (1660)==
*Roger Boyle, 1st Earl of Orrery (1621–1679)
*Roger Boyle, 2nd Earl of Orrery (1646–1682)
*Lionel Boyle, 3rd Earl of Orrery (1671–1703)
*Charles Boyle, 4th Earl of Orrery (1674–1731)
*John Boyle, 5th Earl of Cork and Orrery (1707–1762)
*Hamilton Boyle, 6th Earl of Cork and 6th Earl of Orrey (1729–1764)
*Edmund Boyle, 7th Earl of Cork and 7th Earl of Orrey (1742–1798)
*Edmund Boyle, 8th Earl of Cork and 8th Earl of Orrery (1767–1856)
*Richard Edmund St Lawrence Boyle, 9th Earl of Cork and 9th Earl of Orrery (1829–1904)
*Charles Spencer Canning Boyle, 10th Earl of Cork and 10th Earl of Orrery (1861–1925)
*Robert John Lascelles Boyle, 11th Earl of Cork and 11th Earl of Orrery (1864–1934)
*William Henry Dudley Boyle, 12th Earl of Cork and 12th Earl of Orrery (1873–1967)
*Patrick Reginald Boyle, 13th Earl of Cork and 13th Earl of Orrery (1910–1995)
*John William Boyle, 14th Earl of Cork and 14th Earl of Orrery (1916–2003)
*John Richard Boyle, 15th Earl of Cork and 15th Earl of Orrery (born 1945)

The heir apparent is the present holder&#x27;s only son Rory Jonathan Courtenay Boyle, Viscount Dungarvan (born 1978)

== Family tree ==
==See also==
*Earl of Shannon
*Orrery

==Notes==
==References==
===Attribution===
*Kidd, Charles, Williamson, David (editors). &quot;Debrett&#x27;s Peerage and Baronetage&quot; (1990 edition). New York: St Martin&#x27;s Press, 1990, </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q65962015" start="0" end="14" title="Earl of Orrery" label="Earl of Orrery"/>
<link wikidata="Q1859616" start="33" end="51" title="Peerage of Ireland" label="Peerage of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q65961967" start="82" end="97" title="Earl of Cork" label="earldom of Cork"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345535" start="174" end="202" title="Roger Boyle, 1st Earl of Orrery" label="Roger Boyle, 1st Baron Boyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2485385" start="238" end="269" title="Richard Boyle, 1st Earl of Cork" label="Richard Boyle, 1st Earl of Cork"/>
<link wikidata="Q65962015" start="299" end="309" title="Earl of Orrery" label="Lord Boyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q5170770" start="451" end="462" title="County Cork (Parliament of Ireland constituency)" label="County Cork"/>
<link wikidata="Q2948400" start="470" end="492" title="Irish House of Commons" label="Irish House of Commons"/>
<link wikidata="Q6679869" start="507" end="532" title="Vice-President of Munster" label="Vice-President of Munster"/>
<link wikidata="Q593845" start="616" end="630" title="East Grinstead (UK Parliament constituency)" label="East Grinstead"/>
<link wikidata="Q5914849" start="638" end="662" title="English House of Commons" label="English House of Commons"/>
<link wikidata="Q152951" start="731" end="749" title="Lieutenant-General" label="Lieutenant-General"/>
<link wikidata="Q65962015" start="811" end="833" title="Earl of Orrery" label="Baron Boyle of Marston"/>
<link wikidata="Q1375309" start="869" end="893" title="Peerage of Great Britain" label="Peerage of Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q65961967" start="956" end="968" title="Earl of Cork" label="Earl of Cork"/>
<link wikidata="Q5718485" start="1037" end="1048" title="Henry Boyle, 1st Earl of Shannon" label="Henry Boyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q5326371" start="1149" end="1164" title="Earl of Shannon" label="Earl of Shannon"/>
<link wikidata="Q65962015" start="1195" end="1201" title="Earl of Orrery" label="Orrery"/>
<link wikidata="Q9142" start="1221" end="1227" title="Irish language" label="Gaelic"/>
<link wikidata="Q133311" start="1285" end="1290" title="tribe" label="tribe"/>
<link wikidata="Q183366" start="1364" end="1373" title="territory (country subdivision)" label="territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q52517027" start="1378" end="1386" title="Orrery and Kilmore" label="a barony"/>
<link wikidata="Q162475" start="1390" end="1401" title="County Cork" label="County Cork"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345535" start="1431" end="1462" title="Roger Boyle, 1st Earl of Orrery" label="Roger Boyle, 1st Earl of Orrery"/>
<link wikidata="Q2805246" start="1476" end="1507" title="Roger Boyle, 2nd Earl of Orrery" label="Roger Boyle, 2nd Earl of Orrery"/>
<link wikidata="Q6555553" start="1521" end="1553" title="Lionel Boyle, 3rd Earl of Orrery" label="Lionel Boyle, 3rd Earl of Orrery"/>
<link wikidata="Q2805655" start="1567" end="1600" title="Charles Boyle, 4th Earl of Orrery" label="Charles Boyle, 4th Earl of Orrery"/>
<link wikidata="Q1032335" start="1614" end="1653" title="John Boyle, 5th Earl of Cork" label="John Boyle, 5th Earl of Cork and Orrery"/>
<link wikidata="Q2585248" start="1667" end="1699" title="Hamilton Boyle, 6th Earl of Cork" label="Hamilton Boyle, 6th Earl of Cork"/>
<link wikidata="Q2849925" start="1735" end="1765" title="Edmund Boyle, 7th Earl of Cork" label="Edmund Boyle, 7th Earl of Cork"/>
<link wikidata="Q2850198" start="1801" end="1854" title="Edmund Boyle, 8th Earl of Cork" label="Edmund Boyle, 8th Earl of Cork and 8th Earl of Orrery"/>
<link wikidata="Q2904392" start="1868" end="1941" title="Richard Boyle, 9th Earl of Cork" label="Richard Edmund St Lawrence Boyle, 9th Earl of Cork and 9th Earl of Orrery"/>
<link wikidata="Q5075721" start="1955" end="2027" title="Charles Boyle, 10th Earl of Cork" label="Charles Spencer Canning Boyle, 10th Earl of Cork and 10th Earl of Orrery"/>
<link wikidata="Q25350443" start="2041" end="2111" title="Robert Boyle, 11th Earl of Cork" label="Robert John Lascelles Boyle, 11th Earl of Cork and 11th Earl of Orrery"/>
<link wikidata="Q2021920" start="2125" end="2194" title="William Boyle, 12th Earl of Cork" label="William Henry Dudley Boyle, 12th Earl of Cork and 12th Earl of Orrery"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2208" end="2273" title="Patrick Boyle, 13th Earl of Cork" label="Patrick Reginald Boyle, 13th Earl of Cork and 13th Earl of Orrery"/>
<link wikidata="Q6222778" start="2287" end="2348" title="John Boyle, 14th Earl of Cork" label="John William Boyle, 14th Earl of Cork and 14th Earl of Orrery"/>
<link wikidata="Q25849929" start="2362" end="2423" title="John Boyle, 15th Earl of Cork" label="John Richard Boyle, 15th Earl of Cork and 15th Earl of Orrery"/>
<link wikidata="Q2762318" start="2441" end="2454" title="heir apparent" label="heir apparent"/>
<link wikidata="Q5326371" start="2588" end="2603" title="Earl of Shannon" label="Earl of Shannon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1759299" start="2605" end="2611" title="Orrery" label="Orrery"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="461056" wikidata="Q7278250" url="?curid=461056" title="R v Bowden">
<text>In R v Bowden, a 1999 appeal, the English Court of Appeal dismissed a defence effort to depart from the literal rule, the taking of the natural meaning of statutory language. It concerned the making (copying with knowledge of the content) of an indecent photograph of a child. It confirmed it was irrelevant as to whether the offence was committed that these actions were part of a much larger production and distribution effort. That would likely be a relevant consideration at the time of sentencing if the jury found the facts established guilt.

==Facts==
The police and prosecution could find no evidence nor history of inappropriate behaviour towards children. There was no breach of trust. Bowden&#x27;s position in the chain of production of indecent material was as low as could be consistent with the commission of the reproducing offence. He downloaded directed photographs, occasionally stored, and printed out photographs.

Bowden had been convicted at the Crown Court (by jury) in Cambridge on 12 counts of making indecent photography of a child contrary to section 1(1)(a) of the Protection of Children Act 1978. Before amended by the Criminal Justice and Public Order Act 1994, section 1(a) of the 1978 Act read:

1.- (1) It is an offence for a person- 
:(a) to take, or permit to be taken, any indecent photograph of a child

As amended it read:

1.- (1) It is an offence for a person- 
:(a) to take, or permit to be taken or to make, any indecent photograph or pseudo-photograph of a child

The 1994 Act had added the concept of pseudo-photographs to the law.

The defence team, fancifully, submitted that the making offence applied only to pseudo-photographs. The prosecution submitted that making applied to photographs including digital photographs since the 1978 Act was, as the wording makes clear, seeking to prohibit the spread of indecent photographs as well as their production.

==Judgment==
It was common ground that amended section covered those making pseudo-photographs who may have had no contact with the subjects of the images. The court confirmed the amended section also forbade anyone making a copy (or copies) of an indecent photograph of a child by, knowing of the content.

The wording in the amended section was clear and unambiguous. The words &quot;to make&quot; had to be given their natural and ordinary meaning, and in the instant context that was &quot;to cause to exist; to produce by action, to bring about&quot;.

==Application of related law established as to digital copying==
The court noted in &quot;R v. Fellows; R v. Arnold&quot; (1997) 1 CAR 244, the same court affirmed that a computer file containing data that represented the original photograph in another form was &quot;a copy of a photograph&quot; as per section 7(2) of the 1978 Act.

Therefore, downloading an indecent photograph from the Internet was &quot;making a copy of an indecent photograph&quot; since a copy of that photograph had been caused to exist on the computer to which it had been downloaded.

==Citation==
==See also==
*English criminal law</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1137751" start="34" end="57" title="English Court of Appeal" label="English Court of Appeal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7200649" start="104" end="116" title="literal rule" label="literal rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q3924186" start="245" end="275" title="indecent photograph of a child" label="indecent photograph of a child"/>
<link wikidata="Q3924186" start="1095" end="1126" title="Protection of Children Act 1978" label="Protection of Children Act 1978"/>
<link wikidata="Q5185574" start="1150" end="1192" title="Criminal Justice and Public Order Act 1994" label="Criminal Justice and Public Order Act 1994"/>
<link wikidata="Q3924186" start="1311" end="1341" title="indecent photograph of a child" label="indecent photograph of a child"/>
<link wikidata="Q3924186" start="1465" end="1475" title="indecent photograph of a child" label="photograph"/>
<link wikidata="Q3924186" start="1479" end="1496" title="indecent pseudo-photograph of a child" label="pseudo-photograph"/>
<link wikidata="Q3924186" start="1547" end="1564" title="pseudo-photograph" label="pseudo-photograph"/>
<link wikidata="Q7278233" start="2555" end="2580" title="R v. Fellows; R v. Arnold" label="R v. Fellows; R v. Arnold"/>
<link wikidata="Q2352893" start="3054" end="3074" title="English criminal law" label="English criminal law"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="461058" wikidata="Q2064037" url="?curid=461058" title="Al D'Amato">
<text>Alfonse Marcello D&#x27;Amato (born August 1, 1937) is an American attorney, lobbyist, and Republican politician who represented the state of New York in the United States Senate from 1981 to 1999. From 1995 to 1999, he chaired the Senate Banking Committee.

D&#x27;Amato was born in Brooklyn in 1937 and raised in Island Park, New York. He attended Syracuse University, receiving a law degree, before returning to Island Park and becoming involved in local Republican politics. Rising through the ranks, he held offices at the village, town, and county levels.

In 1980, D&#x27;Amato defeated four-term Republican incumbent Jacob Javits in the primary election for United States Senator. D&#x27;Amato went on to prevail in the general election by defeating Javits, running on the Liberal Party ticket, and Democratic U.S. Representative Elizabeth Holtzman. He was re-elected in 1986 and 1992 but was defeated in 1998 by Chuck Schumer. As of 2025, D&#x27;Amato is the last Republican to have represented New York in the U.S. Senate.

Following his departure from the Senate, D&#x27;Amato founded Park Strategies, a lobbying firm.

==Early life and family==
D&#x27;Amato, of Italian ancestry, was born in Brooklyn and raised on Long Island, in the small village of Island Park. He is the son of Antoinette (Ciofarri) and Armand D&#x27;Amato, an insurance broker. D&#x27;Amato is a graduate of Syracuse University and Syracuse University College of Law. He is an attorney.

==Early political career==
D&#x27;Amato began his career in politics in Island Park (Long Island). He was involved heavily in the Unity Party of Island Park, the local political party that ran village elections in the small village of Island Park. He was then appointed the village attorney. Later, as a member of the Nassau County Republican Party, he was appointed Public Administrator of Nassau County, where he was responsible for managing the assets of county residents who died without wills. He was first appointed and then elected Receiver of Taxes of Hempstead, New York. He left this office to become a town supervisor in Hempstead and in 1977 he was elected presiding supervisor. He was also vice chairman of the Nassau County Board of Supervisors from 1977 to 1980.

==U.S. Senate==

Although a relatively obscure candidate, D&#x27;Amato defeated incumbent senator Jacob Javits by 56% to 44% in the 1980 Republican primary election following Javits&#x27; 1979 diagnosis of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Javits nevertheless pursued the seat on the Liberal Party ticket, splitting the left-wing vote in ordinarily liberal New York with Democratic Congresswoman Elizabeth Holtzman and leading to D&#x27;Amato&#x27;s 45% plurality victory. D&#x27;Amato was re-elected in 1986 and 1992, but lost in 1998 to Democratic congressman Chuck Schumer, a future Senate Majority Leader.

D&#x27;Amato drew the nickname &quot;Senator Pothole&quot; for his delivery of &quot;constituent services&quot;, helping citizens with their individual cases. While some New Yorkers meant the nickname as a pejorative, others saw it as a positive affirmation of his attention to getting things done.

D&#x27;Amato holds the record for the second and eighth longest filibusters ever recorded in the United States Senate. He is remembered for his unique and rather comical filibusters. In 1986, in a filibuster against a military bill that lasted 23 1/2 hours, he read the District of Columbia telephone book. In 1992, D&#x27;Amato filibustered a bill that would have caused the loss of 750 jobs in upstate New York by singing &quot;South of the Border (Down Mexico Way)&quot;.

D&#x27;Amato is remembered for presenting a poster of a &quot;Taxasaurus Rex&quot;, which he then stabbed with an oversized pencil.

D&#x27;Amato voted in favor of the bill establishing Martin Luther King Jr. Day as a federal holiday and the Civil Rights Restoration Act of 1987. D&#x27;Amato voted in favor of the nominations of Robert Bork and Clarence Thomas to the U.S. Supreme Court.

D&#x27;Amato was a member of the President&#x27;s Commission on Aviation Security and Terrorism (PCAST), which was set up in September 1989 to review and report on aviation security policy in light of the bombing of Pan Am Flight 103.

D&#x27;Amato was chair of the Senate Committee on Banking, Housing and Urban Affairs and was a member of the Senate Finance Committee. As a member of the former, he became a leading critic of the Clinton administration regarding the Whitewater scandal, and during 1995 and 1996 he chaired the hearings-heavy Senate Special Whitewater Committee. As a member of the latter, he facilitated the lawsuit of Holocaust survivors trying to recover relatives&#x27; funds from accounts in Swiss banks.

D&#x27;Amato was influential in New York Republican politics and was considered the &quot;boss&quot; of the state party during his Senate years. For example, he played a leading role in recruiting George Pataki and in securing him the Republican nomination in the gubernatorial race of 1994.

D&#x27;Amato was known for being fairly conservative, a reflection of then-strongly conservative Nassau County and Long Island. He strongly supported the conservative positions of his party on &quot;law and order&quot; issues such as capital punishment and harsh penalties for drug offenses. On some issues, he agreed with the opposition: in 1993, D&#x27;Amato was one of only three Republicans to vote in favor of allowing gays to serve openly in the U.S. military. While D&#x27;Amato voted for the Defense of Marriage Act in 1996, he was among the minority of Republicans to vote for the Employment Non-Discrimination Act that year. In 1998, the LGBTQ advocacy group Human Rights Campaign endorsed D&#x27;Amato for re-election over socially liberal Democratic Congressman Chuck Schumer. 

On labor issues, D&#x27;Amato frequently sided with Democrats.

D&#x27;Amato&#x27;s 54% to 44% loss in 1998 was attributed to a lack of support among moderate voters in New York City, the site of opponent Schumer&#x27;s U.S. congressional district. His loss was also partially attributed to reports arising from D&#x27;Amato&#x27;s use of the term &quot;putzhead&quot; (a Yiddish vulgarity) to refer to Schumer.

==Later career==

===Columnist and analyst===
Shortly before leaving office, D&#x27;Amato published his book of recollections, &quot;Power, Pasta and Politics&quot;. After retiring from politics in 1999, he became a regular columnist for &quot;George&quot; magazine until it ceased publication in 2001. He also emerged as an analyst for Fox News. A notable on-air incident occurred when D&#x27;Amato took offense at comments of GOP strategist Jack Burkman. Saying he agreed with Burkman&#x27;s suggestion that the Postal Service should be privatized; D&#x27;Amato slammed him for his characterizations of postal workers, which D&#x27;Amato said were offensively racist.

As of 2023, D&#x27;Amato is a regular contributor at Red Apple Media’s 77WABC, hosted by John Catsimatidis.

===Poker Players Alliance ===
As of 2007, D&#x27;Amato was chairman of the Poker Players Alliance, a nonprofit organization set up to help protect and fight for the rights of poker players in the United States.

===Presidential politics===

====2008====

On June 12, 2007, the former three-term Senator from New York endorsed one-time Senate colleague from Tennessee Fred Thompson for the Republican nomination for president in 2008.
In explaining his endorsement of Thompson, former Senator D&#x27;Amato called Thompson &quot;a real conservative&quot;, not a candidate who adopted conservative positions in preparation for an election. D&#x27;Amato added, &quot;Fred Thompson is the kind of candidate our party can unify behind and support wholeheartedly.&quot; On January 22, 2008, after poor showings from Thompson, D&#x27;Amato threw his support to John McCain for the 2008 presidential election, saying: &quot;If you want to win in November, John McCain is the man&quot;.

====2012====
On March 14, 2012, D&#x27;Amato endorsed Mitt Romney for president. He and Peter Kalikow appeared with Romney at fundraisers in New York leading up to the election.

====2016====
On August 26, 2015, D&#x27;Amato endorsed Ohio Governor John Kasich for president of the United States over Jeb Bush and former New York Gov. George Pataki. While stating that the Republican Party needed to move past the Bush family, he credited Pataki as a &quot;wonderful guy&quot;, but cited Kasich&#x27;s experience in balancing the budget as a congressman in the 1990s and in Ohio. Following Donald Trump&#x27;s victory in the 2016 general election, D&#x27;Amato stated: &quot;I am in great spirits. I feel great for the people of our country.&quot; He urged Trump to appoint Rudy Giuliani as Attorney General, stating: &quot;I think one great appointment and someone who will follow the law and not bend the law as he or she sees fit as the attorney general is Rudy Giuliani...&quot;

====2020====
In 2020, D&#x27;Amato supported Trump for re-election against Joe Biden. However, leading up to the 2024 election, he expressed that New York donors would be less willing to donate to his campaign. He also criticized Trump&#x27;s post-election behavior, noting that Democrats outcampaigned Republicans.

====2024====
However, in 2024, D&#x27;Amato expressed his support for Trump despite his previous statements (he still always maintained that he believed Trump did a good job). He also expressed support for Tim Scott as the Republican Vice Presidential nominee.

== Personal life ==
D&#x27;Amato married Penelope Collenburg in 1960. The couple had four children before divorcing in 1995.

D&#x27;Amato dated Claudia Cohen in the 1990s.

D&#x27;Amato married Katuria Smith in 2004. The couple had one son, Alfonso Marcello D&#x27;Amato, born in 2008, and a daughter, Luciana Cioffari D&#x27;Amato, born in 2009. Katuria D&#x27;Amato filed for divorce on October 3, 2017. Al D&#x27;Amato won emergency custody of the couple&#x27;s children, claiming that Katuria D&#x27;Amato was mentally ill following an episode in which she was detained by authorities. In 2018, Katuria D&#x27;Amato released a video of Al D&#x27;Amato shouting obscenities at her while she was hospitalized. In the midst of the couple&#x27;s custody battle, Katuria D&#x27;Amato filed a $100 million lawsuit against Al D&#x27;Amato for alleged racketeering.

On November 20, 2020, D&#x27;Amato was hospitalized with COVID-19. Five days later, he was released from the hospital.

In 2017, D&#x27;Amato made headlines when he was removed from a New York-bound JetBlue flight after reportedly trying to rally the passengers against the flight crew. The plane was delayed six times. He later issued a statement apologizing for his behavior.

==Electoral history==

* 1980 United States Senate election in New York
** &quot;Republican primary&quot;
*** Al D&#x27;Amato, 55.7%
*** Jacob Javits (incumbent), 43.7%
** &quot;General election&quot;
*** Al D&#x27;Amato (R), 44.9%
*** Elizabeth Holtzman (D), 43.5%
*** Jacob Javits (Lib.) (inc.), 11.1%
* 1986 United States Senate election in New York
** Al D&#x27;Amato (R) (inc.), 53.0%
** Mark Green (D), 38.4%
* 1992 United States Senate election in New York
** Al D&#x27;Amato (R) (inc.), 49.0%
** Robert Abrams (D), 47.8%
* 1998 United States Senate election in New York
** Chuck Schumer (D), 54.6%
** Al D&#x27;Amato (R) (inc.), 44.1%

== Book ==

== See also ==

==References==
==External links==
* 
* Dems target Al D&#x27;Amato
* Al D&#x27;Amato
* Biographical information




|-


|-


|-</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2064037" start="0" end="29" title="Al D&amp;#x27;Amato" label="Alfonse Marcello D&amp;#x27;Amato"/>
<link wikidata="Q29468" start="91" end="101" title="Republican Party (United States)" label="Republican"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384" start="129" end="150" title="New York (state)" label="the state of New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q66096" start="158" end="178" title="United States Senate" label="United States Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q7891260" start="232" end="256" title="Senate Banking Committee" label="Senate Banking Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q18419" start="284" end="292" title="Brooklyn" label="Brooklyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q3448891" start="315" end="336" title="Island Park, New York" label="Island Park, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q617433" start="350" end="369" title="Syracuse University" label="Syracuse University"/>
<link wikidata="Q7891821" start="566" end="570" title="1980 United States Senate election in New York" label="1980"/>
<link wikidata="Q1875906" start="625" end="637" title="Jacob Javits" label="Jacob Javits"/>
<link wikidata="Q5362988" start="838" end="856" title="Elizabeth Holtzman" label="Elizabeth Holtzman"/>
<link wikidata="Q7891824" start="879" end="883" title="1986 United States Senate election in New York" label="1986"/>
<link wikidata="Q7891826" start="888" end="892" title="1992 United States Senate election in New York" label="1992"/>
<link wikidata="Q7891828" start="913" end="917" title="1998 United States Senate election in New York" label="1998"/>
<link wikidata="Q380900" start="921" end="934" title="Chuck Schumer" label="Chuck Schumer"/>
<link wikidata="Q974693" start="1174" end="1181" title="Italian American" label="Italian"/>
<link wikidata="Q18419" start="1204" end="1212" title="Brooklyn" label="Brooklyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q18438" start="1227" end="1238" title="Long Island" label="Long Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q3448891" start="1264" end="1275" title="Island Park, New York" label="Island Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q617433" start="1392" end="1411" title="Syracuse University" label="Syracuse University"/>
<link wikidata="Q7663080" start="1416" end="1450" title="Syracuse University College of Law" label="Syracuse University College of Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q3448891" start="1544" end="1555" title="Island Park, New York" label="Island Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q18438" start="1557" end="1568" title="Long Island" label="Long Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q54064" start="1790" end="1803" title="Nassau County, New York" label="Nassau County"/>
<link wikidata="Q155656" start="1964" end="1969" title="will (law)" label="wills"/>
<link wikidata="Q1583289" start="2032" end="2051" title="Town of Hempstead, New York" label="Hempstead, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q47682" start="2085" end="2100" title="town supervisor" label="town supervisor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1875906" start="2349" end="2361" title="Jacob Javits" label="Jacob Javits"/>
<link wikidata="Q130543050" start="2399" end="2415" title="Partisan primary" label="primary election"/>
<link wikidata="Q206901" start="2457" end="2486" title="amyotrophic lateral sclerosis" label="amyotrophic lateral sclerosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q6540770" start="2532" end="2545" title="Liberal Party of New York" label="Liberal Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1421390" start="2554" end="2563" title="Vote splitting" label="splitting"/>
<link wikidata="Q5362988" start="2644" end="2662" title="Elizabeth Holtzman" label="Elizabeth Holtzman"/>
<link wikidata="Q7891821" start="2702" end="2719" title="United States Senate election in New York, 1980" label="plurality victory"/>
<link wikidata="Q380900" start="2810" end="2823" title="Chuck Schumer" label="Chuck Schumer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1813203" start="2834" end="2856" title="United States Senate Majority Leader" label="Senate Majority Leader"/>
<link wikidata="Q545779" start="3065" end="3075" title="pejorative" label="pejorative"/>
<link wikidata="Q624036" start="3223" end="3233" title="filibuster" label="filibuster"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="3429" end="3449" title="District of Columbia" label="District of Columbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q85792349" start="3803" end="3807" title="Passage of Martin Luther King Jr. Day" label="bill"/>
<link wikidata="Q751738" start="3821" end="3847" title="Martin Luther King Jr. Day" label="Martin Luther King Jr. Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q5440532" start="3853" end="3868" title="Federal holidays in the United States" label="federal holiday"/>
<link wikidata="Q5124547" start="3877" end="3913" title="Civil Rights Restoration Act of 1987" label="Civil Rights Restoration Act of 1987"/>
<link wikidata="Q7342219" start="3965" end="3976" title="Robert Bork Supreme Court nomination" label="Robert Bork"/>
<link wikidata="Q5126773" start="3981" end="3996" title="Clarence Thomas Supreme Court nomination" label="Clarence Thomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q11201" start="4004" end="4022" title="Supreme Court of the United States" label="U.S. Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q211087" start="4241" end="4258" title="Pan Am Flight 103" label="Pan Am Flight 103"/>
<link wikidata="Q7891260" start="4291" end="4345" title="U.S. Senate Committee on Banking, Housing and Urban Affairs" label="Senate Committee on Banking, Housing and Urban Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q2985424" start="4370" end="4394" title="U.S. Senate Committee on Finance" label="Senate Finance Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q2824550" start="4457" end="4479" title="Clinton administration" label="Clinton administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074621" start="4494" end="4512" title="Whitewater scandal" label="Whitewater scandal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7891357" start="4569" end="4604" title="Senate Special Whitewater Committee" label="Senate Special Whitewater Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q8035872" start="4652" end="4659" title="World Jewish Congress lawsuit against Swiss banks" label="lawsuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q12409870" start="4663" end="4681" title="Holocaust survivor" label="Holocaust survivor"/>
<link wikidata="Q674304" start="4740" end="4750" title="Swiss bank" label="Swiss bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q11676" start="4951" end="4964" title="George Pataki" label="George Pataki"/>
<link wikidata="Q2585032" start="5087" end="5099" title="American conservatism" label="conservative"/>
<link wikidata="Q54064" start="5144" end="5157" title="Nassau County, New York" label="Nassau County"/>
<link wikidata="Q18438" start="5162" end="5173" title="Long Island, New York" label="Long Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q8454" start="5281" end="5299" title="capital punishment" label="capital punishment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1182626" start="5547" end="5570" title="Defense of Marriage Act" label="Defense of Marriage Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q5374344" start="5637" end="5670" title="Employment Non-Discrimination Act" label="Employment Non-Discrimination Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q7891828" start="5685" end="5689" title="1998 United States Senate election in New York" label="1998"/>
<link wikidata="Q1253380" start="5716" end="5737" title="Human Rights Campaign" label="Human Rights Campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q380900" start="5821" end="5834" title="Chuck Schumer" label="Chuck Schumer"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="6007" end="6020" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q1086863" start="6475" end="6484" title="columnist" label="columnist"/>
<link wikidata="Q3101362" start="6495" end="6501" title="George (magazine)" label="George"/>
<link wikidata="Q186068" start="6588" end="6596" title="Fox News" label="Fox News"/>
<link wikidata="Q25245132" start="6694" end="6706" title="Jack Burkman" label="Jack Burkman"/>
<link wikidata="Q6225531" start="7011" end="7028" title="John Catsimatidis" label="John Catsimatidis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7208605" start="7106" end="7128" title="Poker Players Alliance" label="Poker Players Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1509" start="7388" end="7397" title="Tennessee" label="Tennessee"/>
<link wikidata="Q298016" start="7398" end="7411" title="Fred Thompson" label="Fred Thompson"/>
<link wikidata="Q10390" start="7884" end="7895" title="John McCain" label="John McCain"/>
<link wikidata="Q45578" start="7904" end="7930" title="2008 United States presidential election" label="2008 presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q4496" start="8063" end="8074" title="Mitt Romney" label="Mitt Romney"/>
<link wikidata="Q74816" start="8097" end="8110" title="Peter Kalikow" label="Peter Kalikow"/>
<link wikidata="Q69319" start="8257" end="8268" title="John Kasich" label="John Kasich"/>
<link wikidata="Q221997" start="8309" end="8317" title="Jeb Bush" label="Jeb Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q11676" start="8343" end="8356" title="George Pataki" label="George Pataki"/>
<link wikidata="Q22686" start="8598" end="8610" title="Donald Trump" label="Donald Trump"/>
<link wikidata="Q699872" start="8633" end="8637" title="2016 United States presidential election" label="2016"/>
<link wikidata="Q212648" start="8782" end="8795" title="Rudy Giuliani" label="Rudy Giuliani"/>
<link wikidata="Q636207" start="8799" end="8815" title="United States Attorney General" label="Attorney General"/>
<link wikidata="Q6279" start="9067" end="9076" title="Joe Biden" label="Joe Biden"/>
<link wikidata="Q561315" start="9515" end="9524" title="Tim Scott" label="Tim Scott"/>
<link wikidata="Q161086" start="10634" end="10641" title="JetBlue" label="JetBlue"/>
<link wikidata="Q7891821" start="10839" end="10885" title="1980 United States Senate election in New York" label="1980 United States Senate election in New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q1875906" start="10951" end="10963" title="Jacob Javits" label="Jacob Javits"/>
<link wikidata="Q42841" start="10965" end="10974" title="incumbent" label="incumbent"/>
<link wikidata="Q5362988" start="11050" end="11068" title="Elizabeth Holtzman" label="Elizabeth Holtzman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1875906" start="11084" end="11096" title="Jacob Javits" label="Jacob Javits"/>
<link wikidata="Q6540770" start="11098" end="11102" title="Liberal Party of New York" label="Lib."/>
<link wikidata="Q42841" start="11105" end="11109" title="incumbent" label="inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q7891824" start="11120" end="11166" title="1986 United States Senate election in New York" label="1986 United States Senate election in New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q42841" start="11191" end="11195" title="incumbent" label="inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q6768204" start="11207" end="11217" title="Mark Green (New York politician)" label="Mark Green"/>
<link wikidata="Q7891826" start="11231" end="11277" title="1992 United States Senate election in New York" label="1992 United States Senate election in New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q42841" start="11302" end="11306" title="incumbent" label="inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q2156314" start="11318" end="11331" title="Robert Abrams" label="Robert Abrams"/>
<link wikidata="Q7891828" start="11345" end="11391" title="1998 United States Senate election in New York" label="1998 United States Senate election in New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q380900" start="11395" end="11408" title="Chuck Schumer" label="Chuck Schumer"/>
<link wikidata="Q42841" start="11444" end="11448" title="incumbent" label="inc."/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="461063" wikidata="Q19896760" url="?curid=461063" title="Evros (regional unit)">
<text>Evros () is one of the regional units of Greece. It is part of the region of East Macedonia and Thrace. Its name is derived from the river Evros, which appears to have been a Thracian hydronym. Evros is the northernmost regional unit. It borders Turkey to the east, across the river Evros, and it borders Bulgaria to the north and the northwest. 

Its capital is Alexandroupolis. Together with the regional units Rhodope and Xanthi, it forms the geographical region of Western Thrace. The population density was 32 per km2 (2021).

==Geography==

Evros is one of the largest regional units of Greece. It forms the eastern part of the geographical region Western Thrace, and includes the island Samothrace in the northern Aegean Sea. Its length is about 150 km from north to south (excluding Samothrace). Its width ranges from 70 to 100 km from east to west. The most important rivers are the Evros and its tributary Arda.

The Rhodope Mountains lie in the west and the southwest. The Aegean Sea lies to the south. The Evros valley is flat. Samothrace is mountainous.

The coastal area has a predominantly Mediterranean climate, whereas the northern part and the mountains have a colder continental climate.

==Administration==

The Evros regional unit is subdivided into 5 municipalities. These are (number as in the map in the infobox):
*Alexandroupolis (1)
*Didymoteicho (2)
*Orestiada (3)
*Samothrace (&quot;Samothraki&quot;, 4)
*Soufli (5)

===Prefecture===

Evros was established as a prefecture in 1930 (), when the former Thrace Prefecture was divided into the Rhodope and Evros prefectures. As a part of the 2011 Kallikratis government reform, the prefecture was transformed into a regional unit within the East Macedonia and Thrace region, with no change in its boundaries. At the same time, the municipalities were reorganised, according to the table below.

===Provinces===

*Province of Orestiada - Orestiada
*Province of Didymoteicho - Didymoteicho
*Province of Soufli - Soufli
*Province of Alexandroupolis - Alexandroupolis
*Province of Samothrace - Samothrace
&quot;Note:&quot; Provinces no longer hold any legal status in Greece.

==History==
As a part of Western Thrace, the territory of the Evros regional unit followed the fate of that region. In 1821, several parts of Evros region rebelled, such as Lavara and Samothraki, and participated in the Greek War of Independence. It became part of Greece in 1920 when it was ceded by Bulgaria as a result of the Treaty of Neuilly-sur-Seine. Initially it was part of the Thrace Prefecture, which was subdivided in 1930. 

During the Greco-Turkish War (1919-1922), many Greek refugees settled in the Evros. New towns were built, including Orestiada. The Evros river valley has flooded several times, with the most recent floods taking place in 2005, 2006, 2014 and in 2021 where the multiple and largest floods took place.

==Transport==

The main roads in the Evros regional unit are:
*A2 motorway (Egnatia Odos)/E90 motorway (... Komotini - Alexandroupolis - İpsala (Turkey))
*Greek National Road 2 (... Komotini - Alexandroupolis - Feres)
*Greek National Road 51/E85 (Svilengrad (Bulgaria) - Orestiada - Didymoteicho - Feres)
*Greek National Road 53 (Ormenio - Metaxades - Aisymi - Alexandroupolis)

A railway line connects Alexandroupolis with Thessaloniki via Komotini, Xanthi and Drama. Another line connects Alexandroupolis with Dimitrovgrad, Bulgaria via Didymoteicho and Orestiada, with a branch line from Didymoteicho to Uzunköprü, Turkey.

The Alexandroupolis International Airport is served by mostly national flights.

== Sights ==
The most important sights of the prefecture are:

* Church of Theotokos Kosmosoteira. The church was founded in 1152. It is considered one of the best examples of Byzantine art in Greece.
* Samothrace with the Sanctuary of the Great Gods and its Archaeological Museum.
* Evros Delta National Park
* Lighthouse of Alexandroupolis
* The post-Byzantine churches in the villages of Alepochori (Church of Saint Athanasius), Metaxades (Church of Saint Athanasius) and Paliouri (Church of Saint Pantaleon)
* The ancient Mesimvria-Zoni
* Dadia Forest
* Fossilized Forest of Lefkimmi
* Cyclops Polyphemus Cave in Makri
* Burial Tomb of Mikri Doxipara: Roman Tomb which dates from the 2nd century
* Didymoteicho
**Byzantine Castle
** Çelebi Sultan Mehmed Mosque
** Hamam of Oruç Paşa
** Türbe of Oruç Pasha
** the Kayali Cave and the Vouva Cave
* Castle of Pythio
* The thermal baths of Traianoupoli
* Castle of Avanta-Potamos
* The Ethnological Museum of Thrace in Alexandroupolis
* The Silk Museum of Soufli
* Zourafa islet
* The village Metaxades with its traditional architecture
* The Pomak villages Goniko and Roussa with the traditional architecture
** The Seyyid Ali Sultan Tekke near Roussa

==Notable people==
*Hrysopiyi Devetzi (1976, Alexandroupolis), Greek silver Olympic Champion in triple jump (Athens, 2004)
*Demis Nikolaidis (1973, Alexandroupolis), Greek international footballer, European Champion with Greece National football team (Portugal, 2004)
*Stelios Venetidis (1976, Orestiada),Greek international footballer, European Champion with Greece National football team (Portugal, 2004)
*Athanasios Tsigas (1982, Aristeino Alexandroupolis), Greek footballer
*Lefteris Hapsiadis (1953, Kila Feres), Greek lyricist and writer
*Andreas Andreadis (1982, Provatonas Soufli), Greek international volleyball player
*Marios Giourdas (1973, Alexandroupolis), international volleyball player
*Thanassis Moustakidis (1962, Soufli), Greek international volleyball player, player with the most appearances with Greece National football team
*Nikos Samaras (1970-2013, Orestiada), Greek international volleyball player, player-symbol for the Greek volleyball
*Constantin Carathéodory (1873-1950, Nea Vyssa), Greek mathematician
*Dimosthenis Michalentzakis (1998, Feres), Greek Gold Paralympic Champion Swimmer in category S9 (Rio, 2016)
*Marinos Ouzounidis (1968, Alexandroupolis), former international Greek footballer, now football coach
*Manolis Siopis (1994, Alexandroupolis), Greek international footballer
*Dimosthenis Magginas (1982, Alexandroupolis), Greek middle-distance, long-distance runner
*Fotis Kosmas, (1926-1995), Alexandroupolis) Mediterranean and 7th Olympic winner in decathlon
*Kostas Gatsioudis (1973, Didymoteicho), 6th Olympic winner, Mediterranean and Silver World champion, in Javelin throw
*Nikos Alavantas (1959, Krios Orestiada), former Greek international footballer
*Giannis Matzourakis (1949, Didymoteicho), former footballer, now football coach
*Nikos Hadjinikolaou (1962, Alexandroupolis), Greek journalist
*Renos Haralampidis (1970, Spilaio), Greek actor, film director
*Yannis Stankoglou (1974, Thourio), Greek actor
*John III Doukas Vatatzes (1192–1254, Didymoteicho), emperor of Nicaea
*John V Palaiologos (1332–1391, Didymoteicho), Byzantine Emperor
*Bayezid II (1481–1512, Didymoteicho) Sultan of the Ottoman Empire
*Eugenios Eugenidis (1882–1954, Didymoteicho), shipping magnate
*Sürmeli Ali Pasha, (1645-1695, Didymoteicho), Grand Vizier of the Ottoman Empire
*Konstantinos Malamatinas, founder of retsina Malamatina
*Paraskevas Tselios (1997, Alexandroupolis), Greek international volleyball player with Greece men&#x27;s national volleyball team
*Savvas Gentsoglou (1990, Alexandroupolis), Greek football player
*Gregoris Mentzas (1960, Alexandroupolis), Greek management scientist and professor at the National Technical University of Athens
*Giorgos Valavanidis (1974, Alexandroupolis), Greek; former international basketball player, silver medalist with Greece women&#x27;s national under-16 basketball team in 1991 and Greek champion with PAOK
*Arete Kosmidou (1997, Alexandroupolis), Greek singer
*Anestis Dalakouras (1993, Alexandroupolis), international Volleyball player with Greece men&#x27;s national volleyball team
*Stavros Stathakis (1987, Alexandroupolis), Greece footballer
*Nikos Alavantas (1959, Orestiada), former international footballer with Greece national football team
*Stefania Liberakaki (2002), Greek-Dutch singer originally from Sofiko, a village near Didymoteicho

==References==
==External links==
*Evros terrain map by Geopsis</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q19896760" start="0" end="5" title="Evros (regional unit)" label="Evros"/>
<link wikidata="Q1234255" start="23" end="47" title="regional units of Greece" label="regional units of Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q207299" start="67" end="73" title="modern regions of Greece" label="region"/>
<link wikidata="Q171314" start="77" end="102" title="East Macedonia and Thrace" label="East Macedonia and Thrace"/>
<link wikidata="Q204347" start="139" end="144" title="Maritsa" label="Evros"/>
<link wikidata="Q144964" start="175" end="183" title="Thracians" label="Thracian"/>
<link wikidata="Q932103" start="184" end="192" title="hydronym" label="hydronym"/>
<link wikidata="Q43" start="246" end="252" title="Turkey" label="Turkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q219" start="305" end="313" title="Bulgaria" label="Bulgaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q190847" start="363" end="378" title="Alexandroupolis" label="Alexandroupolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q19896603" start="413" end="420" title="Rhodope (regional unit)" label="Rhodope"/>
<link wikidata="Q19896642" start="425" end="431" title="Xanthi (regional unit)" label="Xanthi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192701" start="469" end="483" title="Western Thrace" label="Western Thrace"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192701" start="654" end="668" title="Western Thrace" label="Western Thrace"/>
<link wikidata="Q203175" start="694" end="704" title="Samothrace" label="Samothrace"/>
<link wikidata="Q34575" start="721" end="731" title="Aegean Sea" label="Aegean Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q204347" start="892" end="897" title="Maritsa" label="Evros"/>
<link wikidata="Q500954" start="916" end="920" title="Arda (Maritsa)" label="Arda"/>
<link wikidata="Q6489" start="927" end="944" title="Rhodope Mountains" label="Rhodope Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q34575" start="984" end="994" title="Aegean Sea" label="Aegean Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q190847" start="1339" end="1354" title="Alexandroupolis" label="Alexandroupolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q932648" start="1360" end="1372" title="Didymoteicho" label="Didymoteicho"/>
<link wikidata="Q992228" start="1378" end="1387" title="Orestiada" label="Orestiada"/>
<link wikidata="Q203175" start="1393" end="1403" title="Samothrace" label="Samothrace"/>
<link wikidata="Q1014206" start="1433" end="1439" title="Soufli" label="Soufli"/>
<link wikidata="Q202595" start="1490" end="1500" title="prefectures of Greece" label="prefecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192701" start="1529" end="1546" title="Thrace Prefecture" label="Thrace Prefecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q992228" start="1899" end="1908" title="Orestiada" label="Orestiada"/>
<link wikidata="Q932648" start="1934" end="1946" title="Didymoteicho" label="Didymoteicho"/>
<link wikidata="Q1014206" start="1975" end="1981" title="Soufli" label="Soufli"/>
<link wikidata="Q190847" start="2004" end="2019" title="Alexandroupolis" label="Alexandroupolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q203175" start="2051" end="2061" title="Samothrace" label="Samothrace"/>
<link wikidata="Q41" start="2138" end="2144" title="Greece" label="Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192701" start="2172" end="2186" title="Western Thrace" label="Western Thrace"/>
<link wikidata="Q3554928" start="2320" end="2326" title="Lavara" label="Lavara"/>
<link wikidata="Q203175" start="2331" end="2341" title="Samothraki" label="Samothraki"/>
<link wikidata="Q182062" start="2367" end="2392" title="Greek War of Independence" label="Greek War of Independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q219" start="2448" end="2456" title="Bulgaria" label="Bulgaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q269267" start="2476" end="2503" title="Treaty of Neuilly-sur-Seine" label="Treaty of Neuilly-sur-Seine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192701" start="2534" end="2551" title="Thrace Prefecture" label="Thrace Prefecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q87138" start="2596" end="2625" title="Greco-Turkish War (1919-1922)" label="Greco-Turkish War (1919-1922)"/>
<link wikidata="Q108123504" start="2827" end="2883" title="2021 Evros floods" label="in 2021 where the multiple and largest floods took place"/>
<link wikidata="Q389377" start="2949" end="2960" title="A2 motorway (Greece)" label="A2 motorway"/>
<link wikidata="Q370080" start="2976" end="2979" title="European route E90" label="E90"/>
<link wikidata="Q208403" start="2994" end="3002" title="Komotini" label="Komotini"/>
<link wikidata="Q190847" start="3005" end="3020" title="Alexandroupolis" label="Alexandroupolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q49278559" start="3023" end="3029" title="İpsala" label="İpsala"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371290" start="3041" end="3062" title="Greek National Road 2" label="Greek National Road 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q943354" start="3097" end="3102" title="Feres, Evros" label="Feres"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371301" start="3105" end="3127" title="Greek National Road 51" label="Greek National Road 51"/>
<link wikidata="Q926976" start="3128" end="3131" title="European route E85" label="E85"/>
<link wikidata="Q405789" start="3133" end="3143" title="Svilengrad" label="Svilengrad"/>
<link wikidata="Q992228" start="3157" end="3166" title="Orestiada" label="Orestiada"/>
<link wikidata="Q932648" start="3169" end="3181" title="Didymoteicho" label="Didymoteicho"/>
<link wikidata="Q270547" start="3192" end="3214" title="Greek National Road 53" label="Greek National Road 53"/>
<link wikidata="Q1786624" start="3216" end="3223" title="Ormenio" label="Ormenio"/>
<link wikidata="Q2532063" start="3226" end="3235" title="Metaxades" label="Metaxades"/>
<link wikidata="Q939235" start="3238" end="3244" title="Aisymi" label="Aisymi"/>
<link wikidata="Q210296" start="3337" end="3343" title="Xanthi" label="Xanthi"/>
<link wikidata="Q212841" start="3348" end="3353" title="Drama, Greece" label="Drama"/>
<link wikidata="Q331048" start="3398" end="3420" title="Dimitrovgrad, Bulgaria" label="Dimitrovgrad, Bulgaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q775225" start="3493" end="3502" title="Uzunköprü" label="Uzunköprü"/>
<link wikidata="Q1430762" start="3517" end="3554" title="Alexandroupolis International Airport" label="Alexandroupolis International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q96962495" start="3659" end="3691" title="Theotokos Kosmosoteira" label="Church of Theotokos Kosmosoteira"/>
<link wikidata="Q19645" start="3719" end="3723" title="1152" label="1152"/>
<link wikidata="Q211884" start="3770" end="3783" title="Byzantine art" label="Byzantine art"/>
<link wikidata="Q41" start="3787" end="3793" title="Greece" label="Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q203175" start="3797" end="3807" title="Samothrace" label="Samothrace"/>
<link wikidata="Q1791563" start="3817" end="3844" title="Samothrace temple complex" label="Sanctuary of the Great Gods"/>
<link wikidata="Q4785434" start="3853" end="3874" title="Archaeological Museum of Samothrace" label="Archaeological Museum"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3878" end="3903" title="Evros Delta National Park" label="Evros Delta National Park"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3906" end="3935" title="Lighthouse of Alexandroupolis" label="Lighthouse of Alexandroupolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q16725772" start="3985" end="3995" title="Alepochori, Evros" label="Alepochori"/>
<link wikidata="Q97155237" start="3997" end="4023" title="Church of Saint Athanasius (Alepochori, Evros)" label="Church of Saint Athanasius"/>
<link wikidata="Q2532063" start="4026" end="4035" title="Metaxades" label="Metaxades"/>
<link wikidata="Q117751524" start="4037" end="4063" title="Church of Saint Athanasius (Metaxades, Evros)" label="Church of Saint Athanasius"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4069" end="4077" title="Paliouri, Evros" label="Paliouri"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4079" end="4104" title="Church of Saint Pantaleon (Paliouri, Evros)" label="Church of Saint Pantaleon"/>
<link wikidata="Q8073895" start="4120" end="4134" title="Zone (colony)" label="Mesimvria-Zoni"/>
<link wikidata="Q65065436" start="4137" end="4149" title="Dadia Forest" label="Dadia Forest"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4152" end="4181" title="Fossilized Forest of Lefkimmi" label="Fossilized Forest of Lefkimmi"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4184" end="4207" title="Cyclops Cave, Makri" label="Cyclops Polyphemus Cave"/>
<link wikidata="Q3625719" start="4211" end="4216" title="Makri, Evros" label="Makri"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4219" end="4248" title="Burial Tomb of Mikri Doxipara" label="Burial Tomb of Mikri Doxipara"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277" start="4250" end="4255" title="Roman Empire" label="Roman"/>
<link wikidata="Q8103" start="4282" end="4293" title="2nd century" label="2nd century"/>
<link wikidata="Q932648" start="4296" end="4308" title="Didymoteicho" label="Didymoteicho"/>
<link wikidata="Q12874774" start="4311" end="4327" title="Didymoteicho Fortress" label="Byzantine Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q272752" start="4331" end="4358" title="Çelebi Sultan Mehmed Mosque" label="Çelebi Sultan Mehmed Mosque"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4362" end="4380" title="Hamam of Oruç Paşa" label="Hamam of Oruç Paşa"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4384" end="4403" title="Türbe of Oruç Pasha" label="Türbe of Oruç Pasha"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4411" end="4422" title="Kayali Cave" label="Kayali Cave"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4431" end="4441" title="Vouva Cave" label="Vouva Cave"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4444" end="4460" title="Pythio Castle" label="Castle of Pythio"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4467" end="4480" title="Thermal baths of Traianoupolis" label="thermal baths"/>
<link wikidata="Q2284484" start="4484" end="4496" title="Traianoupoli" label="Traianoupoli"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4499" end="4523" title="Castle of Avanta-Potamos" label="Castle of Avanta-Potamos"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4530" end="4559" title="Ethnological Museum of Thrace" label="Ethnological Museum of Thrace"/>
<link wikidata="Q190847" start="4563" end="4578" title="Alexandroupolis" label="Alexandroupolis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4585" end="4606" title="Silk Museum of Soufli" label="Silk Museum of Soufli"/>
<link wikidata="Q19803473" start="4609" end="4616" title="Zourafa" label="Zourafa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2532063" start="4637" end="4646" title="Metaxades" label="Metaxades"/>
<link wikidata="Q38915" start="4687" end="4692" title="Pomaks" label="Pomak"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4702" end="4708" title="Goniko, Evros" label="Goniko"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4713" end="4719" title="Roussa, Evros" label="Roussa"/>
<link wikidata="Q15442756" start="4761" end="4784" title="Seyyid Ali Sultan Tekke" label="Seyyid Ali Sultan Tekke"/>
<link wikidata="Q232650" start="4818" end="4835" title="Hrysopiyi Devetzi" label="Hrysopiyi Devetzi"/>
<link wikidata="Q190847" start="4843" end="4858" title="Alexandroupolis" label="Alexandroupolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q462908" start="4922" end="4938" title="Demis Nikolaidis" label="Demis Nikolaidis"/>
<link wikidata="Q190847" start="4946" end="4961" title="Alexandroupolis" label="Alexandroupolis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5019" end="5048" title="Greece National football team" label="Greece National football team"/>
<link wikidata="Q2263432" start="5067" end="5084" title="Stelios venetidis" label="Stelios Venetidis"/>
<link wikidata="Q992228" start="5092" end="5101" title="Orestiada" label="Orestiada"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5158" end="5187" title="Greece National football team" label="Greece National football team"/>
<link wikidata="Q330945" start="5206" end="5223" title="Athanasios Tsigas" label="Athanasios Tsigas"/>
<link wikidata="Q190847" start="5241" end="5256" title="Alexandroupolis" label="Alexandroupolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q6517024" start="5277" end="5295" title="Lefteris Hapsiadis" label="Lefteris Hapsiadis"/>
<link wikidata="Q943354" start="5308" end="5313" title="Feres, Evros" label="Feres"/>
<link wikidata="Q15066201" start="5343" end="5360" title="Andreas Andreadis" label="Andreas Andreadis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1014206" start="5379" end="5385" title="Soufli" label="Soufli"/>
<link wikidata="Q11770037" start="5427" end="5442" title="Marios Giourdas" label="Marios Giourdas"/>
<link wikidata="Q190847" start="5450" end="5465" title="Alexandroupolis" label="Alexandroupolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q15919872" start="5501" end="5522" title="Thanassis Moustakidis" label="Thanassis Moustakidis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1014206" start="5530" end="5536" title="Soufli" label="Soufli"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5616" end="5645" title="Greece National football team" label="Greece National football team"/>
<link wikidata="Q2606920" start="5647" end="5660" title="Nikos Samaras" label="Nikos Samaras"/>
<link wikidata="Q992228" start="5673" end="5682" title="Orestiada" label="Orestiada"/>
<link wikidata="Q65332" start="5764" end="5787" title="Constantin Carathéodory" label="Constantin Carathéodory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1014288" start="5800" end="5809" title="Nea Vyssa" label="Nea Vyssa"/>
<link wikidata="Q55356814" start="5833" end="5859" title="Dimosthenis Michalentzakis" label="Dimosthenis Michalentzakis"/>
<link wikidata="Q943354" start="5867" end="5872" title="Feres, Evros" label="Feres"/>
<link wikidata="Q2021758" start="5942" end="5960" title="Marinos Ouzounidis" label="Marinos Ouzounidis"/>
<link wikidata="Q190847" start="5968" end="5983" title="Alexandroupolis" label="Alexandroupolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q23771614" start="6045" end="6059" title="Emmanouil Siopis" label="Manolis Siopis"/>
<link wikidata="Q190847" start="6067" end="6082" title="Alexandroupolis" label="Alexandroupolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q28944119" start="6117" end="6137" title="Dimosthenis Magginas" label="Dimosthenis Magginas"/>
<link wikidata="Q190847" start="6145" end="6160" title="Alexandroupolis" label="Alexandroupolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q16090347" start="6208" end="6220" title="Fotis Kosmas" label="Fotis Kosmas"/>
<link wikidata="Q190847" start="6235" end="6250" title="Alexandroupolis" label="Alexandroupolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1380691" start="6303" end="6320" title="Konstadinos Gatsioudis" label="Kostas Gatsioudis"/>
<link wikidata="Q932648" start="6328" end="6340" title="Didymoteicho" label="Didymoteicho"/>
<link wikidata="Q4993371" start="6422" end="6437" title="Nikos Alavantas" label="Nikos Alavantas"/>
<link wikidata="Q992228" start="6451" end="6460" title="Orestiada" label="Orestiada"/>
<link wikidata="Q3297269" start="6502" end="6521" title="Giannis Matzourakis" label="Giannis Matzourakis"/>
<link wikidata="Q932648" start="6529" end="6541" title="Didymoteicho" label="Didymoteicho"/>
<link wikidata="Q7036611" start="6583" end="6602" title="Nikos Hadjinikolaou" label="Nikos Hadjinikolaou"/>
<link wikidata="Q190847" start="6610" end="6625" title="Alexandroupolis" label="Alexandroupolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5789900" start="6646" end="6664" title="Renos Haralambidis" label="Renos Haralampidis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7577247" start="6672" end="6679" title="Spilaio" label="Spilaio"/>
<link wikidata="Q6187073" start="6710" end="6727" title="Yannis Stankoglou" label="Yannis Stankoglou"/>
<link wikidata="Q3565426" start="6735" end="6742" title="Thourio, Evros" label="Thourio"/>
<link wikidata="Q37072" start="6758" end="6782" title="John III Doukas Vatatzes" label="John III Doukas Vatatzes"/>
<link wikidata="Q932648" start="6795" end="6807" title="Didymoteicho" label="Didymoteicho"/>
<link wikidata="Q181254" start="6821" end="6827" title="Empire of Nicaea" label="Nicaea"/>
<link wikidata="Q37070" start="6829" end="6847" title="John V Palaiologos" label="John V Palaiologos"/>
<link wikidata="Q932648" start="6860" end="6872" title="Didymoteicho" label="Didymoteicho"/>
<link wikidata="Q128866" start="6875" end="6892" title="List of Byzantine emperors" label="Byzantine Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q165983" start="6894" end="6904" title="Bayezid II" label="Bayezid II"/>
<link wikidata="Q932648" start="6917" end="6929" title="Didymoteicho" label="Didymoteicho"/>
<link wikidata="Q12877352" start="6961" end="6979" title="Eugenios Eugenidis" label="Eugenios Eugenidis"/>
<link wikidata="Q932648" start="6992" end="7004" title="Didymoteicho" label="Didymoteicho"/>
<link wikidata="Q11069783" start="7025" end="7042" title="Sürmeli Ali Pasha" label="Sürmeli Ali Pasha"/>
<link wikidata="Q932648" start="7056" end="7068" title="Didymoteicho" label="Didymoteicho"/>
<link wikidata="Q18811" start="7071" end="7083" title="Grand Vizier" label="Grand Vizier"/>
<link wikidata="Q1886697" start="7144" end="7162" title="retsina Malamatina" label="retsina Malamatina"/>
<link wikidata="Q33111171" start="7164" end="7182" title="Paraskevas Tselios" label="Paraskevas Tselios"/>
<link wikidata="Q190847" start="7190" end="7205" title="Alexandroupolis" label="Alexandroupolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1546402" start="7251" end="7293" title="Greece men&amp;#x27;s national volleyball team" label="Greece men&amp;#x27;s national volleyball team"/>
<link wikidata="Q2702821" start="7295" end="7312" title="Savvas Gentsoglou" label="Savvas Gentsoglou"/>
<link wikidata="Q190847" start="7320" end="7335" title="Alexandroupolis" label="Alexandroupolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5606764" start="7361" end="7377" title="Gregoris Mentzas" label="Gregoris Mentzas"/>
<link wikidata="Q190847" start="7385" end="7400" title="Alexandroupolis" label="Alexandroupolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1640726" start="7451" end="7490" title="National Technical University of Athens" label="National Technical University of Athens"/>
<link wikidata="Q33507534" start="7492" end="7511" title="Giorgos Valavanidis" label="Giorgos Valavanidis"/>
<link wikidata="Q190847" start="7519" end="7534" title="Alexandroupolis" label="Alexandroupolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q21084270" start="7605" end="7658" title="Greece women&amp;#x27;s national under-16 basketball team" label="Greece women&amp;#x27;s national under-16 basketball team"/>
<link wikidata="Q28226055" start="7662" end="7666" title="1991 FIBA Europe Under-16 Championship for Women" label="1991"/>
<link wikidata="Q1343768" start="7691" end="7695" title="P.A.O.K. BC" label="PAOK"/>
<link wikidata="Q20090141" start="7697" end="7711" title="Arete Kosmidou" label="Arete Kosmidou"/>
<link wikidata="Q190847" start="7719" end="7734" title="Alexandroupolis" label="Alexandroupolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q22277493" start="7751" end="7769" title="Anestis Dalakouras" label="Anestis Dalakouras"/>
<link wikidata="Q190847" start="7777" end="7792" title="Alexandroupolis" label="Alexandroupolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1546402" start="7832" end="7874" title="Greece men&amp;#x27;s national volleyball team" label="Greece men&amp;#x27;s national volleyball team"/>
<link wikidata="Q3557249" start="7876" end="7893" title="Stavros Stathakis" label="Stavros Stathakis"/>
<link wikidata="Q190847" start="7901" end="7916" title="Alexandroupolis" label="Alexandroupolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q4993371" start="7938" end="7953" title="Nikos Alavantas" label="Nikos Alavantas"/>
<link wikidata="Q992228" start="7961" end="7970" title="Orestiada" label="Orestiada"/>
<link wikidata="Q134925" start="8010" end="8039" title="Greece national football team" label="Greece national football team"/>
<link wikidata="Q61696740" start="8041" end="8060" title="Stefania Liberakakis" label="Stefania Liberakaki"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8104" end="8110" title="Sofiko" label="Sofiko"/>
<link wikidata="Q932648" start="8127" end="8139" title="Didymoteicho" label="Didymoteicho"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="461066" wikidata="Q6803020" url="?curid=461066" title="Me Without You">
<text>Me Without You may refer to:

==Songs==
* &quot;Me Without You&quot; (Loick Essien song), 2011
* &quot;Me Without You&quot; (TobyMac song), 2012
* &quot;Me Without You&quot;, by All Time Low from &quot;Don&#x27;t Panic&quot;
* &quot;Me Without You&quot;, by Ashley Tisdale from &quot;Guilty Pleasure&quot;
* &quot;Me Without You&quot;, by Gwen Stefani from &quot;This Is What the Truth Feels Like&quot;
* &quot;Me Without You&quot;, by the Monkees from &quot;Instant Replay&quot;
* &quot;Me Without You&quot;, by Jennifer Nettles from &quot;That Girl&quot;
* &quot;Me Without You&quot;, by Rebecca St. James from &quot;God&quot;
* &quot;Me Without You&quot;, by Tim and the Glory Boys, 2021
* &quot;Me (Without You)&quot;, by Andy Gibb from &quot;Andy Gibb&#x27;s Greatest Hits&quot;

==Other uses==
* &quot;Me Without You&quot; (book), a 2011 book by Lisa Swerling and Ralph Lazar
* &quot;Me Without You&quot; (film), a 2001 British film directed by Sandra Goldbacher
* &quot;Me Without You&quot; (&quot;Medium&quot;), a television episode
* MewithoutYou, an American rock band</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6803020" start="0" end="14" title="Me Without You" label="Me Without You"/>
<link wikidata="Q6803021" start="42" end="88" title="Me Without You (Loick Essien song)" label="&amp;quot;Me Without You&amp;quot; (Loick Essien song)"/>
<link wikidata="Q17009752" start="97" end="138" title="Me Without You (TobyMac song)" label="&amp;quot;Me Without You&amp;quot; (TobyMac song)"/>
<link wikidata="Q60359" start="196" end="224" title="Don&amp;#x27;t Panic (All Time Low album)" label="&amp;quot;Don&amp;#x27;t Panic&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q922472" start="284" end="299" title="Guilty Pleasure (Ashley Tisdale album)" label="Guilty Pleasure"/>
<link wikidata="Q22693262" start="363" end="396" title="This Is What the Truth Feels Like" label="This Is What the Truth Feels Like"/>
<link wikidata="Q3151692" start="459" end="473" title="Instant Replay (The Monkees album)" label="Instant Replay"/>
<link wikidata="Q17059826" start="541" end="550" title="That Girl (album)" label="That Girl"/>
<link wikidata="Q59939" start="619" end="622" title="God (Rebecca St. James album)" label="God"/>
<link wikidata="Q18394410" start="662" end="684" title="Tim and the Glory Boys" label="Tim and the Glory Boys"/>
<link wikidata="Q4760709" start="747" end="777" title="Andy Gibb&amp;#x27;s Greatest Hits" label="Andy Gibb&amp;#x27;s Greatest Hits"/>
<link wikidata="Q20714469" start="802" end="835" title="Me Without You (book)" label="&amp;quot;Me Without You&amp;quot; (book)"/>
<link wikidata="Q474470" start="884" end="917" title="Me Without You (film)" label="&amp;quot;Me Without You&amp;quot; (film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3011156" start="971" end="1018" title="Me Without You (Medium)" label="&amp;quot;Me Without You&amp;quot; (&amp;quot;Medium&amp;quot;)"/>
<link wikidata="Q286724" start="1043" end="1055" title="MewithoutYou" label="MewithoutYou"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="461082" wikidata="Q27590" url="?curid=461082" title="Heath">
<text>A heath () is a shrubland habitat found mainly on free-draining infertile, acidic soils and is characterised by open, low-growing woody vegetation. Moorland is generally related to high-ground heaths with—especially in Great Britain—a cooler and damper climate.

Heaths are widespread worldwide but are fast disappearing and considered a rare habitat in Europe. They form extensive and highly diverse communities across Australia in humid and sub-humid areas where fire regimes with recurring burning are required for the maintenance of the heathlands. Even more diverse though less widespread heath communities occur in Southern Africa. Extensive heath communities can also be found in the Texas chaparral, New Caledonia, central Chile, and along the shores of the Mediterranean Sea. In addition to these extensive heath areas, the vegetation type is also found in scattered locations across all continents, except Antarctica.

== Characteristics ==
Heathland is favoured where climatic conditions are typically hard and dry, particularly in summer, and soils acidic, of low fertility, and often sandy and very free-draining; a mire may occur where drainage is poor, but usually is only small in extent. Heaths are dominated by low shrubs, to tall.

Heath vegetation can be extremely plant-species rich, and heathlands of Australia are home to some 3,700 endemic or typical species in addition to numerous less restricted species. The fynbos heathlands of South Africa are second only to tropical rainforests in plant biodiversity with over 7,000 species. In marked contrast, the tiny pockets of heathland in Europe are extremely depauperate with a flora consisting primarily of heather (&quot;Calluna vulgaris&quot;), heath (&quot;Erica&quot; species) and gorse (&quot;Ulex&quot; species).

The bird fauna of heathlands are usually cosmopolitan species of the region. In the depauperate heathlands of Europe, bird species tend to be more characteristic of the community, and include Montagu&#x27;s harrier and the tree pipit. In Australia the heathland avian fauna is dominated by nectar-feeding birds such as honey-eaters and lorikeets, although numerous other birds from emus to eagles are also common in Australian heathlands. The birds of the South African fynbos include sunbirds, warblers and siskins. Heathlands are also an excellent habitat for insects including ants, moths, butterflies and wasps; many species are restricted entirely to it. One such example of an organism restricted to heathland is the silver-studded blue butterfly, &quot;Plebejus argus&quot;.

== Anthropogenic heaths ==
Anthropogenic heath habitats are a cultural landscape that can be found worldwide in locations as diverse as northern and western Europe, the Americas, Australia, New Zealand, Madagascar and New Guinea.

These heaths were originally made or expanded by centuries of human clearance of the natural forest and woodland vegetation, by grazing and burning. In some cases this clearance went so far that parts of the heathland have given way to open spots of pure sand and sand dunes, with a local climate that, even in Europe, can rise to temperatures of in summer, drying the sand spot bordering the heathland and further raising its vulnerability for wildfires. Referring to heathland in England, Oliver Rackham says, &quot;Heaths are clearly the product of human activities and need to be managed as heathland; if neglected they turn into woodland&quot;.

The conservation value of these human-made heaths has become much more appreciated due to their historical cultural value as habitats; consequently, most heathlands are protected. However they are also threatened by tree incursion because of the discontinuation of traditional management techniques, such as grazing and burning, that mediated the landscapes. Some are also threatened by urban sprawl. Anthropogenic heathlands are maintained artificially by a combination of grazing and periodic burning (known as swailing), or (rarely) mowing; if not so maintained, they are rapidly recolonised by forest or woodland. The recolonising tree species will depend on what is available as the local seed source, and thus it may not reflect the natural vegetation before the heathland became established.

== In literature ==

The heath features prominently in:

* &quot;King Lear&quot;, by William Shakespeare
* &quot;Wuthering Heights&quot;, by Emily Brontë
* &quot;The Return of the Native&quot;, by Thomas Hardy
* &quot;Ethan Frome&quot;, by Edith Wharton
* &quot;The Letters of Vincent van Gogh&quot;, by Vincent van Gogh

== Gallery ==

== See also ==

* Bolster heath
* Chalk heath
* Garrigue
* Maquis shrubland
* Matorral
* Scrubland

== References ==
== External links ==

* The Countryside Agency information on types of open land
* Origin of the word &#x27;heath&#x27;</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q27590" start="2" end="7" title="Heath" label="heath"/>
<link wikidata="Q879641" start="16" end="25" title="shrubland" label="shrubland"/>
<link wikidata="Q52105" start="26" end="33" title="habitat (ecology)" label="habitat"/>
<link wikidata="Q11158" start="75" end="79" title="acid" label="acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1092661" start="148" end="156" title="Moorland" label="Moorland"/>
<link wikidata="Q23666" start="219" end="232" title="Great Britain" label="Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="420" end="429" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5451644" start="465" end="476" title="fire regime" label="fire regime"/>
<link wikidata="Q27394" start="621" end="636" title="Southern Africa" label="Southern Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q842123" start="697" end="706" title="chaparral" label="chaparral"/>
<link wikidata="Q33788" start="708" end="721" title="New Caledonia" label="New Caledonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q298" start="731" end="736" title="Chile" label="Chile"/>
<link wikidata="Q4918" start="766" end="783" title="Mediterranean Sea" label="Mediterranean Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q18648871" start="833" end="848" title="vegetation type" label="vegetation type"/>
<link wikidata="Q51" start="916" end="926" title="Antarctica" label="Antarctica"/>
<link wikidata="Q36449705" start="1129" end="1133" title="mire" label="mire"/>
<link wikidata="Q195861" start="1436" end="1442" title="fynbos" label="fynbos"/>
<link wikidata="Q5260600" start="1631" end="1642" title="Depauperate ecosystem" label="depauperate"/>
<link wikidata="Q6983007" start="1680" end="1687" title="Calluna" label="heather"/>
<link wikidata="Q206998" start="1720" end="1725" title="Erica (plant)" label="heath"/>
<link wikidata="Q393278" start="1758" end="1763" title="Ulex" label="gorse"/>
<link wikidata="Q104021" start="1802" end="1807" title="Fauna (animals)" label="fauna"/>
<link wikidata="Q26574" start="1985" end="2007" title="Montagu&amp;#x27;s harrier" label="Montagu&amp;#x27;s harrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q143313" start="2016" end="2026" title="tree pipit" label="tree pipit"/>
<link wikidata="Q211670" start="2112" end="2124" title="honeyeater" label="honey-eaters"/>
<link wikidata="Q15274050" start="2129" end="2138" title="Lories and lorikeets" label="lorikeets"/>
<link wikidata="Q93208" start="2175" end="2178" title="emu" label="emu"/>
<link wikidata="Q2092297" start="2183" end="2188" title="eagle" label="eagle"/>
<link wikidata="Q208221" start="2278" end="2285" title="sunbird" label="sunbird"/>
<link wikidata="Q7386" start="2373" end="2376" title="ant" label="ant"/>
<link wikidata="Q926992" start="2553" end="2567" title="Silver-studded blue" label="Plebejus argus"/>
<link wikidata="Q574376" start="2603" end="2616" title="human impact on the environment" label="Anthropogenic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129474" start="2638" end="2656" title="cultural landscape" label="cultural landscape"/>
<link wikidata="Q27479" start="2712" end="2720" title="Northern Europe" label="northern"/>
<link wikidata="Q27496" start="2725" end="2739" title="western Europe" label="western Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q828" start="2745" end="2753" title="Americas" label="Americas"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="2755" end="2764" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q664" start="2766" end="2777" title="New Zealand" label="New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q1019" start="2779" end="2789" title="Madagascar" label="Madagascar"/>
<link wikidata="Q40285" start="2794" end="2804" title="New Guinea" label="New Guinea"/>
<link wikidata="Q3239189" start="2935" end="2942" title="grazing" label="grazing"/>
<link wikidata="Q25391" start="3071" end="3080" title="sand dune" label="sand dune"/>
<link wikidata="Q2888789" start="3298" end="3312" title="Oliver Rackham" label="Oliver Rackham"/>
<link wikidata="Q192042" start="3845" end="3857" title="urban sprawl" label="urban sprawl"/>
<link wikidata="Q181598" start="4323" end="4332" title="King Lear" label="King Lear"/>
<link wikidata="Q692" start="4343" end="4362" title="William Shakespeare" label="William Shakespeare"/>
<link wikidata="Q202975" start="4371" end="4388" title="Wuthering Heights" label="Wuthering Heights"/>
<link wikidata="Q80137" start="4399" end="4411" title="Emily Brontë" label="Emily Brontë"/>
<link wikidata="Q141568" start="4420" end="4444" title="The Return of the Native" label="The Return of the Native"/>
<link wikidata="Q132805" start="4455" end="4467" title="Thomas Hardy" label="Thomas Hardy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5402934" start="4476" end="4487" title="Ethan Frome" label="Ethan Frome"/>
<link wikidata="Q276032" start="4498" end="4511" title="Edith Wharton" label="Edith Wharton"/>
<link wikidata="Q7747016" start="4520" end="4551" title="The Letters of Vincent van Gogh" label="The Letters of Vincent van Gogh"/>
<link wikidata="Q5582" start="4562" end="4578" title="Vincent van Gogh" label="Vincent van Gogh"/>
<link wikidata="Q17071319" start="4613" end="4626" title="Bolster heath" label="Bolster heath"/>
<link wikidata="Q5068816" start="4629" end="4640" title="Chalk heath" label="Chalk heath"/>
<link wikidata="Q917381" start="4643" end="4651" title="Garrigue" label="Garrigue"/>
<link wikidata="Q667552" start="4654" end="4670" title="Maquis shrubland" label="Maquis shrubland"/>
<link wikidata="Q304888" start="4673" end="4681" title="Matorral" label="Matorral"/>
<link wikidata="Q879641" start="4684" end="4693" title="Scrubland" label="Scrubland"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="461087" wikidata="Q178225" url="?curid=461087" title="Edna O'Brien">
<text>Josephine Edna O&#x27;Brien (15 December 1930 – 27 July 2024) was an Irish novelist, memoirist, playwright, poet and short-story writer. 

O&#x27;Brien&#x27;s works often revolve around the inner feelings of women and their problems relating to men and society as a whole. Her first novel, &quot;The Country Girls&quot; (1960), has been credited with breaking silence on sexual matters and social issues during a repressive period in Ireland after the Second World War. The book was banned and denounced from the pulpit. Many of her novels were translated into French. Her memoir, &quot;Country Girl&quot;, was published in 2012, and her last novel, &quot;Girl&quot;, was published in 2019. Many of her novels were based in Ireland, but &quot;Girl&quot; was a fictional account of a victim of the 2014 Chibok kidnapping in Nigeria.

In 2015, she was elected to Aosdána by her fellow artists and honoured with the title Saoi. She was the recipient of many other awards and honours, winning the Irish PEN Award in 2001 and the David Cohen Prize in 2019. France made her a in 2021. Her short story collection &quot;Saints and Sinners&quot; won the 2011 Frank O&#x27;Connor International Short Story Award, the world&#x27;s richest prize for that genre.

==Early life and education==
Josephine Edna O&#x27;Brien was born on 15 December 1930 to farmer Michael O&#x27;Brien and Lena Cleary, at Tuamgraney in County Clare, Ireland, a place she would later describe as &quot;fervid&quot; and &quot;enclosed&quot;. She was the youngest child of &quot;a strict, religious family&quot;. They lived at &quot;Drewsborough&quot; (also &quot;Drewsboro&quot;), a &quot;large two-storey house&quot;, which her mother kept in &quot;semi-grandeur&quot;. Michael O&#x27;Brien, &quot;whose family had seen wealthier times&quot; as landowners, had inherited a &quot;thousand acres or more&quot; and &quot;a fortune from rich uncles&quot;, but was a &quot;profligate&quot; hard-drinker who gambled away his inheritance, the land &quot;sold off in bits ... or bartered to pay debts&quot;. Her mother, Lena, &quot;came from a poorer background&quot;. According to O&#x27;Brien, her mother was a strong, controlling woman, who had emigrated temporarily to America and worked for some time as a maid in Brooklyn, New York, for a well-off Irish-American family, before returning to Ireland to raise her family.

From 1941 to 1946, O&#x27;Brien was educated at St. Raphael&#x27;s College, a boarding school run by the Sisters of Mercy in Loughrea, County Galway, a circumstance that contributed to a &quot;suffocating&quot; childhood. She recalled: &quot;I rebelled against the coercive and stifling religion into which I was born and bred. It was very frightening and all-pervasive. I&#x27;m glad it has gone.&quot; Because she deeply missed her mother, she became fond of a nun and tried to identify the nun with herself. 

In 1950, having studied at night at a pharmaceutical college and worked in a Dublin pharmacy during the day, O&#x27;Brien was awarded a licence as a pharmacist.

==Career==
In Ireland, O&#x27;Brien read such writers as Tolstoy, Thackeray, and F. Scott Fitzgerald. In Dublin, she bought &quot;Introducing James Joyce&quot;, with an introduction written by T. S. Eliot, and said later that when she learned that James Joyce&#x27;s &quot;A Portrait of the Artist as a Young Man&quot; was autobiographical, it made her realise where she might turn, should she want to write herself. &quot;Unhappy houses are a very good incubation for stories,&quot; she said. 

In London, she started work as a reader for Hutchinson, where, based on her reports, she was commissioned for £50 to write a novel. She published her first book, &quot;The Country Girls&quot;, in 1960. It was the first part of a trilogy of novels (later collected as &quot;The Country Girls Trilogy&quot;), which included &quot;The Lonely Girl&quot; (1962) and &quot;Girls in Their Married Bliss&quot; (1964). Shortly after their publication, the books were placed on the censorship index and banned in her native country because of their frank portrayals of the sex lives of their characters. O&#x27;Brien herself was accused of &quot;corrupting the minds of young women&quot;. She later said, &quot;I felt no fame. I was married. I had young children. All I could hear out of Ireland from my mother and anonymous letters was bile and odium and outrage&quot;. The book was also denounced from the pulpit. It had been claimed that copies of &quot;The Country Girls&quot; were burned when it was published, but an investigation in 2015 found no witnesses or evidence and it was concluded that the story was probably not true.

Many of her novels were not well received in Ireland. Her fourth novel, &quot;August Is a Wicked Month&quot; (1965), in which an unhappily married woman has a &quot;sensual awakening on the French Riviera&quot;, was excoriated in the press and banned in Ireland. &quot;In The Forest&quot; (2002), a fictional account of a notorious Irish murder, was described by &quot;Irish Times&quot; critic Fintan O&#x27;Toole as &quot;morally criminal&quot;.

In the 1960s, O&#x27;Brien was a patient of Scottish psychiatrist R. D. Laing: &quot;I thought he might be able to help me. He couldn&#x27;t do that – he was too mad himself – but he opened doors&quot;, she said later. Her novel, &quot;A Pagan Place&quot; (1970), was about her repressive childhood. Her parents were vehemently against all things related to literature and her mother strongly disapproved of her daughter&#x27;s career as a writer. Once, when her mother found a Seán O&#x27;Casey book in her daughter&#x27;s possession, she tried to burn it.

Alongside Teddy Taylor (Conservative), Michael Foot (Labour) and Derek Worlock (Catholic Archbishop of Liverpool), O&#x27;Brien was a panel member for the first edition of the BBC&#x27;s &quot;Question Time&quot; in 1979, and was awarded the first answer in the programme&#x27;s history (&quot;Edna O&#x27;Brien, you were born there&quot;, referring to Ireland). Taylor&#x27;s death in 2017 left her the sole surviving member. In 1980, she wrote a play, &quot;Virginia&quot;, about Virginia Woolf, which was first staged in June 1980 at the Stratford Festival, Ontario, Canada. It was subsequently performed in the West End of London, at the Theatre Royal Haymarket, starring Maggie Smith, and directed by Robin Phillips. The play was staged at The Public Theater in New York in 1985. Also in 1980, O&#x27;Brien appeared alongside Patrick McGoohan in the TV movie &quot;The Hard Way&quot;. 

Other works by O&#x27;Brien included a biography of James Joyce, published in 1999, and a biography of the poet Lord Byron, &quot;Byron in Love,&quot; in 2009. &quot;House of Splendid Isolation&quot; (1994), her novel about a terrorist who goes on the run, marked a new phase in her writing career. Part of her research involved visiting Irish republican Dominic McGlinchey, later shot dead, whom she called &quot;a grave and reflective man&quot;, and &quot;most reflective and at the same time most forthcoming&quot;. She told Marianne Heron, of the &quot;Irish Independent&quot;, that she had told McGlinchey &quot;that she liked everything about him except what he was [and] he told her that his mother said the same thing&quot;. O&#x27;Brien denied having an affair with McGlinchey, and claimed later that, as a result of her research, she had to refute questions as to whether she &quot;had love affairs with republicans&quot;.

&quot;Down by the River&quot; (1996) concerned an underage rape victim who sought an abortion in England, the &quot;Miss X case&quot;. &quot;In the Forest&quot; (2002) dealt with the real-life case of Brendan O&#x27;Donnell, who abducted and murdered a woman, her three-year-old son, and a priest, in rural Ireland.

O&#x27;Brien&#x27;s last novel, &quot;Girl&quot; (2019), was based on the abduction of 276 schoolgirls in Nigeria in 2014. She travelled to that country twice to do research, which included interviewing numerous people, from &quot;escaped girls, their mothers and sisters, to trauma specialists, doctors and Unicef&quot;. She later said that she had tried to create a &quot;kind of mythic story from all this pain and horror&quot;, and was disappointed by its poor reception in the US, although it was well-received in France and Germany. In 2020, she opened the Avignon theatre festival with a reading from the book. Poet Imtiaz Dharker, judge for the 2019 David Cohen Prize, said about &quot;Girl&quot;: &quot;I thought I had the course of O&#x27;Brien&#x27;s work mapped out before the judging came around, and then, towards the end of the process, another great tome dropped through the letterbox, changing the whole terrain&quot;. O&#x27;Brien regarded &quot;Girl&quot; as a continuation of the focus of her career, &quot;to chart and get inside the mind, soul, heart and emotion of girls in some form of restriction, some form of life that isn&#x27;t easy, but who find a way to literally plough their way through and come out as winners of sort – maybe not getting prizes – but come through their experiences and live to tell the tale. It is a theme I have lived and often cried with&quot;.

Her work includes references to Irish lore and history, and mentions of distinctive geographic features such as Druids&#x27; circles, Inis Cealtra, and Lough Derg, County Donegal.

Many of her works were translated into French, with &quot;The Country Girls&quot; translation published in 1960 by Éditions Julliard and, in 1962, by Presses de la Cité. Later titles were published by Gallimard and then by Fayard. In 2010, O&#x27;Brien formed an exclusive relationship with publisher Sabine Wespieser. Her work was much loved in France, &quot;both for the quality of her writing but also for her universal struggles which received a particular resonance in France&quot; (French Embassy in London). After the publication of &quot;Girl&quot; in 2019, she featured in a number of French publications, including &quot;Télérama&quot;, &quot;Elle&quot;, &quot;Le Monde des Livres&quot;, and &quot;Le Journal du Dimanche&quot;. 

Emory University in Atlanta, Georgia, US, holds her papers from 1939 to 2000. More recent papers are held at University College Dublin. In September 2021, it was announced that O&#x27;Brien would be donating her archive to the National Library of Ireland. The library was to hold papers from O&#x27;Brien covering the period of 2000 to 2021, including correspondence, drafts, notes and revisions.

==Personal life==
In 1954, O&#x27;Brien met and married, against her parents&#x27; wishes, the Irish writer Ernest Gébler, and the couple moved to London in 1959, where, as she later put it, &quot;We lived in SW 20. Sub-urb-ia&quot;. They had two sons, Sasha, an architect who lives in London, and writer Carlo Gébler, but the marriage ended in 1964. Initially believing he deserved credit for helping her become an accomplished writer, Ernest came to believe he was the author of O&#x27;Brien&#x27;s books. In 2009, Carlo revealed that his parents&#x27; marriage had been volatile, with bitter rows between his mother and father over her success. Ernest Gébler died in 1998. 

O&#x27;Brien remained in London until her death, although she often visited Ireland. In 2020, at the age of 90, she was renting a flat in Chelsea.

The reaction to &quot;The Country Girls&quot; in Ireland damaged her relationship with her mother, who was ashamed of her daughter. (Her mother died in 1977.) The press often portrayed O&#x27;Brien as a &quot;party girl&quot;, with American magazine &quot;Vanity Fair&quot; calling her &quot;the playgirl of the western world&quot;. She socialised with glamorous men such as Marlon Brando and Robert Mitchum, but said later that she was &quot;doing the cooking&quot; at most of the parties. 

===Death and legacy===
Edna O&#x27;Brien died following a long illness in London, England, on 27 July 2024, at the age of 93. She is buried on Inis Cealtra (Holy Island), an island in Lough Derg.

According to Scottish novelist Andrew O&#x27;Hagan, O&#x27;Brien&#x27;s place in Irish letters is assured: &quot;She changed the nature of Irish fiction; she brought the woman&#x27;s experience and sex and internal lives of those people on to the page, and she did it with style, and she made those concerns international.&quot; Irish novelist Colum McCann avers that O&#x27;Brien has been &quot;the advance scout for the Irish imagination&quot; for over fifty years.

Irish president Michael D. Higgins, also a writer and poet, wrote: &quot;Through that deeply insightful work, rich in humanity, Edna O&#x27;Brien was one of the first writers to provide a true voice to the experiences of women in Ireland in their different generations and played an important role in transforming the status of women across Irish society&quot;.

A documentary film &quot;Blue Road - The Edna O&#x27;Brien Story&quot;, by Sinéad O&#x27;Shea, was premiered at the 2024 Toronto International Film Festival, and was released in Irish cinemas in January 2025. The documentary is based on her journals (narrated by Jessie Buckley), and includes interviews with O&#x27;Brien and others.

==Recognition, awards, and honours==
Philip Roth once described her as &quot;the most gifted woman now writing in English&quot;. A former president of Ireland, Mary Robinson, cited her as &quot;one of the great creative writers of her generation&quot;. Others who hailed her as one of the greatest writers of her time included John Banville, Michael Ondaatje and Ian McKellen.

O&#x27;Brien&#x27;s awards include the &quot;Yorkshire Post&quot; Book Award in 1970 (for &quot;A Pagan Place&quot;), and the &quot;Los Angeles Times&quot; Book Prize in 1990 for &quot;Lantern Slides&quot;. In 2006, she was appointed adjunct professor of English Literature in University College Dublin.

In 2009, O&#x27;Brien was honoured with the Bob Hughes Lifetime Achievement Award during a special ceremony at the year&#x27;s Irish Book Awards in Dublin. Her collection &quot;Saints and Sinners&quot; won the 2011 Frank O&#x27;Connor International Short Story Award, with judge Thomas McCarthy referring to her as &quot;the Solzhenitsyn of Irish life&quot;. RTÉ aired a documentary on her as part of its Arts strand in early 2012. 

In 2017, for her contributions to literature, she was appointed an honorary Dame Commander of the Order of the British Empire.

She was presented with the Torc of the Saoi of Aosdána in 2015 by Irish President Michael D. Higgins. In 2024, Higgins remembered her &quot;election as Saoi, chosen by her fellow artists, was the ultimate expression of the esteem in which her work is held&quot;. He also presented her with the Presidential Distinguished Service Award in 2018.

In 2019, O&#x27;Brien was awarded the David Cohen Prize for Literature at a ceremony in London. The £40,000 prize, awarded every two years in recognition of a living writer&#x27;s lifetime achievement in literature, has been described as the &quot;UK and Ireland Nobel in literature&quot;. Judge David Park said &quot;In winning the David Cohen Prize, Edna O&#x27;Brien adds her name to a literary roll call of honour&quot;.

&quot;Girl&quot; (2019) was nominated for two awards in France: the Prix Médicis and the Prix Femina étranger.

In March 2021, France announced that it would be naming O&#x27;Brien a &quot;Commandeur de l&#x27;Ordre des Arts et des Lettres&quot;, the country&#x27;s highest honour for the arts.

Other honours and awards include:
* 1962: Writing in &quot;The Observer&quot; in 1960, Kingsley Amis said that &quot;The Country Girls&quot; deserved his &quot;personal first-novel prize of the year&quot;. This comment was frequently interpreted as referring to a formal &quot;Kingsley Amis Award&quot;, including by O&#x27;Brien&#x27;s publishers, but no such literary prize exists.
* 1970: &quot;The Yorkshire Post&quot; Book Award (Book of the Year), for &quot;A Pagan Place&quot;
* 1990: &quot;Los Angeles Times&quot; Book Prize for Fiction, for &quot;Lantern Slides&quot;
* 1991: Premio Grinzane Cavour (Italy), for &quot;Girl with Green Eyes&quot;
* 1993: Writers&#x27; Guild Award (Best Fiction), for &quot;Time and Tide&quot;
* 1995: European Prize for Literature (European Association for the Arts), for &quot;House of Splendid Isolation&quot;
* 2000: Golden Plate Award of the American Academy of Achievement
* 2001: Irish PEN Award
* 2006: Ulysses Medal (University College Dublin)
* 2009: Bob Hughes Lifetime Achievement Award
* 2010: Shortlisted for Irish Book of the Decade (Irish Book Awards), for &quot;In the Forest&quot;
* 2012: Irish Book Awards (Irish Non-Fiction Book), for &quot;Country Girl&quot;
* 2018: PEN/Nabokov Award
* 2019: David Cohen Prize
* 2019: Prix Femina spécial, awarded in honour of her whole body of work; the first time a non-French author had won it
* 2021: Commandeur de l&#x27;Ordre des Arts et des Lettres (France)

==List of works==
===Novels===
* 1960: &quot;The Country Girls&quot; ()
* 1962: &quot;The Lonely Girl&quot; later published as &quot;Girl with Green Eyes&quot; ()
* 1964: &quot;Girls in Their Married Bliss&quot; ()
* 1965: &quot;August Is a Wicked Month&quot; ()
* 1966: &quot;Casualties of Peace&quot; ()
* 1970: &quot;A Pagan Place&quot; ()
* 1972: &quot;Night&quot; ()
* 1977: &quot;Johnny I Hardly Knew You&quot; (); in US, &quot;I Hardly Knew You&quot; ()
* 1987: &quot;The Country Girls Trilogy&quot; with new epilogue ()
* 1988: &quot;The High Road&quot; ()
* 1992: &quot;Time and Tide&quot; ()
* 1994: &quot;House of Splendid Isolation&quot; ()
* 1996: &quot;Down by the River&quot; ()
* 1999: &quot;Wild Decembers&quot; ()
* 2002: &quot;In the Forest&quot; ()
* 2006: &quot;The Light of Evening&quot; ()
* 2015: &quot;The Little Red Chairs&quot; ()
* 2019: &quot;Girl&quot; ()

===Short story collections===
* 1968: &quot;The Love Object and Other Stories&quot; ()
* 1974: &quot;A Scandalous Woman and Other Stories&quot; ()
* 1978: &quot;Mrs Reinhardt and Other Stories&quot; ()
* 1982: &quot;Returning&quot; ()
* 1985: &quot;A Fanatic Heart&quot; ()
* 1990: &quot;Lantern Slides&quot; ()
* 2011: &quot;Saints and Sinners&quot; ()
* 2013: &quot;The Love Object: Selected Stories&quot;, a fifty-year retrospective, ()

===Drama===
* 1973: &quot;A Pagan Place&quot; ()
* 1975: &quot;Zee and Co&quot; ()
* 1980: &quot;Virginia&quot; ()
* 2005: &quot;Family Butchers&quot;
* 2005: &quot;Triptych and Iphigenia&quot; ()
* 2009: &quot;Haunted&quot;
* 2011: &quot;The Country Girls&quot; ()
* 2014: &quot;Joyce&#x27;s Women&quot; ()

===Screenplays===
* 1971: &quot;Zee &amp; Co.&quot; ()

===Nonfiction books===
* 1976: &quot;Mother Ireland&quot;, ()
* 1977: &quot;Arabian Days&quot; ()
* 1979: &quot;Some Irish Loving&quot;, as editor: anthology ()
* 1981: &quot;James &amp; Nora&quot; (); reprinted in 2020
* 1986: &quot;Vanishing Ireland&quot; (with photographs by Richard Fitzgerald), ()
* 1999: &quot;James Joyce&quot;, biography ()
* 2009: &quot;Byron in Love&quot;, biography ()
* 2012: &quot;Country Girl&quot;, memoir ()

===Children&#x27;s books===
* 1981: &quot;The Dazzle&quot; ()
* 1982: &quot;A Christmas Treat&quot; ()
* 1983: &quot;The Rescue&quot; ()
* 2017: &quot;Tales for the Telling&quot;, ()

===Poetry collections===
* 1989: &quot;On the Bone&quot; ()

===Short stories===
==See also==
==References==
==Further reading==
* 
* 
* 

==External links==
* 2015 interview with Philip Dodd on BBC
* at WiredForBooks, 22 May 1992
* &quot;Lit Chat&quot; at salon.com, 2 December 1995
* &quot;You have to be lonely to be a writer&quot; – O&#x27;Brien video interview for &quot;The Guardian&quot;, 7 December 2012
* Video recording of O&#x27;Brien reads an extract from her autobiography &quot;Country Girl&quot;
* O&#x27;Brien papers, circa 1939–2000, at Emory University</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q178225" start="0" end="27" title="Edna O&amp;#x27;Brien" label="Josephine Edna O&amp;#x27;Brien"/>
<link wikidata="Q7727791" start="296" end="313" title="The Country Girls" label="The Country Girls"/>
<link wikidata="Q2337549" start="452" end="468" title="The Emergency (Ireland)" label="Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q211775" start="513" end="519" title="pulpit" label="pulpit"/>
<link wikidata="Q16385347" start="587" end="599" title="Country Girl (memoir)" label="Country Girl"/>
<link wikidata="Q67873217" start="656" end="660" title="Girl (O&amp;#x27;Brien novel)" label="Girl"/>
<link wikidata="Q16725863" start="802" end="819" title="Chibok kidnapping" label="Chibok kidnapping"/>
<link wikidata="Q201947" start="861" end="868" title="Aosdána" label="Aosdána"/>
<link wikidata="Q4822142" start="919" end="923" title="Saoi" label="Saoi"/>
<link wikidata="Q6071054" start="993" end="1008" title="Irish PEN Award" label="Irish PEN Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q3498181" start="1025" end="1042" title="David Cohen Prize" label="David Cohen Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q17010965" start="1112" end="1130" title="Saints and Sinners (short story collection)" label="Saints and Sinners"/>
<link wikidata="Q5488745" start="1150" end="1201" title="Frank O&amp;#x27;Connor International Short Story Award" label="Frank O&amp;#x27;Connor International Short Story Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q1906588" start="1388" end="1398" title="Tuamgraney" label="Tuamgraney"/>
<link wikidata="Q18419" start="2276" end="2284" title="Brooklyn" label="Brooklyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q96406371" start="2432" end="2458" title="St. Raphael&amp;#x27;s College, Loughrea" label="St. Raphael&amp;#x27;s College"/>
<link wikidata="Q2142854" start="2489" end="2505" title="Sisters of Mercy" label="Sisters of Mercy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1025582" start="2509" end="2517" title="Loughrea" label="Loughrea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1761" start="2974" end="2980" title="Dublin" label="Dublin"/>
<link wikidata="Q105186" start="3046" end="3056" title="pharmacist" label="pharmacist"/>
<link wikidata="Q7243" start="3116" end="3123" title="Leo Tolstoy" label="Tolstoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q167768" start="3125" end="3134" title="William Makepeace Thackeray" label="Thackeray"/>
<link wikidata="Q93354" start="3140" end="3159" title="F. Scott Fitzgerald" label="F. Scott Fitzgerald"/>
<link wikidata="Q37767" start="3252" end="3263" title="T. S. Eliot" label="T. S. Eliot"/>
<link wikidata="Q6882" start="3307" end="3318" title="James Joyce" label="James Joyce"/>
<link wikidata="Q465360" start="3332" end="3371" title="A Portrait of the Artist as a Young Man" label="A Portrait of the Artist as a Young Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q378809" start="3599" end="3609" title="Hutchinson (publisher)" label="Hutchinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7727791" start="3723" end="3740" title="The Country Girls" label="The Country Girls"/>
<link wikidata="Q2678153" start="3883" end="3898" title="The Lonely Girl" label="The Lonely Girl"/>
<link wikidata="Q23307387" start="3922" end="3950" title="Girls in Their Married Bliss" label="Girls in Their Married Bliss"/>
<link wikidata="Q211775" start="4453" end="4459" title="pulpit" label="pulpit"/>
<link wikidata="Q16154411" start="4759" end="4783" title="August Is a Wicked Month" label="August Is a Wicked Month"/>
<link wikidata="Q182822" start="4871" end="4885" title="French Riviera" label="French Riviera"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134208" start="5050" end="5061" title="Irish Times" label="Irish Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q5450982" start="5075" end="5094" title="Fintan O&amp;#x27;Toole" label="Fintan O&amp;#x27;Toole"/>
<link wikidata="Q238584" start="5195" end="5206" title="R. D. Laing" label="R. D. Laing"/>
<link wikidata="Q315170" start="5607" end="5624" title="Seán O&amp;#x27;Casey" label="Seán O&amp;#x27;Casey"/>
<link wikidata="Q12899736" start="5698" end="5710" title="Teddy Taylor" label="Teddy Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q9626" start="5712" end="5724" title="Conservative Party (UK)" label="Conservative"/>
<link wikidata="Q332419" start="5727" end="5739" title="Michael Foot" label="Michael Foot"/>
<link wikidata="Q9630" start="5741" end="5747" title="Labour Party (UK)" label="Labour"/>
<link wikidata="Q3023789" start="5753" end="5766" title="Derek Worlock" label="Derek Worlock"/>
<link wikidata="Q3256136" start="5777" end="5800" title="Archbishop of Liverpool" label="Archbishop of Liverpool"/>
<link wikidata="Q2581397" start="5881" end="5894" title="Question Time (TV series)" label="Question Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q40909" start="6170" end="6184" title="Virginia Woolf" label="Virginia Woolf"/>
<link wikidata="Q367149" start="6229" end="6247" title="Stratford Festival" label="Stratford Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q460735" start="6303" end="6321" title="West End of London" label="West End of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q540426" start="6330" end="6353" title="Theatre Royal Haymarket" label="Theatre Royal Haymarket"/>
<link wikidata="Q172653" start="6364" end="6376" title="Maggie Smith" label="Maggie Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q7352716" start="6394" end="6408" title="Robin Phillips" label="Robin Phillips"/>
<link wikidata="Q3048768" start="6433" end="6451" title="The Public Theater" label="The Public Theater"/>
<link wikidata="Q298908" start="6519" end="6535" title="Patrick McGoohan" label="Patrick McGoohan"/>
<link wikidata="Q10861315" start="6552" end="6576" title="The Hard Way (1980 film)" label="&amp;quot;The Hard Way&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q6882" start="6632" end="6643" title="James Joyce" label="James Joyce"/>
<link wikidata="Q5679" start="6692" end="6702" title="Lord Byron" label="Lord Byron"/>
<link wikidata="Q23307640" start="6746" end="6773" title="House of Splendid Isolation" label="House of Splendid Isolation"/>
<link wikidata="Q550360" start="6935" end="6953" title="Dominic McGlinchey" label="Dominic McGlinchey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1590833" start="7137" end="7154" title="Irish Independent" label="Irish Independent"/>
<link wikidata="Q23307629" start="7520" end="7537" title="Down by the River (novel)" label="Down by the River"/>
<link wikidata="Q28224570" start="7655" end="7668" title="In the Forest" label="In the Forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q67873217" start="7869" end="7873" title="Girl (O&amp;#x27;Brien novel)" label="Girl"/>
<link wikidata="Q16725863" start="7905" end="7944" title="Chibok schoolgirls kidnapping" label="abduction of 276 schoolgirls in Nigeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q740308" start="8139" end="8145" title="Unicef" label="Unicef"/>
<link wikidata="Q473423" start="8394" end="8418" title="Avignon theatre festival" label="Avignon theatre festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q539265" start="8454" end="8468" title="Imtiaz Dharker" label="Imtiaz Dharker"/>
<link wikidata="Q3498181" start="8489" end="8506" title="David Cohen Prize" label="David Cohen Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q1471505" start="9262" end="9272" title="Irish lore" label="Irish lore"/>
<link wikidata="Q131081" start="9342" end="9362" title="Druid" label="Druids&amp;#x27; circles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1625333" start="9364" end="9376" title="Inis Cealtra" label="Inis Cealtra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1871373" start="9382" end="9408" title="Lough Derg, County Donegal" label="Lough Derg, County Donegal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7727791" start="9469" end="9486" title="The Country Girls" label="The Country Girls"/>
<link wikidata="Q80265" start="9526" end="9543" title="Éditions Julliard" label="Éditions Julliard"/>
<link wikidata="Q3402586" start="9561" end="9579" title="Presses de la Cité" label="Presses de la Cité"/>
<link wikidata="Q273819" start="9612" end="9621" title="Éditions Gallimard" label="Gallimard"/>
<link wikidata="Q2777746" start="9634" end="9640" title="Fayard" label="Fayard"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9712" end="9728" title="Sabine Wespieser" label="Sabine Wespieser"/>
<link wikidata="Q377629" start="10042" end="10050" title="Télérama" label="Télérama"/>
<link wikidata="Q154020" start="10064" end="10068" title="Elle (magazine)" label="Elle"/>
<link wikidata="Q12461" start="10082" end="10101" title="Le Monde des Livres" label="Le Monde des Livres"/>
<link wikidata="Q501461" start="10119" end="10141" title="Le Journal du Dimanche" label="Le Journal du Dimanche"/>
<link wikidata="Q621043" start="10151" end="10167" title="Emory University" label="Emory University"/>
<link wikidata="Q23556" start="10171" end="10178" title="Atlanta" label="Atlanta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068258" start="10260" end="10285" title="University College Dublin" label="University College Dublin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1672830" start="10378" end="10405" title="National Library of Ireland" label="National Library of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q5393182" start="10657" end="10670" title="Ernest Gébler" label="Ernest Gébler"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="10696" end="10702" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10758" end="10763" title="SW postcode area#SW20" label="SW 20"/>
<link wikidata="Q27063099" start="10854" end="10866" title="Carlo Gébler" label="Carlo Gébler"/>
<link wikidata="Q743535" start="11365" end="11372" title="Chelsea, London" label="Chelsea"/>
<link wikidata="Q158283" start="11631" end="11642" title="Vanity Fair (magazine)" label="Vanity Fair"/>
<link wikidata="Q34012" start="11750" end="11763" title="Marlon Brando" label="Marlon Brando"/>
<link wikidata="Q16472" start="11768" end="11782" title="Robert Mitchum" label="Robert Mitchum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1625333" start="12011" end="12023" title="Inis Cealtra" label="Inis Cealtra"/>
<link wikidata="Q918349" start="12052" end="12062" title="Lough Derg (Shannon)" label="Lough Derg"/>
<link wikidata="Q4758145" start="12096" end="12115" title="Andrew O&amp;#x27;Hagan" label="Andrew O&amp;#x27;Hagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q966228" start="12409" end="12421" title="Colum McCann" label="Colum McCann"/>
<link wikidata="Q57276" start="12550" end="12568" title="Michael D. Higgins" label="Michael D. Higgins"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12922" end="12961" title="Blue Road - The Edna O&amp;#x27;Brien Story" label="Blue Road - The Edna O&amp;#x27;Brien Story"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12972" end="12990" title="Sinéad O&amp;#x27;Shea" label="Sinéad O&amp;#x27;Shea"/>
<link wikidata="Q125208042" start="13013" end="13053" title="2024 Toronto International Film Festival" label="2024 Toronto International Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q6187642" start="13160" end="13174" title="Jessie Buckley" label="Jessie Buckley"/>
<link wikidata="Q187019" start="13269" end="13280" title="Philip Roth" label="Philip Roth"/>
<link wikidata="Q188214" start="13392" end="13405" title="Mary Robinson" label="Mary Robinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q313077" start="13559" end="13572" title="John Banville" label="John Banville"/>
<link wikidata="Q313593" start="13574" end="13590" title="Michael Ondaatje" label="Michael Ondaatje"/>
<link wikidata="Q170510" start="13595" end="13607" title="Ian McKellen" label="Ian McKellen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1571030" start="13655" end="13669" title="The Yorkshire Post" label="Yorkshire Post"/>
<link wikidata="Q188515" start="13742" end="13759" title="Los Angeles Times" label="Los Angeles Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q116275597" start="13795" end="13809" title="Lantern Slides" label="Lantern Slides"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068258" start="13887" end="13912" title="University College Dublin" label="University College Dublin"/>
<link wikidata="Q17010965" start="14092" end="14110" title="Saints and Sinners (short story collection)" label="Saints and Sinners"/>
<link wikidata="Q5488745" start="14130" end="14181" title="Frank O&amp;#x27;Connor International Short Story Award" label="Frank O&amp;#x27;Connor International Short Story Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q7792268" start="14194" end="14209" title="Thomas McCarthy (poet)" label="Thomas McCarthy"/>
<link wikidata="Q34474" start="14240" end="14252" title="Solzhenitsyn" label="Solzhenitsyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q329494" start="14274" end="14277" title="RTÉ" label="RTÉ"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14352" end="14356" title="2017_Special_Honours#Knight_/_Dame_Commander_of_the_Order_of_the_British_Empire_(KBE_/_DBE)" label="2017"/>
<link wikidata="Q14420" start="14425" end="14474" title="Dame Commander of the Order of the British Empire" label="Dame Commander of the Order of the British Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q397447" start="14504" end="14508" title="Torc" label="Torc"/>
<link wikidata="Q4822142" start="14516" end="14520" title="Saoi" label="Saoi"/>
<link wikidata="Q201947" start="14524" end="14531" title="Aosdána" label="Aosdána"/>
<link wikidata="Q57276" start="14559" end="14577" title="Michael D. Higgins" label="Michael D. Higgins"/>
<link wikidata="Q3498181" start="14860" end="14877" title="David Cohen Prize" label="David Cohen Prize"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15118" end="15128" title="David Park (poet)" label="David Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q67873217" start="15254" end="15258" title="Girl (O&amp;#x27;Brien novel)" label="Girl"/>
<link wikidata="Q58352" start="15316" end="15328" title="Prix Médicis" label="Prix Médicis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3404580" start="15337" end="15357" title="Prix Femina étranger" label="Prix Femina étranger"/>
<link wikidata="Q524980" start="15437" end="15447" title="Commander (order)" label="Commandeur"/>
<link wikidata="Q716909" start="15458" end="15487" title="Ordre des Arts et des Lettres" label="Ordre des Arts et des Lettres"/>
<link wikidata="Q336197" start="15603" end="15615" title="The Observer" label="The Observer"/>
<link wikidata="Q220078" start="15631" end="15644" title="Kingsley Amis" label="Kingsley Amis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1571030" start="15942" end="15960" title="The Yorkshire Post" label="The Yorkshire Post"/>
<link wikidata="Q17009071" start="16008" end="16021" title="A Pagan Place (novel)" label="A Pagan Place"/>
<link wikidata="Q104595582" start="16036" end="16088" title="Los Angeles Times Book Prize for Fiction" label="&amp;quot;Los Angeles Times&amp;quot; Book Prize for Fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q116275597" start="16100" end="16114" title="Lantern Slides" label="Lantern Slides"/>
<link wikidata="Q2678153" start="16171" end="16191" title="Girl with Green Eyes" label="Girl with Green Eyes"/>
<link wikidata="Q23307668" start="16258" end="16271" title="Time and Tide (novel)" label="Time and Tide"/>
<link wikidata="Q23307640" start="16363" end="16390" title="House of Splendid Isolation" label="House of Splendid Isolation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2842834" start="16431" end="16462" title="Academy of Achievement" label="American Academy of Achievement"/>
<link wikidata="Q6071054" start="16471" end="16486" title="Irish PEN Award" label="Irish PEN Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q984002" start="16633" end="16650" title="Irish Book Awards" label="Irish Book Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q28224570" start="16663" end="16676" title="In the Forest" label="In the Forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q984002" start="16691" end="16708" title="Irish Book Awards" label="Irish Book Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q7118964" start="16772" end="16789" title="PEN/Nabokov Award" label="PEN/Nabokov Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q3498181" start="16798" end="16815" title="David Cohen Prize" label="David Cohen Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q18945" start="16824" end="16843" title="Prix Femina spécial" label="Prix Femina spécial"/>
<link wikidata="Q6620231" start="16944" end="16954" title="Commandeur" label="Commandeur"/>
<link wikidata="Q716909" start="16965" end="16994" title="Ordre des Arts et des Lettres" label="Ordre des Arts et des Lettres"/>
<link wikidata="Q7727791" start="17050" end="17067" title="The Country Girls" label="The Country Girls"/>
<link wikidata="Q23307387" start="17182" end="17210" title="Girls in Their Married Bliss" label="Girls in Their Married Bliss"/>
<link wikidata="Q16154411" start="17234" end="17258" title="August Is a Wicked Month" label="August Is a Wicked Month"/>
<link wikidata="Q5050867" start="17282" end="17301" title="Casualties of Peace" label="Casualties of Peace"/>
<link wikidata="Q17009071" start="17325" end="17338" title="A Pagan Place (novel)" label="A Pagan Place"/>
<link wikidata="Q104882062" start="17362" end="17367" title="Night (O&amp;#x27;Brien novel)" label="Night"/>
<link wikidata="Q25217724" start="17547" end="17560" title="The High Road (novel)" label="The High Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q23307668" start="17584" end="17597" title="Time and Tide (novel)" label="Time and Tide"/>
<link wikidata="Q23307640" start="17621" end="17648" title="House of Splendid Isolation" label="House of Splendid Isolation"/>
<link wikidata="Q23307629" start="17672" end="17689" title="Down by the River (novel)" label="Down by the River"/>
<link wikidata="Q16947492" start="17713" end="17727" title="Wild Decembers (novel)" label="Wild Decembers"/>
<link wikidata="Q28224570" start="17751" end="17764" title="In the Forest" label="In the Forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q24196689" start="17788" end="17808" title="The Light of Evening" label="The Light of Evening"/>
<link wikidata="Q28868832" start="17832" end="17853" title="The Little Red Chairs" label="The Little Red Chairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q67873217" start="17877" end="17881" title="Girl (O&amp;#x27;Brien novel)" label="Girl"/>
<link wikidata="Q116275597" start="18180" end="18194" title="Lantern Slides" label="Lantern Slides"/>
<link wikidata="Q17010965" start="18218" end="18236" title="Saints and Sinners (short story collection)" label="Saints and Sinners"/>
<link wikidata="Q1238219" start="18674" end="18687" title="X Y &amp;amp; Zee" label="Zee &amp;amp; Co."/>
<link wikidata="Q16385347" start="19109" end="19121" title="Country Girl (memoir)" label="Country Girl"/>
<link wikidata="Q7183453" start="19504" end="19515" title="Philip Dodd (broadcaster)" label="Philip Dodd"/>
<link wikidata="Q11148" start="19700" end="19712" title="The Guardian" label="The Guardian"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="461097" wikidata="Q2443432" url="?curid=461097" title="2C-T-2">
<text>2C-T-2 is a psychedelic and entactogenic phenethylamine of the 2C family. It was first synthesized in 1981 by Alexander Shulgin, and rated by him as one of the &quot;magical half-dozen&quot; most important psychedelic phenethylamine compounds. The drug has structural and pharmacodynamic properties similar to those of 2C-T-7 (&quot;Blue Mystic&quot;).

==Dosage==
In Alexander Shulgin&#x27;s book &quot;PiHKAL&quot;, the dosage range is listed as 12 to 25 mg.

==Pharmacology==
The mechanism of action that produces 2C-T-2’s hallucinogenic and entheogenic effects is shown to be most likely a result from action as a 5-HT2A, 5-HT2B, and 5-HT2C serotonin receptor agonist, a mechanism of action shared by the hallucinogenic tryptamines and phenethylamines to varying degrees. 2C-T-2 has also shown to be a partial agonist of adrenergic receptors.

==Dangers==
A potential risk of neurotoxicity from 2C-T-2 use (and 2C chemical series in general) has been shown in serotonergic and dopaminergic containing neurons. This has also been shown to be magnified in serotonergic-containing cells with combined use of 2C series drugs with alcohol, MDMA, and methamphetamine.

Severe &#x27;intoxication&#x27; on 2C series drugs has been observed as behavior that includes: intense hallucinations, agitation, aggression, violence, dysphoria, hypertension, tachycardia, seizures, and hyperthermia.

==Drug prohibition laws==

===Argentina===
2C-T-2 is also a controlled substance in Argentina as well as 2C-B and 2C-I.

===Canada===
As of October 31, 2016, 2C-T-2 is a controlled substance (Schedule III) in Canada.

===China===
As of October 2015 2C-T-2 is a controlled substance in China.

===Netherlands===
The Netherlands became the first country in the world to ban 2C-T-2, and classify it as a hard drug, by law. In April, 1999, 2C-T-2 became a list I drug of the Opium Law.

===Sweden===
Schedule I in Sweden.

2C-T-2 was first classified as &quot;health hazard&quot; under the act &quot;Lagen om förbud mot vissa hälsofarliga varor&quot; (translated &quot;Act on the Prohibition of Certain Goods Dangerous to Health&quot;) as of April 1, 1999, under SFS 1999:58 that made it illegal to sell or possess.

The Riksdag added 2C-T-2 to Narcotic Drugs Punishments Act under &quot;Swedish schedule I&quot; (&quot;substances, plant materials and fungi which normally do not have medical use&quot;) as of March 16, 2004, published by Medical Products Agency (MPA) in regulation &quot;LVFS 2004:3&quot; listed as 2C-T-2, 2,5-dimetoxi-4-etyltiofenetylamin.

===United Kingdom===
2C-T-2 and all other compounds featured in PiHKAL are illegal drugs in the United Kingdom.

===United States===
2C-T-2 is specifically listed as a schedule I substance under SEC. 1152 of S.3187: Food and Drug Administration Safety and Innovation Act of 2012.

===Australia===
2C-T-2 is considered a Schedule 9 prohibited substance in Australia under the Poisons Standard (October 2015). A Schedule 9 substance is a substance which may be abused or misused, the manufacture, possession, sale or use of which should be prohibited by law except when required for medical or scientific research, or for analytical, teaching or training purposes with approval of Commonwealth and/or State or Territory Health Authorities.

== References ==
== External links ==
* 2C-T-2 vault at Erowid
* Sulfurous Samadhi: An Investigation of 2C-T-2 &amp; 2C-T-7
* 2C-T-2 at PsychonautWiki</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2443432" start="0" end="6" title="2C-T-2" label="2C-T-2"/>
<link wikidata="Q2314176" start="12" end="23" title="psychedelic drug" label="psychedelic"/>
<link wikidata="Q903338" start="28" end="40" title="empathogen-entactogen" label="entactogenic"/>
<link wikidata="Q407411" start="41" end="55" title="phenethylamine" label="phenethylamine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2728188" start="63" end="72" title="2C (psychedelics)" label="2C family"/>
<link wikidata="Q506336" start="110" end="127" title="Alexander Shulgin" label="Alexander Shulgin"/>
<link wikidata="Q222010" start="319" end="325" title="2C-T-7" label="2C-T-7"/>
<link wikidata="Q506336" start="368" end="385" title="Alexander Shulgin" label="Alexander Shulgin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1751374" start="404" end="410" title="PiHKAL" label="PiHKAL"/>
<link wikidata="Q3271540" start="483" end="502" title="mechanism of action" label="mechanism of action"/>
<link wikidata="Q194270" start="526" end="540" title="Hallucinogen" label="hallucinogenic"/>
<link wikidata="Q310491" start="545" end="556" title="Entheogen" label="entheogenic"/>
<link wikidata="Q14891424" start="618" end="624" title="5-HT2A receptor" label="5-HT2A"/>
<link wikidata="Q4639596" start="626" end="632" title="5-HT2B receptor" label="5-HT2B"/>
<link wikidata="Q18027437" start="638" end="644" title="5-HT2C receptor" label="5-HT2C"/>
<link wikidata="Q238516" start="645" end="663" title="5-HT receptor" label="serotonin receptor"/>
<link wikidata="Q389934" start="664" end="671" title="agonist" label="agonist"/>
<link wikidata="Q10705510" start="724" end="735" title="Substituted tryptamine" label="tryptamines"/>
<link wikidata="Q422693" start="740" end="755" title="Substituted phenethylamine" label="phenethylamines"/>
<link wikidata="Q410568" start="825" end="845" title="Adrenergic receptor" label="adrenergic receptors"/>
<link wikidata="Q3338704" start="880" end="893" title="neurotoxicity" label="neurotoxicity"/>
<link wikidata="Q2880966" start="981" end="993" title="Dopaminergic pathways" label="dopaminergic"/>
<link wikidata="Q69488" start="1139" end="1143" title="MDMA" label="MDMA"/>
<link wikidata="Q191924" start="1149" end="1164" title="methamphetamine" label="methamphetamine"/>
<link wikidata="Q130741" start="1271" end="1285" title="Hallucination" label="hallucinations"/>
<link wikidata="Q290620" start="1320" end="1329" title="dysphoria" label="dysphoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q41861" start="1331" end="1343" title="hypertension" label="hypertension"/>
<link wikidata="Q209583" start="1345" end="1356" title="tachycardia" label="tachycardia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6279182" start="1358" end="1366" title="Seizure" label="seizures"/>
<link wikidata="Q242165" start="1372" end="1384" title="hyperthermia" label="hyperthermia"/>
<link wikidata="Q229942" start="1492" end="1496" title="2C-B" label="2C-B"/>
<link wikidata="Q209255" start="1501" end="1505" title="2C-I" label="2C-I"/>
<link wikidata="Q316572" start="1858" end="1867" title="Opium Law" label="Opium Law"/>
<link wikidata="" start="1977" end="2033" title=":sv:Lagen om förbud mot vissa hälsofarliga varor" label="&amp;quot;Lagen om förbud mot vissa hälsofarliga varor&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q272930" start="2200" end="2211" title="Riksdag" label="The Riksdag"/>
<link wikidata="" start="2228" end="2258" title=":sv:Narkotikastrafflagen" label="Narcotic Drugs Punishments Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q1879124" start="2422" end="2451" title="Medical Products Agency (Sweden)" label="Medical Products Agency (MPA)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1751374" start="2608" end="2614" title="PiHKAL" label="PiHKAL"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="2640" end="2654" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q5465429" start="2760" end="2822" title="Food and Drug Administration Safety and Innovation Act of 2012" label="Food and Drug Administration Safety and Innovation Act of 2012"/>
<link wikidata="Q7598349" start="2919" end="2935" title="Standard for the Uniform Scheduling of Medicines and Poisons" label="Poisons Standard"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="461105" wikidata="Q207554" url="?curid=461105" title="Phthiotis">
<text>Phthiotis (, &quot;Fthiótida&quot; ; ancient Greek and Katharevousa: Φθιῶτις) is one of the regional units of Greece. It is part of the administrative region of Central Greece. The capital is the city of Lamia. It is bordered by the Malian Gulf to the east, Boeotia in the south, Phocis in the south, Aetolia-Acarnania in the southwest, Evrytania in the west, Karditsa regional unit in the north, Larissa regional unit in the north, and Magnesia in the northeast. The name dates back to ancient times. It is best known as the home of Achilles.

==Geography==

Phthiotis covers the northern and southern shorelines of the Malian Gulf, an inlet of the Aegean Sea. It stretches inland towards the west along the valley of the river Spercheios. In the south it covers the upper part of the Cephissus valley. There are several mountain ranges in Phthiotis, including the Othrys in the northeast, the Tymfristos in the west, the Vardousia in the southwest, Oeta in the south and the Kallidromo in the southeast.

==History==
&quot;Phthiotis&quot; means &quot;the region of Phthia&quot;, the southernmost region of ancient Thessaly around Pharsalus and home of Achilles. In Classical times, it also referred to the region of Achaea Phthiotis, which bordered on Thessalian Phthiotis to the south and east. Achaea Phthiotis covered the northern part of the present regional unit Phthiotis and the southern part of present Magnesia. The southeastern part of present Phthiotis was covered by the ancient region Locris, and the southwestern part was ancient Malis and Ainis.

==Transport==
* E65, S, Cen., NE
* Greek National Road 1/E75, SE, E, Cen., NE
* Greek National Road 3, SE, S, Cen., N
* Greek National Road 27, S, Cen.
* Greek National Road 38, W, Cen.

==Administration==

The regional unit Phthiotis is subdivided into 7 municipalities. These are (number as in the map in the infobox):
* Amfikleia-Elateia (2)
* Domokos (3)
* Kamena Vourla (6)
* Lamia (1)
* Lokroi (4)
* Makrakomi (5)
* Stylida (7)

===Prefecture===

The prefecture Phthiotis and Phocis was created in 1845. In 1947 this prefecture was split into the southern part Phocis and the northern part Phthiotis. As a part of the 2011 Kallikratis government reform, the regional unit Phthiotis was created out of the former prefecture Phthiotis (). The prefecture had the same territory as the present regional unit. At the same time, the municipalities were reorganised, according to the table below.

===Provinces===
* Province of Domokos - Domokos
* Province of Phthiotis - Lamia
* Province of Locris - Atalanti
&quot;Note:&quot; Provinces no longer hold any legal status in Greece.

==Persons==
* Thanos Livaditis (1934–2005)
* Dimitrios Holevas

==Sporting teams==
* Lamia F.C.
* Ionikos Lamias BC

==See also==
* List of traditional Greek place names
* List of settlements in Phthiotis

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q207554" start="0" end="9" title="Phthiotis" label="Phthiotis"/>
<link wikidata="Q35497" start="37" end="50" title="ancient Greek" label="ancient Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q35961" start="55" end="67" title="Katharevousa" label="Katharevousa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1234255" start="92" end="116" title="regional units of Greece" label="regional units of Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q199580" start="161" end="175" title="Central Greece (administrative region)" label="Central Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q192980" start="204" end="209" title="Lamia (city)" label="Lamia"/>
<link wikidata="Q549658" start="233" end="244" title="Malian Gulf" label="Malian Gulf"/>
<link wikidata="Q8257871" start="258" end="265" title="Boeotia" label="Boeotia"/>
<link wikidata="Q19890323" start="280" end="286" title="Phocis" label="Phocis"/>
<link wikidata="Q202624" start="301" end="318" title="Aetolia-Acarnania" label="Aetolia-Acarnania"/>
<link wikidata="Q11723827" start="337" end="346" title="Evrytania" label="Evrytania"/>
<link wikidata="Q212810" start="360" end="382" title="Karditsa (regional unit)" label="Karditsa regional unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q578879" start="397" end="418" title="Larissa (regional unit)" label="Larissa regional unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1884468" start="437" end="445" title="Magnesia (regional unit)" label="Magnesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q41746" start="534" end="542" title="Achilles" label="Achilles"/>
<link wikidata="Q549658" start="621" end="632" title="Malian Gulf" label="Malian Gulf"/>
<link wikidata="Q34575" start="650" end="660" title="Aegean Sea" label="Aegean Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q426309" start="729" end="739" title="Spercheios" label="Spercheios"/>
<link wikidata="Q1235405" start="786" end="795" title="Cephissus (Boeotia)" label="Cephissus"/>
<link wikidata="Q775676" start="866" end="872" title="Othrys" label="Othrys"/>
<link wikidata="Q391510" start="895" end="905" title="Tymfristos" label="Tymfristos"/>
<link wikidata="Q1244234" start="923" end="932" title="Vardousia" label="Vardousia"/>
<link wikidata="Q132378" start="951" end="955" title="Mount Oeta" label="Oeta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1227795" start="977" end="987" title="Kallidromo" label="Kallidromo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1232814" start="1067" end="1073" title="Phthia" label="Phthia"/>
<link wikidata="Q166919" start="1116" end="1124" title="Thessaly" label="Thessaly"/>
<link wikidata="Q985596" start="1132" end="1141" title="Farsala" label="Pharsalus"/>
<link wikidata="Q41746" start="1154" end="1162" title="Achilles" label="Achilles"/>
<link wikidata="Q843745" start="1167" end="1176" title="Classical Greece" label="Classical"/>
<link wikidata="Q2089144" start="1218" end="1234" title="Achaea Phthiotis" label="Achaea Phthiotis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1884468" start="1413" end="1421" title="Magnesia (regional unit)" label="Magnesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q659791" start="1500" end="1506" title="Locris" label="Locris"/>
<link wikidata="Q1164290" start="1546" end="1551" title="Malians (Greek tribe)" label="Malis"/>
<link wikidata="Q4697441" start="1556" end="1561" title="Ainis" label="Ainis"/>
<link wikidata="Q911135" start="1580" end="1583" title="European route E65" label="E65"/>
<link wikidata="Q3566460" start="1599" end="1620" title="Greek National Road 1" label="Greek National Road 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q638912" start="1621" end="1624" title="European route E75" label="E75"/>
<link wikidata="Q528444" start="1644" end="1665" title="Greek National Road 3" label="Greek National Road 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q2018223" start="1684" end="1706" title="Greek National Road 27" label="Greek National Road 27"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371299" start="1718" end="1740" title="Greek National Road 38" label="Greek National Road 38"/>
<link wikidata="Q1231795" start="1887" end="1904" title="Amfikleia-Elateia" label="Amfikleia-Elateia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1235572" start="1911" end="1918" title="Domokos" label="Domokos"/>
<link wikidata="Q2016450" start="1925" end="1938" title="Kamena Vourla" label="Kamena Vourla"/>
<link wikidata="Q192980" start="1945" end="1950" title="Lamia (city)" label="Lamia"/>
<link wikidata="Q737245" start="1957" end="1963" title="Lokroi (municipality)" label="Lokroi"/>
<link wikidata="Q669967" start="1970" end="1979" title="Makrakomi" label="Makrakomi"/>
<link wikidata="Q12295369" start="1986" end="1993" title="Stylida" label="Stylida"/>
<link wikidata="Q7188220" start="2032" end="2052" title="Phthiotis and Phocis Prefecture" label="Phthiotis and Phocis"/>
<link wikidata="Q19890323" start="2131" end="2137" title="Phocis" label="Phocis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1235572" start="2491" end="2498" title="Domokos" label="Domokos"/>
<link wikidata="Q659791" start="2555" end="2561" title="Locris" label="Locris"/>
<link wikidata="Q41" start="2636" end="2642" title="Greece" label="Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q7710619" start="2659" end="2675" title="Thanos Livaditis" label="Thanos Livaditis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3557498" start="2690" end="2707" title="Dimitrios Holevas" label="Dimitrios Holevas"/>
<link wikidata="Q6481836" start="2730" end="2740" title="Lamia F.C." label="Lamia F.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q13638387" start="2743" end="2760" title="Ionikos Lamias BC" label="Ionikos Lamias BC"/>
<link wikidata="Q6572457" start="2777" end="2814" title="List of traditional Greek place names" label="List of traditional Greek place names"/>
<link wikidata="Q6638214" start="2817" end="2849" title="List of settlements in Phthiotis" label="List of settlements in Phthiotis"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="461124" wikidata="Q1147118" url="?curid=461124" title="Sheksna">
<text>The Sheksna () is a river in the Belozersky, Kirillovsky, Sheksninsky, and Cherepovetsky districts of Vologda Oblast in Russia. It is a left tributary of the Volga. It is long, and the area of its basin . The principal tributaries of the Sheksna are the Sizma (left) and the Kovzha (right).

According to Max Vasmer&#x27;s Etymological Dictionary, the origin of the river&#x27;s name is unclear, but it may originate from a Finnic language meaning &quot;a woodpecker&quot; or more specifically &quot;a spotted woodpecker&quot;.
The urban-type settlement of Sheksna and Sheksninsky District are named after the river.

The source of the Sheksna is in the southeastern end of Lake Beloye. The river flows south and subsequently turns east. It joins the northern part of the Rybinsk Reservoir of the Volga near the city of Cherepovets. Cherepovets, as well as the urban-type settlement of Sheksna, are located on the Sheksna.

Most of the present course of the river was accommodated as the Sheksna Reservoir, with the dam constructed in Sheksna. Previously, the length of the Sheksna was some , and the mouth of the river was located in the city of Rybinsk, Yaroslavl Oblast. The part of the river between Cherepovets and Rybinsk disappeared when the Rybinsk Reservoir was constructed between 1935 and 1947. Currently, the only natural stretch of the course of the Sheksna is located between the urban-type settlement of Sheksna and the city of Cherepovets.

The river basin of the Sheksna comprises vast areas in the west and in the northwest of Vologda Oblast, including parts of Vytegorsky, Vashkinsky, Kirillovsky, Belozersky, Sheksninsky, and Cherepovetsky Districts, as well as minor areas in Kargopolsky District of Arkhangelsk Oblast. This area includes the towns of Kirillov and Belozersk, as well as the urban-type settlement of Chyobsara and the &quot;selo&quot; of Lipin Bor, the administrative center of Vashkinsky District.

The Sheksna is a part of the Volga–Baltic Waterway and is used for both cruise and cargo traffic. Both the Northern Dvina Canal, which connects the basins of the Volga and the Northern Dvina via Lake Kubenskoye, and the Belozersky Canal, bypassing Lake Beloye, connect to the Sheksna.

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1147118" start="4" end="11" title="Sheksna" label="Sheksna"/>
<link wikidata="Q1772048" start="33" end="43" title="Belozersky District, Vologda Oblast" label="Belozersky"/>
<link wikidata="Q2216860" start="45" end="56" title="Kirillovsky District" label="Kirillovsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q513890" start="58" end="69" title="Sheksninsky District" label="Sheksninsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q2216969" start="75" end="88" title="Cherepovetsky District" label="Cherepovetsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q2015" start="102" end="116" title="Vologda Oblast" label="Vologda Oblast"/>
<link wikidata="Q159675" start="141" end="150" title="tributary" label="tributary"/>
<link wikidata="Q626" start="158" end="163" title="Volga" label="Volga"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="254" end="259" title="Sizma (river)" label="Sizma"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="275" end="281" title="Kovzha (Sheksna)" label="Kovzha"/>
<link wikidata="Q77420" start="305" end="315" title="Max Vasmer" label="Max Vasmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q33328" start="424" end="439" title="Finnic language" label="Finnic language"/>
<link wikidata="Q2989457" start="532" end="553" title="urban-type settlement" label="urban-type settlement"/>
<link wikidata="Q953140" start="674" end="685" title="Lake Beloye (Vologda Oblast)" label="Lake Beloye"/>
<link wikidata="Q375029" start="772" end="789" title="Rybinsk Reservoir" label="Rybinsk Reservoir"/>
<link wikidata="Q2144" start="820" end="831" title="Cherepovets" label="Cherepovets"/>
<link wikidata="Q2094501" start="886" end="893" title="Sheksna, Sheksninsky District, Vologda Oblast" label="Sheksna"/>
<link wikidata="Q2578909" start="988" end="1005" title="Sheksna Reservoir" label="Sheksna Reservoir"/>
<link wikidata="Q193413" start="1147" end="1154" title="Rybinsk" label="Rybinsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q2448" start="1156" end="1172" title="Yaroslavl Oblast" label="Yaroslavl Oblast"/>
<link wikidata="Q375029" start="1249" end="1266" title="Rybinsk Reservoir" label="Rybinsk Reservoir"/>
<link wikidata="Q540999" start="1580" end="1590" title="Vytegorsky District" label="Vytegorsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q2218428" start="1592" end="1602" title="Vashkinsky District" label="Vashkinsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q1807671" start="1697" end="1717" title="Kargopolsky District" label="Kargopolsky District"/>
<link wikidata="Q1875" start="1721" end="1739" title="Arkhangelsk Oblast" label="Arkhangelsk Oblast"/>
<link wikidata="Q153453" start="1773" end="1781" title="Kirillov (town)" label="Kirillov"/>
<link wikidata="Q104764" start="1786" end="1795" title="Belozersk" label="Belozersk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071884" start="1837" end="1846" title="Chyobsara" label="Chyobsara"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1861" end="1865" title="Village#Russia" label="selo"/>
<link wikidata="Q4262532" start="1875" end="1884" title="Lipin Bor" label="Lipin Bor"/>
<link wikidata="Q31263" start="1966" end="1987" title="Volga–Baltic Waterway" label="Volga–Baltic Waterway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1796690" start="2044" end="2064" title="Northern Dvina Canal" label="Northern Dvina Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1463552" start="2132" end="2147" title="Lake Kubenskoye" label="Lake Kubenskoye"/>
<link wikidata="Q4082453" start="2157" end="2173" title="Belozersky Canal" label="Belozersky Canal"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="461136" wikidata="Q207840" url="?curid=461136" title="Imathia">
<text>Imathia ( ) is one of the regional units of Greece. It is part of the region of Central Macedonia, within the geographic region of Macedonia. The capital of Imathia is the city of Veroia.

==Administration==

The regional unit Imathia is subdivided into 3 municipalities. These are (number as in the map in the infobox):
*Alexandreia (2)
*Naousa (3)
*Veroia (1)

===Prefecture===
As a part of the 2011 Kallikratis government reform, the regional unit Imathia was created out of the former Imathia prefecture (). The prefecture had the same territory as the present regional unit. At the same time, the municipalities were reorganised, according to the table below.

===Provinces===
The former prefecture of Imathia was subdivided into the following provinces:
Note: Provinces no longer hold any legal status in Greece since 2006.

==Geography==
The northeastern part of Imathia, along the lower course of the river Aliakmonas, is a vast agricultural plain known as Kampania or Roumlouki. The area is known for the production of fruit crops, such as peaches and strawberries. Much of the population lives in this plain, where the towns Alexandreia and Veroia are situated. Imathia has a short shoreline on the Thermaic Gulf, around the mouth of the Aliakmonas. The mountainous western part of Imathia is covered by the Vermio Mountains, reaching 2,052 metres near the city of Naousa. The Pierian Mountains reach into the southern part of Imathia, south of the Aliakmonas. The regional unit borders on Pieria to the south, Kozani to the west, Pella to the north and Thessaloniki to the east. Imathia has a mainly Mediterranean climate with warm, dry summers and mild, wet winters.

===Transport===

The railway from Thessaloniki to Florina and the important railway from Thessaloniki to Athens pass through Imathia, with main stations at Platy, Veroia and Alexandreia. The A1 and A2 (Egnatia Odos) motorways, and the EO1, EO4 and EO4a national roads pass through Imathia. The Alexandreia Airport is a military airport.

==History==
Imathia was named after the historic region Emathia, which was used by several classical authors as a synonym for Bottiaea or even all of Macedon. Important ancient towns in the area of present Imathia were Aegae and Beroea. As a part of the Macedonia region, it was ruled by the kingdom of Macedonia, the Roman Empire, the Byzantine Empire and from early 15th century by the Ottoman Empire. In 1913, as a result of the Second Balkan War, it became part of Greece. During and after the Greco-Turkish War (1919–1922), several refugees from Turkey settled in Imathia. Initially part of the prefecture of Thessaloniki, Imathia became a prefecture in 1946, and Veroia was selected as its capital.

==Media==
===Newspapers===
*Agrotikoi Orizontes
*Elefthero Vima
*Epikaira Imathias
*Epta Imathias
*Imerisia
*Kerkida
*Laos
*Pliroforisi
*Macedonika Nea

==Culture==
===Museums===
*Wine and Vine Museum (Naoussa)
*Archaeological Museum of Veroia
*Byzantine Museum of Veroia
*Folklore Museum of the Lyceum of Hellenic Women (Naoussa)

==Sports clubs==
*Veria F.C. - Veroia
*Pontioi Veria F.C. - Veroia
*Naoussa F.C. - Naousa
*Alexandria F.C. - Alexandria

==See also==
* Emathus
*List of settlements in Imathia
*Former toponyms in Imathia Prefecture

==References==
==External links==

* Asyrmato Mitropolitiko Dyktio Hmathias, The local wireless network
* Official website
* Veroia 11th Public School</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q207840" start="0" end="7" title="Imathia" label="Imathia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1234255" start="26" end="50" title="regional units of Greece" label="regional units of Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q207299" start="70" end="76" title="modern regions of Greece" label="region"/>
<link wikidata="Q17152" start="80" end="97" title="Central Macedonia" label="Central Macedonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048163" start="110" end="127" title="geographic regions of Greece" label="geographic region"/>
<link wikidata="Q81734" start="131" end="140" title="Macedonia (Greece)" label="Macedonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q12875641" start="180" end="186" title="Veroia" label="Veroia"/>
<link wikidata="Q15967005" start="322" end="333" title="Alexandreia, Greece" label="Alexandreia"/>
<link wikidata="Q12875668" start="339" end="345" title="Naousa, Imathia" label="Naousa"/>
<link wikidata="Q12875641" start="351" end="357" title="Veroia" label="Veroia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860467" start="749" end="758" title="Provinces of Greece" label="provinces"/>
<link wikidata="Q640366" start="915" end="925" title="Haliacmon" label="Aliakmonas"/>
<link wikidata="Q12297272" start="965" end="973" title="Kampania" label="Kampania"/>
<link wikidata="Q12297272" start="977" end="986" title="Roumlouki" label="Roumlouki"/>
<link wikidata="Q13189" start="1049" end="1054" title="peach" label="peach"/>
<link wikidata="Q13158" start="1061" end="1073" title="strawberry" label="strawberries"/>
<link wikidata="Q15967005" start="1135" end="1146" title="Alexandreia, Greece" label="Alexandreia"/>
<link wikidata="Q12875641" start="1151" end="1157" title="Veroia" label="Veroia"/>
<link wikidata="Q913418" start="1209" end="1222" title="Thermaic Gulf" label="Thermaic Gulf"/>
<link wikidata="Q3392962" start="1318" end="1334" title="Vermio Mountains" label="Vermio Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q12875668" start="1375" end="1381" title="Naousa, Imathia" label="Naousa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1991030" start="1387" end="1404" title="Pierian Mountains" label="Pierian Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q19896675" start="1500" end="1506" title="Pieria (regional unit)" label="Pieria"/>
<link wikidata="Q211732" start="1521" end="1527" title="Kozani (regional unit)" label="Kozani"/>
<link wikidata="Q649484" start="1541" end="1546" title="Pella (regional unit)" label="Pella"/>
<link wikidata="Q210176" start="1564" end="1576" title="Thessaloniki (regional unit)" label="Thessaloniki"/>
<link wikidata="Q13996" start="1611" end="1632" title="Mediterranean climate" label="Mediterranean climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q7783478" start="1701" end="1737" title="Thessaloniki–Bitola railway" label="railway from Thessaloniki to Florina"/>
<link wikidata="Q7197675" start="1756" end="1791" title="Piraeus–Platy railway" label="railway from Thessaloniki to Athens"/>
<link wikidata="Q2098876" start="1836" end="1841" title="Platy, Imathia" label="Platy"/>
<link wikidata="Q12875641" start="1843" end="1849" title="Veria" label="Veroia"/>
<link wikidata="Q15967005" start="1854" end="1865" title="Alexandreia, Greece" label="Alexandreia"/>
<link wikidata="Q389356" start="1871" end="1873" title="A1 motorway (Greece)" label="A1"/>
<link wikidata="Q389377" start="1878" end="1880" title="A2 motorway (Greece)" label="A2"/>
<link wikidata="Q3566460" start="1915" end="1918" title="Greek National Road 1" label="EO1"/>
<link wikidata="Q270557" start="1920" end="1923" title="Greek National Road 4" label="EO4"/>
<link wikidata="Q283578" start="1928" end="1932" title="Greek National Road 4a" label="EO4a"/>
<link wikidata="Q4720925" start="1974" end="1993" title="Alexandreia Airport" label="Alexandreia Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q3409210" start="2074" end="2081" title="Emathia" label="Emathia"/>
<link wikidata="Q378855" start="2144" end="2152" title="Bottiaea" label="Bottiaea"/>
<link wikidata="Q83958" start="2168" end="2175" title="Macedon" label="Macedon"/>
<link wikidata="Q213916" start="2237" end="2242" title="Vergina" label="Aegae"/>
<link wikidata="Q12875641" start="2247" end="2253" title="Veria" label="Beroea"/>
<link wikidata="Q81734" start="2272" end="2281" title="Macedonia (Greece)" label="Macedonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q83958" start="2310" end="2330" title="Macedonia (ancient kingdom)" label="kingdom of Macedonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277" start="2336" end="2348" title="Roman Empire" label="Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q12544" start="2354" end="2370" title="Byzantine Empire" label="Byzantine Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="2406" end="2420" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q184183" start="2450" end="2467" title="Second Balkan War" label="Second Balkan War"/>
<link wikidata="Q87138" start="2516" end="2545" title="Greco-Turkish War (1919–1922)" label="Greco-Turkish War (1919–1922)"/>
<link wikidata="Q43" start="2569" end="2575" title="Turkey" label="Turkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q210176" start="2618" end="2644" title="Thessaloniki Prefecture" label="prefecture of Thessaloniki"/>
<link wikidata="Q202595" start="2663" end="2673" title="Prefectures of Greece" label="prefecture"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2752" end="2771" title="Agrotikoi Orizontes" label="Agrotikoi Orizontes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1440457" start="2773" end="2787" title="Elefthero Vima" label="Elefthero Vima"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2789" end="2806" title="Epikaira Imathias" label="Epikaira Imathias"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2808" end="2821" title="Epta Imathias" label="Epta Imathias"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2823" end="2831" title="Imerisia" label="Imerisia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2833" end="2840" title="Kerkida (Imathia)" label="Kerkida"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2842" end="2846" title="Laos (newspaper)" label="Laos"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2848" end="2859" title="Pliroforisi" label="Pliroforisi"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2861" end="2875" title="Macedonika Nea" label="Macedonika Nea"/>
<link wikidata="Q8024916" start="2904" end="2934" title="Wine and Vine Museum (Naoussa)" label="Wine and Vine Museum (Naoussa)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4785442" start="2936" end="2967" title="Archaeological Museum of Veroia" label="Archaeological Museum of Veroia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5004704" start="2969" end="2995" title="Byzantine Museum of Veroia" label="Byzantine Museum of Veroia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5464581" start="2997" end="3054" title="Folklore Museum of the Lyceum of Hellenic Women (Naoussa)" label="Folklore Museum of the Lyceum of Hellenic Women (Naoussa)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348189" start="3074" end="3084" title="Veria F.C." label="Veria F.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q16329329" start="3095" end="3113" title="Pontioi Veria F.C." label="Pontioi Veria F.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q3032016" start="3124" end="3136" title="Naoussa F.C." label="Naoussa F.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q117336474" start="3147" end="3162" title="Alexandria F.C." label="Alexandria F.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q3567413" start="3192" end="3199" title="Emathus" label="Emathus"/>
<link wikidata="Q6638205" start="3201" end="3231" title="List of settlements in Imathia" label="List of settlements in Imathia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5470162" start="3233" end="3270" title="Former toponyms in Imathia Prefecture" label="Former toponyms in Imathia Prefecture"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="461143" wikidata="Q1161171" url="?curid=461143" title="The House of the Dead (novel)">
<text>The House of the Dead (, &quot;Zapiski iz Myortvogo doma&quot;) is a semi-autobiographical novel published in 1860 to 1862 in the journal &quot;Vremya&quot; by Russian author Fyodor Dostoevsky. It has also been published in English under the titles Notes from the House of the Dead, Memoirs from the House of the Dead and Notes from a Dead House, which are more literal translations of the Russian title.

The novel portrays the life of convicts in a Siberian prison camp. It is generally considered to be a fictionalised memoir; a loosely-knit collection of descriptions, events and philosophical discussion, organised around theme and character rather than plot, based on Dostoevsky&#x27;s own experiences as a prisoner in such a setting. Dostoevsky spent four years in a forced-labour prison camp in Siberia following his conviction for involvement in the Petrashevsky Circle. This experience allowed him to describe with great authenticity the conditions of prison life and the characters of the convicts.

==Background==
After his mock execution on 22 December 1849, Dostoevsky was sentenced to four years imprisonment in a &quot;katorga&quot; labor camp at Omsk in western Siberia. Though he often was met with hostility from the other prisoners due to his noble status of &quot;dvoryanin&quot;, his views on life changed. After his time in the camps and a further six years of exile Dostoevsky returned to Petersburg and wrote &quot;The House of the Dead&quot;. The novel incorporates several of the horrifying experiences he witnessed while in prison. He recalls the guards&#x27; brutality and relish performing unspeakably cruel acts, the crimes that the convicted criminals committed, and the fact that among these hardened criminals there were good and decent individuals.
However, he is also astonished at the convicts&#x27; abilities to commit murders without the slightest change in conscience. It was a stark contrast to his own heightened sensitivity. During this time in prison he began experiencing the epileptic seizures that would plague him for the rest of his life.

==Plot==
The narrator, Aleksandr Petrovich Goryanchikov, has been sentenced to deportation to Siberia and ten years of hard labour for murdering his wife. Life in prison is particularly hard for Aleksandr Petrovich, since he is a &quot;gentleman&quot; and suffers the malice of the other prisoners, nearly all of whom belong to the peasantry. Gradually Goryanchikov overcomes his revulsion at his situation and his fellow convicts, undergoing a spiritual awakening that culminates with his release from the camp. Dostoevsky portrays the inmates of the prison with sympathy for their plight, and also expresses admiration for their courage, energy, ingenuity and talent. He concludes that the existence of the prison, with its absurd practices and savage corporal punishments, is a tragic fact, both for the prisoners and for Russia.

Though the novel has no readily identifiable plot in the conventional sense, events and descriptions are carefully organized around the narrator&#x27;s gradual insight into the true nature of the prison-camp and the other prisoners. It is primarily in this sense that the novel is autobiographical: Dostoevsky wrote later, in &quot;A Writer&#x27;s Diary&quot; and elsewhere, about the transformation he underwent during his imprisonment, as he slowly overcame his preconceptions and his repulsion, attaining a new understanding of the intense humanity and moral qualities of those around him.

==Narration==
The first chapter, entitled &quot;Ten years a convict&quot;, is an introduction written by an unnamed acquaintance of Goryanchikov. This narrator discusses Goryanchikov&#x27;s background as a convict, his crime and his sentence, and the nature of his life as a Siberian colonist after his release. He describes Goryanchikov&#x27;s intense personality and reclusive behaviour from the superficial and detached perspective of a new acquaintance who has developed a curiosity about him. He records that, upon hearing of Goryanchikov&#x27;s death, he had managed to acquire some papers from the landlady, among which were the memoirs of prison life. He describes them as &quot;incoherent and fragmentary... interrupted, here and there, either by anecdotes, or by strange, terrible recollections thrown in convulsively as if torn from the writer.&quot; These memoirs, with Goryanchikov himself narrating, constitute the rest of the novel.

==Characters==
Many of the characters in the novel were based on real-life people that Dostoevsky met while in prison. However, there was a degree of alteration or embellishment in some characters and events for the sake of imparting greater depth to his themes.

The Major, the violent-tempered, tyrannical governor of the prison. He is described by Alexander Petrovich as &quot;a spiteful, ill-regulated man, terrible above all things, because he possessed almost absolute power over two hundred human beings.&quot; Referred to by the prisoners as &quot;the man with the eight eyes&quot; due to his apparent omniscience, he is universally despised and feared.

Akim Akimitch, one of the few other noblemen in the prison, befriends Alexander Petrovich and teaches him about the ways of prison life. He is a former officer who was sentenced for unilaterally ordering an illegal execution. Alexander Petrovich considers Akim Akimitch to be incapable of independent intelligence and wholly bound to notions of duty and obedience. He is conscientious, precise, excitable and argumentative, and assumes the role of a moral remonstrator with the other convicts, who, while afraid of him, also laugh at him and consider him a bit mad.

A parricide. The second convict Alexander Petrovich mentions is not referred to by name, but his character and crime (killing his father to obtain his inheritance) are discussed in some detail. He is described as always &quot;in the liveliest, merriest spirits&quot;, and unwavering in his denial of his guilt, a denial that Goryanchikov is inclined to believe. The real life person upon whom this character was based (D. I. Ilyinsky) was later freed after another man confessed to the crime. The main elements of his story became the central theme of &quot;The Brothers Karamazov&quot; and the initial inspiration for the character of Dimitri Karamazov.

Aristov an exceptionally corrupt and perverted nobleman who acts as a spy and informer. Repelled by his depravity, Alexander Petrovich refuses to enter in to relations with him. He is a man utterly submitted to corporeality and the basest impulses, with a conscience guided only by cold calculation. Alexander Petrovich says of him that &quot;if he wanted a drink of brandy, and could only have got it by killing some one, he would not have hesitated one moment if it was pretty certain the crime would not come out.&quot;

Gazin, an immensely strong, violent criminal, in prison for, among other things, torturing and murdering small children. He creates a shocking and repulsive impression on everyone else. According to Alexander Petrovich: &quot;It was less by his great height and his herculean construction, than by his enormous and deformed head, that he inspired terror.&quot;

Orloff, a notorious criminal and escapee, whom Alexander Petrovich describes as &quot;a brilliant example of the victory of spirit over matter&quot;, unlike some other prisoners whose fearfulness proceeded more from their complete submission to matter. He undergoes extreme corporal punishment but is unbowed and quickly recovers his strength and spirit.

Luka has murdered six people, occasionally brags of it, and wishes to be feared for it, but in fact no one in the prison is the least bit afraid of him. For Alexander Petrovich he represents a particular type:When once he has passed the fatal line, he is himself astonished to find that nothing sacred exists for him. He breaks through all laws, defies all powers, and gives himself boundless license... From time to time, the murderer will amuse himself by recalling his audacity, his lawlessness when he was in a state of despair. He likes at these moments to have some silly fellow before whom he can brag... &quot;That is the sort of man I am,&quot; he says.

Petrov, an externally quiet and polite man who befriends Alexander Petrovich and often seeks his company, apparently for edification on matters of knowledge. Alexander Petrovich finds it hard to reconcile Petrov&#x27;s sincere friendship and unfailing courtesy with the ever-present potential (attributed to him by all the other prisoners, including Alexander Petrovich) for the most extreme violence. In this sense, Petrov is thought to be the most dangerous and determined man in the prison.

Ali a beautiful-souled young Tatar, imprisoned with his two older brothers. He has a gentle and innocent yet strong and stoical nature, and is much beloved by Alexander Petrovich and many of the others. &quot;How this young man preserved his tender heart, his native honesty, his frank cordiality without getting perverted and corrupted during his period of hard labour, is quite inexplicable.&quot;

Isaiah Fomitch a Jew who becomes a great friend of Alexander Petrovich. He is small, feeble and cunning, capable of both abject cowardice and great courage, laughed at constantly by the other prisoners, but at the same time &quot;inexhaustibly good humoured&quot;. He has scars on his forehead and cheeks from burns received while in the pillory. In the bath-room scene, where all the convicts are crowded together for a steam bath, Alexander Petrovich describes the hellish chaos of bodies, heat and steam:From this cloud stood out torn backs, shaved heads; and, to complete the picture, Isaiah Fomitch howling with joy on the highest of the benches. He was saturating himself with steam. Any other man would have fainted away, but no temperature is too high for him; he engages the services of a rubber for a kopeck, but after a few moments the latter is unable to continue, throws away his bunch of twigs, and runs to inundate himself with cold water. Isaiah Fomitch does not lose courage, he runs to hire a second rubber, then a third; on these occasions he thinks nothing of expense, and changes his rubber four or five times. &quot;He stews well, the gallant Isaiah Fomitch,&quot; cry the convicts from below. The Jew feels that he goes beyond all the others, he has beaten them; he triumphs with his hoarse falsetto voice, and sings out his favourite air which rises above the general hubbub.

==Reception==
&quot;The House of the Dead&quot; was the only work by Dostoevsky that Leo Tolstoy revered. He saw it as exalted religious art, inspired by deep faith and love of humanity. Turgenev, who was also not enamored of Dostoevsky&#x27;s larger scale fiction (particularly &quot;Demons&quot; and &quot;Crime and Punishment&quot;), described the bath-house scene from &quot;House of the Dead&quot; as &quot;simply Dantesque&quot;. Herzen echoed the comparison to Dante and further compared the description of Siberian prison life to &quot;a fresco in the spirit of Michelangelo&quot;. Frank suggests that the memoir-novel&#x27;s popularity with those who might ordinarily be antipathetic to Dostoevsky&#x27;s prose style, is due to the composed and neutral tone of its narration and the vividness of the descriptive writing: &quot;The intense dramatism of the fiction is here replaced by a calm objectivity of presentation; there is little close analysis of interior states of mind, and there are marvelous descriptive passages that reveal Dostoevsky&#x27;s ability as an observer of the external world.&quot;

Ludwig Wittgenstein considered the book Dostoevsky&#x27;s greatest work.

==Editions==
===English translations===
*
*
*
*

==Adaptations==
In 1927–1928, Leoš Janáček wrote an operatic version of the novel, with the title &quot;From the House of the Dead&quot;. It was his last opera.

In 1932 &quot;The House of the Dead&quot; was made into a film, directed by Vasili Fyodorov and starring Nikolay Khmelyov. The script was devised by the Russian writer and critic Viktor Shklovsky who also had a role as an actor.

==See also==
* Russian literature

==References==
* 

==External links==
*Compare English translations of &quot;The House of the Dead&quot; at the Wayback Machine
*Full text of &quot;The House of the Dead&quot; in the original Russian
*Full text of &quot;The House of the Dead&quot; in English at the Internet Archive</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1959539" start="144" end="150" title="Vremya (magazine)" label="Vremya"/>
<link wikidata="Q991" start="175" end="192" title="Fyodor Dostoevsky" label="Fyodor Dostoevsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q75792" start="859" end="878" title="Petrashevsky Circle" label="Petrashevsky Circle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754722" start="1036" end="1050" title="mock execution" label="mock execution"/>
<link wikidata="Q199895" start="1135" end="1142" title="katorga" label="katorga"/>
<link wikidata="Q898" start="1163" end="1167" title="Omsk" label="Omsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q971558" start="1285" end="1294" title="dvoryanin" label="dvoryanin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2618629" start="3255" end="3276" title="A Writer&amp;#x27;s Diary" label="A Writer&amp;#x27;s Diary"/>
<link wikidata="Q183157" start="6254" end="6276" title="The Brothers Karamazov" label="The Brothers Karamazov"/>
<link wikidata="Q35565" start="8782" end="8787" title="Tatars" label="Tatar"/>
<link wikidata="Q10682443" start="9492" end="9499" title="pillory" label="pillory"/>
<link wikidata="Q7243" start="10640" end="10651" title="Leo Tolstoy" label="Leo Tolstoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q42831" start="10742" end="10750" title="Turgenev" label="Turgenev"/>
<link wikidata="Q329989" start="10840" end="10846" title="Demons (Dostoevsky novel)" label="Demons"/>
<link wikidata="Q165318" start="10863" end="10883" title="Crime and Punishment" label="Crime and Punishment"/>
<link wikidata="Q201221" start="10991" end="10997" title="Alexander Herzen" label="Herzen"/>
<link wikidata="Q9391" start="11671" end="11690" title="Ludwig Wittgenstein" label="Ludwig Wittgenstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q184933" start="11824" end="11836" title="Leoš Janáček" label="Leoš Janáček"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344" start="11846" end="11851" title="opera" label="opera"/>
<link wikidata="Q777727" start="11898" end="11924" title="From the House of the Dead" label="From the House of the Dead"/>
<link wikidata="Q4310525" start="12014" end="12018" title="The House of the Dead (1932 film)" label="film"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12032" end="12047" title="Vasili Fyodorov" label="Vasili Fyodorov"/>
<link wikidata="Q4498496" start="12061" end="12077" title="Nikolay Khmelyov" label="Nikolay Khmelyov"/>
<link wikidata="Q312467" start="12135" end="12151" title="Viktor Shklovsky" label="Viktor Shklovsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q179161" start="12201" end="12219" title="Russian literature" label="Russian literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q648266" start="12333" end="12348" title="Wayback Machine" label="Wayback Machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q461" start="12487" end="12503" title="Internet Archive" label="Internet Archive"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="461144" wikidata="Q212810" url="?curid=461144" title="Karditsa (regional unit)">
<text>Karditsa (, ) is one of the regional units of Greece. It is part of the region of Thessaly. Its name is derived from its capital Karditsa, a town of approximately 56,000 people.

==Administration==

The regional unit Karditsa is subdivided into 6 municipalities. These are (number as in the map in the infobox):
*Argithea (2)
*Karditsa (1)
*Lake Plastiras (&quot;Limni Plastiras&quot;, 3)
*Mouzaki (4)
*Palamas (5)
*Sofades (6)

===Prefecture===

Karditsa was created as a prefecture () in 1899, and again in 1947. As a part of the 2011 Kallikratis government reform, the regional unit Karditsa was created out of the former prefecture Karditsa. The prefecture had the same territory as the present regional unit. At the same time, the municipalities were reorganised, according to the table below.

==History==

Encompassing the ancient geographical region of Thessaliotis, one of the four ancient districts of Thessaly, the present day Karditsa regional unit was in the Kingdom of Macedonia and later the Roman Empire, the Byzantine Empire, the Ottoman Empire from the 15th century until 1881 and finally Greece after the liberation of Thessaly. Its economy and agriculture boomed during that period; Karditsa was administered as the Trikala–Karditsa prefecture until 1947. It was affected by World War II and the Greek Civil War which saw many buildings destroyed and inhabitants left homeless and in hiding. The prefecture was later rebuilt and received electricity, appliances and motorised transport, while emigration also began in the 1950s, when construction of Lake Plastiras was added. Television arrived in the 1970s and the 1980s for its villages, and its economy later declined, seeing high unemployment in the prefecture.

== Population ==
The population was 121,775 in 2001.

The plains of central and southern Karditsa are inhabited by the Karagounides (), while the Agrafa mountains in the west of the prefecture are dominated by a strong Sarakatsani () and Aromanian, or &quot;Vlach&quot; (), element.

===Culture and education===
The Public Market of Karditsa is one of UNESCO&#x27;s protected cultural monuments.

The city is also an important knowledge centre, supporting the Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, the Public and Community Health, Forestry and Wood Sciences, and Science of Foods and Nutrition, departments of the University of Thessaly. There is also a Police Academy.

===Sporting teams===
*Anagennisi Karditsa (&quot;football&quot;) - Karditsa (city) - second division
*A.O. Karditsa - Karditsa - local division
*Iraklis Sofades - Sofades
*Tavropos - Karditsa - fourth division

===Notable residents===
Archbishops:
*Damaskinos of Athens
*Seraphim of Athens Archbishop of Athens and all Greece

Athletes:
*Ioannis Bourousis
*Ekaterini Koffa
*Labros Papakostas
*Dimosthenis Tampakos
*Konstantinos Thanos
*Dimitrios Tsiamis

Military:
*Georgios Karaiskakis

Politicians:
*Charilaos Florakis
*Nikolaos Plastiras
*Dimitris Sioufas
*Spyros Taliadouros

Singers:
*Elena Paparizou
*Efi Thodi

Others:
*George Mitsikostas - Comedian
*Vassilis Papazachos - Seismologist

== Famous Personalities from Karditsa ==
Antigoni Drisbioti, Helena Paparizou, Dimitris Mitropanos, Fotini Velesiotu, Dionisis Tsaknis, Kostas Kafasis, Konstantinos Thanos, Ioannis Bourousis, Nina Kaloutsa, Sakis Tsiolis, Vaios Karagiannis, Mimis Gkioulekas, Charilaos Florakis, G.Mpaltadoros, G.Siantos, N. Plastiras,

==Transport==
There are a number of highways E75 and the main railway from Volos to Meteora crosses Thessaly. The region is directly linked to the rest of Europe through International Airport of Central Greece located in Nea Anchialos in a small distance from Karditsa.

==See also==
* List of settlements in the Karditsa regional unit

== References ==
==External links==
*Municipality of Karditsa 
*http://www.karditsa-net.gr/ 
*Karditsa Wireless Metropolitan Network, Karditsas Wifi Community Network 
*http://www.e-karditsa.gr/ </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q212810" start="0" end="8" title="Karditsa (regional unit)" label="Karditsa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1234255" start="28" end="52" title="regional units of Greece" label="regional units of Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q207299" start="72" end="78" title="modern regions of Greece" label="region"/>
<link wikidata="Q166919" start="82" end="90" title="Thessaly" label="Thessaly"/>
<link wikidata="Q214212" start="129" end="137" title="Karditsa" label="Karditsa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2634096" start="313" end="321" title="Argithea" label="Argithea"/>
<link wikidata="Q214212" start="327" end="335" title="Karditsa" label="Karditsa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1808735" start="341" end="355" title="Lake Plastiras (municipality)" label="Lake Plastiras"/>
<link wikidata="Q2182103" start="390" end="397" title="Mouzaki" label="Mouzaki"/>
<link wikidata="Q1887039" start="403" end="410" title="Palamas" label="Palamas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2061140" start="416" end="423" title="Sofades" label="Sofades"/>
<link wikidata="Q202595" start="473" end="483" title="prefectures of Greece" label="prefecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1722495" start="532" end="566" title="Kallikratis Programme" label="2011 Kallikratis government reform"/>
<link wikidata="Q2084400" start="861" end="873" title="Thessaliotis" label="Thessaliotis"/>
<link wikidata="Q166919" start="912" end="920" title="Thessaly" label="Thessaly"/>
<link wikidata="Q83958" start="972" end="992" title="Kingdom of Macedonia" label="Kingdom of Macedonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277" start="1007" end="1019" title="Roman Empire" label="Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q12544" start="1025" end="1041" title="Byzantine Empire" label="Byzantine Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="1047" end="1061" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1236" end="1263" title="Trikala–Karditsa prefecture" label="Trikala–Karditsa prefecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="1295" end="1307" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q188972" start="1316" end="1331" title="Greek Civil War" label="Greek Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q12634229" start="1856" end="1868" title="Karagounides" label="Karagounides"/>
<link wikidata="Q1230182" start="1883" end="1889" title="Agrafa" label="Agrafa"/>
<link wikidata="Q841744" start="1956" end="1967" title="Sarakatsani" label="Sarakatsani"/>
<link wikidata="Q201111" start="1975" end="1984" title="Aromanians" label="Aromanian"/>
<link wikidata="Q7809" start="2089" end="2095" title="UNESCO" label="UNESCO"/>
<link wikidata="Q1471684" start="2345" end="2367" title="University of Thessaly" label="University of Thessaly"/>
<link wikidata="Q123283162" start="2424" end="2443" title="Anagennisi Karditsa" label="Anagennisi Karditsa"/>
<link wikidata="Q16328488" start="2504" end="2517" title="A.O. Karditsa F.C." label="A.O. Karditsa"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2547" end="2562" title="Iraklis Sofades" label="Iraklis Sofades"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2574" end="2582" title="Tavropos (Karditsa)" label="Tavropos"/>
<link wikidata="Q31280" start="2651" end="2671" title="Damaskinos of Athens" label="Damaskinos of Athens"/>
<link wikidata="Q2593381" start="2673" end="2691" title="Seraphim of Athens" label="Seraphim of Athens"/>
<link wikidata="Q741278" start="2740" end="2757" title="Ioannis Bourousis" label="Ioannis Bourousis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2463047" start="2759" end="2774" title="Ekaterini Koffa" label="Ekaterini Koffa"/>
<link wikidata="Q983684" start="2776" end="2793" title="Labros Papakostas" label="Labros Papakostas"/>
<link wikidata="Q741789" start="2795" end="2815" title="Dimosthenis Tampakos" label="Dimosthenis Tampakos"/>
<link wikidata="Q6430194" start="2817" end="2836" title="Konstantinos Thanos" label="Konstantinos Thanos"/>
<link wikidata="Q1573642" start="2838" end="2855" title="Dimitrios Tsiamis" label="Dimitrios Tsiamis"/>
<link wikidata="Q734967" start="2868" end="2888" title="Georgios Karaiskakis" label="Georgios Karaiskakis"/>
<link wikidata="Q506372" start="2904" end="2922" title="Charilaos Florakis" label="Charilaos Florakis"/>
<link wikidata="Q449445" start="2924" end="2942" title="Nikolaos Plastiras" label="Nikolaos Plastiras"/>
<link wikidata="Q451135" start="2944" end="2960" title="Dimitris Sioufas" label="Dimitris Sioufas"/>
<link wikidata="Q16187335" start="2962" end="2980" title="Spyros Taliadouros" label="Spyros Taliadouros"/>
<link wikidata="Q183008" start="2992" end="3007" title="Elena Paparizou" label="Elena Paparizou"/>
<link wikidata="Q3395861" start="3009" end="3018" title="Efi Thodi" label="Efi Thodi"/>
<link wikidata="Q13635053" start="3029" end="3047" title="George Mitsikostas" label="George Mitsikostas"/>
<link wikidata="Q7916963" start="3060" end="3079" title="Vassilis Papazachos" label="Vassilis Papazachos"/>
<link wikidata="Q24524766" start="3137" end="3155" title="Antigoni Drisbioti" label="Antigoni Drisbioti"/>
<link wikidata="Q183008" start="3157" end="3173" title="Helena Paparizou" label="Helena Paparizou"/>
<link wikidata="Q1226042" start="3175" end="3194" title="Dimitris Mitropanos" label="Dimitris Mitropanos"/>
<link wikidata="" start="3196" end="3212" title=":el:Φωτεινή Βελεσιώτου" label="Fotini Velesiotu"/>
<link wikidata="" start="3214" end="3230" title=":el:Διονύσης Τσακνής" label="Dionisis Tsaknis"/>
<link wikidata="" start="3232" end="3246" title=":el:Κώστας Καφάσης" label="Kostas Kafasis"/>
<link wikidata="Q6430194" start="3248" end="3267" title="Konstantinos Thanos" label="Konstantinos Thanos"/>
<link wikidata="Q741278" start="3269" end="3286" title="Ioannis Bourousis" label="Ioannis Bourousis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3557972" start="3303" end="3316" title="Sakis Tsiolis" label="Sakis Tsiolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q959396" start="3318" end="3335" title="Vaios Karagiannis" label="Vaios Karagiannis"/>
<link wikidata="" start="3337" end="3353" title=":el:Μίμης Γκιουλέκας" label="Mimis Gkioulekas"/>
<link wikidata="Q506372" start="3355" end="3373" title="Charilaos Florakis" label="Charilaos Florakis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2046402" start="3390" end="3399" title="Georgios Siantos" label="G.Siantos"/>
<link wikidata="Q449445" start="3401" end="3413" title="Nikolaos Plastiras" label="N. Plastiras"/>
<link wikidata="Q200036" start="3491" end="3496" title="Volos" label="Volos"/>
<link wikidata="Q3125051" start="3500" end="3507" title="Meteora" label="Meteora"/>
<link wikidata="Q166919" start="3516" end="3524" title="Thessaly" label="Thessaly"/>
<link wikidata="Q46" start="3571" end="3577" title="Europe" label="Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q26453" start="3586" end="3625" title="International Airport of Central Greece" label="International Airport of Central Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q583647" start="3637" end="3650" title="Nea Anchialos" label="Nea Anchialos"/>
<link wikidata="Q214212" start="3676" end="3684" title="Karditsa" label="Karditsa"/>
<link wikidata="Q6638287" start="3702" end="3751" title="List of settlements in the Karditsa regional unit" label="List of settlements in the Karditsa regional unit"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="461148" wikidata="Q1146058" url="?curid=461148" title="Kotorosl">
<text>The Kotorosl () is a right tributary of the Volga in Yaroslavl Oblast, Russia. The river flows from Lake Nero near Rostov past Karabikha and enters the Volga in Yaroslavl. It is long, and has a drainage basin of . 

In the medieval ages, the river was highly important strategically, for it connected Rostov with major waterways of Russia. The Kotorosl&#x27;s main tributary is the Ustye, which flows past Semibratovo to Borisogleb, discharging into the Ustye from the left.

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1146058" start="4" end="12" title="Kotorosl" label="Kotorosl"/>
<link wikidata="Q159675" start="27" end="36" title="tributary" label="tributary"/>
<link wikidata="Q626" start="44" end="49" title="Volga" label="Volga"/>
<link wikidata="Q2448" start="53" end="69" title="Yaroslavl Oblast" label="Yaroslavl Oblast"/>
<link wikidata="Q159" start="71" end="77" title="Russia" label="Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q658234" start="100" end="109" title="Lake Nero" label="Lake Nero"/>
<link wikidata="Q193342" start="115" end="121" title="Rostov, Yaroslavl Oblast" label="Rostov"/>
<link wikidata="Q4213535" start="127" end="136" title="Karabikha" label="Karabikha"/>
<link wikidata="Q2423" start="161" end="170" title="Yaroslavl" label="Yaroslavl"/>
<link wikidata="Q166620" start="194" end="208" title="drainage basin" label="drainage basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2628180" start="382" end="387" title="Ustye (river)" label="Ustye"/>
<link wikidata="Q3955013" start="406" end="417" title="Semibratovo" label="Semibratovo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2426143" start="421" end="431" title="Borisoglebsky, Yaroslavl Oblast" label="Borisogleb"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="461152" wikidata="Q204728" url="?curid=461152" title="Chalkidiki">
<text>Chalkidiki (; , alternatively Halkidiki), also known as Chalcidice, is a peninsula and regional unit of Greece, part of the region of Central Macedonia, in the geographic region of Macedonia in Northern Greece. The autonomous Mount Athos region constitutes the easternmost part of the peninsula, but not of the regional unit.

The capital of Chalkidiki is the town of Polygyros, located in the centre of the peninsula, while the largest town is Nea Moudania. Chalkidiki is a popular summer tourist destination.

==Name==
&quot;Chalkidiki&quot; also spelled &quot;Halkidiki&quot; () or &quot;Chalcidice&quot; () is named after the ancient Greek city-state of Chalcis in Euboea, which colonised the area in the 8th century BC.

==Geography==
Chalkidiki consists of a large peninsula in the northwestern Aegean Sea, resembling a hand with three &#x27;fingers&#x27; (though in Greek these peninsulas are often referred to as &#x27;legs&#x27;). From west to east, these are Kassandra (highest peak 345 m), Sithonia (highest peak Mt Itamos 817 m), and Mount Athos, a special polity within Greece known for its monasteries and its highest peak reaching 2,033 metres above sea level. These &#x27;fingers&#x27; are separated by two gulfs, the Toronean Gulf and the Singitic Gulf. 

Chalkidiki borders on the regional unit of Thessaloniki to the north, and is bounded by the Thermaic Gulf on the west, and the Strymonian Gulf and Ierissos Gulf on the east (which are separated by the Brostomnitsa peninsula). 

The Cholomontas mountains lie in the north-central part of Chalkidiki, with the highest peak reaching 1,165 metres above sea level. Chalkidiki has a few rivers running from Mt Cholomontas south to the sea, these include the Havrias, Vatonias (Olynthios) and Psychros rivers. Chalkidiki also has a few islands including the inhabited Ammouliani and Diaporos both in the Singitic Gulf.

Its largest towns are Nea Moudania (), Nea Kallikrateia () and the capital town of Polygyros ().

There are several summer resorts on the beaches of all three fingers where other minor towns and villages are located, such as at Yerakini (Gerakina Beach) and Psakoudia in central Chalkidiki, Kallithea, Chanioti and Pefkochori in the Kassandra peninsula, Nikiti and Neos Marmaras (Porto Carras) in the Sithonia peninsula, and Ouranoupolis at Mount Athos. A popular village in winter is Arnaia for its architecture and mountain scenery.

===Climate===

The climate of Chalkidiki is mainly Mediterranean (Koppen: &quot;Csa&quot;) with cool, wet winters and hot, relatively dry summers. Snowfalls are possible but not long-lasting during the winter months, while occasional thunderstorms may occur during the summer. Few areas such as Neos Marmaras have a hot semi-arid climate (Köppen climate classification: &quot;BSh&quot;). 

==History==



The first Greek settlers in this area came from Chalcis and Eretria, ancient ionian cities in Euboea, around the 8th century BC who founded cities such as Mende, Toroni and Scione a second wave came from Andros in the 6th century BC who founded cities such as Akanthos. The ancient city of Stageira was the birthplace of the great philosopher Aristotle. Chalkidiki was an important theatre of war during the Peloponnesian War between Athens and Sparta. Later, the Greek colonies of the peninsula were conquered by Philip II of Macedon and Chalkidiki became part of Macedonia (ancient kingdom). After the end of the wars between the Macedonians and the Romans, the region became part of the Roman Empire, along with the rest of Greece. At the end of the Roman Republic (in 43 BC) a Roman colony was settled in Cassandreia, which was later (in 30 BC) resettled by Augustus.

During the following centuries, Chalkidiki was part of the Byzantine Empire (East Roman Empire). On a chrysobull of Emperor Basil I, dated 885, the &quot;Holy Mountain&quot; (Mount Athos) was proclaimed a place of monks, and no laymen or farmers or cattle-breeders were allowed to be settled there. With the support of Nikephoros II Phokas, the Great Lavra monastery was founded soon afterwards. Today, over 2,000 monks from Greece and many other Orthodox Christian countries, such as Romania, Moldova, Georgia, Bulgaria, Serbia, and Russia, live an ascetic life in Athos, isolated from the rest of the world. Athos with its monasteries has been self-governing ever since.

After a short period of domination by the Latin Kingdom of Thessalonica, the area became again Byzantine until its conquest by the Ottomans in 1430. During the Ottoman period, the peninsula was important for its gold mining. In 1821, the Greek War of Independence started and the Greeks of Chalkidiki revolted under the command of Emmanouel Pappas, a member of Filiki Eteria, and other local fighters. The revolt was progressing slowly and unsystematically. The insurrection was confined to the peninsulas of Mount Athos and Kassandra. One of the main goals was to restrain and detain the coming of the Ottoman army from Istanbul, until the revolution in the south (mainly Peloponnese) became stable. Finally, the revolt resulted in a decisive Ottoman victory at Kassandra. The survivors, among them Papas, were rescued by the Psarian fleet, which took them mainly to Skiathos, Skopelos and Skyros. The Ottomans proceeded in retaliation and many villages were burnt.

Finally, the peninsula was incorporated into the Greek Kingdom in 1912 after the Balkan Wars. Many Greek refugees from East Thrace and Anatolia (modern Turkey) were settled in parts of Chalkidiki after the 1922 Greco-Turkish war, adding to the indigenous Greek population.

In the 1980s, a tourism boom came to Chalkidiki and took over agriculture as the primary industry. In June 2003, at the holiday resort of Porto Carras located in Neos Marmaras, Sithonia, leaders of the European Union presented the first draft of the European Constitution (see History of the European Constitution for developments after this point).

===Ancient sites===



*Acanthus (near Ierissos)
*Acrothoi
*Aege
*Alapta
*Aphytis (Afytos)
*Apollonia (near Polygyros)
*Cleonae (Chalcidice)
*Galepsus
*Mekyberna
*Mende
*Neapolis, Chalcidice
*Olophyxus
*Olynthus
*Palaiochori &quot;Neposi&quot; castle
*Polichrono
*Potidaea
*Scione
*Scolus
*Sermylia (Ormylia)
*Stageira
*Spartolus
*Thyssus
*Torone
*Treasury of the Acanthians
*Xerxes Canal

== Archaeology ==
In June 2022, archaeologists announced the discovery of a poorly preserved single-edged sabre among the ruins of a monastery on the coast of Chalcidice. Alongside the curved sword, excavators revealed evidence of a fire, a large cache of 14th-century glazed pottery vessels, as well as other weapons, including axes and arrowheads.

== Economy ==

=== Agriculture ===
The peninsula is notable for its olive oil and its green olives production. Also various types of honey and wine are produced.

=== Tourism ===
Chalkidiki has been a popular summer tourist destination since the late 1950s when people from Thessaloniki started spending their summer holidays in the coastal villages. In the beginning tourists rented rooms in the houses of locals. By the 1960s, tourists from Austria and Germany started to visit Chalkidiki more frequently. Since the start of the big tourist boom in the 1970s, the whole region has been captured by tourism. In the region there is a golf course, with plans for four others in the future.

=== Mining ===
Gold was mined in the region during antiquity by Philip II of Macedon and the next rulers. Since 2013, a revival of mining for gold and other minerals has occurred, and a number of concessions have been granted to Eldorado Gold of Canada. Critics claim that mining adversely affects tourism and the environment.

==Administration==
The Chalkidiki regional unit is subdivided into five municipalities (numbered as in the infobox map):
*Aristotelis (2)
*Kassandra (4)
*Nea Propontida (3)
*Polygyros (1)
*Sithonia (5)

===Prefecture===

As a part of Greece&#x27;s 2011 local government reform, the Chalkidiki regional unit (, ) was created out of the former Chalkidiki prefecture (, ); the regional unit has the same territory as the former prefecture. As par of the reforms, Chalkidiki&#x27;s five municipalities (, ) were created by combining former municipalities, which were in turn demoted to municipal units (, ), according to the table below.

===Provinces===

Before the abolishment of the provinces of Greece in 2006, the Chalkidiki prefecture was subdivided into the following provinces:
==Population==

The autonomous monastic state of Mount Athos which is often considered to be geographically part of Chalkidiki recorded an additional 1,746 people in the 2021 census. The population is mostly Orthodox Christian monks.
==Television==
*TV Halkidiki – Nea Moudania
*Super TV – Nea Moudania

==Transport==
*Motorways:
**A24 motorway connects Thessaloniki and &quot;Macedonia&quot; Airport with Nea Moudania and Kallithea in Kassandra.
*Chalkidiki has no railroads or airports.
*A bus system, KTEL, serves major towns.

In September 2018 it was announced that Line 2 of the Thessaloniki Metro could be extended in the future in order to serve commuters to and from some areas of Chalkidiki.

== Notable inhabitants ==

*Paeonius of Mende (late 5th century BC), sculptor
*Philippus of Mende, Plato&#x27;s student, astronomer
*Nicomachus, Aristotle&#x27;s father
*Aristobulus of Cassandreia (375–301 BC), historian, architect
*Aristotle (384 BC in Stageira–322 BC), philosopher
*Andronicus of Olynthus (), Phrourarchus of Tyre, appointed by Antigonus
*Callisthenes (360–328 BC), historian
*Crates of Olynthus, Alexander&#x27;s hydraulic engineer
*Bubalus of Cassandreia (304 BC), &quot;keles&quot; (horse) competing in the flat race of the Lykaia
*Poseidippus of Cassandreia (–240 BC), comic poet
*Erginus (son of Simylus) from Cassandreia, citharede winner in Soteria 
*Konstantinos Doumbiotis (1793-1848), revolutionary of the Greek War of Independence
*Stamatios Kapsas, revolutionary of the Greek War of Independence
*Xenophon Paionidis (1863–1933), architect
*Manolis Mitsias, singer
*Sokratis Malamas (1957 in Sykia), singer
*Paola Foka (1982 Sykia), singer

== See also ==
* Chalkidian League
* List of settlements in Chalkidiki
* Mount Athos
* Petralona cave
* Vavdos Folklore Collection

== Notes ==
==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q204728" start="0" end="10" title="Chalkidiki" label="Chalkidiki"/>
<link wikidata="Q204728" start="30" end="39" title="Chalkidiki" label="Halkidiki"/>
<link wikidata="Q204728" start="56" end="66" title="Chalkidiki" label="Chalcidice"/>
<link wikidata="Q34763" start="73" end="82" title="peninsula" label="peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q1234255" start="87" end="110" title="regional units of Greece" label="regional unit of Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q17152" start="134" end="151" title="Central Macedonia" label="Central Macedonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048163" start="160" end="177" title="Geographic regions of Greece" label="geographic region"/>
<link wikidata="Q81734" start="181" end="190" title="Macedonia (Greece)" label="Macedonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3563983" start="194" end="209" title="Northern Greece" label="Northern Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q130321" start="226" end="237" title="Mount Athos" label="Mount Athos"/>
<link wikidata="Q14201950" start="368" end="377" title="Polygyros" label="Polygyros"/>
<link wikidata="Q1689422" start="445" end="457" title="Nea Moudania" label="Nea Moudania"/>
<link wikidata="Q200133" start="658" end="665" title="Chalcis" label="Chalcis"/>
<link wikidata="Q173096" start="669" end="675" title="Euboea" label="Euboea"/>
<link wikidata="Q34575" start="801" end="811" title="Aegean Sea" label="Aegean Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q81045" start="969" end="978" title="Kassandra, Chalkidiki" label="Kassandra"/>
<link wikidata="Q922342" start="1001" end="1009" title="Sithonia" label="Sithonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q130321" start="1046" end="1057" title="Mount Athos" label="Mount Athos"/>
<link wikidata="Q2444383" start="1234" end="1247" title="Toronean Gulf" label="Toronean Gulf"/>
<link wikidata="Q1332013" start="1256" end="1269" title="Singitic Gulf" label="Singitic Gulf"/>
<link wikidata="Q913418" start="1365" end="1378" title="Thermaic Gulf" label="Thermaic Gulf"/>
<link wikidata="Q1468759" start="1400" end="1415" title="Strymonian Gulf" label="Strymonian Gulf"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075970" start="1505" end="1516" title="Mount Cholomon" label="Cholomontas"/>
<link wikidata="Q25154873" start="1834" end="1844" title="Ammouliani" label="Ammouliani"/>
<link wikidata="Q5271808" start="1849" end="1857" title="Diaporos Island" label="Diaporos"/>
<link wikidata="Q1689422" start="1908" end="1920" title="Nea Moudania" label="Nea Moudania"/>
<link wikidata="Q1722488" start="1925" end="1941" title="Kallikrateia" label="Nea Kallikrateia"/>
<link wikidata="Q14201950" start="1969" end="1978" title="Polygyros" label="Polygyros"/>
<link wikidata="Q1251598" start="2114" end="2122" title="Yerakini" label="Yerakini"/>
<link wikidata="Q12886292" start="2144" end="2153" title="Psakoudia" label="Psakoudia"/>
<link wikidata="Q626774" start="2177" end="2186" title="Kallithea, Chalkidiki" label="Kallithea"/>
<link wikidata="Q3555215" start="2188" end="2196" title="Chaniotis" label="Chanioti"/>
<link wikidata="Q3560020" start="2201" end="2211" title="Pefkochori" label="Pefkochori"/>
<link wikidata="Q81045" start="2219" end="2228" title="Kassandra, Chalkidiki" label="Kassandra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1018264" start="2240" end="2246" title="Nikiti" label="Nikiti"/>
<link wikidata="Q200417" start="2251" end="2264" title="Neos Marmaras" label="Neos Marmaras"/>
<link wikidata="Q1885884" start="2266" end="2278" title="Porto Carras" label="Porto Carras"/>
<link wikidata="Q922342" start="2287" end="2295" title="Sithonia" label="Sithonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q430886" start="2311" end="2323" title="Ouranoupoli" label="Ouranoupolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q626763" start="2371" end="2377" title="Arnaia" label="Arnaia"/>
<link wikidata="Q13996" start="2473" end="2486" title="Mediterranean climate" label="Mediterranean"/>
<link wikidata="Q21484757" start="2488" end="2494" title="Koppen" label="Koppen"/>
<link wikidata="Q200417" start="2717" end="2730" title="Neos Marmaras" label="Neos Marmaras"/>
<link wikidata="Q124196" start="2738" end="2759" title="hot semi-arid climate" label="hot semi-arid climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q124095" start="2761" end="2790" title="Köppen climate classification" label="Köppen climate classification"/>
<link wikidata="Q200133" start="2875" end="2882" title="Chalcis" label="Chalcis"/>
<link wikidata="Q320367" start="2887" end="2894" title="Eretria" label="Eretria"/>
<link wikidata="Q465331" start="2904" end="2910" title="Ionians" label="ionian"/>
<link wikidata="Q173096" start="2921" end="2927" title="Euboea" label="Euboea"/>
<link wikidata="Q3305786" start="2982" end="2987" title="Mende (Chalcidice)" label="Mende"/>
<link wikidata="Q1638072" start="2989" end="2995" title="Toroni" label="Toroni"/>
<link wikidata="Q963571" start="3000" end="3006" title="Scione" label="Scione"/>
<link wikidata="Q175741" start="3031" end="3037" title="Andros" label="Andros"/>
<link wikidata="Q181109" start="3087" end="3095" title="Akanthos (Greece)" label="Akanthos"/>
<link wikidata="Q846127" start="3117" end="3125" title="Stageira" label="Stageira"/>
<link wikidata="Q868" start="3170" end="3179" title="Aristotle" label="Aristotle"/>
<link wikidata="Q33745" start="3235" end="3252" title="Peloponnesian War" label="Peloponnesian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q844930" start="3261" end="3267" title="Classical Athens" label="Athens"/>
<link wikidata="Q5690" start="3272" end="3278" title="Sparta" label="Sparta"/>
<link wikidata="Q130650" start="3341" end="3361" title="Philip II of Macedon" label="Philip II of Macedon"/>
<link wikidata="Q83958" start="3392" end="3419" title="Macedonia (ancient kingdom)" label="Macedonia (ancient kingdom)"/>
<link wikidata="Q75813" start="3442" end="3446" title="Macedonian Wars" label="wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277" start="3517" end="3529" title="Roman Empire" label="Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q12544" start="3759" end="3775" title="Byzantine Empire" label="Byzantine Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q198721" start="3802" end="3812" title="chrysobull" label="chrysobull"/>
<link wikidata="Q41592" start="3824" end="3831" title="Basil I" label="Basil I"/>
<link wikidata="Q130321" start="3875" end="3886" title="Mount Athos" label="Mount Athos"/>
<link wikidata="Q41625" start="4019" end="4039" title="Nikephoros II Phokas" label="Nikephoros II Phokas"/>
<link wikidata="Q546516" start="4045" end="4066" title="Great Lavra (Athos)" label="Great Lavra monastery"/>
<link wikidata="Q325461" start="4422" end="4445" title="Kingdom of Thessalonica" label="Kingdom of Thessalonica"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="4505" end="4513" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottomans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071389" start="4586" end="4597" title="gold mining" label="gold mining"/>
<link wikidata="Q182062" start="4612" end="4637" title="Greek War of Independence" label="Greek War of Independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1338130" start="4705" end="4721" title="Emmanouel Pappas" label="Emmanouel Pappas"/>
<link wikidata="Q634186" start="4735" end="4748" title="Filiki Eteria" label="Filiki Eteria"/>
<link wikidata="Q406" start="4995" end="5003" title="Istanbul" label="Istanbul"/>
<link wikidata="Q78967" start="5047" end="5058" title="Peloponnese" label="Peloponnese"/>
<link wikidata="Q1330873" start="5201" end="5208" title="Psara" label="Psarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q515085" start="5242" end="5250" title="Skiathos" label="Skiathos"/>
<link wikidata="Q212027" start="5252" end="5260" title="Skopelos" label="Skopelos"/>
<link wikidata="Q208566" start="5265" end="5271" title="Skyros" label="Skyros"/>
<link wikidata="Q209065" start="5391" end="5404" title="Greek Kingdom" label="Greek Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q165725" start="5423" end="5434" title="Balkan Wars" label="Balkan Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q171323" start="5461" end="5472" title="East Thrace" label="East Thrace"/>
<link wikidata="Q51614" start="5477" end="5485" title="Anatolia" label="Anatolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q87138" start="5553" end="5570" title="Greco-Turkish War (1919–1922)" label="Greco-Turkish war"/>
<link wikidata="Q1885884" start="5754" end="5766" title="Porto Carras" label="Porto Carras"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="5818" end="5832" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q189066" start="5893" end="5929" title="History of the European Constitution" label="History of the European Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q181109" start="5991" end="5999" title="Acanthus (Greece)" label="Acanthus"/>
<link wikidata="Q10640373" start="6006" end="6014" title="Ierissos" label="Ierissos"/>
<link wikidata="Q17620105" start="6017" end="6025" title="Acrothoi" label="Acrothoi"/>
<link wikidata="Q16559458" start="6027" end="6031" title="Aege" label="Aege"/>
<link wikidata="Q17620471" start="6033" end="6039" title="Alapta" label="Alapta"/>
<link wikidata="Q4779776" start="6041" end="6048" title="Aphytis" label="Aphytis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3556047" start="6050" end="6056" title="Afytos" label="Afytos"/>
<link wikidata="Q4780386" start="6059" end="6068" title="Apollonia (Chalcidice)" label="Apollonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q14201950" start="6075" end="6084" title="Polygyros" label="Polygyros"/>
<link wikidata="Q17625411" start="6087" end="6107" title="Cleonae (Chalcidice)" label="Cleonae (Chalcidice)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1491828" start="6109" end="6117" title="Galepsus (Chalcidice)" label="Galepsus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1918873" start="6119" end="6128" title="Mekyberna" label="Mekyberna"/>
<link wikidata="Q3305786" start="6130" end="6135" title="Mende (Greece)" label="Mende"/>
<link wikidata="Q6984307" start="6137" end="6157" title="Neapolis, Chalcidice" label="Neapolis, Chalcidice"/>
<link wikidata="Q17623889" start="6159" end="6168" title="Olophyxus" label="Olophyxus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141669" start="6170" end="6178" title="Olynthus" label="Olynthus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1015083" start="6180" end="6217" title="Palaiochori, Chalkidiki" label="Palaiochori &amp;quot;Neposi&amp;quot; castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q3394170" start="6219" end="6229" title="Polychrono" label="Polichrono"/>
<link wikidata="Q999468" start="6231" end="6239" title="Potidaea" label="Potidaea"/>
<link wikidata="Q963571" start="6241" end="6247" title="Scione" label="Scione"/>
<link wikidata="Q11949957" start="6249" end="6255" title="Scolus (Chalcidice)" label="Scolus"/>
<link wikidata="Q16743303" start="6257" end="6265" title="Sermylia" label="Sermylia"/>
<link wikidata="Q773966" start="6267" end="6274" title="Ormylia" label="Ormylia"/>
<link wikidata="Q846127" start="6277" end="6285" title="Stageira" label="Stageira"/>
<link wikidata="Q4894643" start="6287" end="6296" title="Spartolus" label="Spartolus"/>
<link wikidata="Q17631597" start="6298" end="6305" title="Thyssus" label="Thyssus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1638072" start="6307" end="6313" title="Toroni" label="Torone"/>
<link wikidata="Q22810172" start="6315" end="6341" title="Treasury of the Acanthians" label="Treasury of the Acanthians"/>
<link wikidata="Q974205" start="6343" end="6355" title="Xerxes Canal" label="Xerxes Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q231204" start="6463" end="6468" title="sabre" label="sabre"/>
<link wikidata="Q93165" start="6776" end="6785" title="olive oil" label="olive oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q37083" start="6800" end="6805" title="olive" label="olive"/>
<link wikidata="Q10987" start="6841" end="6846" title="honey" label="honey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1779616" start="6851" end="6855" title="Greek wine" label="wine"/>
<link wikidata="Q17151" start="6982" end="6994" title="Thessaloniki" label="Thessaloniki"/>
<link wikidata="Q40" start="7151" end="7158" title="Austria" label="Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="7163" end="7170" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048525" start="7342" end="7353" title="golf course" label="golf course"/>
<link wikidata="Q130650" start="7462" end="7482" title="Philip II of Macedon" label="Philip II of Macedon"/>
<link wikidata="Q44497" start="7529" end="7535" title="mining" label="mining"/>
<link wikidata="Q897" start="7540" end="7544" title="gold" label="gold"/>
<link wikidata="Q1232862" start="7627" end="7640" title="Eldorado Gold" label="Eldorado Gold"/>
<link wikidata="Q1234255" start="7760" end="7773" title="Regional units of Greece" label="regional unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1349648" start="7798" end="7812" title="Municipalities of Greece" label="municipalities"/>
<link wikidata="Q1979895" start="7848" end="7859" title="Aristotelis (municipality)" label="Aristotelis"/>
<link wikidata="Q81045" start="7865" end="7874" title="Kassandra, Chalkidiki" label="Kassandra"/>
<link wikidata="Q2532082" start="7880" end="7894" title="Nea Propontida" label="Nea Propontida"/>
<link wikidata="Q14201950" start="7900" end="7909" title="Polygyros" label="Polygyros"/>
<link wikidata="Q922342" start="7915" end="7923" title="Sithonia" label="Sithonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1722495" start="7974" end="8002" title="Kallikratis Plan" label="2011 local government reform"/>
<link wikidata="Q202595" start="8079" end="8089" title="Prefectures of Greece" label="prefecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860467" start="8408" end="8427" title="provinces of Greece" label="provinces of Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q130321" start="8557" end="8568" title="Mount Athos" label="Mount Athos"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8758" end="8770" title="TV Halkidiki" label="TV Halkidiki"/>
<link wikidata="Q16611319" start="8787" end="8795" title="Super TV (Greek TV channel)" label="Super TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q24259626" start="8840" end="8852" title="A24 motorway (Greece)" label="A24 motorway"/>
<link wikidata="Q17151" start="8862" end="8874" title="Thessaloniki" label="Thessaloniki"/>
<link wikidata="Q127958" start="8879" end="8908" title="Thessaloniki International Airport, &amp;quot;Macedonia&amp;quot;" label="&amp;quot;Macedonia&amp;quot; Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1689422" start="8914" end="8926" title="Nea Moudania" label="Nea Moudania"/>
<link wikidata="Q626774" start="8931" end="8940" title="Kallithea, Chalkidiki" label="Kallithea"/>
<link wikidata="Q3565868" start="8974" end="8983" title="Rail transport" label="railroads"/>
<link wikidata="Q1248784" start="8987" end="8995" title="airports" label="airports"/>
<link wikidata="Q56277844" start="9079" end="9085" title="Line 2 (Thessaloniki Metro)" label="Line 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q1326567" start="9093" end="9111" title="Thessaloniki Metro" label="Thessaloniki Metro"/>
<link wikidata="Q545845" start="9239" end="9256" title="Paeonius of Mende" label="Paeonius of Mende"/>
<link wikidata="Q859" start="9310" end="9315" title="Plato" label="Plato"/>
<link wikidata="Q3050463" start="9344" end="9354" title="Nicomachus (father of Aristotle)" label="Nicomachus"/>
<link wikidata="Q868" start="9356" end="9365" title="Aristotle" label="Aristotle"/>
<link wikidata="Q544987" start="9381" end="9407" title="Aristobulus of Cassandreia" label="Aristobulus of Cassandreia"/>
<link wikidata="Q868" start="9444" end="9453" title="Aristotle" label="Aristotle"/>
<link wikidata="Q846127" start="9465" end="9473" title="Stageira" label="Stageira"/>
<link wikidata="Q513816" start="9496" end="9518" title="Andronicus of Olynthus" label="Andronicus of Olynthus"/>
<link wikidata="Q82793" start="9569" end="9581" title="Callisthenes" label="Callisthenes"/>
<link wikidata="Q5182656" start="9607" end="9625" title="Crates (engineer)" label="Crates of Olynthus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3561213" start="9765" end="9791" title="Poseidippus of Cassandreia" label="Poseidippus of Cassandreia"/>
<link wikidata="Q181922" start="9858" end="9867" title="citharede" label="citharede"/>
<link wikidata="Q5764313" start="9878" end="9885" title="Soteria (festival)" label="Soteria"/>
<link wikidata="Q15981065" start="9888" end="9911" title="Konstantinos Doumbiotis" label="Konstantinos Doumbiotis"/>
<link wikidata="Q182062" start="9946" end="9971" title="Greek War of Independence" label="Greek War of Independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q4213228" start="9973" end="9989" title="Stamatios Kapsas" label="Stamatios Kapsas"/>
<link wikidata="Q182062" start="10012" end="10037" title="Greek War of Independence" label="Greek War of Independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q12882035" start="10039" end="10057" title="Xenophon Paionidis" label="Xenophon Paionidis"/>
<link wikidata="Q12880681" start="10082" end="10097" title="Manolis Mitsias" label="Manolis Mitsias"/>
<link wikidata="Q7555416" start="10107" end="10123" title="Sokratis Malamas" label="Sokratis Malamas"/>
<link wikidata="Q4473023" start="10149" end="10159" title="Paola Foka" label="Paola Foka"/>
<link wikidata="Q2042616" start="10199" end="10216" title="Chalkidian League" label="Chalkidian League"/>
<link wikidata="Q16150594" start="10219" end="10252" title="List of settlements in Chalkidiki" label="List of settlements in Chalkidiki"/>
<link wikidata="Q130321" start="10255" end="10266" title="Mount Athos" label="Mount Athos"/>
<link wikidata="Q2302464" start="10269" end="10283" title="Petralona cave" label="Petralona cave"/>
<link wikidata="Q5464558" start="10286" end="10312" title="Vavdos Folklore Collection" label="Vavdos Folklore Collection"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="461160" wikidata="Q2260571" url="?curid=461160" title="SCORE (software)">
<text>SCORE is a scorewriter program, written in FORTRAN for MS-DOS by Stanford University Professor Leland Smith (1925–2013) with a reputation for producing very high-quality results. It was widely used in engraving during the 1980s and 1990s and continues to have a small, dedicated following of engravers, many of whom hold the program in high regard due to its ability to position symbols precisely on the page. Several publications set using SCORE have earned Paul Revere and German Musikpresse engraving awards.

==Program development==
===Mainframe origins===

The first incarnation of SCORE was written by Leland Smith in 1967 as a means of entering music into the MUSIC V sound generating system running on the PDP-10 mainframe computers at the Stanford Artificial Intelligence Laboratory (SAIL).

The core concept of SCORE was to break music into a set of items (&#x27;objects&#x27; in modern terminology) with parameters that describe their characteristics. In this example of an early SCORE routine the beginnings of the parameter system (P2, P3 etc.) can be seen:
As vector graphics terminals became available in the early 1970s, the parametric approach to describing musical information that had been designed for MUSIC V was adapted by Smith into a program he called MSS (the standard abbreviation for manuscripts) for printing musical scores. The graphics plotters used for output were not able to plot curves so MSS did not use music fonts as they are understood today, instead using user-editable symbol libraries based on polygons, and text was generated from an internal character set.

The first printing of a complete musical work set entirely by computer was of Smith&#x27;s &quot;Six Bagatelles for Piano&quot; which appeared in December 1971, printed at 100dpi on a CalComp plotter and reduced by a factor of five for printing at 8.5&quot;x11&quot;. Smith&#x27;s &quot;Woodwind Trio&quot; was published using this system in 1973 and Richard Swift, reviewing it for &quot;Notes&quot;, drew attention to the &#x27;admirable clarity and ease of reading for performer and score reader, easily equivalent to the finest examples of contemporary music printing by other means. This new process claims the serious attention of commercial music publishers for its fine qualities, not the least of which is ease and cheapness of production.&#x27;

The first book about music typeset entirely by computer to be published was his &quot;Handbook of Harmonic Analysis&quot; in 1979, created on the PDP-10 computer at SAIL using the PUB typesetting program (for more information see &quot;External links&quot;) in conjunction with MSS. The printing was done at double size on a Varian Data Machines Statos electrostatic plotter and then optically reduced by a factor of two for lithographic printing.

From its creation until 1985, all development of MSS was either done on the PDP-10 computers at Stanford or during residencies at IRCAM in the Pompidou Centre, Paris.

===Commercial development===

Between 1985 and 1986 MSS was ported to the Tandy 2000 running MS-DOS under its earlier name of SCORE. Since personal computers of the time had limited memory (usually around 640KB), SCORE was limited to 32 staves and 1420 items per file. In order to handle complex or lengthy works, users had to work on small portions of the score at any one time, naming their files sequentially. These were then laid out and tiled together before being sent to the printer. In order to save memory further on graphics operations, notation was displayed in &#x27;stick figure&#x27; characters and symbols (see first screenshot in &quot;Editing music graphically/numerically&quot;), which showed exactly the boundaries of the notation but lacked fine detail. There was an option to display the true symbols provided there was enough memory remaining to accommodate them (see Pass 2 screenshot in &quot;Entering music symbolically&quot;).

SCORE version 1 was released in 1987 by Passport Designs and updated to version 2 in August 1988. The German music publisher Schott Music began using SCORE in 1988 and their in-house engraving typefaces became the basis for SCORE&#x27;s symbol library. Version 2 also introduced the use of PostScript Type 1 fonts for page text.

In 1988, Passport Designs sent their programmer Perry Devine to work with Smith to make the program more user-friendly. They also hired professional engraver William Holab (music editor at G. Schirmer, Inc.) to rewrite the manuals, resulting in the release of version 3.0 in 1990.

The SCORE music publishing system is made up of the main program, SCORE, and these associated utilities:

* JUST, which aligns and justifies large scores with more than 32 staves per system
* PAGE, which handles part extraction, and layout for multiple pages of music simultaneously
* SPRINT, which sends typeset pages to PostScript printers or creates an EPS file
* DRAW, which draws symbols for inclusion in the main (CODE 9) or user-defined (CODE 11) libraries

ESCORT and SCOREINPUT were sold separately and allowed MIDI input from a MIDI file and a MIDI keyboard, respectively. SCOREINPUT was created by Dr. Paul Nahay, Smith&#x27;s former colleague on the music theory and composition faculty in the Department of Music at Stanford University.

Ties with Passport Designs were severed in 1991, and all subsequent versions were distributed and sold by Smith&#x27;s company, San Andreas Press.

Version 3.10 was released in 1993 and replaced SPRINT with SCORLAS and SCORDOT, which sent output to laser and dot matrix printers.

Version 3.11 was released in May 1994, and replaced ESCORT and SCOREINPUT with MIDISCOR and MIDISCORWRITE. MIDISCOR and MIDISCORWRITE were written by Stephen Gibson of Ararat Software. SCORE 3.11 was the final increment of version 3 and is still used commercially today as it is considered by some to be the most mature and stable version that was released.

The FinalScore utility was released in 1996, which converted PostScript output from the Finale programme into a standard SCORE file, however this became obsolete when Finale 2004 changed the way in which EPS files were created.

Version 4.0 (known as SCOR4) was released in May 1998, and included automatic lute and guitar tablature systems, MIDI playback, group editing of items, a conditional editor, various user interface improvements relating to file access, and further mouse support. Many changes were introduced to make the program more accessible to new users, often making the program more cumbersome for existing professional users in the process - which is one of the reasons version 3 is still so highly regarded.

The last minor update, version 4.01, was released on October 16, 2001, although a special version called SCORLAP was released in May 2002 which addressed graphics redraw problems arising with some laptops.

WinScore, the Microsoft Windows version, was released to beta in March 2009 as version 5.00. Improvements included increasing the possible number of staves on pages, removing the limits on items and vectors per page, a WYSIWYG interface, use of colour, native MIDI input and playback, extending the number of parameters per item to 36, and integrating all previous SCORE utilities (PAGE, JUST, DRAW, SCORLAS) into the main program. WinScore suffered from memory leaks and other bugs which prevented its adoption by many users, and despite officially being released on December 8, 2012, it was still effectively in beta development at the time of its last update to 5.01 on November 1, 2013, six weeks before Smith&#x27;s death.

The basis of SCORE was written in FORTRAN with all the mouse and graphics routines written in Intel assembly language. WinScore was created using a combination of Visual C++ and 32-bit DEC FORTRAN.

===After Smith&#x27;s death===
Following Smith&#x27;s death on December 17, 2013, both SCORE and WinScore are no longer sold and the website registrations have lapsed. At the beginning of 2021 Adobe Inc. announced that support for Type 1 PostScript fonts would end in January 2023.

===Pricing===
On release in 1987, SCORE version 1 cost , version 2 in 1988 was , version 3 in 1991 was , version 4 in 1999 was , and WinScore, in 2013, was .

In 1990 it cost to update from an earlier version to version 3.

In 1999 it cost to update from 3.11 to 4.0.

In 2013 to update to WinScore from version 3 cost , and from version 4, .

==Product reviews==
Version 1 was announced in the press at the beginning of 1987 with an expected release date of April that year, and a predicted price tag of $500. Its release was noted in the &quot;Computer Music Journal&quot; issue of winter 1987.

Version 1.1 was reviewed by &quot;Computer Music Journal&quot; in autumn 1988. DRAW was not yet available, but had been promised. A later reviewer was told by technical support that making the DRAW programme available to users was an afterthought. On-screen help was described as &#x27;awkward and unenlightening&#x27;, but the software &#x27;rewards determined effort to climb the learning curve with powerful abilities&#x27;. &#x27;For routine music printing, it is probably more expensive, more complicated, and less accommodating than some of its competitors, but Score is more powerful than any of them.&#x27;

Writing for &quot;Electronic Musician&quot;, Carter Scholz found the interface of version 2.0 &#x27;opaque and maddening&#x27; though concluded SCORE was an &#x27;amazing&#x27; &#x27;power tool&#x27; which &#x27;sets a new standard&#x27; for professionals for whom ease of use would be less important than the results which could be obtained. A math coprocessor was considered essential to prevent the program response being sluggish when handling the floating-point arithmetic for screen operations.

&quot;Keyboard&quot;&#x27;s Jim Aikin agreed that a considerable investment of time was required to learn the package. Scholz had three months and admitted he had only &#x27;scratched the surface&#x27; of its capabilities. Aikin came to similar conclusions, suggesting improvements to the interface and input methods would make it more accessible.

&quot;PC Magazine&quot;, reviewing SCORE at the end of 1988, concluded that the software was aimed at accomplished musicians who were prepared to put in the time to learn it, and that the design of the program and manual were thorough and clear. Three years later the same magazine described the program as having &#x27;ushered in the era of true desktop music publishing&#x27; allowing musicians to turn out &#x27;engraver-quality printed music of any complexity&#x27;, but still admitting that it had a &#x27;ruthlessly difficult interface&#x27;, a &#x27;confusing amalgam of command line and function keys&#x27; which &#x27;never fully made the transition from the mainframe computers&#x27; where it originated. Editing music once entered was &#x27;cumbersome and daunting&#x27; and the poor documentation made the program even more inaccessible.

Reviewing version 2.10 in March 1990 for &quot;Notes&quot;, Garrett Bowles noted that SCORE surpassed any of the other contemporary notation programmes (The Copyist III, DynaDuet, MusicPrinter Plus, The Note Processor, Personal Composer System, and Theme, the Music Editor) on notational complexity, text handling, part extraction, page layout, and spacing of items on the staff. On-screen help was now &#x27;excellent&#x27;, as were the extensive manuals (although some discussions of operations were considered &#x27;too detailed&#x27;).

Karl Signell, writing in spring 1991, observed that version 3 had the most &#x27;ungraceful, counter-intuitive interface&#x27;, but noted that it was faster than other programmes (including Finale, Music Writer, NoteWriter and Professional Composer) as well as producing one of the most professional looking scores.

== Program use ==

=== Entering music symbolically ===
Music is usually entered using text codes from a standard ASCII keyboard (though a MIDI keyboard can be used purely for note pitch entry), and several passes are required to enter all the information. After the page has been set up with appropriate staves, information is entered voice by voice as follows:

*Pass 1 defines note names (including accidentals and staff position, but not duration), rests (not duration), clefs, measure lines, key signatures, time signatures
*Pass 2 defines rhythmic values (durations) for notes and rests
*Pass 3 defines marks: articulations, accents, dynamics etc.
*Pass 4 defines the position of rhythmic beams
*Pass 5 defines the end points of slurs and ties

For example, to create these two bars of Bach&#x27;s Fugue in C minor, BWV 847 from Book I of the Well-Tempered Clavier:

To create the staff:

The five passes of data entry:

These show the use of the following text codes - note that &#x27;/&#x27; is a delimiter and &#x27;;&#x27; marks the end of each pass:

Pass 1
Pass 2
After pass 2, numbers are displayed above each note to assist with assigning marks, beams and slurs. The image below also illustrates the results of the &#x27;Show&#x27; command to display the true vectors of all items, rather than the &#x27;stick figure&#x27; symbols that are usually used.

Pass 3
Pass 4
Pass 5
=== Editing music graphically/numerically ===

Once the music has been entered using the five-stage input process described above, the musical data is converted by SCORE into the following graphical items and stored as a series of numeric parameters:

Examples of the parameters associated with these items:

Here then is the numerical representation of the BWV 847 fugue theme example. Each line represents one graphical item as a CODE number (item type) and associated numeric parameters. The second number is the staff on which the item belongs, and the third is the horizontal position of the item along the full width of the paper, with 0 representing the left margin, and 200 representing the right margin. The fourth number often contains the vertical position on the staff - the bottom line of the staff is vertical position 3, the bottom space of the staff is 4, and so on.


Unlike most music typesetting editors, understanding and manipulation of these numerical parameters are expected of SCORE users. To access the numeric parameters of items within SCORE, a user clicks on a graphical element, and a list of the parameters is displayed at the top of the editor - as shown in the first screenshot, where a slur is selected (notice the black vertical arrow above the staff at the beginning of the third bar).

SCORE was creative in packing as much information as possible into each numeric parameter. For example, Parameter 5 of CODE 1 is described as &#x27;stem direction/accidental&#x27; but uses each place value to encode a different piece of information. Note that by SCORE default, only the top note of a chord has a stem, all the other notes are stemless. So a down-stemmed sharp would have a P5 of 22. An up-stemmed flat with a left offset of 2.5 would be 11.25. A stemless natural with a right offset of 3 would be 3.93, and if it were bracketed it would be 103.93.







Here are selected examples of items from the numeric parameter data of the fugue example:

The key signature:

The time signature:

The dynamic marking (&#x27;mp&#x27;):
* See bottom right entry in character table in the first picture

The rest in the first bar:

The first B natural in the first bar:

The second slur in the first bar:

The first barline:

The last note (half note, or minim):
=== Editing text ===

In version 1 PostScript text fonts were not used for printing, only the stick-figure characters used within the programme and an internal version of the Bodoni typeface, and text could only be edited by altering the ASCII codes for each character individually within the CODE16 parameters. Version 2 allowed the use of PostScript Type 1 fonts and provided a more convenient method of editing text, but unfortunately only a subset of the glyphs within the chosen font could be used by SCORE. Different fonts were selected by using an escape sequence at the start of the text. Escape codes _00 to _34 selected the Base 35 fonts of the Adobe PostScript Level 2 font set, and codes _35 to _89 could be assigned by the user. Some characters not available on a standard keyboard were obtained by using another escape sequence, for example:

To set the text &quot;&quot;Fête-Dieu à Séville&quot; by Isaac Albéniz&quot; in variants of Times Roman would require the sequence

codice_1

where
It was only possible to use glyphs other than those already escaped within SCORE by manually editing the font files, re-encoding SCORE&#x27;s font templates (a third-party utility called AFM2PSC was written to facilitate this), or editing the final EPS file.

=== Conditional editing ===

With version 4, conditional editing was included in the main program. This allowed users to write conditional statements in a language similar to BASIC. Prior to this it had only been possible by using third party utilities: ScorEdit from Ararat Software, and EDITSCOR from Brodhead Music Typography.

For example,

 will move all items on all staves which are beyond position 100 (), 20 steps to the left ().

 will delete all notes () on staves lower than 4 () and all rests () on staves greater than or equal to 6 ().

 If notes () are on a staff above 3 () and have tails (the result of P9 MOD 10 is not 0), or notes () are on staff 1 () and to the right of position 100 (), then the notes will be given an accent () and an X-shaped notehead ().

Some functionality was limited in the implementation, such as nested parentheses being unsupported (except for use with MOD()), being unable to edit text, being unable to cross-compare and edit different items simultaneously, and being unable to read macros in sequence from a source file. Users wishing to employ these methods had to use the third party utilities described earlier.

WinScore allowed macros to be read in sequence from source files, but did not add any more functions.

===Output===

Music notation data is saved in a proprietary but open format:

The files are saved in binary format where the first word is the word count for the entire file. The word count is normally a 16-bit integer; however, if the word count exceeds about 31000, then a 32-bit integer is used. Saved files with less than 31000 words can be read back into the earlier versions of SCORE, except, of course, any new features of WinScore will be ignored. Files with greater than 31000 words cannot be read by the earlier versions of SCORE. The files are concluded with a 6-word trailer. The last word is -9999. The next word back is the count of the preceding trailer words (currently 5). The next word back is the measurement code (0 = inches, 1 = metric). The next back is the program version number. The next is the program serial number (a converted integer). The first word of the trailer is currently undefined. After the initial integer word count, the rest of the file consists entirely of 4-byte (32-bit) floating-point words. Each item is defined by a parameter count followed by its given parameters.

Files are usually given the extensions &quot;.mus&quot; or &quot;.pag&quot;, though any extension is permitted. (Finale also uses the extension &quot;.mus&quot; though the file format is different).

SCORE creates PostScript graphics that can either be sent to a PostScript printer or saved as an Encapsulated PostScript file. For creating publications the EPS graphics can be imported into a desktop publishing program.

===Extensions and utilities===
There are a number of third party utilities which take advantage of the open file format to extend the programs&#x27; functionalities and share data with other notation programs. These are among the most notable:

===Use with modern systems===
The MS-DOS versions of SCORE can still be run on modern operating systems through the use of virtual machines, though accommodations need to be made for their age. The most common MS-DOS emulators for SCORE are DOSBox in Windows, or Boxer in macOS.

== References ==
== External links ==
* &quot;Leland Smith Interview&quot; at &quot;NAMM Oral History Library
* &quot;Stanford and the Computer Music Revolution&quot; at CCRMA
* &quot;Musical score page layout using SCORE&quot; at YouTube
* &quot;Demonstration of using the LABELS utility with SCORE&quot; at YouTube
* &quot;PUB (early document compiler) manual and information&quot;
* &quot;How I Designed a Free Music Font for 5 Million Musicians (MuseScore 3.6)&quot; at YouTube
* &quot;The Story of Charles Ives, Part 2: The Fourth Symphony and Its Life after Ives&quot; at YouTube</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2260571" start="0" end="5" title="SCORE (software)" label="SCORE"/>
<link wikidata="Q64601" start="11" end="22" title="scorewriter" label="scorewriter"/>
<link wikidata="Q83303" start="43" end="50" title="FORTRAN" label="FORTRAN"/>
<link wikidata="Q47604" start="55" end="61" title="MS-DOS" label="MS-DOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q41506" start="65" end="84" title="Stanford University" label="Stanford University"/>
<link wikidata="Q55905240" start="95" end="107" title="Leland Smith" label="Leland Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q460053" start="201" end="210" title="engraving (music)" label="engraving"/>
<link wikidata="Q55905240" start="608" end="620" title="Leland Smith" label="Leland Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q1568240" start="714" end="720" title="PDP-10" label="PDP-10"/>
<link wikidata="Q177234" start="721" end="739" title="mainframe computer" label="mainframe computer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2931153" start="748" end="791" title="Stanford Artificial Intelligence Laboratory" label="Stanford Artificial Intelligence Laboratory"/>
<link wikidata="Q170130" start="1074" end="1089" title="vector graphics" label="vector graphics"/>
<link wikidata="Q216640" start="1090" end="1099" title="computer terminal" label="terminals"/>
<link wikidata="Q87167" start="1311" end="1321" title="manuscript" label="manuscript"/>
<link wikidata="Q193255" start="1357" end="1374" title="plotter" label="graphics plotters"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147633" start="1445" end="1449" title="computer font" label="font"/>
<link wikidata="Q37555" start="1535" end="1542" title="polygon" label="polygon"/>
<link wikidata="Q305896" start="1776" end="1779" title="dpi" label="dpi"/>
<link wikidata="Q5018853" start="1785" end="1800" title="CalComp plotter" label="CalComp plotter"/>
<link wikidata="Q3027907" start="1952" end="1965" title="Richard Swift (composer)" label="Richard Swift"/>
<link wikidata="Q7062583" start="1990" end="1995" title="Notes (journal)" label="Notes"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2587" end="2613" title="#External_links" label="&amp;quot;External links&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q7915750" start="2682" end="2702" title="Varian Data Machines" label="Varian Data Machines"/>
<link wikidata="Q19597062" start="2710" end="2731" title="electrostatic plotter" label="electrostatic plotter"/>
<link wikidata="Q133036" start="2782" end="2803" title="lithography" label="lithographic printing"/>
<link wikidata="Q579314" start="2936" end="2941" title="IRCAM" label="IRCAM"/>
<link wikidata="Q178065" start="2949" end="2964" title="Pompidou Centre" label="Pompidou Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q90" start="2966" end="2971" title="Paris" label="Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q851989" start="3034" end="3040" title="porting" label="ported"/>
<link wikidata="Q7682524" start="3048" end="3058" title="Tandy 2000" label="Tandy 2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q47604" start="3067" end="3073" title="MS-DOS" label="MS-DOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q751046" start="3113" end="3131" title="IBM PC compatible" label="personal computers"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3620" end="3669" title="#Editing_music_graphically/numerically" label="&amp;quot;Editing music graphically/numerically&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3885" end="3924" title="#Entering_music_symbolically" label="&amp;quot;Entering music symbolically&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q7142844" start="3968" end="3984" title="Passport Designs" label="Passport Designs"/>
<link wikidata="Q536259" start="4053" end="4065" title="Schott Music" label="Schott Music"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4218" end="4241" title="PostScript fonts#Type 1" label="PostScript Type 1 fonts"/>
<link wikidata="Q3093066" start="4447" end="4464" title="G. Schirmer, Inc." label="G. Schirmer, Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q218170" start="4862" end="4872" title="PostScript" label="PostScript"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047541" start="4896" end="4899" title="Encapsulated PostScript" label="EPS"/>
<link wikidata="Q67972035" start="5540" end="5545" title="laser printing" label="laser"/>
<link wikidata="Q584101" start="5550" end="5569" title="dot matrix printers" label="dot matrix printers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1416101" start="6019" end="6025" title="Finale (scorewriter)" label="Finale"/>
<link wikidata="Q143217" start="6254" end="6263" title="tablature" label="tablature"/>
<link wikidata="Q80535" start="6273" end="6277" title="MIDI" label="MIDI"/>
<link wikidata="Q1406" start="6880" end="6897" title="Microsoft Windows" label="Microsoft Windows"/>
<link wikidata="Q1211457" start="6923" end="6927" title="beta (software)" label="beta"/>
<link wikidata="Q170542" start="7085" end="7092" title="WYSIWYG" label="WYSIWYG"/>
<link wikidata="Q751740" start="7321" end="7332" title="memory leak" label="memory leak"/>
<link wikidata="Q83303" start="7629" end="7636" title="FORTRAN" label="FORTRAN"/>
<link wikidata="Q248" start="7689" end="7694" title="Intel" label="Intel"/>
<link wikidata="Q165436" start="7695" end="7712" title="assembly language" label="assembly language"/>
<link wikidata="Q847296" start="7758" end="7768" title="Visual C++" label="Visual C++"/>
<link wikidata="Q690079" start="7780" end="7783" title="Digital Equipment Corporation" label="DEC"/>
<link wikidata="Q11463" start="7987" end="7997" title="Adobe Inc." label="Adobe Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q4036477" start="8623" end="8645" title="Computer Music Journal" label="Computer Music Journal"/>
<link wikidata="Q5358284" start="9309" end="9328" title="Electronic Musician" label="Electronic Musician"/>
<link wikidata="Q5047212" start="9336" end="9349" title="Carter Scholz" label="Carter Scholz"/>
<link wikidata="Q733507" start="9636" end="9652" title="floating-point unit" label="math coprocessor"/>
<link wikidata="Q117879" start="9743" end="9768" title="floating-point arithmetic" label="floating-point arithmetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q6398219" start="9793" end="9813" title="Keyboard (magazine)" label="&amp;quot;Keyboard&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q6193337" start="9821" end="9830" title="Jim Aikin" label="Jim Aikin"/>
<link wikidata="Q631830" start="10148" end="10159" title="PC Magazine" label="PC Magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q7062583" start="11034" end="11051" title="Notes (journal)" label="&amp;quot;Notes&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q6941411" start="11173" end="11190" title="MusicPrinter Plus" label="MusicPrinter Plus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1416101" start="11724" end="11730" title="Finale (scorewriter)" label="Finale"/>
<link wikidata="Q8815" start="11964" end="11969" title="ASCII" label="ASCII"/>
<link wikidata="Q80535" start="11989" end="11993" title="MIDI" label="MIDI"/>
<link wikidata="Q192193" start="12155" end="12161" title="staff (music)" label="staves"/>
<link wikidata="Q263478" start="12230" end="12240" title="musical note" label="note names"/>
<link wikidata="Q816335" start="12252" end="12263" title="accidental (music)" label="accidentals"/>
<link wikidata="Q192193" start="12268" end="12273" title="staff (music)" label="staff"/>
<link wikidata="Q879844" start="12303" end="12308" title="rest (music)" label="rests"/>
<link wikidata="Q181040" start="12325" end="12330" title="clef (music)" label="clefs"/>
<link wikidata="Q3240892" start="12332" end="12345" title="bar (music)" label="measure lines"/>
<link wikidata="Q845391" start="12347" end="12360" title="key signature" label="key signature"/>
<link wikidata="Q155234" start="12363" end="12377" title="time signature" label="time signature"/>
<link wikidata="Q170406" start="12395" end="12401" title="rhythm" label="rhythm"/>
<link wikidata="Q372923" start="12466" end="12479" title="articulation (music)" label="articulations"/>
<link wikidata="Q424494" start="12481" end="12488" title="accent (music)" label="accents"/>
<link wikidata="Q113558" start="12490" end="12498" title="dynamics (music)" label="dynamics"/>
<link wikidata="Q2264032" start="12545" end="12550" title="beam (music)" label="beams"/>
<link wikidata="Q863575" start="12585" end="12590" title="slur (music)" label="slurs"/>
<link wikidata="Q947731" start="12595" end="12599" title="tie (music)" label="ties"/>
<link wikidata="Q1339" start="12642" end="12646" title="Johann Sebastian Bach" label="Bach"/>
<link wikidata="Q4376907" start="12654" end="12679" title="Prelude and Fugue in C minor, BWV 847" label="Fugue in C minor, BWV 847"/>
<link wikidata="Q211971" start="12699" end="12720" title="Well-Tempered Clavier" label="Well-Tempered Clavier"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747853" start="14756" end="14767" title="place value" label="place value"/>
<link wikidata="Q833029" start="15704" end="15710" title="Bodoni" label="Bodoni"/>
<link wikidata="Q1366300" start="16084" end="16099" title="escape sequence" label="escape sequence"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16190" end="16208" title="PostScript fonts#PostScript Level 2" label="PostScript Level 2"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16478" end="16489" title="Times New Roman#Linotype design (Times Roman)" label="Times Roman"/>
<link wikidata="Q42979" start="16969" end="16974" title="BASIC" label="BASIC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1799665" start="17417" end="17420" title="modulo operation" label="MOD"/>
<link wikidata="Q1056408" start="18126" end="18137" title="open format" label="open format"/>
<link wikidata="Q1416101" start="19289" end="19295" title="Finale (software)" label="Finale"/>
<link wikidata="Q218170" start="19390" end="19400" title="PostScript" label="PostScript"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047541" start="19473" end="19496" title="Encapsulated PostScript" label="Encapsulated PostScript"/>
<link wikidata="Q188610" start="19569" end="19587" title="desktop publishing" label="desktop publishing"/>
<link wikidata="Q9135" start="19929" end="19945" title="operating system" label="operating system"/>
<link wikidata="Q192726" start="19966" end="19981" title="virtual machine" label="virtual machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q479783" start="20084" end="20090" title="DOSBox" label="DOSBox"/>
<link wikidata="Q14116" start="20115" end="20120" title="macOS" label="macOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q17091115" start="20207" end="20232" title="NAMM Oral History Program" label="NAMM Oral History Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q2931153" start="20293" end="20298" title="CCRMA" label="CCRMA"/>
<link wikidata="Q866" start="20354" end="20361" title="YouTube" label="YouTube"/>
<link wikidata="Q866" start="20432" end="20439" title="YouTube" label="YouTube"/>
<link wikidata="Q866" start="20597" end="20604" title="YouTube" label="YouTube"/>
<link wikidata="Q866" start="20701" end="20708" title="YouTube" label="YouTube"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="461177" wikidata="Q5375540" url="?curid=461177" title="Encore (software)">
<text>Encore is a music notation (scorewriter) program for Microsoft Windows and macOS.

MusicTime Deluxe is a &#x27;reduced functionality&#x27; version of Encore.

Encore is meant to play back music – either imported as MIDI, recorded from a MIDI device, or entered with mouse and keyboard.

== History ==

Encore was originally created for the Apple Macintosh by Don Williams for the US company Passport Designs Inc. of Half Moon Bay, CA., and first released in 1984.

Lyrrus Inc., d.b.a. GVOX purchased the intellectual property of Passport in 1998 and Encore 5 was released 10 years after Encore 4.

Encore is notable for being one of the first scorewriter programs to enable items in the musical score to be added and edited using the mouse.

Encore 5 included wizards to create scores for numerous types of ensembles from scratch, MusicXML support (although in now obsolete 1.3 version), use of VST, and J.S. Bach complete works for keyboard in Encore format.

On August 1 of 2013, Passport Music Software LLC, acquired the rights of Encore, Music Time Deluxe and MasterTracks Pro.

On June 16 of 2022, Sonic Scores, Inc, acquired the rights of Passport Music Software, Encore, Music Time Deluxe and MasterTracks Pro.

== Status ==
Direct competitors in the music notation niche have taken market lead over the last decade, surpassing Encore in features and improved standards. While Encore runs on the latest versions of Windows, it is not compatible with macOS 10.15 (Catalina), and it lacks support in some areas, such as for 4k displays, recent MIDI to USB applications, and later versions of VST.

Passport Music Software, LLC claimed to be reworking Encore, departing from the original code that was created over 20 years ago. With no version updates since at least 2015 (version 5.0.4 for Windows and 5.0.7 for macOS), Passport Music Software closed doors in early 2022.

Following the subsequent acquisition of the product line by Sonic Scores, version 6 of Encore is being developed by its original author, Don Williams, for both Windows and macOS.

==See also==
* List of music software
* Overture (software), a notation program being developed by the same author, Don Williams, and sharing the original Encore interface

==References==
==External links==
* Passport Music Software Website</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5375540" start="0" end="6" title="Encore (software)" label="Encore"/>
<link wikidata="Q64601" start="28" end="39" title="scorewriter" label="scorewriter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1406" start="53" end="70" title="Microsoft Windows" label="Microsoft Windows"/>
<link wikidata="Q14116" start="75" end="80" title="macOS" label="macOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q80535" start="215" end="219" title="MIDI" label="MIDI"/>
<link wikidata="Q7142844" start="391" end="434" title="Passport Designs Inc." label="Passport Designs Inc. of Half Moon Bay, CA."/>
<link wikidata="Q653301" start="831" end="839" title="MusicXML" label="MusicXML"/>
<link wikidata="Q180703" start="895" end="898" title="Virtual Studio Technology" label="VST"/>
<link wikidata="Q1339" start="904" end="913" title="J.S. Bach" label="J.S. Bach"/>
<link wikidata="Q6785105" start="1064" end="1080" title="MasterTracks Pro" label="MasterTracks Pro"/>
<link wikidata="Q6785105" start="1200" end="1216" title="MasterTracks Pro" label="MasterTracks Pro"/>
<link wikidata="Q21041413" start="2074" end="2096" title="List of music software" label="List of music software"/>
<link wikidata="Q1016954" start="2099" end="2118" title="Overture (software)" label="Overture (software)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="461178" wikidata="Q1238530" url="?curid=461178" title="Nysa (mythology)">
<text>In Greek mythology, the mountainous district of Nysa (), variously associated with Ethiopia, Libya, Boeotia, Thrace, India, or Arabia by Greek mythographers, was the traditional place where the rain nymphs, the Hyades, raised the infant god Dionysus, the &quot;God of Nysa.&quot;

==Mythology==
Though the worship of Dionysus is sometimes presumed to have arrived in Mycenaean Greece from Asia Minor (where the Hittites called themselves &quot;Nesi&quot;), the various locations assigned to Nysa may simply be conventions to show that a romantically remote and mythical land was envisaged. The name &quot;Nysa&quot; may even be an invention to explain the god&#x27;s name. Even Homer mentions the mountain Nyseion as the place where Dionysus grew up under the protection of the nymphs. Hesychius of Alexandria (5th century Byzantine lexicon) gives a list of the following locations proposed by ancient authors as the site of Mount Nysa: Arabia, Ethiopia, Egypt, Babylon, Erythraian Sea (the Red Sea), Thrace, Thessaly, Cilicia, India, Libya, Lydia, Macedonia, Naxos, around Pangaios (mythical island south of Arabia), Syria. On his return from Nysa to join his fellow Olympians, Dionysus brought the entheogen wine.

According to Sir William Jones, &quot;Meros is said by the Greeks to have been a mountain in India, on which their Dionysos was born, and that Meru, though it generally means the north pole in Indian geography, is also a mountain near the city of Naishada or Nysa, called by the Greek geographers Dionysopolis, and universally celebrated in the Sanskrit poems.&quot;

== People of Nysa ==

* When Alexander the Great arrived at the city of Nysa, representatives of the city met and told him not to capture the city and the land because the god Dionysus had founded the city, and he named it Nysa, after the nymph.
* During the Hellenistic period, &quot;Nysa&quot; was personified as Dionysus&#x27; nursemaid, and she was said to be buried at the town of Scythopolis, which claimed Dionysus as its founder.
* Dionysus has been coined the &quot;masked god,&quot; &quot;wine god,&quot; and &quot;god of theater&quot; due to his androgynous appearance and ability to hide his true self under facades and enthusiasm. Many Greek stories believe Dionysus to be the son of Zeus, separated and placed in the care of Nysa nymphs in an attempt to protect him from Hera&#x27;s anger towards Zeus. The nymphs raised him on Nysa until he left for Greece to collect a cult of misfits and those looking for an escape from societal expectations.
* Lycurgus wished to persecute Dionysus for spreading his cult on Mount Nysa, forcing Dionysus and his followers to jump into the sea and shelter with Thetis. Lycurgus&#x27;s actions inspired Dionysus and the Nysa nymphs to curse him to madness, which resulted in him murdering his son.

==Notes==
==References==
== External links ==
* Dictionary of Ancient Deities</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q34726" start="3" end="18" title="Greek mythology" label="Greek mythology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1238530" start="48" end="52" title="Nysa (mythology)" label="Nysa"/>
<link wikidata="Q115" start="83" end="91" title="Ethiopia" label="Ethiopia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1016" start="93" end="98" title="Libya" label="Libya"/>
<link wikidata="Q8257871" start="100" end="107" title="Boeotia" label="Boeotia"/>
<link wikidata="Q41741" start="109" end="115" title="Thrace" label="Thrace"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="117" end="122" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q31945" start="127" end="133" title="Arabia" label="Arabia"/>
<link wikidata="Q373916" start="199" end="205" title="nymphs" label="nymphs"/>
<link wikidata="Q646049" start="211" end="217" title="Hyades (mythology)" label="Hyades"/>
<link wikidata="Q41680" start="241" end="249" title="Dionysus" label="Dionysus"/>
<link wikidata="Q181264" start="367" end="383" title="Mycenaean Greece" label="Mycenaean Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q51614" start="389" end="399" title="Anatolia" label="Asia Minor"/>
<link wikidata="Q5406" start="411" end="419" title="Hittites" label="Hittites"/>
<link wikidata="Q443510" start="786" end="809" title="Hesychius of Alexandria" label="Hesychius of Alexandria"/>
<link wikidata="Q12544" start="823" end="832" title="Byzantine" label="Byzantine"/>
<link wikidata="Q31945" start="937" end="943" title="Arabia" label="Arabia"/>
<link wikidata="Q115" start="945" end="953" title="Ethiopia" label="Ethiopia"/>
<link wikidata="Q79" start="955" end="960" title="Egypt" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q5684" start="962" end="969" title="Babylon" label="Babylon"/>
<link wikidata="Q23406" start="991" end="998" title="Red Sea" label="Red Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q41741" start="1001" end="1007" title="Thrace" label="Thrace"/>
<link wikidata="Q166919" start="1009" end="1017" title="Thessaly" label="Thessaly"/>
<link wikidata="Q620864" start="1019" end="1026" title="Cilicia" label="Cilicia"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="1028" end="1033" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q1016" start="1035" end="1040" title="Libya" label="Libya"/>
<link wikidata="Q620765" start="1042" end="1047" title="Lydia" label="Lydia"/>
<link wikidata="Q83958" start="1049" end="1056" title="Macedon" label="Macedon"/>
<link wikidata="Q188527" start="1060" end="1065" title="Naxos Island" label="Naxos"/>
<link wikidata="Q858" start="1118" end="1123" title="Syria" label="Syria"/>
<link wikidata="Q310491" start="1200" end="1209" title="entheogen" label="entheogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q282" start="1210" end="1214" title="wine" label="wine"/>
<link wikidata="Q273969" start="1230" end="1247" title="William Jones (philologist)" label="Sir William Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q652550" start="1360" end="1364" title="Mount Meru" label="Meru"/>
<link wikidata="Q8409" start="1614" end="1633" title="Alexander the Great" label="Alexander the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q65118637" start="1657" end="1661" title="Nagara (ancient city)" label="Nysa"/>
<link wikidata="Q428995" start="1844" end="1855" title="Hellenistic" label="Hellenistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q21013259" start="1971" end="1982" title="Scythopolis" label="Scythopolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q41680" start="2025" end="2033" title="Dionysus" label="Dionysus"/>
<link wikidata="Q34201" start="2282" end="2286" title="Zeus" label="Zeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q38012" start="2370" end="2374" title="Hera" label="Hera"/>
<link wikidata="Q270117" start="2548" end="2556" title="Lycurgus of Thrace" label="Lycurgus"/>
<link wikidata="Q184437" start="2697" end="2703" title="Thetis" label="Thetis"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="461180" wikidata="Q19896675" url="?curid=461180" title="Pieria (regional unit)">
<text>Pieria () is one of the regional units of Greece located in the southern part of the Region of Central Macedonia, within the historical province of Macedonia. Its capital is the town of Katerini. The name Pieria originates from the ancient Pieres tribe. In Pieria, there are many sites of archeological interest, such as Dion, Pydna, Leivithra and Platamonas. Pieria contains Mount Pierus, from which Hermes takes flight in order to visit Calypso, and is the home of Orpheus, the Muses, and contains the Pierian Spring. Mount Olympus, the highest mountain in Greece and throne of the ancient Greek gods, is located in the southern part of Pieria. Other ancient cities included Leibethra and Pimpleia. 

==Geography==
The Pieria regional unit is bordered by Imathia to the north, Kozani to the west, and to the south and west by the region of Thessaly&#x27;s Regional Unit of Larissa. The Pierian Mountains lie to the west; the Thermaic Gulf lies to the east. It also has a valley by the GR-13. Most of the population live within the Olympian Riviera. The lowest point is the Thermaic Gulf and the highest point is Mount Olympus.

It combines extensive plains, high mountains and sandy beaches. The region&#x27;s beauty gives it a great potential for further tourist development.

The main beaches are Paralia, Olympiaki Akti, Korinos, Neoi Poroi, Methoni, Leptokarya, Platamonas, Skotina, Kalyvia Varikou, Limenas Litochorou (also known as Gritsa). Many of the Pieria&#x27;s beaches have been awarded the Blue Flag certification by the Foundation for Environmental Education (FEE). 

==Climate==
Its climate is mainly of Mediterranean type with hot summers and cool winters. Severe winter weather is common in the central and western parts of Pieria, especially in the Pierian Mountains and on Mount Olympus.

On June 8, 2007, a low pressure weather system from Southern and Central Europe resulted in heavy rainfall that ravaged the prefecture and caused great damage in fruit and vegetable production. The worst hit area was Korinos.

==Administration==
The Regional Unit of Pieria is divided into 3 municipalities. These are (number as in the map in the infobox): 
*Pydna-Kolindros (3)
*Katerini (1)
*Dion-Olympos (2)

===Prefecture===
As a part of the 2011 Kallikratis government reform, the Regional Unit of Pieria was created out of the former prefecture Pieria (). The prefecture had the same territory as the present regional unit. At the same time, the municipalities were reorganized, according to the table below. 


==History==

The region, known as Pieria or Pieris () in Antiquity, took its name from the Pieres (), a Thracian tribe that was expelled by the Macedonians in the 8th century BC from their original seats, and driven to the North beyond the Strymon river and Mount Pangaeus, where they formed a new settlement in Edonis. The name Pieria has been connected to Homeric &#x27; &quot;fat&quot;, &#x27; &quot;fertile land&quot; in a metaphorical sense.

At some time before the archaic period Pieria was incorporated in the Kingdom of Macedon (808 BC, see below) when it became the second province of the ancient kingdom, following its fate through the rule of the Antipatrid dynasty (302 BC - 277 BC) and the Antigonid dynasty (306 BC - 168 BC). It became part of the Roman Republic after the Fourth Macedonian War, and remained part of the Roman Empire and its successor, the Byzantine Empire.

It was later invaded and became a part of the Ottoman Empire. During the Greek War of Independence in 1821, Pieria took up arms along with the rest of Greece, but their struggle failed and Pieria did not join the rest of Greece until the Balkan Wars in 1913. Until 1947, Pieria was part of the Thessaloniki Prefecture (at that time the largest Greek prefecture), as a province. Pieria saw an economic boom in agriculture and business. During the Greco-Turkish War, it saw an influx of refugees from Asia Minor, now a part of Turkey, and several places were named after their former homelands including Nea Trapezounta from Trebizond (now Trabzon) and Nea Efesos from Ephesus (now Efes). The village of Elafos in the municipal unit Elafina, formerly a community in the Imathia prefecture, was attached to Pieria in 1974.

==Transport==
*A1 motorway (E75)
*GR-1
*GR-13

==Notable people==
* George Zorbas (1865–1941), the man upon whom Nikos Kazantzakis based Alexis Zorbas the protagonist of his 1946 novel Zorba the Greek 
* Katerina Nikolaidou (1992), rower athlete, 4th place 2016 Olympic Games, silver medal in the lightweight single sculls at the 2013 and 2014 World Rowing Championships 
* Christina Moschi (2002), 10m air pistol shooter, Member of the Hellenic National Shooting Team 
* Maria Tsionoglou (1991), 10m air pistol shooter, Member of the Hellenic National Shooting Team 
* Eleni Chatziliadou (1993), karate athlete, Kumite +68 kg 2018 World Karate Championship 
* Vladimiros Symeonidis (1972), conductor, university professor of music at AUTH 
* Christos Tsolakis (1935–2012), philologist, author, professor of AUTH 
* Matthew Josafat (1937–2022), psychiatrist, psychoanalyst 
* Anastasios Gkogkos (1925–1991), hagiographer, painter 
* Athanasios Stathakopoulos (1942), painter 
* Theodoros Terzopoulos (1947), theater director 
* Basil Athanasiadis (1970), musician, composer 
* Giorgos Fourniadis (1937), actor and director 
* Konstantinos Papachronis (1977–2008), actor 
* Patriarch Callinicus of Alexandria (1800–1889) 
* Christos Kakkalos (1882–1976), climber, mountain guide 
* Kostas Zolotas (1934–2021), climber, mountain guide 
* Yannis K. Semertzidis (1961), physicist
* Aimilios Xanthopoulos (1903–1943), politician, mayor of Katerini

==Sporting teams== 
*Pierikos - Greek Third Division
*Pierian Sodality

==See also==
*Olympus Festival
*List of settlements in the Regional Unit of Pieria

==References==
==External links==
* 
* old web address 
*Regional Unit of Pieria Archived from the original on 2024-02-22 
*Hellenic Ministry of Culture: Prefecture of Pieria Archived from the original on 2004-05-01</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q19896675" start="0" end="6" title="Pieria (regional unit)" label="Pieria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1234255" start="24" end="48" title="regional units of Greece" label="regional units of Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q17152" start="85" end="112" title="Central Macedonia" label="Region of Central Macedonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q81734" start="148" end="157" title="Macedonia (Greece)" label="Macedonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3595078" start="186" end="194" title="Katerini" label="Katerini"/>
<link wikidata="Q822257" start="240" end="246" title="Pieres" label="Pieres"/>
<link wikidata="Q38251447" start="321" end="325" title="Archaeological Park of Dion" label="Dion"/>
<link wikidata="Q41581937" start="327" end="332" title="Pydna (Ancient Site)" label="Pydna"/>
<link wikidata="Q1753318" start="334" end="343" title="Leivithra" label="Leivithra"/>
<link wikidata="Q603931" start="348" end="358" title="Platamon Castle" label="Platamonas"/>
<link wikidata="Q21567935" start="382" end="388" title="Pierus of Emathia" label="Pierus"/>
<link wikidata="Q41484" start="401" end="407" title="Hermes" label="Hermes"/>
<link wikidata="Q48961" start="439" end="446" title="Calypso (mythology)" label="Calypso"/>
<link wikidata="Q174353" start="467" end="474" title="Orpheus" label="Orpheus"/>
<link wikidata="Q66016" start="480" end="485" title="Muses" label="Muses"/>
<link wikidata="Q4362487" start="504" end="518" title="Pierian Spring" label="Pierian Spring"/>
<link wikidata="Q80344" start="520" end="533" title="Mount Olympus" label="Mount Olympus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1753318" start="677" end="686" title="Leibethra" label="Leibethra"/>
<link wikidata="Q7194716" start="691" end="699" title="Pimpleia" label="Pimpleia"/>
<link wikidata="Q207840" start="757" end="764" title="Imathia" label="Imathia"/>
<link wikidata="Q211732" start="779" end="785" title="Kozani (regional unit)" label="Kozani"/>
<link wikidata="Q207299" start="832" end="838" title="Administrative regions of Greece" label="region"/>
<link wikidata="Q166919" start="842" end="857" title="Thessaly" label="Thessaly&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q578879" start="875" end="882" title="Larissa (regional unit)" label="Larissa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1991030" start="888" end="905" title="Pierian Mountains" label="Pierian Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q913418" start="927" end="940" title="Thermaic Gulf" label="Thermaic Gulf"/>
<link wikidata="Q80344" start="1114" end="1127" title="Mount Olympus (Mountain)" label="Mount Olympus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1229905" start="1301" end="1308" title="Paralia Katerinis" label="Paralia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3656317" start="1310" end="1324" title="Olympiaki Akti" label="Olympiaki Akti"/>
<link wikidata="Q1784437" start="1326" end="1333" title="Korinos" label="Korinos"/>
<link wikidata="Q1001590" start="1335" end="1345" title="Neoi Poroi" label="Neoi Poroi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754455" start="1347" end="1354" title="Methoni, Pieria" label="Methoni"/>
<link wikidata="Q3491767" start="1356" end="1366" title="Leptokarya" label="Leptokarya"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051951" start="1368" end="1378" title="Platamon" label="Platamonas"/>
<link wikidata="Q3562094" start="1380" end="1387" title="Skotina" label="Skotina"/>
<link wikidata="Q16893056" start="1389" end="1404" title="Kalyvia Varikou" label="Kalyvia Varikou"/>
<link wikidata="Q16894184" start="1406" end="1424" title="Limenas Litochorou" label="Limenas Litochorou"/>
<link wikidata="Q458651" start="1505" end="1514" title="Blue Flag beach" label="Blue Flag"/>
<link wikidata="Q1891354" start="1536" end="1574" title="Foundation for Environmental Education" label="Foundation for Environmental Education"/>
<link wikidata="Q1784437" start="2027" end="2034" title="Korinos" label="Korinos"/>
<link wikidata="Q2268710" start="2169" end="2184" title="Pydna-Kolindros" label="Pydna-Kolindros"/>
<link wikidata="Q3595078" start="2190" end="2198" title="Katerini" label="Katerini"/>
<link wikidata="Q2484671" start="2204" end="2216" title="Dion-Olympos" label="Dion-Olympos"/>
<link wikidata="Q1722495" start="2256" end="2290" title="Kallikratis Plan" label="2011 Kallikratis government reform"/>
<link wikidata="Q83958" start="2672" end="2679" title="Macedon" label="Macedon"/>
<link wikidata="Q204127" start="2768" end="2775" title="Struma River" label="Strymon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1448901" start="2786" end="2800" title="Pangaion hills" label="Mount Pangaeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3719711" start="2840" end="2846" title="Edonis (region)" label="Edonis"/>
<link wikidata="Q271834" start="3000" end="3014" title="Archaic Greece" label="archaic period"/>
<link wikidata="Q83958" start="3046" end="3064" title="Kingdom of Macedon" label="Kingdom of Macedon"/>
<link wikidata="Q581531" start="3187" end="3205" title="Antipatrid dynasty" label="Antipatrid dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q237325" start="3232" end="3249" title="Antigonid dynasty" label="Antigonid dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q17167" start="3291" end="3305" title="Roman Republic" label="Roman Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q552373" start="3316" end="3337" title="Fourth Macedonian War" label="Fourth Macedonian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277" start="3364" end="3376" title="Roman Empire" label="Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q12544" start="3400" end="3416" title="Byzantine Empire" label="Byzantine Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="3465" end="3479" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q182062" start="3492" end="3517" title="Greek War of Independence" label="Greek War of Independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q41" start="3640" end="3646" title="Greece" label="Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q165725" start="3657" end="3668" title="Balkan Wars" label="Balkan Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q210176" start="3713" end="3736" title="Thessaloniki Prefecture" label="Thessaloniki Prefecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860467" start="3787" end="3795" title="Provinces of Greece" label="province"/>
<link wikidata="Q87138" start="3865" end="3882" title="Greco-Turkish War (1919–1922)" label="Greco-Turkish War"/>
<link wikidata="Q51614" start="3918" end="3928" title="Asia Minor" label="Asia Minor"/>
<link wikidata="Q43" start="3944" end="3950" title="Turkey" label="Turkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q3792532" start="4021" end="4036" title="Nea Trapezounta, Pieria" label="Nea Trapezounta"/>
<link wikidata="Q45301" start="4057" end="4064" title="Trabzon" label="Trabzon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3563119" start="4070" end="4080" title="Nea Efesos" label="Nea Efesos"/>
<link wikidata="Q47611" start="4086" end="4093" title="Ephesus" label="Ephesus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3541077" start="4121" end="4127" title="Elafos, Pieria" label="Elafos"/>
<link wikidata="Q5073249" start="4150" end="4157" title="Elafina" label="Elafina"/>
<link wikidata="Q389356" start="4255" end="4266" title="A1 motorway (Greece)" label="A1 motorway"/>
<link wikidata="Q638912" start="4268" end="4271" title="European route E75" label="E75"/>
<link wikidata="Q3566460" start="4274" end="4278" title="Greek National Road 1" label="GR-1"/>
<link wikidata="Q1709046" start="4280" end="4285" title="Greek National Road 13" label="GR-13"/>
<link wikidata="Q7429586" start="4308" end="4321" title="George Zorbas" label="George Zorbas"/>
<link wikidata="Q214622" start="4353" end="4370" title="Nikos Kazantzakis" label="Nikos Kazantzakis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059553" start="4377" end="4390" title="Alexis Zorbas" label="Alexis Zorbas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059553" start="4425" end="4440" title="Zorba the Greek (novel)" label="Zorba the Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q11696413" start="4444" end="4463" title="Aikaterini Nikolaidou" label="Katerina Nikolaidou"/>
<link wikidata="Q159354" start="4472" end="4477" title="Rowing (sport)" label="rower"/>
<link wikidata="Q24475024" start="4810" end="4828" title="Eleni Chatziliadou" label="Eleni Chatziliadou"/>
<link wikidata="Q11419" start="4837" end="4843" title="karate" label="karate"/>
<link wikidata="Q667568" start="4975" end="4979" title="Aristotle University of Thessaloniki" label="AUTH"/>
<link wikidata="Q667568" start="5048" end="5052" title="Aristotle University of Thessaloniki" label="AUTH"/>
<link wikidata="Q113462009" start="5218" end="5239" title="Theodoros Terzopoulos" label="Theodoros Terzopoulos"/>
<link wikidata="Q4867102" start="5268" end="5286" title="Basil Athanasiadis" label="Basil Athanasiadis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2668276" start="5413" end="5447" title="Patriarch Callinicus of Alexandria" label="Patriarch Callinicus of Alexandria"/>
<link wikidata="Q12886155" start="5463" end="5480" title="Christos Kakkalos" label="Christos Kakkalos"/>
<link wikidata="Q106545926" start="5521" end="5535" title="Kostas Zolotas" label="Kostas Zolotas"/>
<link wikidata="Q59938255" start="5576" end="5597" title="Yannis K. Semertzidis" label="Yannis K. Semertzidis"/>
<link wikidata="" start="5618" end="5639" title=":el:Αιμίλιος Ξανθόπουλος" label="Aimilios Xanthopoulos"/>
<link wikidata="Q2092873" start="5705" end="5713" title="Pierikos" label="Pierikos"/>
<link wikidata="Q5676535" start="5738" end="5754" title="Pierian Sodality" label="Pierian Sodality"/>
<link wikidata="Q4333824" start="5770" end="5786" title="Olympus Festival" label="Olympus Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q6638300" start="5788" end="5838" title="List of settlements in the Pieria regional unit" label="List of settlements in the Regional Unit of Pieria"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="461187" wikidata="Q19896603" url="?curid=461187" title="Rhodope (regional unit)">
<text>Rhodope (, &quot;Rodópi&quot; ) is one of the regional units of Greece. It is part of the region of East Macedonia and Thrace. Its name is derived from the Rhodope Mountains, which cover the northern part of its territory. Together with the regional units Evros and Xanthi, it forms the geographical region of Western Thrace. The capital of the prefecture is the city of Komotini. The second largest town is Sapes. Most of the Muslims of Thrace, the only officially recognized minority in Greece, are settled in this area, where they form around half of the regional unit&#x27;s population.

==Geography==
Rhodope borders on the regional unit Xanthi to the west and Evros to the east, and on Bulgaria&#x27;s Kardzhali Province to the north. The Aegean Sea lies to the south. The eastern Rhodope Mountains cover the northern part of the regional unit. Apart from the mountainous areas, the territory consists mainly of farmland, forests and grasslands.

The southern and the central part have a mainly Mediterranean climate, and the northern part a mainly continental climate with cold winters.

==Administration==
The regional unit Rhodope is subdivided into 4 municipalities. These are (number as in the map in the infobox):
*Arriana (2)
*Iasmos (3)
*Komotini (1)
*Maroneia-Sapes (4)

In 2015 this regional unit has three seats in the Hellenic Parliament.

===Prefecture===
Rhodope was established as a prefecture in 1930 (), when the former Thrace Prefecture was divided into the Rhodope and Evros prefectures. In 1944 Xanthi Prefecture was created from the western part of Rhodope Prefecture. Since the 1990s Rhodope cooperated with Evros in the Rhodope-Evros Super-prefecture.

As a part of the 2011 Kallikratis government reform, the prefecture was transformed into a regional unit within the East Macedonia and Thrace region, with no change in its boundaries. At the same time, the municipalities were reorganised, according to the table below.

The Rhodope regional unit had 104,380 in accordance with the 2021 census results, a decline from 112,039 inhabitants in the 2011 census results. The capital of the Regional unit is Komotini which has an estimated urban population of 55,000. It is the largest settlement in the regional unit. It also serves as the capital of the Eastern Macedonia and Thrace administrative region.

===Provinces===
*Province of Komotini - Komotini
*Province of Sapes - Sapes
&quot;Note:&quot; Provinces no longer hold any legal status in Greece.

===Sites of interest===

* The ancient city Anastasioupolis-Peritheorion with the medieval towers south-east of Amaxades
* The Imaret of Komotini, one of the oldest Ottoman monuments in Thrace from 1360 - 1380
* The Papikio mountain with the ruins of early Christian monasteries
* The trip route from Arriana to the east, as far as the borders with Evros, within the forest
* The suburban forest of Nymphaea, north of Komotini
* The ancient Maronia
* The &quot;Thracian Meteora&quot; - scenic landscape with wild nature and wild horses north of Iasmos
* The circumcenter temple of 11th - 13th century of Maximianoupolis - Mosynoupolis few km west of Komotini
* Archaeological Museum of Komotini
* Folklore Museum of Komotini
* Byzantine Museum of Komotini
* Carathéodory Museum, dedicated to Constantin Carathéodory, in Komotini
* Thracian, Ethnological, Historical and Cultural museum, in Komotini

===Beaches and resorts===

# Petrota beach
# Synaxi beach
# Marmaritsa
# Agios Charalampos&#x27; beach
# Kangeles, near Maronia
# Platanitis
# Alkyona
# Proskynites&#x27; beach or Kryoneri
# Profitis Ilias
# Imeros&#x27; beach
# Karousmilou
# Molyvoti
# Chrysophora islet
# Glyfada&#x27;s beach
# Paralia Mesis (with Blue flag 2014)
# Arogi&#x27;s beaches (1 of them with Blue flag 2014) 
# Fanari beaches (2 of them with Blue flag 2014)

==Gallery==
==Transport==
*GR-2/E90, Egnatia Highway, old and new, W, Cen., E, SE
*GR-53

==See also==
*List of settlements in the Rhodope regional unit

==References==
==External links==
*Rhodope Internet Portal</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q19896603" start="0" end="7" title="Rhodope (regional unit)" label="Rhodope"/>
<link wikidata="Q1234255" start="46" end="70" title="regional units of Greece" label="regional units of Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q207299" start="90" end="96" title="modern regions of Greece" label="region"/>
<link wikidata="Q171314" start="100" end="125" title="East Macedonia and Thrace" label="East Macedonia and Thrace"/>
<link wikidata="Q6489" start="156" end="173" title="Rhodope Mountains" label="Rhodope Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q19896760" start="256" end="261" title="Evros (regional unit)" label="Evros"/>
<link wikidata="Q19896642" start="266" end="272" title="Xanthi (regional unit)" label="Xanthi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192701" start="310" end="324" title="Western Thrace" label="Western Thrace"/>
<link wikidata="Q208403" start="371" end="379" title="Komotini" label="Komotini"/>
<link wikidata="Q2643560" start="408" end="413" title="Sapes" label="Sapes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2151103" start="427" end="444" title="Muslim minority of Greece" label="Muslims of Thrace"/>
<link wikidata="Q19896642" start="643" end="649" title="Xanthi (regional unit)" label="Xanthi"/>
<link wikidata="Q19896760" start="666" end="671" title="Evros (regional unit)" label="Evros"/>
<link wikidata="Q219" start="692" end="700" title="Bulgaria" label="Bulgaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1104675" start="708" end="726" title="Kardzhali Province" label="Kardzhali Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q34575" start="745" end="755" title="Aegean Sea" label="Aegean Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q6489" start="787" end="804" title="Rhodope Mountains" label="Rhodope Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q2418592" start="1227" end="1234" title="Arriana" label="Arriana"/>
<link wikidata="Q2429463" start="1240" end="1246" title="Iasmos" label="Iasmos"/>
<link wikidata="Q208403" start="1252" end="1260" title="Komotini" label="Komotini"/>
<link wikidata="Q2635137" start="1266" end="1280" title="Maroneia-Sapes" label="Maroneia-Sapes"/>
<link wikidata="Q477089" start="1336" end="1355" title="Hellenic Parliament" label="Hellenic Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q202595" start="1404" end="1414" title="prefectures of Greece" label="prefecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192701" start="1443" end="1460" title="Thrace Prefecture" label="Thrace Prefecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q19896642" start="1521" end="1538" title="Xanthi Prefecture" label="Xanthi Prefecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q7321201" start="1649" end="1679" title="Rhodope-Evros Super-prefecture" label="Rhodope-Evros Super-prefecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q208403" start="2133" end="2141" title="Komotini" label="Komotini"/>
<link wikidata="Q171314" start="2281" end="2309" title="Eastern Macedonia and Thrace" label="Eastern Macedonia and Thrace"/>
<link wikidata="Q208403" start="2363" end="2371" title="Komotini" label="Komotini"/>
<link wikidata="Q2643560" start="2396" end="2401" title="Sapes" label="Sapes"/>
<link wikidata="Q41" start="2473" end="2479" title="Greece" label="Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q62996869" start="2526" end="2554" title="Anastasioupolis-Peritheorion" label="Anastasioupolis-Peritheorion"/>
<link wikidata="Q2636428" start="2594" end="2602" title="Amaxades" label="Amaxades"/>
<link wikidata="Q15728566" start="2609" end="2627" title="Imaret of Komotini" label="Imaret of Komotini"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="2647" end="2654" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman"/>
<link wikidata="Q41741" start="2668" end="2674" title="Thrace" label="Thrace"/>
<link wikidata="Q12883200" start="2698" end="2705" title="Papikio" label="Papikio"/>
<link wikidata="Q2418592" start="2783" end="2790" title="Arriana" label="Arriana"/>
<link wikidata="Q19896760" start="2831" end="2836" title="Evros (regional unit)" label="Evros"/>
<link wikidata="Q208403" start="2900" end="2908" title="Komotini" label="Komotini"/>
<link wikidata="Q690341" start="2923" end="2930" title="Maronia" label="Maronia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2429463" start="3027" end="3033" title="Iasmos" label="Iasmos"/>
<link wikidata="Q1856344" start="3086" end="3116" title="Mosynopolis" label="Maximianoupolis - Mosynoupolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q208403" start="3132" end="3140" title="Komotini" label="Komotini"/>
<link wikidata="Q4785408" start="3143" end="3176" title="Archaeological Museum of Komotini" label="Archaeological Museum of Komotini"/>
<link wikidata="Q8564222" start="3179" end="3206" title="Folklore Museum of Komotini" label="Folklore Museum of Komotini"/>
<link wikidata="Q208403" start="3209" end="3237" title="Byzantine Museum of Komotini" label="Byzantine Museum of Komotini"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3240" end="3259" title="Carathéodory Museum" label="Carathéodory Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q65332" start="3274" end="3297" title="Constantin Carathéodory" label="Constantin Carathéodory"/>
<link wikidata="Q208403" start="3302" end="3310" title="Komotini" label="Komotini"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3313" end="3367" title="Thracian, Ethnological, Historical and Cultural museum" label="Thracian, Ethnological, Historical and Cultural museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q208403" start="3372" end="3380" title="Komotini" label="Komotini"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3411" end="3418" title="Petrota, Rodopi" label="Petrota"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3427" end="3433" title="Synaxi" label="Synaxi"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3442" end="3452" title="Marmaritsa" label="Marmaritsa"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3455" end="3472" title="Agios Charalampos, Rodopi" label="Agios Charalampos"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3487" end="3495" title="Kangeles" label="Kangeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q690341" start="3502" end="3509" title="Maronia" label="Maronia"/>
<link wikidata="Q21571361" start="3512" end="3522" title="Platanitis" label="Platanitis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3525" end="3532" title="Alkyona" label="Alkyona"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3535" end="3546" title="Proskynites" label="Proskynites"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3562" end="3570" title="Kryoneri, Rodopi" label="Kryoneri"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3573" end="3587" title="Profitis Ilias, Rodopi" label="Profitis Ilias"/>
<link wikidata="Q15220603" start="3590" end="3596" title="Imeros Rodopis" label="Imeros"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3611" end="3622" title="Karousmilou" label="Karousmilou"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3625" end="3633" title="Molyvoti" label="Molyvoti"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3636" end="3653" title="Chrysophora islet" label="Chrysophora islet"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3656" end="3663" title="Glyfada, Rodopi" label="Glyfada"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3679" end="3692" title="Paralia Mesis" label="Paralia Mesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q458651" start="3699" end="3713" title="Blue Flag beach" label="Blue flag 2014"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3717" end="3722" title="Arogi" label="Arogi"/>
<link wikidata="Q458651" start="3754" end="3768" title="Blue Flag beach" label="Blue flag 2014"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3773" end="3779" title="Fanari, Rodopi" label="Fanari"/>
<link wikidata="Q458651" start="3804" end="3818" title="Blue Flag beach" label="Blue flag 2014"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371290" start="3848" end="3852" title="Greek National Road 2" label="GR-2"/>
<link wikidata="Q370080" start="3853" end="3856" title="European route E90" label="E90"/>
<link wikidata="Q273783" start="3858" end="3873" title="Via Egnatia" label="Egnatia Highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q270547" start="3904" end="3909" title="Greek National Road 53" label="GR-53"/>
<link wikidata="Q6638304" start="3925" end="3973" title="List of settlements in the Rhodope regional unit" label="List of settlements in the Rhodope regional unit"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="461189" wikidata="Q6645282" url="?curid=461189" title="Sunday morning talk show">
<text>A Sunday morning talk show is a television program with a news/talk/public affairs–hybrid format that is broadcast on Sunday mornings. This type of program originated in the United States, and has since been used in other countries.

==Sunday morning talk shows by country==

===United States===

====English====
(*) - time listed is the time scheduled by the network, local affiliates may delay the show to later slots to accommodate local news or other programming

(**) - considered the traditional &quot;big five&quot; Sunday shows

====Spanish====


Other English language examples include NBC&#x27;s syndicated &quot;The Chris Matthews Show&quot;, Bloomberg Television&#x27;s &quot;Political Capital with Al Hunt&quot;, the PBS roundtables (often broadcast other days than Sunday) &quot;This is America with Dennis Wholey&quot;, &quot;Washington Week&quot;, and &quot;Inside Washington&quot;, and the originally PBS, later commercially syndicated &quot;The McLaughlin Group&quot;. FishbowlDC includes all the shows listed in Daniel W. Reilly&#x27;s definition for &quot;Politico&quot;&#x27;s &quot;Sunday Morning Tip Sheet,&quot; plus CN8&#x27;s &quot;Roll Call TV with Robert Traynham&quot; and other programs, including CNN&#x27;s &quot;Reliable Sources&quot;, &quot;Fareed Zakaria GPS&quot;, &quot;Beyond the Politics with William Bennett&quot; and POTUS08&#x27;s &quot;Post Politics Program&quot; used to be listed in this category but are no longer considered so. C-SPAN&#x27;s &quot;Newsmakers&quot;, TV One&#x27;s &quot;Washington Watch&quot;, Hearst Television&#x27;s &quot;Matter of Fact with Soledad O&#x27;Brien&quot;, Gray Television&#x27;s &quot;Full Court Press with Greta Van Susteren&quot;, Fox News&#x27; &quot;Sunday Morning Futures&quot;, and (until Tim Russert&#x27;s 2008 death) MSNBC&#x27;s &quot;Tim Russert Show&quot; among several others.

C-SPAN Radio provides a commercial-free rebroadcast of all five shows in rapid succession, beginning at 12 noon Eastern. Other radio stations rebroadcast some of the shows with commercials on Sunday afternoons.

Many local television stations (both commercial and non-commercial) also produce their own programs that air in this time frame, generally focusing on local or state politics rather than national issues, and may play off the title of the network shows, such as Hartford, Connecticut&#x27;s WFSB-TV, a CBS affiliate which titles their weekly program dealing with state and local issues &quot;Face the State&quot;, a title also seen on KTVN in Reno/Carson City, Nevada and WHP-TV in Harrisburg, Pennsylvania, all of which serve state capital cities. Station groups may also syndicate programming to air on affiliates within a state, such as &quot;Inside California Politics&quot; for Nexstar-owned stations in California or &quot;Inside Texas Politics&quot; for Tegna-owned stations in Texas. The member stations of PBS also often produce their state/local political affairs programming to air on Friday nights as a lead-out of &quot;Washington Week&quot;.

====Characteristics of guests====

The prominent guests appearing on these programs include U.S. Senators, U.S. Representatives, state governors, candidates for President and Vice president, cabinet secretaries, White House officials, and directors of federal agencies. U.S. military leaders, ambassadors, and religious leaders as well as prominent journalists and commentators. Members of prominent think tanks such as Brookings, Center for American Progress, AEI, Cato, Hoover, and Heritage also are often invited to appear on the Sunday morning talk shows.

Various studies have criticized the shows for inviting predominantly white male guests. A study of the three shows on ABC, CBS and NBC from 1997 to 2005 found that the balance between Republicans and Democrats was fairly equal (52% Republicans), 61% of the journalists on the shows were conservative during the Clinton administration and that rose to 69% when George W. Bush&#x27;s was president. In 2010, a study found that a relatively small number of senior senators, all of whom were white males, accounted for the majority of all Congressional guests on the five most popular shows. In 2021, the Women&#x27;s Media Center published a study that showed overall 70% of the guests were male.

====The &quot;full Ginsburg&quot;====

The programs are generally aired live or pre-recorded, broadcasting from Washington, D.C., providing easy access to many political leaders. Many individuals appear via satellite or in studio for two or more of the programs on a given Sunday. Since &quot;Fox News Sunday&quot;″s debut in 1996, several individuals have appeared on all five programs on the same day. William H. Ginsburg, attorney for Monica Lewinsky&#x27;s family during the Lewinsky scandal, was the first to perform what would be named in his honor as the &quot;full Ginsburg.&quot; More common is an interviewee appearing on different shows in consecutive weeks; for instance, a presidential candidate may appear on &quot;Meet the Press&quot; one week, &quot;This Week&quot; the next, and &quot;Fox News Sunday&quot; the week after that.

===Australia===
Currently, only two Sunday morning political programs exist in Australia - &quot;Insiders&quot; on the ABC and &quot;Sunday Agenda&quot; on Sky News Australia. Former shows include Network Ten&#x27;s &quot;Meet the Press&quot; (1992-2013), Nine Network&#x27;s &quot;Sunday&quot; (1981–2008), &quot;The Bolt Report&quot; (2011-2015) and &quot;Speers on Sunday&quot; on Sky News Australia (2018-2019). &quot;The Bolt Report&quot; became a nightly primetime show in 2016. The three free-to-air commercial broadcasters air general morning news programs &quot;Weekend Sunrise&quot; (Seven), &quot;Weekend Today&quot; (Nine) and &quot;Studio 10&quot; (Ten) which include some political coverage.

====Note====
===Canada===
Similar programming to Sunday morning talk shows are aired on other days in Canada, including:
* CBC Radio One airs a Saturday morning political talk show, &quot;The House&quot;, currently hosted by Catherine Cullen.
* CBC News Network airs the weekday daily political talk show &quot;Power &amp; Politics&quot;, currently hosted by David Cochrane.
* CTV News Channel airs the weekday daily political talk show &quot;Power Play&quot;, currently hosted by Vassy Kapelos.

===United Kingdom===
Similar practice occurs in the UK, in the form of shows such as &quot;The Andrew Marr Show&quot; on the BBC and &quot;Sunday Live with Adam Boulton&quot; on Sky News. However, these shows have a somewhat-broader range, often interviewing figures from the arts, popular entertainment, and sports in addition to political leaders, similar in format to &quot;CBS News Sunday Morning&quot; in the United States. The first such Sunday show in Britain was &quot;Weekend World&quot;, which was produced by London Weekend Television for the ITV network from 1972 to 1988.

===Japan===
There are several political Sunday morning talk shows in Japan, most are often broadcast live from studios in Tokyo (Nichiyō Tōron: Kioichō, Shin Hōdō 2001: Daiba, Sunday Frontline: Roppongi), Jiji Hōdan is usually prerecorded on Friday evening.

&quot;Nichiyō Tōron&quot; by public broadcaster NHK often features one politician from every party represented in the National Diet, in many cases the parties&#x27; Diet Affairs Council Chairmen. The latter was generally the case with &quot;Kokkai Tōronkai&quot; (&quot;Diet forum&quot;), one of several alternating NHK talk shows about political and economic issues sharing the same Sunday morning programming slot before they were replaced by &quot;Nichiyō Tōron&quot; in 1994. It had initially been a NHK radio talk show and was simultaneously broadcast on television starting in the 1950s.


==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6645282" start="2" end="26" title="Sunday morning talk show" label="Sunday morning talk show"/>
<link wikidata="Q15416" start="32" end="50" title="television program" label="television program"/>
<link wikidata="Q38926" start="58" end="62" title="news" label="news"/>
<link wikidata="Q622812" start="63" end="67" title="talk show" label="talk"/>
<link wikidata="Q7257679" start="68" end="82" title="Public affairs programming" label="public affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="174" end="187" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q6952746" start="595" end="616" title="NBC Universal Television Distribution" label="NBC&amp;#x27;s syndicated"/>
<link wikidata="Q7722696" start="623" end="646" title="The Chris Matthews Show" label="The Chris Matthews Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q13975" start="654" end="674" title="Bloomberg Television" label="Bloomberg Television"/>
<link wikidata="Q4704066" start="711" end="718" title="Al Hunt" label="Al Hunt"/>
<link wikidata="Q215616" start="730" end="733" title="PBS" label="PBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q5259064" start="793" end="827" title="Dennis Wholey" label="This is America with Dennis Wholey"/>
<link wikidata="Q7972523" start="841" end="856" title="Washington Week" label="Washington Week"/>
<link wikidata="Q6037865" start="874" end="891" title="Inside Washington" label="Inside Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q1715583" start="959" end="979" title="The McLaughlin Group" label="The McLaughlin Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q5151008" start="1141" end="1144" title="CN8" label="CN8"/>
<link wikidata="Q7310993" start="1245" end="1261" title="Reliable Sources" label="Reliable Sources"/>
<link wikidata="Q5434939" start="1275" end="1293" title="Fareed Zakaria GPS" label="Fareed Zakaria GPS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1251932" start="1332" end="1347" title="William Bennett" label="William Bennett"/>
<link wikidata="Q7530391" start="1358" end="1365" title="P.O.T.U.S `08" label="POTUS08"/>
<link wikidata="Q1022311" start="1475" end="1481" title="C-SPAN" label="C-SPAN"/>
<link wikidata="Q2503321" start="1513" end="1519" title="TV One (American TV channel)" label="TV One"/>
<link wikidata="Q4040485" start="1557" end="1574" title="Hearst Television" label="Hearst Television"/>
<link wikidata="Q56063411" start="1588" end="1628" title="Matter of Fact with Soledad O&amp;#x27;Brien" label="Matter of Fact with Soledad O&amp;#x27;Brien"/>
<link wikidata="Q5598232" start="1636" end="1651" title="Gray Television" label="Gray Television"/>
<link wikidata="Q271491" start="1687" end="1705" title="Greta Van Susteren" label="Greta Van Susteren"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1734" end="1756" title="Sunday Morning Futures" label="Sunday Morning Futures"/>
<link wikidata="Q370747" start="1775" end="1786" title="Tim Russert" label="Tim Russert"/>
<link wikidata="Q13973" start="1806" end="1811" title="MSNBC" label="MSNBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q370747" start="1825" end="1841" title="Tim Russert (talk show)" label="Tim Russert Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q7948101" start="1871" end="1883" title="WCSP-FM" label="C-SPAN Radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q941023" start="1983" end="1990" title="Eastern Time Zone" label="Eastern"/>
<link wikidata="Q1378498" start="2120" end="2130" title="commercial broadcasting" label="commercial"/>
<link wikidata="Q17145784" start="2135" end="2149" title="noncommercial educational" label="non-commercial"/>
<link wikidata="Q35657" start="2243" end="2248" title="U.S. state" label="state"/>
<link wikidata="Q33486" start="2344" end="2365" title="Hartford, Connecticut" label="Hartford, Connecticut"/>
<link wikidata="Q7949496" start="2373" end="2380" title="WFSB-TV" label="WFSB-TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q6339270" start="2517" end="2521" title="KTVN" label="KTVN"/>
<link wikidata="Q49225" start="2525" end="2529" title="Reno, Nevada" label="Reno"/>
<link wikidata="Q40881" start="2530" end="2549" title="Carson City, Nevada" label="Carson City, Nevada"/>
<link wikidata="Q7950357" start="2554" end="2560" title="WHP-TV" label="WHP-TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q25280" start="2564" end="2588" title="Harrisburg, Pennsylvania" label="Harrisburg, Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q321470" start="2609" end="2622" title="List of capitals in the United States" label="state capital"/>
<link wikidata="Q55620202" start="2765" end="2787" title="List of assets owned by Nexstar Media Group" label="Nexstar-owned stations"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2843" end="2863" title="Tegna Inc.#Television stations" label="Tegna-owned stations"/>
<link wikidata="Q7972523" start="3015" end="3030" title="Washington Week" label="Washington Week"/>
<link wikidata="Q66096" start="3131" end="3144" title="United States Senate" label="U.S. Senators"/>
<link wikidata="Q11701" start="3146" end="3166" title="United States House of Representatives" label="U.S. Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q889821" start="3168" end="3183" title="Governor (United States)" label="state governors"/>
<link wikidata="Q11696" start="3200" end="3209" title="President of the United States" label="President"/>
<link wikidata="Q11699" start="3214" end="3228" title="Vice President of the United States" label="Vice president"/>
<link wikidata="Q639738" start="3230" end="3237" title="United States Cabinet" label="cabinet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1355327" start="3251" end="3262" title="Executive Office of the President of the United States" label="White House"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066612" start="3291" end="3307" title="List of United States federal agencies" label="federal agencies"/>
<link wikidata="Q11211" start="3309" end="3322" title="Military of the United States" label="U.S. military"/>
<link wikidata="Q121998" start="3332" end="3342" title="ambassador" label="ambassador"/>
<link wikidata="Q1930187" start="3388" end="3398" title="journalist" label="journalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1642960" start="3404" end="3415" title="political commentator" label="commentator"/>
<link wikidata="Q155271" start="3439" end="3449" title="think tank" label="think tank"/>
<link wikidata="Q929154" start="3459" end="3468" title="Brookings Institution" label="Brookings"/>
<link wikidata="Q368035" start="3470" end="3498" title="Center for American Progress" label="Center for American Progress"/>
<link wikidata="Q464135" start="3500" end="3503" title="American Enterprise Institute" label="AEI"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051256" start="3505" end="3509" title="Cato Institute" label="Cato"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147088" start="3511" end="3517" title="Hoover Institution" label="Hoover"/>
<link wikidata="Q876787" start="3523" end="3531" title="The Heritage Foundation" label="Heritage"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="4407" end="4423" title="Washington, D.C." label="Washington, D.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q8010418" start="4699" end="4718" title="William H. Ginsburg" label="William H. Ginsburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q212659" start="4733" end="4748" title="Monica Lewinsky" label="Monica Lewinsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q154234" start="4774" end="4790" title="Lewinsky scandal" label="Lewinsky scandal"/>
<link wikidata="Q5508056" start="4863" end="4876" title="full Ginsburg" label="full Ginsburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q16250088" start="5238" end="5246" title="Insiders (Australian TV program)" label="Insiders"/>
<link wikidata="Q3600480" start="5260" end="5263" title="ABC (Australian TV channel)" label="ABC"/>
<link wikidata="Q17510089" start="5274" end="5287" title="Agenda (Australian TV program)" label="Sunday Agenda"/>
<link wikidata="Q2092490" start="5297" end="5315" title="Sky News Australia" label="Sky News Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q767920" start="5338" end="5349" title="Network Ten" label="Network Ten"/>
<link wikidata="Q6807862" start="5363" end="5377" title="Meet the Press (Australian TV program)" label="Meet the Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q1432195" start="5397" end="5409" title="Nine Network" label="Nine Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q7639306" start="5423" end="5429" title="Sunday (Australian TV program)" label="Sunday"/>
<link wikidata="Q7719058" start="5455" end="5470" title="The Bolt Report" label="The Bolt Report"/>
<link wikidata="Q2092490" start="5525" end="5543" title="Sky News Australia" label="Sky News Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7979440" start="5712" end="5727" title="Weekend Sunrise" label="Weekend Sunrise"/>
<link wikidata="Q908659" start="5735" end="5740" title="Seven Network" label="Seven"/>
<link wikidata="Q16967041" start="5749" end="5762" title="Weekend Today (Australian TV series)" label="Weekend Today"/>
<link wikidata="Q17055881" start="5786" end="5795" title="Studio 10" label="Studio 10"/>
<link wikidata="Q5009037" start="5971" end="5984" title="CBC Radio One" label="CBC Radio One"/>
<link wikidata="Q7740497" start="6036" end="6045" title="The House (radio)" label="The House"/>
<link wikidata="Q2062629" start="6093" end="6109" title="CBC News Network" label="CBC News Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q7236241" start="6159" end="6179" title="Power &amp;amp; Politics" label="Power &amp;amp; Politics"/>
<link wikidata="Q116973528" start="6207" end="6221" title="David Cochrane (journalist)" label="David Cochrane"/>
<link wikidata="Q1024524" start="6225" end="6241" title="CTV News Channel (Canada)" label="CTV News Channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7236382" start="6291" end="6301" title="Power Play (Canadian political affairs series)" label="Power Play"/>
<link wikidata="Q34902202" start="6329" end="6342" title="Vassy Kapelos" label="Vassy Kapelos"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="6397" end="6399" title="United Kingdom" label="UK"/>
<link wikidata="Q7713706" start="6436" end="6456" title="The Andrew Marr Show" label="The Andrew Marr Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="6470" end="6473" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q7639437" start="6484" end="6513" title="Sunday Live with Adam Boulton" label="Sunday Live with Adam Boulton"/>
<link wikidata="Q217228" start="6523" end="6531" title="Sky News" label="Sky News"/>
<link wikidata="Q5009252" start="6722" end="6745" title="CBS News Sunday Morning" label="CBS News Sunday Morning"/>
<link wikidata="Q7979453" start="6822" end="6835" title="Weekend World" label="Weekend World"/>
<link wikidata="Q3076979" start="6865" end="6890" title="London Weekend Television" label="London Weekend Television"/>
<link wikidata="Q220072" start="6899" end="6902" title="ITV (TV network)" label="ITV"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="461190" wikidata="Q1541265" url="?curid=461190" title="Graduate School of Duke University">
<text>The Graduate School of Duke University is one of ten graduate and professional schools that make up the university. Established in 1926, the Graduate School offers the degrees of Master of Arts, Master of Science, Master of Arts in Teaching, Master of Public Policy, and the Doctor of Philosophy, as well as various certificate programs. The current dean of The Graduate School is Suzanne Barbour, Ph.D., Professor of Cell Biology, who joined Duke in 2022.

The Graduate School is administered by a dean, who with the advice an executive committee of the Graduate Faculty, coordinates the graduate offerings of all departments in the Arts and Sciences, the non-professional degree programs of the professional schools of divinity, law, business, environment and earth sciences, the basic science departments of the School of Medicine, and certain professionally oriented graduate programs as well. The Graduate School enrolls approximately 2,220 students. At Duke, the graduate faculty (currently numbering 1,000) consists of all members of the university faculty who have been so designated by their respective departments or schools and approved by the dean of the Graduate School.

Originally called the Graduate School of Arts and Sciences, in February 1968 the Duke University Board of Trustees changed the name to &quot;The Graduate School&quot; to better reflect the school&#x27;s responsibilities for graduate education outside of Arts and Sciences. Since the early 1960s, the dean of the Graduate School has concurrently held the title of vice provost. This dual title is in recognition of the role played by the dean in reviewing academic departments and doctoral programs throughout the university.

==External links==
*Official website
* Duke University Historical Notes: Dean William H. Glasson Directs Growth in Graduate Studies </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1541265" start="0" end="19" title="Graduate School of Duke University" label="The Graduate School"/>
<link wikidata="Q168751" start="23" end="38" title="Duke University" label="Duke University"/>
<link wikidata="Q2091008" start="179" end="193" title="Master of Arts" label="Master of Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q950900" start="195" end="212" title="Master of Science" label="Master of Science"/>
<link wikidata="Q752297" start="275" end="295" title="Doctor of Philosophy" label="Doctor of Philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q723682" start="499" end="503" title="Dean (academic)" label="dean"/>
<link wikidata="Q2453551" start="634" end="651" title="Trinity College of Arts and Sciences" label="Arts and Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q5312759" start="721" end="729" title="Duke Divinity School" label="divinity"/>
<link wikidata="Q5312901" start="731" end="734" title="Duke University Law School" label="law"/>
<link wikidata="Q2568866" start="736" end="744" title="Fuqua School of Business" label="business"/>
<link wikidata="Q16980344" start="746" end="776" title="Nicholas School of the Environment and Earth Sciences" label="environment and earth sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q4119601" start="815" end="833" title="Duke University School of Medicine" label="School of Medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1541265" start="1207" end="1243" title="Graduate School of Duke University" label="Graduate School of Arts and Sciences"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="461196" wikidata="Q12760042" url="?curid=461196" title="Thesprotia">
<text>Thesprotia (; , ) is one of the regional units of Greece. It is part of the Epirus region. Its capital and largest town is Igoumenitsa. Thesprotia is named after the Thesprotians, an ancient Greek tribe that inhabited the region in antiquity.

==History==

Thesprotia was part of the proto-Greek region in the late Bronze Age in which Greek archaic toponyms are densely found.

In antiquity, the territory of modern Thesprotia was inhabited by the ancient Greek tribe of Thesprotians and was bordered by the neighboring regions of Molossia to the north and Chaonia to the east. Thesprotia is mentioned at the Epic Cycle as a place where Odysseus sailed and married the local queen Callidice of Thesprotia. Thesprotia became part of the Epirote League before it was annexed by Rome where it became part of the Roman province of Epirus. After the fragmentation of the Roman Empire into East and West, it was part of the Eastern Roman (Byzantine) Empire until the late Middle Ages, except for a period of Bulgarian rule in the 9th-11th centuries. In c. 1430 it fell to the Ottomans.

From the 8th-9th until the 15th century, the region was called Vagenetia, a name deriving from the Slavic tribe of the Baiounitai, who appear in the early 7th century during the Slavic invasions of the Balkans. In the late Ottoman period, the area was known as Chameria, and at 1910 most of the territory of the modern prefecture of Thesprotia was known as &quot;Sancak of Resadiye&quot; or &quot;Çamlık Sancak&quot; or &quot;Igoumenitsa Sancak&quot;.

Thesprotia remained under Ottoman rule until 1913, when it was ceded to Greece after the Ottoman defeat in the First Balkan War. As part of Greece the province of Margariti became part of Preveza prefecture and the provinces of Paramythia and Filiates were part of Ioannina prefecture. The area above river Acheron continued to be referred to as Tsamouria in official Greek government communication until 1937, when the separate prefecture of Thesprotia was established. In 1923, the population of Thesprotia was 60,705, In 1920, there were 20,319 Muslim Albanians in Thesprotia. After their expulsion on the orders of Napoleon Zervas at the end of World War II, Muslim Albanians numbered to only 77 individuals in the 1951 census.

==Geography and climate==
Thesprotia borders Albania to the north, the regional unit of Ioannina to the east and Preveza to the south. The Ionian Sea lies to the west. Much of the regional unit is mountainous. Most farmland is located in the valleys in the central, southern and the western part. Two of Thesprotia&#x27;s rivers are legendary: the Thyamis and the Acheron of Greek mythology, lined with reedbeds and plane trees.

Thesprotia&#x27;s coastal climate is Mediterranean. Cold winters of a semi-alpine climate dominate the eastern part and higher elevations.

==Administration==

The regional unit Thesprotia is subdivided into three municipalities (numbered as in the map in the infobox):
*Filiates (3)
*Igoumenitsa (1)
*Souli (2)

===Prefecture===

Thesprotia was established as a prefecture in 1937 (). As a part of the 2011 Kallikratis government reform, the regional unit Thesprotia was created out of the former prefecture Thesprotia. The prefecture had the same territory as the present regional unit. At the same time, the municipalities were reorganised, according to the table below.

===Provinces===
*Province of Thyamida - Igoumenitsa
*Province of Filiates - Filiates
*Province of Margariti - Margariti
*Province of Souli - Paramythia
&quot;Note:&quot; Provinces no longer hold any legal status in Greece.

==Economy==
Thesprotia is traditionally one of the poorest and most remote regional units of Greece. The main economic activities are agriculture and tourism, with agriculture as historically the main economic activity.

The main tourist attractions of the region are its numerous beaches, particularly the resort of Syvota. Other tourist attractions are the remains of ancient cities such as Gitani.

===Infrastructure===
In 1996, construction began on the A2 motorway, officially called &quot;Egnatia Odos&quot;. The road, which links the Ionian coast at Igoumenitsa to Thessaloniki and further to Alexandroupoli the Greek Turkish borders, was opened to traffic in 2009. Other important roads in Thesprotia include the Greek National Road 6 (Igoumenitsa - Ioannina - Larissa) and Greek National Road 18 (Filiates - Paramythia - Preveza).

In 2009, construction began for a new highway that will connect Igoumenitsa and Saranda, passing by Sagiada and Konispol.

The port of Igoumenitsa serves ferry routes to the islands of Corfu and Paxoi (includes Antipaxoi), as well as Italy.

==See also==
*List of settlements in Thesprotia
*Ancient Thesprotia
*Thesprotians

==References==
==Sources==
* 

==External links==
*La Toile: Cooperation Network for European Culture: Thesprotia
* HiT.gr - Thesprotia - Photos and historical information about the prefecture of Thesprotia
* Paramythia of Thesprotia - The historical city of Paramythia</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q12760042" start="0" end="10" title="Thesprotia" label="Thesprotia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1234255" start="32" end="56" title="regional units of Greece" label="regional units of Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q180484" start="76" end="82" title="Epirus (region)" label="Epirus"/>
<link wikidata="Q213874" start="123" end="134" title="Igoumenitsa" label="Igoumenitsa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2551754" start="166" end="178" title="Thesprotians" label="Thesprotians"/>
<link wikidata="Q1231805" start="284" end="295" title="proto-Greek" label="proto-Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q11761" start="310" end="325" title="late Bronze Age" label="late Bronze Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q2551754" start="471" end="483" title="Thesprotians" label="Thesprotians"/>
<link wikidata="Q578605" start="609" end="619" title="Epic Cycle" label="Epic Cycle"/>
<link wikidata="Q47231" start="637" end="645" title="Odysseus" label="Odysseus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3650858" start="681" end="704" title="Callidice of Thesprotia" label="Callidice of Thesprotia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3240682" start="736" end="750" title="Epirote League" label="Epirote League"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747689" start="776" end="780" title="Ancient Rome" label="Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1820754" start="809" end="833" title="Epirus (Roman province)" label="Roman province of Epirus"/>
<link wikidata="Q12544" start="918" end="950" title="Byzantine Empire" label="Eastern Roman (Byzantine) Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q31191118" start="1144" end="1153" title="Vagenetia" label="Vagenetia"/>
<link wikidata="Q40477" start="1180" end="1186" title="Slavs" label="Slavic"/>
<link wikidata="Q18205335" start="1200" end="1210" title="Baiounitai" label="Baiounitai"/>
<link wikidata="Q1102780" start="1342" end="1350" title="Chameria" label="Chameria"/>
<link wikidata="Q41" start="1606" end="1612" title="Greece" label="Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q177918" start="1645" end="1661" title="First Balkan War" label="First Balkan War"/>
<link wikidata="Q21498755" start="1697" end="1706" title="Margariti" label="Margariti"/>
<link wikidata="Q7780449" start="1722" end="1740" title="Preveza prefecture" label="Preveza prefecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q673970" start="1762" end="1772" title="Paramythia" label="Paramythia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1413375" start="1777" end="1785" title="Filiates" label="Filiates"/>
<link wikidata="Q212921" start="1799" end="1818" title="Ioannina prefecture" label="Ioannina prefecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1102780" start="1880" end="1889" title="Chameria" label="Tsamouria"/>
<link wikidata="Q179248" start="2089" end="2098" title="Albanians" label="Albanians"/>
<link wikidata="Q5421752" start="2126" end="2135" title="Expulsion of Cham Albanians" label="expulsion"/>
<link wikidata="Q698278" start="2153" end="2168" title="Napoleon Zervas" label="Napoleon Zervas"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="2183" end="2195" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q222" start="2312" end="2319" title="Albania" label="Albania"/>
<link wikidata="Q212921" start="2355" end="2363" title="Ioannina (regional unit)" label="Ioannina"/>
<link wikidata="Q7780449" start="2380" end="2387" title="Preveza (regional unit)" label="Preveza"/>
<link wikidata="Q37495" start="2406" end="2416" title="Ionian Sea" label="Ionian Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1721931" start="2615" end="2622" title="Thyamis" label="Thyamis"/>
<link wikidata="Q191087" start="2631" end="2638" title="Acheron" label="Acheron"/>
<link wikidata="Q1413375" start="2968" end="2976" title="Filiates" label="Filiates"/>
<link wikidata="Q213874" start="2982" end="2993" title="Igoumenitsa" label="Igoumenitsa"/>
<link wikidata="Q585638" start="2999" end="3004" title="Souli" label="Souli"/>
<link wikidata="Q202595" start="3060" end="3070" title="prefectures of Greece" label="prefecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1721931" start="3401" end="3409" title="Thyamis" label="Thyamida"/>
<link wikidata="Q1413375" start="3437" end="3445" title="Filiates" label="Filiates"/>
<link wikidata="Q21498755" start="3470" end="3479" title="Margariti" label="Margariti"/>
<link wikidata="Q585638" start="3505" end="3510" title="Souli" label="Souli"/>
<link wikidata="Q41" start="3587" end="3593" title="Greece" label="Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q41" start="3689" end="3695" title="Greece" label="Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q2096196" start="3913" end="3919" title="Syvota" label="Syvota"/>
<link wikidata="Q16891687" start="3989" end="3995" title="Gitani" label="Gitani"/>
<link wikidata="Q389377" start="4054" end="4065" title="A2 motorway (Greece)" label="A2 motorway"/>
<link wikidata="Q37495" start="4137" end="4143" title="Ionian Sea" label="Ionian"/>
<link wikidata="Q213874" start="4153" end="4164" title="Igoumenitsa" label="Igoumenitsa"/>
<link wikidata="Q17151" start="4168" end="4180" title="Thessaloniki" label="Thessaloniki"/>
<link wikidata="Q190847" start="4196" end="4210" title="Alexandroupoli" label="Alexandroupoli"/>
<link wikidata="Q5601823" start="4317" end="4338" title="Greek National Road 6" label="Greek National Road 6"/>
<link wikidata="Q183199" start="4354" end="4362" title="Ioannina" label="Ioannina"/>
<link wikidata="Q178405" start="4365" end="4372" title="Larissa" label="Larissa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2018247" start="4378" end="4400" title="Greek National Road 18" label="Greek National Road 18"/>
<link wikidata="Q1413375" start="4402" end="4410" title="Filiates" label="Filiates"/>
<link wikidata="Q673970" start="4413" end="4423" title="Paramythia" label="Paramythia"/>
<link wikidata="Q213898" start="4426" end="4433" title="Preveza" label="Preveza"/>
<link wikidata="Q213874" start="4501" end="4512" title="Igoumenitsa" label="Igoumenitsa"/>
<link wikidata="Q193226" start="4517" end="4524" title="Saranda" label="Saranda"/>
<link wikidata="Q303451" start="4537" end="4544" title="Sagiada" label="Sagiada"/>
<link wikidata="Q18731" start="4549" end="4557" title="Konispol" label="Konispol"/>
<link wikidata="Q6638219" start="4693" end="4726" title="List of settlements in Thesprotia" label="List of settlements in Thesprotia"/>
<link wikidata="Q119039542" start="4728" end="4746" title="Ancient Thesprotia" label="Ancient Thesprotia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2551754" start="4748" end="4760" title="Thesprotians" label="Thesprotians"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="461203" wikidata="Q12912667" url="?curid=461203" title="Appletons' Cyclopædia of American Biography">
<text>Appletons&#x27; Cyclopædia of American Biography is a six-volume collection of biographies of notable people involved in the history of the New World. Published between 1887 and 1889, its unsigned articles were widely accepted as authoritative for several decades. Later the encyclopedia became notorious for including dozens of biographies of people who had never existed. In nearly all articles about the &quot;Cyclopædia&quot; various authors have erroneously spelled the title as &#x27;Appleton&#x27;s Cyclopædia of American Biography&#x27;, placing the apostrophe in the wrong place.

==Overview==
The &quot;Cyclopædia&quot; included the names of over 20,000 native and adopted citizens of the United States, including living persons. Also included were the names of several thousand citizens of all the other countries of North and South America. The aim was to embrace all noteworthy persons of the New World. The work also contained the names of nearly 1,000 people of foreign birth who were closely identified with American history. The &quot;Cyclopædia&quot; was illustrated with about sixty full-page portraits supplemented by some 1,500 smaller vignette portraits accompanied by facsimile autographs, and also several hundred views of birthplaces, residences, monuments, and tombs famous in history.

None of the articles are signed either with names or with initials. The clue to authorship is obtained, when obtained at all, through a list of contributors and their contributions arranged alphabetically as to contributors. One reviewer found this a rather inconvenient method, complaining that the finding of the author of a particular sketch often involved a voyage of discovery through the entire list. These lists are searched in vain, however, for the authors of many sketches, including the one of President Grover Cleveland.

==Fictitious biographies==
&quot;Appletons&#x27; Cyclopædia&quot; is notorious for including 92 known biographies of fictitious persons, with at least a further 51 entries being deemed suspicious. 

The first to discover these fictitious biographies was John Hendley Barnhart in 1919 when he identified and reprinted, with commentary, 14 biographical sketches of supposed European botanists who had come to the New World to study in Latin America. 

By 1939, 47 fictitious biographies had been discovered, though only the letters H and V had been systematically investigated. The status of fictitious biographies in &quot;Appletons&#x27; Cyclopædia&quot; was assessed by Margaret Castle Schindler of Goucher College in 1937. According to Schindler,
The writer (or writers) of these articles must have had some scientific training, for most of the creations were scientists, and sufficient linguistic knowledge to have invented or adapted titles in six languages. He was certainly familiar with the history and geography of South America. Most of the places visited by his characters are real places, and most of the historical events in which they participated are genuine. However, he sometimes made mistakes by which his fraudulent work can be detected.

While some of the entries, such as that of Huet de Navarre, were about a real person, in most details they were fictitious. 

There are also significant issues within the fictitious biographies:
* The presence of details copied from various other sources, including legitimate biographies in the &quot;Cyclopædia&quot;.
* Various factual errors and anachronisms, including in relation to geography, language, honors, institutions and accomplishments.
* A remarkable disconnect between the profession attributed to a subject, his lifelong career, and his character and interests as suggested by the titles of his alleged literary works.
* A marked incompatibility between a subject&#x27;s supposed nationality and the language used in the titles of alleged literary works written by them.
* Spelling, style and grammatical errors are present in some of the titles of alleged literary works, which would be highly atypical of prominent scientists, explorers and adventurers.

===Authorship===
Joseph Cantillion identified the author of &quot;phantom Jesuit&quot; articles as William Christian Tenner: he identified 43 wholly fictitious subjects in this genre, including a highly fictionalised biography of Rafael Ferrer. Dobson suggests Hermann Ritter, who appears as the source of &quot;Articles on South and Central Americans&quot; beginning with volume III, as a likely author of the fictitious articles. Dobson notes that the first two volumes, where Juan G. Puron appears in this role, are practically free of problem articles, although Barnhart identified an article on &quot;Dávila, Nepomuceno&quot; as suspicious (but not fictitious beyond a shadow of a doubt), while &quot;Chel-Ab-Ku-Kil&quot;, &quot;Chignavitcelut&quot; and &quot;Oxiquieb
Chiguaihue&quot; are also listed as suspicious.

An article on &quot;Zénon de Rouvroy, Charles-Albert&quot;, which is sometimes mentioned as &quot;de Rouvroy, Charles-Albert Zénon&quot;, was found by Williams to be fictitious. 

Contributors to &quot;Appletons&#x27; Cyclopædia&quot; were free to suggest new subjects and were paid according to the length of the article, with articles only being checked for form by the editorial staff. While conceding that &quot;Appletons&#x27; Cyclopædia&quot; was a &quot;valuable and authoritative work&quot;, and that her results should not reflect on the many authentic articles, Schindler noted that articles on Latin American subjects should be used cautiously until verified against other sources.

==Precedents==
&quot;Appletons&#x27; Cyclopædia&quot; incorporated Francis S. Drake&#x27;s &quot;Dictionary of American Biography&quot; (not to be confused with the more comprehensive 20th century &quot;Dictionary of American Biography&quot;). Drake&#x27;s &quot;Dictionary&quot; was published in 1872 with 10,000 biographies. He worked on a second edition but died in 1885 without completing it. His first edition, original material, latest corrections, and all material he had gathered for the new edition were used in &quot;Appletons&quot;&#x27;.

==Editions==
The first edition of the &quot;Cyclopædia&quot; was published between 1887 and 1889 by D. Appleton and Company of New York City. The general editors were James Grant Wilson and John Fiske; the managing editor from 1886 to 1888 was Rossiter Johnson. A seventh volume, containing an appendix and supplementary lists, and thematic indexes to the whole work, was issued in 1901.

The &quot;Cyclopædia&quot; was republished, uncorrected, by the Gale Research Company in 1968.

== See also ==
* &quot;The National Cyclopaedia of American Biography&quot;
* &quot;Universal Cyclopaedia&quot;

==Notes==
== References ==

== Further reading ==
* (This is a summary of Barnhart&#x27;s article.)

== External links ==

* &quot;Appletons&#x27; Cyclopædia&quot; at Internet Archive – full views of all volumes:
** Volume I. AARON–CRANDALL (1887) – facsimile
** Volume II. CRANE–GRIMSHAW (1887) – facsimile
** Volume III. GRINNELL–LOCKWOOD (1887) – facsimile
** Volume IV. LODGE–PICKENS (1887) – facsimile
** Volume V. PICKERING–SUMTER (Revised Edition, 1900)
** Volume VI. SUNDERLAND–ZURITA with Supplement and Analytical Index (1889) – 1968 facsimile
* &quot;Appletons&#x27; Cyclopædia&quot; as 7 volumes at HathiTrust Digital Library – &quot;Note: Vol. 7, a supplementary volume, edited by J.G. Wilson, is the same as v. 7 of the 1898–1900 Revised Edition&quot;</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q36279" start="79" end="90" title="biography" label="biographies"/>
<link wikidata="Q127834" start="140" end="149" title="New World" label="New World"/>
<link wikidata="Q35171" start="1828" end="1844" title="Grover Cleveland" label="Grover Cleveland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1417174" start="1964" end="1982" title="fictitious entry" label="fictitious persons"/>
<link wikidata="Q3394812" start="2101" end="2122" title="John Hendley Barnhart" label="John Hendley Barnhart"/>
<link wikidata="Q441" start="2228" end="2236" title="botanist" label="botanist"/>
<link wikidata="Q4134258" start="2547" end="2562" title="Goucher College" label="Goucher College"/>
<link wikidata="Q19596745" start="3147" end="3162" title="Huet de Navarre" label="Huet de Navarre"/>
<link wikidata="Q7282135" start="4308" end="4321" title="Rafael Ferrer (Jesuit)" label="Rafael Ferrer"/>
<link wikidata="Q16062924" start="5662" end="5678" title="Francis Samuel Drake (historian)" label="Francis S. Drake"/>
<link wikidata="Q5273957" start="5798" end="5830" title="Dictionary of American Biography" label="Dictionary of American Biography"/>
<link wikidata="Q3011053" start="6246" end="6269" title="D. Appleton and Company" label="D. Appleton and Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="6273" end="6286" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q12975453" start="6313" end="6331" title="James Grant Wilson" label="James Grant Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q3140992" start="6336" end="6346" title="John Fiske (philosopher)" label="John Fiske"/>
<link wikidata="Q7369859" start="6390" end="6406" title="Rossiter Johnson" label="Rossiter Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2077283" start="6599" end="6620" title="Gale Research Company" label="Gale Research Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q7753168" start="6654" end="6700" title="The National Cyclopaedia of American Biography" label="The National Cyclopaedia of American Biography"/>
<link wikidata="Q7893933" start="6715" end="6736" title="Universal Cyclopaedia" label="Universal Cyclopaedia"/>
<link wikidata="Q461" start="6911" end="6927" title="Internet Archive" label="Internet Archive"/>
<link wikidata="Q3128305" start="7355" end="7381" title="HathiTrust Digital Library" label="HathiTrust Digital Library"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="461206" wikidata="Q919967" url="?curid=461206" title="Gonzalo Fernández de Oviedo y Valdés">
<text>Gonzalo Fernández de Oviedo y Valdés (August 1478 – 1557), commonly known as Oviedo, was a Spanish soldier, historian, writer, botanist and colonist. Oviedo participated in the Spanish colonization of the West Indies, arriving in the first few years after Christopher Columbus became the first European to arrive at the islands in 1492. Oviedo&#x27;s chronicle &quot;Historia general de las Indias&quot;, published in 1535 to expand on his 1526 summary &quot;La Natural hystoria de las Indias&quot; (collectively reprinted, three centuries after his death, as &quot;Historia general y natural de las Indias&quot;), forms one of the few primary sources about it. Portions of the original text were widely read in the 16th century in Spanish, English, Italian and French editions, and introduced Europeans to the hammock, the pineapple, and tobacco as well as creating influential representations of the colonized peoples of the region.

==Early life==
Oviedo was born in Madrid of an Asturian lineage and educated in the court of Ferdinand and Isabella. He was a page to their son, the &quot;Infante&quot; John, Prince of Asturias, from about the age of fourteen until the Prince&#x27;s death in 1497, and then Oviedo went to Italy for three years before returning to Spain as a bureaucrat to the emerging Castilian imperial project. Oviedo married first Margarite de Vergara, who died in childbirth, and then Isabel de Aguilar. Isabel and their multiple children later died within several years of joining Oviedo in America.

==Caribbean==
In 1514 Oviedo was appointed supervisor of gold smelting at Santo Domingo, and on his return to Spain in 1523 was appointed historian of the West Indies. He paid five more visits to the Americas before his death, in Valladolid in 1557. At one point he was placed in charge of the Fortaleza Ozama, in Santo Domingo, Dominican Republic, where there is a large statue of him, a gift to that country from a King of Spain.

==Works==
Oviedo&#x27;s first literary work was a chivalric romance entitled, &quot;&quot; (&quot;Book of the very striving and invincible knight Don Claribalte&quot;). It was published in 1519 in Valencia by Juan Viñao, one of the prominent printers of that time. In the foreword, dedicated to Ferdinand of Aragón, Duke of Calabria (not to be confused with the King Ferdinand II of Aragon), Oviedo relates that the work had been conceived and written while he was in Santo Domingo. Therefore, it seems that this was the first literary work created in the New World.

Oviedo later wrote two extensive works of permanent value, which for the most part were not published until three centuries after his death: &quot;La historia general y natural de las Indias&quot; and &quot;Las Quinquagenas de la nobleza de España&quot;. The &quot;Quinquagenas&quot; is a collection of quaint, moralizing anecdotes in which Oviedo indulges in much lively gossip concerning eminent contemporaries. It was first published at Madrid in 1880, edited by Vicente de la Fuente.

=== General History of the Indies ===

Oviedo first published a smaller work, &quot;La Natural hystoria de las Indias,&quot; which was published at his expense on 15 February 1526 in Toledo&quot;.&quot; This is often described as the &quot;Sumario.&quot; An Italian translation of this appeared in Venice in 1534, with French editions from 1545 and English ones from 1555, although there was no second Spanish edition until 1749. This 108 page work contained only a few illustrations, although it did include one of a hammock. In 1535 the first part of the longer and more fully illustrated &quot;Historia general de las Indias&quot; was printed in Seville, and Oviedo had outlined two subsequent parts. He continued to work in both Santo Domingo and Spain on subsequent parts and to revise the first part until his death in 1557. That year, Fernández de Cordoba published the entirety of &quot;Historia General&quot;&#x27;s first volume in Valladolid, as well as the first two-thirds of the second volume. The remainder, however, languished in Oviedo&#x27;s absence. The manuscript was kept in the Monserrate monastery for many years and then the Royal Academy of History. Surviving portions were used by José Amador de los Ríos in preparing an 1851 edition titled &quot;Natural y General Hystoria de las Indias&quot;. Although some portions were known to be missing by 1780, further large portions of the manuscript which were present then are no longer in Madrid. A paper by Jesús Carrillo in the Huntington Library Quarterly described the circumstances of the disposal as &#x27;unknown&#x27;. Some were sold, by a London bookseller, Maggs to Henry E. Huntington in 1926 and are now held in the Huntington Library. A transcription of part of the manuscript was made in Seville by Andres Gasco before 1566 and two of the three volumes of this transcription are held in the library of the Royal Palace of Madrid.
The &quot;Historia&quot;, though written in a diffuse style, furnishes a mass of information collected at first hand. Las Casas, the fellow contemporary chronicler of the Spanish colonization of the Caribbean, denounced Oviedo as &quot;one of the greatest tyrants, thieves, and destroyers of the Indies, whose &quot;Historia&quot; contains almost as many lies as pages&quot;. The incomplete Seville edition was widely read in the English and French versions published by Eden and Poleur, respectively, in 1555 and 1556. It is through the &quot;Historia&quot; that Europeans came to learn about the hammock, pineapple, tobacco, and barbecue, among other things used by the Native Americans that he encountered. The first illustration of a pineapple is credited to him.

== Extinct animals ==
In zoology, the &quot;General History of the Indies&quot; is of particular interest for its descriptions of Hispaniolan animals, including some that became extinct between Oviedo&#x27;s time and the development of the modern science from Linnaeus and Cuvier. The only land mammals of the island according to Oviedo, besides rats and mice (which Oviedo believed native, but were introduced accidentally by Europeans), were:
* The &quot;hutia&quot;: a grizzled-gray (&quot;pardo gris&quot;), four-legged animal resembling a rabbit, but smaller, with smaller ears and a rat-like tail. Hunted with dogs by natives and Spaniards alike, it was &quot;no longer found except very rarely&quot;. Gerrit Smith Miller Jr. identified this animal as either the living Hispaniolan hutia or one of the extinct &quot;Isolobodon&quot; hutias.
* The &quot;quemi&quot;: similar to the hutia in color and appearance, but much larger, like a medium hound. It was also eaten, and Oviedo believed it already extinct. Miller identified it with a large subfossil rodent found in caverns and archaeological middens, which he named &quot;Quemisia&quot;.
* The &quot;mohuy&quot;: Also similar to the hutia but smaller and paler, and with denser and coarser hair, which was very pointed and stood erect on its back. Its meat was considered the best by people who had eaten it and was highly esteemed by the caciques of the island. Miller identified this with the Hispaniolan edible rat, an extinct rodent commonly found in middens, on the basis of the size and erect hair reported by Oviedo (similar to the spiny rats of the family Echimyidae). He gave it the specific name &quot;voratus&quot;, meaning &quot;devoured&quot;.
* The &quot;cori&quot;: the domestic guinea pig, raised for food in captivity. Actually introduced from South America by the natives prior to Spanish contact.
* The &quot;mute dog&quot; (&quot;perro mudo&quot;, literally &quot;mute dog&quot;, translated as &quot;dumb dog&quot; by Miller): a Native American dog that could not bark, had erect ears, and all kinds of hair length and colorations found in domestic dogs. It was raised by the natives in their houses and used to hunt hutias, though European dogs were more effective. It was extinct on Hispaniola at the time of Oviedo&#x27;s writing, but he saw similar dogs in native settlements of other islands and the American mainland (in what is now Nicaragua).

== Notes ==
==Further reading==
*
*</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q919967" start="0" end="36" title="Gonzalo Fernández de Oviedo y Valdés" label="Gonzalo Fernández de Oviedo y Valdés"/>
<link wikidata="Q919967" start="77" end="84" title="Gonzalo Fernández de Oviedo y Valdés" label="Oviedo,"/>
<link wikidata="Q669037" start="205" end="216" title="West Indies" label="West Indies"/>
<link wikidata="Q7322" start="256" end="276" title="Christopher Columbus" label="Christopher Columbus"/>
<link wikidata="Q193823" start="811" end="818" title="hammock" label="hammock"/>
<link wikidata="Q1493" start="824" end="833" title="pineapple" label="pineapple"/>
<link wikidata="Q1566" start="839" end="846" title="tobacco" label="tobacco"/>
<link wikidata="Q2807" start="970" end="976" title="Madrid" label="Madrid"/>
<link wikidata="Q3934" start="983" end="991" title="Asturias" label="Asturian"/>
<link wikidata="Q12860" start="1029" end="1038" title="Ferdinand II of Aragon" label="Ferdinand"/>
<link wikidata="Q45859" start="1043" end="1051" title="Isabella I of Castile" label="Isabella"/>
<link wikidata="Q381871" start="1105" end="1129" title="John, Prince of Asturias" label="John, Prince of Asturias"/>
<link wikidata="Q25277" start="1600" end="1613" title="Hispaniola" label="Santo Domingo"/>
<link wikidata="Q8356" start="1756" end="1766" title="Valladolid" label="Valladolid"/>
<link wikidata="Q2516819" start="1820" end="1835" title="Fortaleza Ozama" label="Fortaleza Ozama"/>
<link wikidata="Q34820" start="1840" end="1853" title="Santo Domingo" label="Santo Domingo"/>
<link wikidata="Q786" start="1855" end="1873" title="Dominican Republic" label="Dominican Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1159457" start="2009" end="2026" title="chivalric romance" label="chivalric romance"/>
<link wikidata="Q8818" start="2156" end="2164" title="Valencia, Spain" label="Valencia"/>
<link wikidata="Q774819" start="2254" end="2291" title="Ferdinand of Aragón, Duke of Calabria" label="Ferdinand of Aragón, Duke of Calabria"/>
<link wikidata="Q12860" start="2326" end="2348" title="Ferdinand II of Aragon" label="Ferdinand II of Aragon"/>
<link wikidata="Q127834" start="2515" end="2524" title="New World" label="New World"/>
<link wikidata="Q8356" start="3957" end="3967" title="Valladolid" label="Valladolid"/>
<link wikidata="Q2699511" start="4222" end="4245" title="José Amador de los Ríos" label="José Amador de los Ríos"/>
<link wikidata="Q15067374" start="4653" end="4658" title="Maggs Bros Ltd" label="Maggs"/>
<link wikidata="Q3132765" start="4662" end="4681" title="Henry E. Huntington" label="Henry E. Huntington"/>
<link wikidata="Q1400558" start="4714" end="4732" title="Huntington Library" label="Huntington Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q207416" start="5048" end="5057" title="Bartolomé de las Casas" label="Las Casas"/>
<link wikidata="Q461696" start="5561" end="5569" title="barbecue" label="barbecue"/>
<link wikidata="Q113512267" start="5877" end="5884" title="List of Antillian and Bermudan animals extinct in the Holocene" label="extinct"/>
<link wikidata="Q1043" start="5959" end="5967" title="Linnaeus" label="Linnaeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q171969" start="5972" end="5978" title="Cuvier" label="Cuvier"/>
<link wikidata="Q36396" start="6045" end="6049" title="Rattus" label="rats"/>
<link wikidata="Q83310" start="6054" end="6058" title="house mouse" label="mice"/>
<link wikidata="Q651787" start="6156" end="6161" title="hutia" label="hutia"/>
<link wikidata="Q25851" start="6243" end="6249" title="European rabbit" label="rabbit"/>
<link wikidata="Q538252" start="6407" end="6430" title="Gerrit Smith Miller Jr." label="Gerrit Smith Miller Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q549103" start="6475" end="6492" title="Hispaniolan hutia" label="Hispaniolan hutia"/>
<link wikidata="Q738792" start="6521" end="6531" title="Isolobodon" label="Isolobodon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1152199" start="6801" end="6807" title="midden" label="midden"/>
<link wikidata="Q1761671" start="6831" end="6839" title="Quemisia" label="Quemisia"/>
<link wikidata="Q599898" start="7098" end="7105" title="cacique" label="cacique"/>
<link wikidata="Q301328" start="7154" end="7176" title="Hispaniolan edible rat" label="Hispaniolan edible rat"/>
<link wikidata="Q852726" start="7323" end="7333" title="Echimyidae" label="Echimyidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q79803" start="7453" end="7463" title="guinea pig" label="guinea pig"/>
<link wikidata="Q18" start="7520" end="7533" title="South America" label="South America"/>
<link wikidata="Q21002375" start="7708" end="7727" title="Native American dogs" label="Native American dog"/>
<link wikidata="Q811" start="8118" end="8127" title="Nicaragua" label="Nicaragua"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="461207" wikidata="Q5362233" url="?curid=461207" title="Janet Morgan (squash player)">
<text>Janet Rachael Margaret Morgan (later known by her married name, Janet Shardlow) (1921–1990) was an English squash player who dominated the game in the 1950s. She won the British Open on ten consecutive occasions and was the sport&#x27;s most famous player until the rise of Heather McKay.

Born in Wandsworth, London, Morgan was originally a tennis player who played for Britain in the Wightman Cup in 1946. She quickly turned to squash and in 1948 and 1949 was a losing finalist against Joan Curry. In 1950 she won her first British Open title, beating Curry in the final. She went on to win the trophy for the next ten successive years through to 1959. Before the 1959 British Open, Morgan announced that she would retire after the competition due to medical advice because she had suffered from persistent back injuries.

Following the tenth victory and retirement, she married Roland Horcae “Joe” Bisley later that year in 1959 in London. She became the first chairwoman of the Women&#x27;s Squash Association soon after and was appointed MBE in 1961. Following the death of her husband Joe she married for a second time in 1965 to Ambrose Shardlow.

Morgan also competed as a tennis player in the Wimbledon Championships from 1946 until 1957. In the singles event her best result was reaching the third round on four occasions (1946, 1947, 1954 and 1955).

In 1962 a young Australian called Heather Blundell flew to Britain for the first time and stayed with Janet and her husband Joe and became a close friend. Her relationship with Janet Morgan helped her achieve great success in squash. Morgan wrote a book in 1953 entitled &quot;Squash rackets for women&quot; and has been inducted in the Squash Hall of Fame.

==British Open results==
* 1948: runner-up (lost to Joan Curry 9–5 9–0 9-10 6–9 10–8)
* 1949: runner-up (lost to Joan Curry 2–9 9–3 10-8 9–0)
* 1950: won (beat Joan Curry 9–4 9–3 9–0)
* 1951: won (beat Joan Curry 9–1 2–9 9–3 9–4)
* 1952: won (beat Joan Curry 9–3 9–1 9–5)
* 1953: won (beat Marjorie Townsend 9–4 9–2 9–4)
* 1954: won (beat Sheila Speight 9–3 9–1 9–7)
* 1955: won (beat Ruth Turner 9–5 9–3 9–6)
* 1956: won (beat Sheila Speight 9–6 9–4 9–2)
* 1957: won (beat Sheila Speight 4–9 9–5 9–1 9–6)
* 1958: won (beat Sheila Macintosh née Speight 9–2 9–4 9–2)
* 1959: won (beat Sheila Macintosh née Speight 9–4 9–1 9–5)

==References==
==External links==
* Official British Open Squash Championships website
* British Open historical data at squashtalk.com</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5362233" start="0" end="29" title="Janet Morgan (squash player)" label="Janet Rachael Margaret Morgan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5362233" start="64" end="78" title="Janet Morgan (squash player)" label="Janet Shardlow"/>
<link wikidata="Q21" start="99" end="106" title="England" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q133201" start="107" end="113" title="squash (sport)" label="squash"/>
<link wikidata="Q843417" start="170" end="182" title="British Open Squash Championships" label="British Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q538855" start="274" end="287" title="Heather McKay" label="Heather McKay"/>
<link wikidata="Q2166359" start="298" end="308" title="Wandsworth" label="Wandsworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="310" end="316" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q847" start="342" end="348" title="tennis" label="tennis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1388797" start="386" end="398" title="Wightman Cup" label="Wightman Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q6204985" start="488" end="498" title="Joan Curry" label="Joan Curry"/>
<link wikidata="Q375344" start="982" end="1013" title="Women&amp;#x27;s Squash Association" label="Women&amp;#x27;s Squash Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q14420" start="1043" end="1046" title="Member of the British Empire" label="MBE"/>
<link wikidata="Q41520" start="1202" end="1225" title="Wimbledon Championships" label="Wimbledon Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q538855" start="1396" end="1412" title="Heather McKay" label="Heather Blundell"/>
<link wikidata="Q20805342" start="1748" end="1752" title="1948 Women&amp;#x27;s British Open Squash Championship" label="1948"/>
<link wikidata="Q6204985" start="1773" end="1783" title="Joan Curry" label="Joan Curry"/>
<link wikidata="Q20805345" start="1809" end="1813" title="1949 Women&amp;#x27;s British Open Squash Championship" label="1949"/>
<link wikidata="Q6204985" start="1834" end="1844" title="Joan Curry" label="Joan Curry"/>
<link wikidata="Q20805350" start="1865" end="1869" title="1950 Women&amp;#x27;s British Open Squash Championship" label="1950"/>
<link wikidata="Q6204985" start="1881" end="1891" title="Joan Curry" label="Joan Curry"/>
<link wikidata="Q20805355" start="1907" end="1911" title="1951 Women&amp;#x27;s British Open Squash Championship" label="1951"/>
<link wikidata="Q6204985" start="1923" end="1933" title="Joan Curry" label="Joan Curry"/>
<link wikidata="Q20805359" start="1953" end="1957" title="1952 Women&amp;#x27;s British Open Squash Championship" label="1952"/>
<link wikidata="Q6204985" start="1969" end="1979" title="Joan Curry" label="Joan Curry"/>
<link wikidata="Q20805363" start="1995" end="1999" title="1953 Women&amp;#x27;s British Open Squash Championship" label="1953"/>
<link wikidata="Q20805369" start="2044" end="2048" title="1954 Women&amp;#x27;s British Open Squash Championship" label="1954"/>
<link wikidata="Q7493097" start="2060" end="2074" title="Sheila Speight" label="Sheila Speight"/>
<link wikidata="Q20805374" start="2090" end="2094" title="1955 Women&amp;#x27;s British Open Squash Championship" label="1955"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2106" end="2117" title="Ruth Turner (squash player)" label="Ruth Turner"/>
<link wikidata="Q20805378" start="2133" end="2137" title="1956 Women&amp;#x27;s British Open Squash Championship" label="1956"/>
<link wikidata="Q7493097" start="2149" end="2163" title="Sheila Speight" label="Sheila Speight"/>
<link wikidata="Q20805383" start="2179" end="2183" title="1957 Women&amp;#x27;s British Open Squash Championship" label="1957"/>
<link wikidata="Q7493097" start="2195" end="2209" title="Sheila Speight" label="Sheila Speight"/>
<link wikidata="Q20805385" start="2229" end="2233" title="1958 Women&amp;#x27;s British Open Squash Championship" label="1958"/>
<link wikidata="Q7493097" start="2245" end="2261" title="Sheila Macintosh" label="Sheila Macintosh"/>
<link wikidata="Q20805388" start="2289" end="2293" title="1959 Women&amp;#x27;s British Open Squash Championship" label="1959"/>
<link wikidata="Q7493097" start="2305" end="2321" title="Sheila Macintosh" label="Sheila Macintosh"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="461208" wikidata="Q210296" url="?curid=461208" title="Xanthi">
<text>Xanthi is a city in the region of Western Thrace, northeastern Greece. It is the capital of the Xanthi regional unit of the region of East Macedonia and Thrace.

Amphitheatrically built on the foot of Rhodope mountain chain, the city is divided by the Kosynthos River, into the west part, where the old and the modern town are located, and the east part that boasts a rich natural environment. The &quot;Old Town of Xanthi&quot; is known throughout Greece for its distinctive architecture, combining many Byzantine Greek churches with neoclassical mansions of Greek merchants from the 18th and 19th centuries and Ottoman-Era mosques. Other landmarks in Xanthi include the Archaeological Museum of Abdera and the Greek Folk Art Museum.

Xanthi is famous throughout Greece (especially Macedonia and Thrace) for its annual spring carnival (Greek: καρναβάλι) which has a significant role in the city&#x27;s economy. Over 40 cultural associations from around Greece participate in the carnival program. The festivities which take place during the period include concerts, theatre plays, music and dance nights, exhibitions, a cycling event, games on the streets, and re-enactments of old customs.

==Name==
There are two theories regarding the origin of its name: it was either named after a daughter of Oceanus and Tethys, or after Xanthi, one of the Amazons that ruled the region, according to legend.

Xanthi is known as &quot;İskeçe&quot; in Turkish and Скеча (&quot;Skecha&quot;) or Ксанти (&quot;Ksanti&quot;) in Bulgarian.

==History==
Xanthi is sometimes identified with the ancient city of &quot;Xantheia&quot; mentioned in the 1st century BC by the geographer Strabo, but it was not mentioned by any other ancient historian. It began as a small village and experienced all the tumultuous periods of the history of Thrace, such as raids, disasters, ethnic conflicts, civil wars. The population of the region of Xanthi had dwindled down to almost nothing, as the region was depopulated in the 3rd century AD and almost everything had been destroyed when the Ottomans conquered the region in 1361. For this reason, the Ottomans brought Turkish settlers from within of Asia Minor, which is how Genisea (Γενισέα) was created, while Oraio (Ωραίο) and Xanthi remained mainly Greek and Christian centres.

===Middle Ages===
Known references to Xanthi (), or Xanthia (), the city&#x27;s origins are obscure; it was a prosperous stronghold of the Byzantine era but latter became a colony of the Ottomans known as &quot;Eskije&quot;. Xanthi is first recorded in 879 (Bishop Georgios of Xantheia is reported as taking part in the Fourth Council of Constantinople).
From the 13th to the 14th century it was the most important city of the region. Three monasteries date from the Middle Ages: Pammegiston, Taxiarchon, and Panagia Archangeliotisa, although written records indicate several others now lost.
Xanthi featured in the campaign of Andronikos II Palaiologos in 1327.

===Early modern===
By 1715, Xanthi, as well as Genisea, became renowned for its tobacco quality. Many foreign sightseers traveled throughout the region and described both the life and struggles of the locals. The tobacco trade throughout Europe led Xanthi into a course of prosperity. George Demetriou was active in the Xanthi area during the Greek Revolution of 1821. In March and April 1829 two earthquakes leveled the city, however, they played a decisive role in the further developments as the city&#x27;s rebuilding immediately got underway. In 1870, the city of Genisea was burned down and thus all of the agencies and services were transferred to Xanthi which, at that time, had a population of about 10,000 inhabitants. In 1891, a rail line was established near the city, while further economic development led to the founding of schools and associations. During the late period of Ottoman rule until 1912, the city was administratively located in the Sanjak of Gümülcine within the Adrianople Vilayet.

===Balkan Wars===
During the First Balkan War, Xanthi was captured by the Bulgarian army from the Ottomans in 8 November 1912. In the Second Balkan War the Greek army captured it in July 1913. However, with the Treaty of Bucharest, Xanthi along with Western Thrace were ceded to Bulgaria (where it was also called &quot;Skecha&quot;), and remained a part of the latter until the end of World War I. Following the Bulgarian defeat in this war, Western Thrace came under Allied administration and on 4 October 1919 the Greek army under Georgios Leonardopoulos command entered the city. That date is today celebrated in Xanthi as the anniversary of its liberation. Second lieutenant Gavriel Ladas, who was from Xanthi, led the first Greek troops in the city. Ladas became the mayor of Xanthi from 1959 to 1964.
===World War II===
On 8 April 1941 the 164th Infantry Division captured Xanthi following the German invasion of Greece and the Germans passed the city to Bulgaria, who occupied the whole region east of Strymonas, except a small German zone near the border with Turkey. The city became the administrative center of the Bulgarian province of Belomorie and served as headquarters for the Bulgarian Second Army. During the Bulgarian occupation, more than 2,000 men from Xanthi, both Christians and Muslims were sent for forced labor in Bulgaria. On 4 March 1943 the Jews of Xanthi were arrested by the Bulgarians and imprisoned in a tobacco warehouse. On 18 and 19 March, they were deported to Nazi concentration camps in Poland. From a community of 550 people, only six Jews survived the Holocaust. The synagogue of Xanthi built in 1926 at the corner of Hatzistavrou and Anatolikis Thrakis streets, was used by Christian Associations and later abandoned. It was sold and demolished in 1995. The city was liberated following the 9 September coup d&#x27;etat in Bulgaria when partisans of the Greek People&#x27;s Liberation Army entered the city and took over control without a fight. However, the Bulgarian army remained in the region until the end of October 1944 and it withdrew under pressure from the Allies.

=== Today ===

Nowadays Xanthi is a modern city, rich in history, traditions and customs, and with many attractions for the visitors (including the surrounding areas). Xanthi is known as &quot;the city of a thousand colours&quot;, and like Komotini (Gümülcine) and Didymoteicho (Dimetoka) has a large population of Turkish-speaking Muslims. The Muslim population of East Macedonia and Thrace dates to the Ottoman period, and unlike the Ottoman Muslims and Greek Muslims of Greek Macedonia and Crete was exempted from the 1922–23 Greek-Turkish population exchange following the Treaty of Lausanne. In 1972 the Greek authorities planned to demolish the landmark of the city, the clock tower, built by Pomak Hadji Emin Aga in 1870. This decision resulted in protests by the local Muslims and the plans were cancelled.

== Transport ==
===Road Transport===

A few kilometers outside Xanthi, the Egnatia Motorway crosses Xanthi with Macedonia, Epirus and the rest of Thrace. The Xanthi Bus Station runs daily services to several cities throughout Greece. Xanthi is 206 km from Thessaloniki, 704 km from Athens, 397 km from Istanbul and 236 km from Edirne. On 15 January 2010, the Agios Konstantinos border crossing point between Greece and Bulgaria was inaugurated, 51 km from Xanthi, linking the nearby village of Thermi with the town of Zlatograd. A link road between the A2 motorway and the Bulgarian town of Rudozem is to be opened on 1 January 2025 via the Aegean Pass.

===Rail transport===

Outside Xanthi is the Xanthi railway station on the Thessaloniki-Alexandroupoli line, with daily services to Thessaloniki and Alexandroupolis.

===Air Transport===

Xanthi does not have an airport. It is mainly served by Kavala Airport, 42 km away, and secondarily by Alexandroupolis Airport, 112 km away.

== Municipality ==
The municipality Xanthi was formed at the 2011 local government reform by the merger of the following 2 former municipalities, that became municipal units:
*Stavroupoli
*Xanthi

The municipality has an area of 495.118 km2, the municipal unit 153.116 km2.

===Communities===
The municipal unit Xanthi is subdivided into the communities Evmoiro, Kimmeria and Xanthi. These communities contain the following settlements:
*Evmoiro
**Kallithea
**Lamprino
**Lefki
**Nea Morsini
**Palaia Morsini
**Petrochori
*Kimmeria
**Gialisteri
**Livadi
**Pelekito
**the abandoned villages Alikochori, Anthiro, Askyra, Eranos, Ketiki, Porta, Prioni and Ydrochori
*Xanthi

==Economy==
Traditionally, the tobacco business, commerce, and farming have been the primary occupation of the residents of the area. During the last decades, tourism has also increased, especially during the period of the &quot;Old Town Festival&quot;.

==Population==
== Education ==
* Democritus University of Thrace
School of Engineering 
*Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering
*Department of Civil Engineering
*Department of Environmental Engineering
*Department of Architectural Engineering
*Department of Production Management Engineering

==Cultural events==

===Carnival and old town&#x27;s festivals===

The city has a rich history, tradition, and customs and it is the cultural center in the area. It is also considered a multi-cultural city and it has been characterized as &quot;the city of the thousand colours&quot;. Xanthi&#x27;s Carnival is very popular (every February) and is one of the most popular in Greece, while the &quot;old town festival&quot; (early September) is equally famous. Furthermore, the bazaar of Xanthi is famous and takes place at Emboriou Square every Saturday. In addition, the Manos Hatzidakis&#x27; festival attracts worldwide interest.

===Museums===
*Folklore and Historical Museum of Xanthi
*Εcclesiastical Museum Metropolis of Xanthi
*Municipal Gallery of Xanthi
*Museum of Natural History
*Foundation of Thracian Art and Tradition
*Museum of the History of the Greek Costume
*Manos Hadjidakis House

==Sports==
*Xanthi FC, plays in the Super League Greece 2
*Xanthi BC, played in the Greek A2 League
*Aspida Xanthi, football (one appearance in the First League) and basketball
*Orfeas Xanthi FC, football
*Orion Xanthi, basketball

== Famous people from Xanthi ==

* Manos Hadjidakis (1925–1994): Major Greek composer. Winner of the Academy Award for Best Original Song for his song Never on Sunday from the film of the same name.
* Şerif Gören: Turkish film director. Winner of 1982 Palme d&#x27;Or in Cannes Film Festival
* Yanaki Paskalev (1863–1933): Bulgarian revolutionary, member of IMORO
* Archbishop Christodoulos (1939–2008): former Archbishop of the Greek Orthodox Church
* Vasilis Torosidis: football player for Olympiacos F.C. and the Greece national football team
* Lambros Papantoniou (Mandra, Xanthi 1945-Washington, USA 2009): journalist, political analyst.
* Zafeiris Melas, contemporary Greek laïko singer.
* Çiğdem Asafoğlu, The Party of Friendship, Equality and Peace General President
* Apostolos Roumoglou, basketball player for the UConn Huskies.

==International relations==
Xanthi is twinned with:
* Smolyan, Bulgaria
* Novi Beograd, Serbia
* Gifhorn, Lower Saxony, Germany
* Biga, Turkey &quot;(since 2000)&quot;
* Bursa, Turkey
* Adra, Spain

==Gallery==
==See also==
*Xanthi (regional unit)
*Eastern Macedonia and Thrace
*Thrace
*Western Thrace
*Xanthi Carnival

== Notes ==
==References==
==Further reading==
* Messinas, E. (2022). &quot;The Synagogues of Greece: A Study of Synagogues in Macedonia and Thrace: With Architectural Drawings of all Synagogues of Greece&quot;. Seattle: KDP, pp. 133-144 and 197-199. .
* Μεσσίνας, Η. (2022). &quot;H Συναγωγή&quot;, Αθήνα: Εκδόσεις Ινφογνώμων, pp. 19-36. 
* Μεσσίνας, Η. (1999). &quot;Oι Συναγωγές στην Ελλάδα, η αρχιτεκτονική τους και η σχέση τους με τον ιστό της πόλης και την εβραϊκή συνοικία: Συγκριτική μελέτη της ιστορίας και αρχιτεκτονικής των συναγωγών της Βορείου Ελλάδος, η θέση τους στην εβραϊκή συνοικία και η παρουσία τους στον πολεοδομικό ιστό από τον 15ο στον 20ο αιώνα.&quot; Διδακτορική διατριβή στο Τμήμα Αρχιτεκτόνων Μηχανικών Τομέα Πολεοδομίας και Χωροταξίας του ΕΜΠ, pp. 239-254.

==External links==
*The old town of Xanthi – 3D Reconstruction
*Democritus University of Thrace
*Municipality of Xanthi
*Thrace the land of Orpheus – Democritus University of Thrace
*Cultural and Educational Technology Institute
*Xanthi Festival 2024</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q210296" start="0" end="6" title="Xanthi" label="Xanthi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192701" start="34" end="48" title="Western Thrace" label="Western Thrace"/>
<link wikidata="Q41" start="63" end="69" title="Greece" label="Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q19896642" start="96" end="116" title="Xanthi (regional unit)" label="Xanthi regional unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q207299" start="124" end="130" title="modern regions of Greece" label="region"/>
<link wikidata="Q171314" start="134" end="159" title="East Macedonia and Thrace" label="East Macedonia and Thrace"/>
<link wikidata="Q6489" start="201" end="208" title="Rhodope mountains" label="Rhodope"/>
<link wikidata="Q3441232" start="505" end="520" title="Byzantine Greeks" label="Byzantine Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q14378" start="535" end="547" title="neoclassicism" label="neoclassical"/>
<link wikidata="Q132527193" start="697" end="703" title="Abdera, Thrace" label="Abdera"/>
<link wikidata="Q81734" start="783" end="792" title="Macedonia (Greece)" label="Macedonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192701" start="797" end="803" title="Western Thrace" label="Thrace"/>
<link wikidata="Q16327356" start="827" end="835" title="Xanthi Carnival" label="carnival"/>
<link wikidata="Q9129" start="837" end="842" title="Greek language" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q161419" start="1299" end="1306" title="Oceanus" label="Oceanus"/>
<link wikidata="Q184216" start="1311" end="1317" title="Tethys (mythology)" label="Tethys"/>
<link wikidata="Q134154" start="1347" end="1354" title="Amazons" label="Amazons"/>
<link wikidata="Q256" start="1441" end="1448" title="Turkish language" label="Turkish"/>
<link wikidata="Q7918" start="1514" end="1523" title="Bulgarian language" label="Bulgarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q45936" start="1665" end="1671" title="Strabo" label="Strabo"/>
<link wikidata="Q41741" start="1819" end="1825" title="Thrace" label="Thrace"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="2121" end="2129" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottomans"/>
<link wikidata="Q51614" start="2170" end="2180" title="Asia Minor" label="Asia Minor"/>
<link wikidata="Q3659157" start="2195" end="2202" title="Genisea" label="Genisea"/>
<link wikidata="Q7099342" start="2232" end="2237" title="Oraio" label="Oraio"/>
<link wikidata="Q539051" start="2273" end="2278" title="Greeks" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q12544" start="2442" end="2451" title="Byzantine Empire" label="Byzantine"/>
<link wikidata="Q862543" start="2623" end="2655" title="Fourth Council of Constantinople (Eastern Orthodox)" label="Fourth Council of Constantinople"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="2770" end="2781" title="Middle Ages" label="Middle Ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q37067" start="2931" end="2956" title="Andronikos II Palaiologos" label="Andronikos II Palaiologos"/>
<link wikidata="Q3659157" start="3014" end="3021" title="Genisea" label="Genisea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1566" start="3047" end="3054" title="tobacco" label="tobacco"/>
<link wikidata="Q907703" start="3180" end="3193" title="tobacco trade" label="tobacco trade"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3252" end="3268" title="George Demetriou" label="George Demetriou"/>
<link wikidata="Q182062" start="3310" end="3326" title="Greek Revolution" label="Greek Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q7944" start="3364" end="3374" title="earthquake" label="earthquake"/>
<link wikidata="Q3659157" start="3536" end="3543" title="Genisea" label="Genisea"/>
<link wikidata="Q7418368" start="3928" end="3947" title="Sanjak of Gümülcine" label="Sanjak of Gümülcine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1311980" start="3959" end="3977" title="Adrianople Vilayet" label="Adrianople Vilayet"/>
<link wikidata="Q177918" start="4009" end="4025" title="First Balkan War" label="First Balkan War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1953312" start="4054" end="4068" title="Bulgarian Land Forces" label="Bulgarian army"/>
<link wikidata="Q184183" start="4114" end="4131" title="Second Balkan War" label="Second Balkan War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1546449" start="4136" end="4146" title="Greek army" label="Greek army"/>
<link wikidata="Q500067" start="4191" end="4210" title="Treaty of Bucharest (1913)" label="Treaty of Bucharest"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192701" start="4230" end="4244" title="Western Thrace" label="Western Thrace"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="4366" end="4377" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q215669" start="4449" end="4455" title="Allies of World War I" label="Allied"/>
<link wikidata="Q12875105" start="4514" end="4537" title="Georgios Leonardopoulos" label="Georgios Leonardopoulos"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4660" end="4673" title="Gavriel Ladas" label="Gavriel Ladas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2888837" start="4881" end="4906" title="Battle of Greece" label="German invasion of Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q3976211" start="4990" end="4999" title="Strymonas" label="Strymonas"/>
<link wikidata="Q106506134" start="5128" end="5137" title="Belomorie" label="Belomorie"/>
<link wikidata="Q2330260" start="5173" end="5194" title="Second Army (Bulgaria)" label="Bulgarian Second Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q328468" start="5478" end="5502" title="Nazi concentration camps" label="Nazi concentration camps"/>
<link wikidata="Q618048" start="5813" end="5841" title="9 September coup d&amp;#x27;etat" label="9 September coup d&amp;#x27;etat"/>
<link wikidata="Q172648" start="5876" end="5911" title="Greek People&amp;#x27;s Liberation Army" label="Greek People&amp;#x27;s Liberation Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q208403" start="6338" end="6358" title="Komotini" label="Komotini (Gümülcine)"/>
<link wikidata="Q932648" start="6363" end="6386" title="Didymoteicho" label="Didymoteicho (Dimetoka)"/>
<link wikidata="Q171314" start="6464" end="6489" title="East Macedonia and Thrace" label="East Macedonia and Thrace"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6534" end="6549" title="Ottoman Muslims" label="Ottoman Muslims"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365225" start="6554" end="6567" title="Greek Muslims" label="Greek Muslims"/>
<link wikidata="Q81734" start="6571" end="6586" title="Greek Macedonia" label="Greek Macedonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q34374" start="6591" end="6596" title="Crete" label="Crete"/>
<link wikidata="Q131017" start="6627" end="6660" title="Greek-Turkish population exchange" label="Greek-Turkish population exchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q193258" start="6675" end="6693" title="Treaty of Lausanne (1923)" label="Treaty of Lausanne"/>
<link wikidata="Q17279667" start="6775" end="6786" title="Clock tower of Xanthi" label="clock tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q38915" start="6797" end="6802" title="Pomak" label="Pomak"/>
<link wikidata="Q81734" start="7026" end="7035" title="Macedonia, Greece" label="Macedonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q565751" start="7037" end="7043" title="Epirus" label="Epirus"/>
<link wikidata="Q41741" start="7060" end="7066" title="Thrace (Greece)" label="Thrace"/>
<link wikidata="Q17151" start="7170" end="7182" title="Thessaloniki" label="Thessaloniki"/>
<link wikidata="Q1524" start="7196" end="7202" title="Athens" label="Athens"/>
<link wikidata="Q406" start="7216" end="7224" title="Istanbul" label="Istanbul"/>
<link wikidata="Q43387" start="7241" end="7247" title="Edirne" label="Edirne"/>
<link wikidata="Q41" start="7322" end="7328" title="Greece" label="Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q219" start="7333" end="7341" title="Bulgaria" label="Bulgaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q2072599" start="7408" end="7414" title="Thermi" label="Thermi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1790862" start="7432" end="7441" title="Zlatograd" label="Zlatograd"/>
<link wikidata="Q389377" start="7467" end="7478" title="A2 motorway (Greece)" label="A2 motorway"/>
<link wikidata="Q405334" start="7505" end="7512" title="Rudozem" label="Rudozem"/>
<link wikidata="Q12273137" start="7555" end="7566" title="Aegean Pass" label="Aegean Pass"/>
<link wikidata="Q18009324" start="7613" end="7635" title="Xanthi railway station" label="Xanthi railway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q98686580" start="7643" end="7675" title="Thessaloniki-Alexandroupoli railway" label="Thessaloniki-Alexandroupoli line"/>
<link wikidata="Q15116556" start="7700" end="7712" title="Thessaloniki railway station" label="Thessaloniki"/>
<link wikidata="Q18335627" start="7717" end="7732" title="Alexandroupoli railway station" label="Alexandroupolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q676516" start="7812" end="7826" title="Kavala Airport" label="Kavala Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1430762" start="7859" end="7882" title="Alexandroupolis Airport" label="Alexandroupolis Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q2707708" start="8074" end="8085" title="Stavroupoli, Xanthi" label="Stavroupoli"/>
<link wikidata="Q5418530" start="8336" end="8343" title="Evmoiro" label="Evmoiro"/>
<link wikidata="Q3555734" start="8420" end="8428" title="Kimmeria" label="Kimmeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1121584" start="8857" end="8888" title="Democritus University of Thrace" label="Democritus University of Thrace"/>
<link wikidata="Q16327356" start="9413" end="9435" title="Xanthi Carnival" label="Xanthi&amp;#x27;s Carnival"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9651" end="9666" title="Emboriou Square" label="Emboriou Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q447433" start="9700" end="9716" title="Manos Hatzidakis" label="Manos Hatzidakis"/>
<link wikidata="Q750437" start="10041" end="10050" title="Xanthi F.C." label="Xanthi FC"/>
<link wikidata="Q63980269" start="10065" end="10086" title="Super League Greece 2" label="Super League Greece 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q3561365" start="10088" end="10097" title="Xanthi BC" label="Xanthi BC"/>
<link wikidata="Q280002" start="10113" end="10128" title="A2 Ethniki" label="Greek A2 League"/>
<link wikidata="Q12872759" start="10130" end="10143" title="A.P.S. Aspida Xanthi" label="Aspida Xanthi"/>
<link wikidata="Q28229949" start="10207" end="10223" title="Orfeas Xanthi F.C." label="Orfeas Xanthi FC"/>
<link wikidata="Q447433" start="10296" end="10312" title="Manos Hadjidakis" label="Manos Hadjidakis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1423540" start="10412" end="10427" title="Never on Sunday" label="Never on Sunday"/>
<link wikidata="Q388991" start="10462" end="10473" title="Şerif Gören" label="Şerif Gören"/>
<link wikidata="Q179808" start="10513" end="10528" title="Palme d&amp;#x27;Or" label="Palme d&amp;#x27;Or"/>
<link wikidata="Q42369" start="10532" end="10552" title="Cannes Film Festival" label="Cannes Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10555" end="10570" title="Янаки Паскалев" label="Yanaki Paskalev"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10619" end="10624" title="Вътрешна македоно-одринска революционна организация" label="IMORO"/>
<link wikidata="Q703525" start="10627" end="10651" title="Archbishop Christodoulos" label="Archbishop Christodoulos"/>
<link wikidata="Q201776" start="10714" end="10731" title="Vasilis Torosidis" label="Vasilis Torosidis"/>
<link wikidata="Q19628" start="10753" end="10768" title="Olympiacos F.C." label="Olympiacos F.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q134925" start="10777" end="10806" title="Greece national football team" label="Greece national football team"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10809" end="10828" title="Lambros Papantoniou" label="Lambros Papantoniou"/>
<link wikidata="Q16980076" start="10906" end="10920" title="Zafeiris Melas" label="Zafeiris Melas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2087267" start="10941" end="10946" title="laïko" label="laïko"/>
<link wikidata="Q63878062" start="10957" end="10972" title="Çiğdem Asafoğlu" label="Çiğdem Asafoğlu"/>
<link wikidata="Q7141080" start="10978" end="11017" title="Party of Friendship, Equality and Peace" label="Party of Friendship, Equality and Peace"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11038" end="11057" title="Apostolos Roumoglou" label="Apostolos Roumoglou"/>
<link wikidata="Q3143454" start="11085" end="11098" title="UConn Huskies" label="UConn Huskies"/>
<link wikidata="Q184711" start="11139" end="11146" title="Twin towns and sister cities" label="twinned"/>
<link wikidata="Q192888" start="11155" end="11162" title="Smolyan" label="Smolyan"/>
<link wikidata="Q252098" start="11175" end="11187" title="Novi Beograd" label="Novi Beograd"/>
<link wikidata="Q14813" start="11198" end="11205" title="Gifhorn" label="Gifhorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q859621" start="11231" end="11235" title="Biga, Çanakkale" label="Biga"/>
<link wikidata="Q43" start="11237" end="11243" title="Turkey" label="Turkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q40738" start="11271" end="11276" title="Bursa" label="Bursa"/>
<link wikidata="Q49562" start="11287" end="11291" title="Adra, Spain" label="Adra"/>
<link wikidata="Q19896642" start="11326" end="11348" title="Xanthi (regional unit)" label="Xanthi (regional unit)"/>
<link wikidata="Q171314" start="11350" end="11378" title="Eastern Macedonia and Thrace" label="Eastern Macedonia and Thrace"/>
<link wikidata="Q41741" start="11380" end="11386" title="Thrace" label="Thrace"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192701" start="11388" end="11402" title="Western Thrace" label="Western Thrace"/>
<link wikidata="Q16327356" start="11404" end="11419" title="Xanthi Carnival" label="Xanthi Carnival"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="461211" wikidata="Q1502" url="?curid=461211" title="Mizoram">
<text>Mizoram is a landlocked state in northeastern India, with Aizawl as its capital and largest city. It shares 722-kilometres (449 miles) of international borders with Bangladesh to the west, and Myanmar to the east and south, with domestic borders with the Indian states of Assam, Manipur, and Tripura. It covers an area of 21,087 square kilometres (8,139 sq mi). 91% of the area is covered by forests, making it the most heavily forested state in India. With an estimated population of 1.25 million in 2023, it is the second least populated state in India. With an urbanisation rate of 51.5% it is the most urbanised state in northeast India, ranking fifth in urbanisation nationwide. One of the two official languages and most widely spoken tongue is Mizo, which serves as a lingua franca among various ethnic communities who speak a variety of other Tibeto-Burman or Indo-Aryan languages. Mizoram is home to the highest percentage of scheduled tribes in India, with the Mizo people forming the majority.

Early civilisations in Mizoram are believed to have thrived since around 600 BC, with significant archaeological evidence uncovered in the Vangchhia region. Following this, Tibeto-Burman-speaking peoples gradually migrated from the Chin Hills in present-day Myanmar. These groups formed organised chiefdoms and adopted jhum agricultural practices. By the 18th century, various clans in the region united to form the Mizo identity, becoming the dominant inhabitants of the area, introducing the Mizo language, culture, and the Sakhua religion. In the mid-19th century, the British conducted a series of military expeditions to assert control over the region, Mizoram was annexed by the British in 1895 and incorporated into the Assam Province. Under British rule, the introduction of administrative reforms and the spread of Christianity significantly impacted Mizo society.

After India gained independence in 1947, Mizoram remained part of Assam as the Lushai Hills District. After the Assamese Government&#x27;s negligence of the Mizos during the famine, insurgency was led by the Mizo National Front in the 1960s which culminated in the signing of the Mizoram Peace Accord in 1986. On 20 February 1987, Mizoram was granted full statehood, becoming the 23rd state of India.

Mizoram is predominantly Christian, with about 87% of the population practising Christianity, mainly Protestant denominations such as Presbyterian and Baptist. It is one of the three states of India with a Christian majority (87%). Other religions such as Buddhism (8.51%), Hinduism (2.75%), and Islam (1.35%) are also practised in the state. Mizoram&#x27;s population is predominantly made up of Mizo or Zo tribes, comprising about 83.4% of the state&#x27;s population, with other significant communities including the Chakma (8.5%) and Tripuri (3%). Due to the prolonged civil conflict in Myanmar, Mizoram has also seen an influx of Burmese communities, especially from the Chin ethnic group, which have sought refuge in the region, with an estimated 70,000 to 100,000 Burmese refugees residing in the state.

Mizoram is a highly literate agrarian economy. Slash-and-burn farming, also known as jhum, is the most common form of farming in the state. In recent years, the jhum farming practices have been steadily replaced with a significant horticulture and bamboo products industry. The state&#x27;s gross state domestic product for 2012 was estimated at . About 20% of Mizoram&#x27;s population lives below the poverty line, with 35% rural poverty as of 2014. The state has about 871 kilometres of national highways, with NH–54 and NH–150 connecting it to Assam and Manipur respectively. It is also a growing transit point for trade with Myanmar and Bangladesh.

==Etymology and names==
The name Mizoram is derived from two Mizo words: &quot;Mizo&quot; and &quot;ram&quot;. &quot;Mizo&quot; refers to the native inhabitants of the region, with &quot;Mi&quot; (cognate to ) meaning &quot;human&quot; or &quot;civilian&quot; and &quot;Zo&quot; holding varied interpretations. Some suggest &quot;Zo&quot; signifies &quot;highland&quot; or &quot;remote,&quot; drawing parallels to Willem van Schendel&#x27;s concept of &quot;Zomia&quot;. Others associate it with the feeling of &quot;cool&quot; or &quot;crisp,&quot; evoking the climate of the high-altitude region. The term Mizo has evolved into a broad ethnic classification, encompassing various subgroups and clans inhabiting the area, historically known as the Lushai Hills. Many speakers of Central Kuki-Chin languages have also adopted the Mizo identity. 

The second component, &quot;ram&quot;, means &quot;land&quot; or &quot;forest&quot; (cognate to ). Together, Mizoram translates to &quot;land of the Mizos&quot; or simply &quot;Mizo land.&quot;

The Lushais were known as the Ka Lin Kaw or the Kalinko () by the pre-modern Burmans, though detailed etymological studies specific to this name are limited.

According to Lalthangliana, the term Mizo is argued to be from an early settlement in Mizoram. When Chief Lallula established Zopui, he gained a reputation of successfully raiding the Chins and building up his power. Zopui literally translates to Big town of Zo. The term Mizo is said to have possibly emerged from the inhabitants who wanted to distinguish themselves of descending from Zopui under Chief Lallula. The term Mizo became popular by the 1961 census, with over 96% of the population identifying under the term. The popularity is argued to be due to political developments. The Mizo Union established its name to encompass all tribes in the then Lushai Hills. In 1954 the Mizo Union changed the name of the Lushai Hills to the Mizo district.

Before gaining statehood in 1987, the region was historically known as the Lushai Hills District during and after British colonial rule. The term Lushai is an anglicised form of Lusei, one of the prominent clans among the Mizo people. Then, the new state government of Mizoram had replaced the old name with Mizoram to reflect the broader identity of the Mizo community.

==History==

===Prehistory (600 BCE)===

The prehistory and early history of Mizoram are marked by the presence of ancient human settlements, with evidence suggesting that people inhabited the region as early as 2,000 to 3,000 years ago. The archaeological evidence from the Vangchhia site has provided insights into the region&#x27;s ancient past, with human remains, ornaments, pottery, and burial practices dating back to 600 BCE and extending up to 1750 CE. Excavations at Vangchhia revealed a sophisticated culture with distinct socio-political structures of the Indo–Lushai cultural genus. This necropolis is considered one of the largest in the world.

Similar megalithic stones have been discovered in nearby villages like Farkawn, Lianpui, Khankawn, Khawbung, and Vaphai, suggesting a widespread culture. In addition, remnants of small, man-made cave dwellings, topped with towering menhirs, were found at the hilltop village of Dungtlang. These large stones, taller than an average grown man, raise intriguing questions about their purpose, the people who erected them, and how these massive boulders were transported up steep mountain slopes from the valley below, possibly the region&#x27;s only apparent stone quarry.

A unique discovery at Vangchhia is the &quot;Pipute Lamlian&quot; (lit. &#x27;grandparents&#x27; big path&#x27;), or &quot;Ancestors&#x27; Pathway,&quot; which is a footpath that traverses the site and branches out in three directions—north, south, and east. The path is lined with rocks engraved with images of bison heads, flowers, and human figures, reminiscent of carvings found at Kawtchhuah Ropui. This suggests that the region&#x27;s ancient societies developed their own unique cultural practices, separate from other civilisations, with trade connections extending across the region, including Bangladesh, Mainland India, and Myanmar.

Among the most significant findings is a 200-metre long water pavilion, a stone structure resembling those found in Mughal cities. This water pavilion, likely used as a recreational arena, is surrounded by an elevated platform, suggesting its role in entertainment and social gatherings. The discovery of such a feature points to the possibility of a much larger, lost civilisation, and further excavation is essential to draw definitive conclusions about the site&#x27;s full historical significance.

===Arrival of the Luseis (1500s)===
The Mizos, part of the Tibeto-Burman linguistic group, are believed to have embarked on this southward journey between the 16th and 18th centuries, originating from areas in present-day China and Myanmar.

The Chhinlung legend, cherished in Mizo folklore, speaks of an ancestral homeland, often associated with a location near the Yalong River in China. Linguistic and anthropological evidence suggests that the Mizos passed through the Shan State of Myanmar, the Kabaw Valley, settled in the Chin Hills, then the Luseis crossed the Ṭiau river to settle in the Lushai Hills.
The people living in the Lushai Hills were generally referred to as the Cucis or Kukis by their neighbouring ethnic groups which was also a term adopted by the British writers. The claim that &#x27;The Kukis are the earliest known residents of the Mizo hills area,&#x27; must be read in this light. The majority of the tribes classified as &quot;Mizo&quot; today most likely migrated to their present territories from the neighbouring countries in several waves, starting around 1500 CE.

===Chieftainship (1500s–1954)===
Historically, Mizo chiefdoms were primarily subsistence-based, practising slash-and-burn, locally called &quot;jhum&quot; cultivation, but they also engaged in trade due to their proximity to ancient trade routes linking Yunnan to the Bay of Bengal. Chiefs often demanded tributes from neighbouring kingdoms in the plains and established a barter system within their chiefdoms. Larger transactions relied on the &quot;mithun&quot; (tame bison) as a unit of wealth and compensation, while elephant tusks served as an alternative currency. Mizo chiefs also employed &quot;karbari&quot; or &quot;men of business&quot;, who acted as intermediaries between the chiefs and foreign traders. Skilled in jungle navigation and multiple languages, such as Bengali, the &quot;karbari&quot; facilitated trade, particularly in South Lushai Hills.

The forests of Mizoram provided valuable resources such as elephant hides and bones, which were highly sought after by merchants from Sylhet during the Mughal Empire. Elephant hides were used for shields in local infantry and cavalry, while the bones were crafted into luxury items and sword parts. Chiefs maintained a rudimentary system for measuring and sorting goods like rice, using specially shaped buckets.

The Zawlbuk system was established during the chieftainship era as a cornerstone of Mizo society, blending governance, defence, and cultural education. Originating as a dormitory for young men, it was situated at the village entrance to serve as both a sentinel hub and a training ground. Chiefs and elders implemented the Zawlbuk to prepare the youth for communal responsibilities, teaching them skills in warfare, agriculture, and social customs. This system fostered unity, discipline, and loyalty, ensuring that the village thrived under the collective effort and vigilance of its people.

====Selesih Confederation (1700s)====
Selesih emerged as the foundation of the Sailo clan’s power. The migration of the Sailo clan from the neighbouring region, prompted by conflicts with groups such as the Chins (or &quot;Poi&quot; in Mizo), led to the establishment of this significant site. Around 1720, the clan, under the leadership of Chief Sailova’s sons, Chungnunga and Lianlula, created a refuge in Selesih.

As external threats loomed, particularly from the Poi in the east, the leaders of Selesih, understanding the importance of unity for survival, formed a confederation of seven chiefs to defend their land. This confederation brought together a diverse range of tribes from the region, including the five major tribes and twelve minor tribes, creating a peaceful coexistence among them. The settlement, with a population estimated to be between 50,000 and 100,000, housed approximately 7,000 homes, making it one of the most prosperous and populous settlements in ancient Mizoram.

Spoken by the Sailo clan, the Lusei dialect emerged as the dominant form of speech within the confederation. As the settlement expanded and mingled with neighbouring tribes, the Lusei dialect gained prominence and eventually became the cornerstone of the modern Mizo language.

The Selesih Confederation began to decline in the late 18th century, mainly due to socio-political and environmental factors. One of the primary reasons for its fall was the unsustainable agricultural practices, particularly shifting cultivation (jhum), which required regular migration to maintain fertile land. It is now located between South Khawbung and Zawlsei villages in Champhai district.

===British Lushai Hills (1898–1947)===
Following the conclusion of the First Anglo-Burmese War, the British solidified their presence in Assam and Bengal, bringing them closer to the Lushai Hills. The first Anglo–Lushai skirmishes occurred after the Lushai Expedition in 1870–71 prompted by the Lushai kidnapping of a British tea owner&#x27;s daughter, Mary Winchester during a major raid in Alexandrapur. Various Lushai chiefs invaded Chittagong, Cachar, Tripura, Sylhet, and Manipur between the end of 1870 and the beginning of 1871. These were attributed to Vanhnuailiana, Lalbura, Bengkhuaia and Savunga. After the British retaliated, the region remained peaceful until 1888 when chiefs resumed raiding British enterprises and settlements, which saw the Chin-Lushai Expedition of 1889–90. British historical records on the Mizo Hills state that similar inter-ethnic tribal raids continued for decades after the &quot;First British Invasion.&quot; Such raids would be to seek out loot, slaves, or retaliation for earlier lost battles.

The southern region of the Lushai Hills was occupied first in 1889 and was part of the Bengal Presidency. Its capitals were Fort Treagor (1889–1892) and Lung Leh (1892–1898). Then, North Lushai Hills was occupied in 1891 and was part of the Assam Province. In 1898, both regions merged into the Lushai Hills of Assam Province, with Aijal as the capital. At the time of the British conquest, there were around 60 chiefs.

The annexation of the Lushai Hills saw resistance from the chiefs across separate periods between 1890-1895. A western Lushai Rising was led by Khalkam in 1890. An Eastern Lushai Rising was led by Lalbura in 1892. The southern chiefs such as Ropuiliani and Zakapa were also subdued.

====World War I====
During World War I, few Lushais initially enlisted, but social pressures and benefits like tax exemptions and travel opportunities boosted recruitment. By April 1917, 2100 Lushai men joined the 27th Indian Labour Corps, serving in France, Mesopotamia, and other regions. They faced challenges such as disease and casualties, with 71 deaths recorded. Exposure to foreign cultures influenced modernisation, introducing European styles and French culinary elements. Returning veterans joined Indian military units, and a memorial was built in Aijal to honour those who served.

====First political movements====
Organised political movements in the Lushai Hills began in 1925 under Telela Ralte, seeking representation in the Assam administration.
Supported by Chawngbawia, a schoolteacher, and Khasi leader J.J.M. Nichols Roy, the group advocated for administrative change but faced suppression, with arrests by the superintendent N.E. Parry halting progress until after World War II. Concurrently, the Inner Line Regulation was amended to restrict external influence, preserving cultural and land integrity while ensuring British dominion boundaries.

During Superintendent Anthony Gilchrist McCall&#x27;s administration (1933–1943), significant initiatives such as Ten Point Code promoted cultural preservation and modernisation, while the Village Welfare System addressed public health and living conditions, managed by Red Cross committees. McCall also supported Lushai Hills Cottage Industries privately and established the Chief&#x27;s Durbar to coordinate chiefs to prepare the Lushai Hills for self-governance and align them with British administrative policies.

Later, the rise of education and inspiration from the Young Men&#x27;s Buddhist Association in Burma led to the formation of the Young Lushai Association (YLA) in 1935, a cultural organisation initially composed of chiefs&#x27; sons but eventually dominated by commoners. The YLA opposed Lushai chieftainship, shaping the ideology of future political leaders like Vanlawma. McCall&#x27;s progressive policies complemented the YLA&#x27;s cultural influence, which transitioned to political activism with the founding of the Mizo Union.

====World War II====

In April 1942, during the Japanese occupation of Burma, Superintendent Anthony Gilchrist McCall of the Lushai Hills implemented the Total Defence Scheme (TDS) to counter the threat of Japanese invasion. He secured the loyalty of 300 tribal chiefs to the British Crown and prepared for asymmetrical warfare, including guerrilla tactics, scorched earth measures, and strategic ambushes. Despite McCall’s recall in 1943, the TDS, aided by Australian trainers like Colonel Parsons, successfully defended the region, contributing to the Japanese retreat from India’s borderlands by late 1944.

====Pre-independence====
The Mizo Union, while largely supporting union with India, faced internal divisions as a right-wing faction emerged, favouring alternatives like Prof. Coupland&#x27;s Crown Colony Scheme, which proposed a unified British colony for Zo-Kuki-Chin areas. This faction later formed the United Mizo Freedom Organization (UMFO) under Burmese Mizo influence, led by Burmese ex-military officer Lalbiakthanga and Lalmawia Khiangte. Known as &quot;Zalen Pawl&quot; (&quot;Party of the Privileged&quot;), the UMFO struggled to gain significant support, failing to counteract the Mizo Union’s push for integration with India.

===Post 1947===

By the time India gained independence from the British Empire, the number of tribal chiefs had increased to over 200. The educated elites among the Mizos campaigned against the tribal chiefdoms under the banner of the Mizo Union. As a result of their campaign, the hereditary rights of the 259 chiefs were abolished under the Assam-Lushai District (&quot;Acquisition of Chief&#x27;s Rights&quot;) Act, 1954. Village courts were re-implemented in the Mizo region along with other parts of Assam. Few Christian missionaries came to Mizoram during the colonial period knowing that the rural hill population was busy fighting among different tribes. The missionaries propagated Christianity with the support of the British government. As a result, majority of the population converted to Christianity and changed their faiths without any resistance.
The Mizos were particularly dissatisfied with the government&#x27;s inadequate response to the 1959–60 mautam famine. The Mizo National Famine Front, a body formed for famine relief in 1959, later developed into a new political organisation, the Mizo National Front (MNF), in 1961. On 28 February 1966, the Mizo National Front launched an uprising in Aizawl to declare independence from India. The Indian government retaliated with coordinated air bombings in the only instance to happen on Indian soil on 5–6 March on Aizawl and subdued the uprising.

The Mizo National Front turned to underground operations within the forested regions of Mizoram and utilised towns and villages as logistic points and other guerrilla operations. This led to the army to pursue displacement policies in which villages were grouped and moved close to highways. The insurgency would continue to operate at lower levels until the signing of the Mizo Accord in 1986.
In 1971, the government agreed to convert Mizo District into a Union Territory, which became Mizoram in 1972. In 1986, Mizoram Peace Accord (1986) was agreed between the Government and the MNF. In 1986, the Indian Parliament adopted the 53rd amendment of the Indian Constitution, which allowed for the creation of the State of Mizoram on 20 February 1987, as India&#x27;s 23rd state. Mizoram was given two seats in the Parliament, one each in the Lok Sabha and in the Rajya Sabha.

==Geography==
Mizoram is a landlocked state in North East India whose southern part shares 722 kilometres long international borders with Myanmar and Bangladesh, and northern part share domestic borders with Manipur, Assam and Tripura. It is the fifth smallest state of India with . It extends from 21°56&#x27;N to 24°31&#x27;N, and 92°16&#x27;E to 93°26&#x27;E. The tropic of cancer runs through the state nearly at its middle. The maximum north–south distance is 285 km, while maximum east–west stretch is 115 km.

Mizoram is a land of rolling hills, valleys, rivers and lakes. As many as 21 major hill ranges or peaks of different heights run through the length and breadth of the state, with plains scattered here and there. The average height of the hills to the west of the state is about . These gradually rise up to to the east. Some areas, however, have higher ranges which go up to a height of over . Phawngpui Tlang also known as the Blue Mountain, situated in the southeastern part of the state, is the highest peak in Mizoram at . About 76% of the state is covered by forests, 8% is fallows land, 3% is barren and considered uncultivable area, while cultivable and sown area constitutes the rest. Slash-and-burn or &quot;jhum&quot; cultivation, though discouraged, remains in practice in Mizoram and affects its topography. A report by Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change in 2021 states that Mizoram has the highest forest cover as a percentage of its geographical area of any Indian state, being 84.53% forest.

Mizoram terrain is, according to the Geological Survey of India, an immature topography, and the physiographic expression consists of several almost north–south longitudinal valleys containing series of small and flat hummocks, mostly anticlinal, parallel to sub-parallel hill ranges and narrow adjoining synclinal valleys with series of topographic highs. The general geology of western Mizoram consists of repetitive succession of Neogene sedimentary rocks of the Surma Group and Tipam Formation such as sandstone, siltstone, mudstone and rare pockets of shell limestone. The eastern part is the Barail Group. Mizoram lies in seismic zone V, according to the India Meteorological Department; as with other northeastern states of India, this means the state has the highest risk of earthquakes relative to other parts of India.

The biggest river in Mizoram is Chhimtuipui, also known as Kaladan (or Kolodyne). It originates in Chin state in Burma and passes through Saiha and Lawngtlai districts in the southern tip of Mizoram, goes back to Burma&#x27;s Rakhine state. Although many more rivers and streams drain the hill ranges, the most important and useful rivers are the Tlawng, Tut, Tuirial and Tuivawl which flow through the northern territory and eventually join the Barak River in Cachar District. The rivers have a gentle drainage gradient particularly in the south.

===Climate===
Mizoram has a mild climate, being relatively cool in summer but progressively warmer, most probably due to climate change, with summer temperatures crossing 30 degrees Celsius and winter temperatures ranging from . The region is influenced by monsoons, raining heavily from May to September with little rain in the dry (cold) season. The climate pattern is moist tropical to moist sub-tropical, with average state rainfall per annum. In the capital Aizawl, rainfall is about and in Lunglei, another major centre, about . The state is in a region where cyclones and landslides can cause weather-related emergencies.

===Biodiversity===
Mizoram has the third highest total forest cover with hectares ( acres), and highest percentage area (90.68%) covered by forests, among the states of India, according to 2011 Forest Survey of India. Tropical semi-evergreen, tropical moist deciduous, subtropical broadleaved hill and subtropical pine forests are the most common vegetation types found in Mizoram. Bamboo is common in the state, typically intermixed with other forest vegetation; about 9,245 km2 (44%) of the state&#x27;s area is bamboo bearing. The state and central governments of India have cooperated to reserve and protect 67% of the land covered by forests, and additional 15% by management. Only 17% of the land is non-forested area for cultivation, industry, mining, housing and other commercial human activity. Satellite data suggests 91% of state&#x27;s geographical area is covered by forests.

Jhum cultivation, or slash-and-burn practice, was a historic tradition in Mizoram and a threat to its forest cover. This practice has reduced in recent decades, due to a government-supported initiative to support horticultural crops such as pineapple and banana plantations.
Mizoram is host to numerous species of birds, wildlife and flora. About 640 species of birds have been identified in the state, many of which are endemic to the Himalayan foothills and southeast Asia. Of the birds found in Mizoram forests, 27 are on the worldwide threatened species lists and eight are on the critically endangered list. Prominent birds spotted in Mizoram include those from the families of Phasianidae, Anatidae, Ciconiidae, Threskiornithidae, Ardeidae, Pelecanidae, Phalacrocoracidae, Falconidae, Accipitridae, Otididae, Rallidae, Heliornithidae, Turnicidae, Burhinidae, Charadriidae, Scolopacidae, Jacanidae, Laridae, Columbidae, Psittacidae, Cuculidae, Strigidae, Caprimulgidae, Apodidae, Alcedinidae, Meropidae, Bucerotidae, Ramphastidae, Picidae, Pittidae, Laniidae, Campephagidae, Dicruridae, Corvidae, Paridae, Hirundinidae, Cisticolidae, Pycnonotidae, Sylviidae, Timaliidae, Sittidae, Sturnidae, Turdidae, Dicaedae, Chloropseidae, Ploceidae, Motacillidae, Fringillidae, Nectariniidae and Muscicapidae.

The state is also host to a variety of fauna, just like its sister northeastern Indian states. Mammal species observed in the Mizoram forests include slow loris (&quot;Nycticebus coucang&quot;), red serow (&quot;Capricornis rubidus&quot;), which is the state animal, goral (&quot;Nemorhaedus goral&quot;), tiger (&quot;Panthera tigris&quot;), leopard (&quot;Panthera pardus&quot;), clouded leopard (&quot;Neofelis nebulosi&quot;), leopard cat (&quot;Prionailurus bengalensis&quot;), Bengal fox (&quot;Vulpes bengalensis&quot;), and Asiatic black bear (&quot;Ursus thibetanus&quot;). Primates seen include stump-tailed macaque (&quot;Macaca arctoides&quot;), hoolock gibbon (&quot;Hylobates hoolock&quot;), Phayre&#x27;s leaf monkey (&quot;Trachypithecus phayrei&quot;) and capped langur (&quot;Trachypithecus pileatus&quot;). The state is also home to many reptiles, amphibians, fish and invertebrates.

The state has two national parks and six wildlife sanctuaries – Blue Mountain (Phawngpui) National Park, Dampa Tiger Reserve (largest), Lengteng Wildlife Sanctuary, Murlen National Park, Ngengpui Wildlife Sanctuary, Tawi Wildlife Sanctuary, Khawnglung Wildlife Sanctuary, and Thorangtlang Wildlife Sanctuary.

==Demographics==

Mizoram has a population of 1,091,014 with 552,339 males and 538,675 females. This reflects a 22.8% growth since 2001 census; still, Mizoram is second least populated state of India. The sex ratio of the state is 976 females per thousand males, higher than the national ratio 940. The density of population is 52 persons per square kilometre.

The literacy rate of Mizoram in 2011 was 91.58 per cent, higher than the national average 74.04 per cent, and second best among all the states of India. About 52% of Mizoram population lives in urban areas, much higher than India&#x27;s average. Over one third of the population of Mizoram lives in Aizawl district, which hosts the capital.

===Largest cities or towns===
===Ethnic groups===
The great majority of Mizoram&#x27;s population consists of several ethnic tribes who are either culturally or linguistically linked. These ethnic groups are collectively known as Mizos (&quot;Mi&quot; means People, &quot;Zo&quot; meaning the name of a progenitor; Mizo thus is People of Zo origin).

Sometime in the 16th century CE, the first batch of Mizo crossed Tiau River and settled in Mizoram and they were called as Kukis by Bengalis. The term Kuki mean the inhabitants of the interior and inaccessible mountain tracts. Sometimes grouped as Kuki-Chin tribes, The First batch were called Old Kukis, which are the Biate, Ranglong and the Hrangkhol, and the second batch that followed include Lushei (or Lusei), Paite, Lai, Mara, Ralte, Hmar, Thadou, Shendus, and several other.

The Bru (Reang), Chakma, Tanchangya are some non-Kuki tribes of Mizoram, with some suggestion that some of these are Indo-Aryan in their origins. The Bnei Menashe tribe claim Jewish descent.

The diversity of tribal groups reflects the historical immigration patterns. Different tribes and sub-tribes arrived in the present Mizoram, in successive waves and settled down in different parts of the state. Further, as they arrived, there were raids, fear of raids and intertribal feuds. The resulting isolation and separation created numerous tribes and sub-tribes.

Other than tribal groups, other ethnic groups inhabit Mizoram including Bengalis and Nepalis. Nepali Gorkhas, for example, were encouraged to settle in Aizawl area and other parts of Mizoram during the British colonial times. Thousands of their descendants are now residents of Mizoram.

===Protected demographic category===

According to 2011 census, Mizoram had 1,036,115 people (nearly 95% of total) classified as Scheduled Tribe, the highest concentration of protected tribal people in all states of India. This demographic classification, given to Mizoram tribes since the 1950s, has provided reservations and extra resources in education and government job opportunities, a preferential treatment as a means to accelerate their integration with mainstream society.

===Languages===


Mizo and English are the official languages of the state.

===Religion===
The majority (87%) of Mizos are Christians in various denominations, predominantly Presbyterian. Mizoram has a significant Theravada Buddhist population of 8.5%, who are mainly Chakma people, making them the largest religious minority in the region, followed by Hindus at 2.7% according to the 2011 census. There are several thousand people, mostly ethnic Mizo, who have converted to Judaism claiming to be one of the lost Judaic tribe group Bnei Menashe, with descent from the biblical Manasseh.

====Christianity====
The major Christian denomination is the Mizoram Presbyterian Church, which was established by the Welsh missionary David Evan Jones starting in 1894. By the time India gained independence from British Empire, some 80% of Lushei tribe people had converted to Christianity. The Mizoram Presbyterian Church is one of the constituted bodies of the General Assembly of the Presbyterian Church of India at Shillong in Meghalaya; it became the dominant Christian group in north Mizoram hills. In the southern hills of Mizoram, the Baptist Church had the dominant following.

====Buddhism====
According to 2011 census report, there are 93,411 people (8.51%) who follow Buddhism in Mizoram. The Chakmas and Tanchangya have been Buddhist for many centuries

====Hinduism====

According to the 2011 census, there were 30,136 Hindus in Mizoram or about 2.75% of the population.

====Others====

There are also a few Mizos who practice Judaism (866 according to the 2001 census) and a modernised traditional Mizo religion called &quot;Hnam sakhua&quot;, which places a special emphasis on Mizo culture and seeks to revive traditional Mizo values while opposing the influence of Christianity on Mizo people.

A total of 1,367 people practised the Mizo religion according to the 2001 census. This number included, in addition to the original Mizo religion (755 people), adherents of other tribal religions such as Lalchhungkua (279), Lalhnam (122), and Nunna Lalchhungkua (211).

==Politics==
Originally village land, locally called &quot;ram&quot;, was the property of the tribal chief. The institution of chieftainship began in the 16th century. Each village behaved like a small state, and the chief was called &quot;Lal&quot;. The rule was hereditary, and there were no written laws (the first script for Mizo language was developed by Christian Missionaries Lorraine and Savidge about 1895).

After annexation by the British in the 1890s, the northern part of Mizoram was administered as the Lushai Hills district of Assam, while southern Mizoram was part of Bengal. In 1898, the southern part was transferred from Bengal to Assam. The colonial power retained the chiefs and Mizo customs, including the socially stratified hereditary transfer of political power. In 1937, under Section 6 of the Scheduled District Act, the British administration consolidated executive and legislative political power to the Deputy Commissioner and District magistrates, with village chiefs in advisory role. The political and judiciary powers of chiefs were neither final nor exclusive, thereafter. Rulings could be appealed to courts staffed with British officials. After India gained independence from the colonial rule, the region was granted autonomous status in 1952, where Mizo people formulated their own laws and delivered judicial decisions. The region was renamed as Mizo District within Assam State in April 1954 and in that year, the institution of hereditary chieftainship was abolished, and instead village courts/council were set up.

The representatives of the Lushai Hills Autonomous District Council and the Mizo Union pleaded with the States Reorganisation Commission (SRC) to integrate the Mizo-dominated areas of Tripura and Manipur with the District Council in Assam. The tribal leaders in the northeast were unhappy with the final SRC recommendations and met in Aizawl in 1955 to form a new political party, Eastern India Tribal Union (EITU).
In the 1950s, the fears of Assamese hegemony and perceived lack of government concern led to growing discontent among the Mizos. The Mizos were particularly dissatisfied with the government&#x27;s inadequate response to the 1959–60 mautam famine. The Mizo National Famine Front, a body formed for famine relief in 1959, later developed into a new political organisation, the Mizo National Front (MNF) in 1961. The Front sought sovereign independence for the Mizo territory, staging an armed insurrection with the 28 February 1966 uprising against the government. The revolt was suppressed by the government of India, which carried out airstrikes in Aizawl and surrounding areas.

Assam state was split, re-organised into multiple political regions, Mizo hills area was declared Mizoram after the insurgency, and it received status as a Union Territory in 1972. A Peace Accord was signed between central government and insurgent groups of Mizoram on 30 June 1986. Per the accord, insurgents surrendered their arms and Mizoram became the 23rd state of India in 1986, formalised the following year. The first election of Mizoram Legislative Assembly was held on 16 February 1987. Elections have been held at 5-year intervals since then. Elections were held for 40 seats of legislative assembly on 28 November 2018. The voter turnout was 80%. The Mizo National Front led by Zoramthanga was elected to power.

V. K. Singh is the governor of Mizoram since December 2024.

==Administration==


The Mizoram State Legislative Assembly has 40 seats and the Village Councils are the grassroots of democracy and leadership in Mizoram. The state has a chief minister, council of ministers with a portfolio of ministries responsible for different priorities and role of the government.

There are eleven districts in Mizoram. A district of Mizoram is headed by a Deputy Commissioner who is in charge of the administration in that particular district. The Deputy Commissioner is the executive head of the district, responsible for implementing government regulations, the law and order situation in the district, as well as being responsible for tax collection for the government.

A Superintendent of Police is responsible for the police administration of each district.

The Capital city of Aizawl is managed by Aizawl Municipal Corporation and the Lunglei town is managed by Lunglei Municipal Council.

The state has 3 autonomous district councils for ethnic minorities- Chakma Autonomous District Council, Lai Autonomous District Council and Mara Autonomous District Council. Additionally, the local body Sinlung Hills Council was formed for Hmar minority.

==Economy==
Mizoram gross state domestic product (GSDP) in 2011-2012 was about . The state&#x27;s gross state domestic product (GSDP) growth rate was nearly 10% annually over 2001-2013 period. As of 2019, the states&#x27;s provisional GSDP was expected to be . With international borders with Bangladesh and Myanmar, it is an important trade state for southeast Asian imports to India, as well as exports from India.

The biggest contributors to state&#x27;s GSDP growth are agriculture, public administration, and construction work. Tertiary sector of service sector continued to have the contribution to the GSDP with its share hovering between 58% and 60% during the past decade.

As of 2013, according to the Reserve Bank of India, 20.4% of the state population is below poverty line, about the same as the 21.9% average for India. Rural poverty is significantly higher in Mizoram, with 35.4% below the poverty line compared to India&#x27;s rural poverty average of 25.7; while in urban areas of Mizoram, 6.4% are below the poverty line.

Mizoram has a highly literate work force, with literacy rate of nearly 90% and widespread use of English. The state has a total of 4,300 kilometres of roads of which 927 kilometres are high quality national highways and 700 kilometres of state highways. The state is developing its Kolodyne River () for navigation and international trade. Mizoram&#x27;s airport is at the capital city of Aizawl. The state is a power deficit state, with plans to develop its hydroelectric potential. After agriculture, the major employer of its people include handloom and horticulture industries. Tourism is a growth industry. In 2008, the state had nearly 7,000 registered companies. The state government has been implementing special economic zones (SEZs) to encourage economic growth.

===Agriculture===

Between 55% and 60% of the working population of the state is annually deployed on agriculture. The sector&#x27;s contribution to the gross state domestic product was 30% in 1994, just 14% in 2009 due to economic growth of other sectors.

Agriculture has traditionally been a subsistence profession in Mizoram. It is seen as a means for generate food for one&#x27;s family, ignoring its potential for commerce, growth and prosperity. Rice remains the largest crop grown in Mizoram by gross value of output. Fruits have grown to become the second largest category, followed by condiments and spices.

;Jhum practice

Before 1947, agriculture in Mizoram predominantly used to be slash-and-burn driven &quot;Jhum&quot; cultivation. This was discouraged by the state government, and the practice has been slowly declining. A 2012 report estimates the proportion of shifting cultivation area in Mizoram to be about 30% - predominant part of which was for rice production (56% to 63% depending on the year). Despite dedicating largest amount of labour, jhum cultivated and non-jhum crop area to rice, the yields are low; Mizoram average rice yields per acre is about 70% of India&#x27;s average rice yield per acre and 32% of India&#x27;s best yield. Mizoram produces about 26% of rice it consumes every year, and it buys the deficit from other states of India.

The crop area used for jhum cultivation rotates in Mizoram; that is, the area slashed and burnt for a crop is abandoned for a few years and then &quot;jhumias&quot; return to slash and burn the same plot after a few years of non-use. The primary reasons for cyclical jhum cultivation includes, according to Goswami et al.

;Horticulture

In horticulture and floriculture, Mizoram is a significant producer and global exporter of &quot;Anthurium&quot; (over 7 million a year) and roses. It is also a significant producer and domestic supplier of banana, ginger, turmeric, passion fruit, orange and chowchow. Mizoram has accomplished this horticulture success and exports in 2009, with just 6% of its cultivated land dedicated to horticulture and floriculture, indicating a large potential for further growth and economic integration with other Indian states as well export driven economy. In 2013, the area dedicated to horticulture and floriculture increased to 9.4% of 1.2 million hectares potential.

The agricultural productivity is very low in Mizoram. The state gets a lot of rain, but its soil is porous and irrigation infrastructure very inadequate; this has affected it crop yield and reliability. The yield issue that can be addressed by building irrigation infrastructure and adoption of better crop technologies. The state also has very low consumption of fertiliser and pesticides, which scholars suggest offers an opportunity for organic farming particularly of vegetables and fruits.

===Forestry, fisheries and sericulture===
Mizoram is one of the leading producers of bamboo in India, has 27 species of bamboo, and supplies 14% of India&#x27;s commercial bamboo. Forest products contribute about 5% to the state&#x27;s gross product. The state produces about 5,200 metric tonnes of fish a year, about 12% of potential that can be sustainably achieved. Sericulture is an important handicraft industry engaged by nearly 8,000 families in over 300 Mizo villages.

===Industry===

Mizoram has two industrial estates at Zuangtui and Kolasib. Another software technology park is being established in Mizoram University campus. The state government has acquired 127 acres of land in Khawnuam for development of the Indo-Myanmar border trade township.

===Energy infrastructure===
Mizoram is not self-sufficient in power. In 2012, the state had a demand for 107 MW of power, but had an effective installed capacity of only 29.35 MW. To bridge the gap, it purchased electricity from the national grid.

The hydroelectric power potential of Mizoram was assessed to be about 3600 MW in 2010, and about 4500 MW in 2012. If even half of this is realised, the state could supply all its citizens and industry with 24/7 electricity, as well as earn income by selling surplus power to the national grid. The topography of Mizoram hydroelectric resources is ideal for power projects. The following rivers are suited for hydel projects with minimal impact on its biosphere – Tuivai, Tuivawl, Tlawng, Tut, Serlui, Tuirial, Kolodyne, Tuichang, Tuipui, Tiau and Mat. Beyond the major rivers, Mizoram has many small but perennial streams and rivulets with ideal condition for developing micro/mini and small hydroelectric projects. The state has proposed projects to attract private investments on Build, Own, Operate and Transfer (BOOT) basis with financial assistance in rehabilitating its citizens were they to be affected by the project. The largest proposed project is expected to be on Kolodyne (460 MW), and there are dozens of small to micro projects that have been identified.

The main energy infrastructures in Mizoram are:
*Tuirial Dam 60 MW.
*Serlui B Dam 12 MW.
*Vankal Solar Park 20 MW.

==Transport infrastructure==
*Road network: In 2012, Mizoram had a road network of around including unsurfaced village roads to surfaced national highways; and there were 106,000 registered motor vehicles. The village roads are primarily single lane or unmetalled tracks that are typically lightly trafficked. Mizoram had 871 kilometres of national highways, 1,663 kilometres of state highways and 2,320 kilometres of surfaced district roads. All of Mizoram&#x27;s 23 urban centres and 59% of its 764 villages are connected by all weather roads. However, landslide and weather damage to these roads is significant in parts.
*Airport: Mizoram has an airport, Lengpui Airport (IATA: AJL), near Aizawl and its runway is 3,130 feet long at an elevation of 1,000 feet.
*Helicopter: A Helicopter service by Pawan Hans has been started which connects the Aizawl with Lunglei, Lawngtlai, Saiha, Chawngte, Serchhip, Champhai, Kolasib, Khawzawl, Mamit and Hnahthial.
*Water ways: Mizoram is in the process of developing water ways with the port of Akyab Sittwe in Burma along its biggest river, Chhimtuipui. It drains into Burma&#x27;s Rakhine state, and finally enters the Bay of Bengal at Akyab, which is a popular port in Sittwe, Burma. The Indian government considers it a priority to set up inland water ways along this river to trade with Burma. The project is known as the Kaladan Multi-modal Transit Transport Project. India is investing $103 million to develop the Sittwe port on Burma&#x27;s northern coast, about from Mizoram. State Peace and Development Council of Burma has committed $10 million for the venture. The project is expected to be complete in 2015, and consists of two parts. First, river Kaladan (or Kolodyne, Chhimtuipui) is being dredged and widened from the port at Sittwe to Paletwa, in Chin province, adjacent to Mizoram. This 160 km inland waterway will enable cargo ships to enter, upload and offload freight in Paletwa, Myanmar; this is expected to be complete in 2014. As second part of the project, being constructed in parallel, includes a 62 km two-lane highway from Paletwa (also known as Kaletwa or Setpyitpyin) to Lomasu, Mizoram. Additionally, an all weather multilane 100 km road from Lomasu to Lawngtlai in Mizoram is being built to connect it with the Indian National Highway 54. This part of the project is slated to be complete by 2015. Once complete, this project is expected to economically benefit trade and horticulture exports of Mizoram, as well as improve economic access to 60 million people of landlocked northeast India and Myanmar.

==Education==

The first primary school was set up in 1898 at Aijal by Christian missionaries. The state has long enjoyed higher literacy rates than average literacy rates for India. In 1961, the literacy was 51%. By 2011 census, it had reached 92%, compared to 74% average for India. Mizoram is second only to Kerala.

There were 3,894 schools in Mizoram as of 2012. Of these, 42% are publicly owned and managed by Central/State governments, 28% are private without government subsidies, 21% are private with government subsidies, and the rest are primary and middle schools that are government-financed by run by three Autonomous District Councils of Mizoram. The teacher-pupil ratio is about 1:20 for primary, 1:9 for middle School, 1:13 for high, and 1:15 for higher secondary schools.

There are several educational establishments under the umbrella of the Ministry of Education, including universities, colleges, and other institutions. Within Mizoram University, there are 29 undergraduate departments including two professional institutions affiliated with the university. The state had 22 other colleges, and the total college enrolment was approximately 10,600 students in 2012. Other well known institutes are National Institute of Technology Mizoram, ICFAI University, Mizoram, College of Veterinary Sciences &amp; Animal Husbandry, Selesih, Aizawl, Mizoram and Regional Institute of Paramedical and Nursing Aizawl.

==Culture==
The growth of Christianity, scholars state, was shaped from a foundation of cultural, religious and socio-political structure.

A consequence of Hnatlang was the culture of &quot;Tlawmngaihna&quot;, which does not have a direct English translation. &quot;Tlawmngaihna&quot; as cultural concept incorporates behaviour that is self-sacrificing, self-denying, doing what an occasion demands unselfishly and without concern for inconvenience caused, persevering, stoical, stout-hearted, plucky, brave, firm, independent, loath to lose one&#x27;s good reputation.

Several other cultural elements of ancient Mizo tribes, some of which became less prevalent after arrival of Christianity, included:
*&quot;Zawlbuk&quot;: a place near the chief&#x27;s home, which served as defence camp in times of war, as well as &quot;bachelor house&quot; where the youth gathered and centre of village life.
*&quot;Pathian&quot;: the term for god, to whom prayers and hymns were recited. The evil spirits were called &quot;ramhuai&quot;.
*&quot;Nula-rim&quot;: the method of courtship in ancient culture. Courtship, pre-marital sex and polygamy were accepted. The man and the woman could have many partners. If the woman got pregnant, the man was required either marry or pay a substantial sum called &quot;sawnman&quot;. If the woman&#x27;s parents discover the relationship, they had a right to demand a payment called &quot;khumpuikaiman&quot;. While pre-marital sex was accepted, a woman who was virgin at marriage was more highly esteemed than one who was not.
*&quot;Pathlawi&quot;: a divorced man.
*&quot;Ramri lehkha&quot;: a boundary drawing that identified a chief&#x27;s tenured land called &quot;ram&quot;. Only the chief owned the land, and this ownership was hereditary. The tribe and village worked and harvested the land.

===Traditional festivals===

Traditional festivals in Mizoram often revolved around stages of jhum cultivation or the seasons. Community festivals were called &quot;kut&quot; in the local language, and there were major and minor kuts such as Chapchar Kut, Thalfavang Kut, Mim Kut and Pawl Kut. Chapchar Kut was the festival of spring (February/March), just before jhum started and land was cut-and-burnt for a new crop. Chapchar Kut was most anticipated by youth, a major festival and involved dancing and feasts. Thalfavang Kut celebrated completion of weeding of the jhum crop fields.

Chapchar Kut was reintroduced and revived in 1973 by Mizo people to celebrate their heritage. Before Christianity arrived in Mizoram, home-brewed alcohol and many meat delicacies were part of the Chapchar celebrations. Now, with Mizoram&#x27;s state law as a dry state, the youth busy themselves with music and community dancing. Along with reviving traditional festivals, the community has been reviving the traditional dances at these festivals, for example, dances such as Cheraw, Khuallam, Chheihlam and Chai.

==Performing arts==

Mizoram has many traditional dances, such as:
*&quot;Cheraw&quot; – a dance that involves men holding bamboo close to the floor. They tap the sticks open and close with the rhythm of the music. Women in colourful dresses dance on top, stepping in between and out of the bamboo with the music. It requires coordination and skill.
*&quot;Khual Lam&quot; – a mixed-gender dance that traditionally celebrated successfully hunting with swaying cloth with singing and music.

*&quot;Chheih Lam&quot; – typically performed over cool evenings with rice beer, people sit in a circle with two or more dancers in the centre; they sing with impromptu often humorous compositions about recent events or guests between them with music and dancers keeping up. The song was called &quot;Chheih Hla&quot;. Mizo people have tried to introduce the Chheih Lam during church sermons with controversy.
*&quot;Chai Lam&quot; – an important dance at the Chapchar Kut, this places the musicians in the centre while men and women in colourful dresses alternate and form a circle; the women held the men at their waist, while men held the women at their shoulders; they step forward to move in circles while swaying left and right with the music. A song may be sung which is also called &quot;Chai&quot;.

===Sports===
Mizoram&#x27;s first football league debuted in October 2012. The Mizoram Premiere League had eight teams during the 2012–2013 season and is the highest level league in Mizoram. The eight clubs include Aizawl, Chanmari, Dinthar, FC Kulikawn, Luangmual, Mizoram, RS Annexe, and Reitlang. The season starts each year in October and wraps up with the finals in March.

==Tourism==


===Domestic tourists===

The state requires Indian citizens to have an Inner Line Permit. This is available from the Liaison officer, government of Mizoram in Kolkata, Silchar, Shillong, Guwahati and New Delhi. Those arriving by air can obtain a 15-day visit pass at Lengpui airport, Aizawl by submitting photographs and paying the fee of .

===International tourists===

Almost all foreign nationals can get the required Protected Area Permit on arrival, and face the same requirements as domestic tourists. However, they additionally have to register themselves with state police within 24 hours of arrival, a formality that most resorts can provide. Citizens of Afghanistan, China and Pakistan and foreign nationals having their origin in these countries are required to get the pass through the Indian consulate or from the Ministry of Home Affairs in New Delhi, before they arrive in Mizoram.

===Attractions===
Mizoram is a place with flora and fauna rich landscape and pleasant climate.

The state is a bird watcher&#x27;s destination. For Mrs. Hume&#x27;s pheasant (&quot;Syrmaticus humiae&quot;), Mizoram is a stronghold. Wild water buffalo, Sumatran rhinoceros, elephants and other mammals have been spotted in the past.

==Issues==
===Chakmaland===

Having an estimated population of more than 100,000 per 2011 Indian census, the Chakmas have been demanding to convert the existing Chakma Autonomous District Council in Mizoram into a Union territory .

===Alcohol prohibition===
In 1996, the government of Mizoram banned liquor. The church leaders (Mizoram Kohhran Hruaitute Committee) argue that state government should keep the ban and not seek to amend the law, while others argue prohibition should be lifted. However, it has been difficult to enforce the ban due to the high demand for alcohol.

In 2008, the Mizoram Excise and Narcotics (Wine) Rules amended the ban of 1996 to allow the manufacture, export, sale, possession and consumption of wine in Mizoram made from grapes and guava which would help the economy of the state, reduce fruit waste from farms, and encourage large scale commercialisation. In 2011 the bill was amended to include apple, ginger, passion fruit, peach and pear wine.

In 2013, the state assembly unanimously passed a resolution to study the impact of liquor prohibition. In 2014, the state&#x27;s narcotics minister noted that the liquor ban had produced some serious problems in Mizo society due to the drinking of spurious and unhealthy (locally made) liquor, known as &quot;zu&quot;. The government suggested it would introduce an amended liquor bill allowing retail shops to operate in Aizawl and other district headquarters to sell liquor – but not in bars. Furthermore, they would not consult the powerful church on the issue.

The Mizoram Liquor Prohibition and Control bill of 2014 was repealed on 20 March 2019 with the Mizoram Liquor Prohibition Bill 2019, it was a legislation promised by the Mizo National Front.

===Rat problems===

Every 50 years, the Mautam bamboo blooms and its high-protein seeds lead to an explosion in the black rat population in the jungle, also referred to as the rat flood, which has historically destroyed entire villages&#x27; food supplies after rats move on to farm fields and devour crops. The 1958–59 plague provoked a rural uprising during which the indigenous Mizo people launched a violent 20-year rebellion against the central government. The dispute only saw final resolution in 1986. The 48-year rat problem recurred in Mizoram in 2006–08. The crops suffered massive damage, with yields at 30-year lows; the crop yields recovered sharply to pre-mautam levels in 2009 after the mautam flowering.

==Media and communication==
:&quot;See also Newspapers in Mizoram.&quot;
Mizoram&#x27;s media is growing quickly. Internet access is average, and private television cable channels are popular. Doordarshan, the national television service of India provides terrestrial broadcasting services and All India Radio broadcast programmes related to the indigenous culture and local news. Broadband access is available. In addition to these, there are several websites in local dialects. Print journalism remains a popular news medium in Mizoram; local newspapers include Vanglaini and Zalen. The Mizoram Post, an English-language daily newspaper published from Silchar (Assam) was the most circulated newspaper in Mizoram, in 2007.

==Notable people==
 
* Jeje Lalpekhlua - Mizo footballer. Player at the Indian Super League (ISL) and Hero I-League. Former Captain of the India national football team.
* Jeremy Lalrinnunga - Mizo weightlifter who win Gold in International Weightlifting event.
* Jerry Mawihmingthanga - Mizo footballer who plays as a midfielder or winger for Odisha in the Indian Super League.
* Laldenga (d.1990) - Mizo separatist, former party leader of the Mizo National Front (MNF) and 4th Chief Minister of Mizoram. 
* Lalduhawma - politician and party leader of the Zoram People&#x27;s Movement (ZPM). Former Member of Parliament (Lok Sabha) for Mizoram. 6th and current Chief Minister of Mizoram.
* Lallianzuala Chhangte - Mizo footballer who plays as a midfielder or winger for Mumbai in the Indian Super League.
* Lalremsiami - hockey player representing India in several International Hockey Events.
* Lalrindika Ralte - Mizo Footballer. Player at the Indian Super League (ISL) and Hero I-League. Currently the captain of East Bengal F.C.
* Lalsangzuali Sailo (d.2006)- a singer, songwriter, poet, All India Radio &quot;A&quot; grade artist and a recipient of Padma Shree Award.
* Lal Thanhawla - former Chief Minister of Mizoram and leader of the Mizoram Congress Party.
* Nuchhungi Renthlei (d.2002) - founder of Girls&#x27; Auxiliary, a poet, a singer and a school teacher, the first Mizo woman to receive the Padma Shri award
* Robert Lalthlamuana - Mizo footballer. Player at the Indian Super League (ISL) and Hero I-League.
* Shylo Malsawmtluanga - Mizo footballer. Former player at the Hero I-League. Current player of the Mizoram Premier League (MPL).
* Ziona (d.2021) - a polygamous man with 38 wives and numerous children and grandchildren.
* Zoramthanga - former Chief Minister of Mizoram and current party leader of the Mizo National Front (MNF).*

===Chiefs===
* Lallula (d.1807) - Established the Sailo dynasty in the Lushai Hills.
* Khalkam (d.1891) - Son of Sukpilal, organiser of the Western Lushai Rising.
* Lalbura (1843-1933) - Son of Vanhnuailiana, organiser of the Eastern Lushai Rising
* Sukpilal (d.1881) - First and only chief to sign a sunnad with the British under Sir John Ware Edgar.
* Ropuiliani (d.1895) – Mizo chieftainess who fiercely resisted British colonial rule.
* Rothangpuia - Friendly chief and ally of Thomas Herbert Lewin who participated in the Lushai Expedition together.
* Vanhnuailiana (d.1871) - Famous Eastern Mizo chief.
* Zakapa (d.1914) - Organiser of the Southern Lushai Rising, his actions and legacy led to the creation of the Zakapa award for women&#x27;s achievements.

==See also==

* Outline of India
* Bibliography of India
* Mizo Hlakungpui Mual
* Mizo music
* Insurgency in Northeast India
==References==

==Further reading==
#B. Hamlet, Encyclopaedia of North-East India: Mizoram, Volume 5, 
#C. Nunthara, Mizoram: Society and Polity, 
#T. Raatan, Encyclopaedia of North-east India: Arunachal Pradesh Manipur Mizoram, 
#Zoramdinthara, Mizo Fiction: Emergence and Development, 

==External links==
Government
* Official Tourism Site of Mizoram

General information</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1502" start="0" end="7" title="Mizoram" label="Mizoram"/>
<link wikidata="Q131541" start="24" end="29" title="states and union territories of India" label="state"/>
<link wikidata="Q863038" start="33" end="51" title="northeastern India" label="northeastern India"/>
<link wikidata="Q192379" start="58" end="64" title="Aizawl" label="Aizawl"/>
<link wikidata="Q5119" start="72" end="79" title="Capital city" label="capital"/>
<link wikidata="Q902" start="165" end="175" title="Bangladesh" label="Bangladesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q836" start="193" end="200" title="Myanmar" label="Myanmar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1164" start="272" end="277" title="Assam" label="Assam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193" start="279" end="286" title="Manipur" label="Manipur"/>
<link wikidata="Q1363" start="292" end="299" title="Tripura" label="Tripura"/>
<link wikidata="Q24939906" start="411" end="451" title="Forest cover by state in India" label="the most heavily forested state in India"/>
<link wikidata="Q15899186" start="517" end="545" title="List of states in India by past population" label="second least populated state"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="549" end="554" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q161078" start="564" end="581" title="urbanisation rate" label="urbanisation rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q7900228" start="601" end="640" title="Urbanization in India" label="most urbanised state in northeast India"/>
<link wikidata="Q36147" start="751" end="755" title="Mizo language" label="Mizo"/>
<link wikidata="Q80839" start="775" end="788" title="lingua franca" label="lingua franca"/>
<link wikidata="Q34064" start="851" end="864" title="Tibeto-Burman languages" label="Tibeto-Burman"/>
<link wikidata="Q33577" start="868" end="888" title="Indo-Aryan languages" label="Indo-Aryan languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q11555014" start="935" end="951" title="Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes" label="scheduled tribes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1275861" start="971" end="982" title="Mizo people" label="Mizo people"/>
<link wikidata="Q159791" start="1083" end="1085" title="Before christ" label="BC"/>
<link wikidata="Q7914768" start="1145" end="1154" title="Vangchhia" label="Vangchhia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2597340" start="1238" end="1248" title="Chin Hills" label="Chin Hills"/>
<link wikidata="Q130691086" start="1293" end="1312" title="Mizo Chieftainship" label="organised chiefdoms"/>
<link wikidata="Q108427719" start="1325" end="1352" title="jhum" label="jhum agricultural practices"/>
<link wikidata="Q36147" start="1500" end="1513" title="Mizo language" label="Mizo language"/>
<link wikidata="Q60761994" start="1515" end="1522" title="Mizo culture" label="culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q108760493" start="1532" end="1547" title="Mizo religion" label="Sakhua religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q115821529" start="1596" end="1628" title="Chin-Lushai Expedition of 1889–90" label="a series of military expeditions"/>
<link wikidata="Q124422923" start="1664" end="1698" title="British rule in the Lushai Hills" label="Mizoram was annexed by the British"/>
<link wikidata="Q17513379" start="1733" end="1747" title="Assam Province" label="Assam Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q5110547" start="1830" end="1842" title="Christianity in Mizoram" label="Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q124607585" start="1960" end="1981" title="Mizo District" label="Lushai Hills District"/>
<link wikidata="Q3112582" start="1993" end="2012" title="Government of Assam" label="Assamese Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q3524670" start="2055" end="2061" title="mautam" label="famine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1126393" start="2089" end="2108" title="Mizo National Front" label="Mizo National Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q6884653" start="2161" end="2181" title="Mizoram Peace Accord" label="Mizoram Peace Accord"/>
<link wikidata="Q5110547" start="2308" end="2317" title="Christianity in Mizoram" label="Christian"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043" start="2363" end="2375" title="Christianity" label="Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q23540" start="2384" end="2394" title="Protestantism" label="Protestant"/>
<link wikidata="Q178169" start="2417" end="2429" title="Presbyterianism" label="Presbyterian"/>
<link wikidata="Q93191" start="2434" end="2441" title="Baptists" label="Baptist"/>
<link wikidata="Q115804574" start="2539" end="2547" title="Buddhism in Mizoram" label="Buddhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q115804720" start="2557" end="2565" title="Hinduism in Mizoram" label="Hinduism"/>
<link wikidata="Q123630870" start="2579" end="2584" title="Islam in Mizoram" label="Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q17070372" start="2688" end="2690" title="Zo people" label="Zo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059355" start="2803" end="2809" title="Chakma people" label="Chakma"/>
<link wikidata="Q1287933" start="2821" end="2828" title="Tripuri people" label="Tripuri"/>
<link wikidata="Q852088" start="2856" end="2881" title="Myanmar conflict" label="civil conflict in Myanmar"/>
<link wikidata="Q4999429" start="2918" end="2937" title="Burmese community in India" label="Burmese communities"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143462" start="2959" end="2963" title="Chin people" label="Chin"/>
<link wikidata="Q396108" start="3124" end="3140" title="Agrarian society" label="agrarian economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q622543" start="3142" end="3156" title="Slash-and-burn" label="Slash-and-burn"/>
<link wikidata="Q108427719" start="3180" end="3184" title="jhum" label="jhum"/>
<link wikidata="Q48803" start="3326" end="3338" title="horticulture" label="horticulture"/>
<link wikidata="Q670887" start="3343" end="3349" title="bamboo" label="bamboo"/>
<link wikidata="Q19708004" start="3521" end="3534" title="rural poverty" label="rural poverty"/>
<link wikidata="Q36147" start="3811" end="3815" title="Mizo language" label="Mizo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1275861" start="3867" end="3871" title="Mizo people" label="Mizo"/>
<link wikidata="Q17070372" start="4020" end="4022" title="Zo people" label="Zo"/>
<link wikidata="Q7569300" start="4202" end="4219" title="Southeast Asian Massif" label="&amp;quot;Zomia&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q130691086" start="4499" end="4511" title="Mizo Chieftainship" label="Lushai Hills"/>
<link wikidata="Q12628817" start="4530" end="4557" title="Central Kuki-Chin languages" label="Central Kuki-Chin languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q503963" start="4869" end="4876" title="Bamar people" label="Burmans"/>
<link wikidata="Q132295140" start="5057" end="5064" title="Lallula" label="Lallula"/>
<link wikidata="Q124607585" start="5780" end="5801" title="Mizo District" label="Lushai Hills District"/>
<link wikidata="Q540885" start="5864" end="5874" title="anglicised" label="anglicised"/>
<link wikidata="Q5589255" start="5954" end="5981" title="Government of Mizoram" label="state government of Mizoram"/>
<link wikidata="Q11642" start="6457" end="6464" title="pottery" label="pottery"/>
<link wikidata="Q34740" start="6666" end="6671" title="genus" label="genus"/>
<link wikidata="Q200141" start="6678" end="6688" title="necropolis" label="necropolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5435369" start="6808" end="6815" title="Farkawn" label="Farkawn"/>
<link wikidata="Q24929544" start="6817" end="6824" title="Lianpui" label="Lianpui"/>
<link wikidata="Q24929632" start="6826" end="6834" title="Khankawn" label="Khankawn"/>
<link wikidata="Q6401062" start="6836" end="6844" title="Khawbung" label="Khawbung"/>
<link wikidata="Q7915313" start="6850" end="6856" title="Vaphai" label="Vaphai"/>
<link wikidata="Q193475" start="6969" end="6976" title="Menhir" label="menhirs"/>
<link wikidata="Q5315225" start="7015" end="7024" title="Dungtláng" label="Dungtlang"/>
<link wikidata="Q7810725" start="7239" end="7245" title="Tlawng" label="valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191837" start="7376" end="7380" title="Literal translation" label="lit."/>
<link wikidata="Q18099" start="7621" end="7626" title="bison" label="bison"/>
<link wikidata="Q405155" start="7855" end="7872" title="Trade route" label="trade connections"/>
<link wikidata="Q902" start="7912" end="7922" title="Bangladesh" label="Bangladesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q6736667" start="7924" end="7938" title="Mainland India" label="Mainland India"/>
<link wikidata="Q836" start="7944" end="7951" title="Myanmar" label="Myanmar"/>
<link wikidata="Q276173" start="8010" end="8024" title="pavilion" label="water pavilion"/>
<link wikidata="Q33296" start="8070" end="8083" title="Mughal Empire" label="Mughal cities"/>
<link wikidata="Q34064" start="8516" end="8546" title="Tibeto-Burman languages" label="Tibeto-Burman linguistic group"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="8679" end="8684" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q836" start="8689" end="8696" title="Myanmar" label="Myanmar"/>
<link wikidata="Q7524625" start="8703" end="8719" title="Sinlung" label="Chhinlung legend"/>
<link wikidata="Q876857" start="8824" end="8836" title="Yalong River" label="Yalong River"/>
<link wikidata="Q456847" start="8930" end="8940" title="Shan State" label="Shan State"/>
<link wikidata="Q9092421" start="8957" end="8969" title="Kabaw Valley" label="Kabaw Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q2597340" start="8986" end="8996" title="Chin Hills" label="Chin Hills"/>
<link wikidata="Q23808659" start="9026" end="9036" title="Tyao River" label="Ṭiau river"/>
<link wikidata="Q3317337" start="9054" end="9066" title="Lushai Hills" label="Lushai Hills"/>
<link wikidata="Q6442484" start="9149" end="9154" title="Kukis" label="Kukis"/>
<link wikidata="Q6442484" start="9270" end="9275" title="Kuki people" label="Kukis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1642488" start="9609" end="9618" title="chiefdom" label="chiefdoms"/>
<link wikidata="Q1572679" start="9634" end="9645" title="Subsistence economy" label="subsistence"/>
<link wikidata="Q622543" start="9701" end="9705" title="jhum cultivation" label="jhum"/>
<link wikidata="Q405155" start="9790" end="9802" title="Trade route" label="trade routes"/>
<link wikidata="Q43194" start="9811" end="9817" title="Yunnan" label="Yunnan"/>
<link wikidata="Q38684" start="9825" end="9838" title="Bay of Bengal" label="Bay of Bengal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7378" start="10078" end="10092" title="elephant tusks" label="elephant tusks"/>
<link wikidata="Q9610" start="10335" end="10342" title="Bengali language" label="Bengali"/>
<link wikidata="Q466221" start="10558" end="10564" title="Sylhet" label="Sylhet"/>
<link wikidata="Q33296" start="10576" end="10589" title="Mughal Empire" label="Mughal Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q17156974" start="10842" end="10849" title="Zawlbuk" label="Zawlbuk"/>
<link wikidata="Q847950" start="11007" end="11016" title="dormitory" label="dormitory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143462" start="11639" end="11644" title="Chin people" label="Chins"/>
<link wikidata="Q6473719" start="11655" end="11658" title="Lai people" label="Poi"/>
<link wikidata="Q130691086" start="12411" end="12426" title="Mizo Chieftainship" label="ancient Mizoram"/>
<link wikidata="Q622543" start="12932" end="12959" title="Slash-and-burn" label="shifting cultivation (jhum)"/>
<link wikidata="Q24929890" start="13046" end="13060" title="South Khawbung" label="South Khawbung"/>
<link wikidata="Q24929891" start="13065" end="13072" title="Zawlsei" label="Zawlsei"/>
<link wikidata="Q1965256" start="13085" end="13102" title="Champhai district" label="Champhai district"/>
<link wikidata="Q29122" start="13176" end="13199" title="First Anglo-Burmese War" label="First Anglo-Burmese War"/>
<link wikidata="Q5148287" start="13242" end="13247" title="Colonial Assam" label="Assam"/>
<link wikidata="Q817165" start="13252" end="13258" title="Bengal Presidency" label="Bengal"/>
<link wikidata="Q6705084" start="13355" end="13383" title="Lushai Expedition" label="Lushai Expedition in 1870–71"/>
<link wikidata="Q15998765" start="13458" end="13473" title="Mary Winchester (Zoluti)" label="Mary Winchester"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074977" start="13541" end="13551" title="Chittagong Hill Tracts" label="Chittagong"/>
<link wikidata="Q42209" start="13553" end="13559" title="Cachar district" label="Cachar"/>
<link wikidata="Q17342164" start="13561" end="13568" title="Tripura (princely state)" label="Tripura"/>
<link wikidata="Q459732" start="13570" end="13576" title="Sylhet Division" label="Sylhet"/>
<link wikidata="Q889030" start="13582" end="13589" title="Manipur (princely state)" label="Manipur"/>
<link wikidata="Q131782971" start="13666" end="13679" title="Vanhnuailiana" label="Vanhnuailiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q131538195" start="13681" end="13688" title="Lalbura" label="Lalbura"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13690" end="13700" title="Bengkhuaia" label="Bengkhuaia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13705" end="13712" title="Savunga" label="Savunga"/>
<link wikidata="Q115821529" start="13863" end="13896" title="Chin-Lushai Expedition of 1889–90" label="Chin-Lushai Expedition of 1889–90"/>
<link wikidata="Q817165" start="14231" end="14248" title="Bengal Presidency" label="Bengal Presidency"/>
<link wikidata="Q86882590" start="14268" end="14280" title="Hnahthial district" label="Fort Treagor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2182763" start="14297" end="14305" title="Lunglei" label="Lung Leh"/>
<link wikidata="Q17513379" start="14385" end="14399" title="Assam Province" label="Assam Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q17513379" start="14455" end="14469" title="Assam Province" label="Assam Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q192379" start="14476" end="14481" title="Aizawl" label="Aijal"/>
<link wikidata="Q131598205" start="14709" end="14716" title="Khalkam" label="Khalkam"/>
<link wikidata="Q131538195" start="14762" end="14769" title="Lalbura" label="Lalbura"/>
<link wikidata="Q131294431" start="14807" end="14817" title="Ropuiliani" label="Ropuiliani"/>
<link wikidata="Q131551546" start="14822" end="14828" title="Zakapa" label="Zakapa"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="14876" end="14887" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q69585903" start="15063" end="15087" title="Indian Labour Corps" label="27th Indian Labour Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q18937" start="15108" end="15119" title="Mesopotamian campaign" label="Mesopotamia"/>
<link wikidata="Q856122" start="15259" end="15272" title="Modernization theory" label="modernisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377906" start="15286" end="15301" title="Culture of Europe" label="European styles"/>
<link wikidata="Q6661" start="15306" end="15330" title="French cuisine" label="French culinary elements"/>
<link wikidata="Q192379" start="15409" end="15414" title="Aizawl" label="Aijal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3112582" start="15592" end="15612" title="Government of Assam" label="Assam administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q1261144" start="15661" end="15666" title="Khasi people" label="Khasi"/>
<link wikidata="Q61944043" start="15674" end="15692" title="James Joy Mohan Nichols Roy" label="J.J.M. Nichols Roy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2437271" start="15783" end="15797" title="Superintendent (police)" label="superintendent"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="15838" end="15850" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q6035446" start="15870" end="15891" title="Inner Line Permit" label="Inner Line Regulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q131995470" start="16042" end="16066" title="Anthony Gilchrist McCall" label="Anthony Gilchrist McCall"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16134" end="16148" title="British rule in the Lushai Hills#McCall&amp;#x27;s Developments of the Lushai Hills" label="Ten Point Code"/>
<link wikidata="Q7178" start="16290" end="16299" title="International Red Cross and Red Crescent Movement" label="Red Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q20992139" start="16593" end="16630" title="Young Men&amp;#x27;s Buddhist Association (Burma)" label="Young Men&amp;#x27;s Buddhist Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q2376315" start="16634" end="16639" title="British rule in Burma" label="Burma"/>
<link wikidata="Q8058310" start="16668" end="16692" title="Young Mizo Association" label="Young Lushai Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q130691086" start="16827" end="16847" title="Mizo Chieftainship" label="Lushai chieftainship"/>
<link wikidata="Q6884660" start="17062" end="17072" title="Mizo Union" label="Mizo Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q1521499" start="17123" end="17151" title="Japanese occupation of Burma" label="Japanese occupation of Burma"/>
<link wikidata="Q131995470" start="17168" end="17192" title="Anthony Gilchrist McCall" label="Anthony Gilchrist McCall"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="17763" end="17768" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q76074" start="17800" end="17810" title="Right-wing politics" label="right-wing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351282" start="17924" end="17938" title="Crown colony" label="British colony"/>
<link wikidata="Q8073420" start="17943" end="17961" title="Zogam" label="Zo-Kuki-Chin areas"/>
<link wikidata="Q123048017" start="18039" end="18051" title="Mizo people in Myanmar" label="Burmese Mizo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1642488" start="18528" end="18536" title="chiefdom" label="chiefdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q6884660" start="18562" end="18572" title="Mizo Union" label="Mizo Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q3524670" start="19293" end="19299" title="mautam" label="mautam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1126393" start="19436" end="19455" title="Mizo National Front" label="Mizo National Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q192379" start="19541" end="19547" title="Aizawl" label="Aizawl"/>
<link wikidata="Q6884653" start="20117" end="20128" title="Mizo Accord" label="Mizo Accord"/>
<link wikidata="Q6884653" start="20257" end="20277" title="Mizoram Peace Accord" label="Mizoram Peace Accord"/>
<link wikidata="Q695252" start="20557" end="20567" title="Parliament of India" label="Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q230003" start="20585" end="20594" title="Lok Sabha" label="Lok Sabha"/>
<link wikidata="Q244730" start="20606" end="20617" title="Rajya Sabha" label="Rajya Sabha"/>
<link wikidata="Q863038" start="20667" end="20683" title="Northeast India" label="North East India"/>
<link wikidata="Q176635" start="20987" end="21003" title="tropic of cancer" label="tropic of cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3334379" start="21531" end="21546" title="Phawngpui" label="Phawngpui Tlang"/>
<link wikidata="Q622543" start="21830" end="21844" title="Slash-and-burn" label="Slash-and-burn"/>
<link wikidata="Q5327269" start="22789" end="22803" title="Earthquake hazard zoning of India" label="seismic zone V"/>
<link wikidata="Q46910" start="23090" end="23100" title="Chin state" label="Chin state"/>
<link wikidata="Q1821714" start="23129" end="23134" title="Siaha district" label="Saiha"/>
<link wikidata="Q2086209" start="23139" end="23148" title="Lawngtlai district" label="Lawngtlai"/>
<link wikidata="Q7810725" start="23338" end="23344" title="Tlawng" label="Tlawng"/>
<link wikidata="Q7856885" start="23346" end="23349" title="Tut River" label="Tut"/>
<link wikidata="Q7851766" start="23351" end="23358" title="Tuirial River" label="Tuirial"/>
<link wikidata="Q7851781" start="23363" end="23370" title="Tuivawl River" label="Tuivawl"/>
<link wikidata="Q1709169" start="23437" end="23448" title="Barak River" label="Barak River"/>
<link wikidata="Q42209" start="23452" end="23467" title="Cachar District" label="Cachar District"/>
<link wikidata="Q42967" start="23797" end="23804" title="monsoon" label="monsoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2182763" start="24036" end="24043" title="Lunglei" label="Lunglei"/>
<link wikidata="Q26375" start="25743" end="25754" title="Phasianidae" label="Phasianidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q7556" start="25756" end="25764" title="Anatidae" label="Anatidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q28507" start="25766" end="25776" title="Ciconiidae" label="Ciconiidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q162085" start="25778" end="25795" title="Threskiornithidae" label="Threskiornithidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q18789" start="25797" end="25805" title="Ardeidae" label="Ardeidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q11846678" start="25807" end="25818" title="Pelecanidae" label="Pelecanidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q3901247" start="25820" end="25837" title="Phalacrocoracidae" label="Phalacrocoracidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q21744" start="25839" end="25849" title="Falconidae" label="Falconidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q25510" start="25851" end="25863" title="Accipitridae" label="Accipitridae"/>
<link wikidata="Q21755" start="25865" end="25873" title="Otididae" label="Otididae"/>
<link wikidata="Q26623" start="25875" end="25883" title="Rallidae" label="Rallidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q661898" start="25885" end="25899" title="Heliornithidae" label="Heliornithidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q205320" start="25901" end="25911" title="Turnicidae" label="Turnicidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q145854" start="25913" end="25923" title="Burhinidae" label="Burhinidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q28449" start="25925" end="25937" title="Charadriidae" label="Charadriidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q26626" start="25939" end="25951" title="Scolopacidae" label="Scolopacidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q212929" start="25953" end="25962" title="Jacanidae" label="Jacanidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q27589" start="25964" end="25971" title="Laridae" label="Laridae"/>
<link wikidata="Q10856" start="25973" end="25983" title="Columbidae" label="Columbidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q8327" start="25985" end="25996" title="Psittacidae" label="Psittacidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q26381" start="25998" end="26007" title="Cuculidae" label="Cuculidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q26012" start="26009" end="26018" title="Strigidae" label="Strigidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q27244" start="26020" end="26033" title="Caprimulgidae" label="Caprimulgidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q26617" start="26035" end="26043" title="Apodidae" label="Apodidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q8154335" start="26045" end="26056" title="Alcedinidae" label="Alcedinidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q183147" start="26058" end="26067" title="Meropidae" label="Meropidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q26773" start="26069" end="26080" title="Bucerotidae" label="Bucerotidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q1325045" start="26082" end="26094" title="Ramphastidae" label="Ramphastidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q25439" start="26096" end="26103" title="Picidae" label="Picidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q217472" start="26105" end="26113" title="Pittidae" label="Pittidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q171052" start="26115" end="26123" title="Laniidae" label="Laniidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q732881" start="26125" end="26138" title="Campephagidae" label="Campephagidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q839526" start="26140" end="26150" title="Dicruridae" label="Dicruridae"/>
<link wikidata="Q25565" start="26152" end="26160" title="Corvidae" label="Corvidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q168473" start="26162" end="26169" title="Paridae" label="Paridae"/>
<link wikidata="Q39861" start="26171" end="26183" title="Hirundinidae" label="Hirundinidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q550595" start="26185" end="26197" title="Cisticolidae" label="Cisticolidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q188854" start="26199" end="26211" title="Pycnonotidae" label="Pycnonotidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q187014" start="26213" end="26222" title="Sylviidae" label="Sylviidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q408457" start="26224" end="26234" title="Timaliidae" label="Timaliidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q858577" start="26236" end="26244" title="Sittidae" label="Sittidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q185237" start="26246" end="26255" title="Sturnidae" label="Sturnidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q26050" start="26257" end="26265" title="Turdidae" label="Turdidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q843381" start="26277" end="26290" title="Chloropseidae" label="Chloropseidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q211601" start="26292" end="26301" title="Ploceidae" label="Ploceidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q205943" start="26303" end="26315" title="Motacillidae" label="Motacillidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q160835" start="26317" end="26329" title="Fringillidae" label="Fringillidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q208221" start="26331" end="26344" title="Nectariniidae" label="Nectariniidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q200989" start="26349" end="26361" title="Muscicapidae" label="Muscicapidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q688601" start="26514" end="26524" title="Sunda slow loris" label="slow loris"/>
<link wikidata="Q1761705" start="26559" end="26568" title="red serow" label="red serow"/>
<link wikidata="Q494436" start="26631" end="26636" title="Himalayan goral" label="goral"/>
<link wikidata="Q19939" start="26670" end="26675" title="tiger" label="tiger"/>
<link wikidata="Q34706" start="26707" end="26714" title="leopard" label="leopard"/>
<link wikidata="Q36135" start="26746" end="26761" title="clouded leopard" label="clouded leopard"/>
<link wikidata="Q42627" start="26795" end="26806" title="leopard cat" label="leopard cat"/>
<link wikidata="Q214835" start="26847" end="26857" title="Bengal fox" label="Bengal fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q124410" start="26896" end="26914" title="Asiatic black bear" label="Asiatic black bear"/>
<link wikidata="Q266955" start="26969" end="26989" title="stump-tailed macaque" label="stump-tailed macaque"/>
<link wikidata="Q692268" start="27070" end="27095" title="Phayre&amp;#x27;s leaf monkey" label="Phayre&amp;#x27;s leaf monkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q205700" start="27137" end="27150" title="capped langur" label="capped langur"/>
<link wikidata="Q3457187" start="27373" end="27392" title="Dampa Tiger Reserve" label="Dampa Tiger Reserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="27772" end="27777" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q8236" start="27944" end="27957" title="literacy rate" label="literacy rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1947322" start="28239" end="28254" title="Aizawl district" label="Aizawl district"/>
<link wikidata="Q1275861" start="28512" end="28516" title="Mizo people" label="Mizo"/>
<link wikidata="Q17070372" start="28620" end="28622" title="Zo people" label="Zo"/>
<link wikidata="Q6442484" start="28756" end="28761" title="Kuki people" label="Kukis"/>
<link wikidata="Q402913" start="28765" end="28773" title="Bengalis" label="Bengalis"/>
<link wikidata="Q17070372" start="28881" end="28890" title="Kuki-Chin-Mizo people" label="Kuki-Chin"/>
<link wikidata="Q4902590" start="28952" end="28957" title="Biate people" label="Biate"/>
<link wikidata="Q7292878" start="28959" end="28967" title="Ranglong" label="Ranglong"/>
<link wikidata="Q5923419" start="28976" end="28985" title="Hrangkhol people" label="Hrangkhol"/>
<link wikidata="Q1275861" start="29030" end="29036" title="Lushei" label="Lushei"/>
<link wikidata="Q9054264" start="29049" end="29054" title="Paite people" label="Paite"/>
<link wikidata="Q6473719" start="29056" end="29059" title="Lai people" label="Lai"/>
<link wikidata="Q6754529" start="29061" end="29065" title="Mara people" label="Mara"/>
<link wikidata="Q7288393" start="29067" end="29072" title="Ralte people" label="Ralte"/>
<link wikidata="Q3507860" start="29074" end="29078" title="Hmar people" label="Hmar"/>
<link wikidata="Q7709041" start="29080" end="29086" title="Thadou people" label="Thadou"/>
<link wikidata="Q991396" start="29121" end="29124" title="Bru people" label="Bru"/>
<link wikidata="Q35947" start="29126" end="29131" title="Reang language" label="Reang"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059355" start="29134" end="29140" title="Chakma people" label="Chakma"/>
<link wikidata="Q3349806" start="29142" end="29152" title="Tanchangya people" label="Tanchangya"/>
<link wikidata="Q1267849" start="29234" end="29244" title="Indo-Aryan peoples" label="Indo-Aryan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2914516" start="29267" end="29279" title="Bnei Menashe" label="Bnei Menashe"/>
<link wikidata="Q7325" start="29292" end="29298" title="Jews" label="Jewish"/>
<link wikidata="Q402913" start="29753" end="29761" title="Bengalis" label="Bengalis"/>
<link wikidata="Q4317274" start="29766" end="29773" title="Nepalis" label="Nepalis"/>
<link wikidata="Q207962" start="29775" end="29789" title="Gurkha" label="Nepali Gorkhas"/>
<link wikidata="Q192379" start="29833" end="29839" title="Aizawl" label="Aizawl"/>
<link wikidata="Q11555014" start="30098" end="30113" title="Scheduled Tribe" label="Scheduled Tribe"/>
<link wikidata="Q6596489" start="30234" end="30248" title="List of Scheduled Tribes in India" label="Mizoram tribes"/>
<link wikidata="Q36147" start="30471" end="30475" title="Mizo language" label="Mizo"/>
<link wikidata="Q106039" start="30577" end="30587" title="Christians" label="Christians"/>
<link wikidata="Q178169" start="30628" end="30640" title="Presbyterianism" label="Presbyterian"/>
<link wikidata="Q132265" start="30668" end="30686" title="Theravada Buddhist" label="Theravada Buddhist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059355" start="30722" end="30735" title="Chakma people" label="Chakma people"/>
<link wikidata="Q10090" start="30807" end="30813" title="Hindus" label="Hindus"/>
<link wikidata="Q9268" start="30929" end="30936" title="Judaism" label="Judaism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2914516" start="30987" end="30999" title="Bnei Menashe" label="Bnei Menashe"/>
<link wikidata="Q107502158" start="31032" end="31040" title="Manasseh" label="Manasseh"/>
<link wikidata="Q6884700" start="31104" end="31131" title="Mizoram Presbyterian Church" label="Mizoram Presbyterian Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q5233443" start="31179" end="31195" title="David Evan Jones (missionary)" label="David Evan Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="31226" end="31231" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q8680" start="31257" end="31271" title="British Empire" label="British Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1275861" start="31285" end="31291" title="Lushei" label="Lushei"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043" start="31322" end="31334" title="Christianity" label="Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q7240761" start="31408" end="31460" title="Presbyterian Church of India" label="General Assembly of the Presbyterian Church of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q207752" start="31464" end="31472" title="Shillong" label="Shillong"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195" start="31476" end="31485" title="Meghalaya" label="Meghalaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q4857611" start="31588" end="31602" title="Baptist Church of Mizoram" label="Baptist Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q748" start="31725" end="31733" title="Buddhism" label="Buddhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059355" start="31750" end="31757" title="Chakma people" label="Chakmas"/>
<link wikidata="Q3349806" start="31762" end="31772" title="Tanchangya people" label="Tanchangya"/>
<link wikidata="Q10090" start="31878" end="31883" title="Hindu" label="Hindu"/>
<link wikidata="Q9268" start="31987" end="31994" title="Judaism" label="Judaism"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043" start="32229" end="32241" title="Christianity" label="Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1259323" start="32656" end="32669" title="chieftainship" label="chieftainship"/>
<link wikidata="Q51647" start="32889" end="32911" title="Christian Missionaries" label="Christian Missionaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q8680" start="32971" end="32978" title="British Empire" label="British"/>
<link wikidata="Q3317337" start="33046" end="33058" title="Lushai Hills" label="Lushai Hills"/>
<link wikidata="Q1164" start="33071" end="33076" title="Assam" label="Assam"/>
<link wikidata="Q80338" start="33113" end="33119" title="Bengal" label="Bengal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2722496" start="33462" end="33481" title="Deputy Commissioner (India)" label="Deputy Commissioner"/>
<link wikidata="Q2722496" start="33486" end="33505" title="District magistrate" label="District magistrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q6884660" start="34164" end="34174" title="Mizo Union" label="Mizo Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q3595306" start="34192" end="34224" title="States Reorganisation Commission" label="States Reorganisation Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q1363" start="34272" end="34279" title="Tripura" label="Tripura"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193" start="34284" end="34291" title="Manipur" label="Manipur"/>
<link wikidata="Q6884660" start="34469" end="34502" title="Eastern Indian Tribal Union" label="Eastern India Tribal Union (EITU)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1287940" start="34531" end="34539" title="Assamese people" label="Assamese"/>
<link wikidata="Q3524670" start="34736" end="34742" title="mautam" label="mautam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1126393" start="34879" end="34898" title="Mizo National Front" label="Mizo National Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q6756731" start="35017" end="35042" title="March 1966 Mizo National Front uprising" label="28 February 1966 uprising"/>
<link wikidata="Q30594391" start="35738" end="35757" title="2018 Mizoram Legislative Assembly election" label="Elections were held"/>
<link wikidata="Q1362153" start="35874" end="35885" title="Zoramthanga" label="Zoramthanga"/>
<link wikidata="Q7929176" start="35909" end="35920" title="V. K. Singh" label="V. K. Singh"/>
<link wikidata="Q929651" start="36076" end="36086" title="grassroots" label="grassroots"/>
<link wikidata="Q7560972" start="36353" end="36372" title="Deputy Commissioner" label="Deputy Commissioner"/>
<link wikidata="Q126959544" start="36803" end="36831" title="Aizawl Municipal corporation" label="Aizawl Municipal Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q117447176" start="36867" end="36892" title="Lunglei Municipal Council" label="Lunglei Municipal Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q5068372" start="36963" end="36997" title="Chakma Autonomous District Council" label="Chakma Autonomous District Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q6473546" start="36999" end="37030" title="Lai Autonomous District Council" label="Lai Autonomous District Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q6754475" start="37035" end="37067" title="Mara Autonomous District Council" label="Mara Autonomous District Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q130553304" start="37098" end="37119" title="Sinlung Hills Council" label="Sinlung Hills Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q5610525" start="37171" end="37199" title="gross state domestic product" label="gross state domestic product"/>
<link wikidata="Q11708" start="37503" end="37518" title="Southeast Asia" label="southeast Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q11451" start="37626" end="37637" title="agriculture" label="agriculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q31728" start="37639" end="37660" title="public administration" label="public administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q3875186" start="37666" end="37683" title="construction work" label="construction work"/>
<link wikidata="Q188645" start="37685" end="37693" title="Tertiary" label="Tertiary"/>
<link wikidata="Q944085" start="37864" end="37885" title="Reserve Bank of India" label="Reserve Bank of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="37926" end="37938" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
<link wikidata="Q19708004" start="37987" end="38000" title="Rural poverty" label="Rural poverty"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="38136" end="38158" title="Mizoram#Demographics#Largest cities or towns" label="urban areas of Mizoram"/>
<link wikidata="Q8236" start="38241" end="38254" title="literacy rate" label="literacy rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1967342" start="38392" end="38409" title="National highways of India" label="national highways"/>
<link wikidata="Q3524283" start="38432" end="38446" title="State highways in India" label="state highways"/>
<link wikidata="Q3182712" start="38476" end="38490" title="Kaladan River" label="Kolodyne River"/>
<link wikidata="Q102066" start="38498" end="38508" title="navigation" label="navigation"/>
<link wikidata="Q178803" start="38513" end="38532" title="international trade" label="international trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q3504954" start="38534" end="38556" title="Lengpui Airport" label="Mizoram&amp;#x27;s airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q192379" start="38583" end="38589" title="Aizawl" label="Aizawl"/>
<link wikidata="Q80638" start="38653" end="38666" title="Hydroelectricity" label="hydroelectric"/>
<link wikidata="Q173056" start="38738" end="38746" title="handloom" label="handloom"/>
<link wikidata="Q48803" start="38751" end="38763" title="horticulture" label="horticulture"/>
<link wikidata="Q21023735" start="38776" end="38783" title="Tourism in Mizoram" label="Tourism"/>
<link wikidata="Q494978" start="38907" end="38928" title="special economic zone" label="special economic zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q287854" start="39692" end="39696" title="shifting cultivation" label="Jhum"/>
<link wikidata="Q239835" start="40779" end="40788" title="Anthurium" label="Anthurium"/>
<link wikidata="Q42562" start="40905" end="40913" title="turmeric" label="turmeric"/>
<link wikidata="Q38646266" start="40941" end="40949" title="Chayote" label="chowchow"/>
<link wikidata="Q41782662" start="43317" end="43323" title="Tuivai River" label="Tuivai"/>
<link wikidata="Q23808659" start="43392" end="43396" title="Tiau River" label="Tiau"/>
<link wikidata="Q7851765" start="43974" end="43985" title="Tuirial Dam" label="Tuirial Dam"/>
<link wikidata="Q7454973" start="43994" end="44006" title="Serlui B Dam" label="Serlui B Dam"/>
<link wikidata="Q118896139" start="44015" end="44032" title="Vankal Solar Park" label="Vankal Solar Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q3504954" start="44699" end="44714" title="Lengpui Airport" label="Lengpui Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q3633452" start="44842" end="44852" title="Pawan Hans" label="Pawan Hans"/>
<link wikidata="Q2182763" start="44901" end="44908" title="Lunglei" label="Lunglei"/>
<link wikidata="Q3828120" start="44910" end="44919" title="Lawngtlai" label="Lawngtlai"/>
<link wikidata="Q2576192" start="44921" end="44926" title="Saiha" label="Saiha"/>
<link wikidata="Q2086209" start="44928" end="44936" title="Chawngte" label="Chawngte"/>
<link wikidata="Q2726292" start="44938" end="44946" title="Serchhip" label="Serchhip"/>
<link wikidata="Q861388" start="44948" end="44956" title="Champhai" label="Champhai"/>
<link wikidata="Q1112188" start="44958" end="44965" title="Kolasib" label="Kolasib"/>
<link wikidata="Q2238867" start="44967" end="44975" title="Khawzawl" label="Khawzawl"/>
<link wikidata="Q2483873" start="44977" end="44982" title="Mamit, India" label="Mamit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1707211" start="44987" end="44996" title="Hnahthial" label="Hnahthial"/>
<link wikidata="Q738748" start="45085" end="45091" title="Sittwe" label="Sittwe"/>
<link wikidata="Q738748" start="45222" end="45227" title="Akyab" label="Akyab"/>
<link wikidata="Q738748" start="45256" end="45262" title="Sittwe" label="Sittwe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062377" start="45569" end="45604" title="State Peace and Development Council" label="State Peace and Development Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q192379" start="46684" end="46689" title="Aizawl" label="Aijal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1861882" start="46839" end="46850" title="2011 census of India" label="2011 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186" start="46933" end="46939" title="Kerala" label="Kerala"/>
<link wikidata="Q3481047" start="47302" end="47307" title="ratio" label="ratio"/>
<link wikidata="Q6884705" start="47572" end="47590" title="Mizoram University" label="Mizoram University"/>
<link wikidata="Q6973735" start="47843" end="47883" title="National Institute of Technology Mizoram" label="National Institute of Technology Mizoram"/>
<link wikidata="Q5969541" start="47885" end="47910" title="ICFAI University, Mizoram" label="ICFAI University, Mizoram"/>
<link wikidata="Q5146868" start="47912" end="47991" title="College of Veterinary Sciences &amp;amp; Animal Husbandry, Selesih, Aizawl, Mizoram" label="College of Veterinary Sciences &amp;amp; Animal Husbandry, Selesih, Aizawl, Mizoram"/>
<link wikidata="Q7309084" start="47996" end="48048" title="Regional Institute of Paramedical and Nursing Aizawl" label="Regional Institute of Paramedical and Nursing Aizawl"/>
<link wikidata="Q130691086" start="48658" end="48677" title="Mizo Chieftainship" label="ancient Mizo tribes"/>
<link wikidata="Q16978056" start="50124" end="50136" title="Chapchar Kut" label="Chapchar Kut"/>
<link wikidata="Q6861908" start="50154" end="50161" title="Mim Kut" label="Mim Kut"/>
<link wikidata="Q16919428" start="50166" end="50174" title="Pawl Kut" label="Pawl Kut"/>
<link wikidata="Q16978056" start="50176" end="50188" title="Chapchar Kut" label="Chapchar Kut"/>
<link wikidata="Q16978056" start="50470" end="50482" title="Chapchar Kut" label="Chapchar Kut"/>
<link wikidata="Q27891487" start="51059" end="51065" title="Cheraw dance" label="Cheraw"/>
<link wikidata="Q124985825" start="51342" end="51351" title="Khual Lam" label="Khual Lam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1275861" start="51483" end="51493" title="Chheih Lam" label="Chheih Lam"/>
<link wikidata="Q16978056" start="51936" end="51948" title="Chapchar Kut" label="Chapchar Kut"/>
<link wikidata="Q6035446" start="52749" end="52766" title="Inner Line Permit" label="Inner Line Permit"/>
<link wikidata="Q2514216" start="52795" end="52810" title="Liaison officer" label="Liaison officer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5589255" start="52812" end="52833" title="government of Mizoram" label="government of Mizoram"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348" start="52837" end="52844" title="Kolkata" label="Kolkata"/>
<link wikidata="Q944769" start="52846" end="52853" title="Silchar" label="Silchar"/>
<link wikidata="Q207752" start="52855" end="52863" title="Shillong" label="Shillong"/>
<link wikidata="Q199605" start="52865" end="52873" title="Guwahati" label="Guwahati"/>
<link wikidata="Q987" start="52878" end="52887" title="New Delhi" label="New Delhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3504954" start="52945" end="52968" title="Lengpui Airport" label="Lengpui airport, Aizawl"/>
<link wikidata="Q889" start="53343" end="53354" title="Afghanistan" label="Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="53356" end="53361" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q843" start="53366" end="53374" title="Pakistan" label="Pakistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2607861" start="53506" end="53530" title="Ministry of Home Affairs (India)" label="Ministry of Home Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q852185" start="53725" end="53750" title="Mrs. Hume&amp;#x27;s pheasant" label="Mrs. Hume&amp;#x27;s pheasant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1914208" start="53809" end="53827" title="Wild water buffalo" label="Wild water buffalo"/>
<link wikidata="Q29220" start="53829" end="53848" title="Sumatran rhinoceros" label="Sumatran rhinoceros"/>
<link wikidata="Q7378" start="53850" end="53858" title="elephant" label="elephant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1861882" start="53995" end="54013" title="2011 Indian census" label="2011 Indian census"/>
<link wikidata="Q5068372" start="54071" end="54105" title="Chakma Autonomous District Council" label="Chakma Autonomous District Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q282" start="54640" end="54644" title="wine" label="wine"/>
<link wikidata="Q10978" start="54666" end="54672" title="grapes" label="grapes"/>
<link wikidata="Q3181909" start="54677" end="54682" title="guava" label="guava"/>
<link wikidata="Q89" start="54842" end="54847" title="apple" label="apple"/>
<link wikidata="Q35625" start="54849" end="54855" title="ginger" label="ginger"/>
<link wikidata="Q156790" start="54857" end="54870" title="passion fruit" label="passion fruit"/>
<link wikidata="Q13189" start="54872" end="54877" title="peach" label="peach"/>
<link wikidata="Q434" start="54882" end="54886" title="pear" label="pear"/>
<link wikidata="Q131914017" start="55203" end="55205" title="Zu (beverage)" label="zu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1126393" start="55630" end="55649" title="Mizo National Front" label="Mizo National Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q3524670" start="55692" end="55698" title="Mautam" label="Mautam"/>
<link wikidata="Q106133" start="55768" end="55777" title="black rat" label="black rat"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="56417" end="56438" title="Mizo language#Newspaper" label="Newspapers in Mizoram"/>
<link wikidata="Q1763315" start="56566" end="56577" title="Doordarshan" label="Doordarshan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321122" start="56667" end="56682" title="All India Radio" label="All India Radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q7914800" start="56937" end="56946" title="Vanglaini" label="Vanglaini"/>
<link wikidata="Q117378631" start="56951" end="56956" title="Zalen" label="Zalen"/>
<link wikidata="Q20857475" start="56958" end="56974" title="The Mizoram Post" label="The Mizoram Post"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348800" start="56979" end="56995" title="Indian English" label="English-language"/>
<link wikidata="Q944769" start="57027" end="57034" title="Silchar" label="Silchar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1164" start="57036" end="57041" title="Assam" label="Assam"/>
<link wikidata="Q2489730" start="57122" end="57137" title="Jeje Lalpekhlua" label="Jeje Lalpekhlua"/>
<link wikidata="Q212206" start="57238" end="57266" title="India men&amp;#x27;s national football team" label="India national football team"/>
<link wikidata="Q57236317" start="57270" end="57288" title="Jeremy Lalrinnunga" label="Jeremy Lalrinnunga"/>
<link wikidata="Q27662583" start="57362" end="57383" title="Jerry Mawihmingthanga" label="Jerry Mawihmingthanga"/>
<link wikidata="Q16056350" start="57456" end="57475" title="Indian Super League" label="Indian Super League"/>
<link wikidata="Q457664" start="57479" end="57487" title="Laldenga" label="Laldenga"/>
<link wikidata="Q194236" start="57504" end="57514" title="Separatism" label="separatist"/>
<link wikidata="Q7503817" start="57607" end="57617" title="Lalduhawma" label="Lalduhawma"/>
<link wikidata="Q1837932" start="57760" end="57785" title="Chief Minister of Mizoram" label="Chief Minister of Mizoram"/>
<link wikidata="Q22003634" start="57789" end="57810" title="Lallianzuala Chhangte" label="Lallianzuala Chhangte"/>
<link wikidata="Q16056350" start="57883" end="57902" title="Indian Super League" label="Indian Super League"/>
<link wikidata="Q55616525" start="57906" end="57917" title="Lalremsiami" label="Lalremsiami"/>
<link wikidata="Q6480600" start="57995" end="58011" title="Lalrindika Ralte" label="Lalrindika Ralte"/>
<link wikidata="Q16056350" start="58045" end="58064" title="Indian Super League" label="Indian Super League"/>
<link wikidata="Q122981749" start="58115" end="58131" title="East Bengal F.C." label="East Bengal F.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q21235564" start="58134" end="58152" title="Lalsangzuali Sailo" label="Lalsangzuali Sailo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321122" start="58191" end="58206" title="All India Radio" label="All India Radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q949193" start="58253" end="58264" title="Padma Shree" label="Padma Shree"/>
<link wikidata="Q5094693" start="58274" end="58287" title="Lal Thanhawla" label="Lal Thanhawla"/>
<link wikidata="Q10225" start="58341" end="58363" title="Indian National Congress" label="Mizoram Congress Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q20992065" start="58367" end="58385" title="Nuchhungi Renthlei" label="Nuchhungi Renthlei"/>
<link wikidata="Q7346685" start="58525" end="58544" title="Robert Lalthlamuana" label="Robert Lalthlamuana"/>
<link wikidata="Q10496751" start="58625" end="58645" title="Shylo Malsawmtluanga" label="Shylo Malsawmtluanga"/>
<link wikidata="Q7257214" start="58755" end="58760" title="Ziona" label="Ziona"/>
<link wikidata="Q1362153" start="58846" end="58857" title="Zoramthanga" label="Zoramthanga"/>
<link wikidata="Q132295140" start="58969" end="58976" title="Lallula" label="Lallula"/>
<link wikidata="Q131598205" start="59041" end="59048" title="Khalkam" label="Khalkam"/>
<link wikidata="Q131686597" start="59094" end="59115" title="Lushai Rising" label="Western Lushai Rising"/>
<link wikidata="Q131538195" start="59119" end="59126" title="Lalbura" label="Lalbura"/>
<link wikidata="Q131686597" start="59180" end="59201" title="Lushai Rising" label="Eastern Lushai Rising"/>
<link wikidata="Q131394531" start="59204" end="59212" title="Sukpilal" label="Sukpilal"/>
<link wikidata="Q23135233" start="59289" end="59304" title="John Ware Edgar" label="John Ware Edgar"/>
<link wikidata="Q131294431" start="59308" end="59318" title="Ropuiliani" label="Ropuiliani"/>
<link wikidata="Q124422923" start="59370" end="59391" title="British rule in the Lushai Hills" label="British colonial rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q132200588" start="59395" end="59406" title="Rothangpuia" label="Rothangpuia"/>
<link wikidata="Q25340663" start="59436" end="59456" title="Thomas Herbert Lewin" label="Thomas Herbert Lewin"/>
<link wikidata="Q6705084" start="59481" end="59498" title="Lushai Expedition" label="Lushai Expedition"/>
<link wikidata="Q131782971" start="59511" end="59524" title="Vanhnuailiana" label="Vanhnuailiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q131551546" start="59565" end="59571" title="Zakapa" label="Zakapa"/>
<link wikidata="Q131686597" start="59600" end="59622" title="Lushai Rising" label="Southern Lushai Rising"/>
<link wikidata="Q3348804" start="59735" end="59751" title="Outline of India" label="Outline of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q4903358" start="59754" end="59775" title="Bibliography of India" label="Bibliography of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q6884655" start="59778" end="59798" title="Mizo Hlakungpui Mual" label="Mizo Hlakungpui Mual"/>
<link wikidata="Q17073966" start="59801" end="59811" title="Mizo music" label="Mizo music"/>
<link wikidata="Q1125513" start="59814" end="59843" title="Insurgency in Northeast India" label="Insurgency in Northeast India"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="461212" wikidata="Q1655894" url="?curid=461212" title="Face the Nation">
<text>Face the Nation is a weekly news and morning public affairs program airing Sundays on the CBS radio and television network. Created by Frank Stanton in 1954, &quot;Face the Nation&quot; is one of the longest-running news programs in the history of television.

Typically, the program features interviews with prominent American officials, politicians, and authors. Margaret Brennan has been the moderator of &quot;Face the Nation&quot; since 2018, though former host John Dickerson substituted during Brennan&#x27;s maternity leave in spring and summer 2021. Upon Brennan&#x27;s return to the program in September 2021, its title was changed to &quot;Face the Nation with Margaret Brennan.&quot;

The show&#x27;s full hour is broadcast live from the CBS News Washington, D.C., bureau at 10:30 a.m. Eastern Time, though some stations delay or abbreviate episodes to accommodate local and sports programming.

In 2017, &quot;Face the Nation&quot;″s audience was the largest of all Sunday public affairs programs, with an average of 3.538 million viewers. NBC competitor &quot;Meet the Press&quot; closely competed for the title in 2018, besting &quot;Face the Nation&quot;″s audience for several months.

==Format==

Similar to its Sunday morning competitors, &quot;Face the Nation&quot; begins each episode with a short &quot;tease&quot; segment recapping the week&#x27;s events and teasing the day&#x27;s guests, set to the show&#x27;s theme music.

The remainder of the program&#x27;s first half-hour typically features interviews of prominent politicians, often lawmakers and cabinet or White House officials, responding to issues from the week&#x27;s news.

The program&#x27;s second-half hour transitions to more discussion-oriented segments, including interviews of notable authors with forthcoming books and a weekly roundtable discussion, with a rotating cast of panelists. The program&#x27;s inclusion of a roundtable discussion has been indefinitely suspended since circa May 2020, the producers citing their desire to devote more time to interviews (and remained suspended in fall 2022).

Unlike some of its competitors, &quot;Face the Nation&quot; generally books only journalists and columnists for its panel discussions, omitting current and former politicians from providing punditry.

During major news events or breaking news, the program will often feature reports from various CBS News correspondents before the day&#x27;s interviews, to allow guests the opportunity to respond to the latest news.

== Distribution ==
&quot;Face the Nation&quot; first half-hour airs on CBS television stations throughout the United States, typically in the morning. In 2018, the CBS News digital streaming network began re-airing the program&#x27;s full hour at 11:00 a.m., 3:00 p.m., and 6:00 p.m. Eastern Time.

Many of the network&#x27;s affiliates in the Pacific Time Zone air &quot;Face the Nation&quot; at 8:30 a.m. local time, serving as a lead-in to the CBS Sports program &quot;The NFL Today&quot; during the football season.

A delayed audio broadcast of the program is also carried on a handful of radio affiliates through the CBS Radio Network, and in the late afternoon on C-SPAN&#x27;s Washington area radio station WCSP-FM. CBS Radio also edits and distributes a slightly abbreviated version of the program as a weekly podcast.

=== &quot;Face the State&quot; ===
As a complement to the national program, several CBS affiliates, mainly based in state capital cities, carry their own programs leading into and out of &quot;Face the Nation&quot; titled &quot;Face the State&quot; dealing with state and local politics with the same format as &quot;Face the Nation&quot;, including KTVN in Reno, Nevada (in the same metropolitan area as Carson City), the stations of the Montana Television Network, WBNS-TV in Columbus, Ohio, WFSB in Hartford, Connecticut, and WHP-TV in Harrisburg, Pennsylvania, while Miami&#x27;s CBS-owned station WFOR-TV has a complementary program titled &quot;Facing South Florida&quot;. Other stations carry the same format under other titles, such as &quot;For the Record&quot; on WISC-TV in Madison, Wisconsin.

==History==
&quot;Face the Nation&quot; premiered on November 7, 1954, and was originally broadcast on Sunday afternoons at 2:30 p.m. Eastern Time. Bill Shadel was then the Washington, D.C. bureau chief for CBS News. On that first program, his guest was Wisconsin senator Joseph McCarthy. Guests were rarely scheduled far in advance, in order to keep on top of current news stories.

=== Lesley Stahl ===
As the first female host of &quot;Face the Nation&quot;, Stahl became one of the most recognizable female faces on television. She held the position for eight years before stepping down to focus on &quot;60 Minutes.&quot;

=== Under Schieffer ===
In 1991, Bob Schieffer took over as moderator for Lesley Stahl, who as previously mentioned, held the position for eight years. Under Schieffer, ratings boomed and the program extended its half-hour time frame to a full one hour. Ratings soared to over 3 million viewers every Sunday, as &quot;Face the Nation&quot; surpassed all competitors in the ratings. Schieffer won numerous awards with the program, including two Emmy&#x27;s for Outstanding News Discussion &amp; Analysis, an Edward R. Murrow Award, and the Overseas Press Club Award.

In July 2011, &quot;Face the Nation&quot; became the last Sunday morning talk program to begin broadcasting in high definition (leaving only CBS&#x27; overnight news program &quot;Up to the Minute&quot; as the only American news program on the major broadcast networks and cable news channels that continued to broadcast in standard definition, until it converted to HD in late November 2012). Another big change came for the program in December 2011, when they permanently extended the half-hour broadcast to a full hour. The move came after &quot;Face the Nation&quot; competitors, NBC&#x27;s &quot;Meet the Press&quot;, ABC&#x27;s &quot;This Week&quot;, and &quot;Fox News Sunday&quot;, all extended their programs to one-hour. The delay came from dispute among the network&#x27;s affiliate stations.

=== After Schieffer ===


In 2015, Bob Schieffer, the longest-serving moderator in the program&#x27;s history, retired after 24 years. He was replaced by John Dickerson on June 7, 2015.

On February 22, 2018, CBS announced Margaret Brennan as the new host, replacing John Dickerson, who served as moderator for less than three years to let him focus on his anchor duties on &quot;CBS This Morning&quot;. Brennan is the second female host in the program&#x27;s history, after Lesley Stahl.

Brennan conducted numerous interviews with members of the Trump administration, including former Secretary of State Rex Tillerson and House Oversight Committee Chairman Trey Gowdy. Margaret Brennan also serves as the network&#x27;s senior foreign affairs correspondent. Brennan interviewed Vice President Mike Pence in her last episode before maternity leave.

==Moderators==
The program has been hosted by ten moderators to date, beginning with Bill Shadel. The current moderator, Margaret Brennan, has hosted since February 2018.

The following is the list of moderators for &quot;Face the Nation&quot;:
==Program length==
The program ran 30 minutes for much of its history. It expanded to 60 minutes for a preliminary 20-week period in April 2012, and was extended to that time length permanently on July 29, 2012. There is a deliberate break between the first and second half of the program, to allow local affiliates to begin airing another program if they wish to do so.

Approximately 81% of the stations affiliated with CBS air the second half-hour contiguously with the first; the remainder either do not air the second half-hour at all such as KDKA, or air that portion of the program on a tape delayed basis, because of station commitments to other programming (mainly station-produced NFL pre-game shows leading into &quot;The NFL Today&quot;, along with E/I commitments and advertorial, outdoors or religious programming). Other stations choose to air the second half-hour after primetime following their late local newscasts or in a later time slot as part of their late night schedule, though the number of stations carrying the full hour in pattern has increased over time with the end of former commitments as of 2017, from 64% in 2012.

&quot;Face the Nation&quot; was the last Sunday public affairs program to extend its length to a full hour. The move came as a way to draw viewers away from competitors.

==In popular media==
&quot;Face the Nation&quot; has been mentioned by Stephen Colbert using the nickname &quot;The Nation Face&quot; on several occasions.

The comic strip &quot;Grin and Bear It&quot; satirized the show as &quot;Faze the Nation&quot;.

==See also==
* List of longest-running United States television series

==References==
==External links==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6645282" start="37" end="67" title="Sunday morning talk show" label="morning public affairs program"/>
<link wikidata="Q43380" start="90" end="93" title="CBS" label="CBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1254874" start="104" end="122" title="Television broadcasting" label="television network"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195372" start="135" end="148" title="Frank Stanton (executive)" label="Frank Stanton"/>
<link wikidata="Q6626703" start="200" end="229" title="List of longest-running American television series" label="longest-running news programs"/>
<link wikidata="Q289" start="248" end="258" title="television" label="television"/>
<link wikidata="Q6759203" start="365" end="381" title="Margaret Brennan" label="Margaret Brennan"/>
<link wikidata="Q15501423" start="467" end="481" title="John Dickerson (journalist)" label="John Dickerson"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="759" end="775" title="Washington, D.C." label="Washington, D.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q941023" start="798" end="810" title="Eastern Time Zone" label="Eastern Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q2877626" start="1053" end="1056" title="NBC News" label="NBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1543066" start="1074" end="1088" title="Meet the Press" label="Meet the Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q639738" start="1578" end="1585" title="Cabinet of the United States" label="cabinet"/>
<link wikidata="Q35525" start="1589" end="1600" title="White House" label="White House"/>
<link wikidata="Q1642960" start="2289" end="2295" title="pundit" label="pundit"/>
<link wikidata="Q43380" start="2588" end="2591" title="CBS" label="CBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q861764" start="2681" end="2689" title="CBS News" label="CBS News"/>
<link wikidata="Q18643692" start="2690" end="2715" title="CBS News (streaming service)" label="digital streaming network"/>
<link wikidata="Q941023" start="2801" end="2813" title="Eastern Time Zone" label="Eastern Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q847142" start="2861" end="2878" title="Pacific Time Zone" label="Pacific Time Zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q2931052" start="2964" end="2974" title="CBS Sports" label="CBS Sports"/>
<link wikidata="Q7752981" start="2989" end="3002" title="The NFL Today" label="The NFL Today"/>
<link wikidata="Q41323" start="3020" end="3028" title="American football" label="football"/>
<link wikidata="Q2931046" start="3140" end="3157" title="CBS News Radio" label="CBS Radio Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q1022311" start="3188" end="3194" title="C-SPAN" label="C-SPAN"/>
<link wikidata="Q7948101" start="3232" end="3239" title="WCSP-FM" label="WCSP-FM"/>
<link wikidata="Q120669766" start="3462" end="3475" title="Lists of capitals" label="state capital"/>
<link wikidata="Q6339270" start="3696" end="3700" title="KTVN" label="KTVN"/>
<link wikidata="Q49225" start="3704" end="3716" title="Reno, Nevada" label="Reno, Nevada"/>
<link wikidata="Q40881" start="3751" end="3762" title="Carson City, Nevada" label="Carson City"/>
<link wikidata="Q6904342" start="3785" end="3811" title="Montana Television Network" label="Montana Television Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q7947322" start="3813" end="3820" title="WBNS-TV" label="WBNS-TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q16567" start="3824" end="3838" title="Columbus, Ohio" label="Columbus, Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q7949496" start="3840" end="3844" title="WFSB" label="WFSB"/>
<link wikidata="Q33486" start="3848" end="3869" title="Hartford, Connecticut" label="Hartford, Connecticut"/>
<link wikidata="Q7950357" start="3875" end="3881" title="WHP-TV" label="WHP-TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q25280" start="3885" end="3909" title="Harrisburg, Pennsylvania" label="Harrisburg, Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q8652" start="3917" end="3922" title="Miami" label="Miami"/>
<link wikidata="Q7949446" start="3948" end="3955" title="WFOR-TV" label="WFOR-TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q14714634" start="4120" end="4127" title="WISC-TV" label="WISC-TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q43788" start="4131" end="4149" title="Madison, Wisconsin" label="Madison, Wisconsin"/>
<link wikidata="Q941023" start="4286" end="4298" title="Eastern Time Zone" label="Eastern Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="4325" end="4341" title="Washington, D.C." label="Washington, D.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q861764" start="4359" end="4367" title="CBS News" label="CBS News"/>
<link wikidata="Q1537" start="4406" end="4415" title="Wisconsin" label="Wisconsin"/>
<link wikidata="Q189197" start="4424" end="4439" title="Joseph McCarthy" label="Joseph McCarthy"/>
<link wikidata="Q451695" start="4854" end="4866" title="Lesley Stahl" label="Lesley Stahl"/>
<link wikidata="Q699413" start="4949" end="4956" title="Nielsen ratings" label="ratings"/>
<link wikidata="Q133454" start="5458" end="5473" title="high-definition television" label="high definition"/>
<link wikidata="Q2636947" start="5527" end="5543" title="CBS Overnight News" label="Up to the Minute"/>
<link wikidata="Q243314" start="5671" end="5690" title="standard-definition television" label="standard definition"/>
<link wikidata="Q13974" start="5931" end="5934" title="NBC" label="NBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1543066" start="5948" end="5962" title="Meet the Press" label="Meet the Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q287218" start="5970" end="5973" title="ABC Studios" label="ABC"/>
<link wikidata="Q112674" start="5987" end="5996" title="This Week (American TV program)" label="This Week"/>
<link wikidata="Q5476841" start="6014" end="6029" title="Fox News Sunday" label="Fox News Sunday"/>
<link wikidata="Q6565361" start="6131" end="6149" title="List of CBS television affiliates (table)" label="affiliate stations"/>
<link wikidata="Q439261" start="6187" end="6200" title="Bob Schieffer" label="Bob Schieffer"/>
<link wikidata="Q15501423" start="6306" end="6320" title="John Dickerson (journalist)" label="John Dickerson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2784108" start="6532" end="6548" title="CBS This Morning" label="CBS This Morning"/>
<link wikidata="Q331401" start="6758" end="6771" title="Rex Tillerson" label="Rex Tillerson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1822266" start="6811" end="6821" title="Trey Gowdy" label="Trey Gowdy"/>
<link wikidata="Q24313" start="6947" end="6957" title="Mike Pence" label="Mike Pence"/>
<link wikidata="Q4910828" start="7088" end="7099" title="Bill Shadel" label="Bill Shadel"/>
<link wikidata="Q6327881" start="7796" end="7800" title="KDKA-TV" label="KDKA"/>
<link wikidata="Q4817258" start="7842" end="7854" title="broadcast delay" label="tape delayed"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215884" start="7939" end="7942" title="National Football League" label="NFL"/>
<link wikidata="Q7239233" start="7943" end="7956" title="pre-game show" label="pre-game show"/>
<link wikidata="Q7752981" start="7977" end="7990" title="The NFL Today" label="The NFL Today"/>
<link wikidata="Q5424721" start="8009" end="8012" title="Regulations on children&amp;#x27;s television programming in the United States" label="E/I"/>
<link wikidata="Q380060" start="8029" end="8040" title="advertorial" label="advertorial"/>
<link wikidata="Q6495397" start="8222" end="8232" title="late night television" label="late night"/>
<link wikidata="Q212886" start="8639" end="8654" title="Stephen Colbert" label="Stephen Colbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q5609376" start="8747" end="8763" title="Grin and Bear It" label="Grin and Bear It"/>
<link wikidata="Q6626703" start="8837" end="8892" title="List of longest-running United States television series" label="List of longest-running United States television series"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="461214" wikidata="Q2885005" url="?curid=461214" title="Martín Fernández de Navarrete">
<text>Martín Fernández de Navarrete y Ximénez de Tejada (November 9, 1765 – October 8, 1844), was a Spanish noble, grandson of the Marquess of Ximenez de Tejada, knight of the Order of Malta, politician and historian. He was a Spanish senator and Director of the Spanish Royal Academy of History (1824-1844).

He rediscovered Las Casas&#x27; abstract of the journal Columbus kept, known as the &quot;Diario&quot;, of his first voyage. His principal work is the &quot;Colección de los viages y descubrimientos que hicieron por mar los españoles desde fines del siglo XV&quot; (Collection of the voyages and discoveries made by the Spaniards since the late 15th century), a vast work published in five volumes that Navarrete wrote by appointment of the Spanish Crown. As a result of this achievement, he has acquired the nickname &quot;El Marino Historiador&quot; (The Mariner Historian).

Navarrete was a member of all the major Spanish and international Science and Arts Academies of his time.

== Early life and military career ==

He was born at Ábalos, La Rioja in 1765 in Abalos Palace, the main Fernández de Navarrete family property in La Rioja region. This building currently houses his personal archive, that includes samples of his epistolary relation with some of the most important personalities of the time like Alexander Von Humboldt, Washington Irving or Gaspar Melchor de Jovellanos

His grandfather was Martin Fernández de Navarrete y Zárate (born 1684 in Navarrete) knight of the order of Calatrava, who married Catalina Ramírez de la Piscina, descendant of the king of Navarre and the Cid .

His father was Francisco Fernández de Navarrete Ramirez de la Piscina. His mother was Catalina Ximénez de Tejada y Argaiz, daughter of the Marquess of Ximénez de Tejada and niece of the 69th Grand Master of the Sovereign Military Order of Malta, Francisco Ximénez de Tejada (1700-1774)

Martin Fernández de Navarrete Ximénez de Tejada received part of his education at the &quot;Real Seminario de Nobles de Vergara -&quot; the Royal Seminary of Nobles located in Vergara. He entered the navy in 1780 and was later engaged in the unsuccessful operations in 1782 during the Great Siege of Gibraltar, and afterwards in the suppression of Algerine pirates.

Health compelled him for a time to withdraw from active service, but he devoted this forced leisure to historical research, and in 1789 he was appointed by the crown to examine the national archives relating to the maritime history of Spain.

==Marine historian ==

He rejoined the navy in 1793 and was present at the siege of Toulon. Afterwards he received command of a frigate.

From 1797 to 1808 he held in succession various important posts in the ministry of marine.

In 1808 the French invasion caused him serious problems, as Napoleon Bonaparte instituted his brother Joseph Bonaparte as king of Spain during the French invasion of Spain (1808-1814).

The French invaders wanted Martín Fernández Navarrete as Minister of the Navy, but Navarrete refused the offer.

This instability finally led to Martin Fernandez de Navarrete to withdraw from Madrid, and made him participate in the Cortes of Cádiz, in Andalusia, where the new Spanish Constitution was being voted while most of the rest of Spain was under occupation by Napoleon&#x27;s troops .

The rest of his life was entirely devoted to literature and politics. In 1819 appeared, as an appendix to the Academy&#x27;s edition of &quot;Don Quixote&quot;, his &quot;Vida de Miguel de Cervantes Saavedra&quot;, and in 1825 the first two volumes of the &quot;Colección de los viajes y descubrimientos que hicieron por mar los españoles desde el fin del siglo XV&quot; (3rd vol., 1829; 4th vol., 1837) -&quot;Collection of the voyages and discoveries made by the spaniards since the late 15th century.&quot;

This vast work was a compendium of the Spanish naval discoveries in America and Asia, that led to the construction of the Spanish Empire.

In 1837 he was made a senator. In 1824 he was appointed director of the Spanish Royal Academy of History. At the time of his death in Madrid in 1844 he was assisting in the preparation of the &quot;Colección de Documentos Inéditos para la Historia de España&quot;. His &quot;Disertación sobre la Historia de la Nautica&quot; (1846) and &quot;Biblioteca Maritima Española&quot; (1851). were published posthumously.

Martín Fernández de Navarrete Ximénez de Tejada portrait painted by the son of great painter Vicente López Portaña is presently presiding the Board of Trustees&#x27; hall of the Naval Museum of Madrid.

Another portrait of Martin Fernández de Navarrete Ximénez de Tejada presides the main staircase of the Royal Academy of History in Madrid.

== Jobs and distinctions ==
*Knight of the Order of Malta
*Spanish State Counselor  
*Spanish Senator  
*Director of the Spanish Royal Academy of History (1824-1844)
*Vice-protector of the Royal Academy of Noble Arts of San Fernando,  
*Dean of the Royal Spanish Academy of Language,  
*Born member of the Spanish Admiralty Board  
*Great Cross of the Royal American Order of Ysabel la Católica  
*Member of the Council of Spain
*Member of the Council of the Indies  
*Director of Spanish Hydrographic Depot  
*Martin Fernández de Navarrete Ximénez de Tejada was also a member of the following academies:
*Individual of the Institut de France
*Commander of the Legion of Honor of France  
*Academy of History of Rio de Janeiro  
*Academy of San Lucas of Rome  
*Academy of Sciences of Turin  
*Academy of Berlin  
*Antiquarian Societies of Copenhagen and Normandy  
*American Philosophical Society of Philadelphia  
*Academies of Geography of Paris and London 
*Sociedad Economica Matritense 

and of several other Academies of the Kingdom of Spain

== Main works ==

* Fernández de Navarrete, Martín (1825–37) &quot;Colección de los viages y descubrimientos que hicieron por mar los españoles desde fines del siglo XV: con varios documentos inéditos concernientes á la historia de la marina castellana y de los establecimientos españoles en Indias&quot;, 5 vols., Madrid: Imprensa Real. v.1 (1825), v.2 (1825), v.3 (1829), v.4 (1837), v. 5 (1837)
* &quot;Vida de Miguel de Cervantes Saavedra, escrita e ilustrada con varias noticias y documentos inéditos pertenecientes a la historia y literatura de su tiempo&quot;. Madrid, 1819.[1]
* &quot;Disertación sobre la historia de la náutica&quot;. Madrid, 1846.
* &quot;Biblioteca marítima española&quot;. Obra póstuma del señor Martín Fernández de Navarrete. Madrid: Viuda de Calero, 1851, 2 volúmenes.
* &quot;Viajes de Américo Vespucio&quot;. Ed. Espasa-Calpe. Madrid, 2003. .
* &quot;Colección de Documentos Inéditos para la Historia de España&quot;. Inacabado. Madrid, 1844.
* &quot;Disertación Histórica sobre la parte que tuvieron los españoles en las guerras de Ultramar o de las Cruzadas [...].&quot; Tomo V. Real Academia de la Historia. Madrid . 1816

==References==
==Bibliography==
* Fernández de Navarrete, Martín (1825–37) &quot;Colección de los viages y descubrimientos que hicieron por mar los españoles desde fines del siglo XV: con varios documentos inéditos concernientes á la historia de la marina castellana y de los establecimientos españoles en Indias&quot;, 4 vols., Madrid: Imprensa Real.v.1 (1825), v.2 (1825), v.3 (1829), v.4 (1837).
* Cáseda Teresa, J. F. &quot;Martín Fernández de Navarrete y la literatura de su tiempo&quot;. Instituto de Estudios Riojanos. Gibierno de la Rioja. Logroño, 2000. 
* Juretschke, Hans. &quot;Los Afrancesados en la Guerra de la Independencia.&quot; Biblioteca de la Historia de España. SARPE, Madrid 1986. 
* Pando Villarroya, José Luis de. &quot;Colón y Fernández de Navarrete.&quot; Pando Ediciones . Madrid. 1984. 
* Instituto de Historia y Cultura Naval. &quot;Martín Fernández de Navarrete. El marino Historiador. (1765-1844).&quot; Cuadernos Monográficos del Instituto de Historia y Cultura Naval. Nº 24 Madrid. 1995.

==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2885005" start="0" end="49" title="Martín Fernández de Navarrete" label="Martín Fernández de Navarrete y Ximénez de Tejada"/>
<link wikidata="Q209726" start="125" end="133" title="Marquess" label="Marquess"/>
<link wikidata="Q190353" start="170" end="184" title="Sovereign Military Order of Malta" label="Order of Malta"/>
<link wikidata="Q201788" start="201" end="210" title="historian" label="historian"/>
<link wikidata="Q855343" start="229" end="236" title="Senate of Spain" label="senator"/>
<link wikidata="Q2720582" start="257" end="289" title="Real Academia de la Historia" label="Spanish Royal Academy of History"/>
<link wikidata="Q207416" start="320" end="329" title="Bartolomé de las Casas" label="Las Casas"/>
<link wikidata="Q893385" start="348" end="373" title="Christopher Columbus&amp;#x27; journal" label="the journal Columbus kept"/>
<link wikidata="Q889833" start="745" end="758" title="Monarchy of Spain" label="Spanish Crown"/>
<link wikidata="Q582970" start="1042" end="1058" title="Ábalos, La Rioja" label="Ábalos, La Rioja"/>
<link wikidata="Q5727" start="1136" end="1144" title="La Rioja (Spain)" label="La Rioja"/>
<link wikidata="Q6694" start="1318" end="1340" title="Alexander von Humboldt" label="Alexander Von Humboldt"/>
<link wikidata="Q181667" start="1342" end="1359" title="Washington Irving" label="Washington Irving"/>
<link wikidata="Q282498" start="1363" end="1391" title="Gaspar Melchor de Jovellanos" label="Gaspar Melchor de Jovellanos"/>
<link wikidata="Q756910" start="1491" end="1509" title="order of Calatrava" label="order of Calatrava"/>
<link wikidata="Q275045" start="1573" end="1588" title="List of Navarrese monarchs" label="king of Navarre"/>
<link wikidata="Q43958" start="1597" end="1600" title="El Cid" label="Cid"/>
<link wikidata="Q209726" start="1743" end="1751" title="Marquess" label="Marquess"/>
<link wikidata="Q622601" start="1795" end="1807" title="Grand Master (order)" label="Grand Master"/>
<link wikidata="Q190353" start="1815" end="1848" title="Sovereign Military Order of Malta" label="Sovereign Military Order of Malta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1382252" start="2067" end="2074" title="Bergara" label="Vergara"/>
<link wikidata="Q815145" start="2176" end="2200" title="Great Siege of Gibraltar" label="Great Siege of Gibraltar"/>
<link wikidata="Q45393" start="2248" end="2254" title="pirate" label="pirate"/>
<link wikidata="Q815228" start="2576" end="2591" title="siege of Toulon" label="siege of Toulon"/>
<link wikidata="Q161705" start="2629" end="2636" title="frigate" label="frigate"/>
<link wikidata="Q7726" start="2833" end="2849" title="Joseph Bonaparte" label="Joseph Bonaparte"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135591" start="3149" end="3164" title="Cortes of Cádiz" label="Cortes of Cádiz"/>
<link wikidata="Q5783" start="3169" end="3178" title="Andalusia" label="Andalusia"/>
<link wikidata="Q480" start="3455" end="3466" title="Don Quixote" label="Don Quixote"/>
<link wikidata="Q5682" start="3492" end="3520" title="Miguel de Cervantes Saavedra" label="Miguel de Cervantes Saavedra"/>
<link wikidata="Q80702" start="3946" end="3960" title="Spanish Empire" label="Spanish Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q2720582" start="4035" end="4067" title="Real Academia de la Historia" label="Spanish Royal Academy of History"/>
<link wikidata="Q117543" start="4471" end="4492" title="Vicente López Portaña" label="Vicente López Portaña"/>
<link wikidata="Q1815235" start="4556" end="4578" title="Naval Museum of Madrid" label="Naval Museum of Madrid"/>
<link wikidata="Q2720582" start="4684" end="4708" title="Real Academia de la Historia" label="Royal Academy of History"/>
<link wikidata="Q190353" start="4764" end="4778" title="Sovereign Military Order of Malta" label="Order of Malta"/>
<link wikidata="Q2313715" start="4788" end="4803" title="Spanish Council of State" label="State Counselor"/>
<link wikidata="Q855343" start="4815" end="4822" title="Senate of Spain" label="Senator"/>
<link wikidata="Q2720582" start="4842" end="4874" title="Real Academia de la Historia" label="Spanish Royal Academy of History"/>
<link wikidata="Q1322403" start="4910" end="4953" title="Real Academia de Bellas Artes de San Fernando" label="Royal Academy of Noble Arts of San Fernando"/>
<link wikidata="Q11993457" start="4970" end="5003" title="Royal Spanish Academy" label="Royal Spanish Academy of Language"/>
<link wikidata="Q931502" start="5073" end="5115" title="Order of Isabella the Catholic" label="Royal American Order of Ysabel la Católica"/>
<link wikidata="Q2993747" start="5133" end="5149" title="Council of Castile" label="Council of Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1127285" start="5165" end="5186" title="Council of the Indies" label="Council of the Indies"/>
<link wikidata="Q377066" start="5345" end="5363" title="Institut de France" label="Institut de France"/>
<link wikidata="Q163700" start="5382" end="5407" title="Legion of Honour" label="Legion of Honor of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q338523" start="5451" end="5479" title="Accademia di San Luca" label="Academy of San Lucas of Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q466089" start="5588" end="5634" title="American Philosophical Society" label="American Philosophical Society of Philadelphia"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="461219" wikidata="Q923408" url="?curid=461219" title="Gemini Awards">
<text>The Gemini Awards were awards given by the Academy of Canadian Cinema &amp; Television between 1986–2011 to recognize the achievements of Canada&#x27;s English-language television industry. The Gemini Awards are analogous to the Emmy Awards given in the United States and the BAFTA Television Awards in the United Kingdom. First held in 1986 to replace the ACTRA Award, the ceremony celebrated Canadian television productions with awards in 87 categories, along with other special awards such as lifetime achievement awards. The Academy had previously presented the one-off Bijou Awards in 1981, inclusive of some television productions.

The awards&#x27; name was an allusion to Castor and Pollux, a mythological pair of twins; this was in reference to Canada&#x27;s linguistic duality of English and French, with the Academy&#x27;s separate awards presentation for French-language television production named the Gémeaux Awards. The statuette, designed by Toronto artist Scott Thornley, evoked twins through a design that essentially created two faces at the front and back of the statuette.

In April 2012, the Academy of Canadian Cinema &amp; Television announced that the Gemini Awards and the Genie Awards would be discontinued and replaced by a new award ceremony dedicated to all forms of Canadian media, including television, film, and digital media, dubbed the &quot;Canadian Screen Awards&quot;. The first annual Canadian Screen Awards were held on 4 March 2013. 

==Award categories==


===Special awards===
* Academy Achievement Award - general lifetime honour, inaugurated in 1996
* Donald Brittain Award - for the best political or social documentary
* Canada Award - began in 1988 as the Multiculturalism Award, this is award &quot;honours excellence in mainstream television programming that reflects the racial and cultural diversity of Canada.&quot;
* Margaret Collier Award - lifetime writing honour
* John Drainie Award - broadcasting, not necessarily awarded every year
* Humanitarian Award - inaugurated in 2001, recipients to date:
** (2001) Donald Martin
** (2002) Wendy Crewson
** (2003) Max Keeping
** (2004) George R. Robertson
** (2005) Royal Canadian Air Farce
* Gordon Sinclair Award for Broadcast Journalism - for television journalists who make outstanding contributions

==Dates and locations==

==See also==

* Canadian television awards

==References==
==External links==
* Official website (archived): </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q923408" start="4" end="17" title="Gemini Awards" label="Gemini Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q4671432" start="43" end="86" title="Academy of Canadian Cinema &amp;amp; Television" label="Academy of Canadian Cinema &amp;amp; Television"/>
<link wikidata="Q16" start="138" end="144" title="Canada" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q3983009" start="169" end="188" title="Television in Canada" label="television industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q123737" start="229" end="240" title="Emmy Awards" label="Emmy Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="254" end="267" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q1369077" start="276" end="299" title="British Academy Television Awards" label="BAFTA Television Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="307" end="321" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q4650859" start="357" end="368" title="ACTRA Award" label="ACTRA Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q104854197" start="574" end="586" title="Bijou Awards" label="Bijou Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q190103" start="680" end="697" title="Castor and Pollux" label="Castor and Pollux"/>
<link wikidata="Q159979" start="722" end="727" title="twins" label="twins"/>
<link wikidata="Q3404702" start="915" end="929" title="Gémeaux Awards" label="Gémeaux Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q1502249" start="1199" end="1210" title="Genie Award" label="Genie Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076968" start="1345" end="1358" title="digital media" label="digital media"/>
<link wikidata="Q3459735" start="1377" end="1399" title="Canadian Screen Awards" label="Canadian Screen Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q4671332" start="1522" end="1547" title="Academy Achievement Award" label="Academy Achievement Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q48814850" start="1597" end="1618" title="Donald Brittain Award" label="Donald Brittain Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q5029308" start="1668" end="1680" title="Canada Award" label="Canada Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q6759290" start="1871" end="1893" title="Margaret Collier Award" label="Margaret Collier Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q6230071" start="1922" end="1940" title="John Drainie Award" label="John Drainie Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q105773011" start="2066" end="2079" title="Donald Martin (screenwriter)" label="Donald Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q253891" start="2090" end="2103" title="Wendy Crewson" label="Wendy Crewson"/>
<link wikidata="Q6794918" start="2114" end="2125" title="Max Keeping" label="Max Keeping"/>
<link wikidata="Q5543663" start="2136" end="2155" title="George R. Robertson" label="George R. Robertson"/>
<link wikidata="Q3445894" start="2166" end="2190" title="Royal Canadian Air Farce" label="Royal Canadian Air Farce"/>
<link wikidata="Q24190990" start="2193" end="2239" title="Gordon Sinclair Award" label="Gordon Sinclair Award for Broadcast Journalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q85750405" start="2346" end="2372" title="Canadian television awards" label="Canadian television awards"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="461225" wikidata="Q193722" url="?curid=461225" title="Sergiyev Posad">
<text>Sergiyev Posad () is a city that is the administrative center of Sergiyevo-Posadsky District in Moscow Oblast, Russia. Population: 

The city contains the Trinity Lavra of St. Sergius, where Moscow Theological Academy is also located.

The city was previously known by its current name until 1919, later it was renamed as &quot;Sergiyev&quot; (until 1930) and &quot;Zagorsk&quot; (until 1991).

==History==

Sergiyev Posad is the religious center of the Moscow Region as its first monastery was founded in 1337.
The monastery began as a church built by Sergius of Radonezh, made out of wood, and by 1345 was recognized as a place of religious worship. Town status was granted to Sergiyev Posad in 1742. In the 16th and 17th centuries, the religious center continued expanding into new monastery buildings, living areas, and stone walls, which withheld a Polish Siege of 1608–1610. In the 18th century, wooden monasteries were mostly destroyed and began reconstruction and settlement (roads, hotels, stable, and hospice). Lavra was closed in 1919 after the Russian Revolution, like all other places of worship in the USSR. The town&#x27;s name, alluding to St. Sergius, has strong religious connotations. Soviet authorities changed it first to just &quot;Sergiyev&quot; in 1919, and then to &quot;Zagorsk&quot; in 1930, in memory of the revolutionary Vladimir Zagorsky. Sergiyev Posad was penetrated by Germany in 1941. It reopened later in 1941 during WW2 and continued to serve as a religious and historical center of Russia.

The original name was restored in 1991.

==Administrative and municipal status==
Within the framework of administrative divisions, Sergiyev Posad serves as the administrative center of Sergiyevo-Posadsky District. As an administrative division, it is, together with twenty-six rural localities, incorporated within Sergiyevo-Posadsky District as the City of Sergiyev Posad. As a municipal division, the City of Sergiyev Posad is incorporated within Sergiyevo-Posadsky Municipal District as Sergiyev Posad Urban Settlement.

==Culture==
The culture of Sergiyev Posad focuses on its religious and toymaking history, as well as classical music and art. The Sergiyev Posad State History and Art Museum-Preserve contain the Lavra complex of monasteries, and the Konny Dvor museum, which consists of art and excavated artifacts. In addition to the Lavra monasteries, the Chernigovsky Skete was built as a men&#x27;s monastery in the 19th century, providing space for over 400 monks. Today, the Skete is quiet and peaceful, with only 10 monks coming to complete its everyday functions.

The Russian wooden toys, matryoshkas, were invented there by an artist Sergey Malyutin, and are now displayed in the Toy Museum. There are over 800 exhibits from the 11-21st century, including artifacts from other countries.
Because of the town’s deep-rooted focus on art and music, it has many schools for children, who are enrolled between the ages of 6–8 years old.
In addition, it is home to many such as which has been mentioned in War and Peace, Yuri Gagarin Palace of Culture which is a Russian Heritage Building.

==Economy and transportation==
Tourism associated with the Golden Ring plays a role in the regional economy. There is an important toy factory and Zagorsk Optical-Mechanical Plant. 

The Moscow–Yaroslavl railway and highway pass through the town. Sergiyev Posad Bus Terminal is located in the city.

== Notable people ==
*Andrei Rublev, artist, Church iconography, lived in the 14-15th centuries, author of &quot;Saint Trinity&quot;&#x27;s icon
*Zhanna Bichevskaya, Soviet/Russian singer and folk musician
*Daniel Chorniy, artist, Church iconography, lived in the 14-15th centuries
*Pavel Florensky, Russian Orthodox theologian and researcher
*Vikentii Trofimov, painter
*Vladimir Favorsky, graphic artist, woodcut illustrator, painter
*Aristarkh Lentulov, avant-garde artist
*Boris Kustodiev, painter
*Mikhail Nesterov, painter
*German Sterligov, businessman
*Ivan Demidov (born 2005), ice hockey player, picked 5th overall in the 2024 NHL draft by the Montreal Canadiens

==Twin towns – sister cities==
Sergiyev Posad is twinned with:

* Cephalonia, Greece
* Fulda, Germany
* New Athos, Georgia
* Rueil-Malmaison, France
* Saldus, Latvia
* Slonim, Belarus
* Vagharshapat, Armenia

Former twin towns:
* Gniezno, Poland

In March 2022, the Polish city of Gniezno severed its ties with Sergiyev Posad as a response to the 2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine.

==References==

Notes
Sources
*

==Further reading==

==External links==

*Official website of Sergiyev Posad 
*Unofficial website of Sergiyev Posad 
*Official website of the Sergiyev Posad State History and Art Museum-Reserve 
*Official website of the Holy Trinity-St. Sergius Lavra
*Sergiyev Posad travelog</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q193722" start="0" end="14" title="Sergiyev Posad" label="Sergiyev Posad"/>
<link wikidata="Q2578772" start="23" end="27" title="types of inhabited localities in Russia" label="city"/>
<link wikidata="Q432620" start="65" end="92" title="Sergiyevo-Posadsky District" label="Sergiyevo-Posadsky District"/>
<link wikidata="Q1697" start="96" end="109" title="Moscow Oblast" label="Moscow Oblast"/>
<link wikidata="Q211962" start="155" end="183" title="Trinity Lavra of St. Sergius" label="Trinity Lavra of St. Sergius"/>
<link wikidata="Q841804" start="191" end="217" title="Moscow Theological Academy" label="Moscow Theological Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1697" start="454" end="467" title="Moscow Oblast" label="Moscow Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q4463439" start="854" end="866" title="Siege of Troitsky monastery" label="Polish Siege"/>
<link wikidata="Q8729" start="1056" end="1074" title="Russian Revolution" label="Russian Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="1204" end="1210" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet"/>
<link wikidata="Q4183587" start="1350" end="1367" title="Vladimir Zagorsky" label="Vladimir Zagorsky"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1620" end="1657" title="subdivisions of Russia#Administrative divisions" label="framework of administrative divisions"/>
<link wikidata="Q1306755" start="1688" end="1709" title="administrative center" label="administrative center"/>
<link wikidata="Q432620" start="1713" end="1740" title="Sergiyevo-Posadsky District" label="Sergiyevo-Posadsky District"/>
<link wikidata="Q2578772" start="1805" end="1821" title="types of inhabited localities in Russia" label="rural localities"/>
<link wikidata="Q7830079" start="1878" end="1882" title="Town of district significance" label="City"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1907" end="1925" title="subdivisions of Russia#Municipal divisions" label="municipal division"/>
<link wikidata="Q4306036" start="2219" end="2234" title="Museum-Preserve" label="Museum-Preserve"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2285" end="2295" title="Konny Dvor" label="Konny Dvor"/>
<link wikidata="Q4513561" start="2393" end="2411" title="Chernigovsky Skete" label="Chernigovsky Skete"/>
<link wikidata="Q3742270" start="2679" end="2694" title="Sergey Malyutin" label="Sergey Malyutin"/>
<link wikidata="Q161531" start="3045" end="3058" title="War and Peace" label="War and Peace"/>
<link wikidata="Q61973" start="3189" end="3200" title="Golden Ring of Russia" label="Golden Ring"/>
<link wikidata="Q4183603" start="3277" end="3309" title="Zagorsk Optical-Mechanical Plant" label="Zagorsk Optical-Mechanical Plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q649" start="3317" end="3323" title="Moscow" label="Moscow"/>
<link wikidata="Q2423" start="3324" end="3333" title="Yaroslavl" label="Yaroslavl"/>
<link wikidata="Q838" start="3452" end="3465" title="Andrei Rublev" label="Andrei Rublev"/>
<link wikidata="Q570188" start="3537" end="3562" title="Trinity (Andrei Rublev)" label="&amp;quot;Saint Trinity&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q274312" start="3576" end="3594" title="Zhanna Bichevskaya" label="Zhanna Bichevskaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q901946" start="3637" end="3651" title="Daniel Chorny" label="Daniel Chorniy"/>
<link wikidata="Q336769" start="3713" end="3728" title="Pavel Florensky" label="Pavel Florensky"/>
<link wikidata="Q4463914" start="3774" end="3791" title="Vikentii Trofimov" label="Vikentii Trofimov"/>
<link wikidata="Q898175" start="3802" end="3819" title="Vladimir Favorsky" label="Vladimir Favorsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q173242" start="3837" end="3844" title="woodcut" label="woodcut"/>
<link wikidata="Q664360" start="3867" end="3885" title="Aristarkh Lentulov" label="Aristarkh Lentulov"/>
<link wikidata="Q313275" start="3907" end="3922" title="Boris Kustodiev" label="Boris Kustodiev"/>
<link wikidata="Q318427" start="3933" end="3949" title="Mikhail Nesterov" label="Mikhail Nesterov"/>
<link wikidata="Q4442359" start="3960" end="3976" title="German Sterligov" label="German Sterligov"/>
<link wikidata="Q115325153" start="3991" end="4003" title="Ivan Demidov (ice hockey)" label="Ivan Demidov"/>
<link wikidata="Q113127690" start="4062" end="4076" title="2024 NHL entry draft" label="2024 NHL draft"/>
<link wikidata="Q188143" start="4084" end="4102" title="Montreal Canadiens" label="Montreal Canadiens"/>
<link wikidata="Q184711" start="4153" end="4160" title="Sister city" label="twinned"/>
<link wikidata="Q178488" start="4170" end="4180" title="Cephalonia" label="Cephalonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3963" start="4191" end="4196" title="Fulda" label="Fulda"/>
<link wikidata="Q42194" start="4208" end="4217" title="New Athos" label="New Athos"/>
<link wikidata="Q193920" start="4229" end="4244" title="Rueil-Malmaison" label="Rueil-Malmaison"/>
<link wikidata="Q744247" start="4255" end="4261" title="Saldus" label="Saldus"/>
<link wikidata="Q863576" start="4272" end="4278" title="Slonim" label="Slonim"/>
<link wikidata="Q183394" start="4290" end="4302" title="Vagharshapat" label="Vagharshapat"/>
<link wikidata="Q51432" start="4334" end="4341" title="Gniezno" label="Gniezno"/>
<link wikidata="Q110999040" start="4456" end="4483" title="Russian invasion of Ukraine" label="Russian invasion of Ukraine"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="461226" wikidata="Q766552" url="?curid=461226" title="Lucius Cornelius Balbus (consul 40 BC)">
<text>Lucius Cornelius Balbus ( 1st century BC) was born in Gades early in the first century BC. Lucius Cornelius Balbus was a wealthy Roman politician and businessman of Punic origin and a native of Gades in Hispania, who played a significant role in the emergence of the Principate at Rome. He was a prominent supporter of Julius Caesar and a close advisor to the emperor Augustus.

== Biography ==
He served in Hispania under Pompey and Metellus Pius against Sertorius. For his services against Sertorius, Roman citizenship was conferred upon him and his family by Pompey. He accompanied Pompey on his return to Rome in 71 BC, and was for a long time one of his most intimate friends. He also gained the friendship of Julius Caesar, who placed great confidence in him. Balbus&#x27; personal friendships with Pompey and Caesar were instrumental in the formation of the First Triumvirate. He was a chief financier in Rome. Balbus served under Caesar as chief engineer (&quot;praefectus fabrum&quot;) when Caesar was propraetor to Hispania in 61 BC, and proconsul to Gaul in 58 BC.

His position as a naturalized foreigner, his influence, and his wealth naturally made Balbus many enemies, who in 56 BC put up a native of Gades to prosecute him for illegally assuming the rights of a Roman citizen, a charge directed against the triumvirs equally with himself. Cicero (whose speech has been preserved), Pompey and Crassus all spoke on his behalf, and he was acquitted. During Caesar&#x27;s civil war, Balbus did not take any open part against Pompey, though it was reported that Balbus dined with Caesar, Sallust, Hirtius, Oppius, and Sulpicus Rufus on the night after his famous crossing over the Rubicon river into Italy, which took place on January 10, 49 BC. He endeavored to get Cicero to mediate between Caesar and Pompey, with the object of preventing him from definitely siding with the latter, and Cicero admits that he was dissuaded from doing so, against his better judgement.

Balbus attached himself to Caesar, and, in conjunction with Oppius, managed the entirety of Caesar&#x27;s affairs in Rome. Subsequently, Balbus became Caesar&#x27;s private secretary, and Cicero was obliged to ask for his good offices with Caesar. After Caesar&#x27;s murder in 44 BC, Balbus was equally successful in gaining the favour of Octavian; in 43 BC or 42 BC he was praetor, and in 40 BC he became the first naturalized Roman citizen to attain the consulship. The year of his death is not known. Balbus kept a diary of the chief events in his own and Caesar&#x27;s life (&quot;Ephemeris&quot;), which has been lost (Suetonius, &quot;Caesar&quot;, 81). He took care that Caesar&#x27;s Commentaries on the Gallic War should be continued; and accordingly the 8th book of the Commentarii de Bello Gallico (which was probably written by his friend Hirtius at his instigation) is dedicated to him.

== Notes ==
== References ==
* Cicero, &quot;Letters&quot; (ed. Tyrrell and Purser, iv. introd. p. 62) and &quot;Pro Balbo&quot;.
* Heatley, Henry Richard and Herbert Napier Kingdon. (1882). &quot;Gradatim, an Easy Latin Translation Book,&quot; Oxford: Oxford University Press. OCLC 77762862
* E. Jullien, &quot;De L. Cornelio Balbo Maiore&quot;, 1886.
* Pauly-Wissowa, &quot;Realencyclopädie&quot;, iv. pt. i. 1900.
* Schork, R. J. (1997) &quot;Latin and Roman culture in Joyce.&quot; Gainesville: University of FLorida Press. ; OCLC 243862657
* Smith, William. (1850). &quot;A New Classical Dictionary of Greek and Roman Biography, Mythology and Geography&quot;. New York: Harper &amp; Brothers. OCLC 5078784
*Rogerson, In Search of Ancient North Africa: A History in Six Lives </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q766552" start="0" end="23" title="Lucius Cornelius Balbus (consul 40 BC)" label="Lucius Cornelius Balbus"/>
<link wikidata="Q15682" start="54" end="59" title="Cádiz" label="Gades"/>
<link wikidata="Q15682" start="194" end="199" title="Cádiz" label="Gades"/>
<link wikidata="Q206414" start="267" end="277" title="Principate" label="Principate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048" start="319" end="332" title="Julius Caesar" label="Julius Caesar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1405" start="360" end="376" title="Augustus" label="emperor Augustus"/>
<link wikidata="Q186513" start="408" end="416" title="Hispania" label="Hispania"/>
<link wikidata="Q125414" start="423" end="429" title="Pompey" label="Pompey"/>
<link wikidata="Q313680" start="434" end="447" title="Quintus Caecilius Metellus Pius" label="Metellus Pius"/>
<link wikidata="Q296238" start="456" end="465" title="Sertorius" label="Sertorius"/>
<link wikidata="Q213810" start="503" end="520" title="Roman citizenship" label="Roman citizenship"/>
<link wikidata="Q220" start="609" end="613" title="Rome" label="Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048" start="715" end="728" title="Julius Caesar" label="Julius Caesar"/>
<link wikidata="Q715380" start="865" end="882" title="First Triumvirate" label="First Triumvirate"/>
<link wikidata="Q731997" start="1011" end="1021" title="Promagistrate" label="propraetor"/>
<link wikidata="Q38060" start="1061" end="1065" title="Gaul" label="Gaul"/>
<link wikidata="Q1541" start="1355" end="1361" title="Cicero" label="Cicero"/>
<link wikidata="Q175121" start="1408" end="1415" title="Crassus" label="Crassus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1238338" start="1470" end="1493" title="Caesar&amp;#x27;s civil war" label="Caesar&amp;#x27;s civil war"/>
<link wikidata="Q7170" start="1599" end="1606" title="Sallust" label="Sallust"/>
<link wikidata="Q354990" start="1608" end="1615" title="Hirtius" label="Hirtius"/>
<link wikidata="Q670317" start="1617" end="1623" title="Gaius Oppius" label="Oppius"/>
<link wikidata="Q435163" start="1629" end="1643" title="Servius Sulpicius Rufus" label="Sulpicus Rufus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048" start="1804" end="1810" title="Julius Caesar" label="Caesar"/>
<link wikidata="Q670317" start="2043" end="2049" title="Gaius Oppius" label="Oppius"/>
<link wikidata="Q1405" start="2323" end="2331" title="Augustus" label="Octavian"/>
<link wikidata="Q172907" start="2358" end="2365" title="praetor" label="praetor"/>
<link wikidata="Q40779" start="2440" end="2450" title="Roman consul" label="consulship"/>
<link wikidata="Q1229963" start="2608" end="2617" title="Lives of the Twelve Caesars" label="Suetonius"/>
<link wikidata="Q106199" start="2764" end="2792" title="Commentarii de Bello Gallico" label="Commentarii de Bello Gallico"/>
<link wikidata="Q354990" start="2835" end="2842" title="Aulus Hirtius" label="Hirtius"/>
<link wikidata="Q559411" start="3432" end="3447" title="William Smith (lexicographer)" label="Smith, William."/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="461227" wikidata="Q120120" url="?curid=461227" title="Superconducting magnet">
<text>A superconducting magnet is an electromagnet made from coils of superconducting wire. They must be cooled to cryogenic temperatures during operation. In its superconducting state the wire has no electrical resistance and therefore can conduct much larger electric currents than ordinary wire, creating intense magnetic fields. Superconducting magnets can produce stronger magnetic fields than all but the strongest non-superconducting electromagnets, and large superconducting magnets can be cheaper to operate because no energy is dissipated as heat in the windings. They are used in MRI instruments in hospitals, and in scientific equipment such as NMR spectrometers, mass spectrometers, fusion reactors and particle accelerators. They are also used for levitation, guidance and propulsion in a magnetic levitation (maglev) railway system being constructed in Japan.

== Construction ==

=== Cooling ===
During operation, the magnet windings must be cooled below their critical temperature, the temperature at which the winding material changes from the normal resistive state and becomes a superconductor, which is in the cryogenic range far below room temperature. The windings are typically cooled to temperatures significantly below their critical temperature, because the lower the temperature, the better superconductive windings work—the higher the currents and magnetic fields they can stand without returning to their non-superconductive state. Two types of cooling systems are commonly used to maintain magnet windings at temperatures sufficient to maintain superconductivity:

==== Liquid-cooled ====
Liquid helium is used as a coolant for many superconductive windings. It has a boiling point of 4.2 K, far below the critical temperature of most winding materials. The magnet and coolant are contained in a thermally insulated container (dewar) called a cryostat. To keep the helium from boiling away, the cryostat is usually constructed with an outer jacket containing (significantly cheaper) liquid nitrogen at 77 K. Alternatively, a thermal shield made of conductive material and maintained in 40 K – 60 K temperature range, cooled by conductive connections to the cryocooler cold head, is placed around the helium-filled vessel to keep the heat input to the latter at acceptable level. One of the goals of the search for high temperature superconductors is to build magnets that can be cooled by liquid nitrogen alone. At temperatures above about 20 K cooling can be achieved without boiling off cryogenic liquids.

==== Mechanical cooling ====
Because of increasing cost and the dwindling availability of liquid helium, many superconducting systems are cooled using two stage mechanical refrigeration. In general two types of mechanical cryocoolers are employed which have sufficient cooling power to maintain magnets below their critical temperature. The Gifford–McMahon cryocooler has been commercially available since the 1960s and has found widespread application. The G-M regenerator cycle in a cryocooler operates using a piston type displacer and heat exchanger. Alternatively, 1999 marked the first commercial application using a pulse tube cryocooler. This design of cryocooler has become increasingly common due to low vibration and long service interval as pulse tube designs use an acoustic process in lieu of mechanical displacement. In a typical two-stage refrigerator, the first stage will offer higher cooling capacity but at higher temperature (≈ 77 K) with the second stage reaching ≈ 4.2 K and &lt;  of cooling power. In use, the first stage is used primarily for ancillary cooling of the cryostat with the second stage used primarily for cooling the magnet.

=== Coil winding materials ===
The maximal magnetic field achievable in a superconducting magnet is limited by the field at which the winding material ceases to be superconducting, its &quot;critical field&quot;, &quot;H&quot;c, which for type-II superconductors is its upper critical field. Another limiting factor is the &quot;critical current&quot;, &quot;I&quot;c, at which the winding material also ceases to be superconducting. Advances in magnets have focused on creating better winding materials.

The superconducting portions of most current magnets are composed of niobium–titanium. This material has critical temperature of and can superconduct at up to about . More expensive magnets can be made of niobium–tin (Nb3Sn). These have a &quot;T&quot;c of 18 K. When operating at 4.2 K they are able to withstand a much higher magnetic field intensity, up to 25 T to 30 T. Unfortunately, it is far more difficult to make the required filaments from this material. This is why sometimes a combination of Nb3Sn for the high-field sections and NbTi for the lower-field sections is used. Vanadium–gallium is another material used for the high-field inserts.

High-temperature superconductors (e.g. BSCCO or YBCO) may be used for high-field inserts when required magnetic fields are higher than Nb3Sn can manage. BSCCO, YBCO or magnesium diboride may also be used for current leads, conducting high currents from room temperature into the cold magnet without an accompanying large heat leak from resistive leads.

=== Conductor structure ===
The coil windings of a superconducting magnet are made of wires or tapes of Type II superconductors (e.g.niobium–titanium or niobium–tin). The wire or tape itself may be made of tiny filaments (about 20 micrometres thick) of superconductor in a copper matrix. The copper is needed to add mechanical stability, and to provide a low resistance path for the large currents in case the temperature rises above &quot;T&quot;c or the current rises above &quot;I&quot;c and superconductivity is lost. These filaments need to be this small because in this type of superconductor the current only flows in a surface layer whose thickness is limited to the London penetration depth (see &quot;Skin effect&quot;). The coil must be carefully designed to withstand (or counteract) magnetic pressure and Lorentz forces that could otherwise cause wire fracture or crushing of insulation between adjacent turns.

== Operation ==
=== Power supply ===
The current to the coil windings is provided by a high current, very low voltage DC power supply, since in steady state the only voltage across the magnet is due to the resistance of the feeder wires. Any change to the current through the magnet must be done very slowly, first because electrically the magnet is a large inductor and an abrupt current change will result in a large voltage spike across the windings, and more importantly because fast changes in current can cause eddy currents and mechanical stresses in the windings that can precipitate a quench (see below). So the power supply is usually microprocessor-controlled, programmed to accomplish current changes gradually, in gentle ramps. It usually takes several minutes to energize or de-energize a laboratory-sized magnet.

=== Persistent mode ===
An alternate operating mode used by most superconducting magnets is to short-circuit the windings with a piece of superconductor once the magnet has been energized. The windings become a closed superconducting loop, the power supply can be turned off, and persistent currents will flow for months, preserving the magnetic field. The advantage of this &quot;persistent mode&quot; is that stability of the magnetic field is better than is achievable with the best power supplies, and no energy is needed to power the windings. The short circuit is made by a &#x27;persistent switch&#x27;, a piece of superconductor inside the magnet connected across the winding ends, attached to a small heater. When the magnet is first turned on, the switch wire is heated above its transition temperature, so it is resistive. Since the winding itself has no resistance, no current flows through the switch wire. To go to persistent mode, the supply current is adjusted until the desired magnetic field is obtained, then the heater is turned off. The persistent switch cools to its superconducting temperature, short-circuiting the windings. Then the power supply can be turned off. The winding current, and the magnetic field, will not actually persist forever, but will decay slowly according to a normal inductive time constant (&quot;L&quot;/&quot;R&quot;):
: formula_1
where formula_2 is a small residual resistance in the superconducting windings due to joints or a phenomenon called flux motion resistance. Nearly all commercial superconducting magnets are equipped with persistent switches.

=== Magnet quench ===
A quench is an abnormal termination of magnet operation that occurs when part of the superconducting coil enters the normal (resistive) state. This can occur because the field inside the magnet is too large, the rate of change of field is too large (causing eddy currents and resultant heating in the copper support matrix), or a combination of the two. More rarely a defect in the magnet can cause a quench. When this happens, that particular spot is subject to rapid Joule heating from the enormous current, which raises the temperature of the surrounding regions. This pushes those regions into the normal state as well, which leads to more heating in a chain reaction. The entire magnet rapidly becomes normal (this can take several seconds, depending on the size of the superconducting coil). This is accompanied by a loud bang as the energy in the magnetic field is converted to heat, and rapid boil-off of the cryogenic fluid. The abrupt decrease of current can result in kilovolt inductive voltage spikes and arcing. Permanent damage to the magnet is rare, but components can be damaged by localized heating, high voltages, or large mechanical forces. In practice, magnets usually have safety devices to stop or limit the current when the beginning of a quench is detected. If a large magnet undergoes a quench, the inert vapor formed by the evaporating cryogenic fluid can present a significant asphyxiation hazard to operators by displacing breathable air.

A large section of the superconducting magnets in CERN&#x27;s Large Hadron Collider unexpectedly quenched during start-up operations in 2008, necessitating the replacement of a number of magnets. In order to mitigate against potentially destructive quenches, the superconducting magnets that form the LHC are equipped with fast-ramping heaters that are activated once a quench event is detected by the complex quench protection system. As the dipole bending magnets are connected in series, each power circuit includes 154 individual magnets, and should a quench event occur, the entire combined stored energy of these magnets must be dumped at once. This energy is transferred into dumps that are massive blocks of metal which heat up to several hundreds of degrees Celsius due to the resistive heating in a matter of seconds. Although undesirable, a magnet quench is a &quot;fairly routine event&quot; during the operation of a particle accelerator.

=== Magnet &quot;training&quot; ===
In certain cases, superconducting magnets designed for very high currents require extensive bedding in, to enable the magnets to function at their full planned currents and fields. This is known as &quot;training&quot; the magnet, and involves a type of material memory effect. One situation this is required in is the case of particle colliders such as CERN&#x27;s Large Hadron Collider. The magnets of the LHC were planned to run at 8 TeV (2 × 4 TeV) on its first run and 14 TeV (2 × 7 TeV) on its second run, but were initially operated at a lower energy of 3.5 TeV and 6.5 TeV per beam respectively. Because of initial crystallographic defects in the material, they will initially lose their superconducting ability (&quot;quench&quot;) at a lower level than their design current. CERN states that this is due to electromagnetic forces causing tiny movements in the magnets, which in turn cause superconductivity to be lost when operating at the high precision needed for their planned current. By repeatedly running the magnets at a lower current and then slightly increasing the current until they quench under control, the magnet will gradually both gain the required ability to withstand the higher currents of its design specification without quenches occurring, and have any such issues &quot;shaken&quot; out of them, until they are eventually able to operate reliably at their full planned current without experiencing quenches.

== History ==
Although the idea of making electromagnets with superconducting wire was proposed by Heike Kamerlingh Onnes shortly after he discovered superconductivity in 1911, a practical superconducting electromagnet had to await the discovery of superconducting materials that could support large critical supercurrent densities in high magnetic fields. The first successful superconducting magnet was built by G.B. Yntema in 1955 using niobium wire and achieved a field of 0.7 T at 4.2 K. Then, in 1961, J.E. Kunzler, E. Buehler, F.S.L. Hsu, and J.H. Wernick made the discovery that a compound of niobium and tin could support critical-supercurrent densities greater than 100,000 amperes per square centimetre in magnetic fields of 8.8 teslas. Despite its brittle nature, niobium–tin has since proved extremely useful in supermagnets generating magnetic fields up to 20 T.

The persistent switch was invented in 1960 by Dwight Adams while a postdoctoral associate at Stanford University. The second persistent switch was constructed at the University of Florida by M.S. student R.D. Lichti in 1963. It has been preserved in a showcase in the UF Physics Building.

In 1962, T.G. Berlincourt and R.R. Hake discovered the high-critical-magnetic-field, high-critical-supercurrent-density properties of niobium–titanium alloys. Although niobium–titanium alloys possess less spectacular superconducting properties than niobium–tin, they are highly ductile, easily fabricated, and economical. Useful in supermagnets generating magnetic fields up to 10 teslas, niobium–titanium alloys are the most widely used supermagnet materials.

In 1986, the discovery of high temperature superconductors by Georg Bednorz and Karl Müller energized the field, raising the possibility of magnets that could be cooled by liquid nitrogen instead of the more difficult-to-work-with helium.

In 2007, a magnet with windings of YBCO achieved a world record field of . The US National Research Council has a goal of creating a 30-tesla superconducting magnet.

Globally in 2014, almost six billion US dollars worth of economic activity resulted from which superconductivity is indispensable. MRI systems, most of which employ niobium–titanium, accounted for about 80% of that total.

In 2016, Yoon et al. reported a 26 T no-insulation superconducting magnet that they built out of GdBa2Cu3O7–&quot;x&quot;, using a technique which was previously reported in 2013.

In 2017, a YBCO magnet created by the National High Magnetic Field Laboratory (NHMFL) broke the previous world record with a strength of 32 T. This is an all superconducting user magnet, designed to last for many decades. They hold the current record as of March 2018.

In 2019, a new world-record of 32.35 T with all-superconducting magnet is achieved by Institute of Electrical Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences (IEE, CAS). No-insulation technique for the HTS insert magnet is also used.

In 2019, the NHMFL also developed a non-insulated YBCO test coil combined with a resistive magnet and broke the lab&#x27;s own world record for highest continuous magnetic field for any configuration of magnet at 45.5 T.

A 1.2 GHz (28.2 T) NMR magnet was achieved in 2020 using an HTS magnet.

In 2022, the Hefei Institutes of Physical Science, Chinese Academy of Sciences (HFIPS, CAS) claims new world record for strongest steady magnetic field of 45.22 T reached, while the previous NHMFL 45.5 T record in 2019 was actually reached when the magnet failed immediately in a quench.

== Uses ==
Superconducting magnets have a number of advantages over resistive electromagnets. They can generate much stronger magnetic fields than ferromagnetic-core electromagnets, which are limited to fields of around 2 T. The field is generally more stable, resulting in less noisy measurements. They can be smaller, and the area at the center of the magnet where the field is created is empty rather than being occupied by an iron core. Large magnets can consume much less power. In the persistent state (above), the only power the magnet consumes is that needed for refrigeration equipment. Higher fields can be achieved with cooled resistive electromagnets, as superconducting coils enter the non-superconducting state at high fields. Steady fields of over 40 T can be achieved, usually by combining a Bitter electromagnet with a superconducting magnet (often as an insert).

Superconducting magnets are widely used in MRI scanners, NMR equipment, mass spectrometers, magnetic separation processes, and particle accelerators.

=== Rail transport ===
In Japan, after decades of research and development into superconducting maglev by Japanese National Railways and later Central Japan Railway Company (JR Central), the Japanese government gave permission to JR Central to build the Chūō Shinkansen, linking Tokyo to Nagoya and later to Osaka.

=== Particle accelerator ===

One of the most challenging uses of superconducting magnets is in the LHC particle accelerator. Its niobium–titanium (Nb–Ti) magnets operate at 1.9 K to allow them to run safely at 8.3 T. Each magnet stores 7 MJ. In total the magnets store . Once or twice a day, as protons are accelerated from 450 GeV to 7 TeV, the field of the superconducting bending magnets is increased from 0.54 T to 8.3 T.

=== Fusion reactor ===

The central solenoid and toroidal field superconducting magnets designed for the ITER fusion reactor use niobium–tin (Nb3Sn) as a superconductor. The central solenoid coil carries a current of 46 kA and produce a magnetic field of 13.5 T. The 18 toroidal field coils at a maximum field of 11.8 T store an energy of 41 GJ (total?). They have been tested at a record current of 80 kA. Other lower field ITER magnets use niobium–titanium. Most of the ITER magnets have their field varied many times per hour.

=== Mass spectrometer ===
One high-resolution mass spectrometer planned to use a 21-tesla SC magnet.

== See also ==
* Fault current limiter
* Flux pumping

== References ==

== Further reading ==
* Martin N. Wilson, &quot;Superconducting Magnets (Monographs on Cryogenics)&quot;, Oxford University Press, New edition (1987), .
* Yukikazu Iwasa, &quot;Case Studies in Superconducting Magnets: Design and Operational Issues (Selected Topics in Superconductivity)&quot;, Kluwer Academic / Plenum Publishers, (October 1994), .
* Habibo Brechna, &quot;Superconducting magnet systems&quot;, New York, Springer-Verlag New York, Inc., 1973, , 

== External links ==
* Making Superconducting Magnets From the National High Magnetic Field Laboratory
* 1986 evaluation of NbTi and Nb3Sn for particle accelerator magnets.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q120120" start="2" end="24" title="Superconducting magnet" label="superconducting magnet"/>
<link wikidata="Q178032" start="31" end="44" title="electromagnet" label="electromagnet"/>
<link wikidata="Q7643181" start="64" end="84" title="superconducting wire" label="superconducting wire"/>
<link wikidata="Q192116" start="109" end="118" title="cryogenic" label="cryogenic"/>
<link wikidata="Q106603432" start="195" end="216" title="electrical resistance" label="electrical resistance"/>
<link wikidata="Q11651" start="255" end="271" title="electric current" label="electric current"/>
<link wikidata="Q11408" start="372" end="386" title="magnetic field" label="magnetic field"/>
<link wikidata="Q178032" start="435" end="448" title="electromagnet" label="electromagnet"/>
<link wikidata="Q161238" start="585" end="588" title="Magnetic resonance imaging" label="MRI"/>
<link wikidata="Q209402" start="651" end="654" title="Nuclear magnetic resonance" label="NMR"/>
<link wikidata="Q180809" start="670" end="687" title="mass spectrometer" label="mass spectrometer"/>
<link wikidata="Q641442" start="690" end="705" title="Fusion power" label="fusion reactors"/>
<link wikidata="Q130825" start="710" end="730" title="particle accelerator" label="particle accelerator"/>
<link wikidata="Q596228" start="797" end="825" title="SCMaglev" label="magnetic levitation (maglev)"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="862" end="867" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q124131" start="971" end="991" title="Superconductivity" label="critical temperature"/>
<link wikidata="Q124131" start="1093" end="1107" title="Superconductivity" label="superconductor"/>
<link wikidata="Q192116" start="1125" end="1134" title="cryogenic" label="cryogenic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1203476" start="1614" end="1627" title="Liquid helium" label="Liquid helium"/>
<link wikidata="Q131313" start="1641" end="1648" title="Heat pump" label="coolant"/>
<link wikidata="Q23664" start="1852" end="1857" title="Dewar flask" label="dewar"/>
<link wikidata="Q909476" start="1868" end="1876" title="cryostat" label="cryostat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139370" start="2008" end="2023" title="liquid nitrogen" label="liquid nitrogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q846667" start="2339" end="2370" title="high temperature superconductor" label="high temperature superconductor"/>
<link wikidata="Q4241150" start="2891" end="2901" title="cryocooler" label="cryocooler"/>
<link wikidata="Q2118028" start="3157" end="3178" title="pulse tube refrigerator" label="pulse tube cryocooler"/>
<link wikidata="Q4919231" start="3937" end="3959" title="type-II superconductor" label="type-II superconductor"/>
<link wikidata="Q18747500" start="3968" end="3988" title="upper critical field" label="upper critical field"/>
<link wikidata="Q3877263" start="4273" end="4289" title="niobium–titanium" label="niobium–titanium"/>
<link wikidata="Q7039313" start="4409" end="4420" title="niobium–tin" label="niobium–tin"/>
<link wikidata="Q124131" start="4443" end="4457" title="superconductivity" label="&amp;quot;T&amp;quot;c"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365197" start="4532" end="4556" title="field strength" label="magnetic field intensity"/>
<link wikidata="Q7913924" start="4789" end="4805" title="Vanadium–gallium" label="Vanadium–gallium"/>
<link wikidata="Q846667" start="4860" end="4892" title="High-temperature superconductors" label="High-temperature superconductors"/>
<link wikidata="Q866597" start="4899" end="4904" title="BSCCO" label="BSCCO"/>
<link wikidata="Q414015" start="4908" end="4912" title="YBCO" label="YBCO"/>
<link wikidata="Q417611" start="5028" end="5046" title="magnesium diboride" label="magnesium diboride"/>
<link wikidata="Q11421" start="5281" end="5287" title="magnet" label="magnet"/>
<link wikidata="Q4919231" start="5318" end="5341" title="Type-II superconductor" label="Type II superconductors"/>
<link wikidata="Q3877263" start="5347" end="5363" title="niobium–titanium" label="niobium–titanium"/>
<link wikidata="Q7039313" start="5367" end="5378" title="niobium–tin" label="niobium–tin"/>
<link wikidata="Q47616" start="5425" end="5433" title="Electrical filament" label="filament"/>
<link wikidata="Q175821" start="5445" end="5455" title="micrometre" label="micrometre"/>
<link wikidata="Q753" start="5487" end="5493" title="copper" label="copper"/>
<link wikidata="Q124131" start="5648" end="5704" title="superconductivity" label="&amp;quot;T&amp;quot;c or the current rises above &amp;quot;I&amp;quot;c"/>
<link wikidata="Q47616" start="5742" end="5750" title="Electrical filament" label="filament"/>
<link wikidata="Q3277853" start="5889" end="5913" title="London penetration depth" label="London penetration depth"/>
<link wikidata="Q664150" start="5925" end="5936" title="Skin effect" label="Skin effect"/>
<link wikidata="Q383041" start="6010" end="6027" title="magnetic pressure" label="magnetic pressure"/>
<link wikidata="Q172137" start="6032" end="6045" title="Lorentz force" label="Lorentz force"/>
<link wikidata="Q159241" start="6257" end="6259" title="Direct current" label="DC"/>
<link wikidata="Q204157" start="6260" end="6272" title="power supply" label="power supply"/>
<link wikidata="Q5325" start="6497" end="6505" title="inductor" label="inductor"/>
<link wikidata="Q208598" start="6656" end="6668" title="eddy current" label="eddy current"/>
<link wikidata="Q206907" start="7063" end="7076" title="short-circuit" label="short-circuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q7170406" start="7248" end="7266" title="persistent current" label="persistent current"/>
<link wikidata="Q106603432" start="8722" end="8731" title="resistive" label="resistive"/>
<link wikidata="Q208598" start="8855" end="8867" title="eddy current" label="eddy current"/>
<link wikidata="Q21014200" start="8883" end="8890" title="Joule heating" label="heating"/>
<link wikidata="Q21014200" start="9066" end="9079" title="Joule heating" label="Joule heating"/>
<link wikidata="Q11466" start="9124" end="9135" title="temperature" label="temperature"/>
<link wikidata="Q192116" start="9514" end="9523" title="cryogenics" label="cryogenic"/>
<link wikidata="Q193840" start="10001" end="10013" title="asphyxiation" label="asphyxiation"/>
<link wikidata="Q42944" start="10115" end="10119" title="CERN" label="CERN"/>
<link wikidata="Q40605" start="10127" end="10148" title="Large Hadron Collider" label="Large Hadron Collider"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10149" end="10170" title="Large Hadron Collider#Quench incident" label="unexpectedly quenched"/>
<link wikidata="Q2033879" start="11381" end="11398" title="particle collider" label="particle collider"/>
<link wikidata="Q42944" start="11408" end="11412" title="CERN" label="CERN"/>
<link wikidata="Q40605" start="11420" end="11441" title="Large Hadron Collider" label="Large Hadron Collider"/>
<link wikidata="Q898226" start="11677" end="11700" title="crystallographic defect" label="crystallographic defect"/>
<link wikidata="Q11406" start="11871" end="11892" title="electromagnetic force" label="electromagnetic force"/>
<link wikidata="Q62891" start="12595" end="12617" title="Heike Kamerlingh Onnes" label="Heike Kamerlingh Onnes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046" start="12936" end="12943" title="niobium" label="niobium"/>
<link wikidata="Q117334936" start="13004" end="13016" title="John Eugene Kunzler" label="J.E. Kunzler"/>
<link wikidata="Q846667" start="14152" end="14183" title="high temperature superconductor" label="high temperature superconductor"/>
<link wikidata="Q76687" start="14188" end="14201" title="Georg Bednorz" label="Georg Bednorz"/>
<link wikidata="Q122298" start="14206" end="14217" title="Karl Alexander Müller" label="Karl Müller"/>
<link wikidata="Q414015" start="14401" end="14405" title="YBCO" label="YBCO"/>
<link wikidata="Q3233780" start="14445" end="14473" title="United States National Research Council" label="US National Research Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q846667" start="15717" end="15720" title="High-temperature superconductivity" label="HTS"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16010" end="16016" title="Superconducting magnet#Magnet quench" label="quench"/>
<link wikidata="Q106603432" start="16087" end="16096" title="Electrical resistance" label="resistive"/>
<link wikidata="Q178032" start="16166" end="16199" title="Electromagnet" label="ferromagnetic-core electromagnets"/>
<link wikidata="Q2614611" start="16827" end="16847" title="Bitter electromagnet" label="Bitter electromagnet"/>
<link wikidata="Q161238" start="16944" end="16947" title="MRI" label="MRI"/>
<link wikidata="Q209402" start="16958" end="16961" title="nuclear magnetic resonance" label="NMR"/>
<link wikidata="Q180809" start="16973" end="16990" title="mass spectrometer" label="mass spectrometer"/>
<link wikidata="Q130825" start="17028" end="17048" title="particle accelerator" label="particle accelerator"/>
<link wikidata="Q596228" start="17132" end="17154" title="SCMaglev" label="superconducting maglev"/>
<link wikidata="Q384011" start="17158" end="17184" title="Japanese National Railways" label="Japanese National Railways"/>
<link wikidata="Q513679" start="17195" end="17224" title="Central Japan Railway Company" label="Central Japan Railway Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q876490" start="17306" end="17321" title="Chūō Shinkansen" label="Chūō Shinkansen"/>
<link wikidata="Q40605" start="17468" end="17471" title="LHC" label="LHC"/>
<link wikidata="Q191788" start="17901" end="17905" title="ITER" label="ITER"/>
<link wikidata="Q641442" start="17906" end="17920" title="fusion reactor" label="fusion reactor"/>
<link wikidata="Q10858078" start="18446" end="18467" title="Fault current limiter" label="Fault current limiter"/>
<link wikidata="Q5463030" start="18470" end="18482" title="Flux pumping" label="Flux pumping"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="461228" wikidata="Q232865" url="?curid=461228" title="United States (disambiguation)">
<text>The [[United States]] is a country located mainly in North America.

United States may also refer to:
==Countries==
*United States of Mexico

===Former countries===
*United States of Belgium
*United States of Brazil
*United States of Central America
*United States of Colombia
*United States of Indonesia
*United States of the Ionian Islands
*United States of Stellaland
*United States of Venezuela

===Hypothetical countries===
*United States of Europe, hypothetical country emerging from a federated Europe

==Other political entities==
*United Arab States
*United States of Matsya, a former state of India

==Arts and entertainment==
* &quot;United States&quot; (TV series), a 1980 American sitcom 
* &quot;United States&quot; (album), 2009, by Paul Gilbert and Freddie Nelson
* &quot;United States&quot;, a 2014 album by Ian McLagan
* &quot;United States&quot;, a song by Smashing Pumpkins from the 2007 album &quot;Zeitgeist&quot;

==Transportation==
* List of ships named &quot;United States&quot;, many ships, including
** , a retired ocean liner built in 1950
** , a merchant steamship lost in 1881
** , a ship of the Scandinavian American Line scrapped in 1935
** , the name of several U.S. Navy ships
* &quot;United States&quot;, a presidential railcar built for Abraham Lincoln

==See also==
* 
* American (disambiguation)
* American republic (disambiguation)
* United Kingdom (disambiguation)
* United Provinces (disambiguation)
* United State (disambiguation)
* The United States of America (disambiguation)
* United States of North America (disambiguation)
* List of countries that include United States in their name
* U.S. state, a constituent political entity of the United States of America
* Demonyms for the United States</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q232865" start="4" end="21" title="United States (disambiguation)" label="[[United States]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q232865" start="69" end="82" title="United States (disambiguation)" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q96" start="117" end="140" title="United States of Mexico" label="United States of Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q692015" start="166" end="190" title="United States of Belgium" label="United States of Belgium"/>
<link wikidata="Q2414171" start="192" end="215" title="United States of Brazil" label="United States of Brazil"/>
<link wikidata="Q2741089" start="217" end="249" title="United States of Central America" label="United States of Central America"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061488" start="251" end="276" title="United States of Colombia" label="United States of Colombia"/>
<link wikidata="Q523435" start="278" end="304" title="United States of Indonesia" label="United States of Indonesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063498" start="306" end="341" title="United States of the Ionian Islands" label="United States of the Ionian Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q1269234" start="343" end="370" title="United States of Stellaland" label="United States of Stellaland"/>
<link wikidata="Q5848651" start="372" end="398" title="United States of Venezuela" label="United States of Venezuela"/>
<link wikidata="Q258664" start="430" end="453" title="United States of Europe" label="United States of Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q856843" start="540" end="558" title="United Arab States" label="United Arab States"/>
<link wikidata="Q1745385" start="560" end="583" title="United States of Matsya" label="United States of Matsya"/>
<link wikidata="Q3965121" start="639" end="676" title="United States (TV series)" label="&amp;quot;United States&amp;quot; (TV series)"/>
<link wikidata="Q16959097" start="704" end="737" title="United States (album)" label="&amp;quot;United States&amp;quot; (album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q952491" start="825" end="836" title="Ian McLagan" label="Ian McLagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q185989" start="920" end="929" title="Zeitgeist (The Smashing Pumpkins album)" label="Zeitgeist"/>
<link wikidata="Q114119487" start="958" end="1003" title="List of ships named United States" label="List of ships named &amp;quot;United States&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1242" end="1262" title="Vehicles of the President of the United States#Presidential railcars" label="presidential railcar"/>
<link wikidata="Q463180" start="1308" end="1333" title="American (disambiguation)" label="American (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q114088197" start="1336" end="1370" title="American republic (disambiguation)" label="American republic (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q225249" start="1373" end="1404" title="United Kingdom (disambiguation)" label="United Kingdom (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1174703" start="1407" end="1440" title="United Provinces (disambiguation)" label="United Provinces (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q16888152" start="1443" end="1472" title="United State (disambiguation)" label="United State (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q19971019" start="1475" end="1520" title="The United States of America (disambiguation)" label="The United States of America (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7892627" start="1523" end="1570" title="United States of North America (disambiguation)" label="United States of North America (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q106350751" start="1573" end="1631" title="List of countries that include United States in their name" label="List of countries that include United States in their name"/>
<link wikidata="Q35657" start="1634" end="1644" title="U.S. state" label="U.S. state"/>
<link wikidata="Q3044537" start="1711" end="1741" title="Demonyms for the United States" label="Demonyms for the United States"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="461230" wikidata="Q1199084" url="?curid=461230" title="This Week">
<text>This Week may refer to:

* &quot;This Week&quot; (1956 TV programme), a 1956–1992 British current affairs television programme broadcast on ITV
* &quot;This Week&quot; (2003 TV programme), a weekly British political discussion television programme that aired on BBC One between 2003 and 2019
* &quot;This Week&quot; (American TV program), an American Sunday morning political interview and talk show program broadcast on ABC since 1981
* &quot;This Week&quot; (radio series), a Sunday radio show broadcast on RTÉ Radio 1 in Ireland
* &quot;This Week&quot; (album), a 2004 music album by rapper Jean Grae
* &quot;This Week&quot; (magazine), a defunct American magazine
* &quot;This Week&quot; (newspaper), a defunct national tourism newspaper for Wales

==See also==
* The Week (disambiguation)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1199084" start="0" end="9" title="This Week" label="This Week"/>
<link wikidata="Q7786365" start="27" end="68" title="This Week (1956 TV programme)" label="&amp;quot;This Week&amp;quot; (1956 TV programme)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7786366" start="146" end="187" title="This Week (2003 TV programme)" label="&amp;quot;This Week&amp;quot; (2003 TV programme)"/>
<link wikidata="Q112674" start="294" end="337" title="This Week (American TV program)" label="&amp;quot;This Week&amp;quot; (American TV program)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7786367" start="438" end="474" title="This Week (radio series)" label="&amp;quot;This Week&amp;quot; (radio series)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7786368" start="534" end="563" title="This Week (album)" label="&amp;quot;This Week&amp;quot; (album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7786369" start="606" end="638" title="This Week (magazine)" label="&amp;quot;This Week&amp;quot; (magazine)"/>
<link wikidata="Q28126602" start="670" end="703" title="This Week (newspaper)" label="&amp;quot;This Week&amp;quot; (newspaper)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3523330" start="768" end="793" title="The Week (disambiguation)" label="The Week (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="461232" wikidata="Q1545509" url="?curid=461232" title="SS United States">
<text>SS &quot;United States&quot; is a retired American ocean liner that was built during 1950 and 1951 for United States Lines. She is the largest ocean liner to be entirely constructed in the United States and the fastest ocean liner to cross the Atlantic Ocean in either direction, earning the Blue Riband for the highest average speed since her maiden voyage in 1952, a title that remains uncontested.

The ship was designed by American naval architect William Francis Gibbs and could have been converted into a troopship if required by the United States Navy in time of war. The ship served as an icon for the nation, transporting celebrities and immigrants throughout her career between 1952 and 1969. Her design included innovations in steam propulsion, hull form, fire safety, and damage control. Despite her record speed, passenger counts declined in the mid-1960s due to the rise in jet-propelled trans-Atlantic flights.

Following the financial collapse of United States Lines, &quot;United States&quot; was withdrawn from service in a surprise announcement in 1969. All planned cruises were canceled, and the ship changed owners repeatedly for the next several decades. Every owner attempted to make the ship profitable, but she was aging and poorly maintained. In 1984, her interior furnishings were sold at auction, and the rest of her interiors were stripped to the bulkheads in 1994. In 1996, she was towed to Philadelphia, where she remained until February 2025.

Since 2009, the SS &quot;United States&quot; Conservancy has been raising funds in an attempt to save the ship from being scrapped. The group purchased her in 2011 and has created several unrealized plans to restore the ship. Due to a rent dispute, in 2024, the ship was evicted from her pier. Because no other locations for the ship could be found, Okaloosa County, Florida, bought her and plans to sink her by 2026 near Destin to become the world&#x27;s largest artificial reef.

== Development ==

=== William Gibbs ===
SS &quot;United States&quot; was designed by William Gibbs. When Gibbs was eight years old in 1894, he watched the launching of SS &quot;St. Louis&quot; and became enamored with ships and dreamed of a massive, grand American ship to surpass all others.

As an adult, Gibbs&#x27; first project was to lead the redesign and reconstruction of the ocean liner &quot;Leviathan&quot;, the largest ship in the world and an American war prize following World War I. Once complete, his skill was appreciated by the government, media, and other architects; groups such as the &quot;Pacific Marine Review&quot; referred to him as &quot;America&#x27;s foremost naval architect&quot;.

The first ship purely of Gibb&#x27;s design was SS &quot;Malolo&quot;, a luxury liner for the Pacific Ocean. During her sea trials, the ship was struck amidship by a freighter, ripping a massive hole into &quot;Malolo&quot; engine room. The damage was so severe the former Chief of US Navy Construction and Gibb&#x27;s mentor David Taylor thought the ship would immediately sink, much like the RMS &quot;Empress of Ireland&quot; did in similar circumstances. The ship stayed afloat with little damage and few casualties; this success was credited to Gibb&#x27;s meticulous designs, further increasing his fame.

Gibbs&#x27; work put him in contact with American officials, to whom he pitched his idea for a massive, American-flagged liner. By 1936, the US government was planning to replace the aging &quot;Leviathan&quot; so a new vessel could operate as a passenger liner during peacetime and as a troop transport during war. Although not the massive ocean liner Gibbs had envisioned, he was selected to design the new ship, which became the SS &quot;America&quot;.

At the end of the Second World War, Gibbs and his company had designed more than 70% of all American ships used during the conflict, and Gibbs was at the height of his career. He believed it was time to realize his vision of an American superliner.

==Design==

=== Military application ===
During the Second World War, many ocean liners, including &quot;Normandie&quot; and &quot;Queen Mary&quot;, were seized or requisitioned by governments and used to transport soldiers between fronts. In 1945, the US Maritime Commission requested designs for a ship that could handle that role for future conflicts. Gibbs submitted a design of his decades-old vision, which eventually won the contract.

The most-promising use of the liner in war would have been as a troop transport. If mobilized, onboard furnishings could easily be removed to make room for a 14,400-man US Army division. The ship&#x27;s size and speed meant she could rapidly deploy a division anywhere in the world without needing to refuel.

=== Propulsion ===

The ship&#x27;s power plant was developed in unusual cooperation with the Navy, leading to a militarized design. The ship never used US Navy equipment; the designers opted for civilian variants of military models. The engine room arrangement was similar to that of large warships such as the &quot;Forrestal&quot;-class aircraft carriers, with isolated engineering spaces, and redundancies and backups in onboard systems.

In normal service, the ship could theoretically generate of steam per hour, at and , using eight US Navy-type M-type boilers; however, they were operated at 54% of their capacity. The boilers were divided among two engine rooms, four in each. Babcock &amp; Wilcox designed the ship&#x27;s boilers and manufactured those in the forward engine room; the other boilers were made by Foster Wheeler and were located aft.

Steam from the boilers turned four Westinghouse double-reduction geared turbines, each one connected to a drive shaft. Each turbine could generate approximately 60,000 shaft horsepower (shp), or 240,000 shp total. If at flank speed, initial designs estimated 266,800 shp from steam at could be generated.

The turbines turned four shafts, each of which rotated a propeller in diameter. Owing to the designers&#x27; previous military experience, each propeller was made to efficiently rotate in either direction, allowing the ship to efficiently move forward or backwards, and to limit cavitation and vibrations. The two inboard propellers were five-bladed—a key secret of the design—and the outboard two had four. This aspect was one of the concepts that allowed the ship to achieve high speeds.

==== Speed ====
The maximum speed attained by &quot;United States&quot; is disputed and was once held as a military secret, and complicated by the alleged leak of a top speed of the ship attained after her first speed trial. &quot;The New York Times&quot; reported in 1968 the ship could make at a maximum power output of . Other sources, including a paper by John J. McMullen &amp; Associates, placed the ship&#x27;s highest-possible sustained speed at . The liner&#x27;s top achieved speed was later revealed to be , which she achieved during a full-power trial run on June 10, 1952.

===Interior design===
Dorothy Marckwald and Anne Urquhart, who also designed the interiors for &quot;America&quot;, designed the interiors for &quot;United States&quot;. Their goal was to &quot;create a modern fresh contemporary look that emphasized simplicity over palatial, [with] restrained elegance over glitz and glitter&quot;. Marckwald and Urquhart also wanted to replicate the smooth lines seen on the exterior and to visualize the ship&#x27;s speed.

To achieve the aesthetic, the liner was furnished with mid-century modern decor that was amplified by plentiful use of black linoleum decking and the silver lining of edges. While visually unique compared to her competition, the simplicity of decorations compared to the expected grandeur of ocean liners saw the interiors described by those accustomed to the older style as what would be found on a &quot;navy transport&quot;.

Interior décor included a children&#x27;s playroom that was designed by Edward Meshekoff, who was also tasked with creating interiors that were completely fireproof. This caused an exceptional difficulty when selecting materials, such as those for usually flammable items such as drapes or carpet.

==== Fire safety ====
As a result of maritime disasters involving fire, including and , William Gibbs specified the ship must be fully fireproof, which further compounded his history with safety and attention to detail.

To minimize the risk of flames, the designers of &quot;United States&quot; proscribed the use of wood in the ship, aside from the galley&#x27;s wooden butcher&#x27;s block. Fittings, including furniture and fabrics, were custom made in glass, metal, and fiberglass to ensure compliance with the US Navy&#x27;s fireproofing guidelines. Asbestos-laden paneling was extensively used in interior structures and many small items were made of aluminum. The ballroom&#x27;s grand piano was originally designed to be aluminum but was made from mahogany and accepted only after a demonstration in which gasoline was poured upon the wood and ignited, without the wood catching fire.

==== Art ====
To create the onboard art, the artists Hildreth Meière and Austin Purves consulted Marckwald. The artists&#x27; goals were to give the ship a unique character that was detached from any single art style. Because the ship was going to serve as a floating icon of the US, it was decided her character would reflect the country. This was achieved by theming spaces around an aspect of the United States, such as the Mississippi River, Native Americans, or American fauna.

The liner was decorated with hundreds of unique art pieces, including sculptures, relief murals, and paintings. Aluminum was commonly incorporated into the artworks, allowing pieces to be light and fireproof, and to match the black-and-silver theme. For instance, nearly 200 aluminum sculptures were used in the first-class stairway, with a large eagle and each state&#x27;s bird and flower emblems on the landing of each deck.

=== Funnels and superstructure ===

The primary purpose of a ship&#x27;s funnels is to ventilate the vessel&#x27;s engine rooms, allowing exhaust to escape. Gibbs believed funnels also create a unique and iconic character for the ship and her owners. To create an unforgettable silhouette, Gibbs had the liner topped with two massive, red-white-and-blue, tear-drop-shaped funnels located midship. Standing at tall and wide, they were the largest funnels ever put to sea.

The funnel design was a pinnacle of Gibb&#x27;s experience from designing the &quot;Leviathan&quot;, &quot;America&quot;, and &quot;Santa&quot;-class liners. To prevent soot from coating the deck and passengers, horizontal fins on each side of the funnels deflected funnel exhaust away from the ship. During the retrofit of the &quot;Leviathan&quot; decades earlier, it was discovered her tall funnels compromised the vessel&#x27;s stability. To avoid this issue on &quot;United States&quot;, Gibbs decided the funnels and the superstructure would made out of lightweight aluminum to prevent the ship from becoming top-heavy and at risk of capsizing. At the time, &quot;United States&quot; was the world&#x27;s largest aluminum construction project and the first major application of aluminum on a ship.

The main disadvantage in making the funnels and superstructure out of aluminum was that it was the metal&#x27;s difficulty to mold and handle compared to more conventional metals, making the funnels&#x27; fabrication the most complex part of the ship&#x27;s construction. Special care was needed to prevent galvanic corrosion of the aluminum when it was welded to the steel decking. The laborious process antagonized shipyard workers but no problems arose during construction and it continued as planned.

=== Class system ===
Gibbs&#x27; design incorporated a conventional, three-tiered class system for passengers, replicating those found on other classical ocean liners. Each class was segregated, having its own dining rooms, bars, public spaces, services, and recreation areas. Gibbs envisioned having passengers enforce the separation, only intermingling in the gymnasium, swimming pool, and theater. The stark and physical class separations, an idea associated with the Old World, contrasted with the overall American theme of the ocean liner; the United States was often seen as a nation that was removed from the old money and class segregation of the Old World.

At maximum capacity, &quot;United States&quot; could have carried 894 first, 524 cabin, and 554 tourist-class passengers. During a standard season, the cost of a first-class ticket would start at $350 ($ in 2024), a cabin ticket $220 ($), and a tourist ticket $165 ($).

==== First class ====
First-class passengers were entitled to the best services and locations the ship had to offer, including the grand ballroom, the smoking room, first-class dining room and restaurants, observation lounge, main foyer, grand staircase, and promenades. Most of these facilities were located midship, distant from the vibrations and distractions of the engines and the outside.

The liner&#x27;s famous passengers favored first class due to its prestige, priority service, and spacious cabins. The Duck Suite, which was popularized by the Duke and Duchess of Windsor, was the ship&#x27;s best-known stateroom. It was created by combining three first-class staterooms into a single suite containing four beds, three bathrooms, two bedrooms, and a living room. The name came from the walls, which were decorated with paintings of waterfowl. Up to 14 similar suites could be created in a similar way, establishing a level of stateroom above that of a standard first-class ticket. Tickets for the two-bedroom suites started at $930 ($); these were aimed at the wealthiest passengers on board. Much like the Duck Suite, these rooms reflected a post-war American standard of living, lacking in intricate details and adorned with natural scenes. All suites were spacious and equipped with dimmed lights, which were not seen on any other vessels.

==== Cabin class ====
Cabin class was aimed toward the American middle classes, striking a key balance between the affordability of tourist and the elegance of first class. Each cabin had four beds and a private bathroom, and were located primarily aft. While inferior to first class, passengers received service and had access to amenities that were historically reserved for the highest class on other ocean liners.The food, pool, and theater were shared with first-class passengers, making cabin class ideal for those who wanted the first-class experience without paying first-class rates.
==== Tourist class ====
Tourist class was aimed at those who were unable or unwilling to spend much on a ticket; it was often booked by migrants and students. Cheapest of all tickets, tourist-class cabins were located at the peripheries of the ship, where rocking and noise were most pronounced. These small cabins were shared among passengers, each room containing two bunk beds and simply furnished with little detail. Communal bathrooms were shared with all tourist-class passengers in the same passage. Service from the crew was lacking compared to the other classes, as tourist-class passengers received the lowest priority. While equivalent to the steerage or third-class on other vessels, these poorest conditions on &quot;United States&quot; were noticeably better than what was offered on other vessels.
=== Gallery of passenger spaces ===
== Construction ==

Following the end of the Second World War, the newly formed US Department of Defense was divided about its policy in the nuclear age. There was controversy around the supercarrier USS &quot;United States&quot; (CVA-58), which was canceled after her keel was laid. The shipyard, looking for a project to fill the void left by the Navy, agreed to dismantle the aircraft carrier and build an ocean liner with, coincidentally, the same name, in the same dry dock, allowing her keel to be laid on 8 February, 1950. The circumstance saw &quot;United States&quot; become the first ocean liner to be built in a dry dock, accelerating her construction because parts of the ship could be prefabricated.

Another major issue facing the Navy was its reduction of transport capabilities following the war. After the Inchon Landings during the Korean War, the Department of Defense realized it lacked troop-transport capacity and requisitioned the one-third-completed &quot;United States&quot; to quickly and cheaply fill part of the deficit. Under Navy control, stateroom bathrooms were to be stripped and large spaces divided to make room for gun mounts, wardrooms, more lifeboats, and equipment required to support the enlarged passenger count.

&quot;United States&quot; was requisitioned under Secretary of Defense Louis Johnson, who believed it was cheaper and easier to convert an existing vessel than to build a new one. Days after the announcement was made, the secretary was relieved and replaced by George Marshall. After meeting with the chairman of the Maritime Administration, Marshall believed converting &quot;United States&quot; would take too long to be of any use during the Korean War. A month after her requisitioning was announced, the Joint Chiefs of Staff reversed the decision and returned the ship to previously scheduled civilian work.

&quot;United States&quot; was christened and launched on 23 June 1951, sponsored by Lucile Connally, wife of U.S. Senator Tom Connally. Her construction was a joint effort by the United States Navy and United States Lines (USL), and was broken into two parts. The cost of construction was split; USL contributed $25 million and the US government $20 million. The government also paid another $25 million for the incorporation of &quot;national defense features&quot; into her design, which brought her cost to $71.08 million, even though the ship itself cost only $44.4 million. 

==History==
===Commercial service (1952–1957)===

==== Maiden voyage ====

&quot;United States&quot; made her maiden voyage from July 3 to 7, 1952, and broke the eastbound-transatlantic speed record that had been held by for the previous 14 years by more than 10 hours, making the crossing from the Ambrose lightship at New York Harbor to Bishop Rock off Cornwall, UK, in three days, ten hours, and 40 minutes at an average speed of , winning the coveted Blue Riband. On her return voyage &quot;United States&quot; also broke the westbound-transatlantic speed record, which was also held by &quot;Queen Mary&quot;, by returning to America in three days, twelve hours, and twelve minutes at an average speed of . In New York City, her owners were awarded the Hales Trophy, the tangible expression of the Blue Riband competition.

The ship&#x27;s return to the United States was marked with celebration as she was escorted into New York City by bands, helicopters, and small boats, and was met by a crowd of thousands. As a public symbol of the Blue Ribband, a long, blue flag was flown from her radar mast as she approached. Many people noticed her fresh hull paint had worn off, apparently due to the high speeds at which she traveled. Her crew was officially welcomed to the city several days later with a Ticker-tape parade, escorted by more than 2,000 people and greeted by a crowd of 150,000. The centerpiece of the event was the liner&#x27;s captain, Commodore Harry Manning, who is one of the few people to receive a Ticker-tape parade twice after his 1929 rescue of crewmembers from the cargo ship &quot;Florida&quot;.

The record was not a reflection of the ship&#x27;s actual operational speed. Prior to her voyage, many expected a race between &quot;United States&quot; and the British vessel &quot;Queen Elizabeth&quot; for national pride over the Blue Riband. In 1951, Gibbs instructed the crew to &quot;[not] beat the record by very much. Beat it by a reasonable amount, such as 32 knots.&quot; He hoped Cunard Line, which operated &quot;Queen Elizabeth&quot;, would then develop a slightly faster ship and &quot;United States&quot; would then break the intentionally low record, sailing at a much higher speed.

&quot;United States&quot;″ record-breaking speed was also held back by safety concerns. The line understood the crew was still inexperienced with the new ship, and ordered them to not take unnecessary risks with extravagant speeds. The memory of the sinking of RMS &quot;Titanic&quot; influenced USL&#x27;s caution, an issue personal to several of its leaders. CEO John Franklin was son of White Star Line&#x27;s office manager Philip Franklin during the &quot;Titanic&quot; disaster, and the company director Vincent Astor lost his father John Jacob Astor on that ship. Franklin was so concerned about a potential accident he had written and sealed a message that was only to be made public if there was a disaster during &quot;United States&quot;″ maiden voyage. For her regular service, the ship operated at her operational speed of about so the ship could maintain a schedule of five-night crossings.

==== Later service ====
During the 1950s and early 1960s, &quot;United States&quot; was popular for transatlantic travel, sailing between New York, Southampton, and Le Havre, with an occasional additional call at Bremerhaven. She attracted frequent, repeat, celebrity passengers such as Marilyn Monroe, Judy Garland, Cary Grant, Salvador Dalí, Duke Ellington, and Walt Disney, who featured the ship in the 1962 film &quot;Bon Voyage!&quot;. An unrecognized celebrity on the ship was Claude Jones, a trombonist who had performed with Ellington; he worked as part of the waitstaff and died on board in 1962.

&quot;United States&quot; proved exceedingly successful and was the most-popular liner in the North Atlantic, and her fame provided her with a reliable clientele. United States Lines (USL) began drafting plans to create a &quot;running mate&quot; for the ship. Much as did Cunard Line with its liners &quot;Queen Mary&quot; and &quot;Queen Elizabeth&quot;, the idea was to operate two liners in tandem with each other. In 1958, this idea evolved into a plan to build the SS &quot;President Washington&quot;, a superliner with a very similar design to &quot;United States&quot;. &quot;President Washington&quot; was planned to replace the aging USL liner &quot;America&quot;, and was to operate on the American West Coast and sail the Pacific. The idea was never realized because the US Congress did not allocate any funds to the project.

=== Decline (1957–1969) ===
In 1957, for the first time ever, piston-powered aircraft carried more passengers across the Atlantic than did ocean liners. This trend escalated as the advent of jet-propelled airliners provided trans-Atlantic routes that were only hours long, compared to days on the fastest ocean liners. The competition threatened to redirect the customers of USL and other shipping conglomerates, although the economic threat of aircraft was initially dismissed as a fad.

Throughout the 1960s, the liner&#x27;s reputation was permanently altered during strikes by the Masters, Mates, and Pilots Union that forced the cancellation of voyages and the reassignment of passengers. A ticket no longer guaranteed a trip aboard, and passengers and the company began to tire of the unreliable service.

The cancellations and competition from airlines slowly drew away customers. In 1960, USL refused to release a yearly passenger count because it had become so low. The issue further compounded in 1961, when the US Department of Commerce announced &quot;United States&quot; would no longer be used to carry US military personnel or their families. It was believed liners were &quot;sitting ducks for Soviet bombers&quot; and that air transport was a better option. The loss of the contract was a major blow to the company and the stark decline in passenger numbers meant change was needed.

To increase ticket sales, USL planned to convert the liner &quot;America&quot; to a cruise ship, ending trans-Atlantic service for vacation destinations around North America. Similar plans were drafted for &quot;United States&quot;, which would operate as a cruise ship during the less-busy winter season. The ship&#x27;s cabin-class lounge would be replaced by a swimming pool and every stateroom would be fitted with a bathroom to attract vacationers. The cash-strapped company was wary of new projects and soon abandoned the idea because the refit was priced at $15 million. The new corporate strategy was to develop a major advertising campaign that was aimed at reinventing the allure of ocean liners in the age of jet aircraft by promoting the ship&#x27;s speed, luxury, reputation, or another aspect of &quot;United States&quot;.

By 1961, conditions had not improved. For the first time, a voyage was canceled because only 350 people bought tickets. The US Government was subsidizing USL under the condition trans-Atlantic service must be maintained regardless of its profitability; this rule was repealed after pressure from the company. With USL now able to set unique itineraries, and hoping to exploit a new market, &quot;United States&quot; made her first cruises in the Caribbean the next year. Cruises sailed from New York and docked in Nassau, St. Thomas, Trinidad, Curaçao, and Cristobal. &quot;United States&quot; was the largest ship in the region and operated with a temporary pool on her aft deck and no tourist-class passengers.

Despite the new itinerary, &quot;United States&quot; was the most expensive liner to operate and was losing passengers to newer ships such as SS &quot;France&quot;. By 1963, anxiety about &quot;United States&quot;″ future reached crew members and corporate leaders, many of whom unsure how long the ship would be left in service. Two years later, another strike forced the cancellation of all summer voyages, losing the ship 9,000 passengers and the company $3 million.

In 1968, the Atlantic liner routes were declining, with only &quot;United States&quot;, &quot;France&quot;, and &quot;Queen Elizabeth&quot; conducting sailings. To distinguish herself from the competition, &quot;United States&quot; began offering much-longer voyages to distant ports in Europe, Africa, and South America. She again became the most-popular ship in the Atlantic. In 1968, USL was bought by Walter Kidd &amp; Co, who believed the age of ocean liners had passed. Exacerbating matters, US government subsidies for the ship were curtailed because there were insufficient passenger numbers to justify the cost.

Throughout her service, &quot;United States&quot; regularly brought in between $16 million and $20 million but her expenses grew from an initial $18 million to $26 million. In one of her first years of operation, the ship made USL a profit of $3 million; in 1960, she began running at a $2 million loss, and by the 1968 fiscal year, she cost the company $4 million despite stable revenue.

Due to strike-related costs, increasing union dues, decreasing government subsidies, a rise in alleged corporate mismanagement, and general passenger disinterest, &quot;United States&quot; was due for retirement. On 25 October 1969, &quot;United States&quot; returned from her 400th voyage and was ordered to start a scheduled yearly overhaul in Newport News early. This move canceled a planned 21-day cruise, although bookings for future voyages were still being made.

=== Layup in Virginia (1969–1996) ===
While at Newport News for a scheduled annual overhaul, USL announced &quot;United States&quot; was being withdrawn from service on November 11. The ship was sealed, with all furniture, fittings, and crew uniforms left in place. Her funnels were left half-painted when work suddenly halted, which can still be seen today. While many saw the ship&#x27;s layup as inevitable, the decision came as a shock to passengers and crew. With no warning, newly unemployed crewmembers had only days to finalize work while passengers&#x27; awaiting baggage was loaded onto &quot;Leonardo da Vinci&quot; for a new cruise. At the time of her withdrawal, &quot;United States&quot; had made 800 transatlantic crossings (400 round trips), steamed , and carried 1,025,691 passengers.

In June 1970, &quot;United States&quot; was moved across the James River to the Norfolk International Terminal in Norfolk, Virginia. In 1973, USL transferred ownership of the vessel to the United States Maritime Administration. In 1976, Norwegian Caribbean Cruise Line (NCL) was reported to be interested in purchasing the ship and converting her into a Caribbean cruise ship but the US Maritime Administration refused the sale due to the classified nature of the ship&#x27;s naval design elements, forcing NCL to purchase the former &quot;France&quot; instead. The Navy declassified the ship&#x27;s design features in 1977.

The same year, a group headed by Harry Katz sought to purchase the ship and dock her in Atlantic City, New Jersey, for use as a hotel and casino, but the plan was never realized. By 1978, the Maritime Administration deemed &quot;United States&quot; worthless to the government and allowed her to be sold.

However, a recently discovered document from the Government Accountability Office (GAO) disputes the widely accepted events of the 1970s which are portrayed above. In particular, the belief that classified design features hampered the sale of the ship to interested parties. According to the GAO, the United States Maritime Administration (MARAD) attempted to sell or charter the ship to private parties immediately upon taking possession in February, 1973.

At first, &quot;The S.S. United States was offered for sale to United States citizens for operation under the American Flag,&quot; according to the GOA document. Auctions were conducted with opening bids of $12.1 million and later $7.5 million. Although some parties apparently expressed interest during these early auctions, all bids were disqualified for failing to be accompanied by a 10% deposit.

After three unsuccessful auctions to sell the ship between 1973 and 1975, the rule regarding potential buyer&#x27;s use of the ship was expanded in 1976 &quot;... to allow the sale of the S.S. United States for use as a floating hotel in or on the navigable waters of the United States.&quot; Two more auctions (in 1976 and 1978) were conducted under the new terms and with a new, lower opening bid of $5 million. As with previous auctions, no bids were accompanied by a 10% deposit, so there was no sale.

The eventual buyer of the ship, United States Cruise Lines, headed by Richard Hadley, made a deal with MARAD to purchase the ship in September 1978 outside of the typical auction process. Another interested party, Sea Containers, was angry at what it felt was a clandestine sale of the ship and filed a complaint. The GAO found Sea Container&#x27;s complaint to be without merit in a 1979 ruling and the sale to Hadley moved forward.

==== Hospital ship (1970s) ====

By the 1970s, the US Navy had retired all of its hospital ships. The now-laid up &quot;United States&quot; was studied for potential conversion in 1983 because her size and speed would allow her to rapidly deploy to address any crisis around the world. Under the name USNS &quot;United States&quot;, it was planned she would have a capacity of about 1,600 hospital beds, be fitted with an aft helicopter deck, a bow vertical replenishment deck, and a refurbished interior that would have included up to 23 operating theaters and a full set of specialist rooms comparable to any major hospital on land. The plan was led by the Department of Defense and the ship was to be based in the Indian Ocean. The Navy believed the plan was too expensive and impractical, and chose to take no action on the matter.

==== Stripping and deterioration (1980-1996) ====
In 1980, &quot;United States&quot; was sold for $7 million to a group headed by the Seattle developer Richard H. Hadley, who hoped to convert the liner into a floating condominium. Under Hadley&#x27;s ownership, the ship was neglected and her interiors became ruined with rust. In 1984, to pay creditors, the ship&#x27;s fittings and furniture, which had been left in place since 1969, were sold at auction in Norfolk, Virginia. The auction took place between October 8 and 14, 1984; about 3,000 bidders paid $1.65 million for objects from the ship.

On March 4, 1989, &quot;United States&quot; was towed across Hampton Roads to the CSX coal pier in Newport News. Hadley&#x27;s plan of a time-share-style cruise ship failed financially and the ship, which the United States Marshals Service had seized, was put up for auction by the US Maritime Administration on April 27, 1992.

==== Marmara Marine Inc. (1992-1996) ====
Kahraman Sadıkoğlu, a Turkish businessman who was a partner of Marmara Marine Inc, was interested in buying the vessel. He first saw her when a friend of his told him that she was to be auctioned off. But after the first auction was cancelled, he left empty-handed. He went for a second auction 2 months later, and he lost interest after it was also cancelled. While in New York, he was notified that a third auction took place and that his previous offer of $2.6 millon was accepted. 

The Turkish president, Turgut Özal, invited Sadıkoğlu to a business meeting at Athénée after hearing the news. During the meeting, he described the situation as: &quot;There&#x27;s a Turkish business man amongst us tonight. First he bought the Savarona that was destined for scrapping and got it functioning again; and now he has bought the SS &quot;United States&quot;. This legendary ocean liner will be in the seas once again.&quot; 

On the morning of 5 June, 1992, the ship was eased out of Newport News and started sailing for Turkey, arriving 35 days later. Sadıkoğlu and Özal welcomed the ship from the MV &quot;Savarona&quot; as the liner passed through the Dardanelles Strait for refurbishment at a shipyard in Tuzla, İstanbul.

Upon her arrival, members of Greenpeace and the media protested the ship due to her asbestos interior lining, due to the material&#x27;s nature as a carcinogen. After debate, it was agreed that the ship would first undergo asbestos removal in Ukraine. On 22 October 1993, she was towed to Sevastopol, Ukraine, and arrived on 1 November. Continued protests from Greenpeace and their flagship &quot;Rainbow Warrior&quot; continued as a 200-man team worked to gut down the ship&#x27;s interiors to the bulkhead. Hundreds of tons interiors were offloaded onto the docks and scrapped. She was towed back to Turkey after the complete asbestos removal. By now, Marmara Marine Inc. spent so much money on her asbestos problems that parts of the ship, such as the lifeboats, were sold off to pay the shipyard. Work was completed in 1996, and the company was out of money. She was towed to the United States in 1996 and was seized by the US Marshalls and put up for auction as the company was unable to pay debtors.

===Layup in Philadelphia (beginning 1996)===
In November 1997, Edward Cantor purchased &quot;United States&quot; for $6 million. Two years later, the SS &quot;United States&quot; Foundation and the SS &quot;United States&quot; Conservancy (then known as the SS &quot;United States&quot; Preservation Society, Inc.) succeeded in having the ship placed on the National Register of Historic Places.

====Norwegian Cruise Line (2003–2009)====
In 2003, Norwegian Cruise Line (NCL) purchased the ship at auction from Cantor&#x27;s estate after his death. NCL intended to restore the ship to service for NCL America, a newly announced, American-flagged, Hawaiian passenger service. &quot;United States&quot; was one of the few suitable ships for such service because of the Passenger Service Act, which requires any vessel that is engaged in domestic commerce to be built and flagged in the US, and operated by a mostly American crew. In late 2003, NCL began an extensive technical review that found the ship was in sound condition, and cataloged over 100 boxes of the ship&#x27;s blueprints. In August 2004, NCL commenced feasibility studies for retrofitting the vessel, and in 2006, company owner Tan Sri Lim Kok Thay stated &quot;United States&quot; would be retrofitted.

By 2009, NCL changed its plans for &quot;United States&quot;, which was costing the company about $800,000 yearly to keep afloat and was made redundant once , , and started operating for NCL America. The company began taking bids for the scrapping of &quot;United States&quot;.

====Potential scrapping (2009–2010)====
The SS &quot;United States&quot; Conservancy was created in 2009 to try to save the ship by raising funds to purchase her. On July 30, 2009, H. F. Lenfest, a Philadelphia media entrepreneur and philanthropist, pledged a matching grant of $300,000 to help the Conservancy purchase the vessel from NCL&#x27;s parent company. While Lenfest, a former US Navy captain, did not see the project as economically feasible, he was sympathetic to the ship because his father was one of the naval architects who helped build her. The former US president Bill Clinton also endorsed efforts to save the ship, having sailed on her in 1968.

In November 2010, the Conservancy announced a plan to develop a &quot;multi-purpose waterfront complex&quot; with hotels, restaurants, and a casino along the Delaware River in South Philadelphia at the proposed location of the stalled Foxwoods Casino project. In December that year, a detailed study of the site was revealed in tandem with a plan for Harrah&#x27;s Entertainment to take over the project. The deal collapsed later that month when the Pennsylvania Gaming Control Board voted to revoke the casino&#x27;s license.

====Conservation (2010–2015)====
The Conservancy bought &quot;United States&quot; from NCL in February 2011 for a reported $3 million with Lenfest&#x27;s assistance. The group had funds to last 20 months that went to de-toxification and plans to make the ship financially independent, possibly as a hotel or other development project. Conservancy executive director Dan McSweeney stated that possible locations for the ship included Philadelphia, New York City, and Miami.

On February 1, 2011 The Conservancy assumed ownership of &quot;United States&quot;. Talks about a location for the ship lasted months. In New York City, negotiations with a developer for the ship to become part of &quot;Vision 2020&quot;, a $3.3 billion waterfront development, were underway. In Miami, Florida, Ocean Group International was interested in putting the ship in a slip on the north side of American Airlines Arena. With an additional $5.8 million donation from Lenfest, the Conservancy had about 18 months from March 2011 to convert &quot;United States&quot; into a public attraction. On August 5, 2011, the Conservancy announced after several studies, Philadelphia was &quot;[n]ot likely to work there for a variety of reasons&quot;. Discussions to locate the ship at New York—her original home port—as a stationary attraction were ongoing. 

On February 7, 2012, preliminary restoration work to prepare the ship for a complete reconstruction began, although a contract had not yet been signed. In July 2012, the Conservancy launched a new online campaign called &quot;Save the &quot;United States&quot;&quot;; it used social networking and micro-fundraising that allowed donors to sponsor square inches of a virtual ship for redevelopment while allowing them to upload photographs and stories about their experience with the ship. The Conservancy announced donors to the virtual ship would be featured in an interactive &quot;Wall of Honor&quot; aboard the future SS &quot;United States&quot; museum.

A developer that would put &quot;United States&quot; in a selected city by 2013 was to be chosen by the end of 2012. In November 2012, the ship underwent a months-long &quot;below-the-deck&quot; makeover to make her more appealing to developers as an attraction. The Conservancy was warned the ship may be scrapped if its plans were not quickly realized. In January 2014, obsolete pieces of the ship were sold to pay the $80,000-a-month maintenance costs. Enough money to fund the ship for another six months was raised with the hope of finding someone committed to the project, with New York City remaining the likeliest location.

In August, the ship was still moored in Philadelphia and rent costs were $60,000 a month. It was estimated $1 billion would be needed to return &quot;United States&quot; to service, although a 2016 estimate for restoration as a luxury cruise ship placed the maximum cost at $700 million. On September 4, 2014, a final effort to have the ship sail to New York City was made. A developer interested in re-purposing the ship as a major waterfront destination made an announcement about the move. The Conservancy had weeks to decide whether to sell the ship for scrap. On December 15, 2014, preliminary agreements in support of the redevelopment of &quot;United States&quot; were announced. The agreements included the provision of three months of carrying costs, with a timeline and more details to be released in 2015. In February 2015, the Conservancy received another $250,000 toward planning an onboard museum from an anonymous donor.

In October 2015, as the group began to exhaust funds, the Conservancy explored potential bids to scrap &quot;United States&quot;. Attempts to re-purpose the ship continued; ideas for reuse included hotels, restaurants, and office space. One idea was to install computer servers in the lower decks and link them to software development businesses in office space on the upper decks. No firm plans were announced. The Conservancy said if no progress was made by October 31, 2015, they would be forced to sell the ship to a &quot;responsible recycler&quot;. As the deadline passed, it was announced $100,000 had been raised in October 2015, sparing the ship from immediate danger. By November 23, 2015, it was reported over $600,000 in donations had been received for care and upkeep, providing funding well into 2016 for the Conservancy to continue with its plan to redevelop the vessel.

====Crystal Cruises (2016–2018)====
On February 4, 2016, Crystal Cruises announced it had signed a purchase option for &quot;United States&quot;. The company paid the ship&#x27;s docking costs for nine months while it conducted a feasibility study on returning the ship to service as a cruise ship based in New York City. On April 9, 2016, it was announced 600 artifacts from &quot;United States&quot; would be returned to the ship from the Mariners&#x27; Museum and other donors.

On August 5, 2016, the plan was abandoned; Crystal Cruises cited the project&#x27;s technical and commercial challenges, and donated $350,000 to help preservation effort until the end of the year. The Conservancy continued to receive donations, including one for $150,000 from cruise-industry executive Jim Pollin. In January 2018, the Conservancy made an appeal to the US President Donald Trump to take action. In the event it ran out of money, the group made alternative plans for the ship, including sinking her as an artificial reef rather than scrapping her.

On September 20, 2018, the Conservancy consulted with Casper van Hooren and Damen Ship Repair &amp; Conversion about redevelopment of &quot;United States&quot;. Van Hooren had converted the former ocean liner and cruise ship into a hotel and mixed-use development.

====RXR Realty (beginning 2018)====
On December 10, 2018, the Conservancy announced an agreement with the commercial real estate firm RXR Realty to explore options for restoring and redeveloping &quot;United States&quot;. The Conservancy required any redevelopment plan to preserve the ship&#x27;s profile and exterior design, and include approximately for an onboard museum. RXR&#x27;s press release about &quot;United States&quot; stated multiple locations would be considered, depending on the viability of restoration plans.

In March 2020, RXR Realty announced its plans to repurpose the ship as a permanently moored, &quot;hospitality and cultural space&quot;, and requested expressions of interest from major US waterfront cities, including Boston, New York, Philadelphia, Miami, Seattle, San Francisco, Los Angeles, and San Diego. In 2023, RXR Realty and MCR Hotels released a more-detailed plan for the ship&#x27;s redevelopment into a 1,000-room hotel, museum, event venue, public park, and restaurant. New York City was chosen as the best location for the ship due to existing infrastructure and the nearby Javits Convention Center, and the ship would ideally be moored to a specially built pier along the Hudson River.

The 2023 plan document also included several rendered images of the redesigned &quot;United States&quot; depicting the ship docked along Manhattan&#x27;s West Side at a public pier in Hudson River Park. One of the ship&#x27;s funnels, with the top removed and exposed to the sky, would be a key element of the hotel. The funnel would act as a skylight, illuminating the hotel and event spaces. The plan also included hotel rooms held in the lifeboat davits, a swimming pool between the funnels, and an aft-mix interior-exterior ballroom.

==== Pier 82 rent increase (2021–2024) ====
Philadelphia&#x27;s Pier 82, where the ship is located, is owned by Penn Warehousing, which in 2021 increased the ship&#x27;s rent from $850 to $1,700 per day, requested $160,000 in back rent, and terminated the contract with the Conservancy. The company stated the change was due to the &quot;United States&quot; slowly damaging the pier and the Conservancy refusing to maintain a previous agreement to cover possible damages. The Conservancy responded by stating the rent hike violated an agreement made in 2011 and refused to pay. They said Penn Warehousing illegally wanted to evict the ship so the pier could be used for more-profitable activities. This led to the Conservancy and Penn Warehousing suing each other.

==== Eviction ====
A civil trial took place in federal court from January 17–18, 2024. Judge Anita Brody issued a final judgment on June 14. Brody dismissed Penn Warehousing&#x27;s financial demands but found because the 2011 berthing agreement was of indefinite duration, it was terminable at will by either party upon reasonable notice. Brody ordered the removal of &quot;United States&quot; within 90 days (by September 12). With such a tight deadline, the Conservancy was unsure how the liner could be moved or where it could go. Six days later, the Conservancy began a new donation drive and requested $500,000 to help relocate the ship. As of October 2024, the Conservancy stated, in addition to necessary surveys, tugboats, insurance, and other preparations, the 2024 Atlantic hurricane season complicated efforts to relocate the ship before the deadline, the main difficulty being finding a port willing to host the ship.

=== Artificial reef ===
On August 30, 2024, Florida&#x27;s Okaloosa County announced its plan to buy &quot;United States&quot; and sink her as the world&#x27;s largest artificial reef off Destin-Fort Walton beach at a cost of $1 million. The county identified several inshore locations, hoping tourism and diving expeditions would bring in revenue to pay for the project. The county had sunk the aircraft carrier USS &quot;Oriskany&quot; as part of a similar plan, believing the two ships together would attract visitors. The same day, the Conservancy said the agreement with Okaloosa County was a contingent contract and would only proceed if the Conservancy had no other options to keep the ship afloat. It would be enacted in the event no alternatives be found before the eviction deadline.

On September 12, 2024, the date on which &quot;United States&quot; was ordered to be evicted, the Conservancy accused Penn Warehousing of illegally planning to sell the ship. The Conservancy alleged the company had blocked an initial agreement with Okaloosa County then planned to seize the ship and sell her for profit, thus extorting the non-profit and Okaloosa County out of millions of dollars. The Conservancy took the issue back to court and demanded an extension to the eviction notice.

In court, the eviction deadline was temporarily suspended. The company defended itself, saying it added $3 million to the sale of &quot;United States&quot; because she had not vacated her berth before the deadline. Blame was placed on Okaloosa County for not responding to the company, with the ship&#x27;s sale now under the judge&#x27;s supervision. The company stated it wanted to remove the ship so the pier could be used to support the local economy.
In October 2024, Okaloosa County purchased the ship and estimated the project would take about 18 months and $10 million after the judge approved. Part of the money would be used to create a land-based museum, consisting of several re-created onboard spaces, her radar mast, and at least one funnel. She is currently en route to Mobile, Alabama, to be prepared for scuttling. Before the move could take place, however, issues detected by the US Coast Guard in December, 2024 had to be addressed. A move announced for February 8, 2025 was subsequently cancelled due to details requested by the Coast Guard related to moving the liner between Piers 82 and 80 prior to departure. The liner was successfully shifted between the piers on February 14, 2025. On February 19, 2025, after delays, the ship left for Mobile, Alabama.

=== 2024 images ===
==Artifacts==

===Artwork===
The Mariners&#x27; Museum of Newport News holds many objects from &quot;United States&quot;, including &quot;Expressions of Freedom&quot; by Gwen Lux, a main-dining-room sculpture it purchased during the 1984 auction. Celebrity Cruises purchased artworks designed by Charles Gilbert, including glass panels etched with sea creatures from the first-class ballroom, and incorporated them into the &quot;United States&quot;-themed restaurant aboard . Other onboard memorabilia, including original porcelain and a ship model, were moved to the entrance of the ship&#x27;s casino in 2015. At the National Museum of American History, the mural &quot;The Current&quot; by Raymond John Wendell is on display. The museum also bought two murals by Hildreth Meière—&quot;Mississippi&quot; and &quot;Father of Waters&quot;—but these are not on display.

===Propellers and fittings===

One of the five-bladed propellers from &quot;United States&quot; is mounted at Pier 76 in New York City and the other is mounted outside the American Merchant Marine Museum at the United States Merchant Marine Academy in Kings Point, New York. The starboard-side five-bladed propeller is mounted near the waterfront at SUNY Maritime College in Fort Schuyler, New York, while the port side propeller is fitted on an original long drive shaft at the entrance of the Mariner&#x27;s Museum in Newport News, Virginia.

The ship&#x27;s bell, which is kept in a clock tower on the campus of Christopher Newport University in Newport News, Virginia, is used to celebrate special events, and is rung by incoming freshmen and by outgoing graduates.

One of the ship&#x27;s horns that stood on display for decades above a hardware store in Revere, Massachusetts, was sold to a private collector in Texas for $8,000 in 2017.

A large collection of dining-room furniture and other memorabilia from &quot;United States&quot; that had been purchased at the 1984 auction was incorporated at Windmill Point Restaurant in Nags Head, North Carolina. Following the restaurant&#x27;s closure, the items were donated to the Mariners&#x27; Museum and Christopher Newport University in 2007.

==Speed records==
With both the eastbound and westbound speed records, SS &quot;United States&quot; obtained the Blue Riband, which marked the first time a US-flagged ship had held the record since claimed the prize 100 years earlier. During her 17 years of service, &quot;United States&quot; maintained a crossing speed of in the North Atlantic, where she was unchallenged. Due to the decline of ocean liners during the 1960s, many regard the Blue Riband as having ended with &quot;United States&quot;. &quot;United States&quot;″ east-bound record was broken several times, first in 1986 by &quot;Virgin Atlantic Challenger II&quot;, and her west-bound record was broken in 1990 by &quot;Destriero&quot;, but these vessels were not passenger-carrying ocean liners. The Hales Trophy was lost in 1990 to &quot;Hoverspeed Great Britain&quot;, which set a new eastbound speed record for a commercial vessel.

==In film==
Due to her association with luxury and fame, several movies have prominently featured &quot;United States&quot; during her time in and out of service. The ship is a major plot point in films such as &quot;Gentlemen Prefer Blondes&quot; (1953), &quot;Gentlemen Marry Brunettes&quot; (1955), and &quot;Bon Voyage!&quot; (1962). More recently, she was used as a set for and appeared in the thriller &quot;Dead Man Down&quot; (2013) while docked in Philadelphia. Numerous documentaries about the ship have been made, such as &quot;SS United States: Lady in Waiting&quot;, &quot;SS United States: Made in America&quot;, and &quot;The SS United States: From Dream to Reality&quot;. She also appears in the opening sequence of &quot;West Side Story&quot; (1961).

==See also==
* John W. Anderson and Commodore Harry Manning, captains of &quot;United States&quot;
* David_Macaulay: &quot;Crossing on Time: Steam Engines, Fast Ships, and a Journey to the New World&quot; (2019, Planning, Building, and a journey to NYC)
=== Other US passenger ships ===

*SS &quot;America&quot; (1939)
*SS &quot;Leviathan&quot;
*SS &quot;California&quot; (1927)
*SS &quot;Virginia&quot; (1928)
*SS &quot;Pennsylvania&quot; (1929)
*SS &quot;Manhattan&quot; (1931)
*SS &quot;Washington&quot; (1932)
*SS &quot;Santa Rosa&quot; (1958)
*MS &quot;Pride of America&quot; (2002)
=== Restored ocean liners ===

* MV &quot;Minghua&quot; 
* SS &quot;Doulos Phos&quot;
* SS &quot;Hikawa Maru&quot;
* MV &quot;Funchal&quot;
==References==


==Bibliography ==
*&quot;A Man and His Ship: America&#x27;s Greatest Naval Architect and His Quest to Build the S.S. United States&quot;, Steven Ujifusa, Simon &amp; Schuster; Reprint ed., (2013), 
*&quot;Crossing on Time: Steam Engines, Fast Ships, and a Journey to the New World,&quot; David Macaulay, Roaring Brook Press (2019), 
*&quot;Picture History of the SS United States&quot;, William H. Miller, Dover Publications (2012), 
*&quot;SS United States: An Operational Guide to America&#x27;s Flagship&quot;, James Rindfleisch, Schiffer; (2023), 
*&quot;SS United States: America&#x27;s Superliner&quot;, Les Streater, Maritime Publishing Co. (2011), 
*&quot;S.S. United States: The Story of America&#x27;s Greatest Ocean Liner&quot;, William H. Miller, W.W. Norton &amp; Company (1991), 
*&quot;S.S. United States: Fastest Ship in the World&quot;, Frank Braynard &amp; Robert Hudson Westover, Turner Publishing Company (2002), 
*&quot;SS United States&quot;, Andrew Britton, The History Press (2012), 
*&quot;SS United States: Red, White, and Blue Riband, Forever&quot;, John Maxtone-Graham, W.W. Norton &amp; Company; 1st ed. (2014), 
*&quot;SS United States: Speed Queen of the Seas&quot;, William H. Miller, Amberley Publishing (2015), 
*&quot;SS United States: Ship of Power, Might, and Indecision,&quot; William H. Miller, Fonthill Media, (2022), 
*&quot;Superliner S.S. United States&quot;, Henry Billings, The Viking Press (1953)
*&quot;The Last Great Race, The S.S. United States and the Blue Riband&quot;, Lawrence M. Driscoll, The Glencannon Press; 1st ed., (2013) 

== Further reading ==

==External links==
=== Documents ===
* SS &quot;United States&quot; Conservancy, current owner of SS &quot;United States&quot;
* First Class Deck Plan 
* Cabin Class Deck Plan 
* Tourist Class Deck Plan 
* SS &quot;United States&quot;, archive of various stories from the &quot;united-states-lines.org&quot; website

=== Artwork ===
* SS &quot;United States&quot; Onboard Artwork: Hildreth Meière, images of several onboard pieces

=== Video ===
* Inside the Abandoned S.S. &quot;United States&quot;, 2021 YouTube tour video

=== Other ===
* SS &quot;United States&quot; , the defunct website of the Conservancy
* Information on SS &quot;United States&quot; from vesselfinder.com This page gives a list of registered owners of the ship</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1545509" start="0" end="22" title="SS United States" label="SS &amp;quot;United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q697196" start="51" end="62" title="ocean liner" label="ocean liner"/>
<link wikidata="Q477312" start="103" end="122" title="United States Lines" label="United States Lines"/>
<link wikidata="Q104833985" start="161" end="202" title="List of passenger ships built in the United States" label="entirely constructed in the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q97" start="244" end="258" title="Atlantic Ocean" label="Atlantic Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q815532" start="292" end="303" title="Blue Riband" label="Blue Riband"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136352" start="436" end="451" title="naval architect" label="naval architect"/>
<link wikidata="Q3048760" start="452" end="473" title="William Francis Gibbs" label="William Francis Gibbs"/>
<link wikidata="Q671079" start="511" end="520" title="troopship" label="troopship"/>
<link wikidata="Q11220" start="540" end="558" title="United States Navy" label="United States Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q206592" start="888" end="901" title="Jet aircraft" label="jet-propelled"/>
<link wikidata="Q732410" start="902" end="924" title="Transatlantic flight" label="trans-Atlantic flights"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345" start="1421" end="1433" title="Philadelphia" label="Philadelphia"/>
<link wikidata="Q494476" start="1826" end="1850" title="Okaloosa County, Florida" label="Okaloosa County, Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q2156427" start="1898" end="1904" title="Destin, Florida" label="Destin"/>
<link wikidata="Q985843" start="1940" end="1955" title="artificial reef" label="artificial reef"/>
<link wikidata="Q3048760" start="2044" end="2057" title="William Francis Gibbs" label="William Gibbs"/>
<link wikidata="Q7394401" start="2127" end="2151" title="SS St. Louis (1894)" label="SS &amp;quot;St. Louis&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q466732" start="2361" end="2370" title="SS Vaterland (1913)" label="Leviathan"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="2444" end="2455" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q28405668" start="2571" end="2592" title="Pacific Marine Review" label="Pacific Marine Review"/>
<link wikidata="Q7393999" start="2720" end="2741" title="SS Malolo" label="SS &amp;quot;Malolo&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q98" start="2766" end="2779" title="Pacific Ocean" label="Pacific Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q2626877" start="2824" end="2832" title="Amidships" label="amidship"/>
<link wikidata="Q105999" start="2838" end="2847" title="Freighter (cargo ship)" label="freighter"/>
<link wikidata="Q5240748" start="2998" end="3010" title="David W. Taylor" label="David Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1339472" start="3076" end="3094" title="RMS Empress of Ireland" label="Empress of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q463091" start="3716" end="3738" title="SS America (1939)" label="SS &amp;quot;America&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q697196" start="3978" end="3988" title="Superliner (passenger ship)" label="superliner"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="4043" end="4059" title="Second World War" label="Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q304703" start="4096" end="4105" title="SS Normandie" label="Normandie"/>
<link wikidata="Q752939" start="4122" end="4132" title="RMS Queen Mary" label="Queen Mary"/>
<link wikidata="Q2326941" start="4244" end="4266" title="US Maritime Commission" label="US Maritime Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q671079" start="4498" end="4513" title="Troopship" label="troop transport"/>
<link wikidata="Q242412" start="4518" end="4527" title="Mobilization" label="mobilized"/>
<link wikidata="Q9212" start="4603" end="4610" title="US Army" label="US Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q1045896" start="5056" end="5101" title="Forrestal-class aircraft carrier" label="&amp;quot;Forrestal&amp;quot;-class aircraft carriers"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5297" end="5303" title="Water-tube boiler#M-type boilers" label="M-type"/>
<link wikidata="Q797609" start="5430" end="5450" title="Babcock &amp;amp; Wilcox" label="Babcock &amp;amp; Wilcox"/>
<link wikidata="Q669977" start="5566" end="5580" title="Foster Wheeler" label="Foster Wheeler"/>
<link wikidata="Q632404" start="5639" end="5651" title="Westinghouse Electric Corporation" label="Westinghouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q2644088" start="5652" end="5668" title="Double reduction gearing" label="double-reduction"/>
<link wikidata="Q189859" start="5669" end="5684" title="Steam turbine" label="geared turbines"/>
<link wikidata="Q6304756" start="5710" end="5721" title="drive shaft" label="drive shaft"/>
<link wikidata="Q160857" start="5772" end="5788" title="shaft horsepower" label="shaft horsepower"/>
<link wikidata="Q5457394" start="5824" end="5835" title="flank speed" label="flank speed"/>
<link wikidata="Q201666" start="6189" end="6199" title="cavitation" label="cavitation"/>
<link wikidata="Q6241184" start="6761" end="6794" title="John J. McMullen &amp;amp; Associates" label="John J. McMullen &amp;amp; Associates"/>
<link wikidata="Q21608043" start="7010" end="7027" title="Dorothy Marckwald" label="Dorothy Marckwald"/>
<link wikidata="Q6840667" start="7503" end="7521" title="mid-century modern" label="mid-century modern"/>
<link wikidata="Q108728" start="7573" end="7581" title="linoleum" label="linoleum"/>
<link wikidata="Q208123" start="7582" end="7589" title="Deck (ship)" label="decking"/>
<link wikidata="Q23035323" start="7949" end="7965" title="Edward Meshekoff" label="Edward Meshekoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q497741" start="8527" end="8533" title="Galley (kitchen)" label="galley"/>
<link wikidata="Q5861" start="8651" end="8661" title="Glass fiber" label="fiberglass"/>
<link wikidata="Q239788" start="8933" end="8941" title="mahogany" label="mahogany"/>
<link wikidata="Q3135625" start="9124" end="9139" title="Hildreth Meière" label="Hildreth Meière"/>
<link wikidata="Q16008272" start="9144" end="9157" title="Austin Purves Jr." label="Austin Purves"/>
<link wikidata="Q1792644" start="9278" end="9287" title="Style (visual arts)" label="art style"/>
<link wikidata="Q1497" start="9498" end="9515" title="Mississippi River" label="Mississippi River"/>
<link wikidata="Q49297" start="9517" end="9533" title="Native Americans in the United States" label="Native Americans"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9902" end="9907" title="Bald eagle#National bird of the United States" label="eagle"/>
<link wikidata="Q13517610" start="9930" end="9934" title="List of U.S. state birds" label="bird"/>
<link wikidata="Q1851570" start="9939" end="9945" title="List of U.S. state and territory flowers" label="flower"/>
<link wikidata="Q2609216" start="10057" end="10064" title="Funnel (ship)" label="funnels"/>
<link wikidata="Q584049" start="10071" end="10080" title="Ventilation (architecture)" label="ventilate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1415781" start="10099" end="10110" title="engine room" label="engine room"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10319" end="10337" title="Flag of the United States#colors" label="red-white-and-blue"/>
<link wikidata="Q466732" start="10540" end="10549" title="SS Leviathan" label="Leviathan"/>
<link wikidata="Q463091" start="10563" end="10570" title="SS America (1939)" label="America"/>
<link wikidata="Q2367906" start="11568" end="11586" title="galvanic corrosion" label="galvanic corrosion"/>
<link wikidata="Q24354" start="12159" end="12166" title="Theater (structure)" label="theater"/>
<link wikidata="Q7552771" start="12350" end="12378" title="Socioeconomic mobility in the United States" label="nation that was removed from"/>
<link wikidata="Q7085491" start="12383" end="12392" title="old money" label="old money"/>
<link wikidata="Q590227" start="13261" end="13265" title="Edward VIII" label="Duke"/>
<link wikidata="Q209417" start="13270" end="13288" title="Wallis Simpson" label="Duchess of Windsor"/>
<link wikidata="Q21651" start="13550" end="13559" title="waterfowl" label="waterfowl"/>
<link wikidata="Q241588" start="14126" end="14138" title="middle class" label="middle class"/>
<link wikidata="Q244914" start="15309" end="15317" title="steerage" label="steerage"/>
<link wikidata="Q11209" start="15584" end="15608" title="US Department of Defense" label="US Department of Defense"/>
<link wikidata="Q1499604" start="15704" end="15742" title="USS United States (CVA-58)" label="USS &amp;quot;United States&amp;quot; (CVA-58)"/>
<link wikidata="Q811177" start="15974" end="15982" title="dry dock" label="dry dock"/>
<link wikidata="Q582062" start="15997" end="16001" title="keel" label="keel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2086008" start="16202" end="16215" title="Prefabrication" label="prefabricated"/>
<link wikidata="Q483039" start="16327" end="16342" title="Battle of Inchon" label="Inchon Landings"/>
<link wikidata="Q8663" start="16354" end="16364" title="Korean War" label="Korean War"/>
<link wikidata="Q443767" start="16667" end="16675" title="wardroom" label="wardroom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1788820" start="16809" end="16829" title="Secretary of Defense" label="Secretary of Defense"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370756" start="16830" end="16843" title="Louis A. Johnson" label="Louis Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q151414" start="17020" end="17035" title="George C. Marshall" label="George Marshall"/>
<link wikidata="Q679743" start="17076" end="17099" title="United States Maritime Administration" label="Maritime Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q609474" start="17268" end="17289" title="Joint Chiefs of Staff" label="Joint Chiefs of Staff"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17404" end="17414" title="Baptism#Boats and ships" label="christened"/>
<link wikidata="Q596643" start="17419" end="17427" title="Ceremonial ship launching" label="launched"/>
<link wikidata="Q7497970" start="17445" end="17454" title="Ship sponsor" label="sponsored"/>
<link wikidata="Q912806" start="17496" end="17508" title="Tom Connally" label="Tom Connally"/>
<link wikidata="Q11220" start="17553" end="17571" title="United States Navy" label="United States Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q477312" start="17576" end="17595" title="United States Lines" label="United States Lines"/>
<link wikidata="Q68949826" start="18254" end="18271" title="Lightship Ambrose" label="Ambrose lightship"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138301" start="18275" end="18290" title="New York Harbor" label="New York Harbor"/>
<link wikidata="Q866344" start="18294" end="18305" title="Bishop Rock" label="Bishop Rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q23148" start="18310" end="18318" title="Cornwall" label="Cornwall"/>
<link wikidata="Q815532" start="18410" end="18421" title="Blue Riband" label="Blue Riband"/>
<link wikidata="Q35569614" start="18713" end="18725" title="Hales Trophy" label="Hales Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q331744" start="19049" end="19059" title="radar mast" label="radar mast"/>
<link wikidata="Q378575" start="19262" end="19280" title="Ticker-tape parade" label="Ticker-tape parade"/>
<link wikidata="Q1239790" start="19411" end="19434" title="Harry Manning" label="Commodore Harry Manning"/>
<link wikidata="Q105999" start="19549" end="19559" title="cargo ship" label="cargo ship"/>
<link wikidata="Q533218" start="19764" end="19779" title="RMS Queen Elizabeth" label="Queen Elizabeth"/>
<link wikidata="Q730587" start="19972" end="19983" title="Cunard Line" label="Cunard Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q2577588" start="20431" end="20465" title="Sinking of Titanic" label="sinking of RMS &amp;quot;Titanic&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q320466" start="20571" end="20593" title="White Star Line" label="White Star Line&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q7183111" start="20609" end="20624" title="Philip Albright Small Franklin" label="Philip Franklin"/>
<link wikidata="Q632812" start="20691" end="20704" title="Vincent Astor" label="Vincent Astor"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20721" end="20737" title="John Jacob Astor IV#Titanic" label="John Jacob Astor"/>
<link wikidata="Q79848" start="21235" end="21246" title="Southampton" label="Southampton"/>
<link wikidata="Q42810" start="21252" end="21260" title="Le Havre" label="Le Havre"/>
<link wikidata="Q44782" start="21292" end="21296" title="Port of call (nautical term)" label="call"/>
<link wikidata="Q2706" start="21300" end="21311" title="Bremerhaven" label="Bremerhaven"/>
<link wikidata="Q4616" start="21374" end="21388" title="Marilyn Monroe" label="Marilyn Monroe"/>
<link wikidata="Q11637" start="21390" end="21402" title="Judy Garland" label="Judy Garland"/>
<link wikidata="Q83410" start="21404" end="21414" title="Cary Grant" label="Cary Grant"/>
<link wikidata="Q5577" start="21416" end="21429" title="Salvador Dalí" label="Salvador Dalí"/>
<link wikidata="Q4030" start="21431" end="21445" title="Duke Ellington" label="Duke Ellington"/>
<link wikidata="Q8704" start="21451" end="21462" title="Walt Disney" label="Walt Disney"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061109" start="21509" end="21520" title="Bon Voyage! (1962 film)" label="Bon Voyage!"/>
<link wikidata="Q1096827" start="21570" end="21582" title="Claude Jones" label="Claude Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q730587" start="21967" end="21978" title="Cunard Line" label="Cunard Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q463091" start="22354" end="22361" title="SS America (1939)" label="America"/>
<link wikidata="Q12606" start="22395" end="22414" title="West Coast of the United States" label="American West Coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q98" start="22428" end="22435" title="Pacific Ocean" label="Pacific"/>
<link wikidata="Q11268" start="22477" end="22488" title="United States Congress" label="US Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q630010" start="22595" end="22609" title="Piston engine" label="piston-powered"/>
<link wikidata="Q4120025" start="22724" end="22747" title="Jet airliner" label="jet-propelled airliners"/>
<link wikidata="Q732410" start="22757" end="22778" title="Transatlantic flight" label="trans-Atlantic routes"/>
<link wikidata="Q16987118" start="23118" end="23150" title="International Organization of Masters, Mates &amp;amp; Pilots" label="Masters, Mates, and Pilots Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q503577" start="23555" end="23580" title="United States Department of Commerce" label="US Department of Commerce"/>
<link wikidata="Q39804" start="24192" end="24203" title="cruise ship" label="cruise ship"/>
<link wikidata="Q664609" start="25218" end="25227" title="Caribbean" label="Caribbean"/>
<link wikidata="Q2467" start="25286" end="25292" title="Nassau, Bahamas" label="Nassau"/>
<link wikidata="Q463937" start="25294" end="25304" title="Saint Thomas, U.S. Virgin Islands" label="St. Thomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q128323" start="25306" end="25314" title="Trinidad" label="Trinidad"/>
<link wikidata="Q25279" start="25316" end="25323" title="Curaçao" label="Curaçao"/>
<link wikidata="Q80777" start="25329" end="25338" title="Cristóbal, Colón" label="Cristobal"/>
<link wikidata="Q546607" start="25637" end="25643" title="SS France (1960)" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q533218" start="26075" end="26090" title="RMS Queen Elizabeth" label="Queen Elizabeth"/>
<link wikidata="Q191891" start="26899" end="26910" title="fiscal year" label="fiscal year"/>
<link wikidata="Q335017" start="27315" end="27327" title="Newport News, Virginia" label="Newport News"/>
<link wikidata="Q1486987" start="28043" end="28060" title="SS Leonardo da Vinci (1958)" label="Leonardo da Vinci"/>
<link wikidata="Q422487" start="28304" end="28315" title="James River" label="James River"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="28323" end="28353" title="Virginia Port Authority#Norfolk International Terminals" label="Norfolk International Terminal"/>
<link wikidata="Q49231" start="28357" end="28374" title="Norfolk, Virginia" label="Norfolk, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q679743" start="28432" end="28469" title="United States Maritime Administration" label="United States Maritime Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q130309" start="28480" end="28511" title="Norwegian Cruise Line" label="Norwegian Caribbean Cruise Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q679743" start="28627" end="28653" title="US Maritime Administration" label="US Maritime Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q546607" start="28783" end="28789" title="SS Norway" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q139564" start="28957" end="28982" title="Atlantic City, New Jersey" label="Atlantic City, New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q3953521" start="30757" end="30771" title="Sea Containers" label="Sea Containers"/>
<link wikidata="Q15888" start="31060" end="31073" title="hospital ship" label="hospital ship"/>
<link wikidata="Q12072096" start="31427" end="31449" title="vertical replenishment" label="vertical replenishment"/>
<link wikidata="Q49231" start="32275" end="32292" title="Norfolk, Virginia" label="Norfolk, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q856783" start="32498" end="32501" title="CSX Transportation" label="CSX"/>
<link wikidata="Q696937" start="32553" end="32569" title="Timeshare" label="time-share-style"/>
<link wikidata="Q934866" start="32625" end="32655" title="United States Marshals Service" label="United States Marshals Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q6347153" start="32787" end="32805" title="Kahraman Sadıkoğlu" label="Kahraman Sadıkoğlu"/>
<link wikidata="Q180280" start="33297" end="33308" title="Turgut Özal" label="Turgut Özal"/>
<link wikidata="Q6347153" start="33318" end="33327" title="Kahraman Sadıkoğlu" label="Sadıkoğlu"/>
<link wikidata="Q28206674" start="33353" end="33360" title="Hotel Plaza Athénée" label="Athénée"/>
<link wikidata="Q1579492" start="33518" end="33526" title="MV Savarona" label="Savarona"/>
<link wikidata="Q335017" start="33770" end="33782" title="Newport News, Virginia" label="Newport News"/>
<link wikidata="Q6347153" start="33839" end="33848" title="Kahraman Sadıkoğlu" label="Sadıkoğlu"/>
<link wikidata="Q180280" start="33853" end="33857" title="Turgut Özal" label="Özal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1579492" start="33885" end="33908" title="MV Savarona" label="MV &amp;quot;Savarona&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q6514" start="33941" end="33959" title="Dardanelles" label="Dardanelles Strait"/>
<link wikidata="Q938548" start="33995" end="34010" title="Tuzla, Istanbul" label="Tuzla, İstanbul"/>
<link wikidata="Q81307" start="34042" end="34052" title="Greenpeace" label="Greenpeace"/>
<link wikidata="Q187661" start="34162" end="34172" title="carcinogen" label="carcinogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q212" start="34256" end="34263" title="Ukraine" label="Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q7525" start="34302" end="34321" title="Sevastopol, Ukraine" label="Sevastopol, Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1958707" start="34404" end="34431" title="Rainbow Warrior (1957)" label="&amp;quot;Rainbow Warrior&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q43" start="34615" end="34621" title="Turkey" label="Turkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q934866" start="34941" end="34953" title="United States Marshals Service" label="US Marshalls"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="35083" end="35096" title="Edward Cantor" label="Edward Cantor"/>
<link wikidata="Q3719" start="35378" end="35414" title="National Register of Historic Places" label="National Register of Historic Places"/>
<link wikidata="Q130309" start="35468" end="35489" title="Norwegian Cruise Line" label="Norwegian Cruise Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q130309" start="35617" end="35628" title="NCL America" label="NCL America"/>
<link wikidata="Q782" start="35667" end="35673" title="Hawaii" label="Hawaii"/>
<link wikidata="Q7142589" start="35787" end="35808" title="Passenger Vessel Services Act of 1886" label="Passenger Service Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q7682124" start="36212" end="36232" title="Tan Sri Lim Kok Thay" label="Tan Sri Lim Kok Thay"/>
<link wikidata="Q5628225" start="36749" end="36762" title="H. F. Lenfest" label="H. F. Lenfest"/>
<link wikidata="Q5036512" start="36955" end="36970" title="Captain (United States O-6)" label="US Navy captain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136352" start="37087" end="37103" title="Naval architecture" label="naval architects"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124" start="37150" end="37162" title="Bill Clinton" label="Bill Clinton"/>
<link wikidata="Q143762" start="37392" end="37406" title="Delaware River" label="Delaware River"/>
<link wikidata="Q7568214" start="37410" end="37428" title="South Philadelphia" label="South Philadelphia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5477286" start="37469" end="37484" title="Foxwoods Casino Philadelphia" label="Foxwoods Casino"/>
<link wikidata="Q892498" start="37585" end="37612" title="Harrah&amp;#x27;s Entertainment" label="Harrah&amp;#x27;s Entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q7163732" start="37684" end="37717" title="Pennsylvania Gaming Control Board" label="Pennsylvania Gaming Control Board"/>
<link wikidata="Q8652" start="38532" end="38546" title="Miami, Florida" label="Miami, Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q7076003" start="38548" end="38573" title="Ocean Group International" label="Ocean Group International"/>
<link wikidata="Q420129" start="38640" end="38663" title="American Airlines Arena" label="American Airlines Arena"/>
<link wikidata="Q2715623" start="39370" end="39387" title="social networking" label="social networking"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142355" start="42268" end="42283" title="Crystal Cruises" label="Crystal Cruises"/>
<link wikidata="Q2598142" start="42652" end="42673" title="Mariners&amp;#x27; Museum" label="Mariners&amp;#x27; Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q22686" start="43076" end="43088" title="Donald Trump" label="Donald Trump"/>
<link wikidata="Q985843" start="43214" end="43229" title="artificial reef" label="artificial reef"/>
<link wikidata="Q950580" start="43334" end="43368" title="Damen Group" label="Damen Ship Repair &amp;amp; Conversion"/>
<link wikidata="Q20657741" start="43658" end="43668" title="RXR Realty" label="RXR Realty"/>
<link wikidata="Q100" start="44272" end="44278" title="Boston" label="Boston"/>
<link wikidata="Q5083" start="44311" end="44318" title="Seattle" label="Seattle"/>
<link wikidata="Q16552" start="44352" end="44361" title="San Diego" label="San Diego"/>
<link wikidata="Q110633678" start="44387" end="44397" title="MCR Hotels" label="MCR Hotels"/>
<link wikidata="Q564793" start="44642" end="44666" title="Javits Center" label="Javits Convention Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q3140" start="44741" end="44753" title="Hudson River" label="Hudson River"/>
<link wikidata="Q500601" start="44893" end="44919" title="West Side (Manhattan)" label="Manhattan&amp;#x27;s West Side"/>
<link wikidata="Q1359049" start="44940" end="44957" title="Hudson River Park" label="Hudson River Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q965369" start="45206" end="45211" title="davit" label="davit"/>
<link wikidata="Q8016240" start="46082" end="46093" title="civil trial" label="civil trial"/>
<link wikidata="Q194907" start="46108" end="46121" title="Federal judiciary of the United States" label="federal court"/>
<link wikidata="Q4765497" start="46154" end="46165" title="Anita B. Brody" label="Anita Brody"/>
<link wikidata="Q191826" start="46782" end="46789" title="tugboat" label="tugboat"/>
<link wikidata="Q123846558" start="46831" end="46861" title="2024 Atlantic hurricane season" label="2024 Atlantic hurricane season"/>
<link wikidata="Q494476" start="47051" end="47066" title="Okaloosa County, Florida" label="Okaloosa County"/>
<link wikidata="Q985843" start="47160" end="47175" title="artificial reef" label="artificial reef"/>
<link wikidata="Q21020902" start="47180" end="47198" title="Crestview–Fort Walton Beach–Destin metropolitan area" label="Destin-Fort Walton"/>
<link wikidata="Q562053" start="47405" end="47429" title="USS Oriskany" label="USS &amp;quot;Oriskany&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q2534642" start="47590" end="47609" title="contingent contract" label="contingent contract"/>
<link wikidata="Q79875" start="49067" end="49082" title="Mobile, Alabama" label="Mobile, Alabama"/>
<link wikidata="Q2598142" start="49615" end="49652" title="Mariners&amp;#x27; Museum and Park" label="Mariners&amp;#x27; Museum of Newport News"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052823" start="49829" end="49846" title="Celebrity Cruises" label="Celebrity Cruises"/>
<link wikidata="Q148584" start="50202" end="50237" title="National Museum of American History" label="National Museum of American History"/>
<link wikidata="Q3135625" start="50349" end="50364" title="Hildreth Meiere" label="Hildreth Meière"/>
<link wikidata="Q1806541" start="50625" end="50656" title="United States Merchant Marine Academy" label="American Merchant Marine Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1806541" start="50664" end="50701" title="United States Merchant Marine Academy" label="United States Merchant Marine Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3449107" start="50705" end="50716" title="Kings Point, New York" label="Kings Point"/>
<link wikidata="Q7603615" start="50803" end="50824" title="State University of New York Maritime College" label="SUNY Maritime College"/>
<link wikidata="Q5471994" start="50828" end="50841" title="Fort Schuyler" label="Fort Schuyler"/>
<link wikidata="Q6304756" start="50913" end="50924" title="drive shaft" label="drive shaft"/>
<link wikidata="Q2598142" start="50948" end="50969" title="Mariners&amp;#x27; Museum and Park" label="Mariner&amp;#x27;s Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q3444675" start="51068" end="51098" title="Christopher Newport University" label="Christopher Newport University"/>
<link wikidata="Q13883551" start="51187" end="51195" title="freshmen" label="freshmen"/>
<link wikidata="Q54154" start="51313" end="51334" title="Revere, Massachusetts" label="Revere, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q2028067" start="51588" end="51597" title="Nags Head, North Carolina" label="Nags Head"/>
<link wikidata="Q815532" start="51866" end="51877" title="Blue Riband" label="Blue Riband"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="52351" end="52380" title="Virgin Atlantic Challenger II" label="Virgin Atlantic Challenger II"/>
<link wikidata="Q48774797" start="52414" end="52432" title="Columbus Atlantic Trophy" label="was broken in 1990"/>
<link wikidata="Q376594" start="52442" end="52451" title="Destriero" label="Destriero"/>
<link wikidata="Q35569614" start="52523" end="52535" title="Hales Trophy" label="Hales Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5635928" start="52562" end="52586" title="Hoverspeed Great Britain" label="Hoverspeed Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q383355" start="52870" end="52906" title="Gentlemen Prefer Blondes (1953 film)" label="&amp;quot;Gentlemen Prefer Blondes&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1760854" start="52921" end="52946" title="Gentlemen Marry Brunettes" label="Gentlemen Marry Brunettes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061109" start="52971" end="52982" title="Bon Voyage! (1962 film)" label="Bon Voyage!"/>
<link wikidata="Q2484376" start="53058" end="53066" title="Thriller film" label="thriller"/>
<link wikidata="Q2741435" start="53073" end="53086" title="Dead Man Down" label="Dead Man Down"/>
<link wikidata="" start="53198" end="53231" title="SS United States: Lady in Waiting" label="SS United States: Lady in Waiting"/>
<link wikidata="Q273704" start="53391" end="53418" title="West Side Story (1961 film)" label="&amp;quot;West Side Story&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q16007972" start="53443" end="53459" title="John W. Anderson (sailor)" label="John W. Anderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1239790" start="53464" end="53487" title="Harry Manning" label="Commodore Harry Manning"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134356" start="53529" end="53543" title="David_Macaulay" label="David_Macaulay"/>
<link wikidata="Q463091" start="53717" end="53746" title="SS America (1939)" label="SS &amp;quot;America&amp;quot; (1939)"/>
<link wikidata="Q466732" start="53748" end="53772" title="SS Leviathan" label="SS &amp;quot;Leviathan&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q7393300" start="53774" end="53806" title="SS California (1927)" label="SS &amp;quot;California&amp;quot; (1927)"/>
<link wikidata="Q16222856" start="53808" end="53838" title="SS Brazil (1928)" label="SS &amp;quot;Virginia&amp;quot; (1928)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7393183" start="53840" end="53874" title="SS Argentina (1929)" label="SS &amp;quot;Pennsylvania&amp;quot; (1929)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7394001" start="53876" end="53907" title="SS Manhattan (1931)" label="SS &amp;quot;Manhattan&amp;quot; (1931)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1740902" start="53909" end="53941" title="SS Washington" label="SS &amp;quot;Washington&amp;quot; (1932)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2118749" start="53943" end="53975" title="SS The Emerald" label="SS &amp;quot;Santa Rosa&amp;quot; (1958)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1457774" start="53977" end="54015" title="Pride of America" label="MS &amp;quot;Pride of America&amp;quot; (2002)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2845729" start="54049" end="54071" title="Minghua (ship)" label="MV &amp;quot;Minghua&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1205064" start="54075" end="54101" title="MV Doulos Phos" label="SS &amp;quot;Doulos Phos&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186344" start="54104" end="54130" title="Hikawa Maru" label="SS &amp;quot;Hikawa Maru&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q6719551" start="54133" end="54155" title="MV Funchal" label="MV &amp;quot;Funchal&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134356" start="54461" end="54475" title="David Macaulay" label="David Macaulay"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="461239" wikidata="Q201102" url="?curid=461239" title="Lucius Cornelius Balbus (proconsul)">
<text>Lucius Cornelius Balbus, often referred to as Lucius Cornelius Balbus Minor, (not before 60 BC – after 13 BC) was a Roman politician and General. Similarly to his uncle Balbus the Elder, Balbus Minor was also born in Gades with Punic origins, and became a distinguished member of the gens Cornelia through adoption. Despite his Phoenician ancestry, Balbus rendered valuable services to the early Roman Empire, most notably by serving as the proconsul of Africa in 21 BC and leading an expedition to sub-Saharan Africa. He was also known to be a close friend and trusted associate of Julius Caesar. 

== Biography ==

Not much is known about the early life of Balbus due to the scarce and limited historical record available from that time. Records indicate that Balbus was born in the ancient city of Gades in the province of Hispania Ulterior to a Phoenician family. He later received his Roman citizenship simultaneously with his uncle in around 70 BC by gaining the favour of Gnaeus Pompey.

=== In Caesar&#x27;s civil war ===
Balbus was an important supporter of Julius Caesar in his civil war, in which he was entrusted with several missions. He also has participated in the Alexandrian and Spanish wars. For his loyalty and valuable services to Caesar in the civil war, Balbus was awarded, by him, with his admission to the College of Pontiffs, a prestigious religious office. In 43 BC he was entrusted with the office of Quaestor in Hispania Ulterior (Further Spain). He then further accumulated fortune by pillaging and looting the inhabitants of the region.

In that very year he crossed over to meet Bogud, king of Mauretania. His presence in historical records fades away until the year 21 BC.

Balbus seems to have dedicated some of his focus to literature: he wrote a play about his visit to Lentulus in Pompey&#x27;s camp at Dyrrhachium. As reported by Macrobius, he was the author of &quot;Ἐξηγητικά&quot; (&quot;Exegetica&quot;), a work engaging with Gods and their worship.

=== During the early Roman Empire ===
In 21 BC, Balbus was appointed as Proconsul of Africa. Mommsen thinks that he had incurred the displeasure of Augustus by his conduct as praetor, and that his African appointment after so many years was due to his exceptional capabilities for the post.

In 19 BC Balbus defeated the Garamantes, and on 27 March in that year received the honour of a triumph, which was then for the first time granted to one who was not a Roman citizen by birth, and for the last time to a private individual.

== Balbus&#x27; Theatre ==
Balbus built a new theatre, called theatre of Balbus, in Rome in 13 BC, connected to his &quot;Crypta Balbi&quot; complex in the South-Eastern part of the Campus Martius. 

Some of the reasons for the construction were the high demand of innovative and new buildings in the capital and the desire for fame and favor from his supporters, including the emperor Augustus. Due to these factors, Balbus decided to build a theatre near the Theatre of Pompey. Although his theatre was smaller than Pompey&#x27;s, as cited by Pliny the Elder, it possessed its own unique richness: the theatre of Balbus featured four small columns made of Onyx, which were destroyed during the fall of the Roman Empire.

The theatre was destroyed by a fire that erupted during the reign of Titus, but it was after restored, experts say, by Domitian.

Balbus&#x27; theatre could have held around 11,510 spectators.

== Expedition to sub-Saharan Africa ==
Lucius Cornelius Balbus Minor planned to conquer the inhabited African lands, during or in the aftermath of crossing the Saharan desert. Thus, in around 20-19 BC he decided to set off from Sabratha, a Roman city located in today&#x27;s North-Western Libya and near the Libyan desert, to begin the expedition. The Sahara experiences relatively extreme temperatures and conditions that are unsuitable for horses or other animals due to the softness of sand. As a result, Balbus opted for camels instead of horses and mules for the expedition. Balbus also had infantry with him, comprising the largest part of the army. The exact size of his armed force is unclear, but it is estimated that Balbus had around 10,000 soldiers, including an unknown number of camels.

=== Reasons ===
The Garamantes heavily relied on commerce between the other populations living in or near the desert. Since the duty of the nomads on the goods en route were intense, the Roman merchants requested an expedition against the Garamantes to soften the duty. The expedition would aim the conquest of the city of Garama, an important city for the Garamantes, eliminating the tributes for the nomads of the desert, and occupying some mercantile routes for the advantage of the Romans. 

=== The expedition and crossing of the Sahara ===
Balbus had planned his expedition carefully: it is a plausible evidence that the use of spies and explorers was employed to gather news and intelligence against the Garamantes. The spies were sent to the heart of the Saharan desert, where they would frequently control the caravan routes. Balbus also gathered specific maps for the expedition, organized supplies and tools for his troops, and he had officials and cavalry of the army taught to ride camels. 

Ready for the voyage, the army departed for the oasis city of Cydamus. Upon arriving in the city, the troops refreshed themselves by raiding the locals of the oasis. The expedition continued southwards, covering around 650 km through a rocky desert (Hamada el-Hamra), conquering the most important towns and cities of the region, including the capital city of Garama. From there, Balbus could have sent an exploratory expedition even further Southern part of the Sahara, the Fezzan, perhaps reaching the Niger River.

== See also ==
*Romans in sub-Saharan Africa 
*Roman Libya
*Tin Hinan Tomb
*Leptis Magna
*Theatre of ancient Rome
== Sources ==
=== Primary sources ===
These sources mainly comprise the largest or possibly the entirety of the first historiography.
*Cassius Dio - Roman history - LIV.
*Suetonius - Lives of the Caesars - Augustus.
*Tacitus - Annales - III.
*Pliny the Elder - Naturalis Historia - V.

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q201102" start="0" end="23" title="Lucius Cornelius Balbus (proconsul)" label="Lucius Cornelius Balbus"/>
<link wikidata="Q201102" start="46" end="76" title="Lucius Cornelius Balbus (proconsul)" label="Lucius Cornelius Balbus Minor,"/>
<link wikidata="Q766552" start="169" end="185" title="Lucius Cornelius Balbus (consul 40 BC)" label="Balbus the Elder"/>
<link wikidata="Q15682" start="217" end="222" title="Cádiz" label="Gades"/>
<link wikidata="Q4383747" start="228" end="233" title="Punic people" label="Punic"/>
<link wikidata="Q221312" start="284" end="297" title="Cornelia gens" label="gens Cornelia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277" start="396" end="408" title="Roman Empire" label="Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q181238" start="454" end="460" title="Africa (Roman province)" label="Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048" start="583" end="596" title="Julius Caesar" label="Julius Caesar"/>
<link wikidata="Q125414" start="979" end="992" title="Pompey" label="Gnaeus Pompey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1238338" start="1084" end="1097" title="Caesar&amp;#x27;s civil war" label="his civil war"/>
<link wikidata="Q9377266" start="1180" end="1191" title="Alexandrian war" label="Alexandrian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1771261" start="1330" end="1349" title="College of Pontiffs" label="College of Pontiffs"/>
<link wikidata="Q189430" start="1428" end="1436" title="Quaestor" label="Quaestor"/>
<link wikidata="Q747040" start="1440" end="1457" title="Hispania Ulterior" label="Hispania Ulterior"/>
<link wikidata="Q2347534" start="1610" end="1615" title="Bogud" label="Bogud"/>
<link wikidata="Q309272" start="1625" end="1635" title="Mauretania" label="Mauretania"/>
<link wikidata="Q51380" start="1805" end="1813" title="Publius Cornelius Lentulus Spinther" label="Lentulus"/>
<link wikidata="Q83285" start="1839" end="1850" title="Dyrrhachium" label="Dyrrhachium"/>
<link wikidata="Q313934" start="1867" end="1876" title="Macrobius" label="Macrobius"/>
<link wikidata="Q2912782" start="2064" end="2073" title="Proconsul" label="Proconsul"/>
<link wikidata="Q181238" start="2077" end="2083" title="Africa (Roman province)" label="Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q25351" start="2085" end="2092" title="Theodor Mommsen" label="Mommsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1405" start="2140" end="2148" title="Augustus" label="Augustus"/>
<link wikidata="Q839034" start="2313" end="2323" title="Garamantes" label="Garamantes"/>
<link wikidata="Q657438" start="2379" end="2386" title="Roman triumph" label="triumph"/>
<link wikidata="Q2734384" start="2585" end="2602" title="theatre of Balbus" label="theatre of Balbus"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2645" end="2657" title="Crypta Balbi" label="Crypta Balbi"/>
<link wikidata="Q242839" start="2705" end="2719" title="Campus Martius" label="Campus Martius"/>
<link wikidata="Q220" start="2820" end="2831" title="Rome" label="the capital"/>
<link wikidata="Q944814" start="2984" end="3001" title="Theatre of Pompey" label="Theatre of Pompey"/>
<link wikidata="Q82778" start="3068" end="3083" title="Pliny the Elder" label="Pliny the Elder"/>
<link wikidata="Q180884" start="3181" end="3185" title="Onyx" label="Onyx"/>
<link wikidata="Q608613" start="3219" end="3243" title="Fall of the roman empire" label="fall of the Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1421" start="3315" end="3320" title="Titus" label="Titus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1423" start="3365" end="3373" title="Domitian" label="Domitian"/>
<link wikidata="Q6583" start="3600" end="3614" title="Sahara" label="Saharan desert"/>
<link wikidata="Q192918" start="3668" end="3676" title="Sabratha" label="Sabratha"/>
<link wikidata="Q181528" start="3748" end="3761" title="Libyan Desert" label="Libyan desert"/>
<link wikidata="Q17346959" start="4036" end="4044" title="Legionary" label="infantry"/>
<link wikidata="Q117654" start="4565" end="4571" title="Germa" label="Garama"/>
<link wikidata="Q192237" start="5309" end="5316" title="Ghadames" label="Cydamus"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5497" end="5512" title="Hamada el-Hamra" label="Hamada el-Hamra"/>
<link wikidata="Q188258" start="5722" end="5728" title="Fezzan" label="Fezzan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3542" start="5751" end="5762" title="Niger River" label="Niger River"/>
<link wikidata="Q13635528" start="5781" end="5809" title="Romans in sub-Saharan Africa" label="Romans in sub-Saharan Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q7362066" start="5812" end="5823" title="Roman Libya" label="Roman Libya"/>
<link wikidata="Q3531165" start="5825" end="5839" title="Tin Hinan Tomb" label="Tin Hinan Tomb"/>
<link wikidata="Q191504" start="5841" end="5853" title="Leptis Magna" label="Leptis Magna"/>
<link wikidata="Q1203607" start="5855" end="5878" title="Theatre of ancient Rome" label="Theatre of ancient Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q185223" start="6028" end="6041" title="Roman History (Cassius Dio)" label="Roman history"/>
<link wikidata="Q1229963" start="6062" end="6082" title="Lives Of the Caesars" label="Lives of the Caesars"/>
<link wikidata="Q564358" start="6106" end="6113" title="Annals (Tacitus)" label="Annales"/>
<link wikidata="Q442" start="6140" end="6158" title="Natural History (Pliny)" label="Naturalis Historia"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="461242" wikidata="Q6692710" url="?curid=461242" title="Low-Income Housing Tax Credit">
<text>The Low-Income Housing Tax Credit (LIHTC) is a federal program in the United States that awards tax credits to housing developers in exchange for agreeing to reserve a certain fraction of rent-restricted units for lower-income households. The program was created under the Tax Reform Act of 1986 (TRA86) to incentivize the use of private equity in developing affordable housing. Projects developed with LIHTC credits must maintain a certain percentage of affordable units for a set period of time, typically 30 years, though there is a &quot;qualified contract&quot; process that can allow property owners to opt out after 15 years. The maximum rent that can be charged for designated affordable units is based on Area Median Income (AMI); over 50% of residents in LIHTC properties are considered Extremely Low-Income (at or below 30% AMI). Less than 10% of current credit expenditures are claimed by individual investors.

From 1987 to 2021, at least 3.55 million housing units were placed through the LIHTC program. As of 2012, the LIHTC program accounted for approximately 90% of all newly created affordable rental housing in the United States.

In 2010, the President&#x27;s Economic Recovery Advisory Board (PERAB) estimated that the LIHTC program would cost the federal government $61 billion (an average of about $6 billion per year) in lost tax revenue from participating corporations from 2008-2017, as well as noting that some experts believe that vouchers would more cost-effectively help low income households. In 2023, the LIHTC program is estimated to cost the government an average of $13.5 billion annually. 
A 2018 report by the GAO covering the years 2011-2015 found that the LIHTC program financed about 50,000 low-income rental units annually, with median costs per unit for new construction ranging from $126,000 in Texas to $326,000 in California. 

==Overview==
The United States Tax Reform Act of 1986 (TRA86) adversely affected many investment incentives for rental housing while leaving incentives for home ownership. Since low-income people are more likely to live in rental housing than in owner-occupied housing, this would have decreased the new supply of housing accessible to them. The Low-Income Housing Tax Credit (LIHTC) was added to TRA86 to provide some balance and encourage investment in multifamily housing for those in need of affordable rental housing options. Over the subsequent 20 years, it has become an extremely effective tool for developing affordable rental housing. The LIHTC program has helped meet a critical affordable housing shortage by stimulating the production or rehabilitation of nearly 2.4 million affordable homes since 1986. Through development activity, the LIHTC creates and supports approximately 95,000 jobs annually - the majority of which are small business sector jobs.

==How it works==

The LIHTC provides funding for the development costs of low-income housing by allowing an investor (usually the partners of a partnership that owns the housing) to take a federal tax credit equal to a percentage (either 4% or 9%, for 10 years, depending on the credit type) of the cost incurred for development of the low-income units in a rental housing project. Development capital is raised by &quot;syndicating&quot; the credit to an investor or, more commonly, a group of investors. To take advantage of the LIHTC, a developer will either (i) propose a project to a state agency, seek and win a competitive allocation of tax credits, or (ii) obtain approval and issuance of tax-exempt bonds to finance at least 50% of project cost, and then complete the project, certify its cost, and rent-up the project to low income tenants. Simultaneously, an investor will be found that will make a capital contribution to the partnership or limited liability company that owns the project in exchange for being allocated the entity&#x27;s LIHTCs over a ten-year period. The amount of the credit will be based on (i) the amount of credits awarded to the project in the competition, (ii) the actual cost of the project, (iii) the tax credit rate announced by the IRS, and (iv) the percentage of the project&#x27;s units that are rented to low-income tenants. Failure to comply with the applicable rules, or a sale of the project or an ownership interest before the end of at least a 15-year period, can lead to recapture of credits previously taken, as well as the inability to take future credits. These rules are described in greater detail below.

The program&#x27;s structure as part of the tax code ensures that private investors bear the financial burden if properties are not successful. This pay-for-performance accountability has driven private sector discipline to the LIHTC program, resulting in a foreclosure rate of less than 0.1%, far less than that of comparable market-rate properties. As a permanent part of the tax code, the LIHTC program necessitates public-private partnerships, and has leveraged more than $75 billion in private equity investment for the creation of affordable rental housing.

===Application process===

The first step in the process is for a project owner to submit an application to a state authority, which will consider the application competitively. The application will include estimates of the expected cost of the project and a commitment to comply with one of the following conditions, known as &quot;set-asides&quot;:
*At least 20% or more of the residential units in the development are both rent restricted and occupied by individuals whose income is 50% or less than the area median gross income (&quot;20/50&quot;).
*At least 40% or more of the residential units in the development are both rent restricted and occupied by individuals whose income is 60% or less than the area median gross income (&quot;40/60&quot;).
*At least 40% or more of the residential units in the development are both rent restricted and occupied by individuals whose income does not exceed the imputed income limitation designated by the taxpayer with respect to the respective unit. The average of the imputed income limitations shall not exceed 60% of the area median gross income (&quot;income averaging&quot;).

Typically, the project owner will agree to a higher percentage of low income usage than these minimums, up to 100%. Low-income tenants can be charged a maximum rent of 30% of the maximum eligible income, which is 60% of the area&#x27;s median income adjusted for household size as determined by HUD. There are no limits on the rents that can be charged to tenants who are not low income but live in the same project.

===Program administration===

The program is administered at the state level by State housing finance agencies with each state getting a fixed allocation of credits based on its population. The state housing agency has wide discretion in determining which projects to award credits, and applications are considered under the state&#x27;s &quot;Qualified Allocation Plan&quot; (QAP). The credits are usually awarded to projects in a few &quot;allocation rounds&quot; held each year, on a competitive basis. Typically, the top ranked project will get credits, then the second, and so on until the credits are exhausted for the round. A portion of each state&#x27;s credits must be &quot;set aside&quot; for projects sponsored by non-profit organizations, although non-profits more typically apply for credits under the &quot;general&quot; rules, without regard to the set-aside.

This allows each state to set its own priorities and address its specific housing goals. It also encourages developers to offer benefits that are better than the established minimums when competing against other projects (e.g., charging lower rents, or maintaining the low income requirements for a longer number of years, will often improve a project&#x27;s rank in the competitive process; it is important to check the particular state&#x27;s QAP and application to see how it makes these judgments).

Not all projects claim the low income credit based on this competitive process. Projects that are financed by tax-exempt bonds can also qualify for the credit. Certain types of tax-exempt bonds are also limited on a state-by-state basis, and the state agency responsible for bonds may be different, but the state agency generally applies similar rules as the agency responsible for the tax credit program. The credit rate is 4% for bond-financed projects, as opposed to 4% for acquisition of existing buildings, and 9% for new construction or rehabilitation for competitively awarded credits.

===Terms &amp; Conditions===

The project owner must agree to comply with Section 42 and maintain an agreed percentage of low income units in a &quot;Land Use Restriction Agreement&quot; (LURA) which is recorded. Under the LURA, the project is required to meet the particular project&#x27;s low income requirements for a 15-year initial &quot;compliance period&quot; and a subsequent 15-year &quot;extended use period&quot; (or longer, if required by the local authority; the extended use rules were added in 1989, and do not apply to projects developed in the first few years of the program). The credits are subject to &quot;recapture&quot; if the project fails to comply with the requirements of Section 42 of the Tax Code during the 15-year compliance period. Rules that required a taxpayer to post a &quot;bond&quot; if a recapture event occurred were repealed in 2008.

===Eligible basis===

The &quot;eligible basis&quot; of a project is the cost of acquiring an existing building if there is one (but not the cost of the land), plus construction and other construction-related costs to complete the project. (For example, the costs of obtaining permanent financing, or &quot;syndicating&quot; the credits to an investor are not included. Adjustments must be made for federal grants as well.). This is then multiplied by the percentage of the units that are &quot;low income&quot;, in accordance with the conditions described above, to determine the project&#x27;s &quot;qualified basis&quot; that actually qualifies for the credit. For this reason, many developers agree to make 100% of the units low income in order to maximize the potential tax credits. Projects for (1) new construction and (2) the cost of rehabilitating an existing building, if not funded by tax-exempt bonds, can receive a maximum annual tax credit allocation based on a rate which is generally 4% of any acquired building&#x27;s basis, and 9% of the project&#x27;s eligible basis in new construction or rehabilitation. The cost of projects financed in whole or in part with tax-exempt bonds, are eligible for a credit of approximately 3% to 4% annually, and, in most cases, fixed at 4% starting in 2021. The credit percentages are announced monthly by the Internal Revenue Service, but for buildings placed in service after July 30, 2008, the credit for new and rehabilitated buildings that are not financed with tax-exempt bonds is not less than 9%, and for most bond-financed projects with bonds issued after 2020, a 4% rate. Rules that provided a lower credit rate for &quot;below-market federal loans&quot; were repealed in 2008, applicable to buildings placed in service after July 30, 2008. Another rule that does not allow a credit for the acquisition cost of existing buildings, unless they were last placed in service more than ten years ago, no longer applies if the building was substantially financed pursuant to a large number of federal or state programs. The cost of land is not eligible for credits.

===Credit limitations===

Regardless of the result of these computations, the credit cannot exceed the amount allocated by the state agency. For example, suppose a project cost $100,000 for land, $400,000 for an existing building that was most recently placed in service more than ten years ago, and $1,000,000 for rehabilitation; also suppose that the applicable percentages are 4% and 9%, that the project will be 80% low income, that there are no tax-exempt bonds, and that the state agency awarded $70,000 per year of credits. The credits are computed as follows -- (1) the cost of the land is not eligible for credits; (2) the maximum annual credit for the purchase of the building is $400,000 times 80% times 4%, or $12,800; (3) the maximum annual credit for the rehabilitation is $1,000,000 times 80% times 9%, or $72,000. The total maximum annual credits, $84,800, is more than the amount of credits awarded by the state. As a result, the project is limited to $70,000 of credits per year.

The credits are not provided in a lump sum but instead are claimed in equal amounts over a 10-year &quot;credit period&quot; (many projects claim credits over 11 years, due to the rules governing how many credits can be claimed in the first year of the credit period). Thus, the $70,000 of annual credits described in the illustration will yield a total of $700,000 of credits over the credit period.

===Syndication and partnership===

A tax credit, or equity, syndicator connects private investors seeking a strong return on investments with developers seeking cash for a qualified LIHTC project. As mentioned above, the credit is used to generate private equity, often prior to, or during, the construction of the project. Developers typically &quot;sell&quot; the credits by entering into limited partnerships (or limited liability companies) with an investor, with 99.99% of the profits, losses, depreciation, and tax credits being allocated to the investor as a partner in the partnership. The developer serves as the general partner/managing member, and receives a majority of the cash flow (either through the payment of fees, or through distributions). The funds generated through the syndication vary from market to market and year-to-year. Although 85-95¢ for each total dollar of tax credits was common in the first several years of the 21st century, recent turmoil in the financial markets, and reduction in tax rates has reduced some of the demand for tax breaks, meaning that investors are paying somewhat less. So, for example, $10,000 credits annually for the next 10 years would be $100,000 total, and a developer could probably raise $80,000-$85,000 through syndication. Further, due to the fact that depreciation on the buildings owned by the partnership is also tax deductible, and that depreciation is allocated 99.99% to the investor, investors may pay still more for the total tax benefits. (Indeed, when the credit alone was selling for 95 cents per dollar of credit, there were some cases where investors actually paid slightly more than a dollar for a dollars worth of tax credits plus other tax benefits.) 

An investor will typically stay in the partnership for at least the compliance period, because a reduction in its interest can also result in recapture of the credits. An investor wishing to exit the partnership before the end of the compliance period may post a surety bond to avoid credit recapture.

The following table summarizes the relationship between the developer and outside investors. NOTE: This is only meant to demonstrate the concept of partnerships for such projects and is not to be taken as literal guidelines for developing a LIHTC project.

The annual allocations under the program increased significantly in 2001 when Congress increased the state allocations by 40%.

===Compliance===

States are also responsible for monitoring the ongoing development costs, quality and operation of approved projects, as well as the enforcement threat of notifying the IRS of &quot;noncompliance&quot; if the project deviates from the applicable requirements of the Code and the LURA, described above. Such a notice can lead to recapture of previously taken credits and inability to claim credits from the project in the future. The IRS has published Form 8823 for the purpose of reporting possible problems with the project, and its Guide to the Form 8823 that details the IRS view on various issues related to noncompliance.

Owners of LIHTC properties and their management agents must be able to prove the tenants living in the low income units meet the eligibility requirements of the LIHTC Program and remain eligible throughout their tenancy. [Section 1.42-5(b)][1] The initial eligibility requirements include, but are not limited to, income eligibility, rent restriction, full-time student limitations, and non-exclusion of Section 8 applicants. Also, each year the tenant remains in the low-income unit, a re-examination or recertification must be performed to ensure the tenant continues to remain LIHTC Program eligible. Failure to correctly prove initial eligibility and re-examine continued eligibility is noncompliance and puts the LIHTC owner at risk of losing its credit claim.

Thorough documentation of tenants&#x27; eligibility is required and records must be maintained for each qualified tenant. Records from the first year of participation in the LIHTC Program must be maintained for 21 years from the date the tax return claiming these credits was filed including all extensions, and subsequent years&#x27; records must be maintained for 6 years from the date the tax return claiming the applicable credits was filed including all extensions. [Section 1.42-5(b)(vii)(2)][2]

Owners must report on the compliance status of the LIHTC property at least annually to the State Allocation Agency from which it received its credit allocation. [Section 1.42-5(c)][3] At least annually, State Allocation Agencies are required to monitor and inspect the LIHTC properties in which it has allocated credits. Any discovered or suspected noncompliance must be reported to the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) using IRS Form 8823. State Allocation Agencies must follow very specific requirements for monitoring, inspecting and reporting as laid out by the IRS. [Section 1.42-5 and Federal Register: January 14, 2000 (Volume 65, Number 10) – Compliance Monitoring and Miscellaneous Issues Relating to the Low-Income Housing Credit] [4]

Owners and their management agents are strongly encouraged and in some cases mandated by their State Allocation Agencies to become certified compliance professionals. Certifications can be obtained by several LIHTC industry groups. Certifications include the National Compliance Professional (NCP), the Site Compliance Specialist (SCS), the Housing Credit Certified Professional (HCCP), the Specialist in Housing Credit Management (SHCM), and the Certified Credit Compliance Professional (C3P). Certifications requirements usually include an Education and Experience Requirement. The Education Requirement is met by successfully passing an industry exam and accruing the applicable number of required course hours. The Experience Requirements vary among designations. All designations also contain a continuing education component to ensure certified professionals maintain their knowledge and keep abreast of the LIHTC Program changes.

==2008 Financial Crisis Impact on LIHTC==

Under law, the only investors eligible for Low-Income Housing Tax Credit (LIHTC) investments are large C corporations. As the financial markets deteriorated in the second half of 2008, so did the C corporations’ profits that are typically offset by tax credits, like the LIHTC. As a result, the market for LIHTCs was decimated. The development of new tax credit properties and rehabilitation activities for older affordable housing properties froze completely.

Congress took action in February 2009 to help restart the LIHTC market. The American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 created two gap-financing programs to help tax credit properties, which were ready to begin construction, get additional financing.

First, Title XII of the Recovery Act appropriated $2.25 billion to the HOME Investment Partnerships (HOME) Program—administered by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD)—for a grant program to provide funds for capital investments in LIHTC projects. HUD awarded Tax Credit Assistance Program (TCAP) grants to state housing credit agencies to facilitate development of projects that received LIHTC awards between October 1, 2006, and September 30, 2009. The State housing agencies were allowed to offer the assistance in either a grant or loan form to the properties.

Second, Section 1602 of the Recovery Act allowed State housing agencies to elect to receive cash grants instead of the tax credits for up to 40% of the State’s LIHTC allocation. The Department of Treasury estimated outlay to States was $3 billion for 2009. State housing agencies were required to use a grant to make sub-awards to finance the acquisition or construction of qualified low-income buildings, generally subject to the LIHTC requirements discussed (including rent, income, and use restrictions on such buildings). The Section 1602 program was applicable to LIHTC awards made between October 1, 2006, and September 30, 2009. Recent Congressional legislation proposed expanding this program to 2010 housing credits (see below).

In the latter part of 2010, the market stabilized as non-traditional investors began to back fill the investment gap. LIHTC advocates rallied around legislative proposals to ensure that investment remained stable in both the short-term and in the future. Harvard University&#x27;s Joint Center for Housing Studies and the Massachusetts Institute of Technology&#x27;s Center for Real Estate have identified potential opportunities on which to improve the LIHTC to make it more efficient.

==Legislation Impacting LIHTC==

===The 2018 Omnibus Spending Bill===

The passage of the Consolidated Appropriations Act of 2018 (H.R.1625) increased the LIHTC state allocation by 12.5% beginning in 2018 and lasting until 2021. This increase was not extended beyond the fiscal year 2021. 

===The Affordable Housing Credit Improvement Act (AHCIA)===

First introduced in 2016 by Senator Maria Cantwell (D-WA), Orrin Hatch (R-UT), and Chuck Schumer (D-NY), the AHCIA contains provisions to modify the Low-Income Housing Tax Credit. Among the provisions are an increase in the LIHTC state allocation and credit bonuses for developments serving veterans, rural areas, native communities, and extremely low-income individuals. The AHCIA has been reintroduced in each subsequent Congress in both the Senate and House. 

Since its original introduction, three key provisions of the AHCIA have been enacted: a minimum 4 percent Housing Credit rate in 2020, a 12.5 percent allocation increase in 2018 (which expired in 2021), and “income averaging,” which allows properties to serve tenants with a broader range of incomes, in 2018. 

===Tax Relief for American Families and Workers Act of 2024===

In January 2024, the U.S. House of Representatives passed the Tax Relief for American Families and Workers Act of 2024 by a vote of 357-70, which includes provisions impacting Section 42 of the U.S. Tax Code, the law governing LIHTC. The legislation would restore an expired 12.5% allocation increase to each state’s Housing Credit ceiling and reduce the proportion of tax-exempt private activity bond financing required for projects to earn four percent LIHTCs from 50% to 30%. These provisions were derived from the Affordable Housing Credit Improvement Act, bipartisan legislation to expand and strengthen LIHTC. The two LIHTC provisions included in the Tax Relief for American Families and Workers Act of 2024 would expire at the end of 2025 unless extended and are estimated to finance the production or preservation of over 200,000 new affordable rental homes. 

==Evaluations and Studies==
In 2010, the President&#x27;s Economic Recovery Advisory Board (PERAB) estimated that the LIHTC program would cost the federal government $61 billion (an average of about $6 billion per year) in lost tax revenue from participating corporations from 2008-2017, as well as noting that experts believe that vouchers would more cost-effectively help low income households.

A 2018 report by the GAO covering the years 2011-2015 found that the LIHTC program financed about 50,000 low-income rental units annually, with median costs per unit for new construction ranging from $126,000 in Texas to $326,000 in California.

Some other notable findings were that:
*the range of per-unit costs varied dramatically, with Georgia having the lowest variance ($104,000) between the least expensive per-unit cost and the most expensive per-unit cost, while California had the highest variance of $606,000. (Meaning that the per-unit cost in California varied from about $140,000 to about $750,000.)
*larger projects (&gt;100 units) were about $85,000 less expensive per-unit than smaller (&lt;37 units) projects
*urban projects cost about $13,000 more per-unit than non-urban projects
*projects for senior tenants (about a third of all projects) cost about $7,000 less per unit (possibly because of smaller unit sizes
A 2022 study found that LIHTC projects increase land value in surrounding neighborhoods.

A 2018 Urban Institute report criticized the program&#x27;s lack of permanent affordability requirements and questioned whether it fully meets the needs of the poorest households.

==See also==

*United States Department of Housing and Urban Development
*United States Department of Treasury
*Internal Revenue Service
*Internal Revenue Code
*:Category:Housing finance agencies of the United States 
*Tax Reform Act of 1986
*HUD USER
*Regulatory Barriers Clearinghouse

==External links==
*Office of Housing and Urban Development
*List of State Housing Finance Agencies
*HUD USER LIHTC Database
*National Council of State Housing Agencies
*LIHTC Tax Code
*Novogradac &amp; Co. LIHTC Database
*National Equity Fund LIHTC

==Notes==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6692710" start="4" end="33" title="Low-Income Housing Tax Credit" label="Low-Income Housing Tax Credit"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="70" end="83" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062630" start="96" end="107" title="Tax credit" label="tax credits"/>
<link wikidata="Q16326070" start="273" end="295" title="Tax Reform Act of 1986" label="Tax Reform Act of 1986"/>
<link wikidata="Q476115" start="330" end="344" title="private equity" label="private equity"/>
<link wikidata="Q123460415" start="359" end="377" title="Affordable housing in the U.S." label="affordable housing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144772" start="1163" end="1212" title="President&amp;#x27;s Economic Recovery Advisory Board" label="President&amp;#x27;s Economic Recovery Advisory Board"/>
<link wikidata="Q3569700" start="1459" end="1467" title="Section 8 (housing)" label="vouchers"/>
<link wikidata="Q749118" start="1647" end="1650" title="Government Accountability Office" label="GAO"/>
<link wikidata="Q1498804" start="2328" end="2347" title="multi-family residential" label="multifamily housing"/>
<link wikidata="Q123460415" start="2563" end="2581" title="Affordable housing in the U.S." label="affordable housing"/>
<link wikidata="Q221096" start="4923" end="4950" title="public-private partnerships" label="public-private partnerships"/>
<link wikidata="Q476115" start="4995" end="5009" title="private equity" label="private equity"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6696" end="6726" title="Housing Finance Agencies" label="State housing finance agencies"/>
<link wikidata="Q973587" start="10830" end="10854" title="Internal Revenue Service" label="Internal Revenue Service"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19158" end="19171" title="C corporation" label="C corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q123460415" start="19468" end="19486" title="Affordable housing in the U.S." label="affordable housing"/>
<link wikidata="Q811595" start="19908" end="19956" title="U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development" label="U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development"/>
<link wikidata="Q7689369" start="20055" end="20084" title="Tax Credit Assistance Program" label="Tax Credit Assistance Program"/>
<link wikidata="Q124607810" start="22842" end="22898" title="Tax Relief for American Families and Workers Act" label="Tax Relief for American Families and Workers Act of 2024"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144772" start="23690" end="23739" title="President&amp;#x27;s Economic Recovery Advisory Board" label="President&amp;#x27;s Economic Recovery Advisory Board"/>
<link wikidata="Q3569700" start="23981" end="23989" title="Section 8 (housing)" label="vouchers"/>
<link wikidata="Q749118" start="24068" end="24071" title="Government Accountability Office" label="GAO"/>
<link wikidata="Q811595" start="25266" end="25323" title="United States Department of Housing and Urban Development" label="United States Department of Housing and Urban Development"/>
<link wikidata="Q648666" start="25325" end="25361" title="United States Department of Treasury" label="United States Department of Treasury"/>
<link wikidata="Q973587" start="25363" end="25387" title="Internal Revenue Service" label="Internal Revenue Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q1666281" start="25389" end="25410" title="Internal Revenue Code" label="Internal Revenue Code"/>
<link wikidata="" start="25412" end="25467" title=":Category:Housing finance agencies of the United States" label=":Category:Housing finance agencies of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q16326070" start="25470" end="25492" title="Tax Reform Act of 1986" label="Tax Reform Act of 1986"/>
<link wikidata="Q5636171" start="25494" end="25502" title="HUD USER" label="HUD USER"/>
<link wikidata="Q7309682" start="25504" end="25537" title="Regulatory Barriers Clearinghouse" label="Regulatory Barriers Clearinghouse"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="461244" wikidata="Q3276539" url="?curid=461244" title="R.O.D the TV">
<text>R.O.D the TV is a Japanese anime television series, animated by J.C.Staff and produced by Aniplex, directed by Koji Masunari and scripted by Hideyuki Kurata. It is about the adventures of three paper-manipulating sisters, Michelle, Maggie and Anita, who become the bodyguards of Nenene Sumiregawa, a famous Japanese writer. Featuring music by Taku Iwasaki, the series is a sequel to the &quot;Read or Die&quot; OVA. Its official title of &quot;R.O.D the TV&quot; is a catch-all acronym referring to the inclusion of characters from both &quot;Read or Die&quot; (the light novels, manga and OVA) and the &quot;Read or Dream&quot; manga, the latter of which revolves solely around the Paper Sisters. Promotional material for &quot;R.O.D the TV&quot; implies that the show revolves around the three sisters of &quot;Read or Dream&quot;; however, Nenene Sumiregawa of &quot;Read or Die&quot; is also considered a protagonist.

&quot;R.O.D the TV&quot; was broadcast for 26 episodes from October 1, 2003, to March 16, 2004, on pay-per-view satellite television platform SKY PerfecTV!. It also aired across the terrestrial Fuji Television station from October 15, 2003, to March 18, 2004. It was also broadcast worldwide by the anime satellite television network, Animax.

The series was first distributed on DVD in North America by Geneon, in seven discs; the company finished releasing the series in summer 2005. Aniplex of America re-released the original Read or Die episodes and the TV series on Blu-ray in Winter 2010/2011.

==Plot==

The series begins in 2006, five years after the &quot;I-Jin&quot; incident detailed in the &quot;Read or Die&quot; OVA. Yomiko Readman (a.k.a. &quot;The Paper&quot;, agent of British Library Task Force) has supposedly gone missing, and Nenene Sumiregawa, her former student and best friend, is still in Tokyo after her parents moved to the United States. Nenene has not written a book since Yomiko disappeared, as she has become lonely and frustrated that her sensei has never read her last book, and she feels she cannot write again until she hears Yomiko&#x27;s reaction to the book, so Nenene often disappears for long periods of time searching for Yomiko, and has been periodically doing so ever since her &quot;disappearance&quot;.

During a trip to Hong Kong, Nenene meets the three sisters, Michelle, Maggie and Anita (from the &quot;Read or Dream&quot; manga), who are supposed to take care of her during her visit. However, the hotel at which Nenene is supposed to stay at is bombed, and at a press conference Nenene is briefly held hostage by a jealous rival in her industry. The three sisters end up becoming her bodyguards and join her back to Tokyo.

Each sister has paper manipulation skills similar to Yomiko, although less powerful and more focused in scope. After the initial action-filled adventure, the first several episodes take on the feel of an odd-couple comedy which focuses on tension between Nenene and the sisters, who move into her apartment and mooch off her, all while dealing with various crazies and psychos in their everyday lives. The sisters also perform odd jobs as agents of the Dokusensha (ostensibly a Chinese publishing company, but more like an Illuminati-type organization focusing on the collection of rare and powerful documents). This eventually puts them and Nenene in direct conflict with the British Library and the protagonists of &quot;Read or Die&quot; (Dokusensha is established as the British Library&#x27;s rival in the &quot;Read or Die&quot; manga).

Events grow more serious as the series progresses as atrocities are committed by both sides, thrusting the main characters into the middle of a conflict between literary superpowers, the British Library and Dokusensha, who are both trying to collect ancient artifacts (books, of course) to control the entire world and even rewrite history. After a horrific collision between the two superpowers, Nenene and the Paper Sisters set out to find the missing Yomiko to learn the truth about the conflict and save the world from literary terrorism.

==Characters==

===Main characters===
&quot;The Paper Sisters&quot; names seem to be derived from those of three real Hong Kong action stars: Maggie Cheung, Anita Mui, and Michelle Yeoh (who has also been credited as &quot;Michelle Khan&quot;). These three actresses starred together in the 1993 movie &quot;The Heroic Trio&quot; as the titular super-powered heroines. Alternatively, a possible reference is Hong Kong actress Michelle Reis, whose surname means &quot;king&quot; in Portuguese (her father being Portuguese).
;
: The youngest sister is a spitfire who specializes in using her paper offensively (by using paper &quot;blades&quot; and throwing index cards like shuriken), but she also relies upon her impressive physical martial arts skills in combat. Unlike all other known Paper Masters, she dislikes books (but is obsessed with collecting frogs and drinking milk). Although Anita sometimes acts bratty and self-important, she deeply loves her sisters. She frequently fights with Nenene, who is equally outspoken, but beneath their squabbles, they demonstrate a strong bond through the series. She is well liked in her class and is especially admired by classmate named Hisami Hishiishi (whom Anita nicknames &quot;Hisa&quot;). Hisa compares the two to the main characters with an extremely close friendship in &quot;Anne of Green Gables&quot;. Like Maggie, she is also flat chested but unlike the latter; she mostly resembles an elementary school student-(especially in height).
; Ma-nee
: A tall, boyish, quiet wallflower with somewhat depressed looks, her power usually manifests as familiars – beings she controls made of paper; her sisters also rely on her for her strong defensive capabilities. She is known for being easily embarrassed and enjoying tight cosy spots to relax in (which is why she sleeps in the closet). Michelle says her favourite author is Ernest Hemingway, but Maggie quickly points out that she likes Nenene&#x27;s works too. She strongly looks up to her older sister, Michelle, and compares herself negatively to her. She cares for her sisters and always tries to protect them at the expense of her own safety. Anita believes Maggie to be strongest Paper Sister in combat. Because of her masculine appearance; including her flat chest, she strongly resembles a teenage boy.
; Mi-nee
: The oldest sister, generally considered the leader and strategist of the three. She has a cheerful, apparently ditzy personality. Her favourite books are the &quot;Harry Potter&quot; series, and she has a soft spot for cute things and small children. She is almost supernaturally calm, and her enemies find it difficult to manipulate her emotions; their enemy Webber notes her emotional balance makes her resistant to his sonic tortures. Michelle manifests her paper powers primarily through ranged weapons, such as bows and arrows. Michelle&#x27;s love of books almost matches that of Yomiko&#x27;s; when she arrives in Japan, Michelle buys out so many book stores that people begin to speculate Yomiko has returned.
; Sensei, Nene-nee-san
: A prodigy novelist in her high school years, usually referred to as sensei and originally featured in the Read or Die manga as a teenage friend of the older Yomiko. She is often frustrated with Yomiko&#x27;s obsession with books – and later the Paper Sisters when they move into her home – and chides her for being absentminded, leaving post-its in her room. Since Yomiko&#x27;s disappearance, she has become very self-sufficient but unfortunately wistful, cranky and bitter at times in her loneliness. She remained in Japan, despite her parents&#x27; move to the United States, in order to housekeep and tend to Yomiko&#x27;s personal effects until her (presumed) return.

===Characters from &quot;Read or Die&quot;===
;
: The former &quot;Agent Paper&quot; of the British Library, and Nenene&#x27;s close friend, does not appear until episode 15 of the series, with only the vague suggestion before she appears of something terrible happening to her around the same time the British Library was destroyed. Yomiko&#x27;s abilities and power as a papermaster are far greater than those of the Paper Sisters, as she does not seem as limited to one form of use for her powers, whereas Anita, Maggie and Michelle all have one speciality.
;
: She is the second I-Jin clone of Mata Hari that Yomiko met in the R.O.D OVA. At the end of the original series, Nancy suffered extensive brain damage as a result of oxygen deprivation; the result was that her mental state was reduced to that of a child, with no memories of her earlier actions. Desperate to protect her, Yomiko took Nancy and ran off into hiding. When introduced in the TV series, Nancy&#x27;s personality is that of a young girl, far from the femme fatale she was before she was injured.
;
: An American munitions expert, frequently hired by the British Library for mercenary work. Anderson has no superpowers, but is well trained and good with weapons. A weapon of sorts he wields is his knowledge of papermasters, being more knowledgeable than most when pitted against them. He is a sarcastic realist who tries to keep situations calm and professional, although sometimes he is overwhelmed by the eccentric, super-human people around him. He has a young daughter named Maggie, but with no relation to the aforementioned papermaster. Probably because of his daughter, he is less ruthless than a soldier like him would otherwise be (i.e., when he fights the three sisters he does not try to murder them, and he refuses to kill children, such as Anita).
;
: The head of the British Library Special Operations Unit and Yomiko&#x27;s former boss. He took control of the organization after the death of the Gentleman and is now often referred to as &quot;Mr. Carpenter.&quot; Compared to his appearance in the OVA, his face seems a bit more lined from stress (and possibly age), and he now walks with the assistance of a cane. Initially, Joker appears as calm, reassuring, and easy-going as ever, but as the series progresses he gets more violent and high-strung, revealed to be an elitist who holds the same &quot;human selection&quot; principles as the I-Jin (the villains of the OVA). Disappointed by the decline of British global influence following the Gentleman&#x27;s death, Joker implements a scheme to regain control of the world, no matter the human cost. At the end of the TV Series, he is seen recovering from a comatose state after being &quot;force-fed&quot; part of Mr. Gentleman&#x27;s information during the execution of Operation Sleeping Books.
;
: Seen in the manga and OVA as Joker&#x27;s office secretary and junior agent of British Library Special Operations, she now serves as his right hand henchwoman. Wendy&#x27;s character has matured radically, from an enthusiastic, if clumsy, over-eager young assistant into a serious, ruthless agent willing to fulfil the British Library&#x27;s plans by any means necessary. She is highly resentful of Yomiko (whereas she adored her in the OVA and manga), likely due to events laid out through the course of the TV series, and she is one of the few British Library personnel fully aware of Joker&#x27;s plans.
: Seen in the OVA, now deceased. He was the head of the British Library and the true source of Britain&#x27;s secret power over global affairs (i.e., it was because of Gentleman that Joker had the authority over the U.S. President in the OVA). In the TV series, the British Library made efforts to revive him with the purpose of reviving the British Empire. Operation Sleeping Books was launched as a last resort, where the British Library used the concept of &quot;Skin Print&quot; to record his human genome into paper and separated it into 7 books. Once an appropriate body/host was found, these books would have been transmitted to the host so that Gentleman may be reborn in a new body. The seven books are:
:# The Book of Forlorn Blood
:# The Book of Pulsing Flesh
:# The Book of Powerful Arms
:# The Book of Trotting Legs
:# The Book of Rising Intellect
:# The Book of Supporting Bones
:# The Book of The All-Seeing Eye

===New, major and minor characters===
;
: Joker&#x27;s youngest henchman and extremely violent assassin, Junior is a mysterious, effeminate young boy about Anita King&#x27;s own age who is a highly skilled master marksman and secret agent working confidentially under the British Library&#x27;s Special Operations Division. While on missions for Joker, he is referred to as Agent J and usually carries out dangerous and difficult missions using his physical intellect and martial arts, stealth, and his power of , which is later revealed to be a trait he inherited from his mother.
:As an agent, Junior is highly adept at deceiving his enemies, comparable to Joker, Junior&#x27;s enigmatic boss. While he is efficient as an agent, he somewhat lacks the ruthlessness of his legal caretakers, Joe Carpenter (Joker) and Wendy Earhart, or his father, Ikkyu Sojun. Extremely reserved and emotionally distant, he is easily drawn to those who show him kindness, which can explain his deep attraction towards the Paper Sisters whom he befriends later on. Because he was raised by a Government agency, he is socially inept and his withdrawn demeanor and inexperience with friendship and love hints at a lonely upbringing. After meeting Anita King in the Nishihama middle school, he becomes less aloof and he begins to develop a sense of individuality.
: Late in the series, Junior is revealed to be the child of two I-jin, Nancy Makuhari and the deceased Ikkyū Sōjun, and the tool in Joker&#x27;s scheme. As the son of two great, though distinct beings, whose intellect and physiology is deemed as superior above all other humans, Joker considers him as &quot;the perfect vessel&quot;; hence Joker is keen to train him as an agent and later as a medium for resurrecting The Gentleman, an ancient man of power beyond knowledge. Because of the I-jin&#x27;s sudden extinction, which took place five years earlier before the TV series and nine months prior to his birth, it could be said that Junior and his mother are the last of the I-jin.
;
: Nenene Sumiregawa&#x27;s editor, who hired the Paper Sisters to guard her early on in the series. Usually very calm, despite apparently having recently given up smoking (evidenced by chewing a red pen, also a tool of his profession). Seemingly minor at first, he plays a bigger and darker role as the scope of Dokusensha&#x27;s plans – for Nenene in particular – is revealed. Nenene gives him a Zippo lighter, which eventually returns to the giver along with important information.
; or 
: A carrier pigeon used by Mr. Kim to send messages and assignments to the Paper Sisters. The sisters name him after the famous Chinese film director, one of whose trademarks is the use of doves to highlight dramatic moments. The pigeon demands respect and pecks Maggie when she forgets to call him &quot;-san&quot; (&quot;Mr.&quot;). It is unclear then, exactly how the pigeon communicates, as Mr. Lee tells him to &quot;shut up&quot; even though the bird did not vocalize anything. While originally serving Dokusensha, Mr. Woo remains a &quot;friend&quot; to the Three Sisters throughout the series.
;
: A Dokusensha operative who hands the sisters their mission briefings; Michelle refers to him as their &quot;handler.&quot; He can usually be seen overseeing these missions from a safe distance away. Sonny Wong is often with him. During the &quot;Twilight of the Papers,&quot; Mr. Kim disappears during the conflict in Dokusensha headquarters, only to turn up much later as a minor employee for the British Library.
; &quot;The Recycler&quot;
: A Paper Master employed by Dokusensha. He is mysterious, wearing sunglasses and a large coat that conceal most of his face, and he never speaks. He is physically strong. He has no qualms about killing people to achieve his goals. He challenges the Paper Sisters during &quot;Twilight of the Papers&quot; episodes and proves stronger than all three combined, even capable of ripping Maggie&#x27;s familiars apart with his hands, and he only meets his fate after Maggie successfully manages to fight him defensively until he is engulfed in a sea of ink released when a series of explosives in the building go off.
;
: An enthusiast and supporter of the British Empire. After the fire incident in the British library, he was entrusted by the British library to guard &quot;The Book of Pulsating Flesh.&quot; He lives in a Romanian castle together with his faithful servant, Irving. The castle exterior and interior were specially design to detect disturbance from a certain distance and at the same time emit frequency on its own. As shown in TV series, he is an expert in sound and frequency where he uses a special pipe organ (also known as a frequency organ) to transmit various frequency to control mammals, manipulate people&#x27;s emotions and create a semi-visible shield to protect himself. He holds a grudge against Yomiko Readman since she was responsible for the fire in the British Library. Though he proves to be a challenge to the Paper Sisters, he is defeated when the Paper Sisters create a paper &quot;silencer&quot; field which allows them to bypass his protection field.
;Alice Alice Arquette &quot;Triple A&quot;
: Former archaeologist from British Museum and onsen freak. She was a British library agent whose mission was to retrieve the &quot;Key&quot; to activate the Sleeping Books, hidden in an ancient storeroom under a hot spring mountain built by her family. She was killed without mercy while surrendering by Sonny Wong, angering Drake, Nenene, and the Paper Sisters (despite the fact that Wong was technically there to help the Sisters), and Drake attempts to avenge her death.
;
: Another British Library agent believed to have gone rogue, who happened to meet Anita at her junior high school. He is hunted down by the British Library, who sent Junior to kill him and retrieve the book. He asks Anita to hide one of Mr Gentleman’s books when Junior shoots him. Before Anita and her sisters return to Hong Kong, she returns the book to Richard, who is recuperating in the hospital. After she leaves, however, Junior phases through a wall and takes the book, leaving Richard either unconscious or dead.
;
: A famous and an intelligent actor in theatrical circle, turned British Library agent. Dokusensha believes he sold the book entrusted to him by the British Library and used the money to build a town where the population were dedicated to his acting. Their efforts to divert the Paper Sisters from their mission to find the Sleeping Books are frighteningly effective. The town however is effectively wiped off the map afterwards by the Dokusensha. It is also important to note that the term &quot;John Smith&quot; means someone who remains nameless like Joe Bloggs or John Q. Public, this fact plays a vital role in uncovering who exactly he is in his episode.
;
: The President of the United States. Throughout the series he supports Joker&#x27;s plans with the understanding that the United States would be the leading nation in the new world order Gentleman would bring about when resurrected. When he learns that it will be the United Kingdom, not the United States, to lead the new world order, he attempts to attack the UK only to have his forces destroyed. He is probably the same U.S. President shown in the &quot;Read or Die&quot; OVA, as he speaks with a Texan accent and when faced with adversity wets himself.

==Reception==
The series was positively received. Enoch Lau of THEM Anime Reviews argued that the series had a &quot;refreshing concept&quot; of an &quot;ultra-cool&quot; female protagonist as a bookworm, said it is like a &quot;good mystery novel&quot; with some filler episodes, and stated that Maggie reminded him of Sakaki in &quot;Azumanga Daioh&quot;. Lau added that the paper fights are &quot;cool&quot;, while praising the animation, art, detail, and character design, but criticized it occasional inconsistent pacing. Carlos and Giancarla Ross of the same publication argued that the series is a &quot;more exciting and interesting tour of the world of library sciences&quot; than &quot;Kokoro Library&quot;. Timothy Donohoo of CBR praised the series as perfect for bookworms and writers, arguing that it has an &quot;interesting&quot; take on writer&#x27;s block, and called it a classic series which is &quot;one for the books.&quot; Theron Martin of Anime News Network compared the OVA and anime series, noting the &quot;contrast...in focus and tone&quot;, and said the anime series is more about relationships between the characters than the OVA. He added that the OVA and TV series together tell a &quot;complete tale that can be a lot of fun to watch.&quot; 

Caitlin Donnovan of &quot;The Mary Sue&quot; praised the series for having female superheroes with &quot;amazing powers based on literature&quot;, and said that while the series can be &quot;heartwrenching&quot;, it is, in her view, absurd and &quot;over-the-top sci-fi superhero fun&quot;. She also praised the action scenes, storyline, and being about &quot;hardcore ladies kicking ass with the power of literacy,&quot; but noted some fan service, gory deaths, torture, stereotypical Chinese characters, and sexualized female characters. Charles Webb of MTV said the series was the only anime series &quot;made for both bibliophiles and action fans alike.&quot; John Sinnott of DVD Talk reviewed the first four episodes and argued that it had a &quot;good amount of humor, some action, and very good dramatic moments&quot;. Yuricon founder, Erica Friedman, argued that the series was the &quot;standout anime&quot; in 2003, praised the intense and high-powered action in the first episode, switching between &quot;shounen and shoujo style writing&quot;, and called it the &quot;most finely crafted anime&quot; she had seen, and argued that the protagonists have yuri feelings, and noted this is strongest between Anita and her school friend Hisami.

==Other media==
*Dōjin game studio Easy Game Station created the side-scrolling video game &quot;ElePaper Action&quot; based on the series.
*The Three Paper Sisters appeared in the cross-over game &quot;Battle Moon Wars&quot; as enemies, renamed as Anipon, Maggipon and Mipon.

==Notes==
==References==
==External links==
*R.O.D -THE TV- Official Japanese site
*Geneon&#x27;s official &quot;R.O.D. the TV&quot; website
*Madman Entertainment&#x27;s official &quot;R.O.D. the TV&quot; website
*Aniplex USA&#x27;s official &quot;Read or Die/ROD the TV&quot; website</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1107" start="27" end="32" title="anime" label="anime"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065717" start="64" end="73" title="J.C.Staff" label="J.C.Staff"/>
<link wikidata="Q770328" start="90" end="97" title="Aniplex" label="Aniplex"/>
<link wikidata="Q11613563" start="111" end="124" title="Koji Masunari" label="Koji Masunari"/>
<link wikidata="Q3257700" start="141" end="156" title="Hideyuki Kurata" label="Hideyuki Kurata"/>
<link wikidata="Q488184" start="194" end="212" title="Papermaster" label="paper-manipulating"/>
<link wikidata="Q6595328" start="279" end="296" title="Nenene Sumiregawa" label="Nenene Sumiregawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1341491" start="343" end="355" title="Taku Iwasaki" label="Taku Iwasaki"/>
<link wikidata="Q7300408" start="393" end="404" title="Read or Die (OVA)" label="Read or Die"/>
<link wikidata="Q220898" start="411" end="414" title="Original video animation" label="OVA"/>
<link wikidata="Q488184" start="543" end="554" title="Read or Die" label="Read or Die"/>
<link wikidata="Q747381" start="566" end="577" title="light novel" label="light novel"/>
<link wikidata="Q8274" start="580" end="585" title="manga" label="manga"/>
<link wikidata="Q3544694" start="609" end="622" title="Read or Dream" label="Read or Dream"/>
<link wikidata="Q6595328" start="843" end="860" title="Nenene Sumiregawa" label="Nenene Sumiregawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q215972" start="909" end="920" title="protagonist" label="protagonist"/>
<link wikidata="Q851440" start="1022" end="1034" title="pay-per-view" label="pay-per-view"/>
<link wikidata="Q209588" start="1035" end="1055" title="satellite television" label="satellite television"/>
<link wikidata="Q4382365" start="1065" end="1078" title="SKY PerfecTV!" label="SKY PerfecTV!"/>
<link wikidata="Q175122" start="1105" end="1116" title="terrestrial television" label="terrestrial"/>
<link wikidata="Q744800" start="1117" end="1132" title="Fuji Television" label="Fuji Television"/>
<link wikidata="Q209588" start="1228" end="1248" title="satellite television" label="satellite television"/>
<link wikidata="Q161405" start="1258" end="1264" title="Animax" label="Animax"/>
<link wikidata="Q1205595" start="1327" end="1333" title="Geneon" label="Geneon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7300408" start="1453" end="1464" title="Read or Die (OVA)" label="Read or Die"/>
<link wikidata="Q47770" start="1495" end="1502" title="Blu-ray" label="Blu-ray"/>
<link wikidata="Q7300408" start="1626" end="1653" title="Read or Die (OVA)" label="&amp;quot;Read or Die&amp;quot; OVA"/>
<link wikidata="Q8054856" start="1655" end="1669" title="Yomiko Readman" label="Yomiko Readman"/>
<link wikidata="Q6595328" start="1771" end="1788" title="Nenene Sumiregawa" label="Nenene Sumiregawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1490" start="1838" end="1843" title="Tokyo" label="Tokyo"/>
<link wikidata="Q678928" start="1995" end="2001" title="sensei" label="sensei"/>
<link wikidata="Q8646" start="2290" end="2299" title="Hong Kong" label="Hong Kong"/>
<link wikidata="Q3544694" start="2376" end="2389" title="Read or Dream" label="Read or Dream"/>
<link wikidata="Q1490" start="2691" end="2696" title="Tokyo" label="Tokyo"/>
<link wikidata="Q234778" start="4229" end="4242" title="Maggie Cheung" label="Maggie Cheung"/>
<link wikidata="Q232621" start="4244" end="4253" title="Anita Mui" label="Anita Mui"/>
<link wikidata="Q214289" start="4259" end="4272" title="Michelle Yeoh" label="Michelle Yeoh"/>
<link wikidata="Q245817" start="4395" end="4410" title="The Heroic Trio" label="The Heroic Trio"/>
<link wikidata="Q717070" start="4513" end="4526" title="Michelle Reis" label="Michelle Reis"/>
<link wikidata="Q565911" start="5418" end="5438" title="Anne of Green Gables" label="Anne of Green Gables"/>
<link wikidata="Q23434" start="5965" end="5981" title="Ernest Hemingway" label="Ernest Hemingway"/>
<link wikidata="Q8337" start="6577" end="6589" title="Harry Potter" label="Harry Potter"/>
<link wikidata="Q19827042" start="6929" end="6932" title="bow (weapon)" label="bow"/>
<link wikidata="Q45922" start="6938" end="6943" title="arrow" label="arrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q488184" start="7262" end="7273" title="Read or Die" label="Read or Die"/>
<link wikidata="Q23308" start="8133" end="8148" title="British Library" label="British Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q488184" start="8203" end="8214" title="papermaster" label="papermaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q82180" start="8428" end="8437" title="Mata Hari" label="Mata Hari"/>
<link wikidata="Q720026" start="8532" end="8544" title="brain damage" label="brain damage"/>
<link wikidata="Q222573" start="8856" end="8868" title="femme fatale" label="femme fatale"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="8908" end="8916" title="United States" label="American"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047698" start="9011" end="9022" title="Superpower (ability)" label="superpowers"/>
<link wikidata="Q3882219" start="12307" end="12315" title="assassination" label="assassin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3529376" start="12425" end="12433" title="marksman" label="marksman"/>
<link wikidata="Q165950" start="12445" end="12450" title="espionage" label="agent"/>
<link wikidata="Q23308" start="12484" end="12499" title="British Library" label="British Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q6595328" start="13003" end="13016" title="Joe Carpenter (R.O.D)" label="Joe Carpenter"/>
<link wikidata="Q467613" start="13059" end="13070" title="Ikkyu Sojun" label="Ikkyu Sojun"/>
<link wikidata="Q327333" start="13286" end="13303" title="Government agency" label="Government agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q467613" start="13658" end="13669" title="Ikkyū Sōjun" label="Ikkyū Sōjun"/>
<link wikidata="Q205533" start="14640" end="14645" title="Zippo" label="Zippo"/>
<link wikidata="Q55432" start="14854" end="14882" title="John Woo" label="famous Chinese film director"/>
<link wikidata="Q655311" start="17460" end="17465" title="onsen" label="onsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q104861860" start="19700" end="19718" title="THEM Anime Reviews" label="THEM Anime Reviews"/>
<link wikidata="Q214719" start="19832" end="19840" title="bookworm" label="bookworm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1358248" start="19901" end="19907" title="Filler (media)" label="filler"/>
<link wikidata="Q80873" start="19973" end="19987" title="Azumanga Daioh" label="Azumanga Daioh"/>
<link wikidata="Q2988151" start="20333" end="20347" title="Kokoro Library" label="Kokoro Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q2985197" start="20374" end="20377" title="Comic Book Resources" label="CBR"/>
<link wikidata="Q178927" start="20490" end="20509" title="writer&amp;#x27;s block" label="writer&amp;#x27;s block"/>
<link wikidata="Q220509" start="20599" end="20617" title="Anime News Network" label="Anime News Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q15505371" start="20938" end="20950" title="The Mary Sue" label="The Mary Sue"/>
<link wikidata="Q747359" start="21349" end="21360" title="fan service" label="fan service"/>
<link wikidata="Q43359" start="21468" end="21471" title="MTV" label="MTV"/>
<link wikidata="Q596004" start="21738" end="21745" title="Yuricon" label="Yuricon"/>
<link wikidata="Q320568" start="22076" end="22080" title="yuri (genre)" label="yuri"/>
<link wikidata="Q8012311" start="22181" end="22191" title="Dojin soft" label="Dōjin game"/>
<link wikidata="Q7889" start="22244" end="22254" title="video game" label="video game"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="461246" wikidata="Q51380" url="?curid=461246" title="Publius Cornelius Lentulus Spinther">
<text>Publius Cornelius Lentulus Spinther ( – 47 BC) was a Roman politician and general. Hailing from the patrician family of the Cornelii, he helped suppress the Catilinarian conspiracy during his term as curule aedile in 63 BC and later served as consul in 57 BC. Denied the opportunity to invade Egypt the following year, he nevertheless won some victories in his province of Cilicia and celebrated a triumph over it in 51 BC.

In the run-up to Caesar&#x27;s civil war, he sided with Pompey and the senate. Captured by Caesar and pardoned at Corfinium in the opening months of the war, he made his way to Greece to join Pompey&#x27;s forces. He is last attested to in early 47 BC.

==Early career==
Spinther belonged to the famous patrician gens Cornelia. He was the son of a homonymous father and received the cognomen &quot;Spinther&quot; supposedly from his resemblance to an actor by that name. Lucius Cornelius Lentulus Crus, who served as one of the consuls in the year 49 BC, was his younger brother.

He entered public life in 74 BC, when he served as &quot;quaestor urbanus&quot;. During his office, he minted denarii bearing a picture of Genius Populi Romani, to show the justice of the war waged against Sertorius in Spain. Although the Genius is also found on coins minted by other Cornelii Lentuli, numismatist Michael Crawford doubts that he was particularly worshipped in the family.

Afterwards, in the year 63 BC – the same year as that of Cicero&#x27;s consulship and of the Catilinarian conspiracy – he served as curule aedile. During his term, he assisted Cicero in the suppression of the conspiracy – he held in custody a conspirator and praetor of that year, Publius Cornelius Lentulus Sura, before the conspirator&#x27;s execution – and also provided splendid games &quot;outd[oing] all his predecessors&quot; wherein he outfitted stage equipment with silver.

He was then served as urban praetor for the year 60. He was elected, also in that year, as one of the pontifices, as one of a number of replacement for members of the college who had died. After his praetorship he was assigned as governor of Hispania Citerior, probably with proconsular status, and served there for the year 59. 

==Consul and governor==
In the campaign in 58 BC for the next year&#x27;s consulship, Spinther received the backing of Julius Caesar and Pompey. Caesar had for some time cultivated Spinther&#x27;s friendship by supporting Spinther&#x27;s campaign for the pontificate and his assignment to Hispania Citerior. Elected first, he was then joined in the consulship by Quintus Caecilius Metellus Nepos, a Pompeian enemy.

At the beginning of the consular year, 1 January 57 BC, Spinther moved successfully in the senate – after some convincing of his colleague Nepos who had previously been opposed to the matter – to have Cicero recalled from exile; he then carried a bill through the &quot;comitia centuriata&quot; to that effect and helped Cicero recover his house, which had been dispossessed during his exile. In the autumn, news came to Rome of an Egyptian dynastic struggle, which promised huge financial rewards and prestige for any prospective commander. Spinther, with his colleague Nepos, were successful in having Pompey – known to be interested in the command – relegated to a corn commission. His actions during the year, and thereafter, showed &quot;no strong allegiance to Caesar&quot; nor did Pompey&#x27;s support &quot;forestall unpleasant friction over the restoration of [Ptolemy]&quot;.

Taking as proconsul the governorship of Cilicia – to which the island of Cyprus also had been added – he secured for himself instructions from the senate to intervene in the Egyptian dynastic struggle and restore Ptolemy XII Auletes to the throne, but stopped after a Sibylline oracle prohibited the use of an army. Cicero, in a debate in the senate on 13 January 56 BC, supported Spinther&#x27;s interests and described the debate in a letter:

* The senate voted overwhelmingly against use of military force.
* Publius Servilius Isauricus proposed not restoring Ptolemy XII.
* Bibulus proposed sending three senators without &quot;imperium&quot; to mediate (thereby excluding Pompey).
* Crassus proposed sending three senators with &quot;imperium&quot; to mediate.
* Quintus Hortensius, Cicero, and Marcus Lucullus proposed sending Spinther.
* Lucius Volcacius Tullus, supported by Lucius Afranius and Pompey&#x27;s allies, proposed sending Pompey.

Eventually, Bibulus&#x27; proposal was defeated; Hortensius&#x27; proposal was vetoed by a tribune. After a delay, one tribune – Gaius Porcius Cato – proposed recalling Spinther (already in Cilicia). Another tribune – Lucius Caninius Gallus – proposed sending Pompey. Publius Clodius Pulcher&#x27;s supporters then proposed sending Marcus Licinius Crassus. After the consul Gnaeus Cornelius Lentulus Marcellinus put all tribunician proposals on hold by declaring public holidays; Gaius Cato threatened to veto the elections. Eventually, Isauricus&#x27; proposal received senatorial approval, but was then vetoed. 

In the end, the duelling machinations of Pompey, Crassus, and opponents all countered each other and led to inaction. The actions of the consuls and the contrasting ambitions of Pompey and Crassus, two of the three men in the so-called First Triumvirate, showed their alliance &quot;in a shambles&quot;.

Spinther governed Cilicia from 56 to 54 BC. During his term, he was acclaimed &quot;imperator&quot;. He also struck large silver coins (known as Cistophoric tetradrachms) from a provincial mint at Apameia in Phrygia that bear his name - P LENTVLVS P F IMPERATOR. He returned to Italy in 53 BC but stayed outside the &quot;pomerium&quot; hoping for a triumph. He did so for two years before celebrating it in late 51 BC.

== The civil war ==
In the run-up to Caesar&#x27;s civil war, according to Cassius Dio, Spinther played a role in the rejection of an extension of Caesar&#x27;s term by voting down the insertion of an intercalary month by Gaius Scribonius Curio in 50 BC. In the vote, he allegedly was joined by Lucius Domitius Ahenobarbus and a young Marcus Junius Brutus.

When the war started in 49 BC, Spinther took an anti-Caesarian position quickly and sided with Pompey. He joined Domitius Ahenobarbus&#x27; attempt to engage Caesar at Corfinium with three legions in the early months of the war but was besieged and the two consulars – along with Domitius&#x27; son, one of the quaestors, an ex-praetor, and a Pompeian prefect – were forced to surrender. Caesar granted them their lives and even returned to Domitius, who was in overall command, some six million sesterces; Caesar took, however, all the men and sent them thence to take Sicily.

After some hesitation, he rejoined Pompey and his army in Greece. On his return, Cicero wrote a letter to Caesar thanking him for his generous treatment of Spinther; it seems, privately, Spinther believed Caesar&#x27;s clemency was merely a cold and temporary stratagem which would disappear if Caesar lost the support of the people.

In 48 BC, Pompey&#x27;s main army confronted that of Julius Caesar and his lieutenant Marc Antony at the Battle of Pharsalus. Spinther fought in the battle; it ended in decisive defeat for the Pompeian forces. Pompey himself fled to Egypt (where he was then assassinated by Egypt&#x27;s ruler Ptolemy XIII in the mistaken belief this act would please Caesar) and Spinther escaped to Rhodes, where he was at first refused admission, but subsequently given asylum.

==Death and family==
Although Sextus Aurelius Victor implies Spinther was killed in 48 BC, Cicero&#x27;s dialogue &quot;Brutus&quot; implies that Spinther survived until early 47 with a terminus ante quem of 46 BC. The younger Spinther, like his father, also put his own name and nickname &quot;Spinther&quot; on the reverse of his coins, the obverse of which feature the head of &#x27;Liberty&#x27;.

Spinther&#x27;s wife had an affair with Publius Cornelius Dolabella which lead to their divorce. His wife involved in this scandal was likely Caecilia Metella.

There may also have been some kind of marriage alliance between Spinther and Lucius Aurelius Cotta.

==See also==
* List of Roman consuls

==References==
=== Citations ===
=== Sources ===
* 
* 
** 
* 



== External links ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q51380" start="0" end="35" title="Publius Cornelius Lentulus Spinther" label="Publius Cornelius Lentulus Spinther"/>
<link wikidata="Q154668" start="100" end="109" title="Patrician (ancient Rome)" label="patrician"/>
<link wikidata="Q221312" start="124" end="132" title="Cornelia gens" label="Cornelii"/>
<link wikidata="Q205757" start="200" end="213" title="curule aedile" label="curule aedile"/>
<link wikidata="Q40779" start="243" end="249" title="Roman consul" label="consul"/>
<link wikidata="Q2320005" start="293" end="298" title="Ptolemaic Kingdom" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q620864" start="373" end="380" title="Cilicia" label="Cilicia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1238338" start="442" end="465" title="Caesar&amp;#x27;s civil war" label="Caesar&amp;#x27;s civil war"/>
<link wikidata="Q125414" start="481" end="487" title="Pompey" label="Pompey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048" start="516" end="522" title="Julius Caesar" label="Caesar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2428630" start="539" end="548" title="Corfinium" label="Corfinium"/>
<link wikidata="Q221312" start="743" end="751" title="Cornelia gens" label="Cornelia"/>
<link wikidata="Q521670" start="896" end="926" title="Lucius Cornelius Lentulus Crus" label="Lucius Cornelius Lentulus Crus"/>
<link wikidata="Q189430" start="1063" end="1071" title="quaestor" label="quaestor"/>
<link wikidata="Q187776" start="1116" end="1123" title="Denarius" label="denarii"/>
<link wikidata="Q654361" start="1145" end="1165" title="Genius (mythology)" label="Genius Populi Romani"/>
<link wikidata="Q296238" start="1212" end="1221" title="Quintus Sertorius" label="Sertorius"/>
<link wikidata="Q1927193" start="1321" end="1337" title="Michael Crawford (historian)" label="Michael Crawford"/>
<link wikidata="Q1541" start="1454" end="1460" title="Cicero" label="Cicero"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051202" start="1490" end="1513" title="Catilinarian conspiracy" label="Catilinarian conspiracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q205757" start="1529" end="1542" title="curule aedile" label="curule aedile"/>
<link wikidata="Q366203" start="1678" end="1709" title="Publius Cornelius Lentulus Sura" label="Publius Cornelius Lentulus Sura"/>
<link wikidata="Q13365614" start="1983" end="1993" title="Pontiff" label="pontifices"/>
<link wikidata="Q1126678" start="2123" end="2140" title="Hispania Citerior" label="Hispania Citerior"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048" start="2331" end="2344" title="Julius Caesar" label="Julius Caesar"/>
<link wikidata="Q125414" start="2349" end="2355" title="Pompey" label="Pompey"/>
<link wikidata="Q704362" start="2575" end="2607" title="Quintus Caecilius Metellus Nepos (consul 57 BC)" label="Quintus Caecilius Metellus Nepos"/>
<link wikidata="Q130614" start="2719" end="2725" title="Roman Senate" label="senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1541" start="2829" end="2835" title="Cicero" label="Cicero"/>
<link wikidata="Q1114852" start="2898" end="2916" title="comitia centuriata" label="comitia centuriata"/>
<link wikidata="Q2912782" start="3526" end="3535" title="proconsul" label="proconsul"/>
<link wikidata="Q620864" start="3556" end="3563" title="Cilicia" label="Cilicia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2967757" start="3589" end="3595" title="Roman Cyprus" label="Cyprus"/>
<link wikidata="Q39991" start="3729" end="3748" title="Ptolemy XII Auletes" label="Ptolemy XII Auletes"/>
<link wikidata="Q664251" start="3784" end="3800" title="Sibylline Books" label="Sibylline oracle"/>
<link wikidata="Q521460" start="4029" end="4056" title="Publius Servilius Isauricus" label="Publius Servilius Isauricus"/>
<link wikidata="Q320902" start="4285" end="4303" title="Quintus Hortensius" label="Quintus Hortensius"/>
<link wikidata="Q370603" start="4317" end="4332" title="Marcus Lucullus" label="Marcus Lucullus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1283550" start="4362" end="4385" title="Lucius Volcatius Tullus (consul 66 BC)" label="Lucius Volcacius Tullus"/>
<link wikidata="Q472219" start="4400" end="4415" title="Lucius Afranius (consul)" label="Lucius Afranius"/>
<link wikidata="Q2003224" start="4597" end="4615" title="Gaius Porcius Cato (tribune of the plebs 56 BC)" label="Gaius Porcius Cato"/>
<link wikidata="Q1338903" start="4686" end="4708" title="Lucius Caninius Gallus (tribune 56 BC)" label="Lucius Caninius Gallus"/>
<link wikidata="Q313664" start="4736" end="4759" title="Publius Clodius Pulcher" label="Publius Clodius Pulcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q175121" start="4800" end="4823" title="Marcus Licinius Crassus" label="Marcus Licinius Crassus"/>
<link wikidata="Q721788" start="4842" end="4879" title="Gnaeus Cornelius Lentulus Marcellinus" label="Gnaeus Cornelius Lentulus Marcellinus"/>
<link wikidata="Q715380" start="5319" end="5336" title="First Triumvirate" label="First Triumvirate"/>
<link wikidata="Q725434" start="5472" end="5481" title="imperator" label="imperator"/>
<link wikidata="Q617518" start="5585" end="5592" title="Apamea (Phrygia)" label="Apameia"/>
<link wikidata="Q32579" start="5596" end="5603" title="Phrygia" label="Phrygia"/>
<link wikidata="Q849311" start="5710" end="5718" title="pomerium" label="pomerium"/>
<link wikidata="Q657438" start="5738" end="5745" title="Roman triumph" label="triumph"/>
<link wikidata="Q1238338" start="5846" end="5869" title="Caesar&amp;#x27;s civil war" label="Caesar&amp;#x27;s civil war"/>
<link wikidata="Q185223" start="5884" end="5895" title="Cassius Dio" label="Cassius Dio"/>
<link wikidata="Q451516" start="6031" end="6053" title="Gaius Scribonius Curio (tribune 50 BC)" label="Gaius Scribonius Curio"/>
<link wikidata="Q465212" start="6104" end="6131" title="Lucius Domitius Ahenobarbus (consul 54 BC)" label="Lucius Domitius Ahenobarbus"/>
<link wikidata="Q172248" start="6144" end="6164" title="Marcus Junius Brutus" label="Marcus Junius Brutus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2428630" start="6335" end="6344" title="Corfinium" label="Corfinium"/>
<link wikidata="Q208041" start="6663" end="6672" title="sesterces" label="sesterces"/>
<link wikidata="Q691321" start="6737" end="6743" title="Sicilia (Roman province)" label="Sicily"/>
<link wikidata="Q51673" start="7167" end="7178" title="Marc Antony" label="Marc Antony"/>
<link wikidata="Q203681" start="7186" end="7205" title="Battle of Pharsalus" label="Battle of Pharsalus"/>
<link wikidata="Q39938" start="7374" end="7386" title="Ptolemy XIII Theos Philopator" label="Ptolemy XIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q43048" start="7464" end="7470" title="Rhodes" label="Rhodes"/>
<link wikidata="Q275606" start="7575" end="7597" title="Sextus Aurelius Victor" label="Sextus Aurelius Victor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1102542" start="7731" end="7749" title="Terminus post quem" label="terminus ante quem"/>
<link wikidata="Q451597" start="7987" end="8014" title="Publius Cornelius Dolabella (consul 44 BC)" label="Publius Cornelius Dolabella"/>
<link wikidata="Q436302" start="8089" end="8105" title="Caecilia Metella (daughter of Metellus Celer)" label="Caecilia Metella"/>
<link wikidata="Q720840" start="8185" end="8206" title="Lucius Aurelius Cotta (consul 65 BC)" label="Lucius Aurelius Cotta"/>
<link wikidata="Q8121255" start="8224" end="8245" title="List of Roman consuls" label="List of Roman consuls"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="461248" wikidata="Q366203" url="?curid=461248" title="Publius Cornelius Lentulus Sura">
<text>Publius Cornelius Lentulus Sura (114 BC – 5 December 63 BC) was one of the chief figures in the Catilinarian conspiracy. He was also the step-father of the future triumvir Mark Antony.

==Biography==
When accused by Sulla (to whom he had been quaestor in 81 BC) of having squandered the public money, he refused to render any account, but insolently held out the calf of his leg (&quot;sura&quot;), on which part of the person boys were punished when they made mistakes in playing ball, akin to inviting a . He was praetor in 75 BC, governor of Sicily in 74 BC, and consul in 71 BC.

In 70, he was one of a number of senators expelled from the senate for immorality (he was later readmitted at an unknown date). In 63, soon after his election to praetor, he joined Catiline. Relying upon a Sibylline oracle that three Cornelii should be rulers of Rome, Lentulus regarded himself as the destined successor of Lucius Cornelius Sulla and Lucius Cornelius Cinna. When Catiline left Rome after Cicero&#x27;s second speech &quot;In Catilinam&quot;, Lentulus took his place as chief of the conspirators in the city. In conjunction with Gaius Cornelius Cethegus, he undertook to murder Cicero and set fire to Rome, but the plot failed owing to his timidity and indiscretion.

On learning that ambassadors from the Allobroges were in Rome bearing a complaint against their oppression by Roman provincial governors, Lentulus made overtures to them with the object of obtaining armed assistance. Pretending to fall in with his views, the ambassadors obtained a written agreement signed by the chief conspirators, and informed Q. Fabius Sanga, their &quot;patron&quot; in Rome, who in turn informed Cicero.

The conspirators were arrested and forced to admit their guilt. He was put to death in the Tullianum on 5 December 63 BC, along with other senatorial supporters of Catiline.

==See also==
* Lentulus, Roman patrician family.

==References==
===Citations===
===Bibliography===
* Dio Cassius xxxvii. 30, xlvi. 20
* Plutarch, &quot;Cicero&quot;, 17
* Sallust, &quot;Catilina&quot;
* Cicero, &quot;In Catilinam&quot;, iii., iv.; &quot;Pro Sulla&quot;, 25.
* March, Duane A. (1989), &quot;Cicero and the &#x27;Gang of Five&#x27;&quot;, Classical World, Volume 82, p.225–234.
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q366203" start="0" end="31" title="Publius Cornelius Lentulus Sura" label="Publius Cornelius Lentulus Sura"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051202" start="96" end="119" title="Second Catilinarian conspiracy" label="Catilinarian conspiracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q51673" start="172" end="183" title="Mark Antony" label="Mark Antony"/>
<link wikidata="Q483783" start="216" end="221" title="Lucius Cornelius Sulla" label="Sulla"/>
<link wikidata="Q189430" start="243" end="251" title="quaestor" label="quaestor"/>
<link wikidata="Q172907" start="515" end="522" title="praetor" label="praetor"/>
<link wikidata="Q691321" start="545" end="551" title="Sicilia (Roman province)" label="Sicily"/>
<link wikidata="Q4489757" start="566" end="572" title="consul" label="consul"/>
<link wikidata="Q75826" start="765" end="773" title="Catiline" label="Catiline"/>
<link wikidata="Q273320" start="790" end="806" title="Sibyl" label="Sibylline oracle"/>
<link wikidata="Q220" start="847" end="851" title="Rome" label="Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q483783" start="908" end="930" title="Lucius Cornelius Sulla" label="Lucius Cornelius Sulla"/>
<link wikidata="Q171083" start="935" end="957" title="Lucius Cornelius Cinna" label="Lucius Cornelius Cinna"/>
<link wikidata="Q220" start="978" end="982" title="Rome" label="Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1541" start="989" end="995" title="Cicero" label="Cicero"/>
<link wikidata="Q711766" start="1129" end="1153" title="Gaius Cornelius Cethegus (conspirator)" label="Gaius Cornelius Cethegus"/>
<link wikidata="Q656308" start="1306" end="1316" title="Allobroges" label="Allobroges"/>
<link wikidata="Q54203632" start="1886" end="1894" title="Lentulus (disambiguation)" label="Lentulus"/>
<link wikidata="Q185223" start="1973" end="1984" title="Dio Cassius" label="Dio Cassius"/>
<link wikidata="Q41523" start="2008" end="2016" title="Plutarch" label="Plutarch"/>
<link wikidata="Q7170" start="2043" end="2050" title="Sallust" label="Sallust"/>
<link wikidata="Q1541" start="2075" end="2081" title="Cicero" label="Cicero"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055008" start="2089" end="2101" title="In Catilinam" label="In Catilinam"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="461249" wikidata="Q33377" url="?curid=461249" title="Jalandhar">
<text>Jalandhar is a city in the state of Punjab in India. With a considerable population, it ranks as the third most-populous city in the state and is the largest city in the Doaba region. Jalandhar lies alongside the historical Grand Trunk Road and is a well-connected junction for both rail and road networks. The National Highway 1 (NH1), crosses Jalandhar, further enhancing its connectivity.

The city is located northwest of the state capital Chandigarh, southeast of the city of Amritsar, and north of Ludhiana. The national capital, Delhi, is approximately .

==History==

The history of Jalandhar District comprises three periods — ancient, medieval and modern.

=== Ancient ===
The city may be named after Jalandhara, a Nath Guru who was from here. The city was founded by Devasya Verma as mentioned in the Vedas. Other possibilities include that it was the capital of the kingdom of Lava, son of Rama or that the name derives from the vernacular term &quot;Jalandhar&quot;, meaning area inside the water, i.e., tract lying between the two rivers Satluj and Beas. The whole of Punjab and the area of present Jalandhar District was part of the Indus Valley Civilization. Harappa and Mohenjo-daro are the sites where remains of the Indus Valley civilisation have been found extensively. The archaeological explorations made during recent years have pushed the ancient times of Jalandhar District of the Harappa period. Jalandhar was known as Prasthala during the Vedic period and it was the capital of the Trigarta Kingdom.

=== Medieval ===
Jalandhar and the Doaba may have been conquered around 1070 by the Ghaznavids during the reign of Ibrahim of Ghazni. The city was conquered by Raja Jasrat in 1431. It later formed part of the province of Lahore during the Delhi Sultanate and Mughal Empire. The 18th century saw upheaval in Jalandhar amidst an anarchy caused by the disintegration of the Mughals and power struggles involving Persians, Afghans and Sikhs. It was captured by the Faizullahpuria Misl in 1766, and in 1811 Maharaja Ranjit Singh incorporated it within the Sikh Empire.

In 1849, following the annexation of the Punjab by the East India Company, the city of Jalandhar, written in English as Jullundur by company officials, became the headquarters of the division and District of the same name. In 1858, company rule in India ended and the city became part of the British Raj. In the mid to late 19th century, the Punjab administration regarded Jullundur as too densely populated and farmed to capacity. This led to the district being a chief recruitment area for settlers to colonise the newly irrigated Punjab Canal Colonies, in western Punjab.

=== Modern ===
The Khilafat Movement started in the district in the early 1920s to bring pressure on the government to change their policy towards Turkey. Mahatma Gandhi extended sympathy and support to this movement, however in response, the District was declared a &#x27;Proclaimed Area&#x27; under the Seditious Meetings Act. In 1924, Pakistani general and military dictator Muhammad Zia-ul-Haq was born in the city.

Prior to the partition of India, Muslims were in plurality in Jalandhar district. According to the 1941 census, Muslims made up 45.2% of the population, compared to Hindus and Sikhs being 27.6% and 26.5% respectively. Within a period of 10 years, from 1941 to 1951, the Muslim population in Jalandhar district reduced from 45.2% to 0.2%.

== Geography ==
=== Climate ===
The city has a hot semi-arid climate with cool winters and long, hot summers. Summers last from April to June and winters from November to February. Temperatures in the summer vary from average highs of around to average lows of around . Winter temperatures have highs of to lows of . The climate is dry, except during the brief southwest monsoon season during July and August. The average annual rainfall is about . In 2018, Jalandhar witnessed unusually heavy rainfall, with an over 20% increase from average rainfall levels. Since it is located in the northern plains, the area feels quite cold during winters and very hot during summers.

=== Rainfall ===
The city receives an average annual rainfall of approximately . However, fluctuations are not uncommon, as observed in 2018 when Jalandhar experienced a significant increase in precipitation. The city registered over a 20% increase from its average rainfall that year, which marked it as a year of heavy rainfall.

Despite the variations in climate across seasons, one thing remains constant: the extremity of temperatures, with winters feeling notably cold, and summers, feelings markedly hot due to Jalandhar&#x27;s location in the northern plains.Jalandhar has been ranked 39th best “National Clean Air City” under (Category 2 3-10L Population cities) in India.

==Demographics==
===Population===
As per the 2011 census, Jalandhar had a population of 868,929, of which 460,811 were male, and 408,118 female. The literacy rate is 86.20%: for males are 88.81% and females 83.26%. Children of 0-6 years are 90,044 (10.36%), with a sex ratio of 867 females per 1000 males. Scheduled Castes are 27.26% of the population.

===Religion===
As per the census of 2011, Hinduism is the predominant religion in Jalandhar city, with adherents of Sikhism being a significant minority.



At the time of the 2011 census, 81.48% of the population spoke Punjabi and 15.63% Hindi as their first language.

==Economy==
Jalandhar is notable for its sports goods industry. With an employment of 60,000 to 70,000 people, it is estimated to be 1,700 crore industry, with 400 crore export and 1,300 crore domestic supply. In 2022, the Sports Goods Manufacturers and Exporters Association in Jalandhar, with collaboration from local self-help groups, started an initiative to train 1,500 women in stitching soccer balls, ensuring financial development and welfare in the district.

Another significant contributor to Jalandhar&#x27;s economy is its leather industry, having a turn over of 1,200 to 1,500 crore, and 400 crore export.

=== Smart City Project ===
In the second phase of the Indian Government&#x27;s Smart City Project, Jalandhar has been selected to participate, marking a pivotal shift in the city&#x27;s development.

==Transport==

===By air===
The nearest airport is Adampur Airport, northwest of Jalandhar, which currently only handles scheduled operation on maiden flights of the private carrier Spicejet, to Delhi, Mumbai and Jaipur. The nearest fully-fledged International Airport is Sri Guru Ram Dass Jee International Airport, in Amritsar. It is the second busiest airport in North India, and is connected to other parts of the country by regular flights. Several airlines operate flights from abroad, including London Stansted, Birmingham, Dubai, Singapore, Kuala Lumpur, and Doha. The airport handles as many as 48 flights every week up from the occasional, intermittent ones some years ago.
===By rail===
Direct train service is available for other major cities like Mumbai, Calcutta, Chennai, Patna, Guwahati, Pune, Haridwar, Varanasi, Jaipur, Jhansi, Gwalior, Bhopal and Jammu Tawi. Some prestigious trains that halt in Jalandhar City railway station include the Howrah Mail, Golden Temple Mail (Frontier Mail), New-Delhi Amritsar Shatabdi Express, and the Paschim Express. Now, many trains of Jammu route are extended up to Mata Vaishno Devi-Katra.

Jalandhar City Railway Station is well-connected to other parts of the country. Jalandhar City is a major stop between the Amritsar-Delhi rail link, which is serviced by Shatabdi Express, Intercity Express, among others.

Direct Services to major cities such as Mumbai, Calcutta, Chennai, Patna, Guwahati, Pune, Haridwar, Varanasi, Jaipur and Jammu Tawi are available. There are prestigious services such as the Howrah Mail, Golden Temple Mail (Frontier Mail), New-Delhi Amritsar Shatabdi Express, Paschim Express.

===By road===
There is one of the largest networks of bus services of Punjab at Shaheed-e-Azam, Sardar Bhagat Singh ISBT (Jalandhar), Himachal Pradesh, Delhi, Haryana, Pepsu, Chandigarh, Uttar Pradesh, Himachal Pradesh, Jammu &amp; Kashmir, Uttrakhand, Rajasthan State Roadways, apart from private operators.

==Religious places==
*Shri Paramhans adwait mat ashram,shri Anandpur wale,St No 3 Central town ,organised by Shri Shabadpunitanand ji ( Veena Bai ji).
*Historical temple of Shri Bawa lal dayal mandir,partap bagh.
*Shaktipeeth Mata Tripuramalini ji dhaam.
* The Church of Signs &amp; Wonders (also known as Khambra Church / Ankur Narula Ministries)
* Gurudwara Dukh Niwaran Sahib Dham
* Gurdwara Guru Ravidass Dham
* Devi Talab Mandir
* Nakodar Darbar Baba Murad Shah Ji
* Gurdwara Guru Ravidas, Guru Ramdas Nagar
* Dera Sachkand Ballan
* Gurdwara Singh Sabha
* Gurdwara Guru Tegh Bahadur Nagar
* Geeta Mandir Jalandhar

==Leisure==
* Niku Park
*Prithvi&#x27;s Planet
*Smmash
*Wonder Land

==Media==
Doordarshan Kendra, Jalandhar is an Indian television station in Jalandhar, owned and operated by state-owned Doordarshan, the television network of Prasar Bharati (Broadcasting Corporation of India). It was established in 1979 and produces and broadcasts the 24-hour Punjabi language TV channel, DD Punjabi, which was launched in 1998 and covers most of the state of Punjab, India.

The city is the region&#x27;s headquarters for newspapers, national television and radio stations. These include &quot;Daily Ajit, Jagbani, Punjab Kesari, Dainik Bhaskar, Dainik Jagran, Hindustan Times, The Tribune, Truescoop News, Hind Samachar&quot;, etc.

State-owned All India Radio has a local station in Jalandhar that transmits programs of mass interest. FM local radio stations include:
* Radio city 91.9 MHz
* BIG FM 92.7 92.7 MHz
* 94.3 FM-My Fm- 94.3 MHz
* Radio Mirchi 98.3 MHz
*All India Radio 102.7 MHz

==Healthcare==
The Municipal Corporation of Jalandhar claims that the city has over 800 hospitals,
 making it the city with the highest number of hospitals per capita in Asia. Three new Health Centres were set up in Jalandhar on 9 September 2020.
==Sports==
===Cricket===
Cricket is very popular in the grounds and streets of Jalandhar. There is an international-standard stadium at Gandhi Stadium, formerly known as Burlton Park. The Indian cricket team played a Test Match against the Pakistan cricket team on this ground on 24 September 1983.

===Kabaddi===
Major Kabaddi matches are usually held at Guru Gobind Singh Stadium.

===Guru Gobind Singh Stadium===
Guru Gobind Singh Stadium is a multi-purpose stadium in Jalandhar. It is usually used for football matches and served as the home stadium of JCT Mills FC. People can be seen jogging, playing soccer, weight-lifting, etc. in the stadium most of the time. The Punjab government has started new projects at the stadium.

===Surjit Hockey Stadium===
Surjeet Hockey Stadium is a field hockey stadium in Jalandhar, Punjab, India. It is named after Jalandhar-born Olympian Surjit Singh. This stadium is home of the franchise Sher-e-Punjab of the World Series Hockey.

===Sports college===
There is a Government Sports College in the city and it is a focus for many of the National Sports Councils. In this college, many sports are played like cricket, hockey, swimming, volleyball and basketball.

==Education==

Higher education institutions in Jalandhar include;

===Universities===

* D.A.V. College, Jalandhar
* DAV Institute of Engineering &amp; Technology
* DAV University
* Doaba College
* Dr. B. R. Ambedkar National Institute of Technology Jalandhar
* GNA University
* Guru Nanak Dev University
* I. K. Gujral Punjab Technical University
* Lovely Professional University
* Kanya Maha Vidyalaya
* Lyallpur Khalsa College for Women
* Lyallpur Khalsa College
* Mata Gujri Institute of Nursing
* Mehr Chand Polytechnic College
* Punjab Institute of Medical Sciences

===Schools===
* St. Joseph&#x27;s Boys&#x27; School, Jalandhar, Defence Colony

==Jalandhar Cantonment==
==Notable people==


== Notes ==
==References==
==External links==
* 
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q33377" start="0" end="9" title="Jalandhar" label="Jalandhar"/>
<link wikidata="Q22424" start="36" end="42" title="Punjab, India" label="Punjab"/>
<link wikidata="Q6609780" start="101" end="125" title="List of cities in Punjab and Chandigarh by population" label="third most-populous city"/>
<link wikidata="Q3249458" start="170" end="175" title="Doaba" label="Doaba"/>
<link wikidata="Q300701" start="224" end="240" title="Grand Trunk Road" label="Grand Trunk Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q642922" start="311" end="329" title="National Highway 1 (India)" label="National Highway 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q43433" start="444" end="454" title="Chandigarh" label="Chandigarh"/>
<link wikidata="Q48403" start="481" end="489" title="Amritsar" label="Amritsar"/>
<link wikidata="Q200123" start="504" end="512" title="Ludhiana" label="Ludhiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1353" start="536" end="541" title="Delhi" label="Delhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q6126637" start="711" end="721" title="Jalandhara" label="Jalandhara"/>
<link wikidata="Q117421" start="725" end="729" title="Nath" label="Nath"/>
<link wikidata="Q39950" start="812" end="817" title="Vedas" label="Vedas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2725716" start="889" end="893" title="Lava (Ramayana)" label="Lava"/>
<link wikidata="Q160213" start="902" end="906" title="Rama" label="Rama"/>
<link wikidata="Q171675" start="1052" end="1058" title="Sutlej" label="Satluj"/>
<link wikidata="Q4876820" start="1063" end="1067" title="Beas City" label="Beas"/>
<link wikidata="Q42534" start="1148" end="1173" title="Indus Valley Civilisation" label="Indus Valley Civilization"/>
<link wikidata="Q185562" start="1175" end="1182" title="Harappa" label="Harappa"/>
<link wikidata="Q5725" start="1187" end="1199" title="Mohenjo-daro" label="Mohenjo-daro"/>
<link wikidata="Q42534" start="1235" end="1260" title="Indus Valley civilisation" label="Indus Valley civilisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q185562" start="1406" end="1413" title="Harappa" label="Harappa"/>
<link wikidata="Q7238564" start="1445" end="1454" title="Prasthala" label="Prasthala"/>
<link wikidata="Q215262" start="1466" end="1478" title="Vedic period" label="Vedic period"/>
<link wikidata="Q7841669" start="1509" end="1525" title="Trigarta Kingdom" label="Trigarta Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q3249458" start="1563" end="1568" title="Doaba" label="Doaba"/>
<link wikidata="Q12844800" start="1612" end="1622" title="Ghaznavids" label="Ghaznavids"/>
<link wikidata="Q141055" start="1643" end="1660" title="Ibrahim of Ghazni" label="Ibrahim of Ghazni"/>
<link wikidata="Q61598084" start="1693" end="1699" title="Jasrat" label="Jasrat"/>
<link wikidata="Q11739" start="1749" end="1755" title="Lahore" label="Lahore"/>
<link wikidata="Q229411" start="1767" end="1782" title="Delhi Sultanate" label="Delhi Sultanate"/>
<link wikidata="Q33296" start="1787" end="1800" title="Mughal Empire" label="Mughal Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q6957844" start="1937" end="1945" title="Nader Shah&amp;#x27;s invasion of the Mughal Empire" label="Persians"/>
<link wikidata="Q467627" start="1947" end="1954" title="Durrani Empire" label="Afghans"/>
<link wikidata="Q582779" start="1959" end="1964" title="Sikhs" label="Sikhs"/>
<link wikidata="Q20984051" start="1989" end="2008" title="Singhpuria Misl" label="Faizullahpuria Misl"/>
<link wikidata="Q332620" start="2030" end="2051" title="Maharaja Ranjit Singh" label="Maharaja Ranjit Singh"/>
<link wikidata="Q83572" start="2079" end="2090" title="Sikh Empire" label="Sikh Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q83164" start="2148" end="2166" title="East India Company" label="East India Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q1817425" start="2289" end="2297" title="Jalandhar district" label="District"/>
<link wikidata="Q129286" start="2385" end="2396" title="British Raj" label="British Raj"/>
<link wikidata="Q29378881" start="2626" end="2647" title="Punjab Canal Colonies" label="Punjab Canal Colonies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365432" start="2688" end="2705" title="Khilafat Movement" label="Khilafat Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q43" start="2816" end="2822" title="Turkey" label="Turkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1001" start="2824" end="2838" title="Mahatma Gandhi" label="Mahatma Gandhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q7445333" start="2974" end="2996" title="Seditious Meetings Act 1819" label="Seditious Meetings Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q200499" start="3047" end="3066" title="Muhammad Zia-ul-Haq" label="Muhammad Zia-ul-Haq"/>
<link wikidata="Q129053" start="3103" end="3121" title="partition of India" label="partition of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q47740" start="3202" end="3209" title="Muslims" label="Muslims"/>
<link wikidata="Q10090" start="3255" end="3261" title="Hindus" label="Hindus"/>
<link wikidata="Q582779" start="3266" end="3271" title="Sikhs" label="Sikhs"/>
<link wikidata="Q47740" start="3360" end="3366" title="Muslims" label="Muslim"/>
<link wikidata="Q124196" start="3476" end="3497" title="hot semi-arid climate" label="hot semi-arid climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q9089" start="5183" end="5191" title="Hinduism" label="Hinduism"/>
<link wikidata="Q9316" start="5257" end="5264" title="Sikhism" label="Sikhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q58635" start="5361" end="5368" title="Punjabi language" label="Punjabi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1568" start="5380" end="5385" title="Hindi" label="Hindi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137675" start="5551" end="5556" title="crore" label="crore"/>
<link wikidata="Q21099408" start="6087" end="6130" title="Smart Cities Mission" label="Indian Government&amp;#x27;s Smart City Project"/>
<link wikidata="Q20449639" start="6284" end="6299" title="Adampur Airport" label="Adampur Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q943813" start="6415" end="6423" title="Spicejet" label="Spicejet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1353" start="6428" end="6433" title="Delhi" label="Delhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156" start="6435" end="6441" title="Mumbai" label="Mumbai"/>
<link wikidata="Q66485" start="6446" end="6452" title="Jaipur" label="Jaipur"/>
<link wikidata="Q385356" start="6505" end="6548" title="Sri Guru Ram Dass Jee International Airport" label="Sri Guru Ram Dass Jee International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q48403" start="6553" end="6561" title="Amritsar" label="Amritsar"/>
<link wikidata="Q8709" start="6735" end="6750" title="London Stansted Airport" label="London Stansted"/>
<link wikidata="Q2256" start="6752" end="6762" title="Birmingham" label="Birmingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q612" start="6764" end="6769" title="Dubai" label="Dubai"/>
<link wikidata="Q334" start="6771" end="6780" title="Singapore" label="Singapore"/>
<link wikidata="Q1865" start="6782" end="6794" title="Kuala Lumpur" label="Kuala Lumpur"/>
<link wikidata="Q3861" start="6800" end="6804" title="Doha" label="Doha"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156" start="6993" end="6999" title="Mumbai" label="Mumbai"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348" start="7001" end="7009" title="Calcutta" label="Calcutta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1352" start="7011" end="7018" title="Chennai" label="Chennai"/>
<link wikidata="Q80484" start="7020" end="7025" title="Patna" label="Patna"/>
<link wikidata="Q199605" start="7027" end="7035" title="Guwahati" label="Guwahati"/>
<link wikidata="Q1538" start="7037" end="7041" title="Pune" label="Pune"/>
<link wikidata="Q273030" start="7043" end="7051" title="Haridwar" label="Haridwar"/>
<link wikidata="Q79980" start="7053" end="7061" title="Varanasi" label="Varanasi"/>
<link wikidata="Q66485" start="7063" end="7069" title="Jaipur" label="Jaipur"/>
<link wikidata="Q242995" start="7071" end="7077" title="Jhansi" label="Jhansi"/>
<link wikidata="Q158467" start="7079" end="7086" title="Gwalior" label="Gwalior"/>
<link wikidata="Q80989" start="7088" end="7094" title="Bhopal" label="Bhopal"/>
<link wikidata="Q6148005" start="7099" end="7109" title="Jammu Tawi railway station" label="Jammu Tawi"/>
<link wikidata="Q16892825" start="7148" end="7178" title="Jalandhar City railway station" label="Jalandhar City railway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q5579866" start="7204" end="7222" title="Golden Temple Mail" label="Golden Temple Mail"/>
<link wikidata="Q17049281" start="7250" end="7275" title="Amritsar Shatabdi Express" label="Amritsar Shatabdi Express"/>
<link wikidata="Q17082038" start="7285" end="7300" title="Paschim Express" label="Paschim Express"/>
<link wikidata="Q379738" start="7549" end="7565" title="Shatabdi Express" label="Shatabdi Express"/>
<link wikidata="Q17056702" start="7567" end="7584" title="Intercity Express (Indian Railways)" label="Intercity Express"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156" start="7641" end="7647" title="Mumbai" label="Mumbai"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348" start="7649" end="7657" title="Calcutta" label="Calcutta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1352" start="7659" end="7666" title="Chennai" label="Chennai"/>
<link wikidata="Q80484" start="7668" end="7673" title="Patna" label="Patna"/>
<link wikidata="Q199605" start="7675" end="7683" title="Guwahati" label="Guwahati"/>
<link wikidata="Q1538" start="7685" end="7689" title="Pune" label="Pune"/>
<link wikidata="Q273030" start="7691" end="7699" title="Haridwar" label="Haridwar"/>
<link wikidata="Q79980" start="7701" end="7709" title="Varanasi" label="Varanasi"/>
<link wikidata="Q66485" start="7711" end="7717" title="Jaipur" label="Jaipur"/>
<link wikidata="Q6148005" start="7722" end="7732" title="Jammu Tawi railway station" label="Jammu Tawi"/>
<link wikidata="Q986105" start="7791" end="7802" title="Howrah railway station" label="Howrah Mail"/>
<link wikidata="Q5579866" start="7804" end="7822" title="Golden Temple Mail" label="Golden Temple Mail"/>
<link wikidata="Q17049281" start="7850" end="7875" title="Amritsar Shatabdi Express" label="Amritsar Shatabdi Express"/>
<link wikidata="Q17082038" start="7877" end="7892" title="Paschim Express" label="Paschim Express"/>
<link wikidata="Q5638" start="7949" end="7952" title="bus" label="bus"/>
<link wikidata="Q22424" start="7965" end="7971" title="Punjab, India" label="Punjab"/>
<link wikidata="Q1177" start="8029" end="8045" title="Himachal Pradesh" label="Himachal Pradesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1353" start="8047" end="8052" title="Delhi" label="Delhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1174" start="8054" end="8061" title="Haryana" label="Haryana"/>
<link wikidata="Q7118995" start="8063" end="8068" title="PEPSU Road Transport Corporation" label="Pepsu"/>
<link wikidata="Q43433" start="8070" end="8080" title="Chandigarh" label="Chandigarh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1498" start="8082" end="8095" title="Uttar Pradesh" label="Uttar Pradesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1177" start="8097" end="8113" title="Himachal Pradesh" label="Himachal Pradesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q66278313" start="8115" end="8134" title="Jammu and Kashmir (union territory)" label="Jammu &amp;amp; Kashmir"/>
<link wikidata="Q1499" start="8136" end="8146" title="Uttarakhand" label="Uttrakhand"/>
<link wikidata="Q1437" start="8148" end="8157" title="Rajasthan" label="Rajasthan"/>
<link wikidata="Q96375028" start="8528" end="8551" title="Church_of_Signs_and_Wonders" label="Ankur Narula Ministries"/>
<link wikidata="Q26258391" start="8621" end="8638" title="Devi Talab Mandir" label="Devi Talab Mandir"/>
<link wikidata="Q47529220" start="8641" end="8674" title="Dera Baba Murad Shah" label="Nakodar Darbar Baba Murad Shah Ji"/>
<link wikidata="Q5261286" start="8720" end="8740" title="Dera Sach Khand" label="Dera Sachkand Ballan"/>
<link wikidata="Q112740136" start="8801" end="8823" title="Geeta Mandir Jalandhar" label="Geeta Mandir Jalandhar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1763315" start="8904" end="8933" title="Doordarshan Kendra, Jalandhar" label="Doordarshan Kendra, Jalandhar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1763315" start="9014" end="9025" title="Doordarshan" label="Doordarshan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2735284" start="9053" end="9067" title="Prasar Bharati" label="Prasar Bharati"/>
<link wikidata="Q58635" start="9172" end="9188" title="Punjabi language" label="Punjabi language"/>
<link wikidata="Q12430850" start="9201" end="9211" title="DD Punjabi" label="DD Punjabi"/>
<link wikidata="Q22424" start="9272" end="9285" title="Punjab, India" label="Punjab, India"/>
<link wikidata="Q2112457" start="9407" end="9417" title="Daily Ajit" label="Daily Ajit"/>
<link wikidata="Q6122008" start="9419" end="9426" title="Jagbani" label="Jagbani"/>
<link wikidata="Q3630070" start="9428" end="9441" title="Punjab Kesari" label="Punjab Kesari"/>
<link wikidata="Q1872524" start="9443" end="9457" title="Dainik Bhaskar" label="Dainik Bhaskar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1318465" start="9459" end="9472" title="Dainik Jagran" label="Dainik Jagran"/>
<link wikidata="Q41595" start="9474" end="9489" title="Hindustan Times" label="Hindustan Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q1922367" start="9491" end="9502" title="The Tribune (Chandigarh)" label="The Tribune"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9504" end="9518" title="Truescoop News" label="Truescoop News"/>
<link wikidata="Q5765865" start="9520" end="9533" title="Hind Samachar" label="Hind Samachar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321122" start="9559" end="9574" title="All India Radio" label="All India Radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q301560" start="9685" end="9695" title="Radio City (Indian radio station)" label="Radio city"/>
<link wikidata="Q3763950" start="9707" end="9718" title="BIG FM 92.7" label="BIG FM 92.7"/>
<link wikidata="Q4645928" start="9730" end="9737" title="94.3 FM" label="94.3 FM"/>
<link wikidata="Q3519827" start="9756" end="9768" title="Radio Mirchi" label="Radio Mirchi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321122" start="9779" end="9794" title="All India Radio" label="All India Radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q5375" start="10078" end="10085" title="Cricket" label="Cricket"/>
<link wikidata="Q5520723" start="10189" end="10203" title="Gandhi Stadium" label="Gandhi Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143793" start="10241" end="10260" title="Indian cricket team" label="Indian cricket team"/>
<link wikidata="Q182538" start="10293" end="10314" title="Pakistan cricket team" label="Pakistan cricket team"/>
<link wikidata="Q148636" start="10373" end="10380" title="Kabaddi" label="Kabaddi"/>
<link wikidata="Q5620367" start="10409" end="10434" title="Guru Gobind Singh Stadium" label="Guru Gobind Singh Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q5620367" start="10469" end="10494" title="Guru Gobind Singh Stadium" label="Guru Gobind Singh Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1471007" start="10610" end="10622" title="JCT FC" label="JCT Mills FC"/>
<link wikidata="Q7646398" start="10814" end="10836" title="Surjeet Hockey Stadium" label="Surjeet Hockey Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q332620" start="10986" end="10999" title="Sher-e-Punjab" label="Sher-e-Punjab"/>
<link wikidata="Q8036179" start="11007" end="11026" title="World Series Hockey" label="World Series Hockey"/>
<link wikidata="Q11385193" start="11072" end="11086" title="Sports College" label="Sports College"/>
<link wikidata="Q5375" start="11204" end="11211" title="cricket" label="cricket"/>
<link wikidata="Q1455" start="11213" end="11219" title="field hockey" label="hockey"/>
<link wikidata="Q31920" start="11221" end="11229" title="Swimming (sport)" label="swimming"/>
<link wikidata="Q1734" start="11231" end="11241" title="volleyball" label="volleyball"/>
<link wikidata="Q5372" start="11246" end="11256" title="basketball" label="basketball"/>
<link wikidata="Q30641956" start="11349" end="11374" title="D.A.V. College, Jalandhar" label="D.A.V. College, Jalandhar"/>
<link wikidata="Q5204347" start="11377" end="11422" title="DAV Institute of Engineering &amp;amp; Technology" label="DAV Institute of Engineering &amp;amp; Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q18124487" start="11425" end="11439" title="DAV University" label="DAV University"/>
<link wikidata="Q5286459" start="11442" end="11455" title="Doaba College" label="Doaba College"/>
<link wikidata="Q12430577" start="11458" end="11519" title="Dr. B. R. Ambedkar National Institute of Technology Jalandhar" label="Dr. B. R. Ambedkar National Institute of Technology Jalandhar"/>
<link wikidata="Q26157910" start="11522" end="11536" title="GNA University" label="GNA University"/>
<link wikidata="Q5620404" start="11539" end="11564" title="Guru Nanak Dev University" label="Guru Nanak Dev University"/>
<link wikidata="Q7260302" start="11567" end="11607" title="I. K. Gujral Punjab Technical University" label="I. K. Gujral Punjab Technical University"/>
<link wikidata="Q5756621" start="11610" end="11640" title="Lovely Professional University" label="Lovely Professional University"/>
<link wikidata="Q6365773" start="11643" end="11663" title="Kanya Maha Vidyalaya" label="Kanya Maha Vidyalaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q33377" start="11666" end="11699" title="Lyallpur Khalsa College for Women" label="Lyallpur Khalsa College for Women"/>
<link wikidata="Q6707059" start="11702" end="11725" title="Lyallpur Khalsa College" label="Lyallpur Khalsa College"/>
<link wikidata="Q4837293" start="11728" end="11759" title="Mata Gujri Institute of Nursing" label="Mata Gujri Institute of Nursing"/>
<link wikidata="Q6809725" start="11762" end="11792" title="Mehr Chand Polytechnic College" label="Mehr Chand Polytechnic College"/>
<link wikidata="Q19895497" start="11795" end="11831" title="Punjab Institute of Medical Sciences" label="Punjab Institute of Medical Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q16238401" start="11849" end="11895" title="St. Joseph&amp;#x27;s Boys&amp;#x27; School, Jalandhar" label="St. Joseph&amp;#x27;s Boys&amp;#x27; School, Jalandhar"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="461251" wikidata="Q521670" url="?curid=461251" title="Lucius Cornelius Lentulus Crus">
<text>Lucius Cornelius Lentulus Crus (before 97 BC48 BC) was Consul of the Roman Republic in 49 BC, an opponent of Caesar and supporter of Pompeius in the Civil War during 49 to 48 BC.

==Family and political career==

Born sometime before 97 BC, son of a Publius Lentulus, his origins are otherwise unknown, though he was most likely a member of the patrician Cornelii Lentuli branch of the gens Cornelia.

Details of Crus&#x27; younger years are not known. In 72 BC, Caesar&#x27;s man Balbus acquired his Roman citizenship for service under Pompeius against Quintus Sertorius in Spain. On the basis of the Roman names he took – Lucius Cornelius Balbus – and on the basis of later letters to Cicero, it is possible that both Balbus &quot;major&quot; and &quot;minor&quot; obtained citizenship with the sponsorship of L. Cornelius Lentulus Crus, who may then have been serving with Pompeius as a legate (Pompeius was there 76 BC to 71 BC; had Crus been born c. 98 BC, he would have been between the ages of 22 and 27 at the time).

In 61 BC he was the chief prosecutor of Publius Clodius Pulcher at a &quot;quaestio extraordinaria&quot; over the latter&#x27;s violation of the mysteries of the Bona Dea, along with two other Cornelii Lentuli, in which he failed to secure a conviction due in large part to the bribes which Clodius spread amongst the jurors.

Lentulus&#x27; rise through the &quot;cursus honorum&quot; of political office is not now known prior to his election, during the consulship of Caesar and Bibulus, as Praetor for 58 BC. During his term of office Clodius, now a tribune of the people, moved against his enemy Cicero on the basis that the latter, as consul of 63 BC, had put Roman citizens to death without trial. Cicero hoped for Lentulus&#x27; aid against Clodius; although the praetor did, with other senior figures, attempt to persuade Pompeius to act to protect Cicero, this failed, as Pompeius refused to act against an elected tribune on his own authority.

In 51 BC he stood for election to the prestigious priestly board of fifteen men in charge of the Sibylline Books (&quot;Quindecimviri sacris faciundis&quot;), but was defeated by Publius Cornelius Dolabella (to the amusement of Cicero&#x27;s correspondent, Marcus Caelius Rufus).

In 50 BC he was elected consul for the following year alongside G. Claudius Marcellus, as opponents to Caesar, and was an active and vocal participant in the increasingly hysterical scenes in the senate in late 50 and January 49 as Caesar sought to secure a safe consulship whilst a reactionary group of senators sought to have him stripped of command. Finally, on 7 January 49 BC, the senate under Lentulus and Marcellus passed the “final decree” (senatus consultum ultimum); the tribunes Mark Antony and Quintus Cassius fled with Caesar&#x27;s envoy, the younger Curio, from Rome to meet Caesar at Ravenna. On the 10th, Caesar famously crossed the Rubicon, starting the Civil War.

==Civil War==

Initially Lentulus remained in Rome but left, with many senators, ahead of Caesar&#x27;s advancing forces. He recruited troops for Pompeius in Capua (even gladiators at one stage, before thinking better of this). Caesar sent his agent, the younger Balbus, on a mission to win over Lentulus – possibly Crus was &quot;patronus&quot; to the Cornelii Balbi, uncle and nephew, if he had been their sponsor when they were granted Roman citizenship under Pompeius in 72, and Caesar hoped that Balbus would have some influence with the consul. However, by 3 March Cicero reported to Atticus that the Consuls had crossed over from Brundisium to the shore of Greece.

While proconsul of the Roman province of Asia, Lentulus recruited two legions for Pompeius - a decree of his in July 49 BC exempted the Jews of Asia Minor from military service. He fought alongside Pompeius at the Battle of Pharsalus on 9 August 48 BC, where he commanded the Pompeian left wing. On his flight from the battlefield Lentulus was denied refuge in Antioch and instead followed Pompeius to Egypt. He was taken prisoner on 4 September on the order of King Ptolemy XIII and executed whilst in prison.

Caesar himself placed a great deal of blame on Lentulus for the events of late 50/early 49 which brought about the civil war, commenting on the magnitude of Lentulus&#x27; debts and his hopes for control of an army and rich provinces, and going so far as to claim that the Consul was aiming to make himself master of Rome, a second Sulla. He was also seen as duplicitous, warning the senate in the debates of January 49 that if they did not declare against Caesar then he, Lentulus, had his own means of regaining Caesar&#x27;s favour. Cicero, in a characteristically cutting remark, described Lentulus as being averse to the trouble of thinking. Writing of the private interests and personal ambitions of Pompeius&#x27; followers, he seems to give support to Caesar&#x27;s claims, and his later acerbic comments that Lentulus promised himself Hortensius&#x27; town house, Caesar&#x27;s suburban villa, and an estate at Baiae as spoils of the civil war do bear out Lentulus&#x27; reputation for avarice.

==Notes==
==References==

===Modern works===
*
* 
*


===Ancient authors===

* Caesar: &quot;Commentarii de Bello Civili&quot; (B.C.) &quot;Commentaries on the Civil War&quot; (Wikipedia)
* Caesar: &quot;Commentarii de Bello Gallico&quot; (B.G.) &quot;Commentaries on the Gallic War&quot;(Wikipedia)
* Cicero: Brutus, a History of Famous Orators
* Cicero: &quot;Epistulae ad Atticum&quot; (Letters to Atticus)
* Cicero: &quot;Epistulae ad Familiares&quot; (Letters to his Friends)
* Cicero: &quot;Epistulae ad Quintum fratrem&quot; (Letters to his brother, Quintus)
* Cicero: &quot;in Pisonem&quot;
*Cicero: &quot;pro Balbo&quot;
* Josephus: Jewish Antiquities, Book 14
* Plutarch: The Life of Julius Caesar
* Plutarch: The Life of Pompey
* Valerius Maximus: &quot;Factorum ac dictorum memorabilium&quot; (see links) &quot;Memorable Deeds and Sayings&quot;
* Velleius Paterculus: &quot;Historia Romana&quot; (Roman History)
== External links ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q521670" start="0" end="30" title="Lucius Cornelius Lentulus Crus" label="Lucius Cornelius Lentulus Crus"/>
<link wikidata="Q4489757" start="55" end="61" title="Consul" label="Consul"/>
<link wikidata="Q17167" start="69" end="83" title="Roman Republic" label="Roman Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048" start="109" end="115" title="Julius Caesar" label="Caesar"/>
<link wikidata="Q125414" start="133" end="141" title="Pompey" label="Pompeius"/>
<link wikidata="Q1238338" start="149" end="158" title="Caesar&amp;#x27;s Civil War" label="Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q154668" start="345" end="354" title="Patrician (ancient Rome)" label="patrician"/>
<link wikidata="Q221312" start="386" end="399" title="gens Cornelia" label="gens Cornelia"/>
<link wikidata="Q213810" start="501" end="518" title="Roman citizenship" label="Roman citizenship"/>
<link wikidata="Q296238" start="554" end="571" title="Quintus Sertorius" label="Quintus Sertorius"/>
<link wikidata="Q212624" start="890" end="896" title="legatus" label="legate"/>
<link wikidata="Q313664" start="1066" end="1089" title="Publius Clodius Pulcher" label="Publius Clodius Pulcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q724896" start="1188" end="1196" title="Bona Dea" label="Bona Dea"/>
<link wikidata="Q27518" start="1391" end="1405" title="cursus honorum" label="cursus honorum"/>
<link wikidata="Q316775" start="1508" end="1515" title="Marcus Calpurnius Bibulus" label="Bibulus"/>
<link wikidata="Q172907" start="1520" end="1527" title="Praetor" label="Praetor"/>
<link wikidata="Q190401" start="1580" end="1587" title="tribune" label="tribune"/>
<link wikidata="Q1541" start="1627" end="1633" title="Cicero" label="Cicero"/>
<link wikidata="Q664251" start="2079" end="2094" title="Sibylline Books" label="Sibylline Books"/>
<link wikidata="Q1231870" start="2102" end="2132" title="Quindecimviri sacris faciundis" label="Quindecimviri sacris faciundis"/>
<link wikidata="Q451597" start="2161" end="2188" title="Publius Cornelius Dolabella (consul 44 BC)" label="Publius Cornelius Dolabella"/>
<link wikidata="Q779217" start="2239" end="2259" title="Marcus Caelius Rufus" label="Marcus Caelius Rufus"/>
<link wikidata="Q710489" start="2327" end="2348" title="Gaius Claudius Marcellus (consul 49 BC)" label="G. Claudius Marcellus"/>
<link wikidata="Q522482" start="2712" end="2737" title="senatus consultum ultimum" label="senatus consultum ultimum"/>
<link wikidata="Q51673" start="2753" end="2764" title="Mark Antony" label="Mark Antony"/>
<link wikidata="Q385238" start="2769" end="2784" title="Quintus Cassius Longinus" label="Quintus Cassius"/>
<link wikidata="Q451516" start="2828" end="2833" title="Gaius Scribonius Curio (praetor 49 BC)" label="Curio"/>
<link wikidata="Q13364" start="2863" end="2870" title="Ravenna" label="Ravenna"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2913" end="2920" title="Caesar&amp;#x27;s Civil War#Crossing the Rubicon" label="Rubicon"/>
<link wikidata="Q58477" start="3105" end="3110" title="Capua" label="Capua"/>
<link wikidata="Q482999" start="3117" end="3126" title="gladiator" label="gladiator"/>
<link wikidata="Q201102" start="3210" end="3216" title="Lucius Cornelius Balbus the Younger" label="Balbus"/>
<link wikidata="Q56881933" start="3272" end="3292" title="Patronage in ancient Rome" label="&amp;quot;patronus&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q311733" start="3537" end="3544" title="Titus Pomponius Atticus" label="Atticus"/>
<link wikidata="Q13496" start="3584" end="3594" title="Brindisi" label="Brundisium"/>
<link wikidata="Q2912782" start="3626" end="3635" title="proconsul" label="proconsul"/>
<link wikidata="Q210718" start="3661" end="3665" title="Asia (Roman province)" label="Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q51614" start="3764" end="3774" title="Anatolia" label="Asia Minor"/>
<link wikidata="Q203681" start="3834" end="3853" title="Battle of Pharsalus" label="Battle of Pharsalus"/>
<link wikidata="Q39938" start="4087" end="4099" title="Ptolemy XIII Theos Philopator" label="Ptolemy XIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q483783" start="4464" end="4469" title="Sulla" label="Sulla"/>
<link wikidata="Q320902" start="4976" end="4992" title="Quintus Hortensius" label="Hortensius&amp;#x27;"/>
<link wikidata="Q290097" start="5052" end="5057" title="Baiae" label="Baiae"/>
<link wikidata="Q544948" start="5314" end="5323" title="Commentarii de Bello Civili" label="Wikipedia"/>
<link wikidata="Q106199" start="5426" end="5435" title="Commentarii de Bello Gallico" label="Wikipedia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5902" end="5935" title="Factorum ac dictorum memorabilium" label="Factorum ac dictorum memorabilium"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="461255" wikidata="Q7302781" url="?curid=461255" title="Reconstruction Party of Canada">
<text>The Reconstruction Party was a Canadian political party founded by Henry Herbert Stevens, a long-time Conservative Member of Parliament (MP). Stevens served as Minister of Trade in the Arthur Meighen government of 1921, and as Minister of Trade and Commerce from 1930 to 1934 in the Depression-era government of R. B. Bennett.

He was Chairman of the Price-Spreads Commission in 1934. Stevens argued for drastic economic reform and government intervention in the economy. He quit the Bennett government and formed the Reconstruction Party when it became evident that the Tories would not implement the proposals of the Price-Spreads Commission.

The party was also isolationist: it opposed Canadian involvement in a European war and opposed the League of Nations sanctions against Fascist Italy for its invasion of Ethiopia.

The Reconstruction Party nominated 174 candidates in the 1935 federal election. It won more votes nationally than the other new parties. The Liberal vote was 2,076,394, the Conservatives 1,308,688, and that for the Reconstruction Party 389,708; while the Co-operative Commonwealth Federation and the Social Credit parties garnered 386,484 and 187,045 votes respectively. Many of the votes that the party won were taken away from the Conservative Party. In 48 ridings, the margin of victory for the Liberal candidate over the Conservative candidate was less than the number of votes received by the Reconstruction Party candidate.

Despite receiving 8.7% of the vote, the party won only one seat in the House of Commons of Canada - H. H. Stevens in Kootenay East riding. The Reconstruction Party came to an end when Stevens rejoined the Conservatives in 1938.

The party had a short lived provincial wing in Alberta that ran one candidate in 1935 Alberta provincial election and picked up 192 votes.

==Party program==
Fifteen points summarized the &quot;New National Policy of Reconstruction and Reform&quot;:
* a pledge to youth,
* a system of public works, including the completion of the Trans-Canada Highway,
* a national housing program; and
* in order to balance the budget, a Reconstruction government would administer federal taxes &quot;through a single set of auditors&quot; and would invite the provinces to cooperate in the system that would divide the returns on &quot;an equitable and agreeable basis.&quot;

==See also==
* List of federal political parties in Canada

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7302781" start="4" end="24" title="Reconstruction Party of Canada" label="Reconstruction Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q5722901" start="67" end="88" title="Henry Herbert Stevens" label="Henry Herbert Stevens"/>
<link wikidata="Q909827" start="102" end="114" title="Conservative Party of Canada (historical)" label="Conservative"/>
<link wikidata="Q486839" start="115" end="135" title="Member of Parliament" label="Member of Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q128645" start="185" end="199" title="Arthur Meighen" label="Arthur Meighen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2458227" start="227" end="235" title="Cabinet of Canada" label="Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q5599047" start="283" end="297" title="Great Depression in Canada" label="Depression-era"/>
<link wikidata="Q128641" start="312" end="325" title="R. B. Bennett" label="R. B. Bennett"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="351" end="375" title="Price-Spreads Commission" label="Price-Spreads Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q909827" start="571" end="577" title="Conservative Party of Canada (historical)" label="Tories"/>
<link wikidata="Q309310" start="665" end="677" title="isolationism" label="isolationist"/>
<link wikidata="Q38130" start="745" end="762" title="League of Nations" label="League of Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q48742118" start="781" end="794" title="Fascist Italy (1922–1943)" label="Fascist Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q94916" start="803" end="823" title="Second Italo-Ethiopian War" label="invasion of Ethiopia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1493320" start="883" end="904" title="1935 Canadian federal election" label="1935 federal election"/>
<link wikidata="Q138345" start="967" end="974" title="Liberal Party of Canada" label="Liberal"/>
<link wikidata="Q909827" start="999" end="1012" title="Conservative Party of Canada (historical)" label="Conservatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q1104026" start="1081" end="1117" title="Co-operative Commonwealth Federation" label="Co-operative Commonwealth Federation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3326543" start="1126" end="1139" title="Canadian social credit movement" label="Social Credit"/>
<link wikidata="Q2973938" start="1285" end="1292" title="Electoral district (Canada)" label="ridings"/>
<link wikidata="Q383590" start="1528" end="1554" title="House of Commons of Canada" label="House of Commons of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q5722901" start="1557" end="1570" title="H. H. Stevens" label="H. H. Stevens"/>
<link wikidata="Q3198830" start="1574" end="1587" title="Kootenay East" label="Kootenay East"/>
<link wikidata="Q1951" start="1733" end="1740" title="Alberta" label="Alberta"/>
<link wikidata="Q3586286" start="1767" end="1799" title="1935 Alberta general election" label="1935 Alberta provincial election"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061576" start="2017" end="2037" title="Trans-Canada Highway" label="Trans-Canada Highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q6619376" start="2364" end="2407" title="List of federal political parties in Canada" label="List of federal political parties in Canada"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="461256" wikidata="Q2906769" url="?curid=461256" title="Bloc populaire">
<text>The  (, ), often shortened to the Bloc populaire or the Bloc, was a political party in the Canadian province of Quebec from 1942 to 1947. It was founded on September 8, 1942 by opponents of conscription during the Second World War. The party ran candidates at both federal and provincial levels. In the 1945 federal election, the party made a minor breakthrough by winning two seats in the House of Commons.

==Origin==
In early 1942, Liguori Lacombe formed the anti-conscriptionist Parti canadien which finished strongly in two February by-elections.

In the April 27, 1942 national plebiscite on conscription held in Canada, a little more than 70% of Quebec voters refused to free the federal government from its promise to avoid a general mobilization, while about 80 per cent of the citizens of the rest of Canada accepted it. (see also Second Conscription Crisis)

The party was inspired by the nationalist ideas of Henri Bourassa and supported by Montreal mayor Camillien Houde. Jean Drapeau and Pierre Elliot Trudeau were members in their youth.

In addition to opposing conscription, the party aimed to defend provincial autonomy and the rights of French-Canadians.

==Provincial level==

At the provincial level, it was led by André Laurendeau and won four seats in the 1944 Quebec general election, but soon lost popularity. Laurendeau resigned in July 1947, and the party dissolved and did not participate in the 1948 general election.

==Federal level==

At the federal level it was led by Maxime Raymond, who had been Member of Parliament (MP) from the province of Quebec since the 1925 federal election. He and two of his Liberal colleagues (Édouard Lacroix and Pierre Gauthier) crossed the floor to sit as Bloc populaire canadien MPs.

The Bloc populaire won a federal by-election in 1943.

The Bloc populaire&#x27;s entry into provincial politics antagonized Quebec Premier Maurice Duplessis, leader of the Union Nationale, who henceforth transferred his party&#x27;s federal support to the &quot;Independent Group&quot; of anti-conscription MPs led by Frédéric Dorion in the 1945 federal election.

In the 1945 federal election, the Bloc nominated 35 candidates. All of them except two ran in Quebec-based ridings. (Lionel Campeau, ran in the district of Nipissing in Northern Ontario and Léandre Maisonneuve ran in the Eastern Ontario riding of Prescott. Only two candidates were elected as Members of Parliament: Maxime Raymond and René Hamel. Though former Montreal mayor Camillien Houde was officially listed as an independent candidate, he was reported to be the Bloc populaire&#x27;s co-leader in the 1945 election.

In addition to the Bloc populaire, there was also an &quot;Independent Group&quot; of five anti-conscription MPs led by Frédéric Dorion which included Liguori Lacombe, Wilfrid Lacroix, Sasseville Roy and Emmanuel D&#x27;Anjou (D&#x27;Anjou had joined the Bloc in June 1944 but had left to join Dorion&#x27;s group by the time of the 1945 election). Additionally, Arthur Cardin quit Mackenzie King&#x27;s cabinet in May 1942 over the conscription issue to sit as an anti-conscription independent MP.

==Decline==

The Second World War ended in 1945, and by the late 1940s the party&#x27;s concerns had largely become a non-issue. Many insiders abandoned the party. The Bloc populaire canadien contested neither the 1948 provincial election nor the 1949 federal election, and soon ceased to exist.

==Publications==
The party published a modest and short-lived weekly newspaper, &quot;Le Bloc&quot;, in 1944 and 1945, with a circulation of about 15,000 copies. The newspaper was under the responsibility of Victor Trépanier in early 1944 and of Léopold Richer in 1944–1945. The party also published a series of ten brochures reproducing the texts of radio speeches by its leaders.

==Quebec provincial election results==

==Members of the Legislative Assembly of Quebec==

==Members of the Canadian House of Commons==

==Notable defeated candidate==

== Prominent insider==

==Notes==
==References==
==See also==
* Conscription Crisis of 1944 
* Politics of Quebec
* List of Quebec general elections
* National Assembly of Quebec
* Timeline of Quebec history

==External links==
* Platform of the Bloc populaire (1944)
* National Assembly historical information
* La Politique québécoise sur le Web</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2906769" start="4" end="4" title="Bloc populaire" label=""/>
<link wikidata="Q2906769" start="34" end="48" title="Bloc populaire" label="Bloc populaire"/>
<link wikidata="Q2906769" start="56" end="60" title="Bloc populaire" label="Bloc"/>
<link wikidata="Q7278" start="68" end="83" title="political party" label="political party"/>
<link wikidata="Q2879" start="91" end="108" title="Canadian province" label="Canadian province"/>
<link wikidata="Q176" start="112" end="118" title="Quebec" label="Quebec"/>
<link wikidata="Q580750" start="190" end="202" title="conscription" label="conscription"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="214" end="230" title="Second World War" label="Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1723532" start="303" end="324" title="1945 Canadian federal election" label="1945 federal election"/>
<link wikidata="Q9247597" start="390" end="406" title="House of Commons" label="House of Commons"/>
<link wikidata="Q3240688" start="435" end="450" title="Liguori Lacombe" label="Liguori Lacombe"/>
<link wikidata="Q7140307" start="483" end="497" title="Parti canadien (1942)" label="Parti canadien"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="575" end="610" title="Referendums in Canada#Plebiscite on conscription" label="national plebiscite on conscription"/>
<link wikidata="Q910177" start="841" end="867" title="Second Conscription Crisis" label="Second Conscription Crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q641794" start="900" end="911" title="Canadian nationalism" label="nationalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q3130733" start="921" end="935" title="Henri Bourassa" label="Henri Bourassa"/>
<link wikidata="Q340" start="953" end="961" title="Montreal" label="Montreal"/>
<link wikidata="Q461476" start="968" end="983" title="Camillien Houde" label="Camillien Houde"/>
<link wikidata="Q979154" start="985" end="997" title="Jean Drapeau" label="Jean Drapeau"/>
<link wikidata="Q8619" start="1002" end="1023" title="Pierre Elliot Trudeau" label="Pierre Elliot Trudeau"/>
<link wikidata="Q2848105" start="1236" end="1252" title="André Laurendeau" label="André Laurendeau"/>
<link wikidata="Q3586413" start="1279" end="1307" title="1944 Quebec general election" label="1944 Quebec general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q3586414" start="1424" end="1445" title="1948 Quebec general election" label="1948 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q3302673" start="1502" end="1516" title="Maxime Raymond" label="Maxime Raymond"/>
<link wikidata="Q176" start="1578" end="1584" title="Quebec" label="Quebec"/>
<link wikidata="Q1723528" start="1595" end="1616" title="1925 Canadian federal election" label="1925 federal election"/>
<link wikidata="Q138345" start="1636" end="1643" title="Liberal Party of Canada" label="Liberal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3579923" start="1656" end="1671" title="Édouard Lacroix" label="Édouard Lacroix"/>
<link wikidata="Q3385175" start="1676" end="1691" title="Pierre Gauthier (politician)" label="Pierre Gauthier"/>
<link wikidata="Q5188683" start="1693" end="1710" title="crossed the floor" label="crossed the floor"/>
<link wikidata="Q113941" start="1890" end="1907" title="Maurice Duplessis" label="Maurice Duplessis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1815983" start="1923" end="1938" title="Union Nationale (Quebec)" label="Union Nationale"/>
<link wikidata="Q3089776" start="2069" end="2084" title="Frédéric Dorion" label="Frédéric Dorion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1723532" start="2092" end="2113" title="1945 Canadian federal election" label="1945 federal election"/>
<link wikidata="Q1723532" start="2123" end="2144" title="1945 Canadian federal election" label="1945 federal election"/>
<link wikidata="Q176" start="2210" end="2216" title="Quebec" label="Quebec"/>
<link wikidata="Q3342103" start="2272" end="2281" title="Nipissing (electoral district)" label="Nipissing"/>
<link wikidata="Q2066392" start="2285" end="2301" title="Northern Ontario" label="Northern Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q3058779" start="2337" end="2352" title="Eastern Ontario" label="Eastern Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q3402377" start="2363" end="2371" title="Prescott (federal electoral district)" label="Prescott"/>
<link wikidata="Q3302673" start="2432" end="2446" title="Maxime Raymond" label="Maxime Raymond"/>
<link wikidata="Q3426338" start="2451" end="2461" title="René Hamel" label="René Hamel"/>
<link wikidata="Q461476" start="2492" end="2507" title="Camillien Houde" label="Camillien Houde"/>
<link wikidata="Q3089776" start="2760" end="2775" title="Frédéric Dorion" label="Frédéric Dorion"/>
<link wikidata="Q3240688" start="2791" end="2806" title="Liguori Lacombe" label="Liguori Lacombe"/>
<link wikidata="Q3568202" start="2808" end="2823" title="Wilfrid Lacroix" label="Wilfrid Lacroix"/>
<link wikidata="Q3185619" start="2825" end="2839" title="Sasseville Roy" label="Sasseville Roy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3184445" start="2844" end="2865" title="Joseph-Émile-Stanislas-Émmanuel D&amp;#x27;Anjou" label="Emmanuel D&amp;#x27;Anjou"/>
<link wikidata="Q3385607" start="3003" end="3016" title="Arthur Cardin" label="Arthur Cardin"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="3157" end="3173" title="Second World War" label="Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q3586414" start="3354" end="3378" title="1948 Quebec general election" label="1948 provincial election"/>
<link wikidata="Q912416" start="3387" end="3408" title="1949 Canadian federal election" label="1949 federal election"/>
<link wikidata="Q910177" start="4053" end="4080" title="Conscription Crisis of 1944" label="Conscription Crisis of 1944"/>
<link wikidata="Q986069" start="4084" end="4102" title="Politics of Quebec" label="Politics of Quebec"/>
<link wikidata="Q3586951" start="4105" end="4137" title="List of Quebec general elections" label="List of Quebec general elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q1492249" start="4140" end="4167" title="National Assembly of Quebec" label="National Assembly of Quebec"/>
<link wikidata="Q2966956" start="4170" end="4196" title="Timeline of Quebec history" label="Timeline of Quebec history"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="461257" wikidata="Q951941" url="?curid=461257" title="Social Credit Party of Canada">
<text>The Social Credit Party of Canada (), colloquially known as the Socreds, was a populist political party in Canada that promoted social credit theories of monetary reform. It was the federal wing of the Canadian social credit movement.

== Origins and founding: 1932–1963 ==

The Canadian social credit movement was largely an out-growth of the Alberta Social Credit Party, and the Social Credit Party of Canada was strongest in Alberta during this period. In 1932, Baptist evangelist William Aberhart used his radio program to preach the values of social credit throughout the province. He added a heavy dose of fundamentalist Christianity to C. H. Douglas&#x27; monetary theories; as a result, the social credit movement in Canada has had a strong social conservative tint.

The party was formed in 1935 as the Western Social Credit League. It attracted voters from the Progressive Party of Canada and the United Farmers movement. The party grew out of disaffection with the status quo during the Great Depression, which hit the party&#x27;s western Canadian birthplace especially hard. This mood can be credited both for the creation of this party and the rise of the social democratic Co-operative Commonwealth Federation, forerunner of today&#x27;s New Democratic Party.

In the party&#x27;s first federal election in 1935, it only ran candidates in Western Canada. It won 17 seats, of which 15 were in Alberta where it won over 46% of that province&#x27;s popular vote. John Horne Blackmore was chosen as the party&#x27;s parliamentary leader.

In 1939, Social Credit merged with the New Democracy movement led by former Conservative William Duncan Herridge. However, Herridge failed to win a seat in the 1940 election, and Blackmore continued as parliamentary leader. At the party&#x27;s first national convention in 1944, delegates decided to abandon the name New Democracy and founded the Social Credit Association of Canada as a national party. They chose Alberta Treasurer Solon Earl Low as the party&#x27;s first national leader.

In its early years, the Socreds gained a reputation for antisemitism. It was said by the &quot;Encyclopedia Judaica&quot; that Blackmore and Low &quot;frequently gave public aid and comfort to antisemitism&quot; In 1945, Solon Low alleged there was a conspiracy of Jewish bankers behind the world&#x27;s problems, and in 1947, Norman Jaques, the Socred Member of Parliament for Wetaskiwin, read excerpts of &quot;The Protocols of the Elders of Zion&quot; into the parliamentary Hansard. Low repudiated antisemitism in 1957 following a trip to Israel after which he made speeches supporting the Jewish state. After World War II made antisemitism intolerable, the party began purging itself of antisemitic influences, leading Quebec social crediter Louis Even and his followers to leave the party in 1947.

In 1957, Low led the party to its best performance so far, with 19 seats. In 1958, however, the Socreds were swept out of the Commons altogether as part of that year&#x27;s massive Progressive Conservative landslide. Although it was not apparent at the time, this began a long-term decline for the party. For most of its first quarter-century of existence, Social Credit had been either the first or second party in much of rural western Canada, particularly in its birthplace of rural Alberta. In 1957, for instance, it took 13 of Alberta&#x27;s 17 seats, however the 1958 defeat firmly established the Tories as the main right-of-centre party west of Ontario, and Social Credit would never seriously challenge the Tories there again.

=== Provincial social credit movements ===

==== Alberta ====
Aberhart received a positive response from Albertans to his social credit philosophies. In 1935, much to its own surprise, the Alberta Social Credit Party won the 1935 provincial election, forming the first Social Credit government in the world. It went on to win nine subsequent elections, and governed until 1971.

==== Quebec ====
In the 1940s, Social Credit supporters in Quebec often ran under the name Union des électeurs. This was a social credit organization that was formed in 1939 by Louis Even and Gilberte Côté-Mercier as the political arm of their religious organization, the Pilgrims of Saint Michael. They shared some ideologies, but did not merge or collaborate with the western-based national party and had an inconsistent attitude towards electoral politics. The Union des électeurs&#x27; electoral philosophy was that it was not a partisan political party but an organization to marshal voters to enforce their wishes on their elected representatives. Even believed party politics was corrupt and that the party system should be abolished and replaced by a &quot;union of electors&quot; who would compel elected officials to follow the popular will. The Union also favoured a more orthodox application of social credit economic theory, something that the western based Social Credit movement had begun to move away from under the influence of Alberta premier Ernest Manning. This led to tensions with the national party and Even initially opposed the creation of a national Social Credit Party.

Réal Caouette, a member of the Union des électeurs, won a 1946 by-election as a Social Credit MP and ran, unsuccessfully, for re-election as a Union des électeurs candidate in the 1949 federal election. In 1958, Caouette disagreed with Even, Côté-Mercier and the increasingly hostile attitude of the Union des électeurs towards elections and party politics. He founded the Ralliement des créditistes which won recognition as the Quebec wing of the national Social Credit party.

==== Ontario ====
The Union des électeurs philosophy inspired an Ontario group, the Union of Electors led by Ron Gostick, to form in 1950 as a rival to the Ontario Social Credit League. It first ran candidates in the 1948 provincial election under the &quot;Union of Electors&quot; label. Even&#x27;s views also led to a debate within the national Social Credit Party about whether to continue to run on a Social Credit basis or under the &quot;non-partisan&quot; Union of Electors banner.

==== British Columbia ====
In British Columbia, the movement split: both the British Columbia Social Credit League and the Union of Electors ran candidates in the 1949 provincial election. In the 1952 provincial election, the Social Credit party under W. A. C. Bennett won a plurality of seats (defeating the Co-operative Commonwealth Federation by one seat) in the election. The Socreds won a majority government in 1953, and Bennett governed the province until his loss in the 1972 provincial election. The party won the subsequent 1975 provincial election and governed until 1991.

==== Saskatchewan and Manitoba ====
The provincial social credit parties of Saskatchewan and Manitoba won some ridings in the 1950s and 1960s; however, they were unable to form a government.

== Split between Quebec and English Canadian factions: 1963–1973 ==
In the early 1960s, there were serious tensions between the party&#x27;s English and French wings. In 1961, Robert Thompson of Alberta defeated Caouette at the party&#x27;s leadership convention. The vote totals were never announced. Years later, Caouette claimed that he would have won, but Manning advised him to tell the Quebec delegates to vote for Thompson because the West would never accept a Francophone Catholic as party leader.

The party returned to Parliament in the 1962 election, electing 30 members, its highest-ever seat total. Caouette and 25 other créditistes were elected from Quebec, however it only elected four MPs from the rest of Canada, including Thompson in Red Deer, Alberta. This began a gradual shift in the federal party&#x27;s strength from Western Canada to Quebec.

Under the circumstances, Thompson had no choice but to name Caouette the party&#x27;s deputy leader. The linguistic imbalance caused tension in the Social Credit caucus, as the Quebec MPs regarded Caouette as their leader. Also, Caouette and the other Quebec MPs remained true believers in social credit theory while the English branch had largely abandoned it. Thompson refused to resign as party leader and the party voted in 1963 for a motion of non-confidence against the government of John Diefenbaker, forcing an election. The Socreds won 24 seats, all but four coming from Quebec.

On September 9, 1963, the party split into an English Canadian wing and a separate French Canadian party led by Caouette called the Ralliement des créditistes. Of the 20 Social Credit MPs from Quebec in 1963, 13 joined Caouette&#x27;s Ralliement. Of the remaining seven, two ran in the next election as independents, and two joined the Progressive Conservatives.

=== Decline of the party in English Canada ===
The English Canadian party, concentrated in Alberta and British Columbia, won only five seats in the 1965 federal election. Thompson was frustrated by the lack of support given to the federal wing, while the provincial parties in Alberta and British Columbia won provincial elections with large majorities. British Columbia&#x27;s Socred Premier, W. A. C. Bennett cut off his party&#x27;s organizational and financial support after the 1965 election in hopes of pressuring the federal party to reconcile with Caouette&#x27;s Créditistes.

Alberta Premier Manning was becoming concerned with the perceived leftward trajectory of the federal Liberals and Progressive Conservatives (PCs). He encouraged Thompson to begin talks with the PCs about a merger. Negotiations failed and in March 1967, citing lack of support for the party from its provincial wings in Alberta and British Columbia, Thompson resigned as leader. In the fall Bud Olson left to join the Liberals. With the support of both Manning and PC leader Robert Stanfield, Thompson crossed the floor to the PCs. He sought and won the PC nomination in Red Deer when the June 1968 federal election was called. Alexander Bell Patterson was named acting leader of the remains.

In the 1968 election, Social Credit lost its remaining three seats. This was due to its internal turmoil, Manning&#x27;s call to merge with the PCs, the defections of Thompson and Olson, and the wave of Trudeaumania across Canada. National party president Herb Bruch said Patterson&#x27;s refusal to take a clear stand on whether the Socreds would support Robert Stanfield’s PCs in Parliament was a contributing factor in the party&#x27;s defeat. Patterson expressed confidence that the party could return as it had after the Diefenbaker sweep in the 1958 election, noting the strength of the Créditistes in Quebec, and expressed hope that the two parties would be reunited. The party, however, would never win another seat in English Canada.

=== Reunification ===

In 1971, the Ralliement des créditistes and the English Canadian Social Credit Party held a joint leadership convention at the Hull Arena. The two parties merged into a single national party under the Social Credit name, and Caouette won the leadership on the first ballot.

In the 1972 election, the Social Credit Party won 15 seats—all in Quebec—and 7.6% of the popular vote. Manning was appointed to the Senate of Canada in 1970—the first and (as it turned out) only Socred ever to serve in that body. Patterson returned to Parliament as a Progressive Conservative in the 1972 election.

== Decline: 1973–1980 ==
Despite a modest success in the 1970 Quebec election, the provincial wing of the party was wracked continually by internal divisions, eventually splitting into two factions, one led by Camil Samson and the other by Armand Bois. On February 4, 1973, former federal Liberal cabinet minister Yvon Dupuis was elected leader of the Ralliement créditiste du Québec, but failed to win his riding of Saint-Jean in the 1973 provincial election, and the party only retained two of their 12 seats. Under pressure and without a seat, Dupuis resigned the leadership on May 5, 1974.

In the 1974 federal election, the Social Credit Party machine in Quebec began to fall apart. Caouette was recovering from a snowmobiling accident and was unable to actively lead the party. When he was able to speak, Caouette focused his campaign on the Tories and the New Democratic Party instead of the Liberals, even though the Liberals were Social Credit&#x27;s main competitor in Quebec. Two weeks before the election was called, Caouette had informed the parliamentary caucus that he would resign as leader in the fall.

Party rallies faced declining, aging audiences. Feuding within the party had accelerated and some ridings in Quebec had two Social Credit candidates, while others — including the party&#x27;s Lévis stronghold — had none. Many Social Credit MPs ran for re-election on their own strengths, making little mention of the party or its leader in their campaign materials. The party&#x27;s support in Quebec was undermined by rumours that its MPs had made deals with the Progressive Conservatives during Caouette&#x27;s illness.

The Socreds won 11 seats, which was considered a success in light of the divisions that plagued their campaign, but was one short of the 12 seats needed for official party status in the House of Commons. The Socreds failed in their attempts to convince Independent MP Leonard Jones to join their party and the Socreds made attempts to get recognition as an official party. The Speaker of the House of Commons, with approval from the Liberal government, decided to recognize the party.

=== Leadership turmoil ===
The decline of the party accelerated after Caouette resigned from the party leadership in 1976. He was hospitalized after a stroke on September 16, and died later that year. The party held its leadership convention November 6–7, 1976 at the Civic Centre in Ottawa. This time, 85% of the delegates were from Quebec.

André-Gilles Fortin, the 32-year-old MP for Lotbinière won the convention on the second ballot. Fortin presented a young, dynamic image, but campaigned on traditional social credit economic theory and supporting small business. Fortin was killed in a car accident on June 24, 1977, after serving only eight months as leader. Réal&#x27;s son, Gilles Caouette, was named acting leader five days after Fortin&#x27;s death.

In 1978, Socreds elected Lorne Reznowski as their leader, in an attempt to revive the party outside of Quebec. Reznowski, an anglophone Manitoban, presented himself as a candidate in the October 16, 1978, by-elections and fared extremely poorly with 2.76% of votes in the riding of Saint Boniface. He resigned quickly thereafter and was replaced as acting leader by Charles-Arthur Gauthier.

=== Roy&#x27;s leadership ===
Popular provincial Fabien Roy was selected to lead Social Credit just before the 1979 election. Under Roy, the party won the tacit support of the separatist &quot;Parti Québécois&quot;, which had become the government of Quebec three years earlier. Social Credit attempted to rally the separatist and nationalist vote: Canadian flags were absent at its campaign kick-off rally, and the party&#x27;s slogan was (&#x27;It&#x27;s our turn&#x27;), which was reminiscent of the popular separatist anthem &quot;Gens du pays&quot; that includes the chorus, . The party focused its platform on constitutional change, promising to fight to abolish the federal government&#x27;s never-used right to disallow any provincial legislation, and stating that each province has a &quot;right to choose its own destiny within Canada&quot;.

Gilles Caouette publicly denounced what he called (&#x27;PQ supporters disguised as Socreds&#x27;). Caouette had said that he wanted to work within the spirit and letter of Confederation, stating, &quot;Let us not burn our bridges. It is not the time for the Ralliement des créditistes to be separatists, but rather to win recognition for the French fact within Canada.&quot; Caouette said that he would fight for the recognition of French Canada&#x27;s aspirations within Confederation on the basis of a partnership with the other nine provinces, &quot;but if this partnership cannot be brought about, I shall become the more ardent separatist in Quebec.&quot;

The party increased its vote in areas where the PQ was popular, but lost support in areas of traditional Socred strength. This resulted in the Socred caucus being cut in half, from eleven seats to six, and a slightly reduced share of the popular vote compared to the 1974 election.

=== Clark minority government ===
Joe Clark&#x27;s Progressive Conservatives formed a minority government after the 1979 federal election. The Socreds had just enough seats to give the Tories a majority in the House of Commons. Clark, however, declared that he would govern as if he had a majority and refused to grant the small Social Credit caucus the official party status it wanted or make concessions to the party in order to gain its votes. Clark convinced one Socred MP, Richard Janelle from Lotbinière, to cross the floor and join the government caucus. In December 1979, the remaining five members of the Social Credit caucus demanded that the Conservatives amend their budget to allocate the controversial gas tax revenues to Quebec. Clark refused and the Socreds abstained in a vote on a motion of non-confidence, which, along with several Conservative party members not being able to attend the vote, caused the government to fall.

While Roy cited a prior precedent in then-leader Réal Caouette having the party abstain in a motion of non-confidence in the government of Lester B. Pearson in 1968, his doing the same would prove to be a disastrous and, ultimately, fatal miscalculation. Whereas the make-up of the 1968 parliament had been such that the motion of non-confidence in Pearson had little realistic chance of succeeding (and Caouette&#x27;s abstention definitively ended any chance of it doing so), the margins in the 1979 parliament were sufficiently tight that, had the Socreds supported the government and even one of the absent Progressive Conservative MPs been present, the motion of non-confidence would have tied on votes and, according to tradition, been defeated by the speaker&#x27;s casting vote. Moreover, both of the party&#x27;s major bases of support were alienated by the abstention, with the Quebec nationalist faction seeing Socreds as being ineffective at representing the province&#x27;s interests, and the social conservative faction being enraged that the party had effectively offered former prime minister Pierre Trudeau, who had intended to resign as Liberal Party leader until Clark&#x27;s government fell, a route back into power. In the 1980 election the Socreds&#x27; popular vote fell to 1.7 percent, and it lost its remaining seats.

The death of the Social Credit candidate in the riding of Frontenac, Quebec, resulted in the postponement of the election in that riding to March 24, 1980. Fabien Roy sought to return to the House of Commons in that by-election, but lost to the Liberal candidate. Roy resigned as leader on November 1, 1980. The party would never again win a seat in the House of Commons, or even come close to doing so.

== Denouement: 1981–1993 ==

After Fabien Roy&#x27;s resignation, the party chose Martin Hattersley in 1981 as interim leader over Alberta evangelist Ken Sweigard. Hattersley was an Edmonton lawyer and former British army officer.

In the May 4, 1981 by-election in Levis, Quebec, the party nominated Martin Caya. Caya placed sixth in a field of seven candidates, winning 367 votes (1.1% of the total), ahead of renegade Socred John Turmel. In the August 17, 1981 by-election in Quebec, party president Carl O’Malley placed 5th in a field of eight candidates, with 92 votes (0.2% of the total). Turmel won 42 votes, placing last.

Hattersley resigned in 1983 when the party overturned his decision to expel Jim Keegstra and two other Albertans accused of anti-Semitism from the party.

In June 1983, Sweigard was elected interim leader by means of a telephone conference call of 19 party executive members, with nine votes to five votes for party vice-president Richard Lawrence. Quebec party member Adrien Lambert was nominated, but could not be reached by telephone. He nonetheless won two votes.

When the call began, two candidates were in the race: professional gambler John Turmel of Ottawa, and tractor dealer Elmer Knutson of Edmonton, the founder of West-Fed, a western Canada separatist movement.

Turmel&#x27;s candidacy was rejected on the basis that his membership had been suspended. Turmel formed the Christian Credit Party, and later, the Abolitionist Party of Canada, both based on social credit principles. Knutson failed to win endorsement because he was not well known by the members of the executive. Knutson quit the party to form the Confederation of Regions Party.

The meeting decided to appoint an interim leader until a leadership convention could be held in September 1983. This convention was deferred until June 1986, and Sweigard remained as interim leader until that time. Also in 1983, Manning retired from the Senate after reaching the mandatory retirement age of 75, ending Social Credit&#x27;s representation on Parliament Hill.

In the 1984 election, the party nominated 52 candidates in 51 ridings, the second-fewest that it had ever run since it began nominating candidates east of Manitoba. None of those candidates even came close to being elected, and the party collected a total of 17,044 votes (0.13% of votes cast in all ridings), losing over 92 percent of its 1980 vote and dropping from fourth place to ninth place. Two candidates ran as Social Credit candidates in the BC riding of Prince George-Peace River. The party&#x27;s strength remained in Quebec and Alberta, but also ran candidates in British Columbia, Saskatchewan, Ontario and New Brunswick. For all intents and purposes, this was the end of Social Credit as a viable party.
Sweigard resigned as leader in 1986. The party&#x27;s leadership was won by the socially conservative Ontario evangelical minister Harvey Lainson, who defeated Holocaust denier James Keegstra by 67 votes to 38 at a delegated convention in Toronto. Lainson&#x27;s campaign focused on gun rights and an opposition to abortion and the metric system. (He was not affiliated with the anti-Semitic groups that endorsed Keegstra.)

In July 1987, the party&#x27;s national executive ousted Lainson over his call to rename the party the Christian Freedom Party of Canada and Keegstra was appointed acting leader. Lainson, however, refused to relinquish the leadership and Keegstra was expelled from the Social Credit Party and its successor the Christian Freedom Social Credit Party in September. The party was still listed with Elections Canada as the Social Credit Party.

The party nominated Andrew Varaday as its candidate in the 1987 Hamilton Mountain by-election. He won 149 votes (0.4% of the total), placing last in a field of six candidates, which included John Turmel (166 votes).

In the 1988 election, what remained of the party nominated nine candidates: six in Quebec, two in Ontario, and one in British Columbia. These candidates collected a total of 3,408 votes (0.02% of votes cast in all ridings). The British Columbia candidate, running in New Westminster—Burnaby, won 718 votes (1.3% of the total). Although the party came far short of nominating the 50 candidates required for official status, the Chief Electoral Officer agreed to put the party&#x27;s name on the ballots for the nine candidates on the basis of its half-century historical status as an official party.

Lainson resigned as leader in 1990, and another social conservative evangelist, Ken Campbell, took over the party. He continued to describe the party as the Christian Freedom Party in public appearances, although he also retained the &quot;Social Credit&quot; name on official documents for tax purposes. Under Campbell, the party began moving back toward traditional social credit theory.

The party nominated two candidates in by-elections, each of whom won 96 votes. In the February 12 by-election in Chambly, Quebec, Emilian Martel placed last in a field of six, winning 0.2% of the total vote. Party leader Ken Campbell placed seventh out of ten, winning 0.4% of the total vote in the August 13 by-election in Oshawa, Ontario. John Turmel placed last with 50 votes in this race.

After changes to election law required a party to nominate at least 50 candidates in order to keep its registration and assets, Campbell scrambled to nominate at least that number for the 1993 election so he could relaunch the party under the Christian Freedom name. However, it was only able to nominate ten candidates and was deregistered by Elections Canada on September 27, 1993. Its candidates in that election appeared on the ballot as non-affiliated candidates. Campbell later ran as an unofficial &quot;Christian Freedom Party&quot; candidate in a 1996 by-election in Hamilton East, appearing on the ballot as an independent.

Social Credit has never made another attempt to run candidates again. However, it continued to exist as an incorporated non-profit entity, the &quot;Social Credit Party of Canada, Incorporated.&quot; Until his death in 2006, Campbell used it to publish political advocacy material in order to preserve his ministry&#x27;s status as a religious charity.

== Election results (1935–1988) ==
(These results include New Democracy candidates in the 1940 election but does not include those for Union des électeurs, Independent Social Credit candidates, or the Ralliement des créditistes.)

* In the 1940 election, former Canadian ambassador to the US W. D. Herridge led a group of 17 candidates (including some Social Credit incumbents such as party leader Blackmore and prominent social crediters such as Louis Even) as members of a monetary reform party called New Democracy, which was endorsed by the Social Credit movement. New Democracy ran 17 candidates, received 73,083 votes (1.59%), and won 3 seats (Robert Fair, Walter Frederick Kuhl, and Blackmore – all of whom were incumbent Social Credit MPs running for re-election as New Democracy candidates). Nine seats were contested by candidates who ran under the Social Credit banner – they received 46,271 votes (1%), and 7 of them were elected. Herridge failed to win a seat in Parliament and the 3 New Democracy MPs joined the 7-member Social Credit MPs the House of Commons, under Blackmore&#x27;s leadership, with a caucus seat total of 10 members. After the election, the combined caucus was known as New Democracy; the party&#x27;s national convention in 1944 voted to revert to the name Social Credit.

** In the 1965 and 1968 elections, Quebec social crediters ran separately as the Ralliement des créditistes winning nine and fifteen seats, respectively.

*** The Quebec-based Ralliement des créditistes, which had won 14 seats in 1968 and was the 4th place party, reunited with the national Social Credit party, essentially taking it over. All seats won by the party in 1972 and subsequently were in Quebec. When the 1972 results are compared to the Railliement&#x27;s 1968 results there is only a gain of 1 seat and an increase in the popular vote of 2.27 percentage points and no change in place.

== Attempted revival ==
From 2006 to 2009 Wayne Cook, a father&#x27;s rights activist from Toronto and candidate in 2000 for the Canadian Action Party, attempted to revive the national Social Credit Party of Canada/Parti Credit Social du Canada. His attempt failed to win sufficient support to enable his group to become a registered political party with Elections Canada and the group did not run candidates in the 2008 federal election on either an official or unofficial basis. In June 2009, he announced that his unregistered Social Credit Party of Canada would fold and urged all members to join with the Christian Heritage Party of Canada.

Since the demise of the federal party, several small fringe parties have attempted to promote social credit economic policy while not advocating the social conservativism that the Social Credit Party was known for. John Turmel, who is in the Guinness Book of Records for the most elections contested and for the most elections lost, is an advocate of social credit monetary theory and founded the Abolitionist Party of Canada which ran 80 candidates in the 1993 federal election on a social credit style economic platform. The party was dissolved in 1996. (Turmel also founded the short-lived Christian Credit Party in the early 1980s after he was expelled from the Social Credit Party.)

The Canada Party, founded by former Social Credit candidate Joseph Thauberger, also ran candidates in the 1993 election on a platform of monetary reform influenced by social credit. Many of its members also belonged to the social credit influenced Committee on Monetary and Economic Reform (COMER). In 1997, the Canada Party merged with the left economic nationalist Canadian Action Party which, while not a social credit party &quot;per se&quot;, adopted a monetary reform policy that is heavily influenced by COMER and the Canada Party.

== Leaders ==

*John Horne Blackmore, MP (1935–1944) &quot;parliamentary leader&quot;
*Solon Earl Low, MP (1944–1961)
*Robert Thompson, MP (1961–1967)
*Alexander Bell Patterson, MP (1967–1968) &quot;acting leader&quot;
*Réal Caouette, MP (1971–1976)
*André-Gilles Fortin, MP (1976–1977)
*Gilles Caouette, MP (1977–1978) &quot;acting leader&quot;
*Charles-Arthur Gauthier, MP (1978) &quot;acting leader&quot;
*Lorne Reznowski (1978–1979)
*Charles-Arthur Gauthier, MP (1979) &quot;acting leader&quot;
*Fabien Roy, MP (1979–1980)
*Martin Hattersley (1981–1983)
*Ken Sweigard (1983–1986) &quot;acting leader&quot;
*Harvey Lainson (1986–1990)
*Jim Keegstra &quot;acting leader&quot; (July 27–28, 1987)
*Ken Campbell (1990–1993)

Source:Parliament of Canada website: Party File: Social Credit Party

== See also ==
*Canadian social credit movement
*Ralliement créditiste
*List of Social Credit/Créditistes MPs
*Social Credit Party of Alberta
*Social Credit Party of British Columbia
*Ralliement créditiste du Québec
*Manitoba Social Credit Party
*Social Credit Party of Saskatchewan
*Social Credit Party of Ontario

== Footnotes ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q951941" start="4" end="33" title="Social Credit Party of Canada" label="Social Credit Party of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q951941" start="64" end="71" title="Social Credit Party of Canada" label="Socreds"/>
<link wikidata="Q180490" start="79" end="87" title="populism" label="populist"/>
<link wikidata="Q16" start="107" end="113" title="Canada" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q1756412" start="128" end="141" title="social credit" label="social credit"/>
<link wikidata="Q3326543" start="202" end="233" title="Canadian social credit movement" label="Canadian social credit movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q1518382" start="344" end="371" title="Alberta Social Credit Party" label="Alberta Social Credit Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1951" start="428" end="435" title="Alberta" label="Alberta"/>
<link wikidata="Q373069" start="473" end="483" title="evangelism" label="evangelist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1311454" start="484" end="500" title="William Aberhart" label="William Aberhart"/>
<link wikidata="Q1101288" start="643" end="656" title="C. H. Douglas" label="C. H. Douglas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2112263" start="871" end="898" title="Progressive Party of Canada" label="Progressive Party of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q2622935" start="907" end="921" title="United Farmers of Canada" label="United Farmers"/>
<link wikidata="Q8698" start="998" end="1014" title="Great Depression" label="Great Depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q1104026" start="1188" end="1224" title="Co-operative Commonwealth Federation" label="Co-operative Commonwealth Federation"/>
<link wikidata="Q130765" start="1253" end="1273" title="New Democratic Party (Canada)" label="New Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1493320" start="1310" end="1326" title="1935 Canadian federal election" label="election in 1935"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145847" start="1354" end="1368" title="Western Canada" label="Western Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196727" start="1461" end="1473" title="Direct election" label="popular vote"/>
<link wikidata="Q6239893" start="1475" end="1495" title="John Horne Blackmore" label="John Horne Blackmore"/>
<link wikidata="Q7006862" start="1589" end="1602" title="New Democracy (Canada)" label="New Democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q909827" start="1626" end="1638" title="Conservative Party of Canada (historical)" label="Conservative"/>
<link wikidata="Q8008104" start="1639" end="1662" title="William Duncan Herridge" label="William Duncan Herridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1448629" start="1710" end="1723" title="1940 Canadian federal election" label="1940 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q3489584" start="1983" end="1997" title="Solon Earl Low" label="Solon Earl Low"/>
<link wikidata="Q22649" start="2098" end="2110" title="antisemitism" label="antisemitism"/>
<link wikidata="Q846103" start="2137" end="2157" title="Encyclopedia Judaica" label="Encyclopedia Judaica"/>
<link wikidata="Q282728" start="2293" end="2321" title="Jewish conspiracy" label="conspiracy of Jewish bankers"/>
<link wikidata="Q7052403" start="2369" end="2382" title="Norman Jaques" label="Norman Jaques"/>
<link wikidata="Q3567566" start="2420" end="2430" title="Wetaskiwin (federal electoral district)" label="Wetaskiwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q26193" start="2455" end="2490" title="The Protocols of the Elders of Zion" label="The Protocols of the Elders of Zion"/>
<link wikidata="Q524352" start="2520" end="2527" title="Hansard" label="Hansard"/>
<link wikidata="Q801" start="2585" end="2591" title="Israel" label="Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q3261860" start="2789" end="2799" title="Louis Even" label="Louis Even"/>
<link wikidata="Q936847" start="2850" end="2854" title="1957 Canadian federal election" label="1957"/>
<link wikidata="Q595982" start="2924" end="2928" title="1958 Canadian federal election" label="1958"/>
<link wikidata="Q1292617" start="3028" end="3052" title="Progressive Conservative Party of Canada" label="Progressive Conservative"/>
<link wikidata="Q3586286" start="3809" end="3833" title="1935 Alberta general election" label="1935 provincial election"/>
<link wikidata="Q176" start="4022" end="4028" title="Quebec" label="Quebec"/>
<link wikidata="Q3418128" start="4054" end="4073" title="Union des électeurs" label="Union des électeurs"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4155" end="4176" title="Gilberte Côté-Mercier" label="Gilberte Côté-Mercier"/>
<link wikidata="Q3411571" start="4235" end="4260" title="Pilgrims of Saint Michael" label="Pilgrims of Saint Michael"/>
<link wikidata="Q1356461" start="5024" end="5038" title="Ernest Manning" label="Ernest Manning"/>
<link wikidata="Q3454399" start="5161" end="5174" title="Réal Caouette" label="Réal Caouette"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057954" start="5224" end="5235" title="by-election" label="by-election"/>
<link wikidata="Q912416" start="5341" end="5362" title="1949 Canadian federal election" label="1949 federal election"/>
<link wikidata="Q3418128" start="5534" end="5560" title="Ralliement des créditistes" label="Ralliement des créditistes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1904" start="5705" end="5712" title="Ontario" label="Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q7363838" start="5749" end="5760" title="Ron Gostick" label="Ron Gostick"/>
<link wikidata="Q7550505" start="5796" end="5824" title="Ontario Social Credit League" label="Ontario Social Credit League"/>
<link wikidata="Q7094965" start="5857" end="5881" title="1948 Ontario general election" label="1948 provincial election"/>
<link wikidata="Q1973" start="6161" end="6177" title="British Columbia" label="British Columbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q827958" start="6208" end="6245" title="British Columbia Social Credit League" label="British Columbia Social Credit League"/>
<link wikidata="Q4969804" start="6294" end="6318" title="1949 British Columbia general election" label="1949 provincial election"/>
<link wikidata="Q3586312" start="6327" end="6351" title="1952 British Columbia general election" label="1952 provincial election"/>
<link wikidata="Q2536629" start="6383" end="6399" title="W. A. C. Bennett" label="W. A. C. Bennett"/>
<link wikidata="Q4969810" start="6610" end="6634" title="1972 British Columbia general election" label="1972 provincial election"/>
<link wikidata="Q4969811" start="6665" end="6689" title="1975 British Columbia general election" label="1975 provincial election"/>
<link wikidata="Q1989" start="6792" end="6804" title="Saskatchewan" label="Saskatchewan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1948" start="6809" end="6817" title="Manitoba" label="Manitoba"/>
<link wikidata="Q3435983" start="7084" end="7099" title="Robert N. Thompson" label="Robert Thompson"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7136" end="7170" title="Social Credit Party of Canada leadership conventions#1961 leadership convention" label="party&amp;#x27;s leadership convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q937416" start="7455" end="7468" title="1962 Canadian federal election" label="1962 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q3422687" start="7660" end="7677" title="Red Deer (federal electoral district)" label="Red Deer, Alberta"/>
<link wikidata="Q5261098" start="7861" end="7874" title="deputy leader" label="deputy leader"/>
<link wikidata="Q751892" start="7937" end="7943" title="caucus" label="caucus"/>
<link wikidata="Q329547" start="8214" end="8238" title="motion of non-confidence" label="motion of non-confidence"/>
<link wikidata="Q2815405" start="8251" end="8261" title="25th Canadian Parliament" label="government"/>
<link wikidata="Q128614" start="8265" end="8281" title="John Diefenbaker" label="John Diefenbaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q937472" start="8283" end="8302" title="1963 Canadian federal election" label="forcing an election"/>
<link wikidata="Q780004" start="8876" end="8897" title="1965 Canadian federal election" label="1965 federal election"/>
<link wikidata="Q827958" start="9017" end="9033" title="Social Credit Party of British Columbia" label="British Columbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2536629" start="9122" end="9138" title="W. A. C. Bennett" label="W. A. C. Bennett"/>
<link wikidata="Q138345" start="9415" end="9423" title="Liberal Party of Canada" label="Liberals"/>
<link wikidata="Q1000502" start="9704" end="9713" title="Bud Olson" label="Bud Olson"/>
<link wikidata="Q461101" start="9788" end="9804" title="Robert Stanfield" label="Robert Stanfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q951012" start="9902" end="9928" title="1968 Canadian federal election" label="June 1968 federal election"/>
<link wikidata="Q4718337" start="9941" end="9965" title="Alexander Bell Patterson" label="Alexander Bell Patterson"/>
<link wikidata="Q3541093" start="10210" end="10222" title="Trudeaumania" label="Trudeaumania"/>
<link wikidata="Q2995979" start="10901" end="10905" title="Hull, Quebec" label="Hull"/>
<link wikidata="Q951046" start="11056" end="11069" title="1972 Canadian federal election" label="1972 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q841180" start="11181" end="11197" title="Senate of Canada" label="Senate of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q3586419" start="11422" end="11442" title="1970 Quebec general election" label="1970 Quebec election"/>
<link wikidata="Q2934800" start="11575" end="11587" title="Camil Samson" label="Camil Samson"/>
<link wikidata="Q4792642" start="11605" end="11616" title="Armand Bois" label="Armand Bois"/>
<link wikidata="Q2484078" start="11679" end="11690" title="Yvon Dupuis" label="Yvon Dupuis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3418129" start="11717" end="11748" title="Ralliement créditiste du Québec" label="Ralliement créditiste du Québec"/>
<link wikidata="Q3462578" start="11782" end="11792" title="Saint-Jean (provincial electoral district)" label="Saint-Jean"/>
<link wikidata="Q3586420" start="11800" end="11824" title="1973 Quebec general election" label="1973 provincial election"/>
<link wikidata="Q954802" start="11967" end="11988" title="1974 Canadian federal election" label="1974 federal election"/>
<link wikidata="Q130765" start="12228" end="12248" title="New Democratic Party of Canada" label="New Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q139208" start="12678" end="12683" title="Lévis, Quebec" label="Lévis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7079597" start="13166" end="13187" title="official party status" label="official party status"/>
<link wikidata="Q3229675" start="13277" end="13290" title="Leonard Jones (politician)" label="Leonard Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q2506685" start="13386" end="13417" title="Speaker of the House of Commons of Canada" label="Speaker of the House of Commons"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13715" end="13755" title="Social Credit Party of Canada leadership conventions#1976 leadership convention" label="leadership convention November 6–7, 1976"/>
<link wikidata="Q2847053" start="13838" end="13857" title="André-Gilles Fortin" label="André-Gilles Fortin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3259967" start="13882" end="13892" title="Lotbinière (federal electoral district)" label="Lotbinière"/>
<link wikidata="Q9687" start="14089" end="14101" title="car accident" label="car accident"/>
<link wikidata="Q3106144" start="14180" end="14195" title="Gilles Caouette" label="Gilles Caouette"/>
<link wikidata="Q6681507" start="14284" end="14299" title="Lorne Reznowski" label="Lorne Reznowski"/>
<link wikidata="Q16983980" start="14541" end="14555" title="Saint Boniface (electoral district)" label="Saint Boniface"/>
<link wikidata="Q2957963" start="14625" end="14648" title="Charles-Arthur Gauthier" label="Charles-Arthur Gauthier"/>
<link wikidata="Q3063659" start="14700" end="14710" title="Fabien Roy" label="Fabien Roy"/>
<link wikidata="Q954886" start="14762" end="14775" title="1979 Canadian federal election" label="1979 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q950356" start="14844" end="14859" title="Parti Québécois" label="Parti Québécois"/>
<link wikidata="Q977275" start="15186" end="15198" title="Gens du pays" label="Gens du pays"/>
<link wikidata="Q128574" start="16484" end="16493" title="Joe Clark" label="Joe Clark"/>
<link wikidata="Q114793" start="16536" end="16555" title="minority government" label="minority government"/>
<link wikidata="Q7326824" start="16928" end="16943" title="Richard Janelle" label="Richard Janelle"/>
<link wikidata="Q5188683" start="16964" end="16979" title="crossing the floor" label="cross the floor"/>
<link wikidata="Q97356801" start="17123" end="17135" title="1979 Canadian federal budget" label="their budget"/>
<link wikidata="Q128604" start="17534" end="17551" title="Lester B. Pearson" label="Lester B. Pearson"/>
<link wikidata="Q8619" start="18504" end="18518" title="Pierre Trudeau" label="Pierre Trudeau"/>
<link wikidata="Q952341" start="18639" end="18652" title="1980 Canadian federal election" label="1980 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q6775639" start="19226" end="19243" title="Martin Hattersley" label="Martin Hattersley"/>
<link wikidata="Q6388583" start="19294" end="19306" title="Ken Sweigard" label="Ken Sweigard"/>
<link wikidata="Q2096" start="19326" end="19334" title="Edmonton" label="Edmonton"/>
<link wikidata="Q6261412" start="19572" end="19583" title="John Turmel" label="John Turmel"/>
<link wikidata="Q6137143" start="19851" end="19863" title="Jim Keegstra" label="Jim Keegstra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1930" start="20334" end="20340" title="Ottawa" label="Ottawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q5366600" start="20361" end="20374" title="Elmer Knutson" label="Elmer Knutson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2096" start="20378" end="20386" title="Edmonton, Alberta" label="Edmonton"/>
<link wikidata="Q4668273" start="20599" end="20627" title="Abolitionist Party of Canada" label="Abolitionist Party of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q2992408" start="20801" end="20831" title="Confederation of Regions Party" label="Confederation of Regions Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1589289" start="21192" end="21207" title="Parliament Hill" label="Parliament Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q1125968" start="21217" end="21230" title="1984 Canadian federal election" label="1984 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q7551011" start="22008" end="22029" title="social conservatism in Canada" label="socially conservative"/>
<link wikidata="Q5677384" start="22059" end="22073" title="Harvey Lainson" label="Harvey Lainson"/>
<link wikidata="Q151296" start="22088" end="22104" title="holocaust denial" label="Holocaust denier"/>
<link wikidata="Q6137143" start="22105" end="22119" title="James Keegstra" label="James Keegstra"/>
<link wikidata="Q172" start="22167" end="22174" title="Toronto" label="Toronto"/>
<link wikidata="Q232405" start="22260" end="22273" title="metric system" label="metric system"/>
<link wikidata="Q5109624" start="22456" end="22489" title="Christian Freedom Party of Canada" label="Christian Freedom Party of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q3126460" start="22858" end="22875" title="Hamilton Mountain (federal electoral district)" label="Hamilton Mountain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1126013" start="23018" end="23031" title="1988 Canadian federal election" label="1988 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q681292" start="23278" end="23301" title="New Westminster—Burnaby" label="New Westminster—Burnaby"/>
<link wikidata="Q5096725" start="23438" end="23461" title="Chief Electoral Officer (Canada)" label="Chief Electoral Officer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414298" start="23659" end="23678" title="social conservative" label="social conservative"/>
<link wikidata="Q6387411" start="23691" end="23703" title="Ken Campbell (evangelist)" label="Ken Campbell"/>
<link wikidata="Q3357223" start="24326" end="24332" title="Oshawa (federal electoral district)" label="Oshawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q374646" start="24584" end="24597" title="1993 Canadian federal election" label="1993 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q3586687" start="24740" end="24756" title="Elections Canada" label="Elections Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q3126449" start="24972" end="24985" title="Hamilton East (federal electoral district)" label="Hamilton East"/>
<link wikidata="Q7344239" start="26035" end="26046" title="Robert Fair (Canadian politician)" label="Robert Fair"/>
<link wikidata="Q7964878" start="26048" end="26069" title="Walter Frederick Kuhl" label="Walter Frederick Kuhl"/>
<link wikidata="Q1507165" start="27348" end="27368" title="father&amp;#x27;s rights" label="father&amp;#x27;s rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q3366143" start="27421" end="27442" title="Canadian Action Party" label="Canadian Action Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1466815" start="27708" end="27729" title="2008 Canadian federal election" label="2008 federal election"/>
<link wikidata="Q3366294" start="27902" end="27936" title="Christian Heritage Party of Canada" label="Christian Heritage Party of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414298" start="28088" end="28109" title="social conservativism" label="social conservativism"/>
<link wikidata="Q6261412" start="28154" end="28165" title="John Turmel" label="John Turmel"/>
<link wikidata="Q4668273" start="28336" end="28364" title="Abolitionist Party of Canada" label="Abolitionist Party of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q5029407" start="28632" end="28644" title="Canada Party" label="Canada Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q6287387" start="28688" end="28705" title="Joseph Thauberger" label="Joseph Thauberger"/>
<link wikidata="Q5153082" start="28876" end="28917" title="Committee on Monetary and Economic Reform" label="Committee on Monetary and Economic Reform"/>
<link wikidata="Q6239893" start="29184" end="29204" title="John Horne Blackmore" label="John Horne Blackmore"/>
<link wikidata="Q3489584" start="29255" end="29269" title="Solon Earl Low" label="Solon Earl Low"/>
<link wikidata="Q3435983" start="29287" end="29302" title="Robert N. Thompson" label="Robert Thompson"/>
<link wikidata="Q4718337" start="29320" end="29344" title="Alexander Bell Patterson" label="Alexander Bell Patterson"/>
<link wikidata="Q3454399" start="29388" end="29401" title="Réal Caouette" label="Réal Caouette"/>
<link wikidata="Q2847053" start="29419" end="29438" title="André-Gilles Fortin" label="André-Gilles Fortin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3106144" start="29456" end="29471" title="Gilles Caouette" label="Gilles Caouette"/>
<link wikidata="Q2957963" start="29515" end="29538" title="Charles-Arthur Gauthier" label="Charles-Arthur Gauthier"/>
<link wikidata="Q6681507" start="29577" end="29592" title="Lorne Reznowski" label="Lorne Reznowski"/>
<link wikidata="Q2957963" start="29606" end="29629" title="Charles-Arthur Gauthier" label="Charles-Arthur Gauthier"/>
<link wikidata="Q3063659" start="29668" end="29678" title="Fabien Roy" label="Fabien Roy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6775639" start="29696" end="29713" title="Martin Hattersley" label="Martin Hattersley"/>
<link wikidata="Q6388583" start="29727" end="29739" title="Ken Sweigard" label="Ken Sweigard"/>
<link wikidata="Q5677384" start="29779" end="29793" title="Harvey Lainson" label="Harvey Lainson"/>
<link wikidata="Q6137143" start="29807" end="29819" title="Jim Keegstra" label="Jim Keegstra"/>
<link wikidata="Q6387411" start="29866" end="29878" title="Ken Campbell (evangelist)" label="Ken Campbell"/>
<link wikidata="Q3326543" start="29978" end="30009" title="Canadian social credit movement" label="Canadian social credit movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q3418128" start="30011" end="30032" title="Ralliement créditiste" label="Ralliement créditiste"/>
<link wikidata="Q6597317" start="30034" end="30071" title="List of Social Credit/Créditistes MPs" label="List of Social Credit/Créditistes MPs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1518382" start="30073" end="30103" title="Alberta Social Credit Party" label="Social Credit Party of Alberta"/>
<link wikidata="Q827958" start="30105" end="30144" title="British Columbia Social Credit Party" label="Social Credit Party of British Columbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3418129" start="30146" end="30177" title="Ralliement créditiste du Québec" label="Ralliement créditiste du Québec"/>
<link wikidata="Q3366150" start="30179" end="30207" title="Manitoba Social Credit Party" label="Manitoba Social Credit Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q3366149" start="30209" end="30244" title="Social Credit Party of Saskatchewan" label="Social Credit Party of Saskatchewan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7550505" start="30246" end="30276" title="Social Credit Party of Ontario" label="Social Credit Party of Ontario"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="461258" wikidata="Q7609986" url="?curid=461258" title="Stephen Metcalf">
<text>Stephen Metcalf or Metcalfe may refer to:

*Stephen Metcalf (writer), writer and critic-at-large for &quot;Slate&quot;
*Stephen Metcalfe (politician) (born 1966), British politician
*Stephen Metcalfe (screenwriter) (fl. 2002–2015), American film director and screenwriter
*Stephen A. Metcalf (1927–2014), British missionary

==See also==
*Steve Metcalf (fl. 1998–2004), American lobbyist and former politician from North Carolina
*Metcalf (surname)
*Metcalfe (surname)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7609986" start="0" end="15" title="Stephen Metcalf" label="Stephen Metcalf"/>
<link wikidata="Q7609986" start="19" end="27" title="Stephen Metcalf" label="Metcalfe"/>
<link wikidata="Q7609988" start="44" end="68" title="Stephen Metcalf (writer)" label="Stephen Metcalf (writer)"/>
<link wikidata="Q272643" start="120" end="149" title="Stephen Metcalfe (politician)" label="Stephen Metcalfe (politician)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7609989" start="183" end="214" title="Stephen Metcalfe (screenwriter)" label="Stephen Metcalfe (screenwriter)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7608538" start="273" end="291" title="Stephen A. Metcalf" label="Stephen A. Metcalf"/>
<link wikidata="Q7613363" start="339" end="352" title="Steve Metcalf" label="Steve Metcalf"/>
<link wikidata="Q16876873" start="431" end="448" title="Metcalf (surname)" label="Metcalf (surname)"/>
<link wikidata="Q16876875" start="450" end="468" title="Metcalfe (surname)" label="Metcalfe (surname)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="461263" wikidata="Q13424536" url="?curid=461263" title="Mammutidae">
<text>Mammutidae is an extinct family of proboscideans belonging to Elephantimorpha. It is best known for the mastodons (genus &quot;Mammut&quot;), which inhabited North America from the Late Miocene (around 8 million years ago) until their extinction at the beginning of the Holocene, around 11,000 years ago. The earliest fossils of the group are known from the Late Oligocene of Africa, around 24 million years ago, and fossils of the group have also been found across Eurasia. The name &quot;mastodon&quot; derives from Greek, &quot;nipple&quot; and &quot;tooth&quot;, referring to their characteristic teeth.

== Description ==
Mammutids are characterised by their zygodont molars, where pairs of parallel cusps are merged into sharp-sided riges, which are morphologically conservative and differ little between mammutid species.&quot;&quot; Like other members of Elephantimorpha, mammutids exhibited horizontal tooth replacement like modern elephants. Some authors have argued that horizontal tooth replacement evolved in parallel in mammutids and members of Elephantida (which includes gomphotheres and elephants), though this is uncertain. Compared to modern elephants, the bones of most mammutids were more robust, with the limb bones in particular being massive,&quot;&quot; with the legs being proportionally shorter than living elephants, while their bodies were proportionally more elongate. Early members of the group like &quot;Eozygodon&quot; and &quot;Zygolophodon&quot; had elongate mandibular symphysis (the front-most part) of the lower jaws with lower incisors/tusks (which tend to be flattened and narrow in shape), while in later representatives like &quot;Sinomammut&quot; and &quot;Mammut&quot;, the lower incisors/tusks were either lost or only vestigially present, and the lower jaws shortened (brevirostrine). This process happened convergently amongst other elephantimorph proboscideans, including gomphotheres, stegodontids, and elephantids. Mammutids are thought to have had prehensile trunks like those of living elephants, with those of &quot;Mammut&quot; suggested to have been possibly long enough to reach the ground. The upper tusks in primitive mammutids are relatively small as well as being downward (ventrally) and outward (laterally) curving, while those of mastodons (&quot;Mammut&quot;) are large and upward curving, often reaching around in length. The mammutid &quot;&quot;Mammut&quot; borsoni&quot; is one of the largest of all proboscideans with an estimated average male body weight of making it one of the largest land mammals of all time, with the tusks of this species being the longest known of any animal, reaching over in length.

== Ecology ==
Members of Mammutidae are thought to have been primarily browsers on the foliage and twigs of trees and shrubs. The jaws of mammutids are adapted to powerful vertical biting (orthal movement) that served to crush food items and to a considerably lesser extent grind it with side-to side movement. Analysis of American mastodon (&quot;Mammut americanum&quot;) remains suggests that mammutids had a similar social structure to modern elephants, with herds of adult females and juveniles, with adult males living solitarily or in bonding groups with other males, with adult males periodically engaging in musth-like fighting behaviour against other males.

== Evolution ==
Mammutids are the most basal group within Elephantimorpha, with gomphotheres and other members of Elephantida like amebelodonts being more closely related to elephants. Cladogram after Li et al. (2024).

Mammutids originated in Africa during the Late Oligocene, with the oldest genus &quot;Losodokodon&quot; dating to around 27.5-24 million years ago.&quot;&quot; Mammutids belonging to the genus &quot;Zygolophodon&quot; (as well as possibly other mammutid genera) entered Eurasia across the &quot;&quot;Gomphotherium&quot; land bridge&quot; during the early Miocene, around 18 million years ago. Mammutid remains are generally rare in Eurasia in comparison to contemporary gomphotheres and deinotheres.&quot;&quot; During the late early Miocene, around 16.5 million years ago, a population of &quot;Zygolophodon&quot; entered North America, giving rise to &quot;Mammut.&quot; The youngest confirmed records of mammutids in Africa date to around 13 million years ago, though possible Late Miocene fossils have been reported from North Africa. At the beginning of the Pleistocene, around 2 to 2.5 million years ago, the last of the Eurasian mammutids, &quot;&quot;Mammut&quot; borsoni&quot; became extinct, with members of &quot;Mammut&quot; persisting in North America until the end of the Pleistocene, approximately 11,000 years ago.&quot;&quot;

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q13424536" start="0" end="10" title="Mammutidae" label="Mammutidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q35409" start="25" end="31" title="family (biology)" label="family"/>
<link wikidata="Q26308" start="35" end="46" title="proboscidea" label="proboscidea"/>
<link wikidata="Q23926871" start="62" end="77" title="Elephantimorpha" label="Elephantimorpha"/>
<link wikidata="Q192272" start="104" end="113" title="Mastodon" label="mastodons"/>
<link wikidata="Q76267" start="186" end="193" title="Miocene" label="Miocene"/>
<link wikidata="Q25445" start="270" end="278" title="Holocene" label="Holocene"/>
<link wikidata="Q502171" start="358" end="372" title="Late Oligocene" label="Late Oligocene"/>
<link wikidata="Q9129" start="518" end="523" title="Greek language" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046513" start="705" end="710" title="Cusp (anatomy)" label="cusps"/>
<link wikidata="Q23926871" start="863" end="878" title="Elephantimorpha" label="Elephantimorpha"/>
<link wikidata="Q903761" start="1011" end="1030" title="Parallel evolution" label="evolved in parallel"/>
<link wikidata="Q23926871" start="1059" end="1070" title="Elephantida" label="Elephantida"/>
<link wikidata="Q24884040" start="1437" end="1446" title="Eozygodon" label="Eozygodon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2796916" start="1463" end="1475" title="Zygolophodon" label="Zygolophodon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7661740" start="1495" end="1515" title="mandibular symphysis" label="mandibular symphysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q24257051" start="1674" end="1684" title="Sinomammut" label="Sinomammut"/>
<link wikidata="Q192272" start="1701" end="1707" title="Mammut" label="Mammut"/>
<link wikidata="Q387585" start="1921" end="1933" title="gomphotheres" label="gomphotheres"/>
<link wikidata="Q2196033" start="1935" end="1947" title="stegodontids" label="stegodontids"/>
<link wikidata="Q2372824" start="1953" end="1964" title="Elephantidae" label="elephantids"/>
<link wikidata="Q107443761" start="2407" end="2433" title="&amp;quot;Mammut&amp;quot; borsoni" label="&amp;quot;Mammut&amp;quot; borsoni"/>
<link wikidata="Q12353883" start="2751" end="2759" title="Browsing (herbivory)" label="browsers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1756782" start="3296" end="3301" title="musth" label="musth"/>
<link wikidata="Q379061" start="3387" end="3392" title="basal (phylogenetics)" label="basal"/>
<link wikidata="Q23926871" start="3406" end="3421" title="Elephantimorpha" label="Elephantimorpha"/>
<link wikidata="Q387585" start="3428" end="3439" title="gomphothere" label="gomphothere"/>
<link wikidata="Q23926871" start="3462" end="3473" title="Elephantida" label="Elephantida"/>
<link wikidata="Q24883996" start="3479" end="3491" title="Amebelodontidae" label="amebelodonts"/>
<link wikidata="Q101873" start="3615" end="3624" title="Oligocene" label="Oligocene"/>
<link wikidata="Q18024270" start="3654" end="3665" title="Losodokodon" label="Losodokodon"/>
<link wikidata="Q65073192" start="3869" end="3882" title="Gomphotherium land bridge" label="Gomphotherium"/>
<link wikidata="Q65073192" start="3889" end="3900" title="Gomphotherium land bridge" label="land bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q522589" start="4056" end="4067" title="Deinothere" label="deinotheres"/>
<link wikidata="Q25546" start="4432" end="4443" title="Pleistocene" label="Pleistocene"/>
<link wikidata="Q107443761" start="4522" end="4548" title="&amp;quot;Mammut&amp;quot; borsoni" label="&amp;quot;Mammut&amp;quot; borsoni"/>
</links>
</doc>
