<doc id="771" wikidata="Q40949" url="?curid=771" title="American Revolutionary War">
<text>The American Revolutionary War (April 19, 1775 – September 3, 1783), also known as the Revolutionary War or American War of Independence, was an armed conflict that comprised the final eight years of the broader American Revolution, in which American Patriot forces organized as the Continental Army and commanded by George Washington defeated the British Army. The conflict was fought in North America, the Caribbean, and the Atlantic Ocean. The war ended with the Treaty of Paris (1783), which resulted in the establishment of the United States of America as an independent nation, which was recognized by Great Britain and other nations of the world.

In 1763, after the British Empire gained dominance in North America following its victory over the French in the Seven Years&#x27; War, tensions and disputes began escalating between the British and the Thirteen Colonies, especially following passage of Stamp and Townshend Acts by the British Parliament. The British Army responded by seeking to occupy Boston militarily, leading to the Boston Massacre on March 5, 1770. 

In mid-1774, with tensions escalating even further between the British Army and the colonies, the British Parliament imposed the Intolerable Acts, an attempt to disarm Americans, leading to the Battles of Lexington and Concord in April 1775, the first battles of the Revolutionary War. In June 1775, the Second Continental Congress, including 56 colonial delegates, convened in present-day Independence Hall in the colonial capital of Philadelphia, incorporating colonial-based Patriot militias into one single military, the Continental Army, and appointing Washington as its commander-in-chief. 

Two months later, in August 1775, the British Parliament declared the colonies to be in a state of rebellion. In July 1776, the Second Continental Congress embraced and formalized the war, passing the Lee Resolution on July 2, and, two days later, unanimously adopting the Declaration of Independence, on July 4.

In March 1776, in an early win for the newly-formed Continental Army under Washington&#x27;s command, following a successful siege of Boston, the Continental Army successfully drove the British Army out of Boston. British commander in chief William Howe responded by launching the New York and New Jersey campaign, which resulted in Howe&#x27;s capture of New York City in November. Washington responded by clandestinely crossing the Delaware River and winning small but significant victories at Trenton and Princeton. 

In the summer of 1777, as Howe was poised to capture Philadelphia, the Continental Congress fled to Baltimore. In October 1777, a separate northern British force under the command of John Burgoyne was forced to surrender at Saratoga in an American victory that proved crucial in convincing France and Spain that an independent United States was a viable possibility. France signed a commercial agreement with the rebels, followed by a Treaty of Alliance in February 1778. In 1779, the Sullivan Expedition undertook a scorched earth campaign against the Iroquois who were largely allied with the British. Indian raids on the American frontier, however, continued to be a problem. Also, in 1779, Spain allied with France against Great Britain in the Treaty of Aranjuez, though Spain did not formally ally with the Americans.

Howe&#x27;s replacement Henry Clinton intended to take the war against the Americans into the Southern Colonies. Despite some initial success, British General Cornwallis was besieged by a Franco-American force in Yorktown in September and October 1781. Cornwallis was forced to surrender in October. The British wars with France and Spain continued for another two years, but fighting largely ceased in North America. In the Treaty of Paris, ratified on September 3, 1783, Great Britain acknowledged the sovereignty and independence of the United States, bringing the American Revolutionary War to an end. The Treaties of Versailles resolved Great Britain&#x27;s conflicts with France and Spain and forced Great Britain to cede Tobago, Senegal, and small territories in India to France, and Menorca, West Florida and East Florida to Spain.

==Prelude to war==


The French and Indian War, part of the wider global conflict known as the Seven Years&#x27; War, ended with the 1763 Peace of Paris, which expelled France from their possessions in New France. The Royal Proclamation of 1763 was designed to refocus colonial expansion north into Nova Scotia and south into Florida, with the Mississippi River as the dividing line between British and Spanish possessions in America. Settlement was tightly restricted beyond the 1763 limits, and claims west of this line, including by Virginia and Massachusetts, were rescinded. With the exception of Virginia and others deprived of rights to western lands, the colonial legislatures agreed on the boundaries but disagreed on where to set them. Many settlers resented the restrictions entirely, and enforcement required permanent garrisons along the frontier, which led to increasingly bitter disputes over who should pay for them.

===Taxation and legislation===
The huge debt incurred by the Seven Years&#x27; War and demands from British taxpayers for cuts in government expenditure meant Parliament expected the colonies to fund their own defense. The 1763 to 1765 Grenville ministry instructed the Royal Navy to cease trading smuggled goods and enforce customs duties levied in American ports. The most important was the 1733 Molasses Act; routinely ignored before 1763, it had a significant economic impact since 85% of New England rum exports were manufactured from imported molasses. These measures were followed by the Sugar Act and Stamp Act, which imposed additional taxes on the colonies to pay for defending the western frontier. The taxes proved highly burdensome, particularly for the poorer classes, and quickly became a source of discontent. In July 1765, the Whigs formed the First Rockingham ministry, which repealed the Stamp Act and reduced tax on foreign molasses to help the New England economy, but re-asserted Parliamentary authority in the Declaratory Act.

However, this did little to end the discontent; in 1768, a riot started in Boston when the authorities seized the sloop &quot;Liberty&quot; on suspicion of smuggling. Tensions escalated in March 1770 when British troops fired on rock-throwing civilians, killing five in what became known as the Boston Massacre. The Massacre coincided with the partial repeal of the Townshend Acts by the Tory-based North Ministry. North insisted on retaining duty on tea to enshrine Parliament&#x27;s right to tax the colonies; the amount was minor, but ignored the fact it was that very principle Americans found objectionable.

In April 1772, colonialists staged the first American tax revolt against British royal authority in Weare, New Hampshire, later referred to as the Pine Tree Riot. This would inspire the design of the Pine Tree Flag. Tensions escalated following the destruction of a customs vessel in the June 1772 Gaspee Affair, then came to a head in 1773. A banking crisis led to the near-collapse of the East India Company, which dominated the British economy; to support it, Parliament passed the Tea Act, giving it a trading monopoly in the Thirteen Colonies. Since most American tea was smuggled by the Dutch, the act was opposed by those who managed the illegal trade, while being seen as another attempt to impose the principle of taxation by Parliament. In December 1773, a group called the Sons of Liberty disguised as Mohawks dumped crates of tea into Boston Harbor, an event later known as the Boston Tea Party. The British Parliament responded by passing the so-called Intolerable Acts, aimed specifically at Massachusetts, although many colonists and members of the Whig opposition considered them a threat to liberty in general. This increased sympathy for the Patriot cause locally, in the British Parliament, and in the London press.

===Break with the British Crown===
Throughout the 18th century, the elected lower houses in the colonial legislatures gradually wrested power from their governors. Dominated by smaller landowners and merchants, these assemblies now established ad-hoc provincial legislatures, effectively replacing royal control. With the exception of Georgia, twelve colonies sent representatives to the First Continental Congress to agree on a unified response to the crisis. Many of the delegates feared that a boycott would result in war and sent a Petition to the King calling for the repeal of the Intolerable Acts. After some debate, on September 17, 1774, Congress endorsed the Massachusetts Suffolk Resolves and on October 20 passed the Continental Association, which instituted economic sanctions and a boycott of goods against Britain.

While denying its authority over internal American affairs, a faction led by James Duane and future Loyalist Joseph Galloway insisted Congress recognize Parliament&#x27;s right to regulate colonial trade. Expecting concessions by the North administration, Congress authorized the colonial legislatures to enforce the boycott; this succeeded in reducing British imports by 97% from 1774 to 1775. However, on February 9 Parliament declared Massachusetts to be in rebellion and instituted a blockade of the colony. In July, the Restraining Acts limited colonial trade with the British West Indies and Britain and barred New England ships from the Newfoundland cod fisheries. The tension led to a scramble for control of militia stores, which each assembly was legally obliged to maintain for defense. On April 19, a British attempt to secure the Concord arsenal culminated in the Battles of Lexington and Concord, which began the Revolutionary War.

===Political reactions===

After the Patriot victory at Concord, moderates in Congress led by John Dickinson drafted the Olive Branch Petition, offering to accept royal authority in return for George III mediating in the dispute. However, since the petition was immediately followed by the Declaration of the Causes and Necessity of Taking Up Arms, Colonial Secretary Lord Dartmouth viewed the offer as insincere and refused to present the petition to the king. Although constitutionally correct, since the monarch could not oppose his own government, it disappointed those Americans who hoped he would mediate in the dispute, while the hostility of his language annoyed even Loyalist members of Congress. Combined with the Proclamation of Rebellion, issued on August 23 in response to the Battle at Bunker Hill, it ended hopes of a peaceful settlement.

Backed by the Whigs, Parliament initially rejected the imposition of coercive measures by 170 votes, fearing an aggressive policy would drive the Americans towards independence. However, by the end of 1774 the collapse of British authority meant both Lord North and George III were convinced war was inevitable. After Boston, Gage halted operations and awaited reinforcements; the Irish Parliament approved the recruitment of new regiments, while allowing Catholics to enlist for the first time. Britain also signed a series of treaties with German states to supply additional troops. Within a year, it had an army of over 32,000 men in America, the largest ever sent outside Europe at the time. The employment of German soldiers against people viewed as British citizens was opposed by many in Parliament and by the colonial assemblies; combined with the lack of activity by Gage, opposition to the use of foreign troops allowed the Patriots to take control of the legislatures.

===Declaration of Independence===
Support for independence was boosted by Thomas Paine&#x27;s pamphlet &quot;Common Sense&quot;, which was published on January 10, 1776, and argued for American self-government and was widely reprinted. To draft the Declaration of Independence, the Second Continental Congress appointed the Committee of Five: Thomas Jefferson, John Adams, Benjamin Franklin, Roger Sherman, and Robert Livingston. The declaration was written almost exclusively by Jefferson.

Identifying inhabitants of the Thirteen Colonies as &quot;one people&quot;, the declaration simultaneously dissolved political links with Britain, while including a long list of alleged violations of &quot;English rights&quot; committed by George III. This is also one of the first times that the colonies were referred to as &quot;United States&quot;, rather than the more common United Colonies.

On July 2, Congress voted for independence and published the declaration on July 4. At this point, the revolution ceased to be an internal dispute over trade and tax policies and had evolved into a civil war, since each state represented in Congress was engaged in a struggle with Britain, but also split between American Patriots and American Loyalists. Patriots generally supported independence from Britain and a new national union in Congress, while Loyalists remained faithful to British rule. Estimates of numbers vary, one suggestion being the population as a whole was split evenly between committed Patriots, committed Loyalists, and those who were indifferent. Others calculate the split as 40% Patriot, 40% neutral, 20% Loyalist, but with considerable regional variations.

At the onset of the war, the Second Continental Congress realized defeating Britain required foreign alliances and intelligence-gathering. The Committee of Secret Correspondence was formed for &quot;the sole purpose of corresponding with our friends in Great Britain and other parts of the world&quot;. From 1775 to 1776, the committee shared information and built alliances through secret correspondence, as well as employing secret agents in Europe to gather intelligence, conduct undercover operations, analyze foreign publications, and initiate Patriot propaganda campaigns. Paine served as secretary, while Benjamin Franklin and Silas Deane, sent to France to recruit military engineers, were instrumental in securing French aid in Paris.

==War breaks out==

===Early engagements===

On April 14, 1775, Sir Thomas Gage, Commander-in-Chief, North America and Governor of Massachusetts, received orders to take action against the Patriots. He decided to destroy militia ordnance stored at Concord, Massachusetts, and capture John Hancock and Samuel Adams, who were considered the principal instigators of the rebellion. The operation was to begin around midnight on April 19, in the hope of completing it before the American Patriots could respond. However, Paul Revere learned of the plan and notified Captain Parker, commander of the Concord militia, who prepared to resist. The first action of the war, commonly referred to as the shot heard round the world, was a brief skirmish at Lexington, followed by the full-scale Battles of Lexington and Concord. British troops suffered around 300 casualties before withdrawing to Boston, which was then besieged by the militia.

In May 1775, 4,500 British reinforcements arrived under Generals William Howe, John Burgoyne, and Sir Henry Clinton. On June 17, they seized the Charlestown Peninsula at the Battle of Bunker Hill, a frontal assault in which they suffered over 1,000 casualties. Dismayed at the costly attack which had gained them little, Gage appealed to London for a larger army, but instead was replaced as commander by Howe.

On June 14, 1775, Congress took control of Patriot forces outside Boston, and Congressional leader John Adams nominated Washington as commander-in-chief of the newly formed Continental Army. On June 16, Hancock officially proclaimed him &quot;General and Commander in Chief of the army of the United Colonies.&quot; He assumed command on July 3, preferring to fortify Dorchester Heights outside Boston rather than assaulting it. In early March 1776, Colonel Henry Knox arrived with heavy artillery acquired in the Capture of Fort Ticonderoga. Under cover of darkness, on March 5, Washington placed these on Dorchester Heights, from where they could fire on the town and British ships in Boston Harbor. Fearing another Bunker Hill, Howe evacuated the city on March 17 without further loss and sailed to Halifax, Nova Scotia, while Washington moved south to New York City.

Beginning in August 1775, American privateers raided towns in Nova Scotia, including Saint John, Charlottetown, and Yarmouth. In 1776, John Paul Jones and Jonathan Eddy attacked Canso and Fort Cumberland respectively. British officials in Quebec began negotiating with the Iroquois for their support, while US envoys urged them to remain neutral. Aware of Native American leanings toward the British and fearing an Anglo-Indian attack from Canada, Congress authorized a second invasion in April 1775. After the defeat at the Battle of Quebec on December 31, the Americans maintained a loose blockade of the city until they retreated on May 6, 1776. A second defeat at Trois-Rivières on June 8 ended operations in Quebec.

British pursuit was initially blocked by American naval vessels on Lake Champlain until victory at Valcour Island on October 11 forced the Americans to withdraw to Fort Ticonderoga, while in December an uprising in Nova Scotia sponsored by Massachusetts was defeated at Fort Cumberland. These failures impacted public support for the Patriot cause, and aggressive anti-Loyalist policies in the New England colonies alienated the Canadians.

In Virginia, Dunmore&#x27;s Proclamation on November 7, 1775, promised freedom to any slaves who fled their Patriot masters and agreed to fight for the Crown. British forces were defeated at Great Bridge on December 9 and took refuge on British ships anchored near Norfolk. When the Third Virginia Convention refused to disband its militia or accept martial law, Lord Dunmore ordered the Burning of Norfolk on January 1, 1776.

The siege of Savage&#x27;s Old Fields began on November 19 in South Carolina between Loyalist and Patriot militias, and the Loyalists were subsequently driven out of the colony in the Snow Campaign. Loyalists were recruited in North Carolina to reassert British rule in the South, but they were decisively defeated in the Battle of Moore&#x27;s Creek Bridge. A British expedition sent to reconquer South Carolina launched an attack on Charleston in the Battle of Sullivan&#x27;s Island on June 28, 1776, but it failed.

A shortage of gunpowder led Congress to authorize a naval expedition against the Bahamas to secure ordnance stored there. On March 3, 1776, an American squadron under the command of Esek Hopkins landed at the east end of Nassau and encountered minimal resistance at Fort Montagu. Hopkins&#x27; troops then marched on Fort Nassau. Hopkins had promised governor Montfort Browne and the civilian inhabitants that their lives and property would not be in any danger if they offered no resistance; they complied. Hopkins captured large stores of powder and other munitions that was so great he had to impress an extra ship in the harbor to transport the supplies back home, when he departed on March 17. A month later, after a brief skirmish with , they returned to New London, Connecticut, the base for American naval operations.

===British New York counter-offensive===

After regrouping at Halifax in Nova Scotia, Howe set sail for New York in June 1776 and began landing troops on Staten Island near the entrance to New York Harbor on July 2. The Americans rejected Howe&#x27;s informal attempt to negotiate peace on July 30; Washington knew that an attack on the city was imminent and realized that he needed advance information to deal with disciplined British regular troops.

On August 12, 1776, Patriot Thomas Knowlton was ordered to form an elite group for reconnaissance and secret missions. Knowlton&#x27;s Rangers, which included Nathan Hale, became the Army&#x27;s first intelligence unit. When Washington was driven off Long Island, he soon realized that he would need to professionalize military intelligence. With aid from Benjamin Tallmadge, Washington launched the six-man Culper spy ring. The efforts of Washington and the Culper Spy Ring substantially increased the effective allocation and deployment of Continental regiments in the field. Throughout the war, Washington spent more than 10 percent of his total military funds on military intelligence.

Washington split the Continental Army into positions on Manhattan and across the East River in western Long Island. On August 27 at the Battle of Long Island, Howe outflanked Washington and forced him back to Brooklyn Heights, but he did not attempt to encircle Washington&#x27;s forces. Through the night of August 28, Knox bombarded the British. Knowing they were up against overwhelming odds, Washington ordered the assembly of a war council on August 29; all agreed to retreat to Manhattan. Washington quickly had his troops assembled and ferried them across the East River to Manhattan on flat-bottomed freight boats without any losses in men or ordnance, leaving General Thomas Mifflin&#x27;s regiments as a rearguard.

Howe met with a delegation from the Second Continental Congress at the September Staten Island Peace Conference, but it failed to conclude peace, largely because the British delegates only had the authority to offer pardons and could not recognize independence. On September 15, Howe seized control of New York City when the British landed at Kip&#x27;s Bay and unsuccessfully engaged the Americans at the Battle of Harlem Heights the following day. On October 18, Howe failed to encircle the Americans at the Battle of Pell&#x27;s Point, and the Americans withdrew. Howe declined to close with Washington&#x27;s army on October 28 at the Battle of White Plains and instead attacked a hill that was of no strategic value.

Washington&#x27;s retreat isolated his remaining forces and the British captured Fort Washington on November 16. The British victory there amounted to Washington&#x27;s most disastrous defeat with the loss of 3,000 prisoners. The remaining American regiments on Long Island fell back four days later. General Henry Clinton wanted to pursue Washington&#x27;s disorganized army, but he was first required to commit 6,000 troops to capture Newport, Rhode Island, to secure the Loyalist port. General Charles Cornwallis pursued Washington, but Howe ordered him to halt.

The outlook following the defeat at Fort Washington appeared bleak for the American cause. The reduced Continental Army had dwindled to fewer than 5,000 men and was reduced further when enlistments expired at the end of the year. Popular support wavered, and morale declined. On December 20, 1776, the Continental Congress abandoned the revolutionary capital of Philadelphia and moved to Baltimore, where it remained until February 27, 1777. Loyalist activity surged in the wake of the American defeat, especially in New York state.

In London, news of the victorious Long Island campaign was well received with festivities held in the capital. Public support reached a peak. Strategic deficiencies among Patriot forces were evident: Washington divided a numerically weaker army in the face of a stronger one, his inexperienced staff misread the military situation, and American troops fled in the face of enemy fire. The successes led to predictions that the British could win within a year. The British established winter quarters in the New York City area and anticipated renewed campaigning the following spring.

===Patriot resurgence===


On the night of December 25–26, 1776, Washington crossed the Delaware River, leading a column of Continental Army troops from today&#x27;s Bucks County, Pennsylvania, to today&#x27;s Mercer County, New Jersey, in a logistically challenging and dangerous operation.

Meanwhile, the Hessians were involved in numerous clashes with small bands of Patriots and were often aroused by false alarms at night in the weeks before the actual Battle of Trenton. By Christmas they were tired, while a heavy snowstorm led their commander, Colonel Johann Rall, to assume no significant attack would occur. At daybreak on the 26th, the American Patriots surprised and overwhelmed Rall and his troops, who lost over 20 killed including Rall, while 900 prisoners, German cannons and supplies were captured.

The Battle of Trenton restored the American army&#x27;s morale, reinvigorated the Patriot cause, and dispelled their fear of what they regarded as Hessian &quot;mercenaries&quot;. A British attempt to retake Trenton was repulsed at Assunpink Creek on January 2; during the night, Washington outmaneuvered Cornwallis, then defeated his rearguard in the Battle of Princeton the following day. The two victories helped convince the French that the Americans were worthy military allies.

After his success at Princeton, Washington entered winter quarters at Morristown, New Jersey, where he remained until May and received Congressional direction to inoculate all Patriot troops against smallpox. With the exception of a minor skirmishing between the two armies which continued until March, Howe made no attempt to attack the Americans.

===British northern strategy fails===

The 1776 campaign demonstrated that regaining New England would be a prolonged affair, which led to a change in British strategy to isolating the north by taking control of the Hudson River, allowing them to focus on the south where Loyalist support was believed to be substantial. In December 1776, Howe wrote to the Colonial Secretary Lord Germain, proposing a limited offensive against Philadelphia, while a second force moved down the Hudson from Canada. Burgoyne supplied several alternatives, all of which gave him responsibility for the offensive, with Howe remaining on the defensive. The option selected required him to lead the main force south from Montreal down the Hudson Valley, while a detachment under Barry St. Leger moved east from Lake Ontario. The two would meet at Albany, leaving Howe to decide whether to join them. Reasonable in principle, this did not account for the logistical difficulties involved and Burgoyne erroneously assumed Howe would remain on the defensive; Germain&#x27;s failure to make this clear meant he opted to attack Philadelphia instead.

With a mixed force of British regulars, professional German soldiers and Canadian militia Burgoyne set out on June 14, 1777 and captured Fort Ticonderoga on July 5. As General Horatio Gates retreated, his troops blocked roads, destroyed bridges, dammed streams, and stripped the area of food. This slowed Burgoyne&#x27;s progress and forced him to send out large foraging expeditions; one of more than 700 British troops were captured at the Battle of Bennington on August 16. St Leger moved east and besieged Fort Stanwix; despite defeating an American relief force at the Battle of Oriskany on August 6, Burgoyne was abandoned by his Indian allies and withdrew to Quebec on August 22. Now isolated and outnumbered by Gates, Burgoyne continued onto Albany rather than retreating to Fort Ticonderoga, reaching Saratoga on September 13. He asked Clinton for support while constructing defenses around the town.

Morale among his troops rapidly declined, and an unsuccessful attempt to break past Gates at the Battle of Freeman Farms on September 19 resulted in 600 British casualties. When Clinton advised he could not reach them, Burgoyne&#x27;s subordinates advised retreat; a reconnaissance in force on October 7 was repulsed by Gates at the Battle of Bemis Heights, forcing them back into Saratoga with heavy losses. By October 11, all hope of British escape had vanished; persistent rain reduced the camp to a &quot;squalid hell&quot; and supplies were dangerously low. Burgoyne capitulated on October 17; around 6,222 soldiers, including German forces commanded by General Friedrich Adolf Riedesel, surrendered their arms before being taken to Boston, where they were to be transported to England.

After securing additional supplies, Howe made another attempt on Philadelphia by landing his troops in Chesapeake Bay on August 24. He now compounded failure to support Burgoyne by missing repeated opportunities to destroy his opponent: despite defeating Washington at the Battle of Brandywine on September 11, he then allowed him to withdraw in good order. After dispersing an American detachment at Paoli on September 20, Cornwallis occupied Philadelphia on September 26, with the main force of 9,000 under Howe based just to the north at Germantown. Washington attacked them on October 4, but was repulsed.

To prevent Howe&#x27;s forces in Philadelphia being resupplied by sea, the Patriots erected Fort Mifflin and nearby Fort Mercer on the east and west banks of the Delaware respectively, and placed obstacles in the river south of the city. This was supported by a small flotilla of Continental Navy ships on the Delaware, supplemented by the Pennsylvania State Navy, commanded by John Hazelwood. An attempt by the Royal Navy to take the forts in the October 20 to 22 Battle of Red Bank failed; a second attack captured Fort Mifflin on November 16, while Fort Mercer was abandoned two days later when Cornwallis breached the walls. His supply lines secured, Howe tried to tempt Washington into giving battle, but after inconclusive skirmishing at the Battle of White Marsh from December 5 to 8, he withdrew to Philadelphia for the winter.

On December 19, the Americans followed suit and entered winter quarters at Valley Forge. As Washington&#x27;s domestic opponents contrasted his lack of battlefield success with Gates&#x27; victory at Saratoga, foreign observers such as Frederick the Great were equally impressed with Washington&#x27;s command at Germantown, which demonstrated resilience and determination. Over the winter, poor conditions, supply problems and low morale resulted in 2,000 deaths, with another 3,000 unfit for duty due to lack of shoes. However, Baron Friedrich Wilhelm von Steuben took the opportunity to introduce Prussian Army drill and infantry tactics to &quot;model companies&quot; in each Continental Army regiment, who then instructed their home units. Despite Valley Forge being only twenty miles away, Howe made no effort to attack their camp, an action some critics argue could have ended the war.

===Foreign intervention===

Like his predecessors, French foreign minister Vergennes considered the 1763 Peace a national humiliation and viewed the war as an opportunity to weaken Britain. He initially avoided open conflict, but allowed American ships to take on cargoes in French ports, a technical violation of neutrality. Vergennes persuaded Louis XVI to secretly fund a government front company to purchase munitions for the Patriots, carried in neutral Dutch ships and imported through Sint Eustatius in the Caribbean.

Many Americans opposed a French alliance, fearing to &quot;exchange one tyranny for another&quot;, but this changed after a series of military setbacks in early 1776. As France had nothing to gain from the colonies reconciling with Britain, Congress had three choices: making peace on British terms, continuing the struggle on their own, or proclaiming independence, guaranteed by France. Although the Declaration of Independence had wide public support, over 20% of Congressmen voted against an alliance with France. Congress agreed to the treaty with reluctance and as the war moved in their favor increasingly lost interest in it.

Silas Deane was sent to Paris to begin negotiations with Vergennes, whose key objectives were replacing Britain as the United States&#x27; primary commercial and military partner while securing the French West Indies from American expansion. These islands were extremely valuable; in 1772, the value of sugar and coffee produced by Saint-Domingue on its own exceeded that of all American exports combined. Talks progressed slowly until October 1777, when British defeat at Saratoga and their apparent willingness to negotiate peace convinced Vergennes only a permanent alliance could prevent the &quot;disaster&quot; of Anglo-American rapprochement. Assurances of formal French support allowed Congress to reject the Carlisle Peace Commission and insist on nothing short of complete independence.

On February 6, 1778, France and the United States signed the Treaty of Amity and Commerce regulating trade between the two countries, followed by a defensive military alliance against Britain, the Treaty of Alliance. In return for French guarantees of American independence, Congress undertook to defend their interests in the West Indies, while both sides agreed not to make a separate peace; conflict over these provisions would lead to the 1798 to 1800 Quasi-War. Charles III of Spain was invited to join on the same terms but refused, largely due to concerns over the impact of the Revolution on Spanish colonies in the Americas. Spain had complained on multiple occasions about encroachment by American settlers into Louisiana, a problem that could only get worse once the United States replaced Britain.

Although Spain ultimately made important contributions to American success, in the Treaty of Aranjuez, Charles agreed only to support France&#x27;s war with Britain outside America, in return for help in recovering Gibraltar, Menorca and Spanish Florida. The terms were confidential since several conflicted with American aims; for example, the French claimed exclusive control of the Newfoundland cod fisheries, a non-negotiable for colonies like Massachusetts. One less well-known impact of this agreement was the abiding American distrust of &#x27;foreign entanglements&#x27;; the U.S. would not sign another treaty with France until their NATO agreement of 1949. This was because the US had agreed not to make peace without France, while Aranjuez committed France to keep fighting until Spain recovered Gibraltar, effectively making it a condition of U.S. independence without the knowledge of Congress.

To encourage French participation in the struggle for independence, the U.S. representative in Paris, Silas Deane promised promotion and command positions to any French officer who joined the Continental Army. Such as Gilbert du Motier, Marquis de Lafayette, whom Congress via Dean appointed a major general, on July 31, 1777.

When the war started, Britain tried to borrow the Dutch-based Scots Brigade for service in America, but pro-Patriot sentiment led the States General to refuse. Although the Republic was no longer a major power, prior to 1774 they still dominated the European carrying trade, and Dutch merchants made large profits shipping French-supplied munitions to the Patriots. This ended when Britain declared war in December 1780, a conflict that proved disastrous to the Dutch economy.

The British government failed to take into account the strength of the American merchant marine and support from European countries, which allowed the colonies to import munitions and continue trading with relative impunity. While well aware of this, the North administration delayed placing the Royal Navy on a war footing for cost reasons; this prevented the institution of an effective blockade. Traditional British policy was to employ European land-based allies to divert the opposition; in 1778, they were diplomatically isolated and faced war on multiple fronts.

Meanwhile, George III had given up on subduing America while Britain had a European war to fight. He did not welcome war with France, but he held the British victories over France in the Seven Years&#x27; War as a reason to believe in ultimate victory over France. Britain subsequently changed its focus into the Caribbean theater, and diverted major military resources away from America.

===Stalemate in the North===


At the end of 1777, Howe resigned and was replaced by Sir Henry Clinton on May 24, 1778; with French entry into the war, he was ordered to consolidate his forces in New York. On June 18, the British departed Philadelphia with the reinvigorated Americans in pursuit; the Battle of Monmouth on June 28 was inconclusive but boosted Patriot morale. That midnight, the newly installed Clinton continued his retreat to New York. A French naval force under Admiral Charles Henri Hector d&#x27;Estaing was sent to assist Washington; deciding New York was too formidable a target, in August they launched a combined attack on Newport, with General John Sullivan commanding land forces. The resulting Battle of Rhode Island was indecisive; badly damaged by a storm, the French withdrew to avoid risking their ships. 

Further activity was limited to British raids on Chestnut Neck and Little Egg Harbor in October. In July 1779, the Americans captured British positions at Stony Point and Paulus Hook. Clinton unsuccessfully tried to tempt Washington into a decisive engagement by sending General William Tryon to raid Connecticut. In July, a large American naval operation, the Penobscot Expedition, attempted to retake Maine but was defeated.
Persistent Iroquois raids in New York and Pennsylvania led to the punitive Sullivan Expedition from July to September 1779. Involving more than 4,000 patriot soldiers, the scorched earth campaign destroyed more than 40 Iroquois villages and 160,000 bushels (4,000 mts) of maize, leaving the Iroquois destitute and destroying the Iroquois confederacy as an independent power on the American frontier. However, 5,000 Iroquois fled to Canada, where, supplied and supported by the British, they continued their raids.

During the winter of 1779–1780, the Continental Army suffered greater hardships than at Valley Forge. Morale was poor, public support fell away, the Continental dollar was virtually worthless, the army was plagued with supply problems, desertion was common, and mutinies occurred in the Pennsylvania Line and New Jersey Line regiments over the conditions.

In June 1780, Clinton sent 6,000 men under Wilhelm von Knyphausen to retake New Jersey, but they were halted by local militia at the Battle of Connecticut Farms; although the Americans withdrew, Knyphausen felt he was not strong enough to engage Washington&#x27;s main force and retreated. A second attempt two weeks later ended in a British defeat at the Battle of Springfield, effectively ending their ambitions in New Jersey. In July, Washington appointed Benedict Arnold commander of West Point; his attempt to betray the fort to the British failed due to incompetent planning, and the plot was revealed when his British contact John André was captured and executed. Arnold escaped to New York and switched sides, an action justified in a pamphlet addressed &quot;To the Inhabitants of America&quot;; the Patriots condemned his betrayal, while he found himself almost as unpopular with the British.

===War in the South===


The Southern Strategy was developed by Lord Germain, based on input from London-based Loyalists, including Joseph Galloway. They argued that it made no sense to fight the Patriots in the north where they were strongest, while the New England economy was reliant on trade with Britain. On the other hand, duties on tobacco made the South far more profitable for Britain, while local support meant securing it required small numbers of regular troops. Victory would leave a truncated United States facing British possessions in the south, Canada to the north, and Ohio on their western border; with the Atlantic seaboard controlled by the Royal Navy, Congress would be forced to agree to terms. However, assumptions about the level of Loyalist support proved wildly optimistic.

Germain ordered Augustine Prévost, the British commander in East Florida, to advance into Georgia in December 1778. Lieutenant-Colonel Archibald Campbell, an experienced officer, captured Savannah on December 29, 1778. He recruited a Loyalist militia of nearly 1,100, many of whom allegedly joined only after Campbell threatened to confiscate their property. Poor motivation and training made them unreliable troops, as demonstrated in their defeat by Patriot militia at the Battle of Kettle Creek on February 14, 1779, although this was offset by British victory at Brier Creek on March 3.

In June 1779, Prévost launched an abortive assault on Charleston, before retreating to Savannah, an operation notorious for widespread looting by British troops that enraged both Loyalists and Patriots. In October, a joint French and American operation under d&#x27;Estaing and General Benjamin Lincoln failed to recapture Savannah. Prévost was replaced by Lord Cornwallis, who assumed responsibility for Germain&#x27;s strategy; he soon realized estimates of Loyalist support were considerably over-stated, and he needed far more regular forces.

Reinforced by Clinton, Cornwallis&#x27;s troops captured Charleston in May 1780, inflicting the most serious Patriot defeat of the war; over 5,000 prisoners were taken and the Continental Army in the south effectively destroyed. On May 29, Lieutenant-Colonel Banastre Tarleton&#x27;s mainly Loyalist force routed a Continental Army force nearly three times its size under Colonel Abraham Buford at the Battle of Waxhaws. The battle is controversial for allegations of a massacre, which were later used as a recruiting tool by the Patriots.

Clinton returned to New York, leaving Cornwallis to oversee the south; despite their success, the two men left barely on speaking terms. The Southern strategy depended on local support, but this was undermined by a series of coercive measures. Previously, captured Patriots were sent home after swearing not to take up arms against the king; they were now required to fight their former comrades, while the confiscation of Patriot-owned plantations led formerly neutral &quot;grandees&quot; to side with them. Skirmishes at Williamson&#x27;s Plantation, Cedar Springs, Rocky Mount, and Hanging Rock signaled widespread resistance to the new oaths throughout South Carolina.

In July 1780, Congress appointed Gates commander in the south; he was defeated at the Battle of Camden on August 16, leaving Cornwallis free to enter North Carolina. Despite battlefield success, the British could not control the countryside and Patriot attacks continued; before moving north, Cornwallis sent Loyalist militia under Major Patrick Ferguson to cover his left flank, leaving their forces too far apart to provide mutual support. In early October, Ferguson was defeated at the Battle of Kings Mountain, dispersing organized Loyalist resistance in the region. Despite this, Cornwallis continued into North Carolina hoping for Loyalist support, while Washington replaced Gates with General Nathanael Greene in December 1780.

Greene divided his army, leading his main force southeast pursued by Cornwallis; a detachment was sent southwest under Daniel Morgan, who defeated Tarleton&#x27;s British Legion at Cowpens on January 17, 1781, nearly eliminating it as a fighting force. The Patriots now held the initiative in the south, with the exception of a raid on Richmond led by Benedict Arnold in January 1781. Greene led Cornwallis on a series of countermarches around North Carolina; by early March, the British were exhausted and short of supplies and Greene felt strong enough to fight the Battle of Guilford Court House on March 15. Although victorious, Cornwallis suffered heavy casualties and retreated to Wilmington, North Carolina, seeking supplies and reinforcements.

The Patriots now controlled most of the Carolinas and Georgia outside the coastal areas; after a minor reversal at the Battle of Hobkirk&#x27;s Hill, they recaptured Fort Watson and Fort Motte on April 15. On June 6, Brigadier General Andrew Pickens captured Augusta, leaving the British in Georgia confined to Charleston and Savannah. The assumption Loyalists would do most of the fighting left the British short of troops and battlefield victories came at the cost of losses they could not replace. Despite halting Greene&#x27;s advance at the Battle of Eutaw Springs on September 8, Cornwallis withdrew to Charleston with little to show for his campaign.

===Western campaign===

From the beginning of the war, Bernardo de Gálvez, the Governor of Spanish Louisiana, allowed the Americans to import supplies and munitions into New Orleans, then ship them to Pittsburgh. This provided an alternative transportation route for the Continental Army, bypassing the British blockade of the Atlantic Coast.

In February 1778, an expedition of militia to destroy British military supplies in settlements along the Cuyahoga River was halted by adverse weather. Later in the year, a second campaign was undertaken to seize the Illinois Country from the British. Virginia militia, &quot;Canadien&quot; settlers, and Indian allies commanded by Colonel George Rogers Clark captured Kaskaskia on July 4 and then secured Vincennes, though Vincennes was recaptured by Quebec Governor Henry Hamilton. The Spanish-aligned fur trader Francis Vigo, an American sympathizer, alerted Clark to the threat posed to his control of the west by Hamilton&#x27;s position and in early 1779, the Virginians counter-attacked in the siege of Fort Vincennes and took Hamilton prisoner. Clark secured western British Quebec as the American Northwest Territory in the Treaty of Paris as the Revolutionary War came to an end.

When Spain joined France&#x27;s war against Britain in the Anglo-French War in 1779, their treaty specifically excluded Spanish military action in North America. Later that year, however, Gálvez initiated offensive operations against British outposts. First, he cleared British garrisons in Baton Rouge, Louisiana, Fort Bute, and Natchez, Mississippi, and captured five forts. In doing so, Gálvez opened navigation on the Mississippi River north to the American settlement in Pittsburgh.

On May 25, 1780, British Colonel Henry Bird invaded Kentucky as part of a wider operation to clear American resistance from Quebec to the Gulf Coast. Their advance on New Orleans was repelled by Spanish Governor Gálvez&#x27;s offensive on Mobile. Simultaneous British attacks were repulsed on St. Louis by the Spanish Lieutenant Governor de Leyba, and on the Virginia County courthouse in Cahokia, Illinois, by Lieutenant Colonel Clark. The British initiative under Bird from Detroit was ended at the rumored approach of Clark. The scale of violence in the Licking River Valley, was extreme &quot;even for frontier standards.&quot; It led to English and German settlements, who joined Clark&#x27;s militia when the British and their hired German soldiers withdrew to the Great Lakes. The Americans responded with a major offensive along the Mad River in August which met with some success in the Battle of Piqua but did not end Indian raids.

French soldier Augustin de La Balme led a Canadian militia in an attempt to capture Detroit, but they dispersed when Miami natives led by Little Turtle attacked the encamped settlers on November 5. The war in the west stalemated with the British garrison sitting in Detroit and the Virginians expanding westward settlements north of the Ohio River in the face of British-allied Indian resistance.

In 1781, Galvez and Pollock campaigned east along the Gulf Coast to secure West Florida, including British-held Mobile and Pensacola. The Spanish operations impaired the British supply of armaments to British Indian allies, which effectively suspended a military alliance to attack settlers between the Mississippi River and the Appalachian Mountains.

In 1782, large scale retaliations between settlers and Native Americans in the region included the Gnadenhutten massacre and the Crawford expedition. The 1782 Battle of Blue Licks was one of the last major engagements of the war. News of the treaty between Great Britain and the United States arrived late that year. By this time, about 7% of Kentucky settlers had been killed in battles against Native Americans, contrasted with 1% of the population killed in the Thirteen Colonies. Lingering resentments led to continued fighting in the west after the war officially ended.

===British defeat===


Clinton spent most of 1781 based in New York City; he failed to construct a coherent operational strategy, partly due to his difficult relationship with Admiral Marriot Arbuthnot. In Charleston, Cornwallis independently developed an aggressive plan for a campaign in Virginia, which he hoped would isolate Greene&#x27;s army in the Carolinas and cause the collapse of Patriot resistance in the South. This strategy was approved by Lord Germain in London, but neither informed Clinton.

Washington and Rochambeau discussed their options: Washington wanted to attack the British in New York, and Rochambeau wanted to attack them in Virginia, where Cornwallis&#x27;s forces were less established. Washington eventually gave way, and Lafayette took a combined Franco-American force into Virginia. Clinton misinterpreted his movements as preparations for an attack on New York and instructed Cornwallis to establish a fortified sea base, where the Royal Navy could evacuate British troops to help defend New York.

When Lafayette entered Virginia, Cornwallis complied with Clinton&#x27;s orders and withdrew to Yorktown, where he constructed strong defenses and awaited evacuation. An agreement by the Spanish Navy to defend the French West Indies allowed Admiral François Joseph Paul de Grasse to relocate to the Atlantic seaboard, a move Arbuthnot did not anticipate. This provided Lafayette naval support, while the failure of previous combined operations at Newport and Savannah meant their coordination was planned more carefully. Despite repeated urging from his subordinates, Cornwallis made no attempt to engage Lafayette before he could establish siege lines. Expecting to be withdrawn within a few days, he also abandoned the outer defenses, which were promptly occupied by the besiegers and hastened British defeat.

On August 31, a Royal Navy fleet under Thomas Graves left New York for Yorktown. After landing troops and munitions for the besiegers on August 30, de Grasse remained in Chesapeake Bay and intercepted him on September 5; although the Battle of the Chesapeake was indecisive in terms of losses, Graves was forced to retreat, leaving Cornwallis isolated. An attempted breakout over York River at Gloucester Point failed due to bad weather. Under heavy bombardment with dwindling supplies, on October 16 Cornwallis sent emissaries to General Washington to negotiate surrender; after twelve hours of negotiations, the terms of surrender were finalized the following day. Responsibility for defeat was the subject of fierce public debate between Cornwallis, Clinton, and Germain. Clinton ultimately took most of the blame and spent the rest of his life in relative obscurity.

Subsequent to Yorktown, American forces were assigned to supervise the armistice between Washington and Clinton made to facilitate British departure following the January 1782 law of Parliament forbidding any further British offensive action in North America. British-American negotiations in Paris led to signed preliminary agreements in November 1782, which acknowledged U.S. independence. The enacted Congressional war objective, a British withdrawal from North America and cession of these regions to the U.S., was completed in stages in East Coast cities.

In the U.S. South, Generals Greene and Wayne observed the British remove their troops from Charleston on December 14, 1782. Loyalist provincial militias of whites and free Blacks and Loyalists with slaves were transported to Nova Scotia and the British West Indies. Native American allies of the British and some freed Blacks were left to escape unaided through the American lines.

On April 9, 1783, Washington issued orders that &quot;all acts of hostility&quot; were to cease immediately. That same day, by arrangement with Washington, Carleton issued a similar order to British troops. As directed by a Congressional resolution of May 26, 1783, all non-commissioned officers and enlisted were furloughed &quot;to their homes&quot; until the &quot;definitive treaty of peace&quot;, when they would be automatically discharged. The U.S. armies were directly disbanded in the field as of Washington&#x27;s General Orders on June 2, 1783. Once the Treaty of Paris was signed with Britain on September 3, 1783, Washington resigned as commander-in-chief of the Continental Army. The last British occupation of New York City ended on November 25, 1783, with the departure of Clinton&#x27;s replacement, General Sir Guy Carleton.

==Strategy and commanders==
To win their insurrection, Washington and the Continental Army needed to outlast the British will to fight. To restore British America, the British had to defeat the Continental Army quickly and compel the Second Continental Congress to retract its claim to self-governance. Historian Terry M. Mays of The Citadel identifies three separate types of warfare during the Revolutionary War. The first was a colonial conflict in which objections to imperial trade regulation were as significant as taxation policy. The second was a civil war between American Patriots, American Loyalists, and those who preferred to remain neutral. Particularly in the south, many battles were fought between Patriots and Loyalists with no British involvement, leading to divisions that continued after independence was achieved.

The third element was a global war between France, Spain, the Dutch Republic, and Britain, with America serving as one of several different war theaters. After entering the Revolutionary War in 1778, France provided the Americans money, weapons, soldiers, and naval assistance, while French troops fought under U.S. command in North America. While Spain did not formally join the war in America, they provided access to the Mississippi River and captured British possessions on the Gulf of Mexico that denied bases to the Royal Navy, retook Menorca and besieged Gibraltar in Europe. Although the Dutch Republic was no longer a major power prior to 1774, they still dominated the European carrying trade, and Dutch merchants made large profits by shipping French-supplied munitions to the Patriots. This ended when Britain declared war in December 1780, and the conflict proved disastrous to the Dutch economy.

===American strategy===
The Second Continental Congress stood to benefit if the Revolution evolved into a protracted war. Colonial state populations were largely prosperous and depended on local production for food and supplies rather than on imports from Britain. The thirteen colonies were spread across most of North American Atlantic seaboard, stretching 1,000 miles. Most colonial farms were remote from the seaports, and control of four or five major ports did not give Britain control over American inland areas. Each state had established internal distribution systems. Motivation was also a major asset: each colonial capital had its own newspapers and printers, and the Patriots enjoyed more popular support than the Loyalists. Britain hoped that the Loyalists would do much of the fighting, but found that the Loyalists did not engage as significantly as they had hoped.

====Continental Army====


When the Revolutionary War began, the Second Continental Congress lacked a professional army or navy. However, each of the colonies had a long-established system of local militia, which were combat-tested in support of British regulars in the French and Indian War. The colonial state legislatures independently funded and controlled their local militias. 

Militiamen were lightly armed, had little training, and usually did not have uniforms. Their units served for only a few weeks or months at a time and lacked the training and discipline of more experienced soldiers. Local county militias were reluctant to travel far from home and were unavailable for extended operations. To compensate for this, the Continental Congress established a regular force known as the Continental Army on June 14, 1775, which proved to be the origin of the modern United States Army, and appointed Washington as its commander-in-chief. However, it suffered significantly from the lack of an effective training program and from largely inexperienced officers.
Each state legislature appointed officers for both county and state militias and their regimental Continental line officers; although Washington was required to accept Congressional appointments, he was permitted to choose and command his own generals, such as Greene; his chief of artillery, Knox; and Alexander Hamilton, the chief of staff. One of Washington&#x27;s most successful general officer recruits was Steuben, a veteran of the Prussian general staff who wrote the Revolutionary War Drill Manual. The development of the Continental Army was always a work in progress and Washington used both his regulars and state militias throughout the war; when properly employed, the combination allowed them to overwhelm smaller British forces, as they did in battles at Concord, Boston, Bennington, and Saratoga. Both sides used partisan warfare, but the state militias effectively suppressed Loyalist activity when British regulars were not in the area.

Washington designed the overall military strategy in cooperation with Congress, established the principle of civilian supremacy in military affairs, personally recruited his senior officer corps, and kept the states focused on a common goal. Washington initially employed the inexperienced officers and untrained troops in Fabian strategies rather than risk frontal assaults against Britain&#x27;s professional forces. Over the course of the war, Washington lost more battles than he won, but he never surrendered his troops and maintained a fighting force in the face of British field armies.

By prevailing European standards, the armies in America were relatively small, limited by lack of supplies and logistics. The British were constrained by the logistical difficulty of transporting troops across the Atlantic and their dependence on local supplies. Washington never directly commanded more than 17,000 men, and the combined Franco-American army in the decisive American victory at Yorktown was only about 19,000. At the beginning of 1776, Patriot forces consisted of 20,000 men, with two-thirds in the Continental Army and the other third in the state militias. About 250,000 American men served as regulars or as militia for the revolutionary cause during the war, but there were never more than 90,000 men under arms at any time.

On the whole, American officers never equaled their British opponents in tactics and maneuvers, and they lost most of the pitched battles. The great successes at Boston (1776), Saratoga (1777), and Yorktown (1781) were won by trapping the British far from base with a greater number of troops. After 1778, Washington&#x27;s army was transformed into a more disciplined and effective force, mostly as a product of Baron von Steuben&#x27;s military training. Immediately after the Continental Army emerged from Valley Forge in June 1778, it proved its ability to match the military capabilities of the British at the Battle of Monmouth, including a Black Rhode Island regiment fending off a British bayonet attack and then counter charging the British for the first time as part of Washington&#x27;s army. After the Battle of Monmouth, Washington came to realize that saving entire towns was not necessary, but preserving his army and keeping the revolutionary spirit alive was more important. Washington informed Henry Laurens, then president of the Second Continental Congress, &quot;that the possession of our towns, while we have an army in the field, will avail them little.&quot;

Although the Continental Congress was responsible for the war effort and provided supplies to the troops, Washington took it upon himself to pressure Congress and the state legislatures to provide the essentials of war; there was never nearly enough. Congress evolved in its committee oversight and established the Board of War, which included members of the military. Because the Board of War was also a committee ensnared with its own internal procedures, Congress also created the post of Secretary of War, appointing Major General Benjamin Lincoln to the position in February 1781. Washington worked closely with Lincoln to coordinate civilian and military authorities and took charge of training and supplying the army.

====Continental Navy====

During the first summer of the war, Washington began outfitting schooners and other small seagoing vessels to prey on ships supplying the British in Boston. The Second Continental Congress established the Continental Navy on October 13, 1775, and appointed Esek Hopkins as its first commander; for most of the war, the Continental Navy included only a handful of small frigates and sloops, supported by privateers. On November 10, 1775, Congress authorized the creation of the Continental Marines, which ultimately evolved into the United States Marine Corps.

John Paul Jones became the first American naval hero when he captured HMS &quot;Drake&quot; on April 24, 1778, the first victory for any American military vessel in British waters. The last such victory was by the frigate USS &quot;Alliance&quot;, commanded by Captain John Barry. On March 10, 1783, the &quot;Alliance&quot; outgunned HMS &quot;Sybil&quot; in a 45-minute duel while escorting Spanish gold from Havana to the Congress in Philadelphia. After Yorktown, all US Navy ships were sold or given away; it was the first time in America&#x27;s history that it had no fighting forces on the high seas.

Congress primarily commissioned privateers to reduce costs and to take advantage of the large proportion of colonial sailors found in the British Empire. In total, they included 1,700 ships that successfully captured 2,283 enemy ships to damage the British effort and to enrich themselves with the proceeds from the sale of cargo and the ship itself. About 55,000 sailors served aboard American privateers during the war.

===France===

At the beginning of the war, the Americans had no major international allies, since most nation-states waited to see how the conflict unfolded. Over time, the Continental Army established its military credibility. Battles such as the Battle of Bennington, the Battles of Saratoga, and even defeats such as the Battle of Germantown, proved decisive in gaining the support of powerful European nations, including France, Spain, and the Dutch Republic; the Dutch moved from covertly supplying the Americans with weapons and supplies to overtly supporting them.

The decisive American victory at Saratoga convinced France, which was already a long-time rival of Britain, to offer the Americans the Treaty of Amity and Commerce. The two nations also agreed to a defensive Treaty of Alliance to protect their trade and also guaranteed American independence from Britain. To engage the United States as a French ally militarily, the treaty was conditioned on Britain initiating a war on France to stop it from trading with the U.S. Spain and the Dutch Republic were invited to join by both France and the United States in the treaty, but neither was responsive to the request.

On June 13, 1778, France declared war on Great Britain, and it invoked the French military alliance with the U.S., which ensured additional U.S. private support for French possessions in the Caribbean. Washington worked closely with the soldiers and navy that France would send to America, primarily through Lafayette on his staff. French assistance made critical contributions required to defeat Cornwallis at Yorktown in 1781.

===British strategy===
The British military had considerable experience fighting in North America. However, in previous conflicts they benefited from local logistics and support from the colonial militia. In the American Revolutionary War, reinforcements had to come from Europe, and maintaining large armies over such distances was extremely complex; ships could take three months to cross the Atlantic, and orders from London were often outdated by the time they arrived.

Prior to the conflict, the colonies were largely autonomous economic and political entities, with no centralized area of ultimate strategic importance. This meant that, unlike Europe where the fall of a capital city often ended wars, that in America continued even after the loss of major settlements such as Philadelphia, the seat of Congress, New York, and Charleston. British power was reliant on the Royal Navy, whose dominance allowed them to resupply their own expeditionary forces while preventing access to enemy ports. However, the majority of the American population was agrarian, rather than urban; supported by the French navy and blockade runners based in the Dutch Caribbean, their economy was able to survive.
Lord North, Prime Minister since 1770, delegated control of the war in North America to Lord George Germain and the Earl of Sandwich, who was head of the Royal Navy from 1771 to 1782. Defeat at Saratoga in 1777 made it clear the revolt would not be easily suppressed, especially after the Franco-American alliance of February 1778. With Spain also expected to join the conflict, the Royal Navy needed to prioritize either the war in America or in Europe; Germain advocated the former, Sandwich the latter.

North initially backed the Southern strategy attempting to exploit divisions between the mercantile north and slave-owning south, but after the defeat of Yorktown, he was forced to accept that this policy had failed. It was clear the war was lost, although the Royal Navy forced the French to relocate their fleet to the Caribbean in November 1781 and resumed a close blockade of American trade. The resulting economic damage and rising inflation meant the US was now eager to end the war, while France was unable to provide further loans; Congress could no longer pay its soldiers.
The geographical size of the colonies and limited manpower meant the British could not simultaneously conduct military operations and occupy territory without local support. Debate persists over whether their defeat was inevitable; one British statesman described it as &quot;like trying to conquer a map&quot;. While Ferling argues Patriot victory was nothing short of a miracle, Ellis suggests the odds always favored the Americans, especially after Howe squandered the chance of a decisive British success in 1776, an &quot;opportunity that would never come again&quot;. The US military history speculates the additional commitment of 10,000 fresh troops in 1780 would have placed British victory &quot;within the realm of possibility&quot;.
====British Army====


The expulsion of France from North America in 1763 led to a drastic reduction in British troop levels in the colonies; in 1775, there were only 8,500 regular soldiers among a civilian population of 2.8 million. The bulk of military resources in the Americas were focused on defending sugar islands in the Caribbean; Jamaica alone generated more revenue than all thirteen American colonies combined. With the end of the Seven Years&#x27; War, the permanent army in Britain was also cut back, which resulted in administrative difficulties when the war began a decade later.

Over the course of the war, there were four separate British commanders-in-chief. The first was Thomas Gage, appointed in 1763, whose initial focus was establishing British rule in former French areas of Canada. Many in London blamed the revolt on his failure to take firm action earlier, and he was relieved after the heavy losses incurred at the Battle of Bunker Hill. His replacement was Sir William Howe, a member of the Whig faction in Parliament who opposed the policy of coercion advocated by Lord North; Cornwallis, who later surrendered at Yorktown, was one of many senior officers who initially refused to serve in North America.

The 1775 campaign showed the British overestimated the capabilities of their own troops and underestimated the colonial militia, requiring a reassessment of tactics and strategy, and allowing the Patriots to take the initiative. Howe&#x27;s responsibility is still debated; despite receiving large numbers of reinforcements, Bunker Hill seems to have permanently affected his self-confidence and lack of tactical flexibility meant he often failed to follow up opportunities. Many of his decisions were attributed to supply problems, such as his failure to pursue Washington&#x27;s beaten army. Having lost the confidence of his subordinates, he was recalled after Burgoyne surrendered at Saratoga.

Following the failure of the Carlisle Commission, British policy changed from treating the Patriots as subjects who needed to be reconciled to enemies who had to be defeated. In 1778, Howe was replaced by Sir Henry Clinton. Regarded as an expert on tactics and strategy, like his predecessors Clinton was handicapped by chronic supply issues. In addition, Clinton&#x27;s strategy was compromised by conflict with political superiors in London and his colleagues in North America, especially Admiral Mariot Arbuthnot, replaced in early 1781 by Rodney. He was neither notified nor consulted when Germain approved Cornwallis&#x27;s invasion of the south in 1781 and delayed sending him reinforcements believing the bulk of Washington&#x27;s army was still outside New York City. After the surrender at Yorktown, Clinton was relieved by Carleton, whose major task was to oversee the evacuation of Loyalists and British troops from Savannah, Charleston, and New York City.

====German troops====


During the 18th century, states commonly hired foreign soldiers, including Britain. When it became clear additional troops were needed to suppress the revolt in America, it was decided to employ professional German soldiers. There were several reasons for this, including public sympathy for the Patriot cause, a historical reluctance to expand the British army and the time needed to recruit and train new regiments. Many smaller states in the Holy Roman Empire had a long tradition of renting their armies to the highest bidder. The most important was Hesse-Kassel, known as &quot;the Mercenary State&quot;.

The first supply agreements were signed by the North administration in late 1775; 30,000 Germans served in the American War. Often generically referred to as &quot;Hessians&quot;, they included men from many other states, including Hanover and Brunswick. Sir Henry Clinton recommended recruiting Russian troops whom he rated very highly, having seen them in action against the Ottomans; however, negotiations with Catherine the Great made little progress.

Unlike previous wars their use led to intense political debate in Britain, France, and even Germany, where Frederick the Great refused to provide passage through his territories for troops hired for the American war. In March 1776, the agreements were challenged in Parliament by Whigs who objected to &quot;coercion&quot; in general, and the use of foreign soldiers to subdue &quot;British subjects&quot;. The debates were covered in detail by American newspapers; in May 1776 they received copies of the treaties themselves, provided by British sympathizers and smuggled into North America from London.

The prospect of foreign German soldiers being used in the colonies bolstered support for independence, more so than taxation and other acts combined; the King was accused of declaring war on his own subjects, leading to the idea there were now two separate governments. By apparently showing Britain was determined to go to war, it made hopes of reconciliation seem naive and hopeless, while the employment of what was regarded as &quot;foreign mercenaries&quot; became one of the charges levelled against George III in the Declaration of Independence. The Hessian reputation within Germany for brutality also increased support for the Patriot cause among German American immigrants.

The presence of over 150,000 German Americans meant both sides felt the German soldiers might be persuaded to desert; one reason Clinton suggested employing Russians was that he felt they were less likely to defect. When the first German troops arrived on Staten Island in August 1776, Congress approved the printing of handbills, promising land and citizenship to any willing to join the Patriot cause. The British launched a counter-campaign claiming deserters could be executed. Desertion among the Germans occurred throughout the war, with the highest rate of desertion occurring between the surrender at Yorktown and the Treaty of Paris. German regiments were central to the British war effort; of the estimated 30,000 sent to America, some 13,000 became casualties.

==Revolution as civil war==

===Loyalists===


Wealthy Loyalists convinced the British government that most of the colonists were sympathetic toward the Crown; consequently, British military planners relied on recruiting Loyalists, but had trouble recruiting sufficient numbers as the Patriots had widespread support. Approximately 25,000 Loyalists fought for the British throughout the war. Although Loyalists constituted about twenty percent of the colonial population, they were concentrated in distinct communities. Many of them lived among large plantation owners in the Tidewater region and South Carolina.

When the British began probing the backcountry in 1777–1778, they were faced with a major problem: any significant level of organized Loyalist activity required a continued presence of British regulars. The available manpower that the British had in America was insufficient to protect Loyalist territory and counter American offensives. The Loyalist militias in the South were constantly defeated by neighboring Patriot militia. The Patriot victory at the Battle of Kings Mountain irreversibly impaired Loyalist militia capability in the South.

When the early war policy was administered by Howe, the Crown&#x27;s need to maintain Loyalist support prevented it from using the traditional revolt suppression methods. The British cause suffered when their troops ransacked local homes during an aborted attack on Charleston in 1779 that enraged both Patriots and Loyalists. After Congress rejected the Carlisle Peace Commission in 1778 and Westminster turned to &quot;hard war&quot; during Clinton&#x27;s command, neutral colonists in the Carolinas often allied with the Patriots. Conversely, Loyalists gained support when Patriots intimidated suspected Tories by destroying property or tarring and feathering.

A Loyalist militia unit—the British Legion—provided some of the best troops in British service. It was commanded by Tarleton and gained a fearsome reputation in the colonies for &quot;brutality and needless slaughter&quot;.
===Women===

Women played various roles during the Revolutionary War; they often accompanied their husbands when permitted. For example, throughout the war Martha Washington was known to visit and provide aid to her husband George at various American camps. Women often accompanied armies as camp followers to sell goods and perform necessary tasks in hospitals and camps, and numbered in the thousands during the war.

Women also assumed military roles: some dressed as men to directly support combat, fight, or act as spies on both sides. Anna Maria Lane joined her husband in the Army. The Virginia General Assembly later cited her bravery: she fought while dressed as a man and &quot;performed extraordinary military services, and received a severe wound at the battle of Germantown ... with the courage of a soldier&quot;. On April 26, 1777, Sybil Ludington is said to have ridden to alert militia forces to the British&#x27;s approach; she has been called the &quot;female Paul Revere&quot;. Whether the ride occurred is questioned. A few others disguised themselves as men. Deborah Sampson fought until her gender was discovered and she was discharged as a result; Sally St. Clair was killed in action.

===African Americans===


When war began, the population of the Thirteen Colonies included an estimated 500,000 slaves, predominantly used as labor on Southern plantations. In November 1775, Lord Dunmore, the royal governor of Virginia, issued a proclamation that promised freedom to any Patriot-owned slaves willing to bear arms. Although the announcement helped to fill a temporary manpower shortage, white Loyalist prejudice meant recruits were eventually redirected to non-combatant roles. The Loyalists&#x27; motive was to deprive Patriot planters of labor rather than to end slavery; Loyalist-owned slaves were returned.

The 1779 Philipsburg Proclamation issued by Clinton extended the offer of freedom to Patriot-owned slaves throughout the colonies. It persuaded entire families to escape to British lines, many of which were employed growing food for the army by removing the requirement for military service. While Clinton organized the Black Pioneers, he also ensured fugitive slaves were returned to Loyalist owners with orders that they were not to be punished. As the war progressed, service as regular soldiers in British units became increasingly common; Black Loyalists formed two regiments of the Charleston garrison in 1783.

Estimates of the numbers who served the British during the war vary from 25,000 to 50,000, excluding those who escaped during wartime. Thomas Jefferson estimated that Virginia may have lost 30,000 slaves to escapes. In South Carolina, nearly 25,000 slaves (about 30 percent of the enslaved population) either fled, migrated, or died, which significantly disrupted the plantation economies both during and after the war.

Black Patriots were barred from the Continental Army until Washington convinced Congress in January 1778 that there was no other way to replace losses from disease and desertion. The 1st Rhode Island Regiment formed in February included former slaves whose owners were compensated; however, only 140 of its 225 soldiers were Black and recruitment stopped in June 1788. Ultimately, around 5,000 African Americans served in the Continental Army and Navy in a variety of roles, while another 4,000 were employed in Patriot militia units, aboard privateers, or as teamsters, servants, and spies. After the war, a small minority received land grants or Congressional pensions; many others were returned to their masters post-war despite earlier promises of freedom.

As a Patriot victory became increasingly likely, the treatment of Black Loyalists became a point of contention; after the surrender of Yorktown in 1781, Washington insisted all escapees be returned but Cornwallis refused. In 1782 and 1783, around 8,000 to 10,000 freed Blacks were evacuated by the British from Charleston, Savannah, and New York; some moved onto London, while 3,000 to 4,000 settled in Nova Scotia. White Loyalists transported 15,000 enslaved Blacks to Jamaica and the Bahamas. The free Black Loyalists who migrated to the British West Indies included regular soldiers from Dunmore&#x27;s Ethiopian Regiment, and those from Charleston who helped garrison the Leeward Islands.

===Native Americans===

Most Native Americans east of the Mississippi River were affected by the war, and many tribes were divided over how to respond. A few tribes were friendly with the colonists, but most Natives opposed the union of the Colonies as a potential threat to their territory. Approximately 13,000 Natives fought on the British side, with the largest group coming from the Iroquois tribes who deployed around 1,500 men.

Early in July 1776, Cherokee allies of Britain attacked the short-lived Washington District of North Carolina. Their defeat splintered both Cherokee settlements and people, and was directly responsible for the rise of the Chickamauga Cherokee, who perpetuated the Cherokee–American wars against American settlers for decades after hostilities with Britain ended.

Muscogee and Seminole allies of Britain fought against Americans in Georgia and South Carolina. In 1778, a force of 800 Muscogee destroyed American settlements along the Broad River in Georgia. Muscogee warriors also joined Thomas Brown&#x27;s raids into South Carolina and assisted Britain during the siege of Savannah. Many Native Americans were involved in the fight between Britain and Spain on the Gulf Coast and along the British side of the Mississippi River. Thousands of Muscogee, Chickasaw, and Choctaw fought in major battles such as the Battle of Fort Charlotte, the Battle of Mobile, and the siege of Pensacola.

The Iroquois Confederacy was shattered as a result of the American Revolutionary War. The Seneca, Onondaga, and Cayuga tribes sided with the British; members of the Mohawks fought on both sides; and many Tuscarora and Oneida sided with the Americans. To retaliate against raids on American settlement by Loyalists and their Indian allies, the Continental Army dispatched the Sullivan Expedition throughout New York to debilitate the Iroquois tribes that had sided with the British. Mohawk leaders Joseph Louis Cook and Joseph Brant sided with the Americans and the British respectively, which further exacerbated the split.

In the western theater, conflicts between settlers and Native Americans led to lingering distrust. In the 1783 Treaty of Paris, Great Britain ceded control of the disputed lands between the Great Lakes and the Ohio River, but Native inhabitants were not a part of the peace negotiations. Tribes in the Northwest Territory joined as the Western Confederacy and allied with the British to resist American settlement, and their conflict continued after the Revolutionary War as the Northwest Indian War.

==Peace negotiations==

The terms presented by the Carlisle Peace Commission in 1778 included acceptance of the principle of self-government. Parliament would recognize Congress as the governing body, suspend any objectionable legislation, surrender its right to local colonial taxation, and discuss including American representatives in the House of Commons. In return, all property confiscated from Loyalists would be returned, British debts honored, and locally enforced martial law accepted. However, Congress demanded either immediate recognition of independence or the withdrawal of all British troops; they knew the commission were not authorized to accept these, bringing negotiations to a rapid end.

On February 27, 1782, a Whig motion to end the offensive war in America was carried by 19 votes. North resigned, obliging the king to invite Lord Rockingham to form a government; a consistent supporter of the Patriot cause, he made a commitment to U.S. independence a condition of doing so. George III reluctantly accepted and the new government took office on March 27, 1782; however, Rockingham died unexpectedly on July 1, and was replaced by Lord Shelburne who acknowledged American independence.

When Lord Rockingham was elevated to Prime Minister, Congress consolidated its diplomatic consuls in Europe into a peace delegation at Paris. The dean of the delegation was Benjamin Franklin. He had become a celebrity in the French Court, but he was also influential in the courts of Prussia and Austria. Since the 1760s, Franklin had been an organizer of British American inter-colony cooperation, and then served as a colonial lobbyist to Parliament in London. John Adams had been consul to the Dutch Republic and was a prominent early New England Patriot. John Jay of New York had been consul to Spain and was a past president of the Continental Congress. As consul to the Dutch Republic, Henry Laurens had secured a preliminary agreement for a trade agreement. Although active in the preliminaries, he was not a signer of the conclusive treaty.

The Whig negotiators included long-time friend of Franklin David Hartley, and Richard Oswald, who had negotiated Laurens&#x27; release from the Tower of London. The Preliminary Peace signed on November 30 met four key Congressional demands: independence, territory up to the Mississippi, navigation rights into the Gulf of Mexico, and fishing rights in Newfoundland.

British strategy was to strengthen the U.S. sufficiently to prevent France from regaining a foothold in North America, and they had little interest in these proposals. However, divisions between their opponents allowed them to negotiate separately with each to improve their overall position, starting with the American delegation in September 1782. The French and Spanish sought to improve their position by creating the U.S. dependent on them for support against Britain, thus reversing the losses of 1763. Both parties tried to negotiate a settlement with Britain excluding the Americans; France proposed setting the western boundary of the U.S. along the Appalachians, matching the British 1763 Proclamation Line. The Spanish suggested additional concessions in the vital Mississippi River Basin, but required the cession of Georgia in violation of the Franco-American alliance.

Facing difficulties with Spain over claims involving the Mississippi River, and from France who was still reluctant to agree to American independence until all her demands were met, John Jay told the British that he was willing to negotiate directly with them, cutting off France and Spain, and Prime Minister Lord Shelburne, in charge of the British negotiations, agreed. Key agreements for the United States in obtaining peace included recognition of US independence; all of the territory east of the Mississippi River, north of Florida and south of Canada; and fishing rights in the Grand Banks, off the coast of Newfoundland and in the Gulf of Saint Lawrence. The United States and Great Britain were each given perpetual access to the Mississippi River.

An Anglo-American Preliminary Peace was formally entered into in November 1782, and Congress endorsed the settlement on April 15, 1783. It announced the achievement of peace with independence, and the conclusive treaty was signed on September 2, 1783, in Paris, effective the following day when Britain signed its treaty with France. John Adams, who helped draft the treaty, claimed it represented &quot;one of the most important political events that ever happened on the globe&quot;. Ratified respectively by Congress and Parliament, the final versions were exchanged in Paris the following spring. On November 25, the last British troops remaining in the U.S. were evacuated from New York to Halifax.

==Aftermath==
===Territory===
The expanse of territory that was now the U.S. included millions of sparsely settled acres south of the Great Lakes line between the Appalachian Mountains and the Mississippi River, much of which was part of Canada. The tentative colonial migration west became a flood during the war.

Britain&#x27;s extended post-war policy for the U.S. continued to try to establish an Indian barrier state below the Great Lakes as late as 1814 during the War of 1812. The formally acquired western American lands continued to be populated by Indigenous tribes that had mostly been British allies. In practice the British refused to abandon the forts on territory they formally transferred. Instead, they provisioned military allies for continuing frontier raids and sponsored the Northwest Indian War (1785–1795). British sponsorship of local warfare on the U.S. continued until the Anglo-American Jay Treaty, authored by Hamilton, went into effect on February 29, 1796.

Of the European powers with American colonies adjacent to the newly created U.S., Spain was most threatened by American independence, and it was correspondingly the most hostile to it. Its territory adjacent to the U.S. was relatively undefended, so Spanish policy developed a combination of initiatives. Spanish soft power diplomatically challenged the British territorial cession west to the Mississippi River and the previous northern boundaries of Spanish Florida. It imposed a high tariff on American goods, then blocked American settler access to the port of New Orleans. At the same time, the Spanish also sponsored war within the U.S. by Indian proxies in its Southwest Territory ceded by France to Britain, then Britain to the Americans.

===Casualties and losses===

The total loss of life throughout the conflict is largely unknown. As was typical in wars of the era, diseases such as smallpox claimed more lives than battle. Between 1775 and 1782, a smallpox epidemic throughout North America killed an estimated 130,000. Historian Joseph Ellis suggests that Washington having his troops inoculated against the disease was one of his most important decisions.

Up to 70,000 American Patriots died during active military service. Of these, approximately 6,800 were killed in battle, while at least 17,000 died from disease. The majority of the latter died while prisoners of war of the British, mostly in the prison ships in New York Harbor. The number of Patriots seriously wounded or disabled by the war has been estimated from 8,500 to 25,000.

The French suffered 2,112 killed in combat in the United States. The Spanish lost 124 killed and 247 wounded in West Florida.

A British report in 1781 puts their total Army deaths at 6,046 in North America (1775–1779). Approximately 7,774 Germans died in British service in addition to 4,888 deserters; among those labeled German deserters, however, it is estimated that 1,800 were killed in combat.

===Legacy===
The American Revolution set an example to overthrow both monarchy and colonial governments. The United States has the world&#x27;s oldest written constitution, which was used as a model in other countries, sometimes word-for-word. The Revolution inspired revolutions in France, Haiti, Latin America, and elsewhere.

Although the Revolution eliminated many forms of inequality, it did little to change the status of women, despite the role they played in winning independence. Most significantly, it failed to end slavery. While many were uneasy over the contradiction of demanding liberty for some, yet denying it to others, the dependence of southern states on slave labor made abolition too great a challenge. Between 1774 and 1780, many of the states banned the importation of slaves, but the institution itself continued. In 1782, Virginia passed a law permitting manumission and over the next eight years more than 10,000 slaves were given their freedom. The number of abolitionist movements greatly increased, and by 1804 all the northern states had outlawed it. However, slavery continued to be a serious social and political issue and caused divisions that would ultimately end in civil war.

===Historiography===
The body of historical writings on the American Revolution cite many motivations for the Patriot revolt. American Patriots stressed the denial of their constitutional rights as Englishmen, especially &quot;no taxation without representation.&quot; Contemporaries credit the American Enlightenment with laying the intellectual, moral, and ethical foundations for the American Revolution among the Founding Fathers, who were influenced by the classical liberalism of John Locke and other Enlightenment writers and philosophers.

&quot;Two Treatises of Government&quot; has long been cited as a major influence on Revolutionary-era American thinking, but historians David Lundberg and Henry F. May contend that Locke&#x27;s &quot;Essay Concerning Human Understanding&quot; was far more widely read. Historians since the 1960s have emphasized that the Patriot constitutional argument was made possible by the emergence of an American nationalism that united the Thirteen Colonies. In turn, that nationalism was rooted in a Republican value system that demanded consent of the governed and deeply opposed aristocratic control. In Britain, on the other hand, republicanism was largely a fringe ideology since it challenged the aristocratic control of the British monarchy and political system. Political power was not controlled by an aristocracy or nobility in the 13 colonies; instead, the colonial political system was based on the winners of free elections, which were open at the time to the majority of white men. In analysis of the Revolution, historians in recent decades have often cited three motivations behind it:
* The Atlantic history view places the American story in a broader context, including subsequent revolutions in France and Haiti. It tends to reintegrate the historiographies of the American Revolution and the British Empire.
* The &quot;new social history&quot; approach looks at community social structure to find cleavages that were magnified into colonial cleavages.
* The ideological approach that centers on republicanism in the United States. Republicanism dictated there would be no royalty, aristocracy or national church but allowed for continuation of the British common law, which American lawyers and jurists understood and approved and used in their everyday practice. Historians have examined how the rising American legal profession adopted British common law to incorporate republicanism by selective revision of legal customs and by introducing more choices for courts.

===Revolutionary War commemoration stamps===
After the first U.S. postage stamp was issued in 1849, the U.S. Postal Service frequently issued commemorative stamps celebrating people and events of the Revolutionary War. The first such stamp was the Liberty Bell issue of 1926.

==See also==

* 1776 in the United States: events, births, deaths, and other years
* Timeline of the American Revolution

===Topics of the Revolution===
* Committee of safety (American Revolution)
* Diplomacy in the American Revolutionary War
* Financial costs of the American Revolutionary War
* Flags of the American Revolution
* Naval operations in the American Revolutionary War

===Social history of the Revolution===
* Black Patriot
* Christianity in the United States#American Revolution
* The Colored Patriots of the American Revolution
* History of Poles in the United States#American Revolution
* List of clergy in the American Revolution
* List of Patriots (American Revolution)
* Quakers in the American Revolution
* Scotch-Irish Americans#American Revolution

===Others in the American Revolution===
* Nova Scotia in the American Revolution
* Watauga Association

===Lists of Revolutionary military===
* List of American Revolutionary War battles
* List of British Forces in the American Revolutionary War
* List of Continental Forces in the American Revolutionary War
* List of infantry weapons in the American Revolution
* List of United States militia units in the American Revolutionary War

===Legacy and related===
* American Revolution Statuary
* Commemoration of the American Revolution
* Founders Online
* Independence Day (United States)
* The Last Men of the Revolution
* List of plays and films about the American Revolution
* Museum of the American Revolution
* Tomb of the Unknown Soldier of the American Revolution
* List of wars of independence
* Bibliography of the American Revolutionary War
==Notes==

==Citations==
:&quot;Year dates enclosed in [brackets] denote year of original printing&quot;
==Bibliography==

* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* Britannica.com 
* 
* 
* 

* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 

* 
* 
* 
* Dictionary of American Biography 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* Encyclopædia Britannica 

* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 

* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 

* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* , p. 73
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* – Highly regarded examination of British strategy and leadership. An introduction by John W. Shy with his biographical sketch of Mackesy.
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 

* 
* 

* 
* 

* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* Robinson Library 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 


* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* (See also:British Warships in the Age of Sail)
* 


* 
* Canada&#x27;s Digital Collections Program 
* History.org 
* Maryland State House 
* The History Place 
* Totallyhistory.com 
* U.S. Merchant Marine 
* U.S. National Archives 
* Valley Forge National Historic Park 
* Yale Law School, Massachusetts Act 
==Further reading==

* Allison, David, and Larrie D. Ferreiro, eds. &quot;The American Revolution: A World War&quot; (Smithsonian, 2018) excerpt
* Bobrick, Benson. &quot;Angel in the Whirlwind: The Triumph of the American Revolution&quot;. Penguin, 1998 (paperback reprint)
* Brands, H. W. &quot;Our First Civil War: Patriots and Loyalists in the American Revolution&quot;. New York: Anchor Books 2022. 
* 
* 
* Chartrand, Rene. &quot;The French Army in the American War of Independence&quot; (1994). Short (48 pp), very well illustrated descriptions.
* 
* Commager, Henry Steele and Richard B. Morris, eds. &quot;The Spirit of &#x27;Seventy-Six&#x27;: The Story of the American Revolution as told by Participants&quot;. (Indianapolis: Bobbs-Merrill, 1958). online
* 
* 
* Foner, Eric, &quot;Whose Revolution?: The history of the United States&#x27; founding from below&quot; (review of Woody Holton, &quot;Liberty Is Sweet: The Hidden History of the American Revolution&quot;, Simon &amp; Schuster, 2021, 800 pp.), &quot;The Nation&quot;, vol. 314, no. 8 (18–25 April 2022), pp. 32–37. Highlighted are the struggles and tragic fates of America&#x27;s Indians and Black slaves. For example, &quot;In 1779 [George] Washington dispatched a contingent of soldiers to upstate New York to burn Indian towns and crops and seize hostages &#x27;of every age and sex.&#x27; The following year, while serving as governor of Virginia, [Thomas] Jefferson ordered troops under the command of George Rogers Clark to enter the Ohio Valley and bring about the expulsion or &#x27;extermination&#x27; of local Indians.&quot; (pp. 34–35.)
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* Kwasny, Mark V. &quot;Washington&#x27;s Partisan War, 1775–1783&quot;. Kent, Ohio: 1996. . Militia warfare.
* 
* Library of Congress 
* May, Robin. &quot;The British Army in North America 1775–1783&quot; (1993). Short (48pp), very well illustrated descriptions.
* 
* 
* Neimeyer, Charles Patrick. &quot;America Goes to War: A Social History of the Continental Army&quot; (1995) 
* 
* 
* 
* Royal Navy Museum 
* 
* 
* 
* Stoker, Donald, Kenneth J. Hagan, and Michael T. McMaster, eds. &quot;Strategy in the American War of Independence: a global approach&quot; (Routledge, 2009) excerpt.
* Symonds, Craig L. &quot;A Battlefield Atlas of the American Revolution&quot; (1989), newly drawn maps emphasizing the movement of military units
* 
* 
* U.S. Army, &quot;The Winning of Independence, 1777–1783&quot; &quot;American Military History&quot; Volume I, 2005.
* U.S. National Park Service 
* 
* Zlatich, Marko; Copeland, Peter. &quot;General Washington&#x27;s Army (1): 1775–78&quot; (1994). Short (48pp), very well illustrated descriptions.
* ——. &quot;General Washington&#x27;s Army (2): 1779–83&quot; (1994). Short (48pp), very well illustrated descriptions.
== External links ==


* &quot;The American Revolutionary War&quot; at United States Military Academy
* Library of Congress Guide to the American Revolution
* Bibliographies of the War of American Independence compiled by the United States Army Center of Military History</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q40949" start="4" end="30" title="American Revolutionary War" label="American Revolutionary War"/>
<link wikidata="Q40949" start="87" end="104" title="American Revolutionary War" label="Revolutionary War"/>
<link wikidata="Q40949" start="108" end="136" title="American Revolutionary War" label="American War of Independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q192769" start="212" end="231" title="American Revolution" label="American Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365374" start="251" end="258" title="Patriot (American Revolution)" label="Patriot"/>
<link wikidata="Q54122" start="283" end="299" title="Continental Army" label="Continental Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q23" start="317" end="334" title="George Washington" label="George Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q16824430" start="348" end="360" title="British Army during the American Revolutionary War" label="British Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q49" start="389" end="402" title="North America" label="North America"/>
<link wikidata="Q664609" start="408" end="417" title="Caribbean" label="Caribbean"/>
<link wikidata="Q97" start="427" end="441" title="Atlantic Ocean" label="Atlantic Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q217450" start="466" end="481" title="Treaty of Paris (1783)" label="Treaty of Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="533" end="557" title="United States" label="United States of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q161885" start="608" end="621" title="Kingdom of Great Britain" label="Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q8680" start="674" end="688" title="British Empire" label="British Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q33143" start="768" end="789" title="Seven Years&amp;#x27; War" label="Seven Years&amp;#x27; War"/>
<link wikidata="Q179997" start="858" end="875" title="Thirteen Colonies" label="Thirteen Colonies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1335777" start="909" end="914" title="Stamp Act 1765" label="Stamp"/>
<link wikidata="Q2093092" start="919" end="933" title="Townshend Acts" label="Townshend Acts"/>
<link wikidata="Q2739604" start="941" end="959" title="Parliament of Great Britain" label="British Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q100" start="1009" end="1015" title="Boston" label="Boston"/>
<link wikidata="Q215687" start="1043" end="1058" title="Boston Massacre" label="Boston Massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365292" start="1208" end="1224" title="Intolerable Acts" label="Intolerable Acts"/>
<link wikidata="Q778010" start="1273" end="1305" title="Battles of Lexington and Concord" label="Battles of Lexington and Concord"/>
<link wikidata="Q1983034" start="1383" end="1410" title="Second Continental Congress" label="Second Continental Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q390028" start="1469" end="1486" title="Independence Hall" label="Independence Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345" start="1514" end="1526" title="Philadelphia" label="Philadelphia"/>
<link wikidata="Q54122" start="1604" end="1620" title="Continental Army" label="Continental Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q7247433" start="1767" end="1785" title="Proclamation of Rebellion" label="state of rebellion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1611280" start="1878" end="1892" title="Lee Resolution" label="Lee Resolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q127912" start="1950" end="1977" title="United States Declaration of Independence" label="Declaration of Independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q815128" start="2105" end="2121" title="Siege of Boston" label="successful siege"/>
<link wikidata="Q333422" start="2232" end="2244" title="William Howe, 5th Viscount Howe" label="William Howe"/>
<link wikidata="Q2630469" start="2272" end="2304" title="New York and New Jersey campaign" label="New York and New Jersey campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q7971587" start="2398" end="2420" title="George Washington&amp;#x27;s crossing of the Delaware River" label="clandestinely crossing"/>
<link wikidata="Q143762" start="2425" end="2439" title="Delaware River" label="Delaware River"/>
<link wikidata="Q653664" start="2487" end="2494" title="Battle of Trenton" label="Trenton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132579" start="2499" end="2508" title="Battle of Princeton" label="Princeton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1444930" start="2557" end="2577" title="Philadelphia campaign" label="capture Philadelphia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5092" start="2612" end="2621" title="Baltimore" label="Baltimore"/>
<link wikidata="Q436775" start="2695" end="2708" title="John Burgoyne" label="John Burgoyne"/>
<link wikidata="Q846674" start="2736" end="2744" title="Battles of Saratoga" label="Saratoga"/>
<link wikidata="Q2650034" start="2895" end="2915" title="Treaty of Amity and Commerce (France–United States)" label="commercial agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q2788282" start="2947" end="2965" title="Treaty of Alliance (1778)" label="Treaty of Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1426614" start="2997" end="3016" title="Sullivan Expedition" label="Sullivan Expedition"/>
<link wikidata="Q208485" start="3029" end="3043" title="scorched earth" label="scorched earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q2629695" start="3260" end="3278" title="Treaty of Aranjuez (1779)" label="Treaty of Aranjuez"/>
<link wikidata="Q450734" start="3360" end="3373" title="Henry Clinton (British Army officer, born 1730)" label="Henry Clinton"/>
<link wikidata="Q7569779" start="3430" end="3447" title="Southern Colonies" label="Southern Colonies"/>
<link wikidata="Q164723" start="3495" end="3505" title="Charles Cornwallis, 1st Marquess Cornwallis" label="Cornwallis"/>
<link wikidata="Q459447" start="3549" end="3557" title="Siege of Yorktown (1781)" label="Yorktown"/>
<link wikidata="Q3776326" start="3946" end="3968" title="Peace of Paris (1783)" label="Treaties of Versailles"/>
<link wikidata="Q3651696" start="4014" end="4020" title="Anglo-French War (1778–1783)" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q26809259" start="4025" end="4030" title="Spain and the American Revolutionary War" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q185111" start="4064" end="4070" title="Tobago" label="Tobago"/>
<link wikidata="Q1041" start="4072" end="4079" title="Senegal" label="Senegal"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="4106" end="4111" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q2576215" start="4127" end="4134" title="Invasion of Minorca (1781)" label="Menorca"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425202" start="4136" end="4148" title="West Florida" label="West Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q1770351" start="4153" end="4165" title="East Florida" label="East Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q33143" start="4272" end="4293" title="Seven Years&amp;#x27; War" label="Seven Years&amp;#x27; War"/>
<link wikidata="Q156211" start="4310" end="4329" title="Peace of Paris (1763)" label="1763 Peace of Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q179023" start="4346" end="4352" title="French colonial empire" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q170604" start="4379" end="4389" title="New France" label="New France"/>
<link wikidata="Q209573" start="4395" end="4421" title="Royal Proclamation of 1763" label="Royal Proclamation of 1763"/>
<link wikidata="Q1952" start="4476" end="4487" title="Nova Scotia" label="Nova Scotia"/>
<link wikidata="Q812" start="4503" end="4510" title="Florida" label="Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q1497" start="4521" end="4538" title="Mississippi River" label="Mississippi River"/>
<link wikidata="Q80702" start="4580" end="4587" title="Spanish Empire" label="Spanish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070529" start="4713" end="4721" title="Colony of Virginia" label="Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2079909" start="4726" end="4739" title="Province of Massachusetts Bay" label="Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q3112521" start="4840" end="4861" title="Colonial government in the Thirteen Colonies" label="colonial legislatures"/>
<link wikidata="Q2739604" start="5270" end="5280" title="Parliament of Great Britain" label="Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q5607530" start="5347" end="5365" title="Grenville ministry" label="Grenville ministry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1516955" start="5381" end="5391" title="History of the Royal Navy (after 1707)" label="Royal Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q939439" start="5509" end="5521" title="Molasses Act" label="Molasses Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q1363379" start="5706" end="5715" title="Sugar Act" label="Sugar Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q14565721" start="5720" end="5729" title="Stamp Act" label="Stamp Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q108700" start="5955" end="5960" title="Whigs (British political party)" label="Whigs"/>
<link wikidata="Q5453764" start="5972" end="5997" title="First Rockingham ministry" label="First Rockingham ministry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1182068" start="6144" end="6159" title="Declaratory Act" label="Declaratory Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q5633120" start="6288" end="6295" title="HMS Liberty (1768)" label="Liberty"/>
<link wikidata="Q215687" start="6457" end="6472" title="Boston Massacre" label="Boston Massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q2093092" start="6528" end="6542" title="Townshend Acts" label="Townshend Acts"/>
<link wikidata="Q7056125" start="6561" end="6575" title="North Ministry" label="North Ministry"/>
<link wikidata="Q634813" start="6876" end="6896" title="Weare, New Hampshire" label="Weare, New Hampshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q7195397" start="6923" end="6937" title="Pine Tree Riot" label="Pine Tree Riot"/>
<link wikidata="Q7195389" start="6976" end="6990" title="Pine Tree Flag" label="Pine Tree Flag"/>
<link wikidata="Q1495317" start="7074" end="7087" title="Gaspee Affair" label="Gaspee Affair"/>
<link wikidata="Q5183770" start="7120" end="7134" title="Crisis of 1772" label="banking crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q83164" start="7167" end="7185" title="East India Company" label="East India Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047538" start="7261" end="7268" title="Tea Act" label="Tea Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q179997" start="7306" end="7323" title="Thirteen Colonies" label="Thirteen Colonies"/>
<link wikidata="Q31306" start="7560" end="7575" title="Sons of Liberty" label="Sons of Liberty"/>
<link wikidata="Q116971" start="7589" end="7595" title="Mohawk people" label="Mohawk"/>
<link wikidata="Q894564" start="7623" end="7636" title="Boston Harbor" label="Boston Harbor"/>
<link wikidata="Q19024" start="7666" end="7682" title="Boston Tea Party" label="Boston Tea Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365292" start="7742" end="7758" title="Intolerable Acts" label="Intolerable Acts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365374" start="7936" end="7943" title="Patriot (American Revolution)" label="Patriot"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8080" end="8100" title="Colonial government in the Thirteen Colonies#Assembly" label="elected lower houses"/>
<link wikidata="Q785035" start="8347" end="8354" title="Province of Georgia" label="Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q252612" start="8400" end="8426" title="First Continental Congress" label="First Continental Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q7178435" start="8548" end="8568" title="Petition to the King" label="Petition to the King"/>
<link wikidata="Q3503022" start="8695" end="8711" title="Suffolk Resolves" label="Suffolk Resolves"/>
<link wikidata="Q4231641" start="8741" end="8764" title="Continental Association" label="Continental Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q1248258" start="8783" end="8801" title="economic sanctions" label="economic sanctions"/>
<link wikidata="Q339274" start="8920" end="8931" title="James Duane" label="James Duane"/>
<link wikidata="Q935481" start="8943" end="8951" title="Loyalist (American Revolution)" label="Loyalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q2739097" start="8952" end="8967" title="Joseph Galloway" label="Joseph Galloway"/>
<link wikidata="Q16931921" start="9368" end="9384" title="Restraining Acts 1775" label="Restraining Acts"/>
<link wikidata="Q920396" start="9417" end="9436" title="British West Indies" label="British West Indies"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9487" end="9513" title="History of Newfoundland and Labrador#Fishing" label="Newfoundland cod fisheries"/>
<link wikidata="Q778010" start="9720" end="9752" title="Battles of Lexington and Concord" label="Battles of Lexington and Concord"/>
<link wikidata="Q878687" start="9884" end="9898" title="John Dickinson" label="John Dickinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1676888" start="9911" end="9932" title="Olive Branch Petition" label="Olive Branch Petition"/>
<link wikidata="Q5249461" start="10080" end="10137" title="Declaration of the Causes and Necessity of Taking Up Arms" label="Declaration of the Causes and Necessity of Taking Up Arms"/>
<link wikidata="Q3568789" start="10158" end="10172" title="William Legge, 2nd Earl of Dartmouth" label="Lord Dartmouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q7247433" start="10514" end="10539" title="Proclamation of Rebellion" label="Proclamation of Rebellion"/>
<link wikidata="Q334029" start="10580" end="10601" title="Battle of Bunker Hill" label="Battle at Bunker Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q1889821" start="11026" end="11042" title="Parliament of Ireland" label="Irish Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q700853" start="11211" end="11228" title="Hessian (soldier)" label="additional troops"/>
<link wikidata="Q126462" start="11700" end="11712" title="Thomas Paine" label="Thomas Paine"/>
<link wikidata="Q843940" start="11735" end="11747" title="Common Sense (pamphlet)" label="Common Sense"/>
<link wikidata="Q127912" start="11875" end="11902" title="United States Declaration of Independence" label="Declaration of Independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1983034" start="11908" end="11935" title="Second Continental Congress" label="Second Continental Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q2344665" start="11950" end="11967" title="Committee of Five" label="Committee of Five"/>
<link wikidata="Q11812" start="11969" end="11985" title="Thomas Jefferson" label="Thomas Jefferson"/>
<link wikidata="Q11806" start="11987" end="11997" title="John Adams" label="John Adams"/>
<link wikidata="Q34969" start="11999" end="12016" title="Benjamin Franklin" label="Benjamin Franklin"/>
<link wikidata="Q354721" start="12018" end="12031" title="Roger Sherman" label="Roger Sherman"/>
<link wikidata="Q283676" start="12037" end="12054" title="Robert Livingston (chancellor)" label="Robert Livingston"/>
<link wikidata="Q127318" start="12358" end="12368" title="George III" label="George III"/>
<link wikidata="Q7887623" start="12499" end="12514" title="United Colonies" label="United Colonies"/>
<link wikidata="Q5153023" start="13445" end="13479" title="Committee of Secret Correspondence" label="Committee of Secret Correspondence"/>
<link wikidata="Q947190" start="13936" end="13947" title="Silas Deane" label="Silas Deane"/>
<link wikidata="Q581935" start="14115" end="14126" title="Thomas Gage" label="Thomas Gage"/>
<link wikidata="Q5152172" start="14128" end="14161" title="Commander-in-Chief, North America" label="Commander-in-Chief, North America"/>
<link wikidata="Q6611738" start="14166" end="14191" title="List of colonial governors of Massachusetts" label="Governor of Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q523240" start="14295" end="14317" title="Concord, Massachusetts" label="Concord, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q272774" start="14331" end="14343" title="John Hancock" label="John Hancock"/>
<link wikidata="Q212963" start="14348" end="14360" title="Samuel Adams" label="Samuel Adams"/>
<link wikidata="Q327071" start="14564" end="14575" title="Paul Revere" label="Paul Revere"/>
<link wikidata="Q81148" start="14617" end="14623" title="John Parker (captain)" label="Parker"/>
<link wikidata="Q523240" start="14642" end="14649" title="Concord, Massachusetts" label="Concord"/>
<link wikidata="Q428586" start="14740" end="14766" title="shot heard round the world" label="shot heard round the world"/>
<link wikidata="Q100" start="14932" end="14938" title="Boston" label="Boston"/>
<link wikidata="Q815128" start="14955" end="14963" title="Siege of Boston" label="besieged"/>
<link wikidata="Q333422" start="15046" end="15058" title="William Howe, 5th Viscount Howe" label="William Howe"/>
<link wikidata="Q436775" start="15060" end="15073" title="John Burgoyne" label="John Burgoyne"/>
<link wikidata="Q450734" start="15079" end="15096" title="Henry Clinton (American War of Independence)" label="Sir Henry Clinton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1756813" start="15126" end="15147" title="Charlestown Peninsula" label="Charlestown Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q334029" start="15155" end="15176" title="Battle of Bunker Hill" label="Battle of Bunker Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q54122" start="15566" end="15582" title="Continental Army" label="Continental Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q3078508" start="15753" end="15779" title="Fortification of Dorchester Heights" label="fortify Dorchester Heights"/>
<link wikidata="Q355680" start="15851" end="15861" title="Henry Knox" label="Henry Knox"/>
<link wikidata="Q6389258" start="15875" end="15890" title="Noble train of artillery" label="heavy artillery"/>
<link wikidata="Q1546173" start="15907" end="15934" title="Capture of Fort Ticonderoga" label="Capture of Fort Ticonderoga"/>
<link wikidata="Q3186762" start="16151" end="16159" title="Evacuation Day (Massachusetts)" label="March 17"/>
<link wikidata="Q2141" start="16195" end="16215" title="Halifax, Nova Scotia" label="Halifax, Nova Scotia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16291" end="16310" title="Privateer#United States" label="American privateers"/>
<link wikidata="Q55631092" start="16350" end="16360" title="Raid on St. John (1775)" label="Saint John"/>
<link wikidata="Q55631091" start="16362" end="16375" title="Raid on Charlottetown (1775)" label="Charlottetown"/>
<link wikidata="Q55631094" start="16381" end="16389" title="Raid on Yarmouth, Nova Scotia (1775)" label="Yarmouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q314333" start="16400" end="16415" title="John Paul Jones" label="John Paul Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q6273011" start="16420" end="16433" title="Jonathan Eddy" label="Jonathan Eddy"/>
<link wikidata="Q55631090" start="16443" end="16448" title="Raid on Canso (1776)" label="Canso"/>
<link wikidata="Q4584046" start="16453" end="16468" title="Battle of Fort Cumberland" label="Fort Cumberland"/>
<link wikidata="Q251668" start="16504" end="16510" title="Province of Quebec (1763–1791)" label="Quebec"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16538" end="16546" title="Iroquois#American Revolution" label="Iroquois"/>
<link wikidata="Q1840117" start="16790" end="16806" title="Battle of Quebec (1775)" label="Battle of Quebec"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247957" start="16933" end="16947" title="Battle of Trois-Rivières" label="Trois-Rivières"/>
<link wikidata="Q68467" start="17054" end="17068" title="Lake Champlain" label="Lake Champlain"/>
<link wikidata="Q934626" start="17086" end="17100" title="Battle of Valcour Island" label="Valcour Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q1438776" start="17151" end="17167" title="Fort Ticonderoga" label="Fort Ticonderoga"/>
<link wikidata="Q4584046" start="17257" end="17272" title="Battle of Fort Cumberland (1776)" label="Fort Cumberland"/>
<link wikidata="Q7007213" start="17381" end="17401" title="New England colonies" label="New England colonies"/>
<link wikidata="Q5315497" start="17441" end="17468" title="Dunmore&amp;#x27;s Proclamation" label="Dunmore&amp;#x27;s Proclamation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7539285" start="17514" end="17520" title="Slavery in the colonial United States" label="slaves"/>
<link wikidata="Q906018" start="17619" end="17631" title="Battle of Great Bridge" label="Great Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q7934209" start="17711" end="17736" title="Third Virginia Convention" label="Third Virginia Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q336639" start="17791" end="17803" title="John Murray, 4th Earl of Dunmore" label="Lord Dunmore"/>
<link wikidata="Q198670" start="17816" end="17834" title="Burning of Norfolk" label="Burning of Norfolk"/>
<link wikidata="Q45067" start="17860" end="17893" title="siege of Savage&amp;#x27;s Old Fields" label="siege of Savage&amp;#x27;s Old Fields"/>
<link wikidata="Q2513167" start="17918" end="17932" title="Province of South Carolina" label="South Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q195151" start="18040" end="18053" title="Snow Campaign" label="Snow Campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q2334526" start="18083" end="18097" title="Province of North Carolina" label="North Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1518787" start="18178" end="18213" title="Battle of Moore&amp;#x27;s Creek Bridge" label="Battle of Moore&amp;#x27;s Creek Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q7566713" start="18254" end="18268" title="South Carolina in the American Revolution" label="South Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q4071933" start="18309" end="18341" title="Battle of Sullivan&amp;#x27;s Island" label="Battle of Sullivan&amp;#x27;s Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q778" start="18453" end="18464" title="the Bahamas" label="the Bahamas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2889477" start="18597" end="18603" title="Raid of Nassau" label="Nassau"/>
<link wikidata="Q5471701" start="18642" end="18654" title="Fort Montagu" label="Fort Montagu"/>
<link wikidata="Q7084039" start="18693" end="18704" title="Old Fort of Nassau" label="Fort Nassau"/>
<link wikidata="Q6905566" start="18736" end="18751" title="Montfort Browne" label="Montfort Browne"/>
<link wikidata="Q731564" start="19098" end="19112" title="Battle of Block Island" label="brief skirmish"/>
<link wikidata="Q49146" start="19137" end="19160" title="New London, Connecticut" label="New London, Connecticut"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19265" end="19272" title="History of Halifax (former city)#The American Revolution" label="Halifax"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384" start="19307" end="19315" title="New York (state)" label="New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q18432" start="19357" end="19370" title="Staten Island" label="Staten Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138301" start="19392" end="19407" title="New York Harbor" label="New York Harbor"/>
<link wikidata="Q7611100" start="19684" end="19699" title="Thomas Knowlton" label="Thomas Knowlton"/>
<link wikidata="Q6423430" start="19775" end="19798" title="Knowlton&amp;#x27;s Rangers" label="Knowlton&amp;#x27;s Rangers"/>
<link wikidata="Q465574" start="19815" end="19826" title="Nathan Hale" label="Nathan Hale"/>
<link wikidata="Q18438" start="19907" end="19918" title="Long Island" label="Long Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q817708" start="20012" end="20030" title="Benjamin Tallmadge" label="Benjamin Tallmadge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143497" start="20064" end="20079" title="Culper Ring" label="Culper spy ring"/>
<link wikidata="Q4584076" start="20323" end="20344" title="Intelligence in the American Revolutionary War" label="military intelligence"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20403" end="20412" title="Manhattan#American Revolution and the early United States" label="Manhattan"/>
<link wikidata="Q212862" start="20428" end="20438" title="East River" label="East River"/>
<link wikidata="Q862751" start="20483" end="20504" title="Battle of Long Island" label="Battle of Long Island"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20556" end="20572" title="Brooklyn Heights#Early settlement" label="Brooklyn Heights"/>
<link wikidata="Q4868744" start="20955" end="20968" title="Bateau" label="freight boats"/>
<link wikidata="Q142644" start="21024" end="21038" title="Thomas Mifflin" label="Thomas Mifflin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5933851" start="21154" end="21184" title="Staten Island Peace Conference" label="Staten Island Peace Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q692137" start="21406" end="21430" title="Landing at Kip&amp;#x27;s Bay" label="landed at Kip&amp;#x27;s Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q668595" start="21479" end="21503" title="Battle of Harlem Heights" label="Battle of Harlem Heights"/>
<link wikidata="Q63313" start="21583" end="21610" title="Battle of Pell&amp;#x27;s Point" label="Battle of Pell&amp;#x27;s Point"/>
<link wikidata="Q960723" start="21712" end="21734" title="Battle of White Plains" label="Battle of White Plains"/>
<link wikidata="Q706755" start="21877" end="21892" title="Battle of Fort Washington" label="Fort Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q450734" start="22105" end="22118" title="Henry Clinton (British Army officer, born 1730)" label="Henry Clinton"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="22233" end="22254" title="History of Rhode Island#Revolutionary era, 1775–1790" label="Newport, Rhode Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q164723" start="22293" end="22311" title="Charles Cornwallis, 1st Marquess Cornwallis" label="Charles Cornwallis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5092" start="22751" end="22760" title="Baltimore" label="Baltimore"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="22880" end="22894" title="History of New York (state)#New York in the American Revolution" label="New York state"/>
<link wikidata="Q7971587" start="23557" end="23583" title="George Washington&amp;#x27;s crossing of the Delaware River" label="crossed the Delaware River"/>
<link wikidata="Q494192" start="23647" end="23673" title="Bucks County, Pennsylvania" label="Bucks County, Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q496886" start="23691" end="23716" title="Mercer County, New Jersey" label="Mercer County, New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q653664" start="23940" end="23957" title="Battle of Trenton" label="Battle of Trenton"/>
<link wikidata="Q875270" start="24042" end="24053" title="Johann Rall" label="Johann Rall"/>
<link wikidata="Q233417" start="24531" end="24546" title="Battle of the Assunpink Creek" label="Assunpink Creek"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132579" start="24651" end="24670" title="Battle of Princeton" label="Battle of Princeton"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="24854" end="24876" title="Morristown, New Jersey#Eighteenth century" label="Morristown, New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q12214" start="24983" end="24991" title="smallpox" label="smallpox"/>
<link wikidata="Q4584107" start="25017" end="25034" title="Forage War" label="minor skirmishing"/>
<link wikidata="Q18389" start="25219" end="25230" title="New England" label="New England"/>
<link wikidata="Q3140" start="25350" end="25362" title="Hudson River" label="Hudson River"/>
<link wikidata="Q332806" start="25510" end="25522" title="George Germain, 1st Viscount Sackville" label="Lord Germain"/>
<link wikidata="Q340" start="25833" end="25841" title="Montreal" label="Montreal"/>
<link wikidata="Q458783" start="25891" end="25906" title="Barry St. Leger" label="Barry St. Leger"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="25959" end="25965" title="History of Albany, New York (1664–1784)#1744−American Revolution" label="Albany"/>
<link wikidata="Q1444930" start="26235" end="26247" title="Philadelphia campaign" label="Philadelphia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1307876" start="26386" end="26411" title="Siege of Fort Ticonderoga (1777)" label="captured Fort Ticonderoga"/>
<link wikidata="Q365124" start="26434" end="26447" title="Horatio Gates" label="Horatio Gates"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754313" start="26700" end="26720" title="Battle of Bennington" label="Battle of Bennington"/>
<link wikidata="Q7510027" start="26768" end="26780" title="Siege of Fort Stanwix" label="Fort Stanwix"/>
<link wikidata="Q1375813" start="26832" end="26850" title="Battle of Oriskany" label="Battle of Oriskany"/>
<link wikidata="Q518097" start="27068" end="27076" title="Saratoga, New York" label="Saratoga"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="27266" end="27289" title="Battles of Saratoga#First Saratoga" label="Battle of Freeman Farms"/>
<link wikidata="Q251741" start="27436" end="27459" title="reconnaissance in force" label="reconnaissance in force"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="27502" end="27525" title="Battles of Saratoga#Second Saratoga" label="Battle of Bemis Heights"/>
<link wikidata="Q214427" start="27836" end="27860" title="Friedrich Adolf Riedesel" label="Friedrich Adolf Riedesel"/>
<link wikidata="Q216868" start="28065" end="28079" title="Chesapeake Bay" label="Chesapeake Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q301487" start="28235" end="28255" title="Battle of Brandywine" label="Battle of Brandywine"/>
<link wikidata="Q4871984" start="28363" end="28368" title="Battle of Paoli" label="Paoli"/>
<link wikidata="Q279890" start="28503" end="28513" title="Germantown, Philadelphia" label="Germantown"/>
<link wikidata="Q523857" start="28526" end="28539" title="Battle of Germantown" label="attacked them"/>
<link wikidata="Q3077947" start="28665" end="28677" title="Fort Mifflin" label="Fort Mifflin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5471674" start="28689" end="28700" title="Fort Mercer" label="Fort Mercer"/>
<link wikidata="Q89657" start="28769" end="28778" title="Cheval de frise" label="obstacles"/>
<link wikidata="Q2367216" start="28853" end="28869" title="Continental Navy" label="Continental Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7164016" start="28913" end="28936" title="Pennsylvania State Navy" label="Pennsylvania State Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6238436" start="28951" end="28965" title="John Hazelwood" label="John Hazelwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q2889754" start="29038" end="29056" title="Battle of Red Bank" label="Battle of Red Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q2890385" start="29321" end="29342" title="Battle of White Marsh" label="Battle of White Marsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1855211" start="29485" end="29497" title="Valley Forge" label="Valley Forge"/>
<link wikidata="Q213525" start="29946" end="29975" title="Friedrich Wilhelm von Steuben" label="Friedrich Wilhelm von Steuben"/>
<link wikidata="Q706042" start="30010" end="30023" title="Prussian Army" label="Prussian Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q726681" start="30379" end="30388" title="Charles Gravier, comte de Vergennes" label="Vergennes"/>
<link wikidata="Q7732" start="30650" end="30659" title="Louis XVI" label="Louis XVI"/>
<link wikidata="Q7356704" start="30679" end="30703" title="Roderigue Hortalez and Company" label="government front company"/>
<link wikidata="Q26180" start="30796" end="30810" title="Sint Eustatius" label="Sint Eustatius"/>
<link wikidata="Q90" start="31489" end="31494" title="Paris" label="Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q21022" start="31663" end="31681" title="French West Indies" label="French West Indies"/>
<link wikidata="Q861551" start="31797" end="31811" title="Saint-Domingue" label="Saint-Domingue"/>
<link wikidata="Q2650034" start="32324" end="32352" title="Treaty of Amity and Commerce (France–United States)" label="Treaty of Amity and Commerce"/>
<link wikidata="Q2788282" start="32460" end="32478" title="Treaty of Alliance (1778)" label="Treaty of Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q655480" start="32719" end="32728" title="Quasi-War" label="Quasi-War"/>
<link wikidata="Q36234" start="32730" end="32750" title="Charles III of Spain" label="Charles III of Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q748300" start="32985" end="32994" title="Louisiana (New Spain)" label="Louisiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q2629695" start="33157" end="33175" title="Treaty of Aranjuez (1779)" label="Treaty of Aranjuez"/>
<link wikidata="Q3651696" start="33208" end="33238" title="Anglo-French War (1778–1783)" label="France&amp;#x27;s war with Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1410" start="33289" end="33298" title="Gibraltar" label="Gibraltar"/>
<link wikidata="Q52636" start="33300" end="33307" title="Menorca" label="Menorca"/>
<link wikidata="Q555528" start="33312" end="33327" title="Spanish Florida" label="Spanish Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q7184" start="33717" end="33721" title="NATO" label="NATO"/>
<link wikidata="Q186652" start="34201" end="34240" title="Gilbert du Motier, Marquis de Lafayette" label="Gilbert du Motier, Marquis de Lafayette"/>
<link wikidata="Q3483985" start="34373" end="34386" title="Scots Brigade" label="Scots Brigade"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371388" start="34445" end="34459" title="States General of the Netherlands" label="States General"/>
<link wikidata="Q576292" start="34701" end="34713" title="Fourth Anglo-Dutch War" label="declared war"/>
<link wikidata="Q29828922" start="35510" end="35539" title="Annus Mirabilis of 1759" label="British victories over France"/>
<link wikidata="Q1638488" start="36051" end="36069" title="Battle of Monmouth" label="Battle of Monmouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q694048" start="36239" end="36274" title="Charles Henri Hector d&amp;#x27;Estaing" label="Charles Henri Hector d&amp;#x27;Estaing"/>
<link wikidata="Q886420" start="36420" end="36433" title="John Sullivan (general)" label="John Sullivan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2575889" start="36472" end="36494" title="Battle of Rhode Island" label="Battle of Rhode Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q4870723" start="36638" end="36651" title="Battle of Chestnut Neck" label="Chestnut Neck"/>
<link wikidata="Q7712756" start="36656" end="36673" title="The Affair at Little Egg Harbor" label="Little Egg Harbor"/>
<link wikidata="Q111648" start="36744" end="36755" title="Battle of Stony Point" label="Stony Point"/>
<link wikidata="Q4871999" start="36760" end="36771" title="Battle of Paulus Hook" label="Paulus Hook"/>
<link wikidata="Q2580817" start="36868" end="36881" title="William Tryon" label="William Tryon"/>
<link wikidata="Q4392583" start="36885" end="36901" title="Tryon&amp;#x27;s raid" label="raid Connecticut"/>
<link wikidata="Q2575844" start="36950" end="36970" title="Penobscot Expedition" label="Penobscot Expedition"/>
<link wikidata="Q5283452" start="36992" end="36997" title="District of Maine" label="Maine"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="37027" end="37041" title="Northern theater of the American Revolutionary War after Saratoga#Frontier war" label="Iroquois raids"/>
<link wikidata="Q1426614" start="37091" end="37110" title="Sullivan Expedition" label="Sullivan Expedition"/>
<link wikidata="Q208485" start="37188" end="37202" title="scorched earth" label="scorched earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q11575" start="37288" end="37293" title="maize" label="maize"/>
<link wikidata="Q1029329" start="37680" end="37698" title="Continental dollar" label="Continental dollar"/>
<link wikidata="Q7163998" start="37818" end="37835" title="Pennsylvania Line Mutiny" label="Pennsylvania Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q7227515" start="37840" end="37855" title="Pompton Mutiny" label="New Jersey Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q88824" start="37931" end="37953" title="Wilhelm von Knyphausen" label="Wilhelm von Knyphausen"/>
<link wikidata="Q4870783" start="38021" end="38048" title="Battle of Connecticut Farms" label="Battle of Connecticut Farms"/>
<link wikidata="Q4872426" start="38244" end="38265" title="Battle of Springfield (1780)" label="Battle of Springfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q298237" start="38347" end="38362" title="Benedict Arnold" label="Benedict Arnold"/>
<link wikidata="Q9219" start="38376" end="38386" title="West Point" label="West Point"/>
<link wikidata="Q605719" start="38521" end="38531" title="John André" label="John André"/>
<link wikidata="Q7811269" start="38656" end="38685" title="To the Inhabitants of America" label="To the Inhabitants of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q16" start="39354" end="39360" title="Canada" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q1397" start="39379" end="39383" title="Ohio" label="Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q4268" start="39418" end="39435" title="East Coast of the United States" label="Atlantic seaboard"/>
<link wikidata="Q172771" start="39454" end="39464" title="Royal Navy" label="Royal Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4821209" start="39610" end="39627" title="Augustine Prévost" label="Augustine Prévost"/>
<link wikidata="Q1770351" start="39654" end="39666" title="East Florida" label="East Florida"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="39684" end="39691" title="Georgia in the American Revolution#Return of the British Army" label="Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4786243" start="39710" end="39747" title="Archibald Campbell (British Army officer, born 1739)" label="Lieutenant-Colonel Archibald Campbell"/>
<link wikidata="Q5037058" start="39773" end="39790" title="Capture of Savannah" label="captured Savannah"/>
<link wikidata="Q4583774" start="40069" end="40091" title="Battle of Kettle Creek" label="Battle of Kettle Creek"/>
<link wikidata="Q4391287" start="40161" end="40172" title="Battle of Brier Creek" label="Brier Creek"/>
<link wikidata="Q817605" start="40472" end="40488" title="Benjamin Lincoln" label="Benjamin Lincoln"/>
<link wikidata="Q2744875" start="40499" end="40517" title="Siege of Savannah" label="recapture Savannah"/>
<link wikidata="Q332464" start="40993" end="41010" title="Banastre Tarleton" label="Banastre Tarleton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1811438" start="41136" end="41153" title="Battle of Waxhaws" label="Battle of Waxhaws"/>
<link wikidata="Q3907844" start="41751" end="41758" title="grandee" label="grandee"/>
<link wikidata="Q5928028" start="41799" end="41827" title="Battle of Williamson&amp;#x27;s Plantation" label="Williamson&amp;#x27;s Plantation"/>
<link wikidata="Q4872195" start="41844" end="41855" title="Battle of Rocky Mount" label="Rocky Mount"/>
<link wikidata="Q4871187" start="41861" end="41873" title="Battle of Hanging Rock" label="Hanging Rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q1539513" start="42036" end="42052" title="Battle of Camden" label="Battle of Camden"/>
<link wikidata="Q7146485" start="42288" end="42304" title="Patrick Ferguson" label="Patrick Ferguson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035455" start="42439" end="42463" title="Battle of Kings Mountain" label="Battle of Kings Mountain"/>
<link wikidata="Q366113" start="42650" end="42666" title="Nathanael Greene" label="Nathanael Greene"/>
<link wikidata="Q2767" start="42805" end="42818" title="Daniel Morgan" label="Daniel Morgan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4970250" start="42849" end="42863" title="British Legion (American Revolution)" label="British Legion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1326527" start="42867" end="42874" title="Battle of Cowpens" label="Cowpens"/>
<link wikidata="Q16931434" start="43014" end="43030" title="Raid of Richmond" label="raid on Richmond"/>
<link wikidata="Q425773" start="43254" end="43284" title="Battle of Guilford Court House" label="Battle of Guilford Court House"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="43373" end="43399" title="Wilmington, North Carolina#Revolutionary era" label="Wilmington, North Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q494318" start="43558" end="43587" title="Battle of Hobkirk&amp;#x27;s Hill" label="Battle of Hobkirk&amp;#x27;s Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q7510031" start="43605" end="43616" title="Siege of Fort Watson" label="Fort Watson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7510019" start="43621" end="43631" title="Siege of Fort Motte" label="Fort Motte"/>
<link wikidata="Q506733" start="43674" end="43688" title="Andrew Pickens (congressman)" label="Andrew Pickens"/>
<link wikidata="Q7509832" start="43698" end="43705" title="Siege of Augusta" label="Augusta"/>
<link wikidata="Q2888486" start="43985" end="44008" title="Battle of Eutaw Springs" label="Battle of Eutaw Springs"/>
<link wikidata="Q386687" start="44153" end="44171" title="Bernardo de Gálvez, 1st Viscount of Galveston" label="Bernardo de Gálvez"/>
<link wikidata="Q3249923" start="44177" end="44206" title="List of colonial governors of Louisiana" label="Governor of Spanish Louisiana"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="44268" end="44279" title="History of New Orleans#Spanish interregnum" label="New Orleans"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="44299" end="44309" title="History of Pittsburgh#Gateway to the West (1763–1799)" label="Pittsburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146724" start="44547" end="44561" title="Cuyahoga River" label="Cuyahoga River"/>
<link wikidata="Q4167569" start="44614" end="44629" title="Illinois campaign" label="second campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q2554770" start="44658" end="44674" title="Illinois Country" label="Illinois Country"/>
<link wikidata="Q857880" start="44717" end="44725" title="Canadien" label="Canadien"/>
<link wikidata="Q918990" start="44781" end="44800" title="George Rogers Clark" label="George Rogers Clark"/>
<link wikidata="Q999403" start="44810" end="44819" title="Kaskaskia, Illinois" label="Kaskaskia"/>
<link wikidata="Q585857" start="44847" end="44856" title="Vincennes, Indiana" label="Vincennes"/>
<link wikidata="Q715681" start="44909" end="44923" title="Henry Hamilton (colonial administrator)" label="Henry Hamilton"/>
<link wikidata="Q5482656" start="44956" end="44968" title="Francis Vigo" label="Francis Vigo"/>
<link wikidata="Q7510029" start="45142" end="45165" title="siege of Fort Vincennes" label="siege of Fort Vincennes"/>
<link wikidata="Q764479" start="45216" end="45230" title="Quebec Act" label="British Quebec"/>
<link wikidata="Q669315" start="45247" end="45266" title="Northwest Territory" label="Northwest Territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q217450" start="45274" end="45289" title="Treaty of Paris (1783)" label="Treaty of Paris"/>
<link wikidata="" start="45623" end="45634" title="History of Baton Rouge, Louisiana#1763–1779: British period" label="Baton Rouge"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="45636" end="45645" title="History of Louisiana#Spanish interregnum (1763–1803)" label="Louisiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q55138410" start="45647" end="45656" title="Fort Bute" label="Fort Bute"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="45662" end="45669" title="History of Natchez, Mississippi#Colonial history (1716–1783)" label="Natchez"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="45671" end="45682" title="History of Mississippi#European colonial period" label="Mississippi"/>
<link wikidata="Q4915810" start="45865" end="45881" title="Bird&amp;#x27;s invasion of Kentucky" label="invaded Kentucky"/>
<link wikidata="Q176" start="45945" end="45951" title="Quebec" label="Quebec"/>
<link wikidata="Q55241" start="45959" end="45969" title="Gulf Coast of the United States" label="Gulf Coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q79875" start="46060" end="46066" title="Mobile, Alabama" label="Mobile"/>
<link wikidata="Q2729621" start="46114" end="46123" title="Battle of St. Louis" label="St. Louis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5444990" start="46159" end="46167" title="Fernando de Leyba" label="de Leyba"/>
<link wikidata="Q14687596" start="46180" end="46206" title="Illinois County, Virginia" label="Virginia County courthouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1025785" start="46210" end="46227" title="Cahokia, Illinois" label="Cahokia, Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="46378" end="46398" title="Licking River (Kentucky)#History" label="Licking River Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q42406" start="46463" end="46470" title="English people" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q42884" start="46475" end="46481" title="Germans" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q7347" start="46592" end="46603" title="Great Lakes" label="Great Lakes"/>
<link wikidata="Q6726037" start="46662" end="46671" title="Mad River (Ohio)" label="Mad River"/>
<link wikidata="Q4872050" start="46717" end="46732" title="Battle of Piqua" label="Battle of Piqua"/>
<link wikidata="Q2871667" start="46779" end="46799" title="Augustin de La Balme" label="Augustin de La Balme"/>
<link wikidata="Q12439" start="46848" end="46855" title="Detroit" label="Detroit"/>
<link wikidata="Q956264" start="46881" end="46894" title="Miami tribe" label="Miami natives"/>
<link wikidata="Q1355169" start="46902" end="46915" title="Little Turtle" label="Little Turtle"/>
<link wikidata="Q5617470" start="47190" end="47226" title="Gulf Coast campaign" label="campaigned east along the Gulf Coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q1533038" start="47614" end="47635" title="Gnadenhutten massacre" label="Gnadenhutten massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139109" start="47644" end="47663" title="Crawford expedition" label="Crawford expedition"/>
<link wikidata="Q325486" start="47674" end="47694" title="Battle of Blue Licks" label="Battle of Blue Licks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1603" start="47858" end="47866" title="Kentucky" label="Kentucky"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="48028" end="48058" title="Northwest Indian War#Course of the war" label="continued fighting in the west"/>
<link wikidata="Q3294852" start="48276" end="48293" title="Marriot Arbuthnot" label="Marriot Arbuthnot"/>
<link wikidata="Q47716" start="48298" end="48308" title="Charleston, South Carolina" label="Charleston"/>
<link wikidata="Q2747220" start="48447" end="48456" title="Carolinas" label="Carolinas"/>
<link wikidata="Q49042" start="48509" end="48514" title="Southern United States" label="South"/>
<link wikidata="Q508363" start="48616" end="48626" title="Jean-Baptiste Donatien de Vimeur, comte de Rochambeau" label="Rochambeau"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370" start="48745" end="48753" title="Virginia" label="Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q938699" start="49221" end="49229" title="Yorktown, Virginia" label="Yorktown"/>
<link wikidata="Q676404" start="49312" end="49324" title="Spanish Navy" label="Spanish Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q197627" start="49374" end="49404" title="François Joseph Paul de Grasse" label="François Joseph Paul de Grasse"/>
<link wikidata="Q335017" start="49572" end="49579" title="Newport News, Virginia" label="Newport"/>
<link wikidata="Q83813" start="49584" end="49592" title="Savannah, Georgia" label="Savannah"/>
<link wikidata="Q334087" start="49977" end="49990" title="Thomas Graves, 1st Baron Graves" label="Thomas Graves"/>
<link wikidata="Q1419459" start="50172" end="50196" title="Battle of the Chesapeake" label="Battle of the Chesapeake"/>
<link wikidata="Q2258289" start="50318" end="50328" title="York River (Virginia)" label="York River"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="50332" end="50348" title="Gloucester County, Virginia#Gloucester County formation and divisions" label="Gloucester Point"/>
<link wikidata="Q11268" start="51214" end="51227" title="United States Congress" label="Congressional"/>
<link wikidata="Q335163" start="52584" end="52596" title="Guy Carleton, 1st Baron Dorchester" label="Guy Carleton"/>
<link wikidata="Q258532" start="52746" end="52761" title="British America" label="British America"/>
<link wikidata="Q1806300" start="52929" end="52940" title="The Citadel" label="The Citadel"/>
<link wikidata="Q29" start="53487" end="53492" title="Kingdom of Spain" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q170072" start="53498" end="53512" title="Dutch Republic" label="Dutch Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q12630" start="53918" end="53932" title="Gulf of Mexico" label="Gulf of Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q2576215" start="53970" end="53984" title="Invasion of Minorca (1781)" label="retook Menorca"/>
<link wikidata="Q815145" start="53989" end="54007" title="Great Siege of Gibraltar" label="besieged Gibraltar"/>
<link wikidata="Q108822441" start="54990" end="55017" title="Early American publishers and printers" label="own newspapers and printers"/>
<link wikidata="Q9212" start="56107" end="56125" title="United States Army" label="United States Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q178903" start="56605" end="56623" title="Alexander Hamilton" label="Alexander Hamilton"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318883" start="56778" end="56808" title="Revolutionary War Drill Manual" label="Revolutionary War Drill Manual"/>
<link wikidata="Q1376011" start="57582" end="57599" title="Fabian strategy" label="Fabian strategies"/>
<link wikidata="Q459447" start="58249" end="58257" title="Battle of Yorktown" label="Yorktown"/>
<link wikidata="Q459447" start="58799" end="58807" title="Siege of Yorktown" label="Yorktown"/>
<link wikidata="Q213525" start="59014" end="59031" title="Baron von Steuben" label="Baron von Steuben"/>
<link wikidata="Q2335224" start="59254" end="59266" title="Colony of Rhode Island and Providence Plantations" label="Rhode Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q1606981" start="59613" end="59626" title="Henry Laurens" label="Henry Laurens"/>
<link wikidata="Q2419102" start="60278" end="60294" title="United States Secretary of War" label="Secretary of War"/>
<link wikidata="Q3058032" start="60795" end="60807" title="Esek Hopkins" label="Esek Hopkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q3294379" start="61015" end="61034" title="Continental Marines" label="Continental Marines"/>
<link wikidata="Q11218" start="61070" end="61096" title="United States Marine Corps" label="United States Marine Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q3514813" start="61169" end="61190" title="HMS Drake (1777)" label="HMS &amp;quot;Drake&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q7867222" start="61321" end="61345" title="USS Alliance (1778)" label="USS &amp;quot;Alliance&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1593841" start="61368" end="61378" title="John Barry (naval officer)" label="John Barry"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="62578" end="62592" title="Fourth Anglo-Dutch War#Background" label="Dutch Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1781638" start="62755" end="62761" title="France in the American Revolutionary War" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q664609" start="63506" end="63515" title="Caribbean" label="Caribbean"/>
<link wikidata="Q5317255" start="64893" end="64908" title="Dutch Caribbean" label="Dutch Caribbean"/>
<link wikidata="Q312593" start="64945" end="64955" title="Frederick North, 2nd Earl of Guilford" label="Lord North"/>
<link wikidata="Q332806" start="65033" end="65052" title="Lord George Germain" label="Lord George Germain"/>
<link wikidata="Q334953" start="65061" end="65077" title="John Montagu, 4th Earl of Sandwich" label="Earl of Sandwich"/>
<link wikidata="Q21561383" start="65087" end="65109" title="First Lord of the Admiralty" label="head of the Royal Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6230730" start="66353" end="66360" title="John E. Ferling" label="Ferling"/>
<link wikidata="Q669468" start="66416" end="66421" title="Joseph Ellis" label="Ellis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2526023" start="67119" end="67126" title="Colony of Jamaica" label="Jamaica"/>
<link wikidata="Q3294852" start="69215" end="69231" title="Mariot Arbuthnot" label="Mariot Arbuthnot"/>
<link wikidata="Q17354099" start="69750" end="69772" title="Soldatenhandel" label="hired foreign soldiers"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="69904" end="69932" title="Germans in the American Revolution#Allies of Great Britain" label="professional German soldiers"/>
<link wikidata="Q12548" start="70154" end="70171" title="Holy Roman Empire" label="Holy Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q168651" start="70263" end="70275" title="Landgraviate of Hesse-Kassel" label="Hesse-Kassel"/>
<link wikidata="Q706018" start="70552" end="70559" title="Electorate of Brunswick-Lüneburg" label="Hanover"/>
<link wikidata="Q123070" start="70697" end="70705" title="Russo-Turkish War (1768–1774)" label="Ottomans"/>
<link wikidata="Q36450" start="70734" end="70753" title="Catherine the Great" label="Catherine the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q33550" start="70884" end="70903" title="Frederick the Great" label="Frederick the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q141817" start="72097" end="72113" title="German Americans" label="German Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q7800894" start="73417" end="73433" title="Tidewater (region)" label="Tidewater region"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="73438" end="73452" title="South Carolina in the American Revolution#Early conflicts" label="South Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q5041403" start="74357" end="74382" title="Carlisle Peace Commission" label="Carlisle Peace Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q2163931" start="74642" end="74664" title="tarring and feathering" label="tarring and feathering"/>
<link wikidata="Q4970250" start="74695" end="74709" title="British Legion (American Revolutionary War)" label="British Legion"/>
<link wikidata="Q191789" start="75047" end="75064" title="Martha Washington" label="Martha Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q369456" start="75183" end="75196" title="camp follower" label="camp follower"/>
<link wikidata="Q540504" start="75738" end="75753" title="Sybil Ludington" label="Sybil Ludington"/>
<link wikidata="Q1854485" start="75943" end="75970" title="List of wartime cross-dressers" label="disguised themselves as men"/>
<link wikidata="Q3020894" start="75972" end="75987" title="Deborah Sampson" label="Deborah Sampson"/>
<link wikidata="Q39049412" start="76063" end="76078" title="Sally St. Clair" label="Sally St. Clair"/>
<link wikidata="Q7201620" start="76253" end="76273" title="Plantation complexes in the Southern United States" label="Southern plantations"/>
<link wikidata="Q55630100" start="76646" end="76654" title="Planter class" label="planters"/>
<link wikidata="Q7185542" start="76739" end="76763" title="Philipsburg Proclamation" label="Philipsburg Proclamation"/>
<link wikidata="Q4920565" start="77050" end="77064" title="Black Pioneers" label="Black Pioneers"/>
<link wikidata="Q4921438" start="77769" end="77782" title="Black Patriot" label="Black Patriot"/>
<link wikidata="Q4596590" start="77952" end="77977" title="1st Rhode Island Regiment" label="1st Rhode Island Regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q778" start="79017" end="79024" title="Bahamas" label="Bahamas"/>
<link wikidata="Q257900" start="79137" end="79155" title="Ethiopian Regiment" label="Ethiopian Regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q29971" start="79207" end="79222" title="Leeward Islands" label="Leeward Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q68518" start="79613" end="79621" title="Iroquois" label="Iroquois"/>
<link wikidata="Q105405" start="79681" end="79689" title="Cherokee" label="Cherokee"/>
<link wikidata="Q7971844" start="79733" end="79752" title="Washington District, North Carolina" label="Washington District"/>
<link wikidata="Q2334526" start="79756" end="79770" title="North Carolina Colony" label="North Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q472747" start="79883" end="79903" title="Chickamauga Cherokee" label="Chickamauga Cherokee"/>
<link wikidata="Q4122685" start="79925" end="79947" title="Cherokee–American wars" label="Cherokee–American wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q51705" start="80025" end="80033" title="Muscogee" label="Muscogee"/>
<link wikidata="Q474202" start="80038" end="80046" title="Seminole" label="Seminole"/>
<link wikidata="Q4971913" start="80195" end="80206" title="Broad River (Georgia)" label="Broad River"/>
<link wikidata="Q7787956" start="80249" end="80261" title="Thomas Brown (loyalist)" label="Thomas Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q622728" start="80515" end="80524" title="Chickasaw" label="Chickasaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q324516" start="80530" end="80537" title="Choctaw" label="Choctaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q2682171" start="80574" end="80598" title="Battle of Fort Charlotte" label="Battle of Fort Charlotte"/>
<link wikidata="Q3355796" start="80604" end="80620" title="Battle of Mobile (1781)" label="Battle of Mobile"/>
<link wikidata="Q2060558" start="80630" end="80648" title="siege of Pensacola" label="siege of Pensacola"/>
<link wikidata="Q213422" start="80741" end="80747" title="Seneca people" label="Seneca"/>
<link wikidata="Q21056" start="80749" end="80757" title="Onondaga people" label="Onondaga"/>
<link wikidata="Q210334" start="80763" end="80769" title="Cayuga people" label="Cayuga"/>
<link wikidata="Q116971" start="80816" end="80823" title="Mohawk people" label="Mohawks"/>
<link wikidata="Q504912" start="80855" end="80864" title="Tuscarora people" label="Tuscarora"/>
<link wikidata="Q1572875" start="80869" end="80875" title="Oneida people" label="Oneida"/>
<link wikidata="Q6285026" start="81148" end="81165" title="Joseph Louis Cook" label="Joseph Louis Cook"/>
<link wikidata="Q505146" start="81170" end="81182" title="Joseph Brant" label="Joseph Brant"/>
<link wikidata="Q4915" start="81486" end="81496" title="Ohio River" label="Ohio River"/>
<link wikidata="Q4186402" start="81612" end="81631" title="Western Confederacy" label="Western Confederacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2656995" start="81755" end="81775" title="Northwest Indian War" label="Northwest Indian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q5041403" start="81829" end="81854" title="Carlisle Peace Commission" label="Carlisle Peace Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q378043" start="82629" end="82644" title="Charles Watson-Wentworth, 2nd Marquess of Rockingham" label="Lord Rockingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q16933814" start="82819" end="82833" title="Second Rockingham ministry" label="new government"/>
<link wikidata="Q7493328" start="82934" end="82948" title="Shelburne ministry" label="Lord Shelburne"/>
<link wikidata="Q27306" start="83274" end="83281" title="Kingdom of Prussia" label="Prussia"/>
<link wikidata="Q153136" start="83286" end="83293" title="Habsburg monarchy" label="Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q310847" start="83549" end="83557" title="John Jay" label="John Jay"/>
<link wikidata="Q5234782" start="83899" end="83912" title="David Hartley (the Younger)" label="David Hartley"/>
<link wikidata="Q7328204" start="83918" end="83932" title="Richard Oswald (merchant)" label="Richard Oswald"/>
<link wikidata="Q5547924" start="85037" end="85044" title="Georgia in the American Revolution" label="Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q913793" start="85678" end="85689" title="Grand Banks" label="Grand Banks"/>
<link wikidata="Q2003" start="85708" end="85720" title="Newfoundland" label="Newfoundland"/>
<link wikidata="Q169523" start="85732" end="85754" title="Gulf of Saint Lawrence" label="Gulf of Saint Lawrence"/>
<link wikidata="Q3133590" start="86520" end="86543" title="Evacuation Day (New York)" label="evacuated from New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q21070813" start="86959" end="86979" title="Indian barrier state" label="Indian barrier state"/>
<link wikidata="Q26013" start="87029" end="87040" title="War of 1812" label="War of 1812"/>
<link wikidata="Q1568837" start="87472" end="87482" title="Jay Treaty" label="Jay Treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q16153856" start="88508" end="88525" title="1775–82 North American smallpox epidemic" label="smallpox epidemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q669468" start="88590" end="88602" title="Joseph Ellis" label="Joseph Ellis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1899096" start="88646" end="88656" title="Variolation" label="inoculated"/>
<link wikidata="Q179637" start="88919" end="88935" title="prisoners of war" label="prisoners of war"/>
<link wikidata="Q7245844" start="88966" end="88978" title="Prisoners in the American Revolutionary War" label="prison ships"/>
<link wikidata="Q1454489" start="90388" end="90399" title="manumission" label="manumission"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="90709" end="90718" title="American Civil War" label="civil war"/>
<link wikidata="Q7333767" start="90909" end="90929" title="rights of Englishmen" label="rights as Englishmen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1115885" start="90948" end="90982" title="no taxation without representation" label="no taxation without representation"/>
<link wikidata="Q4064242" start="91016" end="91038" title="American Enlightenment" label="American Enlightenment"/>
<link wikidata="Q186539" start="91138" end="91154" title="Founding Fathers of the United States" label="Founding Fathers"/>
<link wikidata="Q794394" start="91183" end="91203" title="classical liberalism" label="classical liberalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q9353" start="91207" end="91217" title="John Locke" label="John Locke"/>
<link wikidata="Q231949" start="91275" end="91302" title="Two Treatises of Government" label="Two Treatises of Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q5721009" start="91424" end="91436" title="Henry F. May" label="Henry F. May"/>
<link wikidata="Q482438" start="91469" end="91505" title="Essay Concerning Human Understanding" label="Essay Concerning Human Understanding"/>
<link wikidata="Q3277720" start="91761" end="91784" title="Republicanism in the United States" label="Republican value system"/>
<link wikidata="Q123432" start="91842" end="91854" title="aristocracy" label="aristocratic"/>
<link wikidata="Q739941" start="91991" end="92007" title="Monarchy of the United Kingdom" label="British monarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2892856" start="92368" end="92384" title="Atlantic history" label="Atlantic history"/>
<link wikidata="Q908604" start="92600" end="92618" title="new social history" label="new social history"/>
<link wikidata="Q1885391" start="93312" end="93330" title="Postage stamps and postal history of the United States" label="U.S. postage stamp"/>
<link wikidata="Q668687" start="93355" end="93374" title="United States Postal Service" label="U.S. Postal Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q390306" start="93499" end="93511" title="Liberty Bell" label="Liberty Bell"/>
<link wikidata="Q2809402" start="93544" end="93569" title="1776 in the United States" label="1776 in the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q2967045" start="93613" end="93648" title="Timeline of the American Revolution" label="Timeline of the American Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q2985399" start="93683" end="93724" title="Committee of safety (American Revolution)" label="Committee of safety (American Revolution)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5279899" start="93727" end="93770" title="Diplomacy in the American Revolutionary War" label="Diplomacy in the American Revolutionary War"/>
<link wikidata="Q5449701" start="93773" end="93822" title="Financial costs of the American Revolutionary War" label="Financial costs of the American Revolutionary War"/>
<link wikidata="Q12404967" start="93825" end="93857" title="Flags of the American Revolution" label="Flags of the American Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q2565240" start="93860" end="93910" title="Naval operations in the American Revolutionary War" label="Naval operations in the American Revolutionary War"/>
<link wikidata="Q4921438" start="93953" end="93966" title="Black Patriot" label="Black Patriot"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="93969" end="94022" title="Christianity in the United States#American Revolution" label="Christianity in the United States#American Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q24525574" start="94025" end="94072" title="The Colored Patriots of the American Revolution" label="The Colored Patriots of the American Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="94075" end="94132" title="History of Poles in the United States#American Revolution" label="History of Poles in the United States#American Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q16153238" start="94135" end="94176" title="List of clergy in the American Revolution" label="List of clergy in the American Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q96388381" start="94179" end="94217" title="List of Patriots (American Revolution)" label="List of Patriots (American Revolution)"/>
<link wikidata="Q24191877" start="94220" end="94254" title="Quakers in the American Revolution" label="Quakers in the American Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="94257" end="94299" title="Scotch-Irish Americans#American Revolution" label="Scotch-Irish Americans#American Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q55138059" start="94343" end="94381" title="Nova Scotia in the American Revolution" label="Nova Scotia in the American Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q7973025" start="94384" end="94403" title="Watauga Association" label="Watauga Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q1975913" start="94445" end="94487" title="List of American Revolutionary War battles" label="List of American Revolutionary War battles"/>
<link wikidata="Q6565049" start="94490" end="94546" title="List of British Forces in the American Revolutionary War" label="List of British Forces in the American Revolutionary War"/>
<link wikidata="Q3933142" start="94549" end="94609" title="List of Continental Forces in the American Revolutionary War" label="List of Continental Forces in the American Revolutionary War"/>
<link wikidata="Q19864135" start="94612" end="94663" title="List of infantry weapons in the American Revolution" label="List of infantry weapons in the American Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q6602852" start="94666" end="94735" title="List of United States militia units in the American Revolutionary War" label="List of United States militia units in the American Revolutionary War"/>
<link wikidata="Q4744830" start="94764" end="94792" title="American Revolution Statuary" label="American Revolution Statuary"/>
<link wikidata="Q48812938" start="94795" end="94835" title="Commemoration of the American Revolution" label="Commemoration of the American Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q110933547" start="94838" end="94853" title="Founders Online" label="Founders Online"/>
<link wikidata="Q86591" start="94856" end="94888" title="Independence Day (United States)" label="Independence Day (United States)"/>
<link wikidata="Q30078028" start="94891" end="94921" title="The Last Men of the Revolution" label="The Last Men of the Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q3243754" start="94924" end="94977" title="List of plays and films about the American Revolution" label="List of plays and films about the American Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q7713548" start="94980" end="95013" title="Museum of the American Revolution" label="Museum of the American Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q39086193" start="95016" end="95070" title="Tomb of the Unknown Soldier of the American Revolution" label="Tomb of the Unknown Soldier of the American Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q4405220" start="95073" end="95101" title="List of wars of independence" label="List of wars of independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q16823210" start="95104" end="95150" title="Bibliography of the American Revolutionary War" label="Bibliography of the American Revolutionary War"/>
<link wikidata="Q4971237" start="95949" end="95984" title="British Warships in the Age of Sail" label="British Warships in the Age of Sail"/>
<link wikidata="Q679533" start="96524" end="96537" title="H. W. Brands" label="Brands, H. W."/>
<link wikidata="Q3785004" start="96805" end="96827" title="Henry Steele Commager" label="Commager, Henry Steele"/>
<link wikidata="Q7323865" start="96832" end="96849" title="Richard B. Morris" label="Richard B. Morris"/>
<link wikidata="Q3056269" start="97021" end="97032" title="Eric Foner" label="Foner, Eric"/>
<link wikidata="Q15453604" start="97135" end="97147" title="Woody Holton" label="Woody Holton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1897630" start="97270" end="97280" title="The Nation" label="The Nation"/>
<link wikidata="Q918990" start="97727" end="97746" title="George Rogers Clark" label="George Rogers Clark"/>
<link wikidata="Q4915" start="97760" end="97771" title="Ohio Valley" label="Ohio Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q9219" start="99122" end="99152" title="United States Military Academy" label="United States Military Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7889463" start="99277" end="99322" title="United States Army Center of Military History" label="United States Army Center of Military History"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="772" wikidata="Q25272" url="?curid=772" title="Ampere">
<text>The ampere ( , ; symbol: A), often shortened to amp, is the unit of electric current in the International System of Units (SI). One ampere is equal to 1 coulomb (C) moving past a point per second. It is named after French mathematician and physicist André-Marie Ampère (1775–1836), considered the father of electromagnetism along with Danish physicist Hans Christian Ørsted.

As of the 2019 revision of the SI, the ampere is defined by fixing the elementary charge to be exactly , which means an ampere is an electric current equivalent to elementary charges moving every seconds or elementary charges moving in a second. Prior to the redefinition the ampere was defined as the current passing through two parallel wires 1 metre apart that produces a magnetic force of newtons per metre.

The earlier CGS system has two units of current, one structured similarly to the SI&#x27;s and the other using Coulomb&#x27;s law as a fundamental relationship, with the CGS unit of charge defined by measuring the force between two charged metal plates. The CGS unit of current is then defined as one unit of charge per second.

== History ==

The ampere is named for French physicist and mathematician André-Marie Ampère (1775–1836), who studied electromagnetism and laid the foundation of electrodynamics. In recognition of Ampère&#x27;s contributions to the creation of modern electrical science, an international convention, signed at the 1881 International Exposition of Electricity, established the ampere as a standard unit of electrical measurement for electric current.

The ampere was originally defined as one tenth of the unit of electric current in the centimetre–gram–second system of units. That unit, now known as the abampere, was defined as the amount of current that generates a force of two dynes per centimetre of length between two wires one centimetre apart. The size of the unit was chosen so that the units derived from it in the MKSA system would be conveniently sized.

The &quot;international ampere&quot; was an early realization of the ampere, defined as the current that would deposit of silver per second from a silver nitrate solution. Later, more accurate measurements revealed that this current is .

Since power is defined as the product of current and voltage, the ampere can alternatively be expressed in terms of the other units using the relationship , and thus 1 A = 1 W/V. Current can be measured by a multimeter, a device that can measure electrical voltage, current, and resistance.

=== Former definition in the SI ===
Until 2019, the SI defined the ampere as follows:

The ampere is that constant current which, if maintained in two straight parallel conductors of infinite length, of negligible circular cross-section, and placed one metre apart in vacuum, would produce between these conductors a force equal to newtons per metre of length. 
Ampère&#x27;s force law states that there is an attractive or repulsive force between two parallel wires carrying an electric current. This force is used in the formal definition of the ampere.

The SI unit of charge, the coulomb, was then defined as &quot;the quantity of electricity carried in 1 second by a current of 1 ampere&quot;. Conversely, a current of one ampere is one coulomb of charge going past a given point per second:
:formula_1
In general, charge was determined by steady current flowing for a time as .

This definition of the ampere was most accurately realised using a Kibble balance, but in practice the unit was maintained via Ohm&#x27;s law from the units of electromotive force and resistance, the volt and the ohm, since the latter two could be tied to physical phenomena that are relatively easy to reproduce, the Josephson effect and the quantum Hall effect, respectively.

Techniques to establish the realisation of an ampere had a relative uncertainty of approximately a few parts in 10, and involved realisations of the watt, the ohm and the volt.

=== Present definition ===
The 2019 revision of the SI defined the ampere by taking the fixed numerical value of the elementary charge to be when expressed in the unit C, which is equal to A⋅s, where the second is defined in terms of , the unperturbed ground state hyperfine transition frequency of the caesium-133 atom.

The SI unit of charge, the coulomb, &quot;is the quantity of electricity carried in 1 second by a current of 1 ampere&quot;. Conversely, a current of one ampere is one coulomb of charge going past a given point per second:
:formula_2
In general, charge is determined by steady current flowing for a time as .

Constant, instantaneous and average current are expressed in amperes (as in &quot;the charging current is 1.2 A&quot;) and the charge accumulated (or passed through a circuit) over a period of time is expressed in coulombs (as in &quot;the battery charge is &quot;). The relation of the ampere (C/s) to the coulomb is the same as that of the watt (J/s) to the joule.

== Units derived from the ampere ==
The international system of units (SI) is based on seven SI base units the second, metre, kilogram, kelvin, ampere, mole, and candela representing seven fundamental types of physical quantity, or &quot;dimensions&quot;, (time, length, mass, temperature, electric current, amount of substance, and luminous intensity respectively) with all other SI units being defined using these. These SI derived units can either be given special names e.g. watt, volt, lux, etc. or defined in terms of others, e.g. metre per second. The units with special names derived from the ampere are:

There are also some SI units that are frequently used in the context of electrical engineering and electrical appliances, but are defined independently of the ampere, notably the hertz, joule, watt, candela, lumen, and lux.

== SI prefixes ==

Like other SI units, the ampere can be modified by adding a prefix that multiplies it by a power of 10.
== See also ==
* 
* 
* 

== References ==
== External links ==
* The NIST Reference on Constants, Units, and Uncertainty
* NIST &quot;Definition of ampere and μ0&quot;</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q25272" start="4" end="10" title="Ampere" label="ampere"/>
<link wikidata="Q25272" start="25" end="26" title="Ampere" label="A"/>
<link wikidata="Q853463" start="35" end="44" title="Clipping (morphology)" label="shortened"/>
<link wikidata="Q25272" start="48" end="51" title="Ampere" label="amp"/>
<link wikidata="Q11651" start="68" end="84" title="electric current" label="electric current"/>
<link wikidata="Q12457" start="92" end="121" title="International System of Units" label="International System of Units"/>
<link wikidata="Q25406" start="153" end="160" title="coulomb" label="coulomb"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="215" end="221" title="France" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q675" start="250" end="268" title="André-Marie Ampère" label="André-Marie Ampère"/>
<link wikidata="Q11406" start="307" end="323" title="electromagnetism" label="electromagnetism"/>
<link wikidata="Q35" start="335" end="341" title="Denmark" label="Danish"/>
<link wikidata="Q44412" start="352" end="373" title="Hans Christian Ørsted" label="Hans Christian Ørsted"/>
<link wikidata="Q3076763" start="386" end="409" title="2019 revision of the SI" label="2019 revision of the SI"/>
<link wikidata="Q2101" start="447" end="464" title="elementary charge" label="elementary charge"/>
<link wikidata="Q11573" start="723" end="728" title="metre" label="metre"/>
<link wikidata="Q12438" start="769" end="776" title="newton (unit)" label="newtons"/>
<link wikidata="Q26240" start="801" end="811" title="Centimetre–gram–second system of units" label="CGS system"/>
<link wikidata="Q83152" start="900" end="918" title="Coulomb&amp;#x27;s law" label="Coulomb&amp;#x27;s law"/>
<link wikidata="Q675" start="1192" end="1210" title="André-Marie Ampère" label="André-Marie Ampère"/>
<link wikidata="Q11406" start="1236" end="1252" title="electromagnetism" label="electromagnetism"/>
<link wikidata="Q11406" start="1280" end="1295" title="electrodynamics" label="electrodynamics"/>
<link wikidata="Q154235" start="1437" end="1476" title="International Exposition of Electricity" label="International Exposition of Electricity"/>
<link wikidata="Q11651" start="1631" end="1647" title="electric current" label="electric current"/>
<link wikidata="Q26240" start="1655" end="1693" title="centimetre–gram–second system of units" label="centimetre–gram–second system of units"/>
<link wikidata="Q864818" start="1723" end="1731" title="abampere" label="abampere"/>
<link wikidata="Q201933" start="1800" end="1804" title="dyne" label="dyne"/>
<link wikidata="Q512417" start="1944" end="1948" title="MKS system of units" label="MKSA"/>
<link wikidata="Q207442" start="2133" end="2147" title="silver nitrate" label="silver nitrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q25342" start="2231" end="2236" title="power (physics)" label="power"/>
<link wikidata="Q189996" start="2433" end="2443" title="multimeter" label="multimeter"/>
<link wikidata="Q11573" start="2770" end="2775" title="metre" label="metre"/>
<link wikidata="Q12438" start="2849" end="2856" title="newton (unit)" label="newtons"/>
<link wikidata="Q2359410" start="2879" end="2902" title="Ampère&amp;#x27;s force law" label="Ampère&amp;#x27;s force law"/>
<link wikidata="Q25406" start="3101" end="3108" title="coulomb" label="coulomb"/>
<link wikidata="Q27203" start="3469" end="3483" title="Kibble balance" label="Kibble balance"/>
<link wikidata="Q41591" start="3529" end="3543" title="Ohm&amp;#x27;s law" label="Ohm&amp;#x27;s law"/>
<link wikidata="Q185329" start="3562" end="3581" title="electromotive force" label="electromotive force"/>
<link wikidata="Q106603432" start="3586" end="3596" title="Electrical resistance and conductance" label="resistance"/>
<link wikidata="Q25250" start="3602" end="3606" title="volt" label="volt"/>
<link wikidata="Q47083" start="3615" end="3618" title="ohm" label="ohm"/>
<link wikidata="Q764228" start="3720" end="3736" title="Josephson effect" label="Josephson effect"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047822" start="3745" end="3764" title="quantum Hall effect" label="quantum Hall effect"/>
<link wikidata="Q865920" start="3840" end="3860" title="Approximation error" label="relative uncertainty"/>
<link wikidata="Q3076763" start="3990" end="4013" title="2019 revision of the SI" label="2019 revision of the SI"/>
<link wikidata="Q2101" start="4076" end="4093" title="elementary charge" label="elementary charge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1108" start="4262" end="4269" title="caesium" label="caesium"/>
<link wikidata="Q25406" start="4308" end="4315" title="coulomb" label="coulomb"/>
<link wikidata="Q267298" start="4831" end="4838" title="battery (electricity)" label="battery"/>
<link wikidata="Q25236" start="4933" end="4937" title="watt" label="watt"/>
<link wikidata="Q25269" start="4951" end="4956" title="joule" label="joule"/>
<link wikidata="Q12457" start="4999" end="5028" title="international system of units" label="international system of units"/>
<link wikidata="Q223662" start="5052" end="5065" title="SI base units" label="SI base units"/>
<link wikidata="Q11574" start="5070" end="5076" title="second" label="second"/>
<link wikidata="Q11570" start="5085" end="5093" title="kilogram" label="kilogram"/>
<link wikidata="Q11579" start="5095" end="5101" title="kelvin" label="kelvin"/>
<link wikidata="Q41509" start="5111" end="5115" title="mole (unit)" label="mole"/>
<link wikidata="Q83216" start="5121" end="5128" title="candela" label="candela"/>
<link wikidata="Q217113" start="5191" end="5213" title="Dimensional analysis" label="&amp;quot;dimensions&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q11471" start="5216" end="5220" title="time" label="time"/>
<link wikidata="Q36253" start="5222" end="5228" title="length" label="length"/>
<link wikidata="Q11423" start="5230" end="5234" title="mass" label="mass"/>
<link wikidata="Q11466" start="5236" end="5247" title="temperature" label="temperature"/>
<link wikidata="Q104946" start="5267" end="5286" title="amount of substance" label="amount of substance"/>
<link wikidata="Q104831" start="5292" end="5310" title="luminous intensity" label="luminous intensity"/>
<link wikidata="Q208469" start="5382" end="5398" title="SI derived units" label="SI derived units"/>
<link wikidata="Q179836" start="5450" end="5453" title="lux" label="lux"/>
<link wikidata="Q182429" start="5496" end="5512" title="metre per second" label="metre per second"/>
<link wikidata="Q43035" start="5645" end="5667" title="electrical engineering" label="electrical engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q39369" start="5752" end="5757" title="hertz" label="hertz"/>
<link wikidata="Q484092" start="5781" end="5786" title="lumen (unit)" label="lumen"/>
<link wikidata="Q131299" start="5877" end="5883" title="Metric prefix" label="prefix"/>
<link wikidata="Q184611" start="5908" end="5919" title="power of 10" label="power of 10"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="775" wikidata="Q8366" url="?curid=775" title="Algorithm">
<text>In mathematics and computer science, an algorithm () is a finite sequence of mathematically rigorous instructions, typically used to solve a class of specific problems or to perform a computation. Algorithms are used as specifications for performing calculations and data processing. More advanced algorithms can use conditionals to divert the code execution through various routes (referred to as automated decision-making) and deduce valid inferences (referred to as automated reasoning).

In contrast, a heuristic is an approach to solving problems that do not have well-defined correct or optimal results. For example, although social media recommender systems are commonly called &quot;algorithms&quot;, they actually rely on heuristics as there is no truly &quot;correct&quot; recommendation.

As an effective method, an algorithm can be expressed within a finite amount of space and time and in a well-defined formal language for calculating a function. Starting from an initial state and initial input (perhaps empty), the instructions describe a computation that, when executed, proceeds through a finite number of well-defined successive states, eventually producing &quot;output&quot; and terminating at a final ending state. The transition from one state to the next is not necessarily deterministic; some algorithms, known as randomized algorithms, incorporate random input.

== Etymology ==
Around 825 AD, Persian scientist and polymath Muḥammad ibn Mūsā al-Khwārizmī wrote &quot;kitāb al-ḥisāb al-hindī&quot; (&quot;Book of Indian computation&quot;) and &quot;kitab al-jam&#x27; wa&#x27;l-tafriq al-ḥisāb al-hindī&quot; (&quot;Addition and subtraction in Indian arithmetic&quot;). In the early 12th century, Latin translations of said al-Khwarizmi texts involving the Hindu–Arabic numeral system and arithmetic appeared, for example &quot;Liber Alghoarismi de practica arismetrice&quot;, attributed to John of Seville, and &quot;Liber Algorismi de numero Indorum&quot;, attributed to Adelard of Bath. Hereby, &quot;alghoarismi&quot; or &quot;algorismi&quot; is the Latinization of Al-Khwarizmi&#x27;s name; the text starts with the phrase &quot;Dixit Algorismi&quot;, or &quot;Thus spoke Al-Khwarizmi&quot;. Around 1230, the English word &quot;algorism&quot; is attested and then by Chaucer in 1391, English adopted the French term. In the 15th century, under the influence of the Greek word ἀριθμός (&quot;arithmos&quot;, &quot;number&quot;; &quot;cf.&quot; &quot;arithmetic&quot;), the Latin word was altered to &quot;algorithmus&quot;.

== Definition ==
One informal definition is &quot;a set of rules that precisely defines a sequence of operations&quot;, which would include all computer programs (including programs that do not perform numeric calculations), and any prescribed bureaucratic procedure
or cook-book recipe. In general, a program is an algorithm only if it stops eventually—even though infinite loops may sometimes prove desirable. define an algorithm to be an explicit set of instructions for determining an output, that can be followed by a computing machine or a human who could only carry out specific elementary operations on symbols&quot;.&quot;

Most algorithms are intended to be implemented as computer programs. However, algorithms are also implemented by other means, such as in a biological neural network (for example, the human brain performing arithmetic or an insect looking for food), in an electrical circuit, or a mechanical device.

== History ==
=== Ancient algorithms ===
Step-by-step procedures for solving mathematical problems have been recorded since antiquity. This includes in Babylonian mathematics (around 2500 BC), Egyptian mathematics (around 1550 BC), Indian mathematics (around 800 BC and later), the Ifa Oracle (around 500 BC), Greek mathematics (around 240 BC), Chinese mathematics (around 200 BC and later), and Arabic mathematics (around 800 AD).

The earliest evidence of algorithms is found in ancient Mesopotamian mathematics. A Sumerian clay tablet found in Shuruppak near Baghdad and dated to describes the earliest division algorithm. During the Hammurabi dynasty , Babylonian clay tablets described algorithms for computing formulas. Algorithms were also used in Babylonian astronomy. Babylonian clay tablets describe and employ algorithmic procedures to compute the time and place of significant astronomical events.

Algorithms for arithmetic are also found in ancient Egyptian mathematics, dating back to the Rhind Mathematical Papyrus . Algorithms were later used in ancient Hellenistic mathematics. Two examples are the Sieve of Eratosthenes, which was described in the &quot;Introduction to Arithmetic&quot; by Nicomachus, and the Euclidean algorithm, which was first described in &quot;Euclid&#x27;s Elements&quot; ().Examples of ancient Indian mathematics included the Shulba Sutras, the Kerala School, and the Brāhmasphuṭasiddhānta.

The first cryptographic algorithm for deciphering encrypted code was developed by Al-Kindi, a 9th-century Arab mathematician, in &quot;A Manuscript On Deciphering Cryptographic Messages&quot;. He gave the first description of cryptanalysis by frequency analysis, the earliest codebreaking algorithm.

=== Computers ===

==== Weight-driven clocks ====
Bolter credits the invention of the weight-driven clock as &quot;the key invention [of Europe in the Middle Ages],&quot; specifically the verge escapement mechanism producing the tick and tock of a mechanical clock. &quot;The accurate automatic machine&quot; led immediately to &quot;mechanical automata&quot; in the 13th century and &quot;computational machines&quot;—the difference and analytical engines of Charles Babbage and Ada Lovelace in the mid-19th century. Lovelace designed the first algorithm intended for processing on a computer, Babbage&#x27;s analytical engine, which is the first device considered a real Turing-complete computer instead of just a calculator. Although the full implementation of Babbage&#x27;s second device was not realized for decades after her lifetime, Lovelace has been called &quot;history&#x27;s first programmer&quot;.

==== Electromechanical relay ====
Bell and Newell (1971) write that the Jacquard loom, a precursor to Hollerith cards (punch cards), and &quot;telephone switching technologies&quot; led to the development of the first computers. By the mid-19th century, the telegraph, the precursor of the telephone, was in use throughout the world. By the late 19th century, the ticker tape () was in use, as were Hollerith cards (c. 1890). Then came the teleprinter () with its punched-paper use of Baudot code on tape.

Telephone-switching networks of electromechanical relays were invented in 1835. These led to the invention of the digital adding device by George Stibitz in 1937. While working in Bell Laboratories, he observed the &quot;burdensome&quot; use of mechanical calculators with gears. &quot;He went home one evening in 1937 intending to test his idea... When the tinkering was over, Stibitz had constructed a binary adding device&quot;.

=== Formalization ===
In 1928, a partial formalization of the modern concept of algorithms began with attempts to solve the &quot;Entscheidungsproblem &quot;(decision problem) posed by David Hilbert. Later formalizations were framed as attempts to define &quot;effective calculability&quot; or &quot;effective method&quot;. Those formalizations included the Gödel–Herbrand–Kleene recursive functions of 1930, 1934 and 1935, Alonzo Church&#x27;s lambda calculus of 1936, Emil Post&#x27;s Formulation 1 of 1936, and Alan Turing&#x27;s Turing machines of 1936–37 and 1939.

==Representations==
Algorithms can be expressed in many kinds of notation, including natural languages, pseudocode, flowcharts, drakon-charts, programming languages or control tables (processed by interpreters). Natural language expressions of algorithms tend to be verbose and ambiguous and are rarely used for complex or technical algorithms. Pseudocode, flowcharts, drakon-charts, and control tables are structured expressions of algorithms that avoid common ambiguities of natural language. Programming languages are primarily for expressing algorithms in a computer-executable form but are also used to define or document algorithms.

=== Turing machines ===
There are many possible representations and Turing machine programs can be expressed as a sequence of machine tables (see finite-state machine, state-transition table, and control table for more), as flowcharts and drakon-charts (see state diagram for more), as a form of rudimentary machine code or assembly code called &quot;sets of quadruples&quot;, and more. Algorithm representations can also be classified into three accepted levels of Turing machine description: high-level description, implementation description, and formal description. A high-level description describes the qualities of the algorithm itself, ignoring how it is implemented on the Turing machine. An implementation description describes the general manner in which the machine moves its head and stores data to carry out the algorithm, but does not give exact states. In the most detail, a formal description gives the exact state table and list of transitions of the Turing machine.

=== Flowchart representation ===
The graphical aid called a flowchart offers a way to describe and document an algorithm (and a computer program corresponding to it). It has four primary symbols: arrows showing program flow, rectangles (SEQUENCE, GOTO), diamonds (IF-THEN-ELSE), and dots (OR-tie). Sub-structures can &quot;nest&quot; in rectangles, but only if a single exit occurs from the superstructure.

== Algorithmic analysis ==
It is often important to know how much time, storage, or other cost an algorithm may require. Methods have been developed for the analysis of algorithms to obtain such quantitative answers (estimates); for example, an algorithm that adds up the elements of a list of &quot;n&quot; numbers would have a time requirement of , using big O notation. The algorithm only needs to remember two values: the sum of all the elements so far, and its current position in the input list. If the space required to store the input numbers is not counted, it has a space requirement of , otherwise is required.

Different algorithms may complete the same task with a different set of instructions in less or more time, space, or &#x27;effort&#x27; than others. For example, a binary search algorithm (with cost ) outperforms a sequential search (cost ) when used for table lookups on sorted lists or arrays.

===Formal versus empirical===
The analysis, and study of algorithms is a discipline of computer science. Algorithms are often studied abstractly, without referencing any specific programming language or implementation. Algorithm analysis resembles other mathematical disciplines as it focuses on the algorithm&#x27;s properties, not implementation. Pseudocode is typical for analysis as it is a simple and general representation. Most algorithms are implemented on particular hardware/software platforms and their algorithmic efficiency is tested using real code. The efficiency of a particular algorithm may be insignificant for many &quot;one-off&quot; problems but it may be critical for algorithms designed for fast interactive, commercial, or long-life scientific usage. Scaling from small n to large n frequently exposes inefficient algorithms that are otherwise benign.

Empirical testing is useful for uncovering unexpected interactions that affect performance. Benchmarks may be used to compare before/after potential improvements to an algorithm after program optimization.
Empirical tests cannot replace formal analysis, though, and are non-trivial to perform fairly.

=== Execution efficiency ===
To illustrate the potential improvements possible even in well-established algorithms, a recent significant innovation, relating to FFT algorithms (used heavily in the field of image processing), can decrease processing time up to 1,000 times for applications like medical imaging. In general, speed improvements depend on special properties of the problem, which are very common in practical applications. Speedups of this magnitude enable computing devices that make extensive use of image processing (like digital cameras and medical equipment) to consume less power.

== Design ==
Algorithm design is a method or mathematical process for problem-solving and engineering algorithms. The design of algorithms is part of many solution theories, such as divide-and-conquer or dynamic programming within operation research. Techniques for designing and implementing algorithm designs are also called algorithm design patterns, with examples including the template method pattern and the decorator pattern. One of the most important aspects of algorithm design is resource (run-time, memory usage) efficiency; the big O notation is used to describe e.g., an algorithm&#x27;s run-time growth as the size of its input increases.

=== Structured programming ===
Per the Church–Turing thesis, any algorithm can be computed by any Turing complete model. Turing completeness only requires four instruction types—conditional GOTO, unconditional GOTO, assignment, HALT. However, Kemeny and Kurtz observe that, while &quot;undisciplined&quot; use of unconditional GOTOs and conditional IF-THEN GOTOs can result in &quot;spaghetti code&quot;, a programmer can write structured programs using only these instructions; on the other hand &quot;it is also possible, and not too hard, to write badly structured programs in a structured language&quot;. Tausworthe augments the three Böhm-Jacopini canonical structures: SEQUENCE, IF-THEN-ELSE, and WHILE-DO, with two more: DO-WHILE and CASE. An additional benefit of a structured program is that it lends itself to proofs of correctness using mathematical induction.

== Legal status ==
By themselves, algorithms are not usually patentable. In the United States, a claim consisting solely of simple manipulations of abstract concepts, numbers, or signals does not constitute &quot;processes&quot; (USPTO 2006), so algorithms are not patentable (as in &quot;Gottschalk v. Benson&quot;). However practical applications of algorithms are sometimes patentable. For example, in &quot;Diamond v. Diehr&quot;, the application of a simple feedback algorithm to aid in the curing of synthetic rubber was deemed patentable. The patenting of software is controversial, and there are criticized patents involving algorithms, especially data compression algorithms, such as Unisys&#x27;s LZW patent. Additionally, some cryptographic algorithms have export restrictions (see export of cryptography).

== Classification ==
=== By implementation ===
; Recursion
: A recursive algorithm invokes itself repeatedly until meeting a termination condition and is a common functional programming method. Iterative algorithms use repetitions such as loops or data structures like stacks to solve problems. Problems may be suited for one implementation or the other. The Tower of Hanoi is a puzzle commonly solved using recursive implementation. Every recursive version has an equivalent (but possibly more or less complex) iterative version, and vice versa.
; Serial, parallel or distributed
: Algorithms are usually discussed with the assumption that computers execute one instruction of an algorithm at a time on serial computers. Serial algorithms are designed for these environments, unlike parallel or distributed algorithms. Parallel algorithms take advantage of computer architectures where multiple processors can work on a problem at the same time. Distributed algorithms use multiple machines connected via a computer network. Parallel and distributed algorithms divide the problem into subproblems and collect the results back together. Resource consumption in these algorithms is not only processor cycles on each processor but also the communication overhead between the processors. Some sorting algorithms can be parallelized efficiently, but their communication overhead is expensive. Iterative algorithms are generally parallelizable, but some problems have no parallel algorithms and are called inherently serial problems.
; Deterministic or non-deterministic
: Deterministic algorithms solve the problem with exact decisions at every step; whereas non-deterministic algorithms solve problems via guessing. Guesses are typically made more accurate through the use of heuristics.
; Exact or approximate
: While many algorithms reach an exact solution, approximation algorithms seek an approximation that is close to the true solution. Such algorithms have practical value for many hard problems. For example, the Knapsack problem, where there is a set of items, and the goal is to pack the knapsack to get the maximum total value. Each item has some weight and some value. The total weight that can be carried is no more than some fixed number X. So, the solution must consider the weights of items as well as their value.
; Quantum algorithm
: Quantum algorithms run on a realistic model of quantum computation. The term is usually used for those algorithms that seem inherently quantum or use some essential feature of Quantum computing such as quantum superposition or quantum entanglement.

=== By design paradigm ===
Another way of classifying algorithms is by their design methodology or paradigm. Some common paradigms are:

; Brute-force or exhaustive search
: Brute force is a problem-solving method of systematically trying every possible option until the optimal solution is found. This approach can be very time-consuming, testing every possible combination of variables. It is often used when other methods are unavailable or too complex. Brute force can solve a variety of problems, including finding the shortest path between two points and cracking passwords.
; Divide and conquer
: A divide-and-conquer algorithm repeatedly reduces a problem to one or more smaller instances of itself (usually recursively) until the instances are small enough to solve easily. Merge sorting is an example of divide and conquer, where an unordered list can be divided into segments containing one item and sorting of the entire list can be obtained by merging the segments. A simpler variant of divide and conquer is called a &quot;decrease-and-conquer algorithm&quot;, which solves one smaller instance of itself, and uses the solution to solve the bigger problem. Divide and conquer divides the problem into multiple subproblems and so the conquer stage is more complex than decrease and conquer algorithms. An example of a decrease and conquer algorithm is the binary search algorithm.
; Search and enumeration
: Many problems (such as playing chess) can be modelled as problems on graphs. A graph exploration algorithm specifies rules for moving around a graph and is useful for such problems. This category also includes search algorithms, branch and bound enumeration, and backtracking.
;Randomized algorithm
: Such algorithms make some choices randomly (or pseudo-randomly). They find approximate solutions when finding exact solutions may be impractical (see heuristic method below). For some problems, the fastest approximations must involve some randomness. Whether randomized algorithms with polynomial time complexity can be the fastest algorithm for some problems is an open question known as the P versus NP problem. There are two large classes of such algorithms:
# Monte Carlo algorithms return a correct answer with high probability. E.g. RP is the subclass of these that run in polynomial time.
# Las Vegas algorithms always return the correct answer, but their running time is only probabilistically bound, e.g. ZPP.
; Reduction of complexity
: This technique transforms difficult problems into better-known problems solvable with (hopefully) asymptotically optimal algorithms. The goal is to find a reducing algorithm whose complexity is not dominated by the resulting reduced algorithms. For example, one selection algorithm finds the median of an unsorted list by first sorting the list (the expensive portion), and then pulling out the middle element in the sorted list (the cheap portion). This technique is also known as &quot;transform and conquer&quot;.
; Back tracking
: In this approach, multiple solutions are built incrementally and abandoned when it is determined that they cannot lead to a valid full solution.

=== Optimization problems ===
For optimization problems there is a more specific classification of algorithms; an algorithm for such problems may fall into one or more of the general categories described above as well as into one of the following:

; Linear programming
: When searching for optimal solutions to a linear function bound by linear equality and inequality constraints, the constraints can be used directly to produce optimal solutions. There are algorithms that can solve any problem in this category, such as the popular simplex algorithm. Problems that can be solved with linear programming include the maximum flow problem for directed graphs. If a problem also requires that any of the unknowns be integers, then it is classified in integer programming. A linear programming algorithm can solve such a problem if it can be proved that all restrictions for integer values are superficial, i.e., the solutions satisfy these restrictions anyway. In the general case, a specialized algorithm or an algorithm that finds approximate solutions is used, depending on the difficulty of the problem.
; Dynamic programming
: When a problem shows optimal substructures—meaning the optimal solution can be constructed from optimal solutions to subproblems—and overlapping subproblems, meaning the same subproblems are used to solve many different problem instances, a quicker approach called &quot;dynamic programming&quot; avoids recomputing solutions. For example, Floyd–Warshall algorithm, the shortest path between a start and goal vertex in a weighted graph can be found using the shortest path to the goal from all adjacent vertices. Dynamic programming and memoization go together. Unlike divide and conquer, dynamic programming subproblems often overlap. The difference between dynamic programming and simple recursion is the caching or memoization of recursive calls. When subproblems are independent and do not repeat, memoization does not help; hence dynamic programming is not applicable to all complex problems. Using memoization dynamic programming reduces the complexity of many problems from exponential to polynomial.
; The greedy method
: Greedy algorithms, similarly to a dynamic programming, work by examining substructures, in this case not of the problem but of a given solution. Such algorithms start with some solution and improve it by making small modifications. For some problems, they always find the optimal solution but for others they may stop at local optima. The most popular use of greedy algorithms is finding minimal spanning trees of graphs without negative cycles. Huffman Tree, Kruskal, Prim, Sollin are greedy algorithms that can solve this optimization problem.
;The heuristic method
:In optimization problems, heuristic algorithms find solutions close to the optimal solution when finding the optimal solution is impractical. These algorithms get closer and closer to the optimal solution as they progress. In principle, if run for an infinite amount of time, they will find the optimal solution. They can ideally find a solution very close to the optimal solution in a relatively short time. These algorithms include local search, tabu search, simulated annealing, and genetic algorithms. Some, like simulated annealing, are non-deterministic algorithms while others, like tabu search, are deterministic. When a bound on the error of the non-optimal solution is known, the algorithm is further categorized as an approximation algorithm.

== Examples ==
One of the simplest algorithms finds the largest number in a list of numbers of random order. Finding the solution requires looking at every number in the list. From this follows a simple algorithm, which can be described in plain English as:

&quot;High-level description:&quot;
# If a set of numbers is empty, then there is no highest number.
# Assume the first number in the set is the largest.
# For each remaining number in the set: if this number is greater than the current largest, it becomes the new largest.
# When there are no unchecked numbers left in the set, consider the current largest number to be the largest in the set.

&quot;(Quasi-)formal description:&quot;
Written in prose but much closer to the high-level language of a computer program, the following is the more formal coding of the algorithm in pseudocode or pidgin code:
 Input: A list of numbers &quot;L&quot;.
 Output: The largest number in the list &quot;L&quot;.

 if &quot;L.size&quot; = 0 return null
 &quot;largest&quot; ← &quot;L&quot;[0]
 for each &quot;item&quot; in &quot;L&quot;, do
 if &quot;item&quot; &gt; &quot;largest&quot;, then
 &quot;largest&quot; ← &quot;item&quot;
 return &quot;largest&quot;
== See also ==
* Abstract machine
* ALGOL
* Algorithm aversion
* Algorithm engineering
* Algorithm characterizations
* Algorithmic bias
* Algorithmic composition
* Algorithmic entities
* Algorithmic synthesis
* Algorithmic technique
* Algorithmic topology
* Computational mathematics
* Garbage in, garbage out
* &quot;Introduction to Algorithms&quot; (textbook)
* Government by algorithm
* List of algorithms
* List of algorithm general topics
* Medium is the message
* Regulation of algorithms
* Theory of computation
** Computability theory
** Computational complexity theory
== Notes ==
== Bibliography ==
* Bell, C. Gordon and Newell, Allen (1971), &quot;Computer Structures: Readings and Examples&quot;, McGraw–Hill Book Company, New York. .
* Includes a bibliography of 56 references.
* : cf. Chapter 3 &quot;Turing machines&quot; where they discuss &quot;certain enumerable sets not effectively (mechanically) enumerable&quot;.
* Campagnolo, M.L., Moore, C., and Costa, J.F. (2000) An analog characterization of the subrecursive functions. In &quot;Proc. of the 4th Conference on Real Numbers and Computers&quot;, Odense University, pp. 91–109
* Reprinted in &quot;The Undecidable&quot;, p. 89ff. The first expression of &quot;Church&#x27;s Thesis&quot;. See in particular page 100 (&quot;The Undecidable&quot;) where he defines the notion of &quot;effective calculability&quot; in terms of &quot;an algorithm&quot;, and he uses the word &quot;terminates&quot;, etc.
* Reprinted in &quot;The Undecidable&quot;, p. 110ff. Church shows that the Entscheidungsproblem is unsolvable in about 3 pages of text and 3 pages of footnotes.
* Davis gives commentary before each article. Papers of Gödel, Alonzo Church, Turing, Rosser, Kleene, and Emil Post are included; those cited in the article are listed here by author&#x27;s name.
* Davis offers concise biographies of Leibniz, Boole, Frege, Cantor, Hilbert, Gödel and Turing with von Neumann as the show-stealing villain. Very brief bios of Joseph-Marie Jacquard, Babbage, Ada Lovelace, Claude Shannon, Howard Aiken, etc.
* 
* , 
* Yuri Gurevich, &quot;Sequential Abstract State Machines Capture Sequential Algorithms&quot;, ACM Transactions on Computational Logic, Vol 1, no 1 (July 2000), pp. 77–111. Includes bibliography of 33 sources.
* , 3rd edition 1976[?], (pbk.)
* , . Cf. Chapter &quot;The Spirit of Truth&quot; for a history leading to, and a discussion of, his proof.
* Presented to the American Mathematical Society, September 1935. Reprinted in &quot;The Undecidable&quot;, p. 237ff. Kleene&#x27;s definition of &quot;general recursion&quot; (known now as mu-recursion) was used by Church in his 1935 paper &quot;An Unsolvable Problem of Elementary Number Theory&quot; that proved the &quot;decision problem&quot; to be &quot;undecidable&quot; (i.e., a negative result).
* Reprinted in &quot;The Undecidable&quot;, p. 255ff. Kleene refined his definition of &quot;general recursion&quot; and proceeded in his chapter &quot;12. Algorithmic theories&quot; to posit &quot;Thesis I&quot; (p. 274); he would later repeat this thesis (in Kleene 1952:300) and name it &quot;Church&#x27;s Thesis&quot;(Kleene 1952:317) (i.e., the Church thesis).
* 
* Kosovsky, N.K. &quot;Elements of Mathematical Logic and its Application to the theory of Subrecursive Algorithms&quot;, LSU Publ., Leningrad, 1981
* A.A. Markov (1954) &quot;Theory of algorithms&quot;. [Translated by Jacques J. Schorr-Kon and PST staff] Imprint Moscow, Academy of Sciences of the USSR, 1954 [i.e., Jerusalem, Israel Program for Scientific Translations, 1961; available from the Office of Technical Services, U.S. Dept. of Commerce, Washington] Description 444 p. 28 cm. Added t.p. in Russian Translation of Works of the Mathematical Institute, Academy of Sciences of the USSR, v. 42. Original title: Teoriya algerifmov. [QA248.M2943 Dartmouth College library. U.S. Dept. of Commerce, Office of Technical Services, number OTS .]
* Minsky expands his &quot;...idea of an algorithm – an effective procedure...&quot; in chapter 5.1 &quot;Computability, Effective Procedures and Algorithms. Infinite machines.&quot;
* Reprinted in &quot;The Undecidable&quot;, pp. 289ff. Post defines a simple algorithmic-like process of a man writing marks or erasing marks and going from box to box and eventually halting, as he follows a list of simple instructions. This is cited by Kleene as one source of his &quot;Thesis I&quot;, the so-called Church–Turing thesis.
* Reprinted in &quot;The Undecidable&quot;, p. 223ff. Herein is Rosser&#x27;s famous definition of &quot;effective method&quot;: &quot;...a method each step of which is precisely predetermined and which is certain to produce the answer in a finite number of steps... a machine which will then solve any problem of the set with no human intervention beyond inserting the question and (later) reading the answer&quot; (p. 225–226, &quot;The Undecidable&quot;)
* 
* 
* Cf. in particular the first chapter titled: &quot;Algorithms, Turing Machines, and Programs&quot;. His succinct informal definition: &quot;...any sequence of instructions that can be obeyed by a robot, is called an &quot;algorithm&quot;&quot; (p. 4).
* . Corrections, ibid, vol. 43(1937) pp. 544–546. Reprinted in &quot;The Undecidable&quot;, p. 116ff. Turing&#x27;s famous paper completed as a Master&#x27;s dissertation while at King&#x27;s College Cambridge UK.
* Reprinted in &quot;The Undecidable&quot;, pp. 155ff. Turing&#x27;s paper that defined &quot;the oracle&quot; was his PhD thesis while at Princeton.
* United States Patent and Trademark Office (2006), &quot;2106.02 **&gt;Mathematical Algorithms: 2100 Patentability&quot;, Manual of Patent Examining Procedure (MPEP). Latest revision August 2006

* Zaslavsky, C. (1970). Mathematics of the Yoruba People and of Their Neighbors in Southern Nigeria. The Two-Year College Mathematics Journal, 1(2), 76–99. https://doi.org/10.2307/3027363

==Further reading==
* 
* 
* 
* Jon Kleinberg, Éva Tardos(2006): &quot;Algorithm Design&quot;, Pearson/Addison-Wesley, ISBN 978-0-32129535-4
* Knuth, Donald E. (2000). &quot;Selected Papers on Analysis of Algorithms &quot;. Stanford, California: Center for the Study of Language and Information.
* Knuth, Donald E. (2010). &quot;Selected Papers on Design of Algorithms &quot;. Stanford, California: Center for the Study of Language and Information.
* 
==External links==

* 
* Dictionary of Algorithms and Data Structures – National Institute of Standards and Technology
; Algorithm repositories
* The Stony Brook Algorithm Repository – State University of New York at Stony Brook
* Collected Algorithms of the ACM – Associations for Computing Machinery
* The Stanford GraphBase – Stanford University</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q395" start="3" end="14" title="mathematics" label="mathematics"/>
<link wikidata="Q21198" start="19" end="35" title="computer science" label="computer science"/>
<link wikidata="Q8366" start="40" end="49" title="Algorithm" label="algorithm"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="77" end="100" title="Rigour#Mathematics" label="mathematically rigorous"/>
<link wikidata="Q3435924" start="159" end="166" title="Computational problem" label="problem"/>
<link wikidata="Q12525525" start="184" end="195" title="computation" label="computation"/>
<link wikidata="Q622821" start="250" end="261" title="calculation" label="calculation"/>
<link wikidata="Q6661985" start="267" end="282" title="data processing" label="data processing"/>
<link wikidata="Q817862" start="317" end="328" title="Conditional (computer programming)" label="conditional"/>
<link wikidata="Q108704339" start="398" end="423" title="automated decision-making" label="automated decision-making"/>
<link wikidata="Q408386" start="442" end="451" title="inference" label="inference"/>
<link wikidata="Q2555318" start="469" end="488" title="automated reasoning" label="automated reasoning"/>
<link wikidata="Q1981968" start="507" end="516" title="Heuristic (computer science)" label="heuristic"/>
<link wikidata="Q554950" start="645" end="663" title="recommender system" label="recommender system"/>
<link wikidata="Q5347270" start="806" end="822" title="effective method" label="effective method"/>
<link wikidata="Q192161" start="917" end="932" title="formal language" label="formal language"/>
<link wikidata="Q11348" start="951" end="959" title="Function (mathematics)" label="function"/>
<link wikidata="Q670834" start="1019" end="1024" title="Empty string" label="empty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1077724" start="1078" end="1085" title="Execution (computing)" label="execute"/>
<link wikidata="Q131133" start="1298" end="1311" title="deterministic" label="deterministic"/>
<link wikidata="Q583461" start="1339" end="1359" title="randomized algorithm" label="randomized algorithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q9038" start="1451" end="1481" title="Al-Khwarizmi" label="Muḥammad ibn Mūsā al-Khwārizmī"/>
<link wikidata="Q3059346" start="1783" end="1810" title="Hindu–Arabic numeral system" label="Hindu–Arabic numeral system"/>
<link wikidata="Q11205" start="1815" end="1825" title="arithmetic" label="arithmetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1382696" start="1917" end="1932" title="John of Seville" label="John of Seville"/>
<link wikidata="Q312372" start="1999" end="2014" title="Adelard of Bath" label="Adelard of Bath"/>
<link wikidata="Q1806983" start="2080" end="2092" title="Latinisation of names" label="Latinization"/>
<link wikidata="Q864014" start="2259" end="2267" title="algorism" label="algorism"/>
<link wikidata="Q5683" start="2298" end="2305" title="Geoffrey Chaucer" label="Chaucer"/>
<link wikidata="Q40056" start="2699" end="2715" title="computer program" label="computer program"/>
<link wikidata="Q72468" start="2799" end="2811" title="bureaucratic" label="bureaucratic"/>
<link wikidata="Q605076" start="2825" end="2834" title="Cookbook" label="cook-book"/>
<link wikidata="Q219239" start="2835" end="2841" title="recipe" label="recipe"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2921" end="2934" title="infinite loop#Intentional looping" label="infinite loop"/>
<link wikidata="Q245962" start="3223" end="3232" title="Implementation" label="implement"/>
<link wikidata="Q40056" start="3238" end="3254" title="computer program" label="computer program"/>
<link wikidata="Q124619446" start="3327" end="3352" title="biological neural network" label="biological neural network"/>
<link wikidata="Q492038" start="3371" end="3382" title="human brain" label="human brain"/>
<link wikidata="Q11205" start="3394" end="3404" title="arithmetic" label="arithmetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q132629" start="3443" end="3461" title="electrical circuit" label="electrical circuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q787931" start="3640" end="3662" title="Babylonian mathematics" label="Babylonian mathematics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1330884" start="3681" end="3701" title="Egyptian mathematics" label="Egyptian mathematics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1279571" start="3720" end="3738" title="Indian mathematics" label="Indian mathematics"/>
<link wikidata="Q58413" start="3798" end="3815" title="Greek mathematics" label="Greek mathematics"/>
<link wikidata="Q540129" start="3833" end="3878" title="Chinese mathematics" label="Chinese mathematics (around 200 BC and later)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1267533" start="3884" end="3902" title="Arabic mathematics" label="Arabic mathematics"/>
<link wikidata="Q11767" start="3977" end="3988" title="Mesopotamia" label="Mesopotamia"/>
<link wikidata="Q35355" start="4005" end="4010" title="Sumer" label="Sumer"/>
<link wikidata="Q392725" start="4035" end="4044" title="Shuruppak" label="Shuruppak"/>
<link wikidata="Q1530" start="4050" end="4057" title="Baghdad" label="Baghdad"/>
<link wikidata="Q3526714" start="4094" end="4112" title="division algorithm" label="division algorithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q733897" start="4125" end="4142" title="First Babylonian dynasty" label="Hammurabi dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q47690" start="4145" end="4154" title="Babylonia" label="Babylonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q787929" start="4243" end="4263" title="Babylonian astronomy" label="Babylonian astronomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1330884" start="4451" end="4471" title="Egyptian mathematics" label="Egyptian mathematics"/>
<link wikidata="Q213540" start="4492" end="4518" title="Rhind Mathematical Papyrus" label="Rhind Mathematical Papyrus"/>
<link wikidata="Q58413" start="4559" end="4582" title="Hellenistic mathematics" label="Hellenistic mathematics"/>
<link wikidata="Q177898" start="4605" end="4626" title="Sieve of Eratosthenes" label="Sieve of Eratosthenes"/>
<link wikidata="Q360366" start="4661" end="4687" title="Introduction to Arithmetic" label="Introduction to Arithmetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q360366" start="4697" end="4707" title="Nicomachus" label="Nicomachus"/>
<link wikidata="Q230848" start="4717" end="4736" title="Euclidean algorithm" label="Euclidean algorithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q172891" start="4773" end="4795" title="Euclid&amp;#x27;s Elements" label="Euclid&amp;#x27;s Elements"/>
<link wikidata="Q84052" start="4857" end="4870" title="Shulba Sutras" label="Shulba Sutras"/>
<link wikidata="Q1765138" start="4876" end="4889" title="Kerala school of astronomy and mathematics" label="Kerala School"/>
<link wikidata="Q1290001" start="4899" end="4920" title="Brāhmasphuṭasiddhānta" label="Brāhmasphuṭasiddhānta"/>
<link wikidata="Q179759" start="5005" end="5013" title="Al-Kindi" label="Al-Kindi"/>
<link wikidata="Q897511" start="5149" end="5162" title="cryptanalysis" label="cryptanalysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q565636" start="5166" end="5184" title="frequency analysis" label="frequency analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="5361" end="5386" title="Europe in the middle ages" label="Europe in the Middle Ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q1435427" start="5412" end="5428" title="verge escapement" label="verge escapement"/>
<link wikidata="Q214526" start="5569" end="5577" title="automata theory" label="automata"/>
<link wikidata="Q628007" start="5647" end="5657" title="difference engine" label="difference"/>
<link wikidata="Q485257" start="5662" end="5679" title="analytical engine" label="analytical engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q46633" start="5684" end="5699" title="Charles Babbage" label="Charles Babbage"/>
<link wikidata="Q7259" start="5704" end="5716" title="Ada Lovelace" label="Ada Lovelace"/>
<link wikidata="Q197970" start="5897" end="5912" title="Turing-complete" label="Turing-complete"/>
<link wikidata="Q31087" start="5940" end="5950" title="calculator" label="calculator"/>
<link wikidata="Q1369967" start="6209" end="6222" title="Jacquard loom" label="Jacquard loom"/>
<link wikidata="Q183414" start="6239" end="6253" title="Hollerith card" label="Hollerith card"/>
<link wikidata="Q721587" start="6395" end="6404" title="telegraph" label="telegraph"/>
<link wikidata="Q2424449" start="6501" end="6512" title="ticker tape" label="ticker tape"/>
<link wikidata="Q66196" start="6577" end="6588" title="teleprinter" label="teleprinter"/>
<link wikidata="Q753170" start="6622" end="6633" title="Baudot code" label="Baudot code"/>
<link wikidata="Q174053" start="6676" end="6700" title="relays" label="electromechanical relays"/>
<link wikidata="Q92839" start="6783" end="6797" title="George Stibitz" label="George Stibitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q11030584" start="7207" end="7227" title="Entscheidungsproblem" label="Entscheidungsproblem"/>
<link wikidata="Q41585" start="7262" end="7275" title="David Hilbert" label="David Hilbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q5347270" start="7338" end="7361" title="effective calculability" label="effective calculability"/>
<link wikidata="Q41390" start="7435" end="7440" title="Kurt Gödel" label="Gödel"/>
<link wikidata="Q448086" start="7441" end="7449" title="Jacques Herbrand" label="Herbrand"/>
<link wikidata="Q335148" start="7450" end="7456" title="Stephen Cole Kleene" label="Kleene"/>
<link wikidata="Q92741" start="7501" end="7514" title="Alonzo Church" label="Alonzo Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q242028" start="7522" end="7537" title="lambda calculus" label="lambda calculus"/>
<link wikidata="Q351366" start="7547" end="7556" title="Emil Post" label="Emil Post"/>
<link wikidata="Q2574032" start="7564" end="7577" title="Formulation 1" label="Formulation 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q7251" start="7591" end="7602" title="Alan Turing" label="Alan Turing"/>
<link wikidata="Q163310" start="7610" end="7625" title="Turing machines" label="Turing machines"/>
<link wikidata="Q33742" start="7733" end="7750" title="natural languages" label="natural languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q189224" start="7752" end="7762" title="pseudocode" label="pseudocode"/>
<link wikidata="Q185092" start="7764" end="7773" title="flowchart" label="flowchart"/>
<link wikidata="Q2671999" start="7776" end="7788" title="DRAKON" label="drakon-chart"/>
<link wikidata="Q9143" start="7791" end="7812" title="programming languages" label="programming languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q5165889" start="7816" end="7829" title="control table" label="control table"/>
<link wikidata="Q183065" start="7845" end="7856" title="Interpreter (computing)" label="interpreter"/>
<link wikidata="Q163310" start="8356" end="8370" title="Turing machine" label="Turing machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q176452" start="8434" end="8454" title="finite-state machine" label="finite-state machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2303083" start="8456" end="8478" title="state-transition table" label="state-transition table"/>
<link wikidata="Q5165889" start="8484" end="8497" title="control table" label="control table"/>
<link wikidata="Q230885" start="8546" end="8559" title="state diagram" label="state diagram"/>
<link wikidata="Q55813" start="8596" end="8608" title="machine code" label="machine code"/>
<link wikidata="Q165436" start="8612" end="8625" title="assembly code" label="assembly code"/>
<link wikidata="Q185092" start="9334" end="9343" title="flowchart" label="flowchart"/>
<link wikidata="Q269878" start="10039" end="10053" title="big O notation" label="big O notation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1296251" start="10428" end="10434" title="algorithmic efficiency" label="effort"/>
<link wikidata="Q243754" start="10469" end="10482" title="binary search" label="binary search"/>
<link wikidata="Q690265" start="10560" end="10572" title="lookup table" label="table lookup"/>
<link wikidata="Q333464" start="10636" end="10668" title="analysis of algorithms" label="analysis, and study of algorithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q21198" start="10689" end="10705" title="computer science" label="computer science"/>
<link wikidata="Q9143" start="10781" end="10801" title="programming language" label="programming language"/>
<link wikidata="Q189224" start="10951" end="10961" title="Pseudocode" label="Pseudocode"/>
<link wikidata="Q1296251" start="11116" end="11138" title="algorithmic efficiency" label="algorithmic efficiency"/>
<link wikidata="Q816747" start="11572" end="11581" title="Benchmark (computing)" label="Benchmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q623950" start="11943" end="11946" title="Fast Fourier transform" label="FFT"/>
<link wikidata="Q671298" start="12565" end="12583" title="divide-and-conquer algorithm" label="divide-and-conquer"/>
<link wikidata="Q380679" start="12587" end="12606" title="dynamic programming" label="dynamic programming"/>
<link wikidata="Q194292" start="12614" end="12632" title="operation research" label="operation research"/>
<link wikidata="Q269878" start="12923" end="12937" title="big O notation" label="big O notation"/>
<link wikidata="Q309157" start="13076" end="13096" title="Church–Turing thesis" label="Church–Turing thesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q197970" start="13135" end="13150" title="Turing complete" label="Turing complete"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047561" start="13420" end="13434" title="spaghetti code" label="spaghetti code"/>
<link wikidata="Q2635326" start="13676" end="13710" title="Structured program theorem" label="Böhm-Jacopini canonical structures"/>
<link wikidata="Q360812" start="13857" end="13877" title="proof of correctness" label="proofs of correctnes"/>
<link wikidata="Q178377" start="13885" end="13907" title="mathematical induction" label="mathematical induction"/>
<link wikidata="Q5588088" start="14199" end="14219" title="Gottschalk v. Benson" label="Gottschalk v. Benson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5270983" start="14321" end="14337" title="Diamond v. Diehr" label="Diamond v. Diehr"/>
<link wikidata="Q183635" start="14373" end="14381" title="feedback" label="feedback"/>
<link wikidata="Q6714735" start="14416" end="14432" title="synthetic rubber" label="synthetic rubber"/>
<link wikidata="Q2996086" start="14460" end="14481" title="Software patent debate" label="patenting of software"/>
<link wikidata="Q2493" start="14566" end="14582" title="data compression" label="data compression"/>
<link wikidata="Q518016" start="14603" end="14609" title="Unisys" label="Unisys"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14617" end="14627" title="Graphics Interchange Format#Unisys and LZW patent enforcement" label="LZW patent"/>
<link wikidata="Q3733198" start="14703" end="14725" title="export of cryptography" label="export of cryptography"/>
<link wikidata="Q264164" start="14792" end="14811" title="recursive algorithm" label="recursive algorithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q193076" start="14892" end="14914" title="functional programming" label="functional programming"/>
<link wikidata="Q651022" start="14923" end="14932" title="Iteration" label="Iterative"/>
<link wikidata="Q868299" start="14968" end="14972" title="Program loops" label="loop"/>
<link wikidata="Q177929" start="14998" end="15003" title="Stack (data structure)" label="stack"/>
<link wikidata="Q213593" start="15088" end="15102" title="Tower of Hanoi" label="Tower of Hanoi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1087987" start="15513" end="15521" title="parallel algorithm" label="parallel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2835898" start="15525" end="15536" title="distributed algorithm" label="distributed"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064349" start="16297" end="16320" title="Deterministic algorithm" label="Deterministic algorithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q3490301" start="16384" end="16411" title="non-deterministic algorithm" label="non-deterministic algorithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q201413" start="16502" end="16512" title="heuristics" label="heuristics"/>
<link wikidata="Q621751" start="16586" end="16609" title="approximation algorithm" label="approximation algorithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q864457" start="16747" end="16763" title="Knapsack problem" label="Knapsack problem"/>
<link wikidata="Q2623817" start="17079" end="17096" title="Quantum algorithm" label="Quantum algorithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q17995793" start="17126" end="17145" title="quantum computation" label="quantum computation"/>
<link wikidata="Q17995793" start="17255" end="17272" title="Quantum computing" label="Quantum computing"/>
<link wikidata="Q830791" start="17281" end="17302" title="quantum superposition" label="quantum superposition"/>
<link wikidata="Q215675" start="17306" end="17326" title="quantum entanglement" label="quantum entanglement"/>
<link wikidata="Q28455561" start="17428" end="17436" title="algorithmic paradigm" label="paradigm"/>
<link wikidata="Q850362" start="17468" end="17479" title="Brute-force search" label="Brute-force"/>
<link wikidata="Q671298" start="17935" end="17963" title="divide-and-conquer algorithm" label="divide-and-conquer algorithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q179976" start="18045" end="18056" title="recursion" label="recursively"/>
<link wikidata="Q189057" start="18112" end="18125" title="mergesort" label="Merge sorting"/>
<link wikidata="Q243754" start="18698" end="18721" title="binary search algorithm" label="binary search algorithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q718" start="18781" end="18785" title="Chess" label="ches"/>
<link wikidata="Q131476" start="18819" end="18824" title="graph theory" label="graph"/>
<link wikidata="Q907955" start="18829" end="18856" title="graph exploration algorithm" label="graph exploration algorithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q755673" start="18960" end="18976" title="search algorithm" label="search algorithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q897659" start="18979" end="18995" title="branch and bound" label="branch and bound"/>
<link wikidata="Q798554" start="19013" end="19025" title="backtracking" label="backtracking"/>
<link wikidata="Q583461" start="19028" end="19048" title="Randomized algorithm" label="Randomized algorithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q176640" start="19290" end="19300" title="randomness" label="randomness"/>
<link wikidata="Q846354" start="19337" end="19363" title="P (complexity)" label="polynomial time complexity"/>
<link wikidata="Q746242" start="19444" end="19463" title="P versus NP problem" label="P versus NP problem"/>
<link wikidata="Q15238499" start="19515" end="19536" title="Monte Carlo algorithm" label="Monte Carlo algorithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190846" start="19590" end="19592" title="RP (complexity)" label="RP"/>
<link wikidata="Q2393193" start="19630" end="19645" title="polynomial time" label="polynomial time"/>
<link wikidata="Q1241487" start="19649" end="19668" title="Las Vegas algorithm" label="Las Vegas algorithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q136355" start="19765" end="19768" title="Zero-error Probabilistic Polynomial time" label="ZPP"/>
<link wikidata="Q1197709" start="19772" end="19795" title="Reduction (complexity)" label="Reduction of complexity"/>
<link wikidata="Q4812191" start="19896" end="19918" title="asymptotically optimal" label="asymptotically optimal"/>
<link wikidata="Q205084" start="19978" end="19988" title="Computational complexity theory" label="complexity"/>
<link wikidata="Q3252726" start="20060" end="20079" title="selection algorithm" label="selection algorithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1197709" start="20286" end="20307" title="Transform and conquer algorithm" label="transform and conquer"/>
<link wikidata="Q798554" start="20317" end="20330" title="Back tracking" label="Back tracking"/>
<link wikidata="Q984063" start="20513" end="20533" title="optimization problem" label="optimization problem"/>
<link wikidata="Q202843" start="20730" end="20748" title="Linear programming" label="Linear programming"/>
<link wikidata="Q134164" start="21015" end="21032" title="simplex algorithm" label="simplex algorithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q2585642" start="21098" end="21118" title="maximum flow problem" label="maximum flow problem"/>
<link wikidata="Q12503" start="21195" end="21202" title="integer" label="integer"/>
<link wikidata="Q6042592" start="21230" end="21249" title="integer programming" label="integer programming"/>
<link wikidata="Q380679" start="21589" end="21608" title="Dynamic programming" label="Dynamic programming"/>
<link wikidata="Q7113766" start="21744" end="21766" title="overlapping subproblem" label="overlapping subproblem"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047576" start="21951" end="21975" title="Floyd–Warshall algorithm" label="Floyd–Warshall algorithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q141488" start="22041" end="22046" title="graph (discrete mathematics)" label="graph"/>
<link wikidata="Q1376168" start="22148" end="22159" title="memoization" label="memoization"/>
<link wikidata="Q504353" start="22641" end="22657" title="Greedy algorithm" label="Greedy algorithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q845060" start="22962" end="22974" title="local optimum" label="local optima"/>
<link wikidata="Q2647" start="23087" end="23099" title="Huffman coding" label="Huffman Tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q797860" start="23101" end="23108" title="kruskal&amp;#x27;s algorithm" label="Kruskal"/>
<link wikidata="Q470813" start="23110" end="23114" title="Prim&amp;#x27;s algorithm" label="Prim"/>
<link wikidata="Q1468211" start="23116" end="23122" title="Sollin&amp;#x27;s algorithm" label="Sollin"/>
<link wikidata="Q984063" start="23213" end="23233" title="optimization problem" label="optimization problem"/>
<link wikidata="Q1981968" start="23236" end="23255" title="heuristic algorithm" label="heuristic algorithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1868524" start="23644" end="23656" title="local search (optimization)" label="local search"/>
<link wikidata="Q1424540" start="23658" end="23669" title="tabu search" label="tabu search"/>
<link wikidata="Q863783" start="23671" end="23690" title="simulated annealing" label="simulated annealing"/>
<link wikidata="Q187787" start="23696" end="23713" title="genetic algorithm" label="genetic algorithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q621751" start="23939" end="23962" title="approximation algorithm" label="approximation algorithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q189224" start="24803" end="24813" title="pseudocode" label="pseudocode"/>
<link wikidata="Q7191290" start="24817" end="24828" title="pidgin code" label="pidgin code"/>
<link wikidata="Q787114" start="25191" end="25207" title="Abstract machine" label="Abstract machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q188436" start="25210" end="25215" title="ALGOL" label="ALGOL"/>
<link wikidata="Q108685436" start="25218" end="25236" title="Algorithm aversion" label="Algorithm aversion"/>
<link wikidata="Q4724358" start="25239" end="25260" title="Algorithm engineering" label="Algorithm engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q4724354" start="25263" end="25290" title="Algorithm characterizations" label="Algorithm characterizations"/>
<link wikidata="Q45253460" start="25293" end="25309" title="Algorithmic bias" label="Algorithmic bias"/>
<link wikidata="Q1758902" start="25312" end="25335" title="Algorithmic composition" label="Algorithmic composition"/>
<link wikidata="Q55080318" start="25338" end="25358" title="Algorithmic entities" label="Algorithmic entities"/>
<link wikidata="Q5754574" start="25361" end="25382" title="Algorithmic synthesis" label="Algorithmic synthesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q65085387" start="25385" end="25406" title="Algorithmic technique" label="Algorithmic technique"/>
<link wikidata="Q4129926" start="25409" end="25429" title="Algorithmic topology" label="Algorithmic topology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1122491" start="25432" end="25457" title="Computational mathematics" label="Computational mathematics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1569381" start="25460" end="25483" title="Garbage in, garbage out" label="Garbage in, garbage out"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141518" start="25492" end="25518" title="Introduction to Algorithms" label="Introduction to Algorithms"/>
<link wikidata="Q96379788" start="25538" end="25561" title="Government by algorithm" label="Government by algorithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1514868" start="25564" end="25582" title="List of algorithms" label="List of algorithms"/>
<link wikidata="Q4435555" start="25585" end="25617" title="List of algorithm general topics" label="List of algorithm general topics"/>
<link wikidata="Q717791" start="25620" end="25641" title="Medium is the message" label="Medium is the message"/>
<link wikidata="Q96401464" start="25644" end="25668" title="Regulation of algorithms" label="Regulation of algorithms"/>
<link wikidata="Q844718" start="25671" end="25692" title="Theory of computation" label="Theory of computation"/>
<link wikidata="Q818930" start="25696" end="25716" title="Computability theory" label="Computability theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q205084" start="25720" end="25751" title="Computational complexity theory" label="Computational complexity theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q5185878" start="26129" end="26138" title="Cris Moore" label="Moore, C."/>
<link wikidata="Q41390" start="26866" end="26871" title="Gödel" label="Gödel"/>
<link wikidata="Q92741" start="26873" end="26886" title="Alonzo Church" label="Alonzo Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q7251" start="26888" end="26894" title="Alan Turing" label="Turing"/>
<link wikidata="Q332905" start="26896" end="26902" title="J. Barkley Rosser" label="Rosser"/>
<link wikidata="Q335148" start="26904" end="26910" title="Kleene" label="Kleene"/>
<link wikidata="Q351366" start="26916" end="26925" title="Emil Post" label="Emil Post"/>
<link wikidata="Q9047" start="27044" end="27051" title="Gottfried Leibniz" label="Leibniz"/>
<link wikidata="Q134661" start="27053" end="27058" title="George Boole" label="Boole"/>
<link wikidata="Q60028" start="27060" end="27065" title="Gottlob Frege" label="Frege"/>
<link wikidata="Q76420" start="27067" end="27073" title="Georg Cantor" label="Cantor"/>
<link wikidata="Q41585" start="27075" end="27082" title="David Hilbert" label="Hilbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q17455" start="27106" end="27117" title="John von Neumann" label="von Neumann"/>
<link wikidata="Q310833" start="27167" end="27188" title="Joseph-Marie Jacquard" label="Joseph-Marie Jacquard"/>
<link wikidata="Q46633" start="27190" end="27197" title="Babbage" label="Babbage"/>
<link wikidata="Q7259" start="27199" end="27211" title="Ada Lovelace" label="Ada Lovelace"/>
<link wikidata="Q92760" start="27213" end="27227" title="Claude Shannon" label="Claude Shannon"/>
<link wikidata="Q299723" start="27229" end="27241" title="Howard Aiken" label="Howard Aiken"/>
<link wikidata="Q8061506" start="27258" end="27271" title="Yuri Gurevich" label="Yuri Gurevich"/>
<link wikidata="Q309157" start="28362" end="28375" title="Church thesis" label="Church thesis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="28532" end="28543" title="A.A. Markov" label="A.A. Markov"/>
<link wikidata="Q309157" start="29629" end="29649" title="Church–Turing thesis" label="Church–Turing thesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1459541" start="30734" end="30775" title="United States Patent and Trademark Office" label="United States Patent and Trademark Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q17457" start="31260" end="31276" title="Donald Knuth" label="Knuth, Donald E."/>
<link wikidata="Q176691" start="31641" end="31687" title="National Institute of Standards and Technology" label="National Institute of Standards and Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q969850" start="31754" end="31797" title="State University of New York at Stony Brook" label="State University of New York at Stony Brook"/>
<link wikidata="Q127992" start="31834" end="31870" title="Association for Computing Machinery" label="Associations for Computing Machinery"/>
<link wikidata="Q41506" start="31898" end="31917" title="Stanford University" label="Stanford University"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="777" wikidata="Q192691" url="?curid=777" title="Annual plant">
<text>An annual plant is a plant that completes its life cycle, from germination to the production of seeds, within one growing season, and then dies. Globally, 6% of all plant species and 15% of herbaceous plants (excluding trees and shrubs) are annuals. The annual life cycle has independently emerged in over 120 different plant families throughout the entire angiosperm phylogeny.

== The evolutionary and ecological drivers of the annual life cycle ==
Traditionally, there has been a prevailing assumption that annuals have evolved from perennial ancestors. However, recent research challenges this notion, revealing instances where perennials have evolved from annual ancestors. Intriguingly, models propose that transition rates from an annual to a perennial life cycle are twice as fast as the reverse transition.

The life-history theory posits that annual plants are favored when adult mortality is higher than seedling (or seed) mortality, i.e., annuals will dominate environments with disturbances or high temporal variability, reducing adult survival. This hypothesis finds support in observations of increased prevalence of annuals in regions with hot-dry summers, with elevated adult mortality and high seed persistence. Furthermore, the evolution of the annual life cycle under hot-dry summer in different families makes it one of the best examples of convergent evolution. Additionally, annual prevalence is also positively affected by year-to-year variability.

Globally, the prevalence of annual plants shows an upward trend with an increasing human footprint. Moreover, domestic grazing has been identified as contributing to the heightened abundance of annuals in grasslands. Disturbances linked to activities like grazing and agriculture, particularly following European settlement, have facilitated the invasion of annual species from Europe and Asia into the New World.

In various ecosystems, the dominance of annual plants is often a temporary phase during secondary succession, particularly in the aftermath of disturbances. For instance, after fields are abandoned, annuals may initially colonize them but are eventually replaced by long-lived species. However, in certain Mediterranean systems, a unique scenario unfolds: when annuals establish dominance, perennials do not necessarily supplant them. This peculiarity is attributed to alternative stable states in the system—both annual dominance and perennial states prove stable, with the ultimate system state dependent on the initial conditions.

== Traits of annuals and their implication for agriculture ==
Annual plants commonly exhibit a higher growth rate, allocate more resources to seeds, and allocate fewer resources to roots than perennials. In contrast to perennials, which feature long-lived plants and short-lived seeds, annual plants compensate for their lower longevity by maintaining a higher persistence of soil seed banks. These differences in life history strategies profoundly affect ecosystem functioning and services. For instance, annuals, by allocating less resources belowground, play a more minor role in reducing erosion, storing organic carbon, and achieving lower nutrient- and water-use efficiencies than perennials.

The distinctions between annual and perennial plants are notably evident in agricultural contexts. Despite constituting a minor part of global biomass, annual species stand out as the primary food source for humankind, likely owing to their greater allocation of resources to seed production, thereby enhancing agricultural productivity. In the Anthropocene epoch, marked by human impact on the environment, there has been a substantial increase in the global cover of annuals. This shift is primarily attributed to the conversion of natural systems, often dominated by perennials, into annual cropland. Currently, annual plants cover approximately 70% of croplands and contribute to around 80% of worldwide food consumption.

==Molecular genetics==
In 2008, it was discovered that the inactivation of only two genes in one species of annual plant leads to its conversion into a perennial plant. Researchers deactivated the SOC1 and FUL genes (which control flowering time) of &quot;Arabidopsis thaliana&quot;. This switch established phenotypes common in perennial plants, such as wood formation.

==See also==
*
* - Plant that flowers &amp; sets seeds once, then dies.
*Ephemeral plant

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q192691" start="3" end="15" title="Annual plant" label="annual plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q513359" start="46" end="56" title="biological life cycle" label="life cycle"/>
<link wikidata="Q193838" start="63" end="74" title="germination" label="germination"/>
<link wikidata="Q40763" start="96" end="100" title="seed" label="seed"/>
<link wikidata="Q732240" start="114" end="128" title="growing season" label="growing season"/>
<link wikidata="Q25314" start="357" end="367" title="Flowering plant" label="angiosperm"/>
<link wikidata="Q157957" start="536" end="545" title="perennial" label="perennial"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139127" start="821" end="840" title="Life history theory" label="life-history theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q200312" start="1362" end="1382" title="convergent evolution" label="convergent evolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q188230" start="1987" end="1997" title="Ecological succession" label="succession"/>
<link wikidata="Q4736552" start="2358" end="2382" title="alternative stable state" label="alternative stable state"/>
<link wikidata="Q1209176" start="2900" end="2915" title="Soil seed bank" label="soil seed banks"/>
<link wikidata="Q157957" start="4103" end="4118" title="perennial plant" label="perennial plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q158695" start="4207" end="4227" title="Arabidopsis thaliana" label="Arabidopsis thaliana"/>
<link wikidata="Q104053" start="4259" end="4269" title="phenotypes" label="phenotypes"/>
<link wikidata="Q287" start="4306" end="4310" title="wood" label="wood"/>
<link wikidata="Q927110" start="4396" end="4411" title="Ephemeral plant" label="Ephemeral plant"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="779" wikidata="Q1425109" url="?curid=779" title="Anthophyta">
<text>The anthophytes are a paraphyletic grouping of plant taxa bearing flower-like reproductive structures. The group, once thought to be a clade, contained the angiosperms – the extant flowering plants, such as roses and grasses – as well as the Gnetales and the extinct Bennettitales.

Detailed morphological and molecular studies have shown that the group is not actually monophyletic, with proposed floral homologies of the gnetophytes and the angiosperms having evolved in parallel. This makes it easier to reconcile molecular clock data that suggests that the angiosperms diverged from the gymnosperms around 320-300 mya.

Some more recent studies have used the word anthophyte to describe a hypothetical group which includes the angiosperms and a variety of extinct seed plant groups (with various suggestions including at least some of the following groups: glossopterids, corystosperms, Petriellales Pentoxylales, Bennettitales and Caytoniales), but not the Gnetales.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1425109" start="4" end="15" title="Anthophyta" label="anthophytes"/>
<link wikidata="Q208755" start="22" end="34" title="paraphyletic" label="paraphyletic"/>
<link wikidata="Q713623" start="135" end="140" title="clade" label="clade"/>
<link wikidata="Q25314" start="156" end="167" title="Flowering plant" label="angiosperms"/>
<link wikidata="Q46299" start="207" end="212" title="Rosaceae" label="roses"/>
<link wikidata="Q43238" start="217" end="224" title="Poaceae" label="grasses"/>
<link wikidata="Q309147" start="242" end="250" title="Gnetales" label="Gnetales"/>
<link wikidata="Q132823" start="267" end="280" title="Bennettitales" label="Bennettitales"/>
<link wikidata="Q210958" start="370" end="382" title="monophyletic" label="monophyletic"/>
<link wikidata="Q309147" start="423" end="433" title="gnetophyte" label="gnetophyte"/>
<link wikidata="Q25314" start="443" end="453" title="angiosperm" label="angiosperm"/>
<link wikidata="Q133712" start="591" end="601" title="gymnosperm" label="gymnosperm"/>
<link wikidata="Q138456" start="861" end="874" title="Glossopteridales" label="glossopterids"/>
<link wikidata="Q21588008" start="876" end="889" title="Corystospermaceae" label="corystosperms"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="891" end="903" title="Petriellales" label="Petriellales"/>
<link wikidata="Q35135259" start="904" end="916" title="Pentoxylales" label="Pentoxylales"/>
<link wikidata="Q132823" start="918" end="931" title="Bennettitales" label="Bennettitales"/>
<link wikidata="Q148539" start="936" end="947" title="Caytoniales" label="Caytoniales"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="780" wikidata="Q102520" url="?curid=780" title="Atlas (disambiguation)">
<text>An [[atlas]] is a collection of maps.

Atlas may also refer to:

==Arts, entertainment and media==

===Fictional characters===
* Atlas (DC Comics), several fictional characters
* Atlas (&quot;Teen Titans&quot;)
* Atlas, an &quot;Astro Boy&quot; (1980) character
* Atlas (&quot;BioShock&quot;)
* Atlas, a BattleMech in the &quot;BattleTech&quot; universe
* Atlas, an antagonist in &quot;Mega Man ZX Advent&quot;
* Atlas, a &quot;Portal 2&quot; character
* Atlas, a &quot;PS238&quot; character
* Erik Josten, a.k.a. Atlas, a Marvel Comics supervillain
* The Atlas, a strong driving force from &quot;No Man&#x27;s Sky&quot;

===Literature===
* &quot;Atlas&quot;, a photography book by Gerhard Richter
* &quot;The Atlas&quot; (novel), by William T. Vollmann
* &quot;Atlas&quot; (magazine)
* &quot;The Atlas&quot; (newspaper), published in England from 1826 to 1869

===Music===
====Bands====
* Atlas (band), a New Zealand rock band

====Albums====
* &quot;Atlas&quot; (Kinky album)
* &quot;Atlas&quot; (Laurel Halo album)
* &quot;Atlas&quot; (Parkway Drive album)
* &quot;Atlas&quot; (Real Estate album)
* &quot;Atlas&quot; (RÜFÜS album)
* &quot;Atlas&quot; (The Score album)

====Opera====
* &quot;Atlas&quot; (opera), 1991, by Meredith Monk
**&quot;&quot;, a 1993 recording of Monk&#x27;s opera

====Songs====
* &quot;Atlas&quot; (Battles song), 2007
* &quot;Atlas&quot; (Bicep song), 2020
* &quot;Atlas&quot; (Coldplay song), 2013
* &quot;Atlas&quot;, by Delphic
*&quot;Atlas&quot;, from the album &quot;The Tide, the Thief &amp; River&#x27;s End&quot; by Caligula&#x27;s Horse
* &quot;Atlas&quot;, by Parkway Drive
* &quot;Atlas&quot;, from &quot;Man Overboard&quot; by Man Overboard
* &quot;Atlas&quot;, by Jake Chudnow, used as the main theme in the YouTube series &quot;Mind Field&quot;
* “Atlas”, by Coheed and Cambria
* “Atlas”, by Good Kid

===Gaming===
* &quot;The Atlas&quot; (video game), a 1991 multiplatform strategy video game
* &quot;Atlas&quot; (video game), a massively-multiplayer online video game released for early access in 2018
* Atlas Corporation, an arms manufacturer in the video game series &quot;Borderlands&quot;
* Atlas Corporation, a private military company in the video game &quot;Call of Duty: Advanced Warfare&quot;

===Other uses in arts, entertainment and media===
* &quot;Atlas&quot; (1961 film), an action-adventure film
* &quot;Atlas&quot; (2024 film), an American science fiction thriller film
* &quot;Atlas&quot; (comic book series), by Dylan Horrocks
* &quot;Atlas&quot; (statue), a statue by Lee Lawrie in Rockefeller Center

==Businesses and organizations==
* Atlas Air, an American cargo airline
* Atlas Aircraft, a 1940s aircraft manufacturer
* Atlas Aviation, an aircraft maintenance firm
* Atlas Blue, a Moroccan low-cost airline
* Atlas (appliance company), in Belarus
* Atlas Car and Manufacturing Company, a locomotive manufacturer
* Atlas Comics (1950s), a publisher
* Atlas/Seaboard Comics, a 1970s line of comics
* Atlas Consortium, a group of technology companies
* Atlas Copco, a Swedish company founded in 1873
* Atlas Corporation, an investment company
* Atlas Drop Forge Company, a parts subsidiary of REO Motor Car Company
* Atlas Elektronik, a German naval/marine electronics and systems business
* Atlas Entertainment, a film production company
* Atlas Group, a Pakistani business group
* Atlas Media Corp., a non-fiction entertainment company
* Atlas Aircraft Corporation, a South African military aircraft manufacturer
* Atlas Model Railroad, American maker of model trains and accessories
* Atlas Network, formerly Atlas Economic Research Foundation
* Atlas Powder Company, an American explosives and chemicals company
* Atlas Press, a UK publisher
* Atlas Press (tool company)
* Atlas (restaurant), a Michelin-starred restaurant in Atlanta
* Atlas Solutions, an online advertising subsidiary of Meta Platforms
* Atlas Van Lines, a moving company
* Atlas Werke, a defunct German shipbuilding company
* RTV Atlas, a broadcaster in Montenegro

==Military==
* Airbus A400M Atlas, a military aircraft produced since 2007
* Armstrong Whitworth Atlas, a British military aircraft produced 1927–1933
* HMLAT-303, a United States Marine Corps helicopter training squadron
* Atlas Aircraft Corporation, a South African military aircraft manufacturer
* French ship &quot;Atlas&quot;, several French Navy ships
* HMS &quot;Atlas&quot;, several Royal Navy ships
* USS &quot;Atlas&quot;, several U.S. Navy ships
* ATLAS (simulation) (Army Tactical Level Advanced Simulation), a Thai military system

==Mythological and legendary figures==
* Atlas (mythology), a Titan in ancient Greek mythology
* Atlas of Atlantis, the first legendary king of Atlantis
* Atlas of Mauretania, a legendary king

==People==
* Atlas (name), including lists of people with the given name or surname
* Atlas (graffiti artist) 

==Places==
===United States===
* Atlas, Illinois
* Atlas, Texas
* Atlas, West Virginia
* Atlas, Wisconsin
* Atlas District, in Washington, D.C.
* Atlas Peak AVA, a California wine region
* Atlas Township, Michigan

===Other places===
* Atlas Cinema, a historic movie theatre in Istanbul, Turkey
* Atlas Mountains, a set of mountain ranges in northwestern Africa
* Atlas, Nilüfer, a village in Bursa Province, Turkey

==Science and technology==
===Astronomy===
* Atlas (comet) (C/2019 Y4)
* Atlas (crater), on the near side of the Moon
* Atlas (moon), a satellite of Saturn
* Atlas (star), a triple star system in the constellation of Taurus and a member of the Pleiades
* Advanced Topographic Laser Altimeter System (ATLAS), a space-based lidar instrument on ICESat-2
* Asteroid Terrestrial-impact Last Alert System (ATLAS)

===Computing===
* Atlas (computer), a 1960s supercomputer
** Atlas Supervisor, its operating system
* Atlas (robot)
* ATLAS (software), a tool to scan American citizenship records for candidates for denaturalization
* Atlas, a computer used at the Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory in 2006
* Abbreviated Test Language for All Systems (ATLAS), a computer language for equipment testing
* Advanced Technology Leisure Application Simulator (ATLAS), a hydraulic motion simulator used in theme parks
* ASP.NET AJAX (formerly &quot;Atlas&quot;), a set of ASP.NET extensions
* ATLAS Transformation Language, a programming language for model transformation
* Atlas.ti, a qualitative analysis program
* Automatically Tuned Linear Algebra Software (ATLAS)
* Texture atlas, in computer graphics, a large image containing multiple smaller images
* UNIVAC 1101, a 1950s American computer

===Mathematics===
* Atlas (topology), a set of charts
** A set of charts which covers a manifold
* A smooth structure, a maximal smooth atlas for a topological manifold

===Physics===
* Argonne Tandem Linear Accelerator System (ATLAS), at the Argonne National Laboratory
* ATLAS experiment, a particle detector for the Large Hadron Collider at CERN
* Atomic-terrace low-angle shadowing (ATLAS), a nanofabrication technique

===Biology and healthcare===
* Atlas (anatomy), a vertebra in the cervical spine
* Atlas personality, the personality of someone whose childhood was characterized by excessive responsibilities

====Animals and plants====
* Atlas bear
* Atlas beetle
* Atlas cedar
* Atlas moth
* Atlas pied flycatcher, a bird
* Atlas turtle
* Atlas, a book about flora and/or fauna of a region, such as atlases of the flora and fauna of Britain and Ireland

==Sport==
* Atlas Delmenhorst, a German association football club
* Atlas F.C., a Mexican professional football club
* Club Atlético Atlas, an Argentine amateur football club
* KK Atlas, a former Serbian men&#x27;s professional basketball club

==Transport==

===Aerospace===
* Atlas (rocket family)
* SM-65 Atlas intercontinental ballistic missile (ICBM)
* AeroVelo Atlas, a human-powered helicopter
* Birdman Atlas, an ultralight aircraft
* La Mouette Atlas, a French hang glider design

===Automotive===
* Atlas (1951 automobile), a French mini-car
* Atlas (light trucks), a Greek motor vehicle manufacturer
* Atlas (Pittsburgh automobile), produced 1906–1907
* Atlas (Springfield automobile), produced 1907–1913
* Atlas, a British van by the Standard Motor Company produced 1958–1962
* Atlas Motor Buggy, an American highwheeler produced in 1909
* Ford Atlas, a concept pickup truck that previewed the then-new 2015 F-150
* Geely Atlas, a sport utility vehicle
* General Motors Atlas engine
* Honda Atlas Cars Pakistan, a car manufacturer
* Nissan Atlas, a Japanese light truck
* Volkswagen Atlas, a sport utility vehicle

===Ships and boats===
* &quot;Atlas&quot; (ship), various merchant ships
* ST &quot;Atlas&quot;, a Swedish tugboat

===Trains===
* Atlas, an 1863–1885 South Devon Railway Dido class locomotive
* Atlas, a 1927–1962 LMS Royal Scot Class locomotive

==Other uses==
* Atlas (architecture)
* Atlas (storm), which hit the Midwestern United States in October 2013
* Agrupación de Trabajadores Latinoamericanos Sindicalistas (ATLAS), a 1950s Latin American trade union confederation
* Atlas languages, Berber languages spoken in the Atlas Mountains of Morocco
* ATLAS Network, a network of European special police units
* Atlas power station, İskenderun, Hatay Province, Turkey
* Atlas Uranium Mill, Moab, Utah, United States
* Atlas folio, a book size

==See also==
* Altas (disambiguation)
* AtlasGlobal, a former Turkish airline
* Atlas-Imperial, an American diesel engine manufacturer
* Atlas Mara Limited, formerly Atlas Mara Co-Nvest Limited, a financial holding company that owns banks in Africa
* Dresser Atlas, a provider of oilfield and factory automation services
* Tele Atlas, a Dutch mapping company
* Western Atlas, an oilfield services company
* Brain atlas, a neuroanatomical map of the brain of a human or other animal
* Black Atlass, a Canadian musician
* Advanced Technology Large-Aperture Space Telescope (ATLAST)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q102520" start="3" end="12" title="Atlas (disambiguation)" label="[[atlas]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q102520" start="39" end="44" title="Atlas (disambiguation)" label="Atlas"/>
<link wikidata="Q3628247" start="129" end="146" title="Atlas (DC Comics)" label="Atlas (DC Comics)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6599164" start="179" end="210" title="Atlas (Teen Titans)" label="Atlas (&amp;quot;Teen Titans&amp;quot;)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="223" end="261" title="Astro Boy (1980 TV series)#Atlas" label="&amp;quot;Astro Boy&amp;quot; (1980) character"/>
<link wikidata="Q6371889" start="264" end="292" title="Atlas (BioShock)" label="Atlas (&amp;quot;BioShock&amp;quot;)"/>
<link wikidata="Q810983" start="304" end="314" title="BattleMech" label="BattleMech"/>
<link wikidata="Q2452472" start="386" end="404" title="Mega Man ZX Advent" label="Mega Man ZX Advent"/>
<link wikidata="Q279446" start="428" end="436" title="Portal 2" label="Portal 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q7120564" start="470" end="475" title="PS238" label="PS238"/>
<link wikidata="Q1172694" start="494" end="505" title="Erik Josten" label="Erik Josten"/>
<link wikidata="Q15297043" start="597" end="614" title="No Man&amp;#x27;s Sky" label="No Man&amp;#x27;s Sky"/>
<link wikidata="Q164351" start="682" end="697" title="Gerhard Richter" label="Gerhard Richter"/>
<link wikidata="Q7714814" start="700" end="729" title="The Atlas (novel)" label="&amp;quot;The Atlas&amp;quot; (novel)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4816781" start="756" end="784" title="Atlas (magazine)" label="&amp;quot;Atlas&amp;quot; (magazine)"/>
<link wikidata="Q28001508" start="787" end="820" title="The Atlas (newspaper)" label="&amp;quot;The Atlas&amp;quot; (newspaper)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4816778" start="890" end="902" title="Atlas (band)" label="Atlas (band)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4816771" start="946" end="977" title="Atlas (Kinky album)" label="&amp;quot;Atlas&amp;quot; (Kinky album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q122909207" start="980" end="1017" title="Atlas (Laurel Halo album)" label="&amp;quot;Atlas&amp;quot; (Laurel Halo album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2782804" start="1020" end="1059" title="Atlas (Parkway Drive album)" label="&amp;quot;Atlas&amp;quot; (Parkway Drive album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q16242741" start="1062" end="1099" title="Atlas (Real Estate album)" label="&amp;quot;Atlas&amp;quot; (Real Estate album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q16242745" start="1102" end="1133" title="Atlas (RÜFÜS album)" label="&amp;quot;Atlas&amp;quot; (RÜFÜS album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q21189752" start="1136" end="1171" title="Atlas (The Score album)" label="&amp;quot;Atlas&amp;quot; (The Score album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q16962879" start="1189" end="1214" title="Atlas (opera)" label="&amp;quot;Atlas&amp;quot; (opera)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3628246" start="1310" end="1342" title="Atlas (Battles song)" label="&amp;quot;Atlas&amp;quot; (Battles song)"/>
<link wikidata="Q111953389" start="1351" end="1381" title="Atlas (Bicep song)" label="&amp;quot;Atlas&amp;quot; (Bicep song)"/>
<link wikidata="Q14846927" start="1390" end="1423" title="Atlas (Coldplay song)" label="&amp;quot;Atlas&amp;quot; (Coldplay song)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1184632" start="1454" end="1461" title="Delphic (band)" label="Delphic"/>
<link wikidata="Q24037388" start="1503" end="1545" title="The Tide, the Thief &amp;amp; River&amp;#x27;s End" label="The Tide, the Thief &amp;amp; River&amp;#x27;s End"/>
<link wikidata="Q282855" start="1601" end="1614" title="Parkway Drive" label="Parkway Drive"/>
<link wikidata="Q6746246" start="1647" end="1660" title="Man Overboard (Man Overboard album)" label="Man Overboard"/>
<link wikidata="Q30587910" start="1773" end="1783" title="Mind Field" label="Mind Field"/>
<link wikidata="Q4299" start="1804" end="1822" title="Coheed and Cambria" label="Coheed and Cambria"/>
<link wikidata="Q108492453" start="1837" end="1845" title="Good Kid" label="Good Kid"/>
<link wikidata="Q7714815" start="1862" end="1896" title="The Atlas (video game)" label="&amp;quot;The Atlas&amp;quot; (video game)"/>
<link wikidata="Q65227402" start="1941" end="1971" title="Atlas (video game)" label="&amp;quot;Atlas&amp;quot; (video game)"/>
<link wikidata="Q16820462" start="2122" end="2133" title="Borderlands (series)" label="Borderlands"/>
<link wikidata="" start="2212" end="2242" title="Call of Duty: Advanced Warfare" label="Call of Duty: Advanced Warfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q3628243" start="2302" end="2331" title="Atlas (1961 film)" label="&amp;quot;Atlas&amp;quot; (1961 film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q115474889" start="2360" end="2389" title="Atlas (2024 film)" label="&amp;quot;Atlas&amp;quot; (2024 film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4816768" start="2435" end="2472" title="Atlas (comic book series)" label="&amp;quot;Atlas&amp;quot; (comic book series)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2869431" start="2494" end="2520" title="Atlas (statue)" label="&amp;quot;Atlas&amp;quot; (statue)"/>
<link wikidata="Q757135" start="2603" end="2612" title="Atlas Air" label="Atlas Air"/>
<link wikidata="Q4816784" start="2642" end="2656" title="Atlas Aircraft" label="Atlas Aircraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q4816785" start="2690" end="2704" title="Atlas Aviation" label="Atlas Aviation"/>
<link wikidata="Q757153" start="2737" end="2747" title="Atlas Blue" label="Atlas Blue"/>
<link wikidata="Q4295217" start="2779" end="2804" title="Atlas (appliance company)" label="Atlas (appliance company)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4816791" start="2819" end="2854" title="Atlas Car and Manufacturing Company" label="Atlas Car and Manufacturing Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q2869434" start="2884" end="2904" title="Atlas Comics (1950s)" label="Atlas Comics (1950s)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3628245" start="2920" end="2941" title="Atlas/Seaboard Comics" label="Atlas/Seaboard Comics"/>
<link wikidata="Q4816796" start="2968" end="2984" title="Atlas Consortium" label="Atlas Consortium"/>
<link wikidata="Q757164" start="3020" end="3031" title="Atlas Copco" label="Atlas Copco"/>
<link wikidata="Q4034542" start="3069" end="3086" title="Atlas Corporation" label="Atlas Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1584348" start="3160" end="3181" title="REO Motor Car Company" label="REO Motor Car Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q176856" start="3184" end="3200" title="Atlas Elektronik" label="Atlas Elektronik"/>
<link wikidata="Q19747898" start="3259" end="3278" title="Atlas Entertainment" label="Atlas Entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q11702583" start="3308" end="3319" title="Atlas Group" label="Atlas Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q4816825" start="3350" end="3367" title="Atlas Media Corp." label="Atlas Media Corp."/>
<link wikidata="Q577703" start="3407" end="3433" title="Atlas Aircraft Corporation" label="Atlas Aircraft Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q757188" start="3484" end="3504" title="Atlas Model Railroad" label="Atlas Model Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q757172" start="3555" end="3568" title="Atlas Network" label="Atlas Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q113499592" start="3616" end="3636" title="Atlas Powder Company" label="Atlas Powder Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q4034541" start="3685" end="3696" title="Atlas Press" label="Atlas Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q4816833" start="3715" end="3741" title="Atlas Press (tool company)" label="Atlas Press (tool company)"/>
<link wikidata="Q123367305" start="3744" end="3762" title="Atlas (restaurant)" label="Atlas (restaurant)"/>
<link wikidata="Q16835072" start="3807" end="3822" title="Atlas Solutions" label="Atlas Solutions"/>
<link wikidata="Q25113005" start="3877" end="3892" title="Atlas Van Lines" label="Atlas Van Lines"/>
<link wikidata="Q2205021" start="3913" end="3924" title="Atlas Werke" label="Atlas Werke"/>
<link wikidata="Q7277892" start="3966" end="3975" title="RTV Atlas" label="RTV Atlas"/>
<link wikidata="Q6496" start="4021" end="4039" title="Airbus A400M Atlas" label="Airbus A400M Atlas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2383789" start="4083" end="4108" title="Armstrong Whitworth Atlas" label="Armstrong Whitworth Atlas"/>
<link wikidata="Q5631070" start="4159" end="4168" title="HMLAT-303" label="HMLAT-303"/>
<link wikidata="Q577703" start="4230" end="4256" title="Atlas Aircraft Corporation" label="Atlas Aircraft Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5502362" start="4307" end="4336" title="French ship Atlas" label="French ship &amp;quot;Atlas&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q3124964" start="4366" end="4387" title="HMS Atlas" label="HMS &amp;quot;Atlas&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q7867482" start="4416" end="4437" title="USS Atlas" label="USS &amp;quot;Atlas&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q2749588" start="4465" end="4483" title="ATLAS (simulation)" label="ATLAS (simulation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q130818" start="4592" end="4609" title="Atlas (mythology)" label="Atlas (mythology)"/>
<link wikidata="Q130818" start="4648" end="4665" title="Atlas of Atlantis" label="Atlas of Atlantis"/>
<link wikidata="Q130818" start="4706" end="4725" title="Atlas of Mauretania" label="Atlas of Mauretania"/>
<link wikidata="Q16420002" start="4758" end="4770" title="Atlas (name)" label="Atlas (name)"/>
<link wikidata="Q104178383" start="4831" end="4854" title="Atlas (graffiti artist)" label="Atlas (graffiti artist)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4816758" start="4890" end="4905" title="Atlas, Illinois" label="Atlas, Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q21196331" start="4908" end="4920" title="Atlas, Texas" label="Atlas, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q4816756" start="4923" end="4943" title="Atlas, West Virginia" label="Atlas, West Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1659624" start="4946" end="4962" title="Atlas, Wisconsin" label="Atlas, Wisconsin"/>
<link wikidata="Q4816799" start="4965" end="4979" title="Atlas District" label="Atlas District"/>
<link wikidata="Q757192" start="5003" end="5017" title="Atlas Peak AVA" label="Atlas Peak AVA"/>
<link wikidata="Q4816850" start="5046" end="5070" title="Atlas Township, Michigan" label="Atlas Township, Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6065720" start="5093" end="5105" title="Atlas Cinema" label="Atlas Cinema"/>
<link wikidata="Q130135" start="5154" end="5169" title="Atlas Mountains" label="Atlas Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q6905143" start="5221" end="5235" title="Atlas, Nilüfer" label="Atlas, Nilüfer"/>
<link wikidata="Q84082435" start="5319" end="5332" title="Atlas (comet)" label="Atlas (comet)"/>
<link wikidata="Q621022" start="5347" end="5361" title="Atlas (crater)" label="Atlas (crater)"/>
<link wikidata="Q17707" start="5394" end="5406" title="Atlas (moon)" label="Atlas (moon)"/>
<link wikidata="Q13427" start="5432" end="5444" title="Atlas (star)" label="Atlas (star)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5969535" start="5616" end="5624" title="ICESat-2" label="ICESat-2"/>
<link wikidata="Q17002475" start="5627" end="5672" title="Asteroid Terrestrial-impact Last Alert System" label="Asteroid Terrestrial-impact Last Alert System"/>
<link wikidata="Q4816782" start="5700" end="5716" title="Atlas (computer)" label="Atlas (computer)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5710907" start="5743" end="5759" title="Atlas Supervisor" label="Atlas Supervisor"/>
<link wikidata="Q14248859" start="5784" end="5797" title="Atlas (robot)" label="Atlas (robot)"/>
<link wikidata="Q778223" start="5800" end="5816" title="ATLAS (software)" label="ATLAS (software)"/>
<link wikidata="Q519826" start="5930" end="5968" title="Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory" label="Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory"/>
<link wikidata="Q2560076" start="5979" end="6020" title="Abbreviated Test Language for All Systems" label="Abbreviated Test Language for All Systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q4686306" start="6074" end="6123" title="Advanced Technology Leisure Application Simulator" label="Advanced Technology Leisure Application Simulator"/>
<link wikidata="Q2578643" start="6184" end="6196" title="ASP.NET AJAX" label="ASP.NET AJAX"/>
<link wikidata="Q667812" start="6257" end="6286" title="ATLAS Transformation Language" label="ATLAS Transformation Language"/>
<link wikidata="Q3628244" start="6338" end="6346" title="Atlas.ti" label="Atlas.ti"/>
<link wikidata="Q456344" start="6381" end="6424" title="Automatically Tuned Linear Algebra Software" label="Automatically Tuned Linear Algebra Software"/>
<link wikidata="Q7708528" start="6435" end="6448" title="Texture atlas" label="Texture atlas"/>
<link wikidata="Q532714" start="6523" end="6534" title="UNIVAC 1101" label="UNIVAC 1101"/>
<link wikidata="Q1303310" start="6583" end="6599" title="Atlas (topology)" label="Atlas (topology)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6622" end="6659" title="Manifold#Atlases" label="set of charts which covers a manifold"/>
<link wikidata="Q7546440" start="6664" end="6680" title="smooth structure" label="smooth structure"/>
<link wikidata="Q4789690" start="6749" end="6789" title="Argonne Tandem Linear Accelerator System" label="Argonne Tandem Linear Accelerator System"/>
<link wikidata="Q299002" start="6836" end="6852" title="ATLAS experiment" label="ATLAS experiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q4817239" start="6914" end="6948" title="Atomic-terrace low-angle shadowing" label="Atomic-terrace low-angle shadowing"/>
<link wikidata="Q655357" start="7018" end="7033" title="Atlas (anatomy)" label="Atlas (anatomy)"/>
<link wikidata="Q42417338" start="7070" end="7087" title="Atlas personality" label="Atlas personality"/>
<link wikidata="Q695431" start="7210" end="7220" title="Atlas bear" label="Atlas bear"/>
<link wikidata="Q1340892" start="7223" end="7235" title="Atlas beetle" label="Atlas beetle"/>
<link wikidata="Q623489" start="7238" end="7249" title="Atlas cedar" label="Atlas cedar"/>
<link wikidata="Q167435" start="7252" end="7262" title="Atlas moth" label="Atlas moth"/>
<link wikidata="Q2225944" start="7265" end="7286" title="Atlas pied flycatcher" label="Atlas pied flycatcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q19848678" start="7297" end="7309" title="Atlas turtle" label="Atlas turtle"/>
<link wikidata="Q4816871" start="7372" end="7425" title="atlases of the flora and fauna of Britain and Ireland" label="atlases of the flora and fauna of Britain and Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q757170" start="7439" end="7456" title="Atlas Delmenhorst" label="Atlas Delmenhorst"/>
<link wikidata="Q1023532" start="7495" end="7505" title="Atlas F.C." label="Atlas F.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q3301126" start="7546" end="7565" title="Club Atlético Atlas" label="Club Atlético Atlas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2350779" start="7604" end="7612" title="KK Atlas" label="KK Atlas"/>
<link wikidata="Q22949" start="7705" end="7726" title="Atlas (rocket family)" label="Atlas (rocket family)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7578232" start="7729" end="7740" title="SM-65 Atlas" label="SM-65 Atlas"/>
<link wikidata="Q13894311" start="7785" end="7799" title="AeroVelo Atlas" label="AeroVelo Atlas"/>
<link wikidata="Q4916019" start="7830" end="7843" title="Birdman Atlas" label="Birdman Atlas"/>
<link wikidata="Q17145737" start="7870" end="7886" title="La Mouette Atlas" label="La Mouette Atlas"/>
<link wikidata="Q757048" start="7936" end="7959" title="Atlas (1951 automobile)" label="Atlas (1951 automobile)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4816779" start="7981" end="8001" title="Atlas (light trucks)" label="Atlas (light trucks)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4816773" start="8040" end="8069" title="Atlas (Pittsburgh automobile)" label="Atlas (Pittsburgh automobile)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4816774" start="8092" end="8122" title="Atlas (Springfield automobile)" label="Atlas (Springfield automobile)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1522049" start="8173" end="8195" title="Standard Motor Company" label="Standard Motor Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q4816828" start="8217" end="8234" title="Atlas Motor Buggy" label="Atlas Motor Buggy"/>
<link wikidata="Q16993631" start="8279" end="8289" title="Ford Atlas" label="Ford Atlas"/>
<link wikidata="Q50135075" start="8355" end="8366" title="Geely Atlas" label="Geely Atlas"/>
<link wikidata="Q5513828" start="8394" end="8421" title="General Motors Atlas engine" label="General Motors Atlas engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q5892142" start="8424" end="8449" title="Honda Atlas Cars Pakistan" label="Honda Atlas Cars Pakistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q257673" start="8472" end="8484" title="Nissan Atlas" label="Nissan Atlas"/>
<link wikidata="Q27765737" start="8511" end="8527" title="Volkswagen Atlas" label="Volkswagen Atlas"/>
<link wikidata="Q16479773" start="8578" end="8602" title="Atlas (ship)" label="&amp;quot;Atlas&amp;quot; (ship)"/>
<link wikidata="Q22293737" start="8629" end="8649" title="ST Atlas" label="ST &amp;quot;Atlas&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q7567047" start="8705" end="8735" title="South Devon Railway Dido class" label="South Devon Railway Dido class"/>
<link wikidata="Q12061344" start="8768" end="8788" title="LMS Royal Scot Class" label="LMS Royal Scot Class"/>
<link wikidata="Q756079" start="8818" end="8838" title="Atlas (architecture)" label="Atlas (architecture)"/>
<link wikidata="Q15614828" start="8841" end="8854" title="Atlas (storm)" label="Atlas (storm)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4694405" start="8913" end="8970" title="Agrupación de Trabajadores Latinoamericanos Sindicalistas" label="Agrupación de Trabajadores Latinoamericanos Sindicalistas"/>
<link wikidata="Q3123021" start="9031" end="9046" title="Atlas languages" label="Atlas languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q757030" start="9108" end="9121" title="ATLAS Network" label="ATLAS Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q97613608" start="9168" end="9187" title="Atlas power station" label="Atlas power station"/>
<link wikidata="Q6886327" start="9226" end="9244" title="Atlas Uranium Mill" label="Atlas Uranium Mill"/>
<link wikidata="Q18602566" start="9289" end="9298" title="book size" label="book size"/>
<link wikidata="Q104840891" start="9315" end="9337" title="Altas (disambiguation)" label="Altas (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q757295" start="9340" end="9351" title="AtlasGlobal" label="AtlasGlobal"/>
<link wikidata="Q4816760" start="9380" end="9394" title="Atlas-Imperial" label="Atlas-Imperial"/>
<link wikidata="Q17513924" start="9437" end="9455" title="Atlas Mara Limited" label="Atlas Mara Limited"/>
<link wikidata="Q1258651" start="9551" end="9564" title="Dresser Atlas" label="Dresser Atlas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1865306" start="9623" end="9633" title="Tele Atlas" label="Tele Atlas"/>
<link wikidata="Q7987481" start="9661" end="9674" title="Western Atlas" label="Western Atlas"/>
<link wikidata="Q17047956" start="9707" end="9718" title="Brain atlas" label="Brain atlas"/>
<link wikidata="Q98884770" start="9784" end="9796" title="Black Atlass" label="Black Atlass"/>
<link wikidata="Q28405640" start="9820" end="9870" title="Advanced Technology Large-Aperture Space Telescope" label="Advanced Technology Large-Aperture Space Telescope"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="782" wikidata="Q518968" url="?curid=782" title="Mouthwash">
<text>Mouthwash, mouth rinse, oral rinse, or mouth bath is a liquid which is held in the mouth passively or swirled around the mouth by contraction of the perioral muscles and/or movement of the head, and may be gargled, where the head is tilted back and the liquid bubbled at the back of the mouth.

Usually mouthwashes are antiseptic solutions intended to reduce the microbial load in the mouth, although other mouthwashes might be given for other reasons such as for their analgesic, anti-inflammatory or anti-fungal action. Additionally, some rinses act as saliva substitutes to neutralize acid and keep the mouth moist in xerostomia (dry mouth). Cosmetic mouthrinses temporarily control or reduce bad breath and leave the mouth with a pleasant taste.

Rinsing with water or mouthwash after brushing with a fluoride toothpaste can reduce the availability of salivary fluoride. This can lower the anti-cavity re-mineralization and antibacterial effects of fluoride. Fluoridated mouthwash may mitigate this effect or in high concentrations increase available fluoride, but is not as cost-effective as leaving the fluoride toothpaste on the teeth after brushing. A group of experts discussing post brushing rinsing in 2012 found that although there was clear guidance given in many public health advice publications to &quot;spit, avoid rinsing with water/excessive rinsing with water&quot; they believed there was a limited evidence base for best practice.

==Use==
Common use involves rinsing the mouth with about of mouthwash. The wash is typically swished or gargled for about half a minute and then spat out. Most companies suggest not drinking water immediately after using mouthwash. In some brands, the expectorate is stained, so that one can see the bacteria and debris.
Mouthwash should not be used immediately after brushing the teeth so as not to wash away the beneficial fluoride residue left from the toothpaste. Similarly, the mouth should not be rinsed out with water after brushing. Patients were told to &quot;spit don&#x27;t rinse&quot; after toothbrushing as part of a National Health Service campaign in the UK. A fluoride mouthrinse can be used at a different time of the day to brushing.

Gargling is where the head is tilted back, allowing the mouthwash to sit in the back of the mouth while exhaling, causing the liquid to bubble. Gargling is practiced in Japan for perceived prevention of viral infection. One commonly used way is with infusions or tea. In some cultures, gargling is usually done in private, typically in a bathroom at a sink so the liquid can be rinsed away.

==Dangerous misuse==
Serious harm and even death can quickly result from ingestion due to the high alcohol content and other substances harmful to ingestion present in some brands of mouthwash. Zero percent alcohol mouthwashes do exist, as well as many other formulations for different needs (covered in the above sections). 

These risks may be higher in toddlers and young children if they are allowed to use toothpaste and/or mouthwash unsupervised, where they may swallow it. Misuse in this way can be avoided with parental admission or supervision and by using child-safe forms or a children&#x27;s brand of mouthwash. 

Surrogate alcohol use such as ingestion of mouthwash is a common cause of death among homeless people during winter months, because a person can feel warmer after drinking it.

== Effects==
The most-commonly-used mouthwashes are commercial antiseptics, which are used at home as part of an oral hygiene routine. Mouthwashes combine ingredients to treat a variety of oral conditions. Variations are common, and mouthwash has no standard formulation, so its use and recommendation involves concerns about patient safety. Some manufacturers of mouthwash state that their antiseptic and antiplaque mouthwashes kill the bacterial plaque that causes cavities, gingivitis, and bad breath. It is, however, generally agreed that the use of mouthwash does not eliminate the need for both brushing and flossing. The American Dental Association asserts that regular brushing and proper flossing are enough in most cases, in addition to regular dental check-ups, although they approve many mouthwashes.
For many patients, however, the mechanical methods could be tedious and time-consuming, and, additionally, some local conditions may render them especially difficult. Chemotherapeutic agents, including mouthwashes, could have a key role as adjuncts to daily home care, preventing and controlling supragingival plaque, gingivitis and oral malodor.

Minor and transient side effects of mouthwashes are very common, such as taste disturbance, tooth staining, sensation of a dry mouth, etc. Alcohol-containing mouthwashes may make dry mouth and halitosis worse, as they dry out the mouth. Soreness, ulceration and redness may sometimes occur (e.g., aphthous stomatitis or allergic contact stomatitis) if the person is allergic or sensitive to mouthwash ingredients, such as preservatives, coloring, flavors and fragrances. Such effects might be reduced or eliminated by diluting the mouthwash with water, using a different mouthwash (e.g. saltwater), or foregoing mouthwash entirely.

Prescription mouthwashes are used prior to and after oral surgery procedures, such as tooth extraction, or to treat the pain associated with mucositis caused by radiation therapy or chemotherapy. They are also prescribed for aphthous ulcers, other oral ulcers, and other mouth pain. &quot;Magic mouthwashes&quot; are prescription mouthwashes compounded in a pharmacy from a list of ingredients specified by a doctor. Despite a lack of evidence that prescription mouthwashes are more effective in decreasing the pain of oral lesions, many patients and prescribers continue to use them. There has been only one controlled study to evaluate the efficacy of magic mouthwash; it shows no difference in efficacy between the most common magic-mouthwash formulation, on the one hand, and commercial mouthwashes (such as chlorhexidine) or a saline/baking soda solution, on the other. Current guidelines suggest that saline solution is just as effective as magic mouthwash in pain relief and in shortening the healing time of oral mucositis from cancer therapies.

==History==

The first known references to mouth rinsing is in Ayurveda for treatment of gingivitis. Later, in the Greek and Roman periods, mouth rinsing following mechanical cleansing became common among the upper classes, and Hippocrates recommended a mixture of salt, alum, and vinegar. The Jewish Talmud, dating back about 1,800 years, suggests a cure for gum ailments containing &quot;dough water&quot; and olive oil. The ancient Chinese had also gargled salt water, tea and wine as a form of mouthwash after meals, due to the antiseptic properties of those liquids.

Before Europeans came to the Americas, Native North American and Mesoamerican cultures used mouthwashes, often made from plants such as &quot;Coptis trifolia&quot;. Peoples of the Americas used salt water mouthwashes for sore throats, and other mouthwashes for problems such as teething and mouth ulcers.

Anton van Leeuwenhoek, the famous 17th century microscopist, discovered living organisms (living, because they were mobile) in deposits on the teeth (what we now call dental plaque). He also found organisms in water from the canal next to his home in Delft. He experimented with samples by adding vinegar or brandy and found that this resulted in the immediate immobilization or killing of the organisms suspended in water. Next he tried rinsing the mouth of himself and somebody else with a mouthwash containing vinegar or brandy and found that living organisms remained in the dental plaque. He concluded—correctly—that the mouthwash either did not reach, or was not present long enough, to kill the plaque organisms.
In 1892, German Richard Seifert invented mouthwash product Odol, which was produced by company founder Karl August Lingner (1861–1916) in Dresden.

That remained the state of affairs until the late 1960s when Harald Loe (at the time a professor at the Royal Dental College in Aarhus, Denmark) demonstrated that a chlorhexidine compound could prevent the build-up of dental plaque. The reason for chlorhexidine&#x27;s effectiveness is that it strongly adheres to surfaces in the mouth and thus remains present in effective concentrations for many hours.

Since then commercial interest in mouthwashes has been intense and several newer products claim effectiveness in reducing the build-up in dental plaque and the associated severity of gingivitis, in addition to fighting bad breath. Many of these solutions aim to control the volatile sulfur compound–creating anaerobic bacteria that live in the mouth and excrete substances that lead to bad breath and unpleasant mouth taste. For example, the number of mouthwash variants in the United States of America has grown from 15 (1970) to 66 (1998) to 113 (2012).

==Research==
Research in the field of microbiotas shows that only a limited set of microbes cause tooth decay, with most of the bacteria in the human mouth being harmless. Focused attention on cavity-causing bacteria such as &quot;Streptococcus mutans&quot; has led research into new mouthwash treatments that prevent these bacteria from initially growing. While current mouthwash treatments must be used with a degree of frequency to prevent this bacteria from regrowing, future treatments could provide a viable long-term solution.

A clinical trial and laboratory studies have shown that alcohol-containing mouthwash could reduce the growth of &quot;Neisseria gonorrhoeae&quot; in the pharynx. However, subsequent trials have found that there was no difference in gonorrhoea cases among men using daily mouthwash compared to those who did not use mouthwash for 12 weeks.
==Ingredients==
===Alcohol===

Alcohol is added to mouthwash not to destroy bacteria but to act as a carrier agent for essential active ingredients such as menthol, eucalyptol and thymol, which help to penetrate plaque. Sometimes a significant amount of alcohol (up to 27% vol) is added, as a carrier for the flavor, to provide &quot;bite&quot;. Because of the alcohol content, it is possible to fail a breathalyzer test after rinsing, although breath alcohol levels return to normal after 10 minutes. In addition, alcohol is a drying agent, which encourages bacterial activity in the mouth, releasing more malodorous volatile sulfur compounds. Therefore, alcohol-containing mouthwash may temporarily worsen halitosis in those who already have it, or, indeed, be the sole cause of halitosis in other individuals. Alcohol in mouthwashes may act as a carcinogen (cancer-inducing agent) in some cases . Many newer brands of mouthwash are alcohol-free, not just in response to consumer concerns about oral cancer, but also to cater for religious groups who abstain from alcohol consumption.

===Benzydamine (analgesic)===
In painful oral conditions such as aphthous stomatitis, analgesic mouthrinses (e.g. benzydamine mouthwash, or &quot;Difflam&quot;) are sometimes used to ease pain, commonly used before meals to reduce discomfort while eating.

===Benzoic acid===
Benzoic acid acts as a buffer.

===Betamethasone===
Betamethasone is sometimes used as an anti-inflammatory, corticosteroid mouthwash. It may be used for severe inflammatory conditions of the oral mucosa such as the severe forms of aphthous stomatitis.

===Cetylpyridinium chloride (antiseptic, antimalodor)===
Cetylpyridinium chloride containing mouthwash (e.g. 0.05%) is used in some specialized mouthwashes for halitosis. Cetylpyridinium chloride mouthwash has less anti-plaque effect than chlorhexidine and may cause staining of teeth, or sometimes an oral burning sensation or ulceration.

===Chlorhexidine digluconate and hexetidine (antiseptic)===
Chlorhexidine digluconate is a chemical antiseptic and is used in a 0.05–0.2% solution as a mouthwash. There is no evidence to support that higher concentrations are more effective in controlling dental plaque and gingivitis. A randomized clinical trial conducted in Rabat University in Morocco found better results in plaque inhibition when chlorohexidine with alcohol base 0.12% was used, when compared to an alcohol-free 0.1% chlorhexidine mouthrinse.

Chlorhexidine has good &quot;substantivity&quot; (the ability of a mouthwash to bind to hard and soft tissues in the mouth). It has anti-plaque action, and also some anti-fungal action. It is especially effective against Gram-negative rods. The proportion of Gram-negative rods increase as gingivitis develops, so it is also used to reduce gingivitis. It is sometimes used as an adjunct to prevent dental caries and to treat periodontal disease, although it does not penetrate into periodontal pockets well. Chlorhexidine mouthwash alone is unable to prevent plaque, so it is not a substitute for regular toothbrushing and flossing. Instead, chlorhexidine mouthwash is more effective when used as an adjunctive treatment with toothbrushing and flossing. In the short term, if toothbrushing is impossible due to pain, as may occur in primary herpetic gingivostomatitis, chlorhexidine mouthwash is used as a temporary substitute for other oral hygiene measures. It is not suited for use in acute necrotizing ulcerative gingivitis, however. Rinsing with chlorhexidine mouthwash before and after a tooth extraction may reduce the risk of a dry socket. Other uses of chlorhexidine mouthwash include prevention of oral candidiasis in immunocompromised persons, treatment of denture-related stomatitis, mucosal ulceration/erosions and oral mucosal lesions, general burning sensation and many other uses.

Chlorhexidine mouthwash is known to have minor adverse effects. Chlorhexidine binds to tannins, meaning that prolonged use in persons who consume coffee, tea or red wine is associated with extrinsic staining (i.e. removable staining) of teeth. A systematic review of commercial chlorhexidine products with anti-discoloration systems (ADSs) found that the ADSs were able to reduce tooth staining without affecting the beneficial effects of chlorhexidine. Chlorhexidine mouthwash can also cause taste disturbance or alteration. Chlorhexidine is rarely associated with other issues like overgrowth of enterobacteria in persons with leukemia, desquamation, irritation, and stomatitis of oral mucosa, salivary gland pain and swelling, and hypersensitivity reactions including anaphylaxis.

Hexetidine also has anti-plaque, analgesic, astringent and anti-malodor properties, but is considered an inferior alternative to chlorhexidine.

===Chlorine dioxide=== 
In dilute concentrations, chlorine dioxide is an ingredient that acts as an antiseptic agent in some mouthwashes.

===Edible oils===
In traditional Ayurvedic medicine, the use of oil mouthwashes is called &quot;Kavala&quot; (&quot;oil swishing&quot;) or &quot;Gandusha&quot;, and this practice has more recently been re-marketed by the complementary and alternative medicine industry as &quot;oil pulling&quot;. Its promoters claim it works by &quot;pulling out&quot; &quot;toxins&quot;, which are known as ama in Ayurvedic medicine, and thereby reducing inflammation. Ayurvedic literature claims that oil pulling is capable of improving oral and systemic health, including a benefit in conditions such as headaches, migraines, diabetes mellitus, asthma, and acne, as well as whitening teeth.

Oil pulling has received little study and there is little evidence to support claims made by the technique&#x27;s advocates. When compared with chlorhexidine in one small study, it was found to be less effective at reducing oral bacterial load, and the other health claims of oil pulling have failed scientific verification or have not been investigated. There is a report of lipid pneumonia caused by accidental inhalation of the oil during oil pulling.

The mouth is rinsed with approximately one tablespoon of oil for 10–20 minutes then spat out. Sesame oil, coconut oil and ghee are traditionally used, but newer oils such as sunflower oil are also used.

===Essential oils===
Phenolic compounds and monoterpenes include essential oil constituents that have some antibacterial properties, such as eucalyptol, eugenol, hinokitiol, menthol, phenol, or thymol.
Essential oils are oils which have been extracted from plants. Mouthwashes based on essential oils could be more effective than traditional mouthcare as anti-gingival treatments. They have been found effective in reducing halitosis, and are being used in several commercial mouthwashes.

===Fluoride (anticavity)===
Anti-cavity mouthwashes contain fluoride compounds (such as sodium fluoride, stannous fluoride, or sodium monofluorophosphate) to protect against tooth decay. Fluoride-containing mouthwashes are used as prevention for dental caries for individuals who are considered at higher risk for tooth decay, whether due to xerostomia related to salivary dysfunction or side effects of medication, to not drinking fluoridated water, or to being physically unable to care for their oral needs (brushing and flossing), and as treatment for those with dentinal hypersensitivity, gingival recession/ root exposure.

===Flavoring agents and xylitol===
Flavoring agents include sweeteners such as sorbitol, sucralose, sodium saccharin, and xylitol, which stimulate salivary function due to their sweetness and taste and helps restore the mouth to a neutral level of acidity.

Xylitol rinses double as a bacterial inhibitor, and have been used as substitute for alcohol to avoid dryness of mouth associated with alcohol.

===Hydrogen peroxide===
Hydrogen peroxide can be used as an oxidizing mouthwash (e.g. Peroxyl, 1.5%). It kills anaerobic bacteria, and also has a mechanical cleansing action when it froths as it comes into contact with debris in mouth. It is often used in the short term to treat acute necrotising ulcerative gingivitis. Side effects can occur with prolonged use, including hypertrophy of the lingual papillae.

===Lactoperoxidase (saliva substitute)===
Enzymes and non-enzymatic proteins, such as lactoperoxidase, lysozyme, and lactoferrin, have been used in mouthwashes (e.g., Biotene) to reduce levels of oral bacteria, and, hence, of the acids produced by these bacteria.

===Lidocaine/xylocaine===
Oral lidocaine is useful for the treatment of mucositis symptoms (inflammation of mucous membranes) induced by radiation or chemotherapy. There is evidence that lidocaine anesthetic mouthwash has the potential to be systemically absorbed, when it was tested in patients with oral mucositis who underwent a bone marrow transplant.

===Methyl salicylate===
Methyl salicylate functions as an antiseptic, antiinflammatory, and analgesic agent, a flavoring, and a fragrance. Methyl salicylate has some anti-plaque action, but less than chlorhexidine. Methyl salicylate does not stain teeth.

===Nystatin===
Nystatin suspension is an antifungal ingredient used for the treatment of oral candidiasis.

===Potassium oxalate===
A randomized clinical trial found promising results in controlling and reducing dentine hypersensitivity when potassium oxalate mouthwash was used in conjugation with toothbrushing.

===Povidone/iodine (PVP-I)===
A 2005 study found that gargling three times a day with simple water or with a povidone-iodine solution was effective in preventing upper respiratory infection and decreasing the severity of symptoms if contracted. Other sources attribute the benefit to a simple placebo effect.

PVP-I in general covers &quot;a wider virucidal spectrum, covering both enveloped and nonenveloped viruses, than the other commercially available antiseptics&quot;, which also includes the novel SARS-CoV-2 virus.

===Sanguinarine===
Sanguinarine-containing mouthwashes are marketed as anti-plaque and anti-malodor treatments. Sanguinarine is a toxic alkaloid herbal extract, obtained from plants such as &quot;Sanguinaria canadensis&quot; (bloodroot), &quot;Argemone mexicana&quot; (Mexican prickly poppy), and others. However, its use is strongly associated with the development of leukoplakia (a white patch in the mouth), usually in the buccal sulcus. This type of leukoplakia has been termed &quot;sanguinaria-associated keratosis&quot;, and more than 80% of people with leukoplakia in the vestibule of the mouth have used this substance. Upon stopping contact with the causative substance, the lesions may persist for years. Although this type of leukoplakia may show dysplasia, the potential for malignant transformation is unknown. Ironically, elements within the complementary and alternative medicine industry promote the use of sanguinaria as a therapy for cancer.

===Sodium bicarbonate (baking soda)===
Sodium bicarbonate is sometimes combined with salt to make a simple homemade mouthwash, indicated for any of the reasons that a saltwater mouthwash might be used. Pre-mixed mouthwashes of 1% sodium bicarbonate and 1.5% sodium chloride in aqueous solution are marketed, although pharmacists will easily be able to produce such a formulation from the base ingredients when required. Sodium bicarbonate mouthwash is sometimes used to remove viscous saliva and to aid visualization of the oral tissues during examination of the mouth.

===Sodium chloride (salt)===

Saline has a mechanical cleansing action and an antiseptic action, as it is a hypertonic solution in relation to bacteria, which undergo lysis. The heat of the solution produces a therapeutic increase in blood flow (hyperemia) to the surgical site, promoting healing. Hot saltwater mouthwashes also encourage the draining of pus from dental abscesses. In contrast, if heat is applied on the side of the face (e.g., hot water bottle) rather than inside the mouth, it may cause a dental abscess to drain extra-orally, which is later associated with an area of fibrosis on the face .

Saltwater mouthwashes are also routinely used after oral surgery, to keep food debris out of healing wounds and to prevent infection. Some oral surgeons consider saltwater mouthwashes the mainstay of wound cleanliness after surgery. In dental extractions, hot saltwater mouthbaths should start about 24 hours after a dental extraction. The term &quot;mouth bath&quot; implies that the liquid is passively held in the mouth, rather than vigorously swilled around (which could dislodge a blood clot). Once the blood clot has stabilized, the mouthwash can be used more vigorously. These mouthwashes tend to be advised for use about 6 times per day, especially after meals (to remove food from the socket).

===Sodium lauryl sulfate (foaming agent)===
Sodium lauryl sulfate (SLS) is used as a foaming agent in many oral hygiene products, including many mouthwashes. Some may suggest that it is probably advisable to use mouthwash at least an hour after brushing with toothpaste when the toothpaste contains SLS, since the anionic compounds in the SLS toothpaste can deactivate cationic agents present in the mouthwash.

===Sucralfate===
Sucralfate is a mucosal coating agent, composed of an aluminum salt of sulfated sucrose. It is not recommended for use in the prevention of oral mucositis in head and neck cancer patients receiving radiotherapy or chemoradiation, due to a lack of efficacy found in a well-designed, randomized controlled trial.

===Tetracycline (antibiotic)===
Tetracycline is an antibiotic which may sometimes be used as a mouthwash in adults (it causes red staining of teeth in children). It is sometimes use for herpetiforme ulceration (an uncommon type of aphthous stomatitis), but prolonged use may lead to oral candidiasis, as the fungal population of the mouth overgrows in the absence of enough competing bacteria. Similarly, minocycline mouthwashes of 0.5% concentrations can relieve symptoms of recurrent aphthous stomatitis. Erythromycin is similar.

===Tranexamic acid===
A 4.8% tranexamic acid solution is sometimes used as an antifibrinolytic mouthwash to prevent bleeding during and after oral surgery in persons with coagulopathies (clotting disorders) or who are taking anticoagulants (blood thinners such as warfarin).

===Triclosan===
Triclosan is a non-ionic chlorinate bisphenol antiseptic found in some mouthwashes. When used in mouthwash (e.g. 0.03%), there is moderate substantivity, broad spectrum anti-bacterial action, some anti-fungal action, and significant anti-plaque effect, especially when combined with a copolymer or zinc citrate. Triclosan does not cause staining of the teeth. The safety of triclosan has been questioned.

===Zinc===
Astringents like zinc chloride provide a pleasant-tasting sensation and shrink tissues. Zinc, when used in combination with other antiseptic agents, can limit the buildup of tartar.

== See also ==
* Sodium fluoride/malic acid
* Virucide

== References ==
== External links ==
* Article on Bad-Breath Prevention Products – from MSNBC
* Mayo Clinic Q&amp;A on Magic Mouthwash for chemotherapy sores
* American Dental Association article on mouthwash</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q518968" start="0" end="9" title="Mouthwash" label="Mouthwash"/>
<link wikidata="Q518968" start="11" end="22" title="Mouthwash" label="mouth rinse"/>
<link wikidata="Q518968" start="24" end="34" title="Mouthwash" label="oral rinse"/>
<link wikidata="Q518968" start="39" end="49" title="Mouthwash" label="mouth bath"/>
<link wikidata="Q1555174" start="206" end="213" title="gargling" label="gargled"/>
<link wikidata="Q274493" start="319" end="329" title="antiseptic" label="antiseptic"/>
<link wikidata="Q173235" start="470" end="479" title="analgesic" label="analgesic"/>
<link wikidata="Q581996" start="481" end="498" title="anti-inflammatory" label="anti-inflammatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q578726" start="502" end="513" title="anti-fungal medication" label="anti-fungal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1162276" start="621" end="631" title="xerostomia" label="xerostomia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="805" end="824" title="Toothpaste#Fluorides" label="fluoride toothpaste"/>
<link wikidata="Q740540" start="1706" end="1717" title="expectorate" label="expectorate"/>
<link wikidata="Q918396" start="2084" end="2107" title="National Health Service" label="National Health Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q61951" start="2457" end="2465" title="infusion" label="infusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q6097" start="2470" end="2473" title="tea" label="tea"/>
<link wikidata="Q190771" start="2545" end="2553" title="bathroom" label="bathroom"/>
<link wikidata="Q4353992" start="3225" end="3242" title="Surrogate alcohol" label="Surrogate alcohol"/>
<link wikidata="Q13445028" start="3515" end="3527" title="oral hygiene" label="oral hygiene"/>
<link wikidata="Q1475557" start="3728" end="3742" title="patient safety" label="patient safety"/>
<link wikidata="Q143504" start="3840" end="3856" title="Dental plaque" label="bacterial plaque"/>
<link wikidata="Q133772" start="3869" end="3877" title="Dental caries" label="cavities"/>
<link wikidata="Q673083" start="3879" end="3889" title="gingivitis" label="gingivitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q16408" start="3895" end="3905" title="bad breath" label="bad breath"/>
<link wikidata="Q134205" start="4003" end="4011" title="toothbrush" label="brushing"/>
<link wikidata="Q143978" start="4016" end="4024" title="flossing" label="flossing"/>
<link wikidata="Q4743596" start="4030" end="4057" title="American Dental Association" label="American Dental Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q6402731" start="4636" end="4653" title="Dysgeusia" label="taste disturbance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1162276" start="4671" end="4695" title="xerostomia" label="sensation of a dry mouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q189956" start="4860" end="4879" title="aphthous stomatitis" label="aphthous stomatitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q911386" start="4883" end="4910" title="allergic contact stomatitis" label="allergic contact stomatitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q849893" start="5282" end="5298" title="tooth extraction" label="tooth extraction"/>
<link wikidata="Q6931269" start="5337" end="5346" title="mucositis" label="mucositis"/>
<link wikidata="Q180507" start="5357" end="5374" title="radiation therapy" label="radiation therapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q974135" start="5378" end="5390" title="chemotherapy" label="chemotherapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q189956" start="5421" end="5435" title="aphthous ulcer" label="aphthous ulcer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3245680" start="5444" end="5454" title="oral ulcer" label="oral ulcer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1303150" start="5538" end="5548" title="Compounding" label="compounded"/>
<link wikidata="Q614304" start="5554" end="5562" title="pharmacy" label="pharmacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q827023" start="5720" end="5726" title="lesion" label="lesion"/>
<link wikidata="Q367359" start="5805" end="5821" title="Controlled experiment" label="controlled study"/>
<link wikidata="Q2585693" start="5838" end="5846" title="efficacy" label="efficacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q15646788" start="6008" end="6021" title="chlorhexidine" label="chlorhexidine"/>
<link wikidata="Q275792" start="6028" end="6034" title="Saline (medicine)" label="saline"/>
<link wikidata="Q179731" start="6035" end="6046" title="baking soda" label="baking soda"/>
<link wikidata="Q132325" start="6314" end="6322" title="Ayurveda" label="Ayurveda"/>
<link wikidata="Q11772" start="6366" end="6371" title="ancient Greece" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747689" start="6376" end="6381" title="Ancient Rome" label="Roman"/>
<link wikidata="Q5264" start="6479" end="6490" title="Hippocrates" label="Hippocrates"/>
<link wikidata="Q190527" start="6522" end="6526" title="alum" label="alum"/>
<link wikidata="Q43290" start="6552" end="6558" title="Talmud" label="Talmud"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165425" start="6966" end="6981" title="Coptis trifolia" label="Coptis trifolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2393344" start="7102" end="7110" title="teething" label="teething"/>
<link wikidata="Q43522" start="7130" end="7151" title="Anton van Leeuwenhoek" label="Anton van Leeuwenhoek"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074953" start="7177" end="7189" title="Microscopy" label="microscopist"/>
<link wikidata="Q143504" start="7297" end="7310" title="dental plaque" label="dental plaque"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7866" end="7881" title="Richard Seifert (inventor)" label="Richard Seifert"/>
<link wikidata="Q112860932" start="7909" end="7913" title="Odol" label="Odol"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7953" end="7972" title="Karl August Lingner" label="Karl August Lingner"/>
<link wikidata="Q1731" start="7988" end="7995" title="Dresden" label="Dresden"/>
<link wikidata="Q924265" start="8102" end="8122" title="Aarhus University" label="Royal Dental College"/>
<link wikidata="Q25319" start="8126" end="8132" title="Aarhus" label="Aarhus"/>
<link wikidata="Q15646788" start="8163" end="8176" title="chlorhexidine" label="chlorhexidine"/>
<link wikidata="Q104117645" start="8999" end="9009" title="Microbiota (microbiology)" label="microbiota"/>
<link wikidata="Q131452" start="9192" end="9212" title="Streptococcus mutans" label="Streptococcus mutans"/>
<link wikidata="Q153" start="10089" end="10096" title="ethanol" label="alcohol"/>
<link wikidata="Q4173974" start="10144" end="10150" title="flavoring" label="flavor"/>
<link wikidata="Q754230" start="10238" end="10250" title="breathalyzer" label="breathalyzer"/>
<link wikidata="Q378705" start="10363" end="10375" title="astringent" label="drying agent"/>
<link wikidata="Q16408" start="10543" end="10552" title="halitosis" label="halitosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q187661" start="10684" end="10694" title="carcinogen" label="carcinogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q189956" start="10988" end="11007" title="aphthous stomatitis" label="aphthous stomatitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q793143" start="11037" end="11048" title="benzydamine" label="benzydamine"/>
<link wikidata="Q191700" start="11199" end="11211" title="Benzoic acid" label="Benzoic acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q416132" start="11251" end="11264" title="Betamethasone" label="Betamethasone"/>
<link wikidata="Q418318" start="11510" end="11534" title="Cetylpyridinium chloride" label="Cetylpyridinium chloride"/>
<link wikidata="Q3245680" start="11781" end="11791" title="mouth ulcer" label="ulceration"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11854" end="11879" title="Chlorhexidine#Dental use" label="Chlorhexidine digluconate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1028" start="12141" end="12148" title="Morocco" label="Morocco"/>
<link wikidata="Q143504" start="12173" end="12179" title="Dental plaque" label="plaque"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12545" end="12548" title="Bacterial cellular morphologies#Bacillus" label="rod"/>
<link wikidata="Q632006" start="12569" end="12582" title="Gram-negative bacteria" label="Gram-negative"/>
<link wikidata="Q673083" start="12600" end="12610" title="gingivitis" label="gingivitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q520127" start="12735" end="12754" title="Periodontitis" label="periodontal disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q5563114" start="13143" end="13177" title="primary herpetic gingivostomatitis" label="primary herpetic gingivostomatitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3106761" start="13298" end="13337" title="acute necrotizing ulcerative gingivitis" label="acute necrotizing ulcerative gingivitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q15646788" start="13361" end="13374" title="chlorhexidine" label="chlorhexidine"/>
<link wikidata="Q448753" start="13446" end="13456" title="dry socket" label="dry socket"/>
<link wikidata="Q3149136" start="13538" end="13554" title="Immunocompetence" label="immunocompromise"/>
<link wikidata="Q5259645" start="13578" end="13604" title="denture-related stomatitis" label="denture-related stomatitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1776131" start="13638" end="13649" title="oral mucosa" label="oral mucosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q187607" start="13795" end="13801" title="tannin" label="tannin"/>
<link wikidata="Q29496" start="14337" end="14345" title="leukemia" label="leukemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q911386" start="14377" end="14387" title="stomatitis" label="stomatitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q419749" start="14493" end="14503" title="Hexetidine" label="Hexetidine"/>
<link wikidata="Q422080" start="14688" end="14704" title="chlorine dioxide" label="chlorine dioxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q132325" start="14810" end="14828" title="Ayurvedic medicine" label="Ayurvedic medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q188504" start="14998" end="15036" title="complementary and alternative medicine" label="complementary and alternative medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q297078" start="15055" end="15066" title="oil pulling" label="oil pulling"/>
<link wikidata="Q132325" start="15169" end="15172" title="ama (ayurveda)" label="ama"/>
<link wikidata="Q101991" start="15217" end="15229" title="inflammation" label="inflammation"/>
<link wikidata="Q86" start="15368" end="15376" title="headache" label="headache"/>
<link wikidata="Q133823" start="15379" end="15387" title="migraine" label="migraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q12206" start="15390" end="15407" title="diabetes mellitus" label="diabetes mellitus"/>
<link wikidata="Q35869" start="15409" end="15415" title="asthma" label="asthma"/>
<link wikidata="Q79928" start="15421" end="15425" title="acne vulgaris" label="acne"/>
<link wikidata="Q143458" start="15438" end="15453" title="Tooth whitening" label="whitening teeth"/>
<link wikidata="Q3824458" start="15832" end="15847" title="lipid pneumonia" label="lipid pneumonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q212317" start="16006" end="16016" title="Sesame oil" label="Sesame oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q216235" start="16018" end="16029" title="coconut oil" label="coconut oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q323225" start="16034" end="16038" title="ghee" label="ghee"/>
<link wikidata="Q94787" start="16086" end="16099" title="sunflower oil" label="sunflower oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q407142" start="16137" end="16155" title="Phenols" label="Phenolic compounds"/>
<link wikidata="Q32528" start="16160" end="16171" title="monoterpene" label="monoterpene"/>
<link wikidata="Q170885" start="16181" end="16194" title="essential oil" label="essential oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q161572" start="16257" end="16267" title="eucalyptol" label="eucalyptol"/>
<link wikidata="Q423357" start="16269" end="16276" title="eugenol" label="eugenol"/>
<link wikidata="Q2705171" start="16278" end="16288" title="hinokitiol" label="hinokitiol"/>
<link wikidata="Q407418" start="16290" end="16297" title="menthol" label="menthol"/>
<link wikidata="Q130336" start="16299" end="16305" title="phenol" label="phenol"/>
<link wikidata="Q408883" start="16310" end="16316" title="thymol" label="thymol"/>
<link wikidata="Q170885" start="16318" end="16331" title="Essential oil" label="Essential oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q170885" start="16402" end="16415" title="essential oil" label="essential oil"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16471" end="16484" title="Gingivitis#Treatment" label="anti-gingival"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16531" end="16549" title="Halitosis#Mouthwashes" label="reducing halitosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q44793182" start="16666" end="16674" title="fluoride" label="fluoride"/>
<link wikidata="Q407520" start="16694" end="16709" title="sodium fluoride" label="sodium fluoride"/>
<link wikidata="Q204962" start="16711" end="16728" title="stannous fluoride" label="stannous fluoride"/>
<link wikidata="Q3498849" start="16733" end="16759" title="sodium monofluorophosphate" label="sodium monofluorophosphate"/>
<link wikidata="Q133772" start="16780" end="16791" title="tooth decay" label="tooth decay"/>
<link wikidata="Q4173974" start="17271" end="17286" title="Flavoring agent" label="Flavoring agent"/>
<link wikidata="Q245280" start="17315" end="17323" title="sorbitol" label="sorbitol"/>
<link wikidata="Q410209" start="17325" end="17334" title="sucralose" label="sucralose"/>
<link wikidata="Q191381" start="17336" end="17352" title="Saccharin" label="sodium saccharin"/>
<link wikidata="Q212093" start="17358" end="17365" title="xylitol" label="xylitol"/>
<link wikidata="Q171877" start="17663" end="17680" title="Hydrogen peroxide" label="Hydrogen peroxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q3106761" start="17919" end="17958" title="acute necrotising ulcerative gingivitis" label="acute necrotising ulcerative gingivitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q216211" start="18013" end="18024" title="hypertrophy" label="hypertrophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6553990" start="18032" end="18047" title="lingual papilla" label="lingual papilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q8047" start="18093" end="18099" title="Enzyme" label="Enzyme"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18137" end="18152" title="Lactoperoxidase#Oral care" label="lactoperoxidase"/>
<link wikidata="Q24779410" start="18154" end="18162" title="lysozyme" label="lysozyme"/>
<link wikidata="Q410246" start="18168" end="18179" title="lactoferrin" label="lactoferrin"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18218" end="18225" title="Biotene#Ingredients" label="Biotene"/>
<link wikidata="Q216935" start="18347" end="18356" title="lidocaine" label="lidocaine"/>
<link wikidata="Q6931269" start="18388" end="18397" title="mucositis" label="mucositis"/>
<link wikidata="Q101991" start="18408" end="18420" title="inflammation" label="inflammation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1219805" start="18424" end="18439" title="mucous membrane" label="mucous membrane"/>
<link wikidata="Q407669" start="18697" end="18714" title="Methyl salicylate" label="Methyl salicylate"/>
<link wikidata="Q251005" start="18944" end="18952" title="Nystatin" label="Nystatin"/>
<link wikidata="Q578726" start="18970" end="18980" title="Antifungal medication" label="antifungal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2886899" start="19018" end="19034" title="oral candidiasis" label="oral candidiasis"/>
<link wikidata="Q948056" start="19141" end="19165" title="Dentin hypersensitivity" label="dentine hypersensitivity"/>
<link wikidata="Q241516" start="19353" end="19368" title="povidone-iodine" label="povidone-iodine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2622199" start="19406" end="19433" title="upper respiratory infection" label="upper respiratory infection"/>
<link wikidata="Q82069695" start="19749" end="19759" title="Severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2" label="SARS-CoV-2"/>
<link wikidata="Q347392" start="19787" end="19799" title="Sanguinarine" label="Sanguinarine"/>
<link wikidata="Q14566105" start="19964" end="19986" title="Sanguinaria canadensis" label="Sanguinaria canadensis"/>
<link wikidata="Q683404" start="20012" end="20029" title="Argemone mexicana" label="Argemone mexicana"/>
<link wikidata="Q838145" start="20137" end="20148" title="leukoplakia" label="leukoplakia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370895" start="20348" end="20370" title="vestibule of the mouth" label="vestibule of the mouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128996" start="20527" end="20536" title="dysplasia" label="dysplasia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1483951" start="20556" end="20565" title="malignancy" label="malignant"/>
<link wikidata="Q179731" start="20769" end="20787" title="Sodium bicarbonate" label="Sodium bicarbonate"/>
<link wikidata="Q906356" start="21007" end="21023" title="aqueous solution" label="aqueous solution"/>
<link wikidata="Q925744" start="21409" end="21419" title="hypertonic" label="hypertonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1218293" start="21468" end="21473" title="lysis" label="lysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q948806" start="21547" end="21556" title="hyperemia" label="hyperemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q12829829" start="21656" end="21659" title="pus" label="pus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2710164" start="21665" end="21679" title="dental abscess" label="dental abscess"/>
<link wikidata="Q605709" start="21889" end="21897" title="fibrosis" label="fibrosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q422241" start="22661" end="22682" title="Sodium lauryl sulfate" label="Sodium lauryl sulfate"/>
<link wikidata="Q35855" start="22960" end="22970" title="toothpaste" label="toothpaste"/>
<link wikidata="Q420394" start="23046" end="23056" title="Sucralfate" label="Sucralfate"/>
<link wikidata="Q4027534" start="23126" end="23133" title="sucrose" label="sucrose"/>
<link wikidata="Q6931269" start="23186" end="23200" title="oral mucositis" label="oral mucositis"/>
<link wikidata="Q180507" start="23244" end="23256" title="radiotherapy" label="radiotherapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5090613" start="23260" end="23274" title="chemoradiation" label="chemoradiation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1436668" start="23328" end="23355" title="randomized controlled trial" label="randomized controlled trial"/>
<link wikidata="Q193045" start="23390" end="23402" title="Tetracycline" label="Tetracycline"/>
<link wikidata="Q189956" start="23834" end="23863" title="recurrent aphthous stomatitis" label="recurrent aphthous stomatitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q213511" start="23865" end="23877" title="Erythromycin" label="Erythromycin"/>
<link wikidata="Q418666" start="23920" end="23935" title="tranexamic acid" label="tranexamic acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q575222" start="23969" end="23985" title="antifibrinolytic" label="antifibrinolytic"/>
<link wikidata="Q890200" start="24062" end="24076" title="coagulopathy" label="coagulopathies"/>
<link wikidata="Q215118" start="24116" end="24129" title="anticoagulant" label="anticoagulant"/>
<link wikidata="Q113368879" start="24155" end="24163" title="warfarin" label="warfarin"/>
<link wikidata="Q408646" start="24183" end="24192" title="Triclosan" label="Triclosan"/>
<link wikidata="Q421281" start="24468" end="24477" title="copolymer" label="copolymer"/>
<link wikidata="Q758" start="24481" end="24493" title="zinc citrate" label="zinc citrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q378705" start="24600" end="24611" title="Astringents" label="Astringents"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="24688" end="24692" title="Zinc#Topical use" label="Zinc"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="24774" end="24780" title="Calculus (dental)#Prevention" label="tartar"/>
<link wikidata="Q16883197" start="24800" end="24826" title="Sodium fluoride/malic acid" label="Sodium fluoride/malic acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q3560867" start="24829" end="24837" title="Virucide" label="Virucide"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="783" wikidata="Q8409" url="?curid=783" title="Alexander the Great">
<text>Alexander III of Macedon (; 20/21 July 356 BC – 10/11 June 323 BC), most commonly known as Alexander the Great, was a king of the ancient Greek kingdom of Macedon. He succeeded his father Philip II to the throne in 336 BC at the age of 20 and spent most of his ruling years conducting a lengthy military campaign throughout Western Asia, Central Asia, parts of South Asia, and Egypt. By the age of 30, he had created one of the largest empires in history, stretching from Greece to northwestern India. He was undefeated in battle and is widely considered to be one of history&#x27;s greatest and most successful military commanders.

Until the age of 16, Alexander was tutored by Aristotle. In 335 BC, shortly after his assumption of kingship over Macedon, he campaigned in the Balkans and reasserted control over Thrace and parts of Illyria before marching on the city of Thebes, which was subsequently destroyed in battle. Alexander then led the League of Corinth, and used his authority to launch the pan-Hellenic project envisaged by his father, assuming leadership over all Greeks in their conquest of Persia.

In 334 BC, he invaded the Achaemenid Persian Empire and began a series of campaigns that lasted for 10 years. Following his conquest of Asia Minor, Alexander broke the power of Achaemenid Persia in a series of decisive battles, including those at Issus and Gaugamela; he subsequently overthrew Darius III and conquered the Achaemenid Empire in its entirety. After the fall of Persia, the Macedonian Empire held a vast swath of territory between the Adriatic Sea and the Indus River. Alexander endeavored to reach the &quot;ends of the world and the Great Outer Sea&quot; and invaded India in 326 BC, achieving an important victory over Porus, an ancient Indian king of present-day Punjab, at the Battle of the Hydaspes. Due to the mutiny of his homesick troops, he eventually turned back at the Beas River and later died in 323 BC in Babylon, the city of Mesopotamia that he had planned to establish as his empire&#x27;s capital. Alexander&#x27;s death left unexecuted an additional series of planned military and mercantile campaigns that would have begun with a Greek invasion of Arabia. In the years following his death, a series of civil wars broke out across the Macedonian Empire, eventually leading to its disintegration at the hands of the Diadochi.

With his death marking the start of the Hellenistic period, Alexander&#x27;s legacy includes the cultural diffusion and syncretism that his conquests engendered, such as Greco-Buddhism and Hellenistic Judaism. He founded more than twenty cities, with the most prominent being the city of Alexandria in Egypt. Alexander&#x27;s settlement of Greek colonists and the resulting spread of Greek culture led to the overwhelming dominance of Hellenistic civilization and influence as far east as the Indian subcontinent. The Hellenistic period developed through the Roman Empire into modern Western culture; the Greek language became the &quot;lingua franca&quot; of the region and was the predominant language of the Byzantine Empire until its collapse in the mid-15th century AD.

Alexander became legendary as a classical hero in the mould of Achilles, featuring prominently in the historical and mythical traditions of both Greek and non-Greek cultures. His military achievements and unprecedented enduring successes in battle made him the measure against which many later military leaders would compare themselves, and his tactics remain a significant subject of study in military academies worldwide. Legends of Alexander&#x27;s exploits coalesced into the third-century &quot;Alexander Romance&quot; which, in the premodern period, went through over one hundred recensions, translations, and derivations and was translated into almost every European vernacular and every language of the Islamic world. After the Bible, it was the most popular form of European literature.

==Early life==

===Lineage and childhood===
Alexander III was born in Pella, the capital of the Kingdom of Macedon, on the sixth day of the ancient Greek month of Hekatombaion, which probably corresponds to 20 July 356 BC (although the exact date is uncertain). He was the son of the erstwhile king of Macedon, Philip II, and his fourth wife, Olympias (daughter of Neoptolemus I, king of Epirus). Although Philip had seven or eight wives, Olympias was his principal wife for some time, likely because she gave birth to Alexander.Several legends surround Alexander&#x27;s birth and childhood. According to the ancient Greek biographer Plutarch, on the eve of the consummation of her marriage to Philip, Olympias dreamed that her womb was struck by a thunderbolt that caused a flame to spread &quot;far and wide&quot; before dying away. Sometime after the wedding, Philip is said to have seen himself, in a dream, securing his wife&#x27;s womb with a seal engraved with a lion&#x27;s image. Plutarch offered a variety of interpretations for these dreams: that Olympias was pregnant before her marriage, indicated by the sealing of her womb; or that Alexander&#x27;s father was Zeus. Ancient commentators were divided about whether the ambitious Olympias promulgated the story of Alexander&#x27;s divine parentage, variously claiming that she had told Alexander, or that she dismissed the suggestion as impious.

On the day Alexander was born, Philip was preparing a siege on the city of Potidea on the peninsula of Chalcidice. That same day, Philip received news that his general Parmenion had defeated the combined Illyrian and Paeonian armies and that his horses had won at the Olympic Games. It was also said that on this day, the Temple of Artemis in Ephesus, one of the Seven Wonders of the World, burnt down. This led Hegesias of Magnesia to say that it had burnt down because Artemis was away, attending the birth of Alexander. Such legends may have emerged when Alexander was king, and possibly at his instigation, to show that he was superhuman and destined for greatness from conception.

In his early years, Alexander was raised by a nurse, Lanike, sister of Alexander&#x27;s future general Cleitus the Black. Later in his childhood, Alexander was tutored by the strict Leonidas, a relative of his mother, and by Lysimachus of Acarnania. Alexander was raised in the manner of noble Macedonian youths, learning to read, play the lyre, ride, fight, and hunt. When Alexander was ten years old, a trader from Thessaly brought Philip a horse, which he offered to sell for thirteen talents. The horse refused to be mounted, and Philip ordered it away. Alexander, however, detecting the horse&#x27;s fear of its own shadow, asked to tame the horse, which he eventually managed. Plutarch stated that Philip, overjoyed at this display of courage and ambition, kissed his son tearfully, declaring: &quot;My boy, you must find a kingdom big enough for your ambitions. Macedon is too small for you&quot;, and bought the horse for him. Alexander named it Bucephalas, meaning &quot;ox-head&quot;. Bucephalas carried Alexander as far as India. When the animal died (because of old age, according to Plutarch, at age 30), Alexander named a city after him, Bucephala.

===Education===

When Alexander was 13, Philip began to search for a tutor, and considered such academics as Isocrates and Speusippus, the latter offering to resign from his stewardship of the Academy to take up the post. In the end, Philip chose Aristotle and provided the Temple of the Nymphs at Mieza as a classroom. In return for teaching Alexander, Philip agreed to rebuild Aristotle&#x27;s hometown of Stageira, which Philip had razed, and to repopulate it by buying and freeing the ex-citizens who were slaves, or pardoning those who were in exile.

Mieza was like a boarding school for Alexander and the children of Macedonian nobles, such as Ptolemy, Hephaistion, and Cassander. Many of these students would become his friends and future generals, and are often known as the &quot;Companions&quot;. Aristotle taught Alexander and his companions about medicine, philosophy, morals, religion, logic, and art. Under Aristotle&#x27;s tutelage, Alexander developed a passion for the works of Homer, and in particular the &quot;Iliad&quot;; Aristotle gave him an annotated copy, which Alexander later carried on his campaigns. Alexander was able to quote Euripides from memory.

In his youth, Alexander was also acquainted with Persian exiles at the Macedonian court, who received the protection of Philip II for several years as they opposed Artaxerxes III. Among them were Artabazos II and his daughter Barsine, possible future mistress of Alexander, who resided at the Macedonian court from 352 to 342 BC, as well as Amminapes, future satrap of Alexander, and a Persian nobleman named Sisines. This gave the Macedonian court a good knowledge of Persian issues, and may even have influenced some of the innovations in the management of the Macedonian state.

Suda writes that Anaximenes of Lampsacus was one of Alexander&#x27;s teachers, and that Anaximenes also accompanied Alexander on his campaigns.

==Heir of Philip II==

===Regency and ascent of Macedon===


At the age of 16, Alexander&#x27;s education under Aristotle ended. Philip II had waged war against the Thracians to the north, which left Alexander in charge as regent and heir apparent. During Philip&#x27;s absence, the Thracian tribe of Maedi revolted against Macedonia. Alexander responded quickly and drove them from their territory. The territory was colonized, and a city, named Alexandropolis, was founded.

Upon Philip&#x27;s return, Alexander was dispatched with a small force to subdue the revolts in southern Thrace. Campaigning against the Greek city of Perinthus, Alexander reportedly saved his father&#x27;s life. Meanwhile, the city of Amphissa began to work lands that were sacred to Apollo near Delphi, a sacrilege that gave Philip the opportunity to further intervene in Greek affairs. While Philip was occupied in Thrace, Alexander was ordered to muster an army for a campaign in southern Greece. Concerned that other Greek states might intervene, Alexander made it look as though he was preparing to attack Illyria instead. During this turmoil, the Illyrians invaded Macedonia, only to be repelled by Alexander.

Philip and his army joined his son in 338 BC, and they marched south through Thermopylae, taking it after stubborn resistance from its Theban garrison. They went on to occupy the city of Elatea, only a few days&#x27; march from both Athens and Thebes. The Athenians, led by Demosthenes, voted to seek alliance with Thebes against Macedonia. Both Athens and Philip sent embassies to win Thebes&#x27;s favour, but Athens won the contest. Philip marched on Amphissa (ostensibly acting on the request of the Amphictyonic League), capturing the mercenaries sent there by Demosthenes and accepting the city&#x27;s surrender. Philip then returned to Elatea, sending a final offer of peace to Athens and Thebes, who both rejected it.

As Philip marched south, his opponents blocked him near Chaeronea, Boeotia. During the ensuing Battle of Chaeronea, Philip commanded the right wing and Alexander the left, accompanied by a group of Philip&#x27;s trusted generals. According to the ancient sources, the two sides fought bitterly for some time. Philip deliberately commanded his troops to retreat, counting on the untested Athenian hoplites to follow, thus breaking their line. Alexander was the first to break the Theban lines, followed by Philip&#x27;s generals. Having damaged the enemy&#x27;s cohesion, Philip ordered his troops to press forward and quickly routed them. With the Athenians lost, the Thebans were surrounded. Left to fight alone, they were defeated.

After the victory at Chaeronea, Philip and Alexander marched unopposed into the Peloponnese, devastating much of Laconia and ejecting the Spartans from various parts of it. At Corinth, Philip established a &quot;Hellenic Alliance&quot; (modelled on the old anti-Persian alliance of the Greco-Persian Wars), which included most Greek city-states except Sparta. Philip was then named &quot;Hegemon&quot; (often translated as &quot;Supreme Commander&quot;) of this league (known by modern scholars as the League of Corinth), and announced his plans to attack the Persian Empire.

===Exile and return===
When Philip returned to Pella, he fell in love with and married Cleopatra Eurydice in 338 BC, the niece of his general Attalus. The marriage made Alexander&#x27;s position as heir less secure, since any son of Cleopatra Eurydice would be a fully Macedonian heir, while Alexander was only half-Macedonian. During the wedding banquet, a drunken Attalus publicly prayed to the gods that the union would produce a legitimate heir.

In 337 BC, Alexander fled Macedon with his mother, dropping her off with her brother, King Alexander I of Epirus in Dodona, capital of the Molossians. He continued to Illyria where he sought refuge with one or more Illyrian kings, perhaps with Glaucias, and was treated as a guest, despite having defeated them in battle a few years before. However, it appears Philip never intended to disown his politically and militarily trained son. Accordingly, Alexander returned to Macedon after six months due to the efforts of a family friend, Demaratus, who mediated between the two parties.

In the following year, the Persian satrap (governor) of Caria, Pixodarus, offered his eldest daughter to Alexander&#x27;s half-brother, Philip Arrhidaeus. Olympias and several of Alexander&#x27;s friends suggested this showed Philip intended to make Arrhidaeus his heir. Alexander reacted by sending an actor, Thessalus of Corinth, to tell Pixodarus that he should not offer his daughter&#x27;s hand to an illegitimate son, but instead to Alexander. When Philip heard of this, he stopped the negotiations and scolded Alexander for wishing to marry the daughter of a Carian, explaining that he wanted a better bride for him. Philip exiled four of Alexander&#x27;s friends, Harpalus, Nearchus, Ptolemy and Erigyius, and had the Corinthians bring Thessalus to him in chains.

==King of Macedon==

===Accession===

In the 24th day of the Macedonian month Dios, which probably corresponds to 25 October 336 BC, while at Aegae attending the wedding of his daughter Cleopatra to Olympias&#x27;s brother, Alexander I of Epirus, Philip was assassinated by the captain of his bodyguards, Pausanias. As Pausanias tried to escape, he tripped over a vine and was killed by his pursuers, including two of Alexander&#x27;s companions, Perdiccas and Leonnatus. Alexander was proclaimed king on the spot by the nobles and army at the age of 20.

===Consolidation of power===
Alexander began his reign by eliminating potential rivals to the throne. He had his cousin, the former Amyntas IV, executed. He also had two Macedonian princes from the region of Lyncestis killed for having been involved in his father&#x27;s assassination, but spared a third, Alexander Lyncestes. Olympias had Cleopatra Eurydice, and Europa, her daughter by Philip, burned alive. When Alexander learned about this, he was furious. Alexander also ordered the murder of Attalus, who was in command of the advance guard of the army in Asia Minor and Cleopatra&#x27;s uncle.

Attalus was at that time corresponding with Demosthenes, regarding the possibility of defecting to Athens. Attalus also had severely insulted Alexander, and following Cleopatra&#x27;s murder, Alexander may have considered him too dangerous to be left alive. Alexander spared Arrhidaeus, who was by all accounts mentally disabled, possibly as a result of poisoning by Olympias.

News of Philip&#x27;s death roused many states into revolt, including Thebes, Athens, Thessaly, and the Thracian tribes north of Macedon. When news of the revolts reached Alexander, he responded quickly. Though advised to use diplomacy, Alexander mustered 3,000 Macedonian cavalry and rode south towards Thessaly. He found the Thessalian army occupying the pass between Mount Olympus and Mount Ossa, and ordered his men to ride over Mount Ossa. When the Thessalians awoke the next day, they found Alexander in their rear and promptly surrendered, adding their cavalry to Alexander&#x27;s force. He then continued south towards the Peloponnese.

Alexander stopped at Thermopylae where he was recognized as the leader of the Amphictyonic League before heading south to Corinth. Athens sued for peace and Alexander pardoned the rebels. The famous encounter between Alexander and Diogenes the Cynic occurred during Alexander&#x27;s stay in Corinth. When Alexander asked Diogenes what he could do for him, the philosopher disdainfully asked Alexander to stand a little to the side, as he was blocking the sunlight. This reply apparently delighted Alexander who is reported to have said, &quot;But verily, if I were not Alexander, I would like to be Diogenes.&quot; At Corinth, Alexander took the title of &quot;Hegemon&quot; (&quot;leader&quot;) and, like Philip, was appointed commander for the coming war against Persia. He also received news of a Thracian uprising.

===Balkan campaign===
Before crossing to Asia, Alexander wanted to safeguard his northern borders. In the spring of 335 BC, he advanced to suppress several revolts. Starting from Amphipolis, he travelled east into the country of the &quot;Independent Thracians&quot;, and at Mount Haemus, the Macedonian army attacked and defeated the Thracian forces manning the heights. The Macedonians marched into the country of the Triballi and defeated their army near the Lyginus river (a tributary of the Danube). Alexander then marched for three days to the Danube, encountering the Getae tribe on the opposite shore. Crossing the river at night, he surprised them and forced their army to retreat after the first cavalry skirmish.

News then reached Alexander that the Illyrian chieftain Cleitus and King Glaukias of the Taulantii were in open revolt against his authority. Marching west into Illyria, Alexander defeated each in turn, forcing the two rulers to flee with their troops. With these victories, he secured his northern frontier.

=== Destruction of Thebes ===

While Alexander campaigned north, the Thebans and Athenians rebelled once again. Alexander immediately headed south. While the other cities again hesitated, Thebes decided to fight. The Theban resistance was ineffective and Alexander razed the city and divided its territory between the other Boeotian cities. The end of Thebes cowed Athens, leaving all of Greece temporarily at peace. Alexander then set out on his Asian campaign, leaving Antipater as regent.

==Conquest of the Achaemenid Persian Empire==
===Strategy===

Alexander&#x27;s invasion of Persia as a whole has been denoted as a supreme example of a &quot;strategic line&quot; of conducting war, a line formed by &quot;the chain of logic that connects operations into a single whole.&quot; In his book &quot;Strategy&quot;, Soviet military officer and theorist Alexander Svechin delineates Alexander&#x27;s strategic steps. After securing his Greek base and the Balkans by subjugating his political opponents, and securing his army&#x27;s rear through the conquest of all the Afro-Asian coastline, where the Persian fleet was based and from which it was supplied, Alexander, moved to confront directly the Persians. He thus resolved the eternal problem of an army conducting operations deep into enemy territory, Svechin states, in an &quot;exemplary manner.&quot;

===Asia Minor===


After his victory at the Battle of Chaeronea (338 BC), Philip II began the work of establishing himself as &quot;hēgemṓn&quot; () of a league which according to Diodorus was to wage a campaign against the Persians for the sundry grievances Greece suffered in 480 and free the Greek cities of the western coast and islands from Achaemenid rule. In 336 he sent Parmenion, Amyntas, Andromenes, Attalus, and an army of 10,000 men into Anatolia to make preparations for an invasion. The Greek cities on the western coast of Anatolia revolted until the news arrived that Philip had been murdered and had been succeeded by his young son Alexander. The Macedonians were demoralized by Philip&#x27;s death and were subsequently defeated near Magnesia by the Achaemenids under the command of the mercenary Memnon of Rhodes.

Taking over the invasion project of Philip II, Alexander&#x27;s army crossed the Hellespont in 334 BC with approximately 48,100 soldiers, 6,100 cavalry, and a fleet of 120 ships with crews numbering 38,000 drawn from Macedon and various Greek city states, mercenaries, and feudally raised soldiers from Thrace, Paionia, and Illyria. He showed his intent to conquer the entirety of the Persian Empire by throwing a spear into Asian soil and saying he accepted Asia as a gift from the gods. This also showed Alexander&#x27;s eagerness to fight, in contrast to his father&#x27;s preference for diplomacy.

After an initial victory against Persian forces at the Battle of the Granicus, Alexander accepted the surrender of the Persian provincial capital and treasury of Sardis; he then proceeded along the Ionian coast, granting autonomy and democracy to the cities. Miletus, held by Achaemenid forces, required a delicate siege operation, with Persian naval forces nearby. Further south, at Halicarnassus, in Caria, Alexander successfully waged his first large-scale siege, eventually forcing his opponents, the mercenary captain Memnon of Rhodes and the Persian satrap of Caria, Orontobates, to withdraw by sea. Alexander left the government of Caria to a member of the Hecatomnid dynasty, Ada, who adopted Alexander.

From Halicarnassus, Alexander proceeded into mountainous Lycia and the Pamphylian plain, asserting control over all coastal cities to deny the Persians naval bases. From Pamphylia onwards, the coast held no major ports and Alexander moved inland. At Termessos, Alexander humbled and did not storm the Pisidian city. At the ancient Phrygian capital of Gordium, Alexander &quot;undid&quot; the hitherto unsolvable Gordian Knot, a feat said to await the future &quot;king of Asia&quot;. According to the story, Alexander proclaimed that it did not matter how the knot was undone, and hacked it apart with his sword.

===The Levant and Syria===
In spring 333 BC, Alexander crossed the Taurus into Cilicia. After a long pause due to an illness, he marched on towards Syria. Though outmanoeuvered by Darius&#x27;s significantly larger army, he marched back to Cilicia, where he defeated Darius at Issus. Darius fled the battle, causing his army to collapse, and left behind his wife, his two daughters, his mother Sisygambis, and a fabulous treasure. He offered a peace treaty that included the lands he had already lost, and a ransom of 10,000 talents for his family. Alexander replied that since he was now king of Asia, it was he alone who decided territorial divisions. Alexander proceeded to take possession of Syria, and most of the coast of the Levant. In the following year, 332 BC, he was forced to attack Tyre, which he captured after a long and difficult siege. The men of military age were massacred and the women and children sold into slavery.

===Egypt===

When Alexander destroyed Tyre, most of the towns on the route to Egypt quickly capitulated. However, Alexander was met with resistance at Gaza. The stronghold was heavily fortified and built on a hill, requiring a siege. When &quot;his engineers pointed out to him that because of the height of the mound it would be impossible... this encouraged Alexander all the more to make the attempt&quot;. After three unsuccessful assaults, the stronghold fell, but not before Alexander had received a serious shoulder wound. As in Tyre, men of military age were put to the sword, and the women and children were sold into slavery.

Egypt was only one of a large number of territories taken by Alexander from the Persians. After his trip to Siwa, Alexander was crowned in the temple of Ptah at Memphis. It appears that the Egyptian people did not find it disturbing that he was a foreigner – nor that he was absent for virtually his entire reign. Alexander restored the temples neglected by the Persians and dedicated new monuments to the Egyptian gods. In the temple of Luxor, near Karnak, he built a chapel for the sacred barge. During his brief months in Egypt, he reformed the taxation system on the Greek models and organized the military occupation of the country, but in early 331 BC he left for Asia in pursuit of the Persians.

Alexander advanced on Egypt in later 332 BC where he was regarded as a liberator. To legitimize taking power and be recognized as the descendant of the long line of pharaohs, Alexander made sacrifices to the gods at Memphis and went to consult the famous oracle of Amun-Ra at the Siwa Oasis in the Libyan desert, at which he was pronounced the son of the deity Amun. Henceforth, Alexander often referred to Zeus-Ammon as his true father, and after his death, currency depicted him adorned with horns, using the Horns of Ammon as a symbol of his divinity. The Greeks interpreted this message – one that the gods addressed to all pharaohs – as a prophecy.

During his stay in Egypt, he founded Alexandria, which would become the prosperous capital of the Ptolemaic Kingdom after his death. Control of Egypt passed to Ptolemy I (son of Lagos), the founder of the Ptolemaic Dynasty (305–30 BC) after the death of Alexander.

===Assyria and Babylonia===
Leaving Egypt in 331 BC, Alexander marched eastward into Achaemenid Assyria in Upper Mesopotamia (now northern Iraq) and defeated Darius again at the Battle of Gaugamela. Darius once more fled the field, and Alexander chased him as far as Arbela. Gaugamela would be the final and decisive encounter between the two. Darius fled over the mountains to Ecbatana (modern Hamadan) while Alexander captured Babylon.

Babylonian astronomical diaries say that &quot;the king of the world, Alexander&quot; sent his scouts with a message to the people of Babylon before entering the city: &quot;I shall not enter your houses&quot;.

===Persia===

From Babylon, Alexander went to Susa, one of the Achaemenid capitals, and captured its treasury. He sent the bulk of his army to the Persian ceremonial capital of Persepolis via the Persian Royal Road. Alexander himself took selected troops on the direct route to the city. He then stormed the pass of the Persian Gates (in the modern Zagros Mountains) which had been blocked by a Persian army under Ariobarzanes and then hurried to Persepolis before its garrison could loot the treasury.

On entering Persepolis, Alexander allowed his troops to loot the city for several days. Alexander stayed in Persepolis for five months. During his stay, a fire broke out in the eastern palace of Xerxes I and spread to the rest of the city. Possible causes include a drunken accident or deliberate revenge for the burning of the Acropolis of Athens during the Second Persian War by Xerxes; Plutarch and Diodorus allege that Alexander&#x27;s companion, the hetaera Thaïs, instigated and started the fire. Even as he watched the city burn, Alexander immediately began to regret his decision. Plutarch claims that he ordered his men to put out the fires but the flames had already spread to most of the city. Curtius claims that Alexander did not regret his decision until the next morning. Plutarch recounts an anecdote in which Alexander pauses and talks to a fallen statue of Xerxes as if it were a live person:

===Fall of the Persian Empire and the East===

Alexander then chased Darius, first into Media, and then Parthia. The Persian king no longer controlled his own destiny, and was taken prisoner by Bessus, his Bactrian satrap and kinsman. As Alexander approached, Bessus had his men fatally stab the Great King and then declared himself Darius&#x27;s successor as Artaxerxes V, before retreating into Central Asia to launch a guerrilla campaign against Alexander. Alexander buried Darius&#x27;s remains next to his Achaemenid predecessors in a regal funeral. He claimed that, while dying, Darius had named him as his successor to the Achaemenid throne. The Achaemenid Empire is normally considered to have fallen with Darius. However, as basic forms of community life and the general structure of government were maintained and resuscitated by Alexander under his own rule, he, in the words of the Iranologist Pierre Briant &quot;may therefore be considered to have acted in many ways as the &quot;last of the Achaemenids&quot;.&quot;

Alexander viewed Bessus as a usurper and set out to defeat him. This campaign, initially against Bessus, turned into a grand tour of central Asia. Alexander founded a series of new cities, all called Alexandria, including modern Kandahar in Afghanistan, and Alexandria Eschate (&quot;The Furthest&quot;) in modern Tajikistan. The campaign took Alexander through Media, Parthia, Aria (West Afghanistan), Drangiana, Arachosia (South and Central Afghanistan), Bactria (North and Central Afghanistan), and Scythia.

In 329 BC, Spitamenes, who held an undefined position in the satrapy of Sogdiana, betrayed Bessus to Ptolemy, one of Alexander&#x27;s trusted companions, and Bessus was executed. However, at some point later when Alexander was on the Jaxartes dealing with an incursion by a horse nomad army, Spitamenes raised Sogdiana in revolt. Alexander personally defeated the Scythians at the Battle of Jaxartes and immediately launched a campaign against Spitamenes, defeating him in the Battle of Gabai. After the defeat, Spitamenes was killed by his own men, who then sued for peace.

===Problems and plots===

During this time, Alexander adopted some elements of Persian dress and customs at his court, notably the custom of &quot;proskynesis&quot;, either a symbolic kissing of the hand, or prostration on the ground, that Persians showed to their social superiors. This was one aspect of Alexander&#x27;s broad strategy aimed at securing the aid and support of the Iranian upper classes. The Greeks however regarded the gesture of &quot;proskynesis&quot; as the province of deities and believed that Alexander meant to deify himself by requiring it. This cost him the sympathies of many of his countrymen, and he eventually abandoned it.

During the long rule of the Achaemenids, the elite positions in many segments of the empire including the central government, the army, and the many satrapies were specifically reserved for Iranians and to a major degree, Persian noblemen. The latter were in many cases additionally connected through marriage alliances with the royal Achaemenid family. This created a problem for Alexander as to whether he had to make use of the various segments and people that had given the empire its solidity and unity for a lengthy period of time. Pierre Briant explains that Alexander realized that it was insufficient to merely exploit the internal contradictions within the imperial system as in Asia Minor, Babylonia or Egypt; he also had to (re)create a central government with or without the support of the Iranians. As early as 334 BC he demonstrated awareness of this, when he challenged incumbent King Darius III &quot;by appropriating the main elements of the Achaemenid monarchy&#x27;s ideology, particularly the theme of the king who protects the lands and the peasants&quot;. Alexander wrote a letter in 332 BC to Darius III, wherein he argued that he was worthier than Darius &quot;to succeed to the Achaemenid throne&quot;. However, Alexander&#x27;s eventual decision to burn the Achaemenid palace at Persepolis in conjunction with the major rejection and opposition of the &quot;entire Persian people&quot; made it impracticable for him to pose himself as Darius&#x27; legitimate successor. Against Bessus (Artaxerxes V) however, Briant adds, Alexander reasserted &quot;his claim to legitimacy as the avenger of Darius III&quot;.

A plot against his life was revealed, and one of his officers, Philotas, was executed for failing to alert Alexander. The death of the son necessitated the death of the father, and thus Parmenion, who had been charged with guarding the treasury at Ecbatana, was assassinated at Alexander&#x27;s command, to prevent attempts at vengeance. Most infamously, Alexander personally killed the man who had saved his life at Granicus, Cleitus the Black, during a violent drunken altercation at Maracanda (modern day Samarkand in Uzbekistan), in which Cleitus accused Alexander of several judgmental mistakes and especially of having forgotten the Macedonian ways in favour of a corrupt oriental lifestyle.

Later, in the Central Asian campaign, a second plot against his life was revealed. This one was instigated by his own royal pages. His official historian, Callisthenes of Olynthus, was implicated in the plot, and in the &quot;Anabasis of Alexander&quot;, Arrian states that Callisthenes and the pages were then tortured on the rack as punishment, and likely died soon after. It remains unclear if Callisthenes was actually involved in the plot, for prior to his accusation he had fallen out of favour by leading the opposition to the attempt to introduce proskynesis.

===Macedon in Alexander&#x27;s absence===
When Alexander set out for Asia, he left his general Antipater, an experienced military and political leader, and part of Philip II&#x27;s &quot;Old Guard&quot;, in charge of Macedon. Alexander&#x27;s sacking of Thebes ensured that Greece remained quiet during his absence. The one exception was a call to arms by Spartan king Agis III in 331 BC, whom Antipater defeated and killed in the battle of Megalopolis. Antipater referred the Spartans&#x27; punishment to the League of Corinth, which then deferred to Alexander, who chose to pardon them. There was also considerable friction between Antipater and Olympias, and each complained to Alexander about the other.

In general, Greece enjoyed a period of peace and prosperity during Alexander&#x27;s campaign in Asia. Alexander sent back vast sums from his conquest, which stimulated the economy and increased trade across his empire. However, Alexander&#x27;s constant demands for troops and the migration of Macedonians throughout his empire depleted Macedon&#x27;s strength, greatly weakening it in the years after Alexander, and ultimately led to its subjugation by Rome after the Third Macedonian War (171–168 BC).

=== Coinage ===
The conquest by Philip II of Pangaeum, and then of the island of Thasos between 356 and 342 BC brought rich gold and silver mines under Macedonian control.

Alexander appears to have introduced a new coinage in Cilicia in Tarsus, after the Battle of Issus in 333 BC, which went on to become the main coinage of the empire. Alexander minted gold staters, silver tetradrachms and drachims, and various fractional bronze coins. The types of these coins remained constant in his empire. The gold series had the head of Athena on the obverse and a winged Nike (Victory) on the reverse. The silver coinage had a beardless head of Heracles wearing a lionskin headdress on the obverse and Zeus aetophoros (&#x27;eagle bearer&#x27;) enthroned with a scepter in his left hand, on the reverse. There are both Greek and non-Greek aspects to this design. Heracles and Zeus were important deities for the Macedonians, with Heracles considered to be the ancestor of the Temenid dynasty and Zeus the patron of the main Macedonian sanctuary, Dium. The lion was also the symbolic animal of the Anatolian god Sandas, worshipped at Tarsus. The reverse design of Alexander&#x27;s tetradrachms is closely modelled on the depiction of the god Baaltars (Baal of Tarsus), on the silver staters minted at Tarsus by the Persian satrap Mazaeus before Alexander&#x27;s conquest.

Alexander did not attempt to impose uniform imperial coinage throughout his new conquests. Persian coins continued to circulate in all the satrapies of the empire.

==Indian campaign==
===Forays into the Indian subcontinent===
After the death of Spitamenes and his marriage to Roxana (Raoxshna in Old Iranian) to cement relations with his new satrapies, Alexander turned to the Indian subcontinent. He invited the chieftains of the former satrapy of Gandhara (a region presently straddling eastern Afghanistan and northern Pakistan), to come to him and submit to his authority. Omphis (Indian name Ambhi), the ruler of Taxila, whose kingdom extended from the Indus to the Hydaspes (Jhelum), complied, but the chieftains of some hill clans, including the Aspasioi and Assakenoi sections of the Kambojas (known in Indian texts also as Ashvayanas and Ashvakayanas), refused to submit. Ambhi hastened to relieve Alexander of his apprehension and met him with valuable presents, placing himself and all his forces at his disposal. Alexander not only returned Ambhi his title and the gifts but he also presented him with a wardrobe of &quot;Persian robes, gold and silver ornaments, 30 horses and 1,000 talents in gold&quot;. Alexander was emboldened to divide his forces, and Ambhi assisted Hephaestion and Perdiccas in constructing a bridge over the Indus where it bends at Hund, supplied their troops with provisions, and he received Alexander and his whole army in his capital city of Taxila, with every demonstration of friendship and the most liberal hospitality.
On the subsequent advance of the Macedonian king, Taxiles accompanied him with a force of 5,000 men and took part in the Battle of the Hydaspes. After that victory, he was sent by Alexander in pursuit of Porus, to whom he was charged to offer favourable terms, but narrowly escaped losing his life at the hands of his old enemy. Subsequently, the two rivals were reconciled by the personal mediation of Alexander; Taxiles contributed zealously to the equipment of the fleet on the Hydaspes and was entrusted by Alexander with the government of the whole territory between that river and the Indus. A considerable accession of power was granted him after the death of Philip, son of Machatas, and he was allowed to retain his authority at the death of Alexander himself (323 BC), as well as in the subsequent partition of the provinces at Triparadisus, 321 BC.

In the winter of 327/326 BC, Alexander personally led a campaign against the Aspasioi of the Kunar Valley, the Guraeans of the Guraeus Valley, and the Assakenoi of the Swat and Buner Valleys. A fierce contest ensued with the Aspasioi in which Alexander was wounded in the shoulder by a dart, but eventually the Aspasioi lost. Alexander then faced the Assakenoi who fought against him from the strongholds of Massaga, Ora, and Aornos.

The fort of Massaga was reduced after days of bloody fighting in which Alexander was seriously wounded in the ankle. According to Curtius, &quot;Not only did Alexander slaughter the entire population of Massaga, but also did he reduce its buildings to rubble.&quot; A similar slaughter followed at Ora. In the aftermath of Massaga and Ora, numerous Assakenians fled to the fortress of Aornos. Alexander followed close behind and captured the strategic hill-fort after four bloody days.
After Aornos, Alexander crossed the Indus and won an epic battle against King Porus, who ruled a region lying between the Hydaspes and the Acesines (Chenab), in what is now the Punjab, in the Battle of the Hydaspes in 326 BC. Alexander was impressed by Porus&#x27;s bravery and made him an ally. He appointed Porus as satrap, and added to Porus&#x27;s territory land that he did not previously own, towards the south-east, up to the Hyphasis (Beas). Choosing a local helped him control these lands that were distant from Greece. Alexander founded two cities on opposite sides of the Hydaspes river, naming one Bucephala, in honour of his horse, who died around this time. The other was Nicaea (Victory), thought to be located at the site of modern-day Mong, Punjab. Philostratus the Elder in the &quot;Life of Apollonius of Tyana&quot; writes that in the army of Porus, there was an elephant who fought bravely against Alexander&#x27;s army, and Alexander dedicated it to the Helios (Sun) and named it Ajax because he thought that such a great animal deserved a great name. The elephant had gold rings around its tusks and an inscription was on them written in Greek: &quot;Alexander the son of Zeus dedicates Ajax to the Helios&quot; (ΑΛΕΞΑΝΔΡΟΣ Ο ΔΙΟΣ ΤΟΝ ΑΙΑΝΤΑ ΤΩΙ ΗΛΙΩΙ).

===Revolt of the Hellenic army===
East of Porus&#x27;s kingdom, near the Ganges River, was the Nanda Empire of Magadha, and further east, the Gangaridai Empire of Bengal region of the Indian subcontinent. Fearing the prospect of facing other large armies and exhausted by years of campaigning, Alexander&#x27;s army mutinied at the Hyphasis River (Beas), refusing to march farther east. This river thus marks the easternmost extent of Alexander&#x27;s conquests.

Alexander tried to persuade his soldiers to march farther, but his general Coenus pleaded with him to change his opinion and return; the men, he said, &quot;longed to again see their parents, their wives and children, their homeland&quot;. Alexander eventually agreed and turned south, marching along the Indus. Along the way his army conquered the Malhi (in modern-day Multan) and other Indian tribes; while besieging the Mallian citadel, Alexander suffered a near-fatal injury when an arrow penetrated his armor and entered his lung.

Alexander sent much of his army to Carmania (modern southern Iran) with general Craterus, and commissioned a fleet to explore the Persian Gulf shore under his admiral Nearchus, while he led the rest back to Persia through the more difficult southern route along the Gedrosian Desert and Makran. Alexander reached Susa in 324 BC, but not before losing many men to the harsh desert.

==Last years in Persia==

Discovering that many of his satraps and military governors had misbehaved in his absence, Alexander executed several of them as examples on his way to Susa. As a gesture of thanks, he paid off the debts of his soldiers, and announced that he would send over-aged and disabled veterans back to Macedon, led by Craterus. His troops misunderstood his intention and mutinied at the town of Opis. They refused to be sent away and criticized his adoption of Persian customs and dress and the introduction of Persian officers and soldiers into Macedonian units.

After three days, unable to persuade his men to back down, Alexander gave Persians command posts in the army and conferred Macedonian military titles upon Persian units. The Macedonians quickly begged forgiveness, which Alexander accepted, and held a great banquet with several thousand of his men. In an attempt to craft a lasting harmony between his Macedonian and Persian subjects, Alexander held a mass marriage of his senior officers to Persian and other noblewomen at Susa, but few of those marriages seem to have lasted much beyond a year.
Meanwhile, upon his return to Persia, Alexander learned that guards of the tomb of Cyrus the Great in Pasargadae had desecrated it, and swiftly executed them. Alexander admired Cyrus the Great, from an early age reading Xenophon&#x27;s &quot;Cyropaedia&quot;, which described Cyrus&#x27;s heroism in battle and governance as a king and legislator. During his visit to Pasargadae, Alexander ordered his architect Aristobulus to decorate the interior of the sepulchral chamber of Cyrus&#x27;s tomb.

Afterwards, Alexander travelled to Ecbatana to retrieve the bulk of the Persian treasure. There, his closest friend, Hephaestion, died of illness or poisoning. Hephaestion&#x27;s death devastated Alexander and he ordered the preparation of an expensive funeral pyre in Babylon along with a decree for public mourning. Back in Babylon, Alexander planned a series of new campaigns, beginning with an invasion of Arabia.

==Death and succession==

On either 10 or 11 June 323 BC, Alexander died in the palace of Nebuchadnezzar II, in Babylon, at age 32. There are two different versions of Alexander&#x27;s death, differing slightly in details. Plutarch&#x27;s account is that roughly 14 days before his death, Alexander entertained admiral Nearchus and spent the night and next day drinking with Medius of Larissa. Alexander developed a fever, which worsened until he was unable to speak. The common soldiers, anxious about his health, were granted the right to file past him as he silently waved at them. In the second account, Diodorus recounts that Alexander was struck with pain after downing a large bowl of unmixed wine in honour of Heracles followed by 11 days of weakness; he did not develop a fever, instead dying after some agony. Arrian also mentioned this as an alternative, but Plutarch specifically denied this claim.

Given the propensity of the Macedonian aristocracy to assassination and Alexander&#x27;s relatively young age, foul play featured in multiple accounts of his death. Diodorus, Plutarch, Arrian and Justin all mentioned the theory that Alexander was poisoned. Justin stated that Alexander was the victim of a poisoning conspiracy, Plutarch dismissed it as a fabrication, while both Diodorus and Arrian noted that they mentioned it only for the sake of completeness. The accounts were nevertheless fairly consistent in designating Antipater, recently removed as Macedonian viceroy, replaced by Craterus, as the head of the alleged plot. Perhaps taking his summons to Babylon as a death sentence and having seen the fate of Parmenion and Philotas, Antipater purportedly arranged for Alexander to be poisoned by his son Iollas, who was Alexander&#x27;s wine-pourer. There was even a suggestion that Aristotle may have participated. 
The strongest argument against the poison theory is the fact that twelve days passed between the start of his illness and his death; such long-acting poisons were probably not available. However, in a 2003 BBC documentary investigating the death of Alexander, Leo Schep from the New Zealand National Poisons Centre proposed that the plant white hellebore (&quot;Veratrum album&quot;), which was known in antiquity, may have been used to poison Alexander. In a 2014 manuscript in the journal &quot;Clinical Toxicology&quot;, Schep suggested Alexander&#x27;s wine was spiked with &quot;Veratrum album&quot;, and that this would produce poisoning symptoms that match the course of events described in the &quot;Alexander Romance&quot;. &quot;Veratrum album&quot; poisoning can have a prolonged course and it was suggested that if Alexander was poisoned, &quot;Veratrum album&quot; offers the most plausible cause. Another poisoning explanation put forward in 2010 proposed that the circumstances of his death were compatible with poisoning by water of the river Styx (modern-day Mavroneri in Arcadia, Greece) that contained calicheamicin, a dangerous compound produced by bacteria.

Several natural causes (diseases) have been suggested, including malaria and typhoid fever. A 1998 article in the &quot;New England Journal of Medicine&quot; attributed his death to typhoid fever complicated by bowel perforation and ascending paralysis. A 2004 analysis suggested pyogenic (infectious) spondylitis or meningitis. Other illnesses fit the symptoms, including acute pancreatitis, West Nile virus, and Guillain-Barré syndrome. Natural-cause theories also tend to emphasize that Alexander&#x27;s health may have been in general decline after years of heavy drinking and severe wounds. The anguish that Alexander felt after Hephaestion&#x27;s death may also have contributed to his declining health.

===Post-death events===

Alexander&#x27;s body was laid in a gold anthropoid sarcophagus that was filled with honey, which was in turn placed in a gold casket. According to Aelian, a seer called Aristander foretold that the land where Alexander was laid to rest &quot;would be happy and unvanquishable forever&quot;. Perhaps more likely, the successors may have seen possession of the body as a symbol of legitimacy, since burying the prior king was a royal prerogative.
While Alexander&#x27;s funeral cortege was on its way to Macedon, Ptolemy seized it and took it temporarily to Memphis. His successor, Ptolemy II Philadelphus, transferred the sarcophagus to Alexandria, where it remained until at least late antiquity. Ptolemy IX Lathyros, one of Ptolemy&#x27;s final successors, replaced Alexander&#x27;s sarcophagus with a glass one so he could convert the original to coinage. The 2014 discovery of an enormous tomb in northern Greece, at Amphipolis, dating from the time of Alexander the Great has given rise to speculation that its original intent was to be the burial place of Alexander. This would fit with the intended destination of Alexander&#x27;s funeral cortege. However, the memorial was found to be dedicated to the dearest friend of Alexander the Great, Hephaestion.
Pompey, Julius Caesar and Augustus all visited the tomb in Alexandria where Augustus, allegedly, accidentally knocked the nose of Alexander&#x27;s mummified body off. Caligula was said to have taken Alexander&#x27;s breastplate from the tomb for his own use. Around AD 200, Emperor Septimius Severus closed Alexander&#x27;s tomb to the public. His son and successor, Caracalla, a great admirer, visited the tomb during his own reign. After this, details on the fate of the tomb are hazy.

The so-called &quot;Alexander Sarcophagus&quot;, discovered near Sidon and now in the Istanbul Archaeology Museum, is so named not because it was thought to have contained Alexander&#x27;s remains, but because its bas-reliefs depict Alexander and his companions fighting the Persians and hunting. It was originally thought to have been the sarcophagus of Abdalonymus (died 311 BC), the king of Sidon appointed by Alexander immediately following the battle of Issus in 331. However, in 1969, it was suggested by Karl Schefold that it may date from earlier than Abdalonymus&#x27;s death.

Demades likened the Macedonian army, after the death of Alexander, to the blinded Cyclops due to the many random and disorderly movements that it made. In addition, Leosthenes also likened the anarchy between the generals, after Alexander&#x27;s death, to the blinded Cyclops &quot;who after he had lost his eye went feeling and groping about with his hands before him, not knowing where to lay them&quot;.

===Division of the Macedonian Empire===

Alexander&#x27;s death was so sudden that when reports of his death reached Greece, they were not immediately believed. Alexander had no obvious or legitimate heir, his son Alexander IV by Roxane being born after Alexander&#x27;s death. According to Diodorus, Alexander&#x27;s companions asked him on his deathbed to whom he bequeathed his kingdom; his laconic reply was &quot;tôi kratistôi&quot;—&quot;to the strongest&quot;. Another theory is that his successors wilfully or erroneously misheard &quot;tôi Kraterôi&quot;—&quot;to Craterus&quot;, the general leading his Macedonian troops home and newly entrusted with the regency of Macedonia. Arrian and Plutarch claimed that Alexander was speechless by this time, implying that this was an apocryphal story. Diodorus, Curtius and Justin offered the more plausible story that Alexander passed his signet ring to Perdiccas, a bodyguard and leader of the companion cavalry, in front of witnesses, thereby nominating him.

Perdiccas initially did not claim power, instead suggesting that Roxane&#x27;s baby would be king, if male, with himself, Craterus, Leonnatus, and Antipater as guardians. However, the infantry, under the command of Meleager, rejected this arrangement since they had been excluded from the discussion. Instead, they supported Alexander&#x27;s half-brother Philip Arrhidaeus. Eventually, the two sides reconciled, and after the birth of Alexander IV, he and Philip III were appointed joint kings, albeit in name only. Dissension and rivalry soon affected the Macedonians. The satrapies handed out by Perdiccas at the Partition of Babylon became power bases each general used to bid for power. After the assassination of Perdiccas in 321 BC, Macedonian unity collapsed, and 40 years of war between &quot;The Successors&quot; (&quot;Diadochi&quot;) ensued before the Hellenistic world settled into three stable power blocs: Ptolemaic Egypt, Seleucid Syria and East, and Antigonid Macedonia. In the process, both Alexander IV and Philip III were murdered.

===Last plans===

Diodorus stated that Alexander had given detailed written instructions to Craterus some time before his death, which are known as Alexander&#x27;s &quot;last plans&quot;. Craterus started to carry out Alexander&#x27;s commands, but the successors chose not to further implement them, on the grounds they were impractical and extravagant. Furthermore, Perdiccas had read the notebooks containing Alexander&#x27;s last plans to the Macedonian troops in Babylon, who voted not to carry them out.

According to Diodorus, Alexander&#x27;s last plans called for military expansion into the southern and western Mediterranean, monumental constructions, and the intermixing of Eastern and Western populations. It included:
* Construction of 1,000 ships larger than triremes, along with harbours and a road running along the African coast all the way to the Pillars of Hercules, to be used for an invasion of Carthage and the western Mediterranean;
* Erection of great temples in Delos, Delphi, Dodona, Dium, Amphipolis, all costing 1,500 talents, and a monumental temple to Athena at Troy
* Amalgamation of small settlements into larger cities (&quot;synoecisms&quot;) and the &quot;transplant of populations from Asia to Europe and in the opposite direction from Europe to Asia, in order to bring the largest continent to common unity and to friendship by means of intermarriage and family ties&quot;
* Construction of a monumental tomb for his father Philip, &quot;to match the greatest of the pyramids of Egypt&quot;
* Conquest of Arabia
* Circumnavigation of Africa

The enormous scale of these plans has led many scholars to doubt their historicity. Ernst Badian argued that they were exaggerated by Perdiccas in order to ensure that the Macedonian troops voted not to carry them out. Other scholars have proposed that they were invented by later authors within the tradition of the Alexander Romance.

==Character==

===Generalship===
Alexander perhaps earned the epithet &quot;the Great&quot; due to his unparalleled success as a military commander; he never lost a battle, despite typically being outnumbered. This was due to use of terrain, phalanx and cavalry tactics, bold strategy, and the fierce loyalty of his troops. The Macedonian phalanx, armed with the sarissa, a spear long, had been developed and perfected by Philip II through rigorous training, and Alexander used its speed and manoeuvrability to great effect against larger but more disparate Persian forces. Alexander also recognized the potential for disunity among his diverse army, which employed various languages and weapons. He overcame this by being personally involved in battle, in the manner of a Macedonian king.

In his first battle in Asia, at Granicus, Alexander used only a small part of his forces, perhaps 13,000 infantry with 5,000 cavalry, against a much larger Persian force of 40,000. Alexander placed the phalanx at the center and cavalry and archers on the wings, so that his line matched the length of the Persian cavalry line, about . By contrast, the Persian infantry was stationed behind its cavalry. This ensured that Alexander would not be outflanked, while his phalanx, armed with long pikes, had a considerable advantage over the Persians&#x27; scimitars and javelins. Macedonian losses were negligible compared to those of the Persians.

At Issus in 333 BC, his first confrontation with Darius, he used the same deployment, and again the central phalanx pushed through. Alexander personally led the charge in the center, routing the opposing army. At the decisive encounter with Darius at Gaugamela, Darius equipped his chariots with scythes on the wheels to break up the phalanx and equipped his cavalry with pikes. Alexander arranged a double phalanx, with the center advancing at an angle, parting when the chariots bore down and then reforming. The advance was successful and broke Darius&#x27;s center, causing the latter to flee once again.

When faced with opponents who used unfamiliar fighting techniques, such as in Central Asia and India, Alexander adapted his forces to his opponents&#x27; style. Thus, in Bactria and Sogdiana, Alexander successfully used his javelin throwers and archers to prevent outflanking movements, while massing his cavalry at the center. In India, confronted by Porus&#x27;s elephant corps, the Macedonians opened their ranks to envelop the elephants and used their sarissas to strike upwards and dislodge the elephants&#x27; handlers.
===Physical appearance===
Historical sources frequently give conflicting accounts of Alexander&#x27;s appearance, and the earliest sources are the most scant in their detail. During his lifetime, Alexander carefully curated his image by commissioning works from famous and great artists of the time. This included commissioning sculptures by Lysippos, paintings by Apelles and gem engravings by Pyrgoteles. Ancient authors recorded that Alexander was so pleased with portraits of himself created by Lysippos that he forbade other sculptors from crafting his image; scholars today, however, find the claim dubious. Nevertheless, Andrew Stewart highlights the fact that artistic portraits, not least because of who they are commissioned by, are always partisan, and that artistic portrayals of Alexander &quot;seek to legitimize him (or, by extension, his Successors), to interpret him to their audiences, to answer their critiques, and to persuade them of his greatness&quot;, and thus should be considered within a framework of &quot;praise and blame&quot;, in the same way sources such as praise poetry are. Despite those caveats, Lysippos&#x27;s sculpture, famous for its naturalism, as opposed to a stiffer, more static pose, is thought to be the most faithful depiction.

Curtius Rufus, a Roman historian from the first century AD, who wrote the &quot;Histories of Alexander the Great&quot;, gives this account of Alexander sitting on the throne of Darius III:

Both Curtius and Diodorus report a story that when Darius III&#x27;s mother, Sisygambis, first met Alexander and Hephaestion, she assumed that the latter was Alexander because he was the taller and more handsome of the two.
The Greek biographer Plutarch () discusses the accuracy of his depictions:
Historians have understood the detail of the pleasant fragrance attributed to Alexander as stemming from a belief in ancient Greece that pleasant scents are characteristic of gods and heroes.

The Alexander Mosaic and contemporary coins portray Alexander with &quot;a straight nose, a slightly protruding jaw, full lips and eyes deep set beneath a strongly pronounced forehead&quot;. He is also described as having a slight upward tilt of his head to the left.

The ancient historian Aelian ( – ), in his &quot;Varia Historia&quot; (12.14), describes Alexander&#x27;s hair color as &quot;ξανθὴν&quot; (&quot;xanthín&quot;), which at the time, could mean blond, brown, tawny (light brown) or auburn. It is sometimes claimed that Alexander had one blue and one brown eye, referring to the &quot;Alexander Romance&quot;, which is however a fictional account that also claims Alexander &quot;had sharp teeth like fangs&quot; and &quot;did not look like Philip or Olympias&quot;. Reconstruction, based on remaining traces of paint of the original polychromy on his sarcophagus, indicates that he was depicted with brown eyes and chestnut brown hair. While the acropolis museum suggests that trace amounts of red paint on a head statue of Alexander were most likely a base coat for golden hues to be painted over for his hair.

===Personality===
Both of Alexander&#x27;s parents encouraged his ambitions. His father Philip was probably Alexander&#x27;s most immediate and influential role model, as the young Alexander watched him campaign practically every year, winning victory after victory while ignoring severe wounds. Alexander&#x27;s relationship with his father &quot;forged&quot; the competitive side of his personality; he had a need to outdo his father, illustrated by his reckless behavior in battle. While Alexander worried that his father would leave him &quot;no great or brilliant achievement to be displayed to the world&quot;, he also downplayed his father&#x27;s achievements to his companions. Alexander&#x27;s mother Olympia similarly had huge ambitions, and encouraged her son to believe it was his destiny to conquer the Persian Empire. She instilled a sense of destiny in him, and Plutarch tells how his ambition &quot;kept his spirit serious and lofty in advance of his years&quot;.

According to Plutarch, Alexander also had a violent temper and rash, impulsive nature, which could influence his decision making. Although Alexander was stubborn and did not respond well to orders from his father, he was open to reasoned debate. He had a calmer side—perceptive, logical, and calculating. He had a great desire for knowledge, a love for philosophy, and was an avid reader. This was no doubt in part due to Aristotle&#x27;s tutelage; Alexander was intelligent and quick to learn. His intelligent and rational side was amply demonstrated by his ability and success as a general. He had great self-restraint in &quot;pleasures of the body&quot;, in contrast with his lack of self-control with alcohol.
Alexander was erudite and patronized both arts and sciences. However, he had little interest in sports or the Olympic Games (unlike his father), seeking only the Homeric ideals of honour (&quot;timê&quot;) and glory (&quot;kudos&quot;). He had great charisma and force of personality, characteristics which made him a great leader. His unique abilities were further demonstrated by the inability of any of his generals to unite Macedonia and retain the Empire after his death—only Alexander had the ability to do so.

During his final years, and especially after the death of Hephaestion, Alexander began to exhibit signs of and paranoia. His extraordinary achievements, coupled with his own ineffable sense of destiny and the flattery of his companions, may have combined to produce this effect. His delusions of grandeur are readily visible in his will and in his desire to conquer the world, in as much as he is by various sources described as having &quot;boundless ambition&quot;, an epithet, the meaning of which has descended into a historical cliché.

He appears to have believed himself a deity, or at least sought to deify himself. Olympias always insisted to him that he was the son of Zeus, an idea apparently confirmed to him by the oracle of Amun at Siwa. He began to identify himself as the son of Zeus-Ammon. Alexander adopted elements of Persian dress and customs at court, notably &quot;proskynesis&quot;, which was one aspect of Alexander&#x27;s broad strategy aimed at securing the aid and support of the Iranian upper classes; however the practise of &quot;proskynesis&quot; was disapproved by the Macedonians, and they were unwilling to perform it. This behaviour cost him the sympathies of many of his countrymen. Alexander also was a pragmatic ruler who understood the difficulties of ruling culturally disparate peoples, many of whom lived in societies where the king was treated as divine. Thus, rather than megalomania, his behaviour may have been a practical attempt at strengthening his rule and keeping his empire together.

===Personal relationships===
Alexander married three times: Roxana, daughter of the Sogdian nobleman Oxyartes of Bactria, out of love; and the Persian princesses Stateira and Parysatis, the former a daughter of Darius III and the latter a daughter of Artaxerxes III, for political reasons. Alexander apparently had two children by Roxana: an unnamed first child, who was born in India and died in infancy in November 326 BC, and Alexander IV of Macedon, born after his father&#x27;s death. Additionally Heracles of Macedon was claimed to be his illegitimate son born of mistress, Barsine. 

Alexander also had a close relationship with his friend, general, and bodyguard Hephaestion, the son of a Macedonian noble. Hephaestion&#x27;s death devastated Alexander. This event may have contributed to Alexander&#x27;s failing health and detached mental state during his final months.

=== Sexuality ===

Alexander&#x27;s sexuality has been the subject of speculation and controversy in modern times. The Roman era writer Athenaeus says, based on the scholar Dicaearchus, who was Alexander&#x27;s contemporary, that the king &quot;was quite excessively keen on boys&quot;, and that Alexander kissed the eunuch Bagoas in public. This episode is also told by Plutarch, probably based on the same source. Historian William Woodthorpe Tarn rejected the stories of Bagoas as fabricated in ancient times to defame Alexander, mainly referring to the Rufus&#x27;s fairly fictionalized biography of Alexander that criticized the Macedonian&#x27;s &quot;degeneration&quot; in embracing foreign Persian customs However, in 1958 Badian countered Tarn’s arguments, though his concern was the issue of the reliability of sources for Alexander rather than the figure of the eunuch himself. None of Alexander&#x27;s contemporaries, however, are known to have explicitly described Alexander&#x27;s relationship with Hephaestion as sexual, though the pair was often compared to Achilles and Patroclus, who are often interpreted as a couple. Aelian writes of Alexander&#x27;s visit to Troy where &quot;Alexander garlanded the tomb of Achilles, and Hephaestion that of Patroclus, the latter hinting that he was a beloved of Alexander, in just the same way as Patroclus was of Achilles.&quot; Some modern historians (e.g., Robin Lane Fox) believe not only that Alexander&#x27;s youthful relationship with Hephaestion was sexual, but also that their sexual contacts may have continued into adulthood, which went against the social norms of at least some Greek cities, such as Athens, though some modern researchers have tentatively proposed that Macedonia (or at least the Macedonian court) may have been more tolerant of homosexuality between adults.

Peter Green argues that there is little evidence in ancient sources that Alexander had much sexual interest in women; he did not produce an heir until the very end of his life. However, Ogden calculates that Alexander, who impregnated his partners thrice in eight years, had a higher matrimonial record than his father at the same age. Two of these pregnancies—Stateira&#x27;s and Barsine&#x27;s—are of dubious legitimacy.

According to Diodorus Siculus, Alexander accumulated a harem in the style of Persian kings, but he used it rather sparingly, &quot;not wishing to offend the Macedonians&quot;, showing great self-control in &quot;pleasures of the body&quot;. Nevertheless, Plutarch described how Alexander was infatuated by Roxana while complimenting him on not forcing himself on her. Green suggested that, in the context of the period, Alexander formed quite strong friendships with women, including Ada of Caria, who adopted him, and even Darius&#x27;s mother Sisygambis, who supposedly died from grief upon hearing of Alexander&#x27;s death.

==Battle record==
==Legacy==

Alexander&#x27;s legacy extended beyond his military conquests, and his reign marked a turning point in European and Asian history. His campaigns greatly increased contacts and trade between East and West, and vast areas to the east were significantly exposed to Greek civilization and influence. Some of the cities he founded became major cultural centers, many surviving into the 21st century. His chroniclers recorded valuable information about the areas through which he marched, while the Greeks themselves got a sense of belonging to a world beyond the Mediterranean.

===Hellenistic kingdoms===

Alexander&#x27;s most immediate legacy was the introduction of Macedonian rule to huge new swathes of Asia. At the time of his death, Alexander&#x27;s empire covered some , and was the largest state of its time. Many of these areas remained in Macedonian hands or under Greek influence for the next 200–300 years. The successor states that emerged were, at least initially, dominant forces, and these 300 years are often referred to as the Hellenistic period.

The eastern borders of Alexander&#x27;s empire began to collapse even during his lifetime. However, the power vacuum he left in the northwest of the Indian subcontinent directly gave rise to one of the most powerful Indian dynasties in history, the Maurya Empire. Taking advantage of this power vacuum, Chandragupta Maurya (referred to in Greek sources as &quot;Sandrokottos&quot;), of relatively humble origin, took control of the Punjab, and with that power base proceeded to conquer the Nanda Empire.

===Founding of cities===

Over the course of his conquests, Alexander founded many cities that bore his name, most of them east of the Tigris. The first, and greatest, was Alexandria in Egypt, which would become one of the leading Mediterranean cities. The cities&#x27; locations reflected trade routes as well as defensive positions. At first, the cities must have been inhospitable, little more than defensive garrisons. Following Alexander&#x27;s death, many Greeks who had settled there tried to return to Greece. However, a century or so after Alexander&#x27;s death, many of the Alexandrias were thriving, with elaborate public buildings and substantial populations that included both Greek and local peoples.

===Funding of temples===

In 334 BC, Alexander the Great donated funds for the completion of the new temple of Athena Polias in Priene, in modern-day western Turkey. An inscription from the temple, now housed in the British Museum, declares: &quot;King Alexander dedicated [this temple] to Athena Polias.&quot; This inscription is one of the few independent archaeological discoveries confirming an episode from Alexander&#x27;s life. The temple was designed by Pytheos, one of the architects of the Mausoleum at Halicarnassus.

Libanius wrote that Alexander founded the temple of Zeus Bottiaios (), in the place where later the city of Antioch was built.

Suda wrote that Alexander built a big temple to Sarapis.

In 2023, British Museum experts have suggested the possibility that a Greek temple at Girsu in Iraq, was founded by Alexander. According to the researchers, recent discoveries suggest that &quot;this site honours Zeus and two divine sons. The sons are Heracles and Alexander.&quot;

===Hellenization===

&quot;Hellenization&quot; was coined by the German historian Johann Gustav Droysen to denote the spread of Greek language, culture, and population into the former Persian empire after Alexander&#x27;s conquest. This process can be seen in such great Hellenistic cities as Alexandria, Antioch and Seleucia (south of modern Baghdad). Alexander sought to insert Greek elements into Persian culture and to hybridize Greek and Persian culture, homogenizing the populations of Asia and Europe. Although his successors explicitly rejected such policies, Hellenization occurred throughout the region, accompanied by a distinct and opposite &#x27;Orientalization&#x27; of the successor states.

The core of the Hellenistic culture promulgated by the conquests was essentially Athenian. The close association of men from across Greece in Alexander&#x27;s army directly led to the emergence of the largely Attic-based &quot;koine&quot;, or &quot;common&quot; Greek dialect. Koine spread throughout the Hellenistic world, becoming the lingua franca of Hellenistic lands, and eventually the ancestor of modern Greek. Furthermore, town planning, education, local government, and art current in the Hellenistic period were all based on Classical Greek ideals, evolving into distinct new forms commonly grouped as Hellenistic. Also, the New Testament was written in the Koine Greek language. Aspects of Hellenistic culture were still evident in the traditions of the Byzantine Empire in the mid-15th century.

==== Hellenization in South and Central Asia ====
Some of the most pronounced effects of Hellenization can be seen in Afghanistan and India, in the region of the relatively late-rising Greco-Bactrian Kingdom (250–125 BC) (in modern Afghanistan, Pakistan, and Tajikistan) and the Indo-Greek Kingdom (180 BC – 10 AD) in modern Afghanistan and India. On the Silk Road trade routes, Hellenistic culture hybridized with Iranian and Buddhist cultures. The cosmopolitan art and mythology of Gandhara (a region spanning the upper confluence of the Indus, Swat and Kabul rivers in modern Pakistan) of the ~3rd century BC to the ~5th century AD are most evident of the direct contact between Hellenistic civilization and South Asia, as are the Edicts of Ashoka, which directly mention the Greeks within Ashoka&#x27;s dominion as converting to Buddhism and the reception of Buddhist emissaries by Ashoka&#x27;s contemporaries in the Hellenistic world. The resulting syncretism known as Greco-Buddhism influenced the development of Buddhism and created a culture of Greco-Buddhist art. These Greco-Buddhist kingdoms sent some of the first Buddhist missionaries to China, Sri Lanka and Hellenistic Asia and Europe (Greco-Buddhist monasticism).

Some of the first and most influential figurative portrayals of The Buddha appeared at this time, perhaps modelled on Greek statues of Apollo in the Greco-Buddhist style. Several Buddhist traditions may have been influenced by the ancient Greek religion: the concept of Boddhisatvas is reminiscent of Greek divine heroes, and some Mahayana ceremonial practices (burning incense, gifts of flowers, and food placed on altars) are similar to those practised by the ancient Greeks; however, similar practices were also observed amongst the native Indic culture. One Greek king, Menander I, probably became Buddhist, and was immortalized in Buddhist literature as &#x27;Milinda&#x27;. The process of Hellenization also spurred trade between the east and west. For example, Greek astronomical instruments dating to the 3rd century BC were found in the Greco-Bactrian city of Ai Khanoum in modern-day Afghanistan, while the Greek concept of a spherical Earth surrounded by the spheres of planets eventually supplanted the long-standing Indian cosmological belief of a disc consisting of four continents grouped around a central mountain (Mount Meru) like the petals of a flower. The Yavanajataka (lit. Greek astronomical treatise) and Paulisa Siddhanta texts depict the influence of Greek astronomical ideas on Indian astronomy.

Following the conquests of Alexander the Great in the east, Hellenistic influence on Indian art was far-reaching. In architecture, a few examples of the Ionic order can be found as far as Pakistan with the Jandial temple near Taxila. Several examples of capitals displaying Ionic influences can be seen as far as Patna, especially with the Pataliputra capital, dated to the 3rd century BC. The Corinthian order is also heavily represented in the art of Gandhara, especially through Indo-Corinthian capitals.

===Influence on Rome===

Alexander and his exploits were admired by many Romans, especially generals, who wanted to associate themselves with his achievements. Polybius began his &quot;Histories&quot; by reminding Romans of Alexander&#x27;s achievements, and thereafter Roman leaders saw him as a role model. Pompey the Great adopted the epithet &quot;Magnus&quot; and even Alexander&#x27;s anastole-type haircut, and searched the conquered lands of the east for Alexander&#x27;s 260-year-old cloak, which he then wore as a sign of greatness. Julius Caesar dedicated a Lysippean equestrian bronze statue, but replaced Alexander&#x27;s head with his own, while Octavian visited Alexander&#x27;s tomb in Alexandria and temporarily changed his seal from a sphinx to Alexander&#x27;s profile. The emperor Trajan also admired Alexander, as did Nero and Caracalla. The Macriani, a Roman family that in the person of Macrinus briefly ascended to the imperial throne, kept images of Alexander on their persons, either on jewellery or embroidered into their clothes.

On the other hand, some Roman writers, particularly Republican figures, used Alexander as a cautionary tale of how autocratic tendencies can be kept in check by the values of the Roman Republic. Alexander was used by these writers as an example of ruler values such as (friendship) and (clemency), but also (anger) and (over-desire for glory).

Emperor Julian in his satire called &quot;The Caesars&quot;, describes a contest between the previous Roman emperors, with Alexander the Great called in as an extra contestant, in the presence of the assembled gods.

The Itinerarium Alexandri is a 4th-century Latin description of Alexander the Great&#x27;s campaigns. Julius Caesar went to serve his quaestorship in Hispania after his wife&#x27;s funeral, in the spring or early summer of 69 BC. While there, he encountered a statue of Alexander the Great, and realised with dissatisfaction that he was now at an age when Alexander had the world at his feet, while he had achieved comparatively little.

Pompey posed as the &quot;new Alexander&quot; since he was his boyhood hero.

After Caracalla concluded his campaign against the Alamanni, it became evident that he was inordinately preoccupied with Alexander the Great. He began openly mimicking Alexander in his personal style. In planning his invasion of the Parthian Empire, Caracalla decided to arrange 16,000 of his men in Macedonian-style phalanxes, despite the Roman army having made the phalanx an obsolete tactical formation. The historian Christopher Matthew mentions that the term &quot;Phalangarii&quot; has two possible meanings, both with military connotations. The first refers merely to the Roman battle line and does not specifically mean that the men were armed with pikes, and the second bears similarity to the &#x27;Marian Mules&#x27; of the late Roman Republic who carried their equipment suspended from a long pole, which were in use until at least the 2nd century AD. As a consequence, the &quot;Phalangarii&quot; of Legio II Parthica may not have been pikemen, but rather standard battle line troops or possibly &quot;Triarii&quot;.

Caracalla&#x27;s mania for Alexander went so far that Caracalla visited Alexandria while preparing for his Persian invasion and persecuted philosophers of the Aristotelian school based on a legend that Aristotle had poisoned Alexander. This was a sign of Caracalla&#x27;s increasingly erratic behaviour. But this mania for Alexander, strange as it was, was overshadowed by subsequent events in Alexandria.

In 39, Caligula performed a spectacular stunt by ordering a temporary floating bridge to be built using ships as pontoons, stretching for over two miles from the resort of Baiae to the neighbouring port of Puteoli. It was said that the bridge was to rival the Persian king Xerxes&#x27; pontoon bridge crossing of the Hellespont. Caligula, who could not swim, then proceeded to ride his favourite horse Incitatus across, wearing the breastplate of Alexander the Great. This act was in defiance of a prediction by Tiberius&#x27;s soothsayer Thrasyllus of Mendes that Caligula had &quot;no more chance of becoming emperor than of riding a horse across the Bay of Baiae&quot;.

The diffusion of Greek culture and language cemented by Alexander&#x27;s conquests in West Asia and North Africa served as a &quot;precondition&quot; for the later Roman expansion into these territories and entire basis for the Byzantine Empire, according to Errington.

===Letters===

Alexander wrote and received numerous letters, but no originals survive. A few official letters addressed to the Greek cities survive in copies inscribed in stone and the content of others is sometimes reported in historical sources. These only occasionally quote the letters and it is an open question how reliable such quotations are. Several fictitious letters, some perhaps based on actual letters, made their way into the &quot;Romance&quot; tradition.

===In legend===

Many of the legends about Alexander derive from his own lifetime, probably encouraged by Alexander himself. His court historian Callisthenes portrayed the sea in Cilicia as drawing back from him in proskynesis. Writing shortly after Alexander&#x27;s death, Onesicritus invented a tryst between Alexander and Thalestris, queen of the mythical Amazons. He reportedly read this passage to his patron King Lysimachus, who had been one of Alexander&#x27;s generals and who quipped, &quot;I wonder where I was at the time.&quot;

In the first centuries after Alexander&#x27;s death, probably in Alexandria, a quantity of the legendary material coalesced into a text known as the &quot;Alexander Romance&quot;, later falsely ascribed to Callisthenes and therefore known as &quot;Pseudo-Callisthenes&quot;. This text underwent over one hundred recensions, translations, and derivations throughout the Islamic and European worlds in premodern times, containing many dubious stories, and was translated into twenty-five languages, for example Middle Persian, Syriac and Arabic.

===In ancient and modern culture===

Alexander the Great&#x27;s accomplishments and legacy have been depicted in many cultures. Alexander has featured in both high and popular culture, beginning from his own era to the present day. The &quot;Alexander Romance&quot;, in particular, has had a significant impact on portrayals of Alexander in later cultures, from Persian to medieval European, to modern Greek.

Alexander features prominently in modern Greek folklore, more than any other ancient figure. The colloquial form of his name in modern Greek (&quot;O Megalexandros&quot;) is a household name, and he is the only ancient hero to appear in the Karagiozis shadow play. One well-known fable among Greek seamen involves a solitary mermaid who would grasp a ship&#x27;s prow during a storm and ask the captain, &quot;Is King Alexander alive?&quot; The answer should be &quot;He is alive and well and rules the world!&quot; causing the mermaid to vanish and the sea to calm. Any other answer would cause the mermaid to turn into a raging Gorgon who would drag the ship to the bottom of the sea, all hands aboard.
In pre-Islamic Middle Persian (Zoroastrian) literature, Alexander is referred to by the epithet &quot;gujastak&quot;, meaning &quot;accursed&quot;, and is accused of destroying temples and burning the sacred texts of Zoroastrianism. In Islamic Persia, under the influence of the &quot;Alexander Romance&quot; (in &quot;Iskandarnameh&quot;), a more positive portrayal of Alexander emerges. Firdausi&#x27;s &quot;Shahnameh&quot; (&quot;The Book of Kings&quot;) includes Alexander in a line of legitimate Persian shahs, a mythical figure who explored the far reaches of the world in search of the Fountain of Youth. In the &quot;Shahnameh&quot;, Alexander&#x27;s first journey is to Mecca to pray at the Kaaba. Alexander was depicted as performing a Hajj (pilgrimage to Mecca) many times in subsequent Islamic art and literature. Later Persian writers associate him with philosophy, portraying him at a symposium with figures such as Socrates, Plato and Aristotle, in search of immortality.
The figure of Dhu al-Qarnayn (Arabic: ذو القرنين; lit. &quot;The Two-Horned One&quot;) is believed by the majority of modern researchers of the Qur&#x27;an as well as Islamic commentators to be a reference to Alexander. The figure is also believed by scholars to be based on later legends of Alexander. In this tradition, he was a heroic figure who built a wall to defend against the nations of Gog and Magog. He also travelled the known world in search of the Water of Life and Immortality, eventually becoming a prophet.

The Syriac version of the &quot;Alexander Romance&quot; portrays him as an ideal Christian world conqueror who prayed to &quot;the one true God&quot;. In Egypt, Alexander was portrayed as the son of Nectanebo II, the last pharaoh before the Persian conquest. His defeat of Darius was depicted as Egypt&#x27;s salvation, &quot;proving&quot; Egypt was still ruled by an Egyptian.

According to Josephus, Alexander was shown the Book of Daniel when he entered Jerusalem, which described a mighty Greek king who would conquer the Persian Empire. This is cited as a reason for sparing Jerusalem.
In Hindi and Urdu, the name &quot;Sikandar&quot;, derived from the Persian name for Alexander, denotes a rising young talent, and the Delhi Sultanate ruler Alauddin Khalji stylized himself as &quot;Sikandar-i-Sani&quot; (the Second Alexander the Great). In medieval India, Turkic and Afghan sovereigns from the Iranian-cultured region of Central Asia brought positive cultural connotations of Alexander to the Indian subcontinent, resulting in the efflorescence of &quot;Sikandernameh&quot; (Alexander Romances) written by Indo-Persian poets such as Amir Khusrau and the prominence of Alexander the Great as a popular subject in Mughal-era Persian miniatures. In medieval Europe, Alexander the Great was revered as a member of the Nine Worthies; a group of heroes whose lives were believed to encapsulate all the ideal qualities of chivalry. During the first Italian campaign of the French Revolutionary Wars, in a question from Bourrienne, asking whether he gave his preference to Alexander or Caesar, Napoleon said that he places Alexander The Great in the first rank, the main reason being his campaign on Asia.

In the &quot;Greek Anthology&quot;, there are poems referring to Alexander.

==Historiography==

Apart from a few inscriptions and fragments, texts written by people who actually knew Alexander or who gathered information from men who served with Alexander were all lost. Contemporaries who wrote accounts of his life included Alexander&#x27;s campaign historian Callisthenes, Alexander&#x27;s generals; Ptolemy and Nearchus, Aristobulus, a junior officer on the campaigns, and Onesicritus, Alexander&#x27;s chief helmsman. Their works are lost, but later works based on these original sources have survived. The earliest of these is Diodorus Siculus (1st century BC), followed by Quintus Curtius Rufus (mid-to-late 1st century AD), Arrian (1st to 2nd century AD), the biographer Plutarch (1st to 2nd century AD), and finally Justin, whose work dated as late as the 4th century. Of these, Arrian is generally considered the most reliable, given that he used Ptolemy and Aristobulus as his sources, closely followed by Diodorus.

==See also==

* Alexander the Great in Islamic tradition
* Ancient Macedonian army
* Bucephalus
* Chronology of European exploration of Asia
* Horns of Alexander
* List of biblical figures identified in extra-biblical sources
* List of people known as The Great
* Gates of Alexander
* Military tactics of Alexander the Great
* Ptolemaic cult of Alexander the Great
* Theories about Alexander the Great in the Quran

==References==
===Notes===





===Citations===
===Sources===

====Primary sources====
* 
* 
* 
====Secondary sources====
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
*
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
*
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
==Further reading==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* , also (1974) New York: E. P. Dutton and (1986) London: Penguin Books.
* 
* 
* 
* 
*
* 
* 
* 


== External links ==
* 
* Part 1, Part 2, Part 3, Part 4, Part 5, Part 6.
* Alexander the Great: An annotated list of primary sources. Livius. Archived from the original on 4 December 2016. Retrieved 26 March 2020.
* &quot;In Our Time&quot;: &quot;Alexander the Great&quot;BBC discussion with Paul Cartledge, Diana Spencer and Rachel Mairs hosted by Melvyn Bragg, first broadcast 1 October 2015.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q8409" start="0" end="24" title="Alexander the Great" label="Alexander III of Macedon"/>
<link wikidata="Q8409" start="91" end="110" title="Alexander the Great" label="Alexander the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q11772" start="130" end="143" title="Ancient Greece" label="ancient Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q83958" start="155" end="162" title="Macedonia (ancient kingdom)" label="Macedon"/>
<link wikidata="Q130650" start="188" end="197" title="Philip II of Macedon" label="Philip II"/>
<link wikidata="Q831663" start="295" end="312" title="military campaign" label="military campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q27293" start="324" end="336" title="West Asia" label="Western Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q27275" start="338" end="350" title="Central Asia" label="Central Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q771405" start="361" end="371" title="South Asia" label="South Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q11768" start="377" end="382" title="ancient Egypt" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q478024" start="428" end="443" title="List of largest empires" label="largest empires"/>
<link wikidata="Q7794" start="472" end="478" title="History of Greece" label="Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q17055962" start="495" end="500" title="India (Herodotus)" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q868" start="680" end="689" title="Aristotle" label="Aristotle"/>
<link wikidata="Q260684" start="760" end="785" title="Alexander&amp;#x27;s Balkan campaign" label="campaigned in the Balkans"/>
<link wikidata="Q41741" start="814" end="820" title="Thrace" label="Thrace"/>
<link wikidata="Q32047" start="834" end="841" title="Illyria" label="Illyria"/>
<link wikidata="Q5760" start="873" end="879" title="Thebes, Greece" label="Thebes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2237798" start="891" end="923" title="Battle of Thebes" label="subsequently destroyed in battle"/>
<link wikidata="Q332337" start="948" end="965" title="League of Corinth" label="League of Corinth"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1004" end="1024" title="Greek nationalism#History" label="pan-Hellenic project"/>
<link wikidata="Q539051" start="1079" end="1085" title="Greeks" label="Greeks"/>
<link wikidata="Q25763" start="1107" end="1113" title="Greater Iran" label="Persia"/>
<link wikidata="Q389688" start="1142" end="1167" title="Achaemenid Persian Empire" label="Achaemenid Persian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1178" end="1199" title="Wars of Alexander the Great#Persia" label="a series of campaigns"/>
<link wikidata="Q51614" start="1252" end="1262" title="Asia Minor" label="Asia Minor"/>
<link wikidata="Q201526" start="1363" end="1368" title="Battle of Issus" label="Issus"/>
<link wikidata="Q179670" start="1373" end="1382" title="Gaugamela" label="Gaugamela"/>
<link wikidata="Q102865" start="1410" end="1420" title="Darius III" label="Darius III"/>
<link wikidata="Q83958" start="1504" end="1521" title="Macedonian Empire" label="Macedonian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q13924" start="1565" end="1577" title="Adriatic Sea" label="Adriatic Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q7348" start="1586" end="1597" title="Indus River" label="Indus River"/>
<link wikidata="Q4200795" start="1691" end="1704" title="Indian campaign of Alexander the Great" label="invaded India"/>
<link wikidata="Q28935" start="1752" end="1757" title="Porus" label="Porus"/>
<link wikidata="Q169132" start="1797" end="1803" title="Punjab" label="Punjab"/>
<link wikidata="Q213074" start="1812" end="1834" title="Battle of the Hydaspes" label="Battle of the Hydaspes"/>
<link wikidata="Q319590" start="1911" end="1921" title="Beas River" label="Beas River"/>
<link wikidata="Q5684" start="1950" end="1957" title="Babylon" label="Babylon"/>
<link wikidata="Q11767" start="1971" end="1982" title="Mesopotamia" label="Mesopotamia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5247391" start="2046" end="2068" title="Death of Alexander the Great" label="Alexander&amp;#x27;s death"/>
<link wikidata="Q31945" start="2198" end="2204" title="Arabia" label="Arabia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2912306" start="2240" end="2262" title="Wars of the Diadochi" label="a series of civil wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q201546" start="2364" end="2372" title="Diadochi" label="Diadochi"/>
<link wikidata="Q428995" start="2415" end="2433" title="Hellenistic period" label="Hellenistic period"/>
<link wikidata="Q9213532" start="2472" end="2490" title="cultural diffusion" label="cultural diffusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q172904" start="2495" end="2505" title="syncretism" label="syncretism"/>
<link wikidata="Q970700" start="2545" end="2559" title="Greco-Buddhism" label="Greco-Buddhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1602777" start="2564" end="2583" title="Hellenistic Judaism" label="Hellenistic Judaism"/>
<link wikidata="Q55619289" start="2585" end="2619" title="List of cities founded by Alexander the Great" label="He founded more than twenty cities"/>
<link wikidata="Q87" start="2663" end="2673" title="Alexandria" label="Alexandria"/>
<link wikidata="Q828047" start="2715" end="2730" title="Greek colonisation" label="Greek colonists"/>
<link wikidata="Q1149548" start="2759" end="2772" title="Greek culture" label="Greek culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q428995" start="2810" end="2834" title="Hellenistic civilization" label="Hellenistic civilization"/>
<link wikidata="Q60140" start="2868" end="2887" title="Indian subcontinent" label="Indian subcontinent"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277" start="2934" end="2946" title="Roman Empire" label="Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q478958" start="2959" end="2974" title="Western culture" label="Western culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q9129" start="2980" end="2994" title="Greek language" label="Greek language"/>
<link wikidata="Q80839" start="3012" end="3025" title="lingua franca" label="lingua franca"/>
<link wikidata="Q12544" start="3086" end="3102" title="Byzantine Empire" label="Byzantine Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q41746" start="3214" end="3222" title="Achilles" label="Achilles"/>
<link wikidata="Q917182" start="3545" end="3563" title="military academies" label="military academies"/>
<link wikidata="Q974482" start="3651" end="3668" title="Alexander Romance" label="Alexander Romance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1845" start="3887" end="3892" title="Bible" label="Bible"/>
<link wikidata="Q213679" start="4018" end="4023" title="Pella" label="Pella"/>
<link wikidata="Q83958" start="4044" end="4062" title="Kingdom of Macedon" label="Kingdom of Macedon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2738499" start="4088" end="4107" title="Ancient Greek calendars" label="ancient Greek month"/>
<link wikidata="Q758195" start="4111" end="4123" title="Hekatombaion" label="Hekatombaion"/>
<link wikidata="Q130650" start="4259" end="4268" title="Philip II of Macedon" label="Philip II"/>
<link wikidata="Q223134" start="4291" end="4299" title="Olympias" label="Olympias"/>
<link wikidata="Q13230617" start="4313" end="4326" title="Neoptolemus I of Epirus" label="Neoptolemus I"/>
<link wikidata="Q11266977" start="4336" end="4342" title="Epirus (ancient state)" label="Epirus"/>
<link wikidata="Q11772" start="4557" end="4570" title="Ancient Greeks" label="ancient Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q41523" start="4582" end="4590" title="Plutarch" label="Plutarch"/>
<link wikidata="Q162919" start="4897" end="4901" title="Seal (emblem)" label="seal"/>
<link wikidata="Q34201" start="5123" end="5127" title="Zeus" label="Zeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q188055" start="5412" end="5417" title="siege" label="siege"/>
<link wikidata="Q999468" start="5433" end="5440" title="Potidea" label="Potidea"/>
<link wikidata="Q204728" start="5461" end="5471" title="Chalcidice" label="Chalcidice"/>
<link wikidata="Q296233" start="5526" end="5535" title="Parmenion" label="Parmenion"/>
<link wikidata="Q32047" start="5562" end="5569" title="Illyria" label="Illyria"/>
<link wikidata="Q249561" start="5575" end="5583" title="Paeonian" label="Paeonian"/>
<link wikidata="Q188468" start="5626" end="5639" title="Ancient Olympic Games" label="Olympic Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q43018" start="5680" end="5697" title="Temple of Artemis" label="Temple of Artemis"/>
<link wikidata="Q47611" start="5701" end="5708" title="Ephesus" label="Ephesus"/>
<link wikidata="Q489772" start="5721" end="5747" title="Seven Wonders of the Ancient World" label="Seven Wonders of the World"/>
<link wikidata="Q929311" start="5770" end="5790" title="Hegesias of Magnesia" label="Hegesias of Magnesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q39503" start="5829" end="5836" title="Artemis" label="Artemis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3409034" start="6098" end="6104" title="Lanike" label="Lanike"/>
<link wikidata="Q26341" start="6148" end="6165" title="Cleitus the Black" label="Cleitus the Black"/>
<link wikidata="Q1819435" start="6227" end="6235" title="Leonidas of Epirus" label="Leonidas"/>
<link wikidata="Q452941" start="6270" end="6293" title="Lysimachus of Acarnania" label="Lysimachus of Acarnania"/>
<link wikidata="Q201129" start="6385" end="6389" title="lyre" label="lyre"/>
<link wikidata="Q166919" start="6462" end="6470" title="Thessaly" label="Thessaly"/>
<link wikidata="Q14877141" start="6533" end="6540" title="Attic talent" label="talents"/>
<link wikidata="Q201598" start="6999" end="7009" title="Bucephalas" label="Bucephalas"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="7079" end="7084" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q786725" start="7197" end="7206" title="Alexandria Bucephalous" label="Bucephala"/>
<link wikidata="Q901222" start="7278" end="7283" title="tutor" label="tutor"/>
<link wikidata="Q221182" start="7318" end="7327" title="Isocrates" label="Isocrates"/>
<link wikidata="Q325955" start="7332" end="7342" title="Speusippus" label="Speusippus"/>
<link wikidata="Q193093" start="7402" end="7409" title="Platonic Academy" label="Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q868" start="7456" end="7465" title="Aristotle" label="Aristotle"/>
<link wikidata="Q132472" start="7507" end="7512" title="Mieza, Macedonia" label="Mieza"/>
<link wikidata="Q846127" start="7617" end="7625" title="Stageira" label="Stageira"/>
<link wikidata="Q168261" start="7860" end="7867" title="Ptolemy I Soter" label="Ptolemy"/>
<link wikidata="Q310739" start="7869" end="7880" title="Hephaistion" label="Hephaistion"/>
<link wikidata="Q207183" start="7886" end="7895" title="Cassander" label="Cassander"/>
<link wikidata="Q6691" start="8205" end="8210" title="Homer" label="Homer"/>
<link wikidata="Q8275" start="8240" end="8245" title="Iliad" label="Iliad"/>
<link wikidata="Q48305" start="8367" end="8376" title="Euripides" label="Euripides"/>
<link wikidata="Q192867" start="8555" end="8569" title="Artaxerxes III" label="Artaxerxes III"/>
<link wikidata="Q463760" start="8587" end="8599" title="Artabazos II" label="Artabazos II"/>
<link wikidata="Q233783" start="8617" end="8624" title="Barsine" label="Barsine"/>
<link wikidata="Q473290" start="8732" end="8741" title="Amminapes" label="Amminapes"/>
<link wikidata="Q170305" start="8750" end="8756" title="satrap" label="satrap"/>
<link wikidata="Q346463" start="8800" end="8807" title="Sisines" label="Sisines"/>
<link wikidata="Q216299" start="8973" end="8977" title="Suda" label="Suda"/>
<link wikidata="Q221787" start="8990" end="9013" title="Anaximenes of Lampsacus" label="Anaximenes of Lampsacus"/>
<link wikidata="Q144964" start="9283" end="9292" title="Thracians" label="Thracians"/>
<link wikidata="Q477406" start="9341" end="9347" title="regent" label="regent"/>
<link wikidata="Q2762318" start="9352" end="9365" title="heir apparent" label="heir apparent"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163436" start="9419" end="9424" title="Maedi" label="Maedi"/>
<link wikidata="Q4721037" start="9565" end="9579" title="Alexandropolis Maedica" label="Alexandropolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q41741" start="9700" end="9706" title="Thrace" label="Thrace"/>
<link wikidata="Q11815679" start="9746" end="9755" title="Perinthus" label="Perinthus"/>
<link wikidata="Q470481" start="9831" end="9839" title="Amphissa (city)" label="Amphissa"/>
<link wikidata="Q37340" start="9880" end="9886" title="Apollo" label="Apollo"/>
<link wikidata="Q75459" start="9892" end="9898" title="Delphi" label="Delphi"/>
<link wikidata="Q146715" start="10249" end="10258" title="Illyrians" label="Illyrians"/>
<link wikidata="Q194450" start="10390" end="10401" title="Thermopylae" label="Thermopylae"/>
<link wikidata="Q1235347" start="10500" end="10506" title="Elatea" label="Elatea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1524" start="10546" end="10552" title="Athens" label="Athens"/>
<link wikidata="Q5760" start="10557" end="10563" title="Thebes, Greece" label="Thebes"/>
<link wikidata="Q117253" start="10587" end="10598" title="Demosthenes" label="Demosthenes"/>
<link wikidata="Q182875" start="10817" end="10836" title="Amphictyonic League" label="Amphictyonic League"/>
<link wikidata="Q549874" start="11096" end="11105" title="Chaeronea" label="Chaeronea"/>
<link wikidata="Q8257871" start="11107" end="11114" title="Boeotia" label="Boeotia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11135" end="11154" title="Battle of Chaeronea (338 BC)" label="Battle of Chaeronea"/>
<link wikidata="Q175249" start="11436" end="11444" title="hoplites" label="hoplites"/>
<link wikidata="Q78967" start="11855" end="11866" title="Peloponnese" label="Peloponnese"/>
<link wikidata="Q1363688" start="11951" end="11958" title="Ancient Corinth" label="Corinth"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12032" end="12053" title="Second Persian invasion of Greece#Hellenic alliance" label="anti-Persian alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q76026" start="12061" end="12079" title="Greco-Persian Wars" label="Greco-Persian Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q182034" start="12163" end="12170" title="Hegemon" label="Hegemon"/>
<link wikidata="Q332337" start="12277" end="12294" title="League of Corinth" label="League of Corinth"/>
<link wikidata="Q389688" start="12335" end="12349" title="Persian Empire" label="Persian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q257526" start="12439" end="12457" title="Cleopatra Eurydice" label="Cleopatra Eurydice"/>
<link wikidata="Q356050" start="12494" end="12501" title="Attalus (general)" label="Attalus"/>
<link wikidata="Q626066" start="12691" end="12706" title="Banquet" label="wedding banquet"/>
<link wikidata="Q335658" start="12894" end="12915" title="Alexander I of Epirus" label="Alexander I of Epirus"/>
<link wikidata="Q382317" start="12919" end="12925" title="Dodona" label="Dodona"/>
<link wikidata="Q827399" start="12942" end="12952" title="Molossians" label="Molossians"/>
<link wikidata="Q240881" start="13047" end="13055" title="Glaucias of Taulantii" label="Glaucias"/>
<link wikidata="Q5255064" start="13339" end="13348" title="Demaratus (hetairos)" label="Demaratus"/>
<link wikidata="Q170305" start="13424" end="13430" title="satrap" label="satrap"/>
<link wikidata="Q193214" start="13445" end="13450" title="Caria" label="Caria"/>
<link wikidata="Q930824" start="13452" end="13461" title="Pixodarus" label="Pixodarus"/>
<link wikidata="Q295530" start="13525" end="13542" title="Philip Arrhidaeus" label="Philip Arrhidaeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q7783480" start="13699" end="13708" title="Thessalus (actor)" label="Thessalus"/>
<link wikidata="Q462994" start="14061" end="14069" title="Harpalus" label="Harpalus"/>
<link wikidata="Q320132" start="14071" end="14079" title="Nearchus" label="Nearchus"/>
<link wikidata="Q168261" start="14081" end="14088" title="Ptolemy I Soter" label="Ptolemy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1353797" start="14093" end="14101" title="Erigyius" label="Erigyius"/>
<link wikidata="Q745102" start="14223" end="14239" title="Ancient Macedonian calendar" label="Macedonian month"/>
<link wikidata="Q213916" start="14304" end="14309" title="Vergina" label="Aegae"/>
<link wikidata="Q230258" start="14348" end="14357" title="Cleopatra of Macedon" label="Cleopatra"/>
<link wikidata="Q335658" start="14386" end="14407" title="Alexander I of Epirus" label="Alexander I of Epirus"/>
<link wikidata="Q581199" start="14455" end="14465" title="Somatophylax" label="bodyguards"/>
<link wikidata="Q457994" start="14467" end="14476" title="Pausanias of Orestis" label="Pausanias"/>
<link wikidata="Q202113" start="14609" end="14618" title="Perdiccas" label="Perdiccas"/>
<link wikidata="Q347164" start="14623" end="14632" title="Leonnatus" label="Leonnatus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2432315" start="14694" end="14698" title="Ancient Macedonian army" label="army"/>
<link wikidata="Q175811" start="14850" end="14860" title="Amyntas IV" label="Amyntas IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247667" start="14926" end="14935" title="Lyncestis" label="Lyncestis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2064224" start="15024" end="15043" title="Alexander Lyncestes" label="Alexander Lyncestes"/>
<link wikidata="Q80344" start="16068" end="16081" title="Mount Olympus" label="Mount Olympus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1471677" start="16086" end="16096" title="Mount Ossa (Greece)" label="Mount Ossa"/>
<link wikidata="Q78967" start="16329" end="16340" title="Peloponnese" label="Peloponnese"/>
<link wikidata="Q103011" start="16465" end="16472" title="Corinth" label="Corinth"/>
<link wikidata="Q5279176" start="16542" end="16592" title="Diogenes and Alexander" label="encounter between Alexander and Diogenes the Cynic"/>
<link wikidata="Q217414" start="17342" end="17352" title="Amphipolis" label="Amphipolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q170427" start="17438" end="17450" title="Mount Haemus" label="Mount Haemus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1257541" start="17583" end="17591" title="Triballi" label="Triballi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2167795" start="17625" end="17632" title="Lyginus" label="Lyginus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1494903" start="17642" end="17665" title="List of tributaries of the Danube" label="tributary of the Danube"/>
<link wikidata="Q1653" start="17713" end="17719" title="Danube" label="Danube"/>
<link wikidata="Q19012" start="17738" end="17743" title="Getae" label="Getae"/>
<link wikidata="Q1481555" start="17877" end="17885" title="skirmish" label="skirmish"/>
<link wikidata="Q3269324" start="17944" end="17951" title="Cleitus (son of Bardylis)" label="Cleitus"/>
<link wikidata="Q240881" start="17956" end="17969" title="King Glaukias" label="King Glaukias"/>
<link wikidata="Q1271795" start="17977" end="17986" title="Taulantii" label="Taulantii"/>
<link wikidata="Q2237798" start="18463" end="18477" title="Battle of Thebes" label="razed the city"/>
<link wikidata="Q204760" start="18669" end="18678" title="Antipater" label="Antipater"/>
<link wikidata="Q547006" start="19054" end="19071" title="Alexander Svechin" label="Alexander Svechin"/>
<link wikidata="Q200716" start="19603" end="19631" title="Battle of Chaeronea (338 BC)" label="Battle of Chaeronea (338 BC)"/>
<link wikidata="Q130650" start="19633" end="19642" title="Philip II of Macedon" label="Philip II"/>
<link wikidata="Q171241" start="19739" end="19747" title="Diodorus" label="Diodorus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1122337" start="19837" end="19840" title="Second Persian invasion of Greece" label="480"/>
<link wikidata="Q296233" start="19937" end="19946" title="Parmenion" label="Parmenion"/>
<link wikidata="Q482105" start="19948" end="19955" title="Amyntas (son of Andromenes)" label="Amyntas"/>
<link wikidata="Q51614" start="20009" end="20017" title="Anatolia" label="Anatolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1432674" start="20311" end="20319" title="Magnesia on the Meander" label="Magnesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q319378" start="20374" end="20390" title="Memnon of Rhodes" label="Memnon of Rhodes"/>
<link wikidata="Q6514" start="20474" end="20484" title="Hellespont" label="Hellespont"/>
<link wikidata="Q41741" start="20696" end="20702" title="Thrace" label="Thrace"/>
<link wikidata="Q249561" start="20704" end="20711" title="Paionia" label="Paionia"/>
<link wikidata="Q32047" start="20717" end="20724" title="Illyria" label="Illyria"/>
<link wikidata="Q192938" start="21051" end="21073" title="Battle of the Granicus" label="Battle of the Granicus"/>
<link wikidata="Q232615" start="21158" end="21164" title="Sardis" label="Sardis"/>
<link wikidata="Q620874" start="21194" end="21199" title="Ionia" label="Ionia"/>
<link wikidata="Q169460" start="21255" end="21262" title="Miletus" label="Miletus"/>
<link wikidata="Q5843680" start="21380" end="21393" title="Halicarnassus" label="Halicarnassus"/>
<link wikidata="Q193214" start="21398" end="21403" title="Caria" label="Caria"/>
<link wikidata="Q188055" start="21456" end="21461" title="siege" label="siege"/>
<link wikidata="Q319378" start="21519" end="21535" title="Memnon of Rhodes" label="Memnon of Rhodes"/>
<link wikidata="Q170305" start="21552" end="21558" title="satrap" label="satrap"/>
<link wikidata="Q961005" start="21569" end="21580" title="Orontobates" label="Orontobates"/>
<link wikidata="Q235788" start="21680" end="21683" title="Ada of Caria" label="Ada"/>
<link wikidata="Q18927" start="21766" end="21771" title="Lycia" label="Lycia"/>
<link wikidata="Q585250" start="21780" end="21789" title="Pamphylia" label="Pamphylia"/>
<link wikidata="Q599462" start="21959" end="21968" title="Termessos" label="Termessos"/>
<link wikidata="Q621805" start="22010" end="22017" title="Pisidia" label="Pisidia"/>
<link wikidata="Q542854" start="22060" end="22067" title="Gordium" label="Gordium"/>
<link wikidata="Q193373" start="22121" end="22133" title="Gordian Knot" label="Gordian Knot"/>
<link wikidata="Q51614" start="22181" end="22185" title="Asia Minor" label="Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q172556" start="22390" end="22396" title="Taurus Mountains" label="Taurus"/>
<link wikidata="Q620864" start="22402" end="22409" title="Cilicia" label="Cilicia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1360503" start="22600" end="22605" title="Issus (Cilicia)" label="Issus"/>
<link wikidata="Q242340" start="22717" end="22727" title="Sisygambis" label="Sisygambis"/>
<link wikidata="Q625298" start="22767" end="22779" title="peace treaty" label="peace treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q14877141" start="22848" end="22855" title="Attic talent" label="talents"/>
<link wikidata="Q943676" start="23019" end="23024" title="Ancient Syria" label="Syria"/>
<link wikidata="Q81483" start="23055" end="23061" title="Levant" label="Levant"/>
<link wikidata="Q82070" start="23118" end="23122" title="Tyre, Lebanon" label="Tyre"/>
<link wikidata="Q815233" start="23169" end="23174" title="Siege of Tyre (332 BC)" label="siege"/>
<link wikidata="Q8463" start="23252" end="23259" title="slavery" label="slavery"/>
<link wikidata="Q79" start="23340" end="23345" title="Egypt" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q47492" start="23413" end="23417" title="Gaza City" label="Gaza"/>
<link wikidata="Q2008735" start="24883" end="24893" title="Siwa Oasis" label="Siwa Oasis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2370577" start="24901" end="24907" title="Ancient Libya" label="Libyan"/>
<link wikidata="Q58373" start="24964" end="24968" title="Amun" label="Amun"/>
<link wikidata="Q58373" start="25010" end="25020" title="Zeus-Ammon" label="Zeus-Ammon"/>
<link wikidata="Q124392595" start="25062" end="25102" title="Horns of Alexander" label="currency depicted him adorned with horns"/>
<link wikidata="Q85767287" start="25114" end="25128" title="Horns of Ammon" label="Horns of Ammon"/>
<link wikidata="Q87" start="25295" end="25305" title="Alexandria" label="Alexandria"/>
<link wikidata="Q2320005" start="25356" end="25373" title="Ptolemaic Kingdom" label="Ptolemaic Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q3625641" start="25609" end="25627" title="Achaemenid Assyria" label="Achaemenid Assyria"/>
<link wikidata="Q311819" start="25631" end="25648" title="Upper Mesopotamia" label="Upper Mesopotamia"/>
<link wikidata="Q796" start="25663" end="25667" title="Iraq" label="Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q179670" start="25702" end="25721" title="Battle of Gaugamela" label="Battle of Gaugamela"/>
<link wikidata="Q132754" start="25791" end="25797" title="Erbil" label="Arbela"/>
<link wikidata="Q696193" start="25902" end="25910" title="Ecbatana" label="Ecbatana"/>
<link wikidata="Q28587" start="25919" end="25926" title="Hamadan" label="Hamadan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5684" start="25953" end="25960" title="Babylon" label="Babylon"/>
<link wikidata="Q751861" start="25963" end="25994" title="Babylonian astronomical diaries" label="Babylonian astronomical diaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q180773" start="26221" end="26225" title="Susa" label="Susa"/>
<link wikidata="Q389688" start="26238" end="26248" title="Achaemenid" label="Achaemenid"/>
<link wikidata="Q129072" start="26352" end="26362" title="Persepolis" label="Persepolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q220796" start="26379" end="26389" title="Royal Road" label="Royal Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q3507255" start="26495" end="26508" title="Persian Gates" label="Persian Gates"/>
<link wikidata="Q167021" start="26524" end="26540" title="Zagros Mountains" label="Zagros Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q1401199" start="26589" end="26601" title="Ariobarzanes (satrap of Persis)" label="Ariobarzanes"/>
<link wikidata="Q129165" start="26874" end="26882" title="Xerxes I" label="Xerxes I"/>
<link wikidata="Q131013" start="27007" end="27026" title="Acropolis of Athens" label="Acropolis of Athens"/>
<link wikidata="Q76026" start="27038" end="27056" title="Greco-Persian Wars" label="Second Persian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q171241" start="27081" end="27089" title="Diodorus" label="Diodorus"/>
<link wikidata="Q466118" start="27134" end="27141" title="hetaera" label="hetaera"/>
<link wikidata="Q267733" start="27142" end="27147" title="Thaïs" label="Thaïs"/>
<link wikidata="Q41523" start="27268" end="27276" title="Plutarch" label="Plutarch"/>
<link wikidata="Q5959" start="27384" end="27391" title="Quintus Curtius Rufus" label="Curtius"/>
<link wikidata="Q296434" start="27785" end="27791" title="Bessus" label="Bessus"/>
<link wikidata="Q132646" start="27797" end="27804" title="Bactria" label="Bactria"/>
<link wikidata="Q80895" start="28013" end="28022" title="guerrilla" label="guerrilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q1367176" start="28485" end="28496" title="Iranologist" label="Iranologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q721821" start="28497" end="28510" title="Pierre Briant" label="Pierre Briant"/>
<link wikidata="Q45604" start="28852" end="28860" title="Kandahar" label="Kandahar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2280882" start="28881" end="28899" title="Alexandria Eschate" label="Alexandria Eschate"/>
<link wikidata="Q863" start="28937" end="28947" title="Tajikistan" label="Tajikistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3853673" start="28985" end="28990" title="Media (region)" label="Media"/>
<link wikidata="Q1645483" start="28992" end="28999" title="Parthia" label="Parthia"/>
<link wikidata="Q654243" start="29001" end="29005" title="Aria (satrapy)" label="Aria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074810" start="29026" end="29035" title="Drangiana" label="Drangiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q624638" start="29037" end="29046" title="Arachosia" label="Arachosia"/>
<link wikidata="Q132646" start="29080" end="29087" title="Bactria" label="Bactria"/>
<link wikidata="Q845909" start="29125" end="29132" title="Scythia" label="Scythia"/>
<link wikidata="Q529850" start="29146" end="29156" title="Spitamenes" label="Spitamenes"/>
<link wikidata="Q168261" start="29236" end="29243" title="Ptolemy I Soter" label="Ptolemy"/>
<link wikidata="Q483159" start="29369" end="29377" title="Jaxartes" label="Jaxartes"/>
<link wikidata="Q123215" start="29516" end="29534" title="Battle of Jaxartes" label="Battle of Jaxartes"/>
<link wikidata="Q676790" start="29858" end="29869" title="proskynesis" label="proskynesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q178885" start="30203" end="30210" title="deities" label="deities"/>
<link wikidata="Q1672477" start="30558" end="30566" title="Iranian peoples" label="Iranians"/>
<link wikidata="Q484206" start="30590" end="30597" title="Persians" label="Persian"/>
<link wikidata="Q721821" start="30906" end="30919" title="Pierre Briant" label="Pierre Briant"/>
<link wikidata="Q129072" start="31674" end="31684" title="Persepolis" label="Persepolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q346665" start="32068" end="32076" title="Philotas" label="Philotas"/>
<link wikidata="Q296233" start="32191" end="32200" title="Parmenion" label="Parmenion"/>
<link wikidata="Q696193" start="32253" end="32261" title="Ecbatana" label="Ecbatana"/>
<link wikidata="Q26341" start="32432" end="32449" title="Cleitus the Black" label="Cleitus the Black"/>
<link wikidata="Q5753" start="32491" end="32500" title="Maracanda" label="Maracanda"/>
<link wikidata="Q5753" start="32513" end="32522" title="Samarkand" label="Samarkand"/>
<link wikidata="Q265" start="32526" end="32536" title="Uzbekistan" label="Uzbekistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q855855" start="32828" end="32833" title="page (servant)" label="pages"/>
<link wikidata="Q82793" start="32859" end="32871" title="Callisthenes" label="Callisthenes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141669" start="32875" end="32883" title="Olynthus" label="Olynthus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1236228" start="32930" end="32951" title="Anabasis of Alexander" label="Anabasis of Alexander"/>
<link wikidata="Q31845" start="32959" end="32965" title="Arrian" label="Arrian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351382" start="33031" end="33035" title="rack (torture)" label="rack"/>
<link wikidata="Q204760" start="33368" end="33377" title="Antipater" label="Antipater"/>
<link wikidata="Q314364" start="33642" end="33650" title="Agis III" label="Agis III"/>
<link wikidata="Q223220" start="33704" end="33725" title="battle of Megalopolis" label="battle of Megalopolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q76118" start="34451" end="34471" title="Third Macedonian War" label="Third Macedonian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q130650" start="34519" end="34528" title="Philip II of Macedon" label="Philip II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1448901" start="34532" end="34540" title="Pangaeum" label="Pangaeum"/>
<link wikidata="Q204096" start="34568" end="34574" title="Thasos" label="Thasos"/>
<link wikidata="Q620864" start="34714" end="34721" title="Cilicia" label="Cilicia"/>
<link wikidata="Q134287" start="34725" end="34731" title="Tarsus, Mersin" label="Tarsus"/>
<link wikidata="Q921668" start="34848" end="34854" title="stater" label="stater"/>
<link wikidata="Q1083662" start="34864" end="34875" title="tetradrachm" label="tetradrachm"/>
<link wikidata="Q15078648" start="34881" end="34888" title="Ancient drachma" label="drachim"/>
<link wikidata="Q440311" start="34914" end="34926" title="Ancient Greek coinage" label="bronze coins"/>
<link wikidata="Q37122" start="35018" end="35024" title="Athena" label="Athena"/>
<link wikidata="Q165023" start="35053" end="35057" title="Nike (mythology)" label="Nike"/>
<link wikidata="Q308902" start="35059" end="35066" title="Victoria (mythology)" label="Victory"/>
<link wikidata="Q122248" start="35127" end="35135" title="Heracles" label="Heracles"/>
<link wikidata="Q34201" start="35358" end="35362" title="Zeus" label="Zeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q990247" start="35528" end="35532" title="Dium" label="Dium"/>
<link wikidata="Q2223351" start="35593" end="35599" title="Sandas" label="Sandas"/>
<link wikidata="Q134287" start="35615" end="35621" title="Tarsus, Mersin" label="Tarsus"/>
<link wikidata="Q4837148" start="35723" end="35731" title="Baaltars" label="Baaltars"/>
<link wikidata="Q561959" start="35811" end="35818" title="Mazaeus" label="Mazaeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q170305" start="35993" end="35999" title="satrap" label="satrap"/>
<link wikidata="Q529850" start="36100" end="36110" title="Spitamenes" label="Spitamenes"/>
<link wikidata="Q33527" start="36151" end="36162" title="Old Iranian" label="Old Iranian"/>
<link wikidata="Q60140" start="36232" end="36251" title="Indian subcontinent" label="Indian subcontinent"/>
<link wikidata="Q1259323" start="36268" end="36278" title="tribal chief" label="chieftains"/>
<link wikidata="Q213651" start="36304" end="36312" title="Gandhara" label="Gandhara"/>
<link wikidata="Q843" start="36377" end="36385" title="Pakistan" label="Pakistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q724136" start="36432" end="36438" title="Omphis" label="Omphis"/>
<link wikidata="Q724136" start="36452" end="36457" title="Ambhi" label="Ambhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q156093" start="36473" end="36479" title="Taxila" label="Taxila"/>
<link wikidata="Q7348" start="36513" end="36518" title="Indus" label="Indus"/>
<link wikidata="Q214874" start="36526" end="36534" title="Hydaspes" label="Hydaspes"/>
<link wikidata="Q4833410" start="36608" end="36616" title="Aspasioi" label="Aspasioi"/>
<link wikidata="Q4833410" start="36621" end="36630" title="Assakenoi" label="Assakenoi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2586782" start="36647" end="36655" title="Kambojas" label="Kambojas"/>
<link wikidata="Q724136" start="36736" end="36741" title="Ambhi" label="Ambhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3695597" start="37224" end="37228" title="Hund, Khyber Pakhtunkhwa" label="Hund"/>
<link wikidata="Q213074" start="37539" end="37561" title="Battle of the Hydaspes" label="Battle of the Hydaspes"/>
<link wikidata="Q28935" start="37622" end="37627" title="Porus" label="Porus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1850877" start="38085" end="38091" title="Philip (son of Machatas)" label="Philip"/>
<link wikidata="Q1271334" start="38256" end="38268" title="Treaty of Triparadisus" label="Triparadisus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3308493" start="38372" end="38384" title="Kunar Valley" label="Kunar Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q7131261" start="38406" end="38420" title="Panjkora River" label="Guraeus Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q389161" start="38447" end="38451" title="Swat District" label="Swat"/>
<link wikidata="Q2039096" start="38456" end="38469" title="Buner District" label="Buner Valleys"/>
<link wikidata="Q938635" start="38705" end="38711" title="Aornos" label="Aornos"/>
<link wikidata="Q5959" start="38844" end="38851" title="Quintus Curtius Rufus" label="Curtius"/>
<link wikidata="Q938635" start="39099" end="39105" title="Aornos" label="Aornos"/>
<link wikidata="Q28935" start="39278" end="39283" title="Porus" label="Porus"/>
<link wikidata="Q216875" start="39339" end="39347" title="Chenab River" label="Acesines"/>
<link wikidata="Q169132" start="39377" end="39383" title="Punjab" label="Punjab"/>
<link wikidata="Q319590" start="39643" end="39647" title="Beas" label="Beas"/>
<link wikidata="Q214874" start="39783" end="39791" title="Hydaspes" label="Hydaspes"/>
<link wikidata="Q786725" start="39810" end="39819" title="Alexandria Bucephalous" label="Bucephala"/>
<link wikidata="Q786725" start="39886" end="39892" title="Nicaea (Punjab)" label="Nicaea"/>
<link wikidata="Q6899381" start="39952" end="39964" title="Mong, Punjab" label="Mong, Punjab"/>
<link wikidata="Q691292" start="39966" end="39988" title="Philostratus the Elder" label="Philostratus the Elder"/>
<link wikidata="Q1225196" start="40002" end="40029" title="Life of Apollonius of Tyana" label="Life of Apollonius of Tyana"/>
<link wikidata="Q134270" start="40176" end="40182" title="Helios" label="Helios"/>
<link wikidata="Q5089" start="40551" end="40563" title="Ganges River" label="Ganges River"/>
<link wikidata="Q949268" start="40573" end="40585" title="Nanda Empire" label="Nanda Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q234009" start="40589" end="40596" title="Magadha (Mahajanapada)" label="Magadha"/>
<link wikidata="Q835313" start="40620" end="40637" title="Gangaridai" label="Gangaridai Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q80338" start="40641" end="40647" title="Bengal" label="Bengal"/>
<link wikidata="Q319590" start="40810" end="40824" title="Hyphasis River" label="Hyphasis River"/>
<link wikidata="Q561955" start="41017" end="41023" title="Coenus (general)" label="Coenus"/>
<link wikidata="Q7348" start="41247" end="41252" title="Indus" label="Indus"/>
<link wikidata="Q6743254" start="41291" end="41296" title="Malhi (Jat clan)" label="Malhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q185453" start="41312" end="41318" title="Multan" label="Multan"/>
<link wikidata="Q165352" start="41514" end="41522" title="Kerman province" label="Carmania"/>
<link wikidata="Q794" start="41540" end="41544" title="Iran" label="Iran"/>
<link wikidata="Q297390" start="41559" end="41567" title="Craterus" label="Craterus"/>
<link wikidata="Q34675" start="41609" end="41621" title="Persian Gulf" label="Persian Gulf"/>
<link wikidata="Q320132" start="41646" end="41654" title="Nearchus" label="Nearchus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348342" start="41745" end="41761" title="Gedrosia" label="Gedrosian Desert"/>
<link wikidata="Q695111" start="41766" end="41772" title="Makran" label="Makran"/>
<link wikidata="Q170305" start="41916" end="41922" title="satrap" label="satrap"/>
<link wikidata="Q180773" start="42039" end="42043" title="Susa" label="Susa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1287526" start="42274" end="42278" title="Opis" label="Opis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193349" start="42839" end="42859" title="Susa weddings" label="held a mass marriage"/>
<link wikidata="Q2635530" start="43066" end="43089" title="tomb of Cyrus the Great" label="tomb of Cyrus the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q230025" start="43093" end="43103" title="Pasargadae" label="Pasargadae"/>
<link wikidata="Q8423" start="43168" end="43183" title="Cyrus the Great" label="Cyrus the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q129772" start="43211" end="43219" title="Xenophon" label="Xenophon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145374" start="43233" end="43243" title="Cyropaedia" label="Cyropaedia"/>
<link wikidata="Q544987" start="43403" end="43414" title="Aristobulus of Cassandreia" label="Aristobulus"/>
<link wikidata="Q736132" start="43742" end="43754" title="funeral pyre" label="funeral pyre"/>
<link wikidata="Q12591" start="43998" end="44015" title="Nebuchadnezzar II" label="Nebuchadnezzar II"/>
<link wikidata="Q320132" start="44227" end="44235" title="Nearchus" label="Nearchus"/>
<link wikidata="Q240927" start="44283" end="44300" title="Medius of Larissa" label="Medius of Larissa"/>
<link wikidata="Q210853" start="45016" end="45022" title="Justin (historian)" label="Justin"/>
<link wikidata="Q204760" start="45347" end="45356" title="Antipater" label="Antipater"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="45953" end="45956" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q157547" start="46109" end="46123" title="Veratrum album" label="Veratrum album"/>
<link wikidata="Q1101545" start="46244" end="46263" title="Clinical Toxicology" label="Clinical Toxicology"/>
<link wikidata="Q974482" start="46455" end="46472" title="Alexander Romance" label="Alexander Romance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1568711" start="46823" end="46832" title="Mavroneri" label="Mavroneri"/>
<link wikidata="Q409744" start="46868" end="46881" title="calicheamicin" label="calicheamicin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2438541" start="46935" end="46949" title="natural causes" label="natural causes"/>
<link wikidata="Q12156" start="46992" end="46999" title="malaria" label="malaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q83319" start="47004" end="47017" title="typhoid fever" label="typhoid fever"/>
<link wikidata="Q582728" start="47047" end="47078" title="New England Journal of Medicine" label="New England Journal of Medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q279324" start="47138" end="47155" title="bowel perforation" label="bowel perforation"/>
<link wikidata="Q107231" start="47170" end="47179" title="paralysis" label="paralysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2165411" start="47229" end="47240" title="spondylitis" label="spondylitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q48143" start="47244" end="47254" title="meningitis" label="meningitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q854573" start="47300" end="47318" title="acute pancreatitis" label="acute pancreatitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q158856" start="47320" end="47335" title="West Nile virus" label="West Nile virus"/>
<link wikidata="Q205214" start="47341" end="47364" title="Guillain-Barré syndrome" label="Guillain-Barré syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q48634" start="47715" end="47726" title="sarcophagus" label="sarcophagus"/>
<link wikidata="Q313782" start="47811" end="47817" title="Claudius Aelianus" label="Aelian"/>
<link wikidata="Q3042529" start="48090" end="48107" title="royal prerogative" label="royal prerogative"/>
<link wikidata="Q39576" start="48244" end="48267" title="Ptolemy II Philadelphus" label="Ptolemy II Philadelphus"/>
<link wikidata="Q217050" start="48345" end="48359" title="late antiquity" label="late antiquity"/>
<link wikidata="Q3340" start="48361" end="48380" title="Ptolemy IX Lathyros" label="Ptolemy IX Lathyros"/>
<link wikidata="Q18010006" start="48547" end="48560" title="Kasta Tomb" label="enormous tomb"/>
<link wikidata="Q217414" start="48584" end="48594" title="Amphipolis" label="Amphipolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q125414" start="48925" end="48931" title="Pompey" label="Pompey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048" start="48933" end="48946" title="Julius Caesar" label="Julius Caesar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1405" start="48951" end="48959" title="Augustus" label="Augustus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1409" start="49092" end="49100" title="Caligula" label="Caligula"/>
<link wikidata="Q1442" start="49207" end="49224" title="Septimius Severus" label="Septimius Severus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1446" start="49292" end="49301" title="Caracalla" label="Caracalla"/>
<link wikidata="Q636751" start="49434" end="49455" title="Alexander Sarcophagus" label="Alexander Sarcophagus"/>
<link wikidata="Q163490" start="49479" end="49484" title="Sidon" label="Sidon"/>
<link wikidata="Q636978" start="49500" end="49527" title="Istanbul Archaeology Museum" label="Istanbul Archaeology Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q245117" start="49628" end="49638" title="bas-relief" label="bas-relief"/>
<link wikidata="Q307688" start="49769" end="49780" title="Abdalonymus" label="Abdalonymus"/>
<link wikidata="Q201526" start="49863" end="49878" title="battle of Issus" label="battle of Issus"/>
<link wikidata="Q122511" start="49925" end="49938" title="Karl Schefold" label="Karl Schefold"/>
<link wikidata="Q211430" start="50001" end="50008" title="Demades" label="Demades"/>
<link wikidata="Q128430" start="50083" end="50090" title="Cyclops" label="Cyclops"/>
<link wikidata="Q162919" start="51300" end="51311" title="Seal (device)" label="signet ring"/>
<link wikidata="Q202113" start="51315" end="51324" title="Perdiccas" label="Perdiccas"/>
<link wikidata="Q297390" start="51545" end="51553" title="Craterus" label="Craterus"/>
<link wikidata="Q729432" start="51638" end="51646" title="Meleager (general)" label="Meleager"/>
<link wikidata="Q797946" start="52038" end="52058" title="Partition of Babylon" label="Partition of Babylon"/>
<link wikidata="Q201546" start="52252" end="52260" title="Diadochi" label="Diadochi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2320005" start="52343" end="52358" title="Ptolemaic Egypt" label="Ptolemaic Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q93180" start="52360" end="52383" title="Seleucid Empire" label="Seleucid Syria and East"/>
<link wikidata="Q237325" start="52389" end="52408" title="Antigonid dynasty" label="Antigonid Macedonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q171241" start="52493" end="52501" title="Diodorus" label="Diodorus"/>
<link wikidata="Q297390" start="52567" end="52575" title="Craterus" label="Craterus"/>
<link wikidata="Q202113" start="52844" end="52853" title="Perdiccas" label="Perdiccas"/>
<link wikidata="Q152854" start="53342" end="53361" title="Pillars of Hercules" label="Pillars of Hercules"/>
<link wikidata="Q2429397" start="53393" end="53401" title="Ancient Carthage" label="Carthage"/>
<link wikidata="Q173148" start="53464" end="53469" title="Delos" label="Delos"/>
<link wikidata="Q75459" start="53471" end="53477" title="Delphi" label="Delphi"/>
<link wikidata="Q382317" start="53479" end="53485" title="Dodona" label="Dodona"/>
<link wikidata="Q990247" start="53487" end="53491" title="Dium" label="Dium"/>
<link wikidata="Q217414" start="53493" end="53503" title="Amphipolis" label="Amphipolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q14877141" start="53523" end="53530" title="Attic talent" label="talents"/>
<link wikidata="Q37122" start="53559" end="53565" title="Athena" label="Athena"/>
<link wikidata="Q22647" start="53569" end="53573" title="Troy" label="Troy"/>
<link wikidata="Q977693" start="53636" end="53645" title="synoecism" label="synoecism"/>
<link wikidata="Q175582" start="53981" end="53998" title="pyramids of Egypt" label="pyramids of Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q31945" start="54019" end="54025" title="Arabia" label="Arabia"/>
<link wikidata="Q78996" start="54140" end="54152" title="Ernst Badian" label="Ernst Badian"/>
<link wikidata="Q974482" start="54373" end="54390" title="Alexander Romance" label="Alexander Romance"/>
<link wikidata="Q180335" start="54635" end="54642" title="phalanx" label="phalanx"/>
<link wikidata="Q1340305" start="54721" end="54739" title="Macedonian phalanx" label="Macedonian phalanx"/>
<link wikidata="Q271113" start="54756" end="54763" title="sarissa" label="sarissa"/>
<link wikidata="Q121308" start="55735" end="55744" title="scimitars" label="scimitars"/>
<link wikidata="Q3757641" start="55749" end="55757" title="javelins" label="javelins"/>
<link wikidata="Q132646" start="56609" end="56616" title="Bactria" label="Bactria"/>
<link wikidata="Q486244" start="56621" end="56629" title="Sogdiana" label="Sogdiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q192222" start="57307" end="57315" title="Lysippos" label="Lysippos"/>
<link wikidata="Q216822" start="57330" end="57337" title="Apelles" label="Apelles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1243453" start="57360" end="57370" title="Pyrgoteles" label="Pyrgoteles"/>
<link wikidata="Q5959" start="58241" end="58254" title="Quintus Curtius Rufus" label="Curtius Rufus"/>
<link wikidata="Q12900294" start="58321" end="58353" title="Histories of Alexander the Great" label="Histories of Alexander the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q102865" start="58418" end="58428" title="Darius III" label="Darius III"/>
<link wikidata="Q171241" start="58448" end="58456" title="Diodorus" label="Diodorus"/>
<link wikidata="Q102865" start="58482" end="58492" title="Darius III" label="Darius III"/>
<link wikidata="Q242340" start="58508" end="58518" title="Sisygambis" label="Sisygambis"/>
<link wikidata="Q310739" start="58544" end="58555" title="Hephaestion" label="Hephaestion"/>
<link wikidata="Q41523" start="58676" end="58684" title="Plutarch" label="Plutarch"/>
<link wikidata="Q841762" start="58927" end="58943" title="Alexander Mosaic" label="Alexander Mosaic"/>
<link wikidata="Q313782" start="59214" end="59220" title="Claudius Aelianus" label="Aelian"/>
<link wikidata="Q461486" start="59472" end="59498" title="heterochromia" label="one blue and one brown eye"/>
<link wikidata="Q974482" start="59523" end="59540" title="Alexander Romance" label="Alexander Romance"/>
<link wikidata="Q183127" start="59772" end="59782" title="polychromy" label="polychromy"/>
<link wikidata="Q636751" start="59790" end="59801" title="Alexander Sarcophagus" label="sarcophagus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1405524" start="61721" end="61733" title="self-control" label="self-control"/>
<link wikidata="Q188468" start="61858" end="61871" title="Ancient Olympic Games" label="Olympic Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q6691" start="61910" end="61917" title="Homeric" label="Homeric"/>
<link wikidata="Q118157" start="61998" end="62006" title="charisma" label="charisma"/>
<link wikidata="Q1229994" start="62377" end="62385" title="paranoia" label="paranoia"/>
<link wikidata="Q987664" start="62549" end="62570" title="delusions of grandeur" label="delusions of grandeur"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="62598" end="62602" title="#Will" label="will"/>
<link wikidata="Q2008735" start="63012" end="63016" title="Siwa Oasis" label="Siwa"/>
<link wikidata="Q676790" start="63153" end="63164" title="proskynesis" label="proskynesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q190055" start="63863" end="63869" title="Roxana" label="Roxana"/>
<link wikidata="Q486244" start="63887" end="63893" title="Sogdia" label="Sogdia"/>
<link wikidata="Q551847" start="63904" end="63912" title="Oxyartes" label="Oxyartes"/>
<link wikidata="Q132646" start="63916" end="63923" title="Bactria" label="Bactria"/>
<link wikidata="Q5429464" start="63965" end="63973" title="Stateira (wife of Alexander the Great)" label="Stateira"/>
<link wikidata="Q434369" start="63978" end="63987" title="Parysatis II" label="Parysatis"/>
<link wikidata="Q102865" start="64014" end="64024" title="Darius III" label="Darius III"/>
<link wikidata="Q192867" start="64054" end="64068" title="Artaxerxes III" label="Artaxerxes III"/>
<link wikidata="Q207847" start="64232" end="64255" title="Alexander IV of Macedon" label="Alexander IV of Macedon"/>
<link wikidata="Q447770" start="64306" end="64325" title="Heracles of Macedon" label="Heracles of Macedon"/>
<link wikidata="Q233783" start="64383" end="64390" title="Barsine" label="Barsine"/>
<link wikidata="Q310739" start="64474" end="64485" title="Hephaestion" label="Hephaestion"/>
<link wikidata="Q317309" start="64645" end="64657" title="mental health" label="mental state"/>
<link wikidata="Q294923" start="64820" end="64829" title="Athenaeus" label="Athenaeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q352621" start="64857" end="64868" title="Dicaearchus" label="Dicaearchus"/>
<link wikidata="Q179294" start="65001" end="65007" title="eunuch" label="eunuch"/>
<link wikidata="Q799959" start="65008" end="65014" title="Bagoas (courtier)" label="Bagoas"/>
<link wikidata="Q3622807" start="65110" end="65133" title="William Woodthorpe Tarn" label="William Woodthorpe Tarn"/>
<link wikidata="Q5959" start="65241" end="65246" title="Quintus Curtius Rufus" label="Rufus"/>
<link wikidata="Q997428" start="65758" end="65780" title="Achilles and Patroclus" label="Achilles and Patroclus"/>
<link wikidata="Q22647" start="65864" end="65868" title="Troy" label="Troy"/>
<link wikidata="Q186271" start="65947" end="65956" title="Patroclus" label="Patroclus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1225832" start="66100" end="66114" title="Robin Lane Fox" label="Robin Lane Fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q1343486" start="66529" end="66540" title="Peter Green (historian)" label="Peter Green"/>
<link wikidata="Q235788" start="67437" end="67449" title="Ada of Caria" label="Ada of Caria"/>
<link wikidata="Q242340" start="67498" end="67508" title="Sisygambis" label="Sisygambis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1149081" start="67803" end="67807" title="Eastern world" label="East"/>
<link wikidata="Q160381" start="67812" end="67816" title="Western world" label="West"/>
<link wikidata="Q1149548" start="67875" end="67893" title="Greek civilization" label="Greek civilization"/>
<link wikidata="Q201546" start="68533" end="68549" title="Diadochi" label="successor states"/>
<link wikidata="Q428995" start="68655" end="68673" title="Hellenistic period" label="Hellenistic period"/>
<link wikidata="Q62943" start="68925" end="68938" title="Maurya Empire" label="Maurya Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q188541" start="68979" end="68998" title="Chandragupta Maurya" label="Chandragupta Maurya"/>
<link wikidata="Q169132" start="69108" end="69114" title="Punjab" label="Punjab"/>
<link wikidata="Q949268" start="69166" end="69178" title="Nanda Empire" label="Nanda Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q55619289" start="69259" end="69289" title="List of cities founded by Alexander the Great" label="many cities that bore his name"/>
<link wikidata="Q35591" start="69316" end="69322" title="Tigris" label="Tigris"/>
<link wikidata="Q87" start="69353" end="69363" title="Alexandria" label="Alexandria"/>
<link wikidata="Q37122" start="70009" end="70022" title="Athena Polias" label="Athena Polias"/>
<link wikidata="Q142819" start="70026" end="70032" title="Priene" label="Priene"/>
<link wikidata="Q16933622" start="70067" end="70094" title="Priene inscription of Alexander the Great" label="inscription from the temple"/>
<link wikidata="Q6373" start="70114" end="70128" title="British Museum" label="British Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1243502" start="70360" end="70367" title="Pythius of Priene" label="Pytheos"/>
<link wikidata="Q45368" start="70398" end="70424" title="Mausoleum at Halicarnassus" label="Mausoleum at Halicarnassus"/>
<link wikidata="Q263892" start="70427" end="70435" title="Libanius" label="Libanius"/>
<link wikidata="Q200441" start="70535" end="70542" title="Antioch" label="Antioch"/>
<link wikidata="Q216299" start="70555" end="70559" title="Suda" label="Suda"/>
<link wikidata="Q214554" start="70603" end="70610" title="Sarapis" label="Sarapis"/>
<link wikidata="Q6373" start="70622" end="70636" title="British Museum" label="British Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q853946" start="70699" end="70704" title="Girsu" label="Girsu"/>
<link wikidata="Q796" start="70708" end="70712" title="Iraq" label="Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q60217" start="70978" end="70999" title="Johann Gustav Droysen" label="Johann Gustav Droysen"/>
<link wikidata="Q87" start="71189" end="71199" title="Alexandria" label="Alexandria"/>
<link wikidata="Q200441" start="71201" end="71208" title="Antioch" label="Antioch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136681" start="71213" end="71221" title="Seleucia" label="Seleucia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1530" start="71239" end="71246" title="Baghdad" label="Baghdad"/>
<link wikidata="Q953291" start="71296" end="71311" title="Persian culture" label="Persian culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1524" start="71684" end="71692" title="Athenian" label="Athenian"/>
<link wikidata="Q506588" start="71812" end="71817" title="Attic Greek" label="Attic"/>
<link wikidata="Q107358" start="71830" end="71835" title="koine" label="koine"/>
<link wikidata="Q80839" start="71940" end="71953" title="lingua franca" label="lingua franca"/>
<link wikidata="Q36510" start="72007" end="72019" title="modern Greek" label="modern Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q69883" start="72034" end="72047" title="town planning" label="town planning"/>
<link wikidata="Q18813" start="72238" end="72251" title="New Testament" label="New Testament"/>
<link wikidata="Q107358" start="72271" end="72282" title="Koine Greek" label="Koine Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q488880" start="72596" end="72618" title="Greco-Bactrian Kingdom" label="Greco-Bactrian Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q889" start="72643" end="72654" title="Afghanistan" label="Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q843" start="72656" end="72664" title="Pakistan" label="Pakistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q863" start="72670" end="72680" title="Tajikistan" label="Tajikistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q215643" start="72690" end="72708" title="Indo-Greek Kingdom" label="Indo-Greek Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q36288" start="72766" end="72775" title="Silk Road" label="Silk Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q748" start="72838" end="72846" title="Buddhist" label="Buddhist"/>
<link wikidata="Q213651" start="72895" end="72903" title="Gandhara" label="Gandhara"/>
<link wikidata="Q779933" start="73145" end="73161" title="Edicts of Ashoka" label="Edicts of Ashoka"/>
<link wikidata="Q172904" start="73366" end="73376" title="syncretism" label="syncretism"/>
<link wikidata="Q970700" start="73386" end="73400" title="Greco-Buddhism" label="Greco-Buddhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1008014" start="73465" end="73483" title="Greco-Buddhist art" label="Greco-Buddhist art"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="73563" end="73568" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q854" start="73570" end="73579" title="Sri Lanka" label="Sri Lanka"/>
<link wikidata="Q5601554" start="73613" end="73639" title="Greco-Buddhist monasticism" label="Greco-Buddhist monasticism"/>
<link wikidata="Q9441" start="73707" end="73717" title="The Buddha" label="The Buddha"/>
<link wikidata="Q37340" start="73778" end="73784" title="Apollo" label="Apollo"/>
<link wikidata="Q855270" start="73874" end="73896" title="ancient Greek religion" label="ancient Greek religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q178149" start="73913" end="73925" title="Boddhisatvas" label="Boddhisatvas"/>
<link wikidata="Q48362" start="73974" end="73982" title="Mahayana" label="Mahayana"/>
<link wikidata="Q11544585" start="73983" end="74003" title="Offering (Buddhism)" label="ceremonial practices"/>
<link wikidata="Q273131" start="74013" end="74020" title="incense" label="incense"/>
<link wikidata="Q347878" start="74217" end="74227" title="Menander I" label="Menander I"/>
<link wikidata="Q1001051" start="74279" end="74298" title="Buddhist literature" label="Buddhist literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q488880" start="74489" end="74503" title="Greco-Bactrian" label="Greco-Bactrian"/>
<link wikidata="Q857845" start="74512" end="74522" title="Ai Khanoum" label="Ai Khanoum"/>
<link wikidata="Q889" start="74537" end="74548" title="Afghanistan" label="Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1349283" start="74579" end="74594" title="spherical Earth" label="spherical Earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q8050366" start="74819" end="74831" title="Yavanajataka" label="Yavanajataka"/>
<link wikidata="Q7155145" start="74871" end="74888" title="Paulisa Siddhanta" label="Paulisa Siddhanta"/>
<link wikidata="Q27958690" start="75026" end="75061" title="Hellenistic influence on Indian art" label="Hellenistic influence on Indian art"/>
<link wikidata="Q12271" start="75083" end="75095" title="architecture" label="architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q189548" start="75119" end="75130" title="Ionic order" label="Ionic order"/>
<link wikidata="Q843" start="75154" end="75162" title="Pakistan" label="Pakistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q28163477" start="75172" end="75186" title="Jandial temple" label="Jandial temple"/>
<link wikidata="Q156093" start="75192" end="75198" title="Taxila" label="Taxila"/>
<link wikidata="Q193893" start="75220" end="75228" title="capital (architecture)" label="capitals"/>
<link wikidata="Q80484" start="75279" end="75284" title="Patna" label="Patna"/>
<link wikidata="Q28154546" start="75306" end="75325" title="Pataliputra capital" label="Pataliputra capital"/>
<link wikidata="Q54124" start="75360" end="75376" title="Corinthian order" label="Corinthian order"/>
<link wikidata="Q1008014" start="75412" end="75427" title="art of Gandhara" label="art of Gandhara"/>
<link wikidata="Q12021586" start="75448" end="75471" title="Indo-Corinthian capital" label="Indo-Corinthian capital"/>
<link wikidata="Q131169" start="75635" end="75643" title="Polybius" label="Polybius"/>
<link wikidata="Q250816" start="75660" end="75669" title="Histories (Polybius)" label="Histories"/>
<link wikidata="Q125414" start="75784" end="75800" title="Pompey the Great" label="Pompey the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048" start="76018" end="76031" title="Julius Caesar" label="Julius Caesar"/>
<link wikidata="Q192222" start="76044" end="76053" title="Lysippus" label="Lysippean"/>
<link wikidata="Q659396" start="76054" end="76064" title="equestrian statue" label="equestrian"/>
<link wikidata="Q34095" start="76065" end="76071" title="bronze" label="bronze"/>
<link wikidata="Q1405" start="76135" end="76143" title="Octavian" label="Octavian"/>
<link wikidata="Q151480" start="76228" end="76234" title="sphinx" label="sphinx"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425" start="76276" end="76282" title="Trajan" label="Trajan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1413" start="76314" end="76318" title="Nero" label="Nero"/>
<link wikidata="Q1446" start="76323" end="76332" title="Caracalla" label="Caracalla"/>
<link wikidata="Q1752" start="76385" end="76393" title="Macrinus" label="Macrinus"/>
<link wikidata="Q173424" start="76649" end="76659" title="autocratic" label="autocratic"/>
<link wikidata="Q17167" start="76713" end="76727" title="Roman Republic" label="Roman Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q33941" start="76879" end="76893" title="Emperor Julian" label="Emperor Julian"/>
<link wikidata="Q846551" start="77100" end="77121" title="Itinerarium Alexandri" label="Itinerarium Alexandri"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048" start="77198" end="77211" title="Julius Caesar" label="Julius Caesar"/>
<link wikidata="Q125414" start="77534" end="77540" title="Pompey" label="Pompey"/>
<link wikidata="Q180335" start="77929" end="77936" title="phalanx" label="phalanx"/>
<link wikidata="Q220016" start="78269" end="78274" title="Pike (weapon)" label="pikes"/>
<link wikidata="Q17167" start="78352" end="78366" title="Roman Republic" label="Roman Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q543055" start="78525" end="78542" title="Legio II Parthica" label="Legio II Parthica"/>
<link wikidata="Q143546" start="78627" end="78634" title="Triarii" label="Triarii"/>
<link wikidata="Q263307" start="78802" end="78814" title="Aristotelianism" label="Aristotelian"/>
<link wikidata="Q868" start="78845" end="78854" title="Aristotle" label="Aristotle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2104072" start="79120" end="79135" title="Pontoon bridge" label="floating bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q2103880" start="79163" end="79171" title="Pontoon (boat)" label="pontoons"/>
<link wikidata="Q290097" start="79222" end="79227" title="Baiae" label="Baiae"/>
<link wikidata="Q72425" start="79256" end="79263" title="Puteoli" label="Puteoli"/>
<link wikidata="Q1315391" start="79323" end="79350" title="Xerxes&amp;#x27; pontoon bridge" label="Xerxes&amp;#x27; pontoon bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q935895" start="79452" end="79461" title="Incitatus" label="Incitatus"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="79497" end="79516" title="#After death" label="Alexander the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q725225" start="79589" end="79609" title="Thrasyllus of Mendes" label="Thrasyllus of Mendes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1616064" start="79882" end="79903" title="Mithridatic Wars" label="later Roman expansion"/>
<link wikidata="Q3441232" start="79931" end="79943" title="Byzantine Greeks" label="entire basis"/>
<link wikidata="Q12544" start="79952" end="79968" title="Byzantine Empire" label="Byzantine Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q2158162" start="79983" end="79992" title="Robert Malcolm Errington" label="Errington"/>
<link wikidata="Q9026959" start="80064" end="80073" title="autograph manuscript" label="originals"/>
<link wikidata="Q620864" start="80648" end="80655" title="Cilicia" label="Cilicia"/>
<link wikidata="Q447476" start="80743" end="80754" title="Onesicritus" label="Onesicritus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1246563" start="80794" end="80804" title="Thalestris" label="Thalestris"/>
<link wikidata="Q134154" start="80828" end="80835" title="Amazons" label="Amazons"/>
<link wikidata="Q32133" start="80888" end="80898" title="Lysimachus" label="Lysimachus"/>
<link wikidata="Q974482" start="81165" end="81182" title="Alexander Romance" label="Alexander Romance"/>
<link wikidata="Q32063" start="81519" end="81533" title="Middle Persian" label="Middle Persian"/>
<link wikidata="Q33538" start="81535" end="81541" title="Syriac language" label="Syriac"/>
<link wikidata="Q13955" start="81546" end="81552" title="Arabic" label="Arabic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860623" start="82206" end="82216" title="Karagiozis" label="Karagiozis"/>
<link wikidata="Q182559" start="82290" end="82297" title="mermaid" label="mermaid"/>
<link wikidata="Q102059" start="82595" end="82601" title="Gorgon" label="Gorgon"/>
<link wikidata="Q32063" start="82685" end="82699" title="Middle Persian" label="Middle Persian"/>
<link wikidata="Q9601" start="82701" end="82712" title="Zoroastrian" label="Zoroastrian"/>
<link wikidata="Q432" start="82906" end="82911" title="Islam" label="Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q974482" start="82955" end="82972" title="Alexander Romance" label="Alexander Romance"/>
<link wikidata="Q124785419" start="82989" end="83002" title="Iskandarnameh" label="Iskandarnameh"/>
<link wikidata="Q43459" start="83059" end="83067" title="Firdausi" label="Firdausi"/>
<link wikidata="Q8279" start="83081" end="83090" title="Shahnameh" label="Shahnameh"/>
<link wikidata="Q125146201" start="83129" end="83147" title="Alexander the Great in the Shahnameh" label="includes Alexander"/>
<link wikidata="Q184299" start="83180" end="83184" title="shah" label="shah"/>
<link wikidata="Q775332" start="83264" end="83281" title="Fountain of Youth" label="Fountain of Youth"/>
<link wikidata="Q5806" start="83350" end="83355" title="Mecca" label="Mecca"/>
<link wikidata="Q29466" start="83371" end="83376" title="Kaaba" label="Kaaba"/>
<link wikidata="Q234915" start="83417" end="83421" title="Hajj" label="Hajj"/>
<link wikidata="Q913" start="83601" end="83609" title="Socrates" label="Socrates"/>
<link wikidata="Q859" start="83611" end="83616" title="Plato" label="Plato"/>
<link wikidata="Q1207846" start="83672" end="83686" title="Dhu al-Qarnayn" label="Dhu al-Qarnayn"/>
<link wikidata="Q13955" start="83688" end="83694" title="Arabic" label="Arabic"/>
<link wikidata="Q428" start="83802" end="83813" title="Qur&amp;#x27;an" label="Qur&amp;#x27;an"/>
<link wikidata="Q318277" start="84007" end="84019" title="Gates of Alexander" label="built a wall"/>
<link wikidata="Q629060" start="84053" end="84066" title="Gog and Magog" label="Gog and Magog"/>
<link wikidata="Q33538" start="84186" end="84192" title="Syriac language" label="Syriac"/>
<link wikidata="Q313126" start="84381" end="84393" title="Nectanebo II" label="Nectanebo II"/>
<link wikidata="Q37110" start="84404" end="84411" title="pharaoh" label="pharaoh"/>
<link wikidata="Q134461" start="84574" end="84582" title="Josephus" label="Josephus"/>
<link wikidata="Q80115" start="84608" end="84622" title="Book of Daniel" label="Book of Daniel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1568" start="84776" end="84781" title="Hindi" label="Hindi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1617" start="84786" end="84790" title="Urdu" label="Urdu"/>
<link wikidata="Q30315209" start="84807" end="84815" title="Iskandar (name)" label="Sikandar"/>
<link wikidata="Q229411" start="84907" end="84922" title="Delhi Sultanate" label="Delhi Sultanate"/>
<link wikidata="Q335362" start="84929" end="84944" title="Alauddin Khalji" label="Alauddin Khalji"/>
<link wikidata="Q12057021" start="85030" end="85044" title="medieval India" label="medieval India"/>
<link wikidata="Q974482" start="85265" end="85283" title="Alexander Romances" label="Alexander Romances"/>
<link wikidata="Q207817" start="85323" end="85335" title="Amir Khusrau" label="Amir Khusrau"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="85436" end="85451" title="medieval Europe" label="medieval Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q32498" start="85504" end="85517" title="Nine Worthies" label="Nine Worthies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1056721" start="85605" end="85613" title="chivalry" label="chivalry"/>
<link wikidata="Q7263697" start="85632" end="85681" title="Italian campaigns of the French Revolutionary Wars" label="Italian campaign of the French Revolutionary Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344191" start="85702" end="85712" title="Bourrienne" label="Bourrienne"/>
<link wikidata="Q517" start="85776" end="85784" title="Napoleon" label="Napoleon"/>
<link wikidata="Q8934183" start="85902" end="85917" title="Greek Anthology" label="Greek Anthology"/>
<link wikidata="Q320132" start="86305" end="86313" title="Nearchus" label="Nearchus"/>
<link wikidata="Q544987" start="86315" end="86326" title="Aristobulus of Cassandreia" label="Aristobulus"/>
<link wikidata="Q112754" start="86466" end="86482" title="primary source" label="original sources"/>
<link wikidata="Q171241" start="86523" end="86539" title="Diodorus Siculus" label="Diodorus Siculus"/>
<link wikidata="Q31845" start="86622" end="86628" title="Arrian" label="Arrian"/>
<link wikidata="Q210853" start="86715" end="86721" title="Justin (historian)" label="Justin"/>
<link wikidata="Q124397690" start="86934" end="86974" title="Alexander the Great in Islamic tradition" label="Alexander the Great in Islamic tradition"/>
<link wikidata="Q2432315" start="86977" end="87000" title="Ancient Macedonian army" label="Ancient Macedonian army"/>
<link wikidata="Q201598" start="87003" end="87013" title="Bucephalus" label="Bucephalus"/>
<link wikidata="Q5114170" start="87016" end="87058" title="Chronology of European exploration of Asia" label="Chronology of European exploration of Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q124392595" start="87061" end="87079" title="Horns of Alexander" label="Horns of Alexander"/>
<link wikidata="Q6607516" start="87082" end="87143" title="List of biblical figures identified in extra-biblical sources" label="List of biblical figures identified in extra-biblical sources"/>
<link wikidata="Q3244366" start="87146" end="87179" title="List of people known as The Great" label="List of people known as The Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q318277" start="87182" end="87200" title="Gates of Alexander" label="Gates of Alexander"/>
<link wikidata="Q3513676" start="87203" end="87242" title="Military tactics of Alexander the Great" label="Military tactics of Alexander the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q2116254" start="87245" end="87282" title="Ptolemaic cult of Alexander the Great" label="Ptolemaic cult of Alexander the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q1674001" start="87285" end="87332" title="Theories about Alexander the Great in the Quran" label="Theories about Alexander the Great in the Quran"/>
<link wikidata="Q1336200" start="87670" end="87683" title="Penguin Books" label="Penguin Books"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="784" wikidata="Q333402" url="?curid=784" title="Alfred Korzybski">
<text>Alfred Habdank Skarbek Korzybski (; ; July 3, 1879 – March 1, 1950) was a Polish-American independent scholar who developed a field called general semantics, which he viewed as both distinct from, and more encompassing than, the field of semantics. He argued that human knowledge of the world is limited both by the human nervous system and the languages humans have developed, and thus no one can have direct access to reality, given that the most we can know is that which is filtered through the brain&#x27;s responses to reality. His best known dictum is &quot;The map is not the territory&quot;.

==Early life and career==

Born in Warsaw, Vistula Country, which was then part of the Russian Empire, Korzybski belonged to an aristocratic Polish family whose members had worked as mathematicians, scientists, and engineers for generations. He learned the Polish language at home and the Russian language in schools, and having a French and German governess, he became fluent in four languages as a child.

Korzybski studied engineering at the Warsaw University of Technology. During the First World War (1914–1918) Korzybski served as an intelligence officer in the Russian Army. After being wounded in a leg and suffering other injuries, he moved to North America in 1916 (first to Canada, then to the United States) to coordinate the shipment of artillery to Russia. He also lectured to Polish-American audiences about the conflict, promoting the sale of war bonds. After the war he decided to remain in the United States, becoming a naturalized citizen in 1940. He met Mira Edgerly, a painter of portraits on ivory, shortly after the 1918 Armistice; They married in January 1919; the marriage lasted until his death.

E. P. Dutton published Korzybski&#x27;s first book, &quot;Manhood of Humanity&quot;, in 1921. In this work he proposed and explained in detail a new theory of humankind: mankind as a &quot;time-binding&quot; class of life (humans perform time binding by the transmission of knowledge and abstractions through time which become accreted in cultures).
In 1925 and 1926, Korzybski observed psychiatric patients at St. Elizabeth&#x27;s hospital in D.C. under the supervision of William Alanson White.

==General semantics==
Korzybski&#x27;s work culminated in the initiation of a discipline that he named general semantics (GS). This should not be confused with semantics. The basic principles of general semantics, which include time-binding, are described in the book &quot;Science and Sanity&quot;, published in 1933. In 1938, Korzybski founded the Institute of General Semantics in Chicago. The post-World War II housing shortage in Chicago cost him the institute&#x27;s building lease, so in 1946 he moved the institute to Lakeville, Connecticut, U.S., where he directed it until his death in 1950.

Korzybski maintained that humans are limited in what they know by (1) the structure of their nervous systems, and (2) the structure of their languages. Humans cannot experience the world directly, but only through their &quot;abstractions&quot; (nonverbal impressions or &quot;gleanings&quot; derived from the nervous system, and verbal indicators expressed and derived from language). These sometimes mislead us about what is the truth. Our understanding sometimes lacks &quot;similarity of structure&quot; with what is actually happening.

He sought to train our awareness of abstracting, using techniques he had derived from his study of mathematics and science. He called this awareness, this goal of his system, &quot;consciousness of abstracting&quot;. His system included the promotion of attitudes such as &quot;I don&#x27;t know; let&#x27;s see,&quot; in order that we may better discover or reflect on its realities as revealed by modern science. Another technique involved becoming inwardly and outwardly quiet, an experience he termed, &quot;silence on the objective levels&quot;.

==&quot;To be&quot;==
Many devotees and critics of Korzybski reduced his rather complex system to a simple matter of what he said about the verb form &quot;is&quot; of the general verb &quot;to be.&quot; His system, however, is based primarily on such terminology as the different &quot;orders of abstraction,&quot; and formulations such as &quot;consciousness of abstracting.&quot; The contention that Korzybski &quot;opposed&quot; the use of the verb &quot;to be&quot; would be a profound exaggeration.

He thought that &quot;certain uses&quot; of the verb &quot;to be&quot;, called the &quot;is of identity&quot; and the &quot;is of predication&quot;, were faulty in structure, e.g., a statement such as, &quot;Elizabeth is a fool&quot; (said of a person named &quot;Elizabeth&quot; who has done something that we regard as foolish). In Korzybski&#x27;s system, one&#x27;s assessment of Elizabeth belongs to a higher order of abstraction than Elizabeth herself. Korzybski&#x27;s remedy was to &quot;deny&quot; identity; in this example, to be aware continually that &quot;Elizabeth&quot; is &quot;not&quot; what we &quot;call&quot; her. We find Elizabeth not in the verbal domain, the world of words, but the nonverbal domain (the two, he said, amount to different orders of abstraction). This was expressed by Korzybski&#x27;s most famous premise, &quot;the map is not the territory&quot;. Note that this premise uses the phrase &quot;is not&quot;, a form of &quot;to be&quot;; this and many other examples show that he did not intend to abandon &quot;to be&quot; as such. In fact, he said explicitly that there were no structural problems with the verb &quot;to be&quot; when used as an auxiliary verb or when used to state existence or location. It was even acceptable at times to use the faulty forms of the verb &quot;to be,&quot; as long as one was aware of their structural limitations.

==Anecdotes==
One day, Korzybski was giving a lecture to a group of students, and he interrupted the lesson suddenly in order to retrieve a packet of biscuits, wrapped in white paper, from his briefcase. He muttered that he just had to eat something, and he asked the students on the seats in the front row if they would also like a biscuit. A few students took a biscuit. &quot;Nice biscuit, don&#x27;t you think,&quot; said Korzybski, while he took a second one. The students were chewing vigorously. Then he tore the white paper from the biscuits, in order to reveal the original packaging. On it was a big picture of a dog&#x27;s head and the words &quot;Dog Cookies.&quot; The students looked at the package, and were shocked. Two of them wanted to vomit, put their hands in front of their mouths, and ran out of the lecture hall to the toilet. &quot;You see,&quot; Korzybski remarked, &quot;I have just demonstrated that people don&#x27;t just eat food, but also words, and that the taste of the former is often outdone by the taste of the latter.&quot;

William Burroughs went to a Korzybski workshop in the autumn of 1939. He was 25 years old, and paid $40. His fellow students—there were 38 in all—included young Samuel I. Hayakawa (later to become a Republican member of the U.S. Senate) and Wendell Johnson (founder of the Monster Study).

== Influence ==
Korzybski&#x27;s work had a positive reception from a variety of persons in the 1940s and 1950s. Robert A. Heinlein named a character after him in his 1940 short story &quot;Blowups Happen&quot;. The science fiction writer A. E. van Vogt based his novel &quot;The World of Null-A&quot;, published in 1948, on ideas from General Semantics. On March 8, 1949, fellow science-fiction author L. Ron Hubbard wrote to Heinlein referencing Korzybski as an influence on what would become Dianetics:


Korzybski&#x27;s ideas influenced philosopher Alan Watts and physicist Fritjof Capra who used his phrase &quot;the map is not the territory&quot; in lectures and writings &quot;The Tao of Physics&quot;, 35th Anniversary Edition. Writer Robert Anton Wilson was also deeply influenced by Korzybski&#x27;s ideas.

The third edition of &quot;Science and Sanity&quot; states that in World War II the United States Army used Korzybski&#x27;s system to treat battle fatigue in Europe, under the supervision of Dr. Douglas M. Kelley, who went on to become the psychiatrist in charge of the Nazi war criminals at Nuremberg.

Some of the General Semantics tradition was continued by Samuel I. Hayakawa.

== Publications ==
* &quot;Science and Sanity: An Introduction to Non-Aristotelian Systems and General Semantics&quot;. Lancaster, Pennsylvania: Science Press Printing Co. 1933.

==See also==
* 
* 


==References==
==Further reading==
* Kodish, Bruce. 2011. &quot;Korzybski: A Biography&quot;. Pasadena, CA: Extensional Publishing. softcover, 978-09700664-28 hardcover.
* Kodish, Bruce and Susan Presby Kodish. 2011. &quot;Drive Yourself Sane: Using the Uncommon Sense of General Semantics, Third Edition&quot;. Pasadena, CA: Extensional Publishing. 
* Alfred Korzybski, &quot;Manhood of Humanity&quot;, foreword by Edward Kasner, notes by M. Kendig, Institute of General Semantics, 1950, hardcover, 2nd edition, 391 pages, . (Copy of the first edition.)
* &quot;Science and Sanity: An Introduction to Non-Aristotelian Systems and General Semantics&quot;, Alfred Korzybski, preface by Robert P. Pula, Institute of General Semantics, 1994, hardcover, 5th edition, . (Full text online.)
* Alfred Korzybski, &quot;Collected Writings 1920-1950&quot;, Institute of General Semantics, 1990, hardcover, 
* Montagu, M. F. A. (1953). Time-binding and the concept of culture. &quot;The Scientific Monthly&quot;, Vol. 77, No. 3 (Sep., 1953), pp. 148–155.
* Murray, E. (1950). In memoriam: Alfred H. Korzybski. &quot;Sociometry&quot;, Vol. 13, No. 1 (Feb., 1950), pp. 76–77.
*
*

==External links==
* 
* Alfred Korzybski and Gestalt Therapy Website
* Australian General Semantics Society
* Institute of General Semantics
* Finding aid to Alfred Korzybski papers at Columbia University. Rare Book &amp; Manuscript Library.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q333402" start="0" end="32" title="Alfred Korzybski" label="Alfred Habdank Skarbek Korzybski"/>
<link wikidata="Q2621039" start="139" end="156" title="general semantics" label="general semantics"/>
<link wikidata="Q796212" start="238" end="247" title="semantics" label="semantics"/>
<link wikidata="Q9404" start="322" end="336" title="nervous system" label="nervous system"/>
<link wikidata="Q315" start="345" end="353" title="language" label="language"/>
<link wikidata="Q9510" start="420" end="427" title="reality" label="reality"/>
<link wikidata="Q1963130" start="565" end="593" title="Map–territory relation" label="The map is not the territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q270" start="637" end="643" title="Warsaw" label="Warsaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q2068091" start="645" end="660" title="Vistula Country" label="Vistula Country"/>
<link wikidata="Q34266" start="689" end="703" title="Russian Empire" label="Russian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q809" start="859" end="874" title="Polish language" label="Polish language"/>
<link wikidata="Q7737" start="891" end="907" title="Russian language" label="Russian language"/>
<link wikidata="Q1540278" start="951" end="960" title="governess" label="governess"/>
<link wikidata="Q1718656" start="1047" end="1078" title="Warsaw University of Technology" label="Warsaw University of Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="1091" end="1106" title="First World War" label="First World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q4168000" start="1142" end="1162" title="Military intelligence" label="intelligence officer"/>
<link wikidata="Q159" start="1170" end="1176" title="Russia" label="Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q64418" start="1352" end="1361" title="artillery" label="artillery"/>
<link wikidata="Q617663" start="1461" end="1470" title="war bonds" label="war bonds"/>
<link wikidata="Q841440" start="1540" end="1559" title="Naturalization" label="naturalized citizen"/>
<link wikidata="Q21810582" start="1576" end="1588" title="Mira Edgerly-Korzybska" label="Mira Edgerly"/>
<link wikidata="Q253224" start="1641" end="1655" title="Armistice of 11 November 1918" label="1918 Armistice"/>
<link wikidata="Q5317558" start="1725" end="1737" title="E. P. Dutton" label="E. P. Dutton"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1914" end="1926" title="General semantics#The major premises" label="time-binding"/>
<link wikidata="Q673661" start="2013" end="2024" title="abstraction" label="abstraction"/>
<link wikidata="Q3656349" start="2199" end="2220" title="William Alanson White" label="William Alanson White"/>
<link wikidata="Q2621039" start="2326" end="2343" title="general semantics" label="general semantics"/>
<link wikidata="Q796212" start="2383" end="2392" title="semantics" label="semantics"/>
<link wikidata="Q25916981" start="2497" end="2515" title="Science and Sanity" label="Science and Sanity"/>
<link wikidata="Q6040335" start="2573" end="2603" title="Institute of General Semantics" label="Institute of General Semantics"/>
<link wikidata="Q3086417" start="2749" end="2771" title="Lakeville (Salisbury, Connecticut)" label="Lakeville, Connecticut"/>
<link wikidata="Q6671777" start="2948" end="2957" title="structure" label="structure"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4556" end="4567" title="E-Prime#Different functions of &amp;quot;to be&amp;quot;" label="predication"/>
<link wikidata="Q1963130" start="5278" end="5306" title="Map–territory relation" label="the map is not the territory"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5612" end="5626" title="E-prime#The different functions of &amp;#x27;to be&amp;#x27;" label="auxiliary verb"/>
<link wikidata="Q13270" start="5968" end="5975" title="biscuit" label="biscuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q188176" start="6879" end="6896" title="William Burroughs" label="William Burroughs"/>
<link wikidata="Q942027" start="7040" end="7058" title="Samuel I. Hayakawa" label="Samuel I. Hayakawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q29468" start="7078" end="7088" title="Republican Party (United States)" label="Republican"/>
<link wikidata="Q66096" start="7103" end="7114" title="United States Senate" label="U.S. Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q7982440" start="7120" end="7135" title="Wendell Johnson" label="Wendell Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q3861016" start="7152" end="7165" title="Monster Study" label="Monster Study"/>
<link wikidata="Q123078" start="7282" end="7300" title="Robert A. Heinlein" label="Robert A. Heinlein"/>
<link wikidata="Q3148480" start="7359" end="7373" title="Blowups Happen" label="Blowups Happen"/>
<link wikidata="Q315059" start="7408" end="7422" title="A. E. van Vogt" label="A. E. van Vogt"/>
<link wikidata="Q957076" start="7445" end="7464" title="The World of Null-A" label="The World of Null-A"/>
<link wikidata="Q216896" start="7572" end="7586" title="L. Ron Hubbard" label="L. Ron Hubbard"/>
<link wikidata="Q284451" start="7664" end="7673" title="Dianetics" label="Dianetics"/>
<link wikidata="Q354867" start="7723" end="7733" title="Alan Watts" label="Alan Watts"/>
<link wikidata="Q84258" start="7748" end="7761" title="Fritjof Capra" label="Fritjof Capra"/>
<link wikidata="Q314215" start="7913" end="7932" title="Robert Anton Wilson" label="Robert Anton Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="8055" end="8067" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q9212" start="8072" end="8090" title="United States Army" label="United States Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q1482034" start="8129" end="8143" title="Combat stress reaction" label="battle fatigue"/>
<link wikidata="Q5301677" start="8184" end="8201" title="Douglas Kelley" label="Douglas M. Kelley"/>
<link wikidata="Q80130" start="8281" end="8290" title="Nuremberg trials" label="Nuremberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q942027" start="8350" end="8368" title="Samuel I. Hayakawa" label="Samuel I. Hayakawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q25916981" start="8398" end="8416" title="Science and Sanity" label="Science and Sanity"/>
<link wikidata="Q6766294" start="9011" end="9020" title="M. Kendig" label="M. Kendig"/>
<link wikidata="Q6040335" start="9256" end="9270" title="Robert P. Pula" label="Robert P. Pula"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="785" wikidata="Q748890" url="?curid=785" title="Asteroids (video game)">
<text>Asteroids is a multidirectional shooter video game developed and published by Atari for arcades. It was designed by Lyle Rains and Ed Logg. The player controls a single spaceship in an asteroid field which is periodically traversed by flying saucers. The object of the game is to shoot and destroy the asteroids and saucers, while not colliding with either, or being hit by the saucers&#x27; counter-fire. The game becomes more difficult as the number of asteroids increases.

&quot;Asteroids&quot; was conceived during a meeting between Logg and Rains, who decided to use hardware developed by Wendi Allen (then known as Howard Delman) previously used for &quot;Lunar Lander&quot;. Asteroids was based on an unfinished game titled &quot;Cosmos&quot;; its physics model, control scheme, and gameplay elements were derived from &quot;Spacewar!&quot;, &quot;Computer Space&quot;, and &quot;Space Invaders&quot; and refined through trial and error. The game is rendered on a vector display in a two-dimensional view that wraps around both screen axes.

&quot;Asteroids&quot; was one of the first major hits of the golden age of arcade games; the game sold 47,840 upright cabinets and 8,725 cocktail cabinets and proved both popular with players and influential with developers. In the 1980s it was ported to Atari&#x27;s home systems, and the Atari VCS version sold over three million copies. The game was widely imitated, and it directly influenced &quot;Defender&quot;, &quot;Gravitar&quot;, and many other video games.

==Gameplay==

The objective of &quot;Asteroids&quot; is to destroy asteroids and saucers. The player controls a triangular ship that can rotate left and right, fire shots straight forward, and thrust forward. Once the ship begins moving in a direction, it will continue in that direction for a time without player intervention unless the player applies thrust in a different direction. The ship eventually comes to a stop when not thrusting. The player can also send the ship into hyperspace, causing it to disappear and reappear in a random location on the screen, at the risk of self-destructing or appearing on top of an asteroid.

Each level starts with multiple large asteroids drifting across the screen. Objects wrap around screen edges; an asteroid that drifts off the top edge of the screen reappears at the bottom and continues moving in the same direction. As the player shoots asteroids, they break into smaller asteroids that move faster and are more difficult to hit. Smaller asteroids are also worth more points. Two flying saucers appear periodically on the screen; the &quot;big saucer&quot; shoots randomly and poorly, while the &quot;small saucer&quot; fires frequently at the ship. After reaching a score of 40,000, only the small saucer appears. As the player&#x27;s score increases, the angle range of the shots from the small saucer diminishes until the saucer fires extremely accurately. Once the screen has been cleared of all asteroids and flying saucers, a new set of large asteroids appears, thus starting the next level. The game gets harder as the number of asteroids increases until after the score reaches a range between 40,000 and 60,000. The player starts with 3–5 lives upon game start and gains an extra life per 10,000 points. Play continues to the last ship lost, which ends the game. The machine &quot;turns over&quot; at 99,990 points, which is the maximum high score that can be achieved.

===Lurking exploit===
In the original game design, saucers were supposed to begin shooting as soon as they appeared, but this was changed. Additionally, saucers can only aim at the player&#x27;s ship on-screen; they are not capable of aiming across a screen boundary. These behaviors allow a &quot;lurking&quot; strategy, in which the player stays near the edge of the screen opposite the saucer. By keeping just one or two rocks in play, a player can shoot across the boundary and destroy saucers to accumulate points indefinitely with little risk of being destroyed. Arcade operators began to complain about losing revenue due to this exploit. In response, Atari issued a patched EPROM and, due to the impact of this exploit, Atari (and other companies) changed their development and testing policies to try to prevent future games from having such exploits.

==Development==
&quot;Asteroids&quot; was conceived by Lyle Rains and programmed by Ed Logg with collaborations from other Atari staff. Logg was impressed with the Atari Video Computer System (later called the Atari 2600), and he joined Atari&#x27;s coin-op division to work on &quot;Dirt Bike&quot;, which was never released due to an unsuccessful field test. Paul Mancuso joined the development team as &quot;Asteroids&quot;″ technician and engineer Wendi Allen contributed to the hardware. During a meeting in April 1979, Rains discussed &quot;Planet Grab&quot;, a multiplayer arcade game later renamed to &quot;Cosmos&quot;. The unfinished game featured a giant, indestructible asteroid. Logg did play Cosmos and remembered shooting the indestructible asteroid to no effect. So Rains asked Logg: &quot;Well, why don&#x27;t we have a game where you shoot the rocks and blow them up?&quot; In response, Logg described a similar concept where the player selectively shoots at rocks that break into smaller pieces. Thus combining the two-dimensional approach of &quot;Space War&quot; with &quot;Space Invaders&quot;″ addictive gameplay of &quot;completion&quot; and &quot;eliminate all threats&quot;. Both agreed on the concept.

===Hardware===
&quot;Asteroids&quot; was implemented on hardware developed by Allen and is a vector game, in which the graphics are composed of lines drawn on a vector monitor. Rains initially wanted the game done in raster graphics, but Logg, experienced in vector graphics, suggested an XY monitor because the high image quality would permit precise aiming. The hardware is chiefly a MOS 6502 executing the game program, and QuadraScan, a high-resolution vector graphics processor developed by Atari and referred to as an &quot;XY display system&quot; and the &quot;Digital Vector Generator (DVG)&quot;.

The original design concepts for QuadraScan came out of Cyan Engineering, Atari&#x27;s off-campus research lab in Grass Valley, California, in 1978. Cyan gave it to Wendi Allen, who finished the design and first used it for &quot;Lunar Lander&quot;. Logg received Allen&#x27;s modified board with five buttons, 13 sound effects, and additional RAM, and he used it to develop &quot;Asteroids&quot;. The size of the board was 4 by 4 inches, and it was &quot;linked up&quot; to a monitor.

===Implementation===
Logg modeled the player&#x27;s ship, the five-button control scheme, and the game physics after &quot;Spacewar!&quot;, which he had played as a student at the University of California, Berkeley, but made several changes to improve playability. The ship was programmed into the hardware and rendered by the monitor, and it was configured to move with thrust and inertia. The hyperspace button was not placed near Logg&#x27;s right thumb, which he was dissatisfied with, as he had a problem &quot;tak[ing] his hand off the thrust button&quot;. Drawings of asteroids in various shapes were incorporated into the game. Logg copied the idea of a high score table with initials from Exidy&#x27;s &quot;Star Fire&quot;.

The two saucers were formulated to be different from each other. A steadily decreasing timer shortens intervals between saucer attacks to keep the player from not shooting asteroids and saucers. A &quot;heartbeat&quot; soundtrack quickens as the game progresses. The game does not have a sound chip. Allen created a hardware circuit for 13 sound effects by hand which was wired onto the board.

A prototype of &quot;Asteroids&quot; was well received by several Atari staff and engineers, who &quot;wander[ed] between labs, passing comment and stopping to play as they went&quot;. Logg was often asked when he would be leaving by employees eager to play the prototype, so he created a second prototype for staff to play. Atari tested the game in arcades in Sacramento, California, and also observed players during focus group sessions at Atari. Players used to &quot;Spacewar!&quot; struggled to maintain grip on the thrust button and requested a joystick; players accustomed to &quot;Space Invaders&quot; noted they get no break in the game. Logg and other engineers observed proceedings and documented comments in four pages.
===Quirks===
&quot;Asteroids&quot; slows down as the player gains 50–100 lives, because there is no limit to the number of lives displayed. The game&#x27;s code continues trying to draw them even if they fall outside the boundaries of the screen. After more than 250 lives are collected, the game slows down enough that the watchdog timer thinks it has crashed and reboots the hardware.

There is limit of 26 asteroids. If there are already that many, shooting a large asteroid turns it into a single medium one, rather than two as per normal. Similarly, a medium asteroid turns into a single small one instead of splitting.
==Ports==
&quot;Asteroids&quot; was released for the Atari VCS (later renamed Atari 2600) and Atari 8-bit computers in 1981. Programmers Brad Stewart and Bob Smith were unable to fit the Atari VCS port into a 4 KB cartridge. It became the first game for the console to use bank switching, a technique that increases ROM size from 4 KB to 8 KB. A port for the Atari 5200, identical to the Atari 8-bit version, was in development in 1982, but was not published.

An Atari 7800 version was published in 1986 with the official launch of the console. It includes cooperative play and colorful bitmapped graphics. 

==Reception==
&quot;Asteroids&quot; was immediately successful upon release. It displaced &quot;Space Invaders&quot; by popularity in the United States and became Atari&#x27;s best selling arcade game of all time, with over 70,000 units sold. Atari earned an estimated $150 million in sales from the game, and arcade operators earned a further $500 million from coin drops. Atari had been in the process of manufacturing another vector game, &quot;Lunar Lander&quot;, but demand for &quot;Asteroids&quot; was so high &quot;that several hundred &quot;Asteroids&quot; games were shipped in &quot;Lunar Lander&quot; cabinets&quot;. &quot;Asteroids&quot; was so popular that some video arcade operators had to install large boxes to hold the number of coins spent by players, and Atari assembly line workers that ignored other games they built played finished &quot;Asteroids&quot; machines awaiting shipping. It replaced &quot;Space Invaders&quot; at the top of the US &quot;RePlay&quot; amusement arcade charts in April 1980, though &quot;Space Invaders&quot; remained the top game at street locations. &quot;Asteroids&quot; went on to become the highest-grossing arcade video game of 1980 in the United States, dethroning &quot;Space Invaders&quot;. It shipped 70,000 arcade units worldwide in 1980, including over 60,000 sold in the United States that year, and grossed about worldwide ( adjusted for inflation) by 1980. The game remained at the top of the US &quot;RePlay&quot; charts through March 1981. The game did not perform as well overseas in Europe and Asia. It sold 30,000 arcade units overseas, for a total of 100,000 arcade units sold worldwide. Atari manufactured 76,312 units from its US and Ireland plants, including 21,394 &quot;Asteroids Deluxe&quot; units. It was a commercial failure in Japan when it released there in 1980, partly due to its complex controls and partly due to the Japanese market beginning to lose interest in space shoot &#x27;em ups at the time.

&quot;Asteroids&quot; received positive reviews from video game critics and has been regarded as Logg&#x27;s magnum opus. Richard A. Edwards reviewed the 1981 &quot;Asteroids&quot; home cartridge in &quot;The Space Gamer&quot; No. 46. Edwards commented that &quot;this home cartridge is a virtual duplicate of the ever-popular Atari arcade game. [...] If blasting asteroids is the thing you want to do then this is the game, but at this price I can&#x27;t wholeheartedly recommend it&quot;. &quot;Video Games Player&quot; magazine reviewed the Atari VCS version, rating the graphics and sound a B, while giving the game an overall B+ rating. &quot;Electronic Fun with Computers &amp; Games&quot; magazine gave the Atari VCS version an A rating.

William Cassidy, writing for GameSpy&#x27;s &quot;Classic Gaming&quot;, noticed its innovations, including being one of the first video games to track initials and allow players to enter their initials for appearing in the top 10 high scores, and commented that &quot;the vector graphics fit the futuristic outer space theme very well&quot;. In 1995, Flux magazine ranked the arcade version 11th on their &quot;Top 100 Video Games&quot;. In 1996, &quot;Next Generation&quot; listed it as number 39 on their &quot;Top 100 Games of All Time&quot;, particularly lauding the control dynamics which require &quot;the constant juggling of speed, positioning, and direction&quot;. In 1999, &quot;Next Generation&quot; listed &quot;Asteroids&quot; as number 29 on their &quot;Top 50 Games of All Time&quot;, commenting that &quot;&quot;Asteroids&quot; was a classic the day it was released, and it has never lost any of its appeal&quot;. &quot;Asteroids&quot; was ranked fourth on &quot;Retro Gamer&quot;″s list of &quot;Top 25 Arcade Games&quot;; the &quot;Retro Gamer&quot; staff cited its simplicity and the lack of a proper ending as allowances of revisiting the game. In 2012, &quot;Asteroids&quot; was listed on &quot;Time&quot; All-Time 100 greatest video games list. &quot;Entertainment Weekly&quot; named &quot;Asteroids&quot; one of the top ten games for the Atari 2600 in 2013. It was added to the Museum of Modern Art&#x27;s collection of video games. In 2021, &quot;The Guardian&quot; listed &quot;Asteroids&quot; as the second greatest video game of the 1970s, just below &quot;Galaxian&quot; (1979). By contrast, in March 1983 the Atari 8-bit port of &quot;Asteroids&quot; won sixth place in &quot;Softline&quot;″s Dog of the Year awards &quot;for badness in computer games&quot;, Atari division, based on reader submissions.

Usage of the names of &quot;Saturday Night Live&quot; characters &quot;Mr. Bill&quot; and &quot;Sluggo&quot; to refer to the saucers in an &quot;Esquire&quot; article about the game led to Logg receiving a cease and desist letter from a lawyer with the &quot;Mr. Bill Trademark&quot;.

==Legacy==
===Arcade sequels===
Released in 1981, &quot;Asteroids Deluxe&quot; was the first sequel to &quot;Asteroids&quot;. Dave Shepperd edited the code and made enhancements to the game without Logg&#x27;s involvement. The onscreen objects are tinted blue, and hyperspace is replaced by a shield that depletes when used. The asteroids rotate, and new &quot;killer satellite&quot; enemies break into smaller ships that home in on the player&#x27;s position. The arcade machine&#x27;s monitor displays vector graphics overlaying a holographic backdrop. The game is more difficult than the original and enables saucers to shoot across the screen boundary, eliminating the lurking strategy for high scores in the original.

&quot;Space Duel&quot;, released in arcades in 1982, replaces the rocks with colorful geometric shapes and adds cooperative two-player gameplay.

1987&#x27;s &quot;Blasteroids&quot; includes power-ups, ship morphing, branching levels, bosses, and the ability to dock ships in multiplayer for added firepower. &quot;Blasteroids&quot; uses raster graphics instead of vectors.

===Re-releases===
The game is half of the Atari Lynx pairing &quot;Super Asteroids &amp; Missile Command&quot; and included in the 1993 &quot;Microsoft Arcade&quot; compilation.

Activision published an enhanced version of &quot;Asteroids&quot; for the PlayStation (1998), Nintendo 64 (1999), Microsoft Windows (1998), Game Boy Color (1999), and Mac (2000). The Atari Flashback series of dedicated video game consoles have included both the 2600 and the arcade versions of &quot;Asteroids&quot;.

&quot;Asteroids Hyper 64&quot; made the ship and asteroids 3D, and added new weapons and a multiplayer mode. It was developed by Syrox Developments and published by Crave Entertainment for the Nintendo 64.

A technical demo of &quot;Asteroids&quot; was developed by iThink for the Atari Jaguar but was never released. Unofficially referred to as &quot;Asteroids 2000&quot;, it was demonstrated at E-JagFest 2000. An updated version of the game was announced in 2018 for the Intellivision Amico.

Different versions of &quot;Asteroids&quot; were included in several Atari games compilations, such as &quot;Atari Anniversary Edition&quot; (2001) for the Dreamcast, PlayStation, and Microsoft Windows, &quot;Atari Anthology&quot; (2003) for both Xbox and PlayStation 2, &quot;Atari Greatest Hits Volume 1&quot; (2010) for the Nintendo DS, Atari Collection 1 and 2 in 2020 for the Evercade, and Atari 50 (2022) for the Atari VCS, Nintendo Switch, PlayStation 4, PlayStation 5, Windows, Xbox One, and Xbox Series X/S.

Released in November 2007, the Xbox Live Arcade port of &quot;Asteroids&quot; has revamped HD graphics along with an added intense &quot;throttle monkey&quot; mode. The arcade and 2600 versions were made available through Microsoft″s &quot;Game Room&quot; service in 2010. Glu Mobile released an enhanced mobile phone port.

In 2005 &quot;Asteroids&quot; was released for the Game Boy Advance with &quot;Pong&quot; and &quot;Yars&#x27; Revenge&quot; also being included on the same package.

A remake, &quot;Asteroids: Recharged&quot;, was released in December 2021 for the Nintendo Switch, PlayStation 4, PlayStation 5, Windows, Xbox One, and Xbox Series X/S, developed by Adamvision Studios and SneakyBox and published by Atari.

In November 2024, Alan-1 Inc. released an official coin-op arcade version of Asteroids Recharged. The game won the first place in Best New Product of the category Games and Devices of the IAAPA 2024 Brass Ring Awards.

===Clones===
Quality Software&#x27;s &quot;Asteroids in Space&quot; (1980) was one of the best selling games for the Apple II and voted one of the most popular software titles of 1978–80 by &quot;Softalk&quot; magazine. In December 1981, &quot;Byte&quot; reviewed eight &quot;Asteroids&quot; clones for home computers. Three clones for the Apple II were reviewed together in the 1982 &quot;Creative Computing Software Buyers Guide&quot;: &quot;The Asteroid Field&quot;, &quot;Asteron&quot;, and &quot;Apple-Oids&quot;. In the last of these, the asteroids are in the shape of apples. Two independent clones, &quot;Asteroid&quot; for the Apple II and &quot;Fasteroids&quot; for TRS-80, were renamed to &quot;Planetoids&quot; and sold by Adventure International. Others clones include Acornsoft&#x27;s &quot;Meteors&quot;, &quot;Moons of Jupiter&quot; for the VIC-20, &quot;MineStorm&quot; for the Vectrex, and Quicksilva&#x27;s &quot;Meteor Storm&quot; for the ZX Spectrum which uses speech synthesis. A poorly implemented &quot;Asteroids&quot; clone for the VIC-20, published by Bug-Byte, motivated Jeff Minter to found Llamasoft.

The Intellivision game &quot;Meteor!&quot; was cancelled to avoid a lawsuit for being too similar to &quot;Asteroids&quot; and was reworked as &quot;Astrosmash&quot;. The game borrows elements from &quot;Asteroids&quot; and &quot;Space Invaders&quot;.

===Proposed film adaptation===
In July 2009, Universal Pictures offered Roland Emmerich the option to direct the film adaptation of &quot;Asteroids&quot;, with Matt Lopez writing the script and Lorenzo di Bonaventura producing the film adaptation. Lopez and di Bonaventura were still attached to write and produce the film adaptation, respectively, but Emmerich passed on directing, while Evan Spiliotopoulos and F. Scott Frazier were hired to rewrite the screenplay.

===In other media===
The game has made cameo appearances in a number of films and music videos. An Asteroids machine appears in the music video for 38 Special&#x27;s song &quot;Caught Up in You&quot;, and one is also briefly seen in the movie &quot;Pee-Wee&#x27;s Big Adventure&quot;.

==World records==
On February 6, 1982, Leo Daniels of Carolina Beach, North Carolina, set a world record score of 40,101,910 points. On November 13 of the same year, 15-year-old Scott Safran of Cherry Hill, New Jersey, set a new record at 41,336,440 points. In 1998, to congratulate Safran on his accomplishment, the Twin Galaxies Intergalactic Scoreboard searched for him for four years until 2002, when it was discovered that he had died in an accident in 1989. In a ceremony in Philadelphia on April 27, 2002, Walter Day of Twin Galaxies presented an award to the surviving members of Safran&#x27;s family, commemorating his achievement. On April 5, 2010, John McAllister broke Safran&#x27;s record with a high score of 41,838,740 in a 58-hour Internet livestream.

==References==
==External links==
* at Atari
* 
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1044478" start="15" end="39" title="multidirectional shooter" label="multidirectional shooter"/>
<link wikidata="Q7889" start="40" end="50" title="video game" label="video game"/>
<link wikidata="Q13409231" start="78" end="83" title="Atari, Inc." label="Atari"/>
<link wikidata="Q3841002" start="116" end="126" title="Lyle Rains" label="Lyle Rains"/>
<link wikidata="Q3047191" start="131" end="138" title="Ed Logg" label="Ed Logg"/>
<link wikidata="Q13409231" start="138" end="139" title="Atari, Inc." label="."/>
<link wikidata="Q2179" start="185" end="199" title="Asteroid belt" label="asteroid field"/>
<link wikidata="Q5401971" start="235" end="248" title="flying saucer" label="flying saucer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2590391" start="663" end="675" title="Lunar Lander (1979 video game)" label="Lunar Lander"/>
<link wikidata="Q782919" start="833" end="842" title="Spacewar!" label="Spacewar!"/>
<link wikidata="Q1122324" start="856" end="870" title="Computer Space" label="Computer Space"/>
<link wikidata="Q220665" start="888" end="902" title="Space Invaders" label="Space Invaders"/>
<link wikidata="Q1712927" start="972" end="986" title="vector display" label="vector display"/>
<link wikidata="Q1421269" start="1111" end="1137" title="Golden age of arcade video games" label="golden age of arcade games"/>
<link wikidata="Q1182593" start="1453" end="1461" title="Defender (1981 video game)" label="Defender"/>
<link wikidata="Q2646223" start="1475" end="1483" title="Gravitar" label="Gravitar"/>
<link wikidata="Q40218" start="1643" end="1647" title="spacecraft" label="ship"/>
<link wikidata="Q8037591" start="2239" end="2263" title="Wraparound (video games)" label="wrap around screen edges"/>
<link wikidata="Q378210" start="4134" end="4139" title="EPROM" label="EPROM"/>
<link wikidata="Q206261" start="4524" end="4534" title="Atari 2600" label="Atari 2600"/>
<link wikidata="Q1712927" start="5637" end="5648" title="vector monitor" label="vector game"/>
<link wikidata="Q182270" start="5761" end="5776" title="raster graphics" label="raster graphics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1712927" start="5803" end="5818" title="vector monitor" label="vector graphics"/>
<link wikidata="Q255528" start="5930" end="5938" title="MOS Technology 6502" label="MOS 6502"/>
<link wikidata="Q1712927" start="5971" end="5981" title="QuadraScan" label="QuadraScan"/>
<link wikidata="Q834337" start="6265" end="6289" title="Grass Valley, California" label="Grass Valley, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q168756" start="6818" end="6852" title="University of California, Berkeley" label="University of California, Berkeley"/>
<link wikidata="Q2390105" start="7355" end="7364" title="Star Fire" label="Star Fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q18013" start="8129" end="8151" title="Sacramento, California" label="Sacramento, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q220665" start="8357" end="8371" title="Space Invaders" label="Space Invaders"/>
<link wikidata="Q1334191" start="8824" end="8838" title="watchdog timer" label="watchdog timer"/>
<link wikidata="Q206261" start="9203" end="9213" title="Atari 2600" label="Atari 2600"/>
<link wikidata="Q249075" start="9219" end="9240" title="Atari 8-bit computers" label="Atari 8-bit computers"/>
<link wikidata="Q806652" start="9398" end="9412" title="bank switching" label="bank switching"/>
<link wikidata="Q743222" start="9484" end="9494" title="Atari 5200" label="Atari 5200"/>
<link wikidata="Q220665" start="9831" end="9845" title="Space Invaders" label="Space Invaders"/>
<link wikidata="Q260676" start="10411" end="10423" title="video arcade" label="video arcade"/>
<link wikidata="Q260676" start="10720" end="10736" title="amusement arcade" label="amusement arcade"/>
<link wikidata="Q2631225" start="10897" end="10922" title="1980 in video games" label="arcade video game of 1980"/>
<link wikidata="Q2539216" start="11229" end="11239" title="1981 in video games" label="March 1981"/>
<link wikidata="Q1118748" start="11926" end="11941" title="The Space Gamer" label="The Space Gamer"/>
<link wikidata="Q15864024" start="12369" end="12410" title="Electronic Fun with Computers &amp;amp; Games" label="Electronic Fun with Computers &amp;amp; Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q281239" start="12496" end="12503" title="GameSpy" label="GameSpy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5463010" start="12818" end="12822" title="Flux (magazine)" label="Flux"/>
<link wikidata="Q7021002" start="12920" end="12935" title="Next Generation (magazine)" label="Next Generation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7021002" start="13156" end="13171" title="Next Generation (magazine)" label="Next Generation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3021204" start="13446" end="13457" title="Retro Gamer" label="Retro Gamer"/>
<link wikidata="Q43297" start="13683" end="13687" title="Time (magazine)" label="Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q275033" start="13740" end="13760" title="Entertainment Weekly" label="Entertainment Weekly"/>
<link wikidata="Q188740" start="13868" end="13888" title="Museum of Modern Art" label="Museum of Modern Art"/>
<link wikidata="Q11148" start="13938" end="13950" title="The Guardian" label="The Guardian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192514" start="14051" end="14059" title="Galaxian" label="Galaxian"/>
<link wikidata="Q7554062" start="14172" end="14180" title="Softline (magazine)" label="Softline"/>
<link wikidata="Q13979" start="14329" end="14348" title="Saturday Night Live" label="Saturday Night Live"/>
<link wikidata="Q762195" start="14446" end="14453" title="Esquire (magazine)" label="Esquire"/>
<link wikidata="Q31726" start="14507" end="14523" title="cease and desist" label="cease and desist"/>
<link wikidata="Q4188002" start="14643" end="14659" title="Asteroids Deluxe" label="Asteroids Deluxe"/>
<link wikidata="Q3965789" start="15317" end="15327" title="Space Duel" label="Space Duel"/>
<link wikidata="Q100042" start="15475" end="15486" title="Blasteroids" label="Blasteroids"/>
<link wikidata="Q7642149" start="15753" end="15790" title="Super Asteroids &amp;amp; Missile Command" label="Super Asteroids &amp;amp; Missile Command"/>
<link wikidata="Q17042551" start="15828" end="15844" title="Microsoft Arcade" label="Microsoft Arcade"/>
<link wikidata="Q200491" start="15865" end="15875" title="Activision" label="Activision"/>
<link wikidata="Q10677" start="15939" end="15950" title="PlayStation (console)" label="PlayStation"/>
<link wikidata="Q184839" start="15959" end="15970" title="Nintendo 64" label="Nintendo 64"/>
<link wikidata="Q1406" start="15979" end="15996" title="Microsoft Windows" label="Microsoft Windows"/>
<link wikidata="Q203992" start="16005" end="16019" title="Game Boy Color" label="Game Boy Color"/>
<link wikidata="Q75687" start="16032" end="16035" title="Mac (computer)" label="Mac"/>
<link wikidata="Q753622" start="16048" end="16063" title="Atari Flashback" label="Atari Flashback"/>
<link wikidata="Q3002349" start="16348" end="16367" title="Crave Entertainment" label="Crave Entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q184839" start="16376" end="16387" title="Nintendo 64" label="Nintendo 64"/>
<link wikidata="Q650601" start="16464" end="16476" title="Atari Jaguar" label="Atari Jaguar"/>
<link wikidata="Q78928288" start="16657" end="16676" title="Intellivision Amico" label="Intellivision Amico"/>
<link wikidata="Q2868781" start="16788" end="16813" title="Atari Anniversary Edition" label="Atari Anniversary Edition"/>
<link wikidata="Q2868782" start="16888" end="16903" title="Atari Anthology" label="Atari Anthology"/>
<link wikidata="Q132020" start="16926" end="16930" title="Xbox (console)" label="Xbox"/>
<link wikidata="Q10680" start="16935" end="16948" title="PlayStation 2" label="PlayStation 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q4812833" start="16956" end="16975" title="Atari Greatest Hits" label="Atari Greatest Hits"/>
<link wikidata="Q170323" start="17006" end="17017" title="Nintendo DS" label="Nintendo DS"/>
<link wikidata="Q74408971" start="17060" end="17068" title="Evercade" label="Evercade"/>
<link wikidata="Q115932648" start="17074" end="17082" title="Atari 50" label="Atari 50"/>
<link wikidata="Q41168744" start="17098" end="17107" title="Atari VCS (2021 console)" label="Atari VCS"/>
<link wikidata="Q19610114" start="17109" end="17124" title="Nintendo Switch" label="Nintendo Switch"/>
<link wikidata="Q5014725" start="17126" end="17139" title="PlayStation 4" label="PlayStation 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q63184502" start="17141" end="17154" title="PlayStation 5" label="PlayStation 5"/>
<link wikidata="Q1406" start="17156" end="17163" title="Windows" label="Windows"/>
<link wikidata="Q13361286" start="17165" end="17173" title="Xbox One" label="Xbox One"/>
<link wikidata="Q98973368" start="17179" end="17194" title="Xbox Series X/S" label="Xbox Series X/S"/>
<link wikidata="Q2283" start="17419" end="17428" title="Microsoft" label="Microsoft"/>
<link wikidata="Q425594" start="17437" end="17446" title="Game Room" label="Game Room"/>
<link wikidata="Q2450081" start="17470" end="17480" title="Glu Mobile" label="Glu Mobile"/>
<link wikidata="Q188642" start="17573" end="17589" title="Game Boy Advance" label="Game Boy Advance"/>
<link wikidata="Q216293" start="17601" end="17605" title="Pong" label="Pong"/>
<link wikidata="Q1507926" start="17622" end="17640" title="Yars&amp;#x27; Revenge" label="Yars&amp;#x27; Revenge"/>
<link wikidata="Q19610114" start="17771" end="17786" title="Nintendo Switch" label="Nintendo Switch"/>
<link wikidata="Q5014725" start="17788" end="17801" title="PlayStation 4" label="PlayStation 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q63184502" start="17803" end="17816" title="PlayStation 5" label="PlayStation 5"/>
<link wikidata="Q13361286" start="17827" end="17835" title="Xbox One" label="Xbox One"/>
<link wikidata="Q98973368" start="17841" end="17856" title="Xbox Series X/S" label="Xbox Series X/S"/>
<link wikidata="Q527336" start="17921" end="17926" title="Atari, Inc. (1993–present)" label="Atari"/>
<link wikidata="Q326395" start="18117" end="18122" title="IAAPA" label="IAAPA"/>
<link wikidata="Q17042796" start="18161" end="18177" title="Quality Software" label="Quality Software"/>
<link wikidata="Q201652" start="18265" end="18273" title="Apple II" label="Apple II"/>
<link wikidata="Q7554062" start="18344" end="18351" title="Softalk" label="Softalk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1018709" start="18392" end="18396" title="Byte (magazine)" label="Byte"/>
<link wikidata="Q48990001" start="18649" end="18659" title="Apple-Oids" label="Apple-Oids"/>
<link wikidata="Q96033519" start="18854" end="18864" title="Planetoids (video game)" label="Planetoids"/>
<link wikidata="Q4686510" start="18883" end="18906" title="Adventure International" label="Adventure International"/>
<link wikidata="Q3604604" start="18930" end="18939" title="Acornsoft" label="Acornsoft"/>
<link wikidata="Q918232" start="19005" end="19011" title="VIC-20" label="VIC-20"/>
<link wikidata="Q119538" start="19019" end="19028" title="MineStorm" label="MineStorm"/>
<link wikidata="Q767631" start="19043" end="19050" title="Vectrex" label="Vectrex"/>
<link wikidata="Q23882" start="19107" end="19118" title="ZX Spectrum" label="ZX Spectrum"/>
<link wikidata="Q671855" start="19226" end="19234" title="Bug-Byte" label="Bug-Byte"/>
<link wikidata="Q541962" start="19246" end="19257" title="Jeff Minter" label="Jeff Minter"/>
<link wikidata="Q541962" start="19267" end="19276" title="Llamasoft" label="Llamasoft"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061441" start="19283" end="19296" title="Intellivision" label="Intellivision"/>
<link wikidata="Q3627661" start="19428" end="19438" title="Astrosmash" label="Astrosmash"/>
<link wikidata="Q168383" start="19577" end="19595" title="Universal Pictures" label="Universal Pictures"/>
<link wikidata="Q60100" start="19604" end="19619" title="Roland Emmerich" label="Roland Emmerich"/>
<link wikidata="Q636664" start="19726" end="19748" title="Lorenzo di Bonaventura" label="Lorenzo di Bonaventura"/>
<link wikidata="Q228648" start="20149" end="20159" title="38 Special (band)" label="38 Special"/>
<link wikidata="Q5054436" start="20178" end="20194" title="Caught Up in You" label="Caught Up in You"/>
<link wikidata="Q2293972" start="20250" end="20278" title="Pee-Wee&amp;#x27;s Big Adventure" label="Pee-Wee&amp;#x27;s Big Adventure"/>
<link wikidata="Q688615" start="20379" end="20391" title="world record" label="world record"/>
<link wikidata="Q7437183" start="20465" end="20477" title="Scott Safran" label="Scott Safran"/>
<link wikidata="Q4001054" start="20604" end="20617" title="Twin Galaxies" label="Twin Galaxies"/>
<link wikidata="Q527336" start="21095" end="21100" title="Atari, Inc. (1993–present)" label="Atari"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="786" wikidata="Q26229" url="?curid=786" title="Asparagales">
<text>Asparagales (asparagoid lilies) are a diverse order of flowering plants in the monocots. Under the APG IV system of flowering plant classification, Asparagales are the largest order of monocots with 14 families, 1,122 genera, and about 36,000 species, with members as varied as asparagus, orchids, yuccas, irises, onions, garlic, leeks, and other Alliums, daffodils, snowdrops, amaryllis, agaves, butcher&#x27;s broom, Agapanthus, Solomon&#x27;s seal, hyacinths, bluebells, spider plants, grasstrees, aloe, freesias, gladioli, crocuses, and saffron.

Most species of Asparagales are herbaceous perennials, although some are climbers and some are trees or shrubs. The order also contains many geophytes (bulbs, corms, and various kinds of tuber). The leaves of almost all species form a tight rosette, either at the base of the plant or at the end of the stem, but occasionally along the stem. The flowers are not particularly distinctive, being &#x27;lily type&#x27;, with six tepals and up to six stamina. One of the defining characteristics (synapomorphies) of the order is the presence of phytomelanin, a black pigment present in the seed coat, creating a dark crust. Phytomelanin is found in most families of the Asparagales (although not in Orchidaceae, thought to be the sister-group of the rest of the order).

The order Asparagales takes its name from the type family Asparagaceae and has only recently been recognized in classification systems. The order is clearly circumscribed on the basis of molecular phylogenetics, but it is difficult to define morphologically since its members are structurally diverse. The order was first put forward by Huber in 1977 and later taken up in the Dahlgren system of 1985 and then the Angiosperm Phylogeny Group systems. Before this, many of its families were assigned to the old order Liliales, which was redistributed over three orders, Liliales, Asparagales, and Dioscoreales, based on molecular phylogenetics. The boundaries of the Asparagales and of its families have undergone a series of changes in recent years; future research may lead to further changes and ultimately greater stability.

The order is thought to have first diverged from other related monocots some 120–130 million years ago (early in the Cretaceous period), although given the difficulty in classifying the families involved, estimates are likely to be uncertain.

From an economic point of view, the order Asparagales is second in importance within the monocots only to the order Poales (which includes grasses and cereals). Species are used as food and flavourings (e.g. onion, garlic, leek, asparagus, vanilla, saffron), in medicinal or cosmetic applications (&quot;Aloe&quot;), as cut flowers (e.g. freesia, gladiolus, iris, orchids), and as garden ornamentals (e.g. day lilies, lily of the valley, &quot;Agapanthus&quot;).

==Description==

Although most species in the order are herbaceous, some no more than 15 cm high, there are a number of climbers (&quot;e.g.&quot;, some species of &quot;Asparagus&quot;), as well as several genera forming trees (e.g. &quot;Agave&quot;, &quot;Cordyline&quot;, &quot;Yucca&quot;, &quot;Dracaena&quot;, &quot;Aloidendron&quot; ), which can exceed 10 m in height. Succulent genera occur in several families (e.g. &quot;Aloe&quot;).

Almost all species have a tight cluster of leaves (a rosette), either at the base of the plant or at the end of a more-or-less woody stem as with &quot;Yucca&quot;. In some cases, the leaves are produced along the stem. The flowers are in the main not particularly distinctive, being of a general &#x27;lily type&#x27;, with six tepals, either free or fused from the base and up to six stamina. They are frequently clustered at the end of the plant stem.

The Asparagales are generally distinguished from the Liliales by the lack of markings on the tepals, the presence of septal nectaries in the ovaries, rather than the bases of the tepals or stamen filaments, and the presence of secondary growth. They are generally geophytes, but with linear leaves, and a lack of fine reticular venation.

The seeds characteristically have the external epidermis either obliterated (in most species bearing fleshy fruit), or if present, have a layer of black carbonaceous phytomelanin in species with dry fruits (nuts). The inner part of the seed coat is generally collapsed, in contrast to Liliales whose seeds have a well developed outer epidermis, lack phytomelanin, and usually display a cellular inner layer.

The orders which have been separated from the old Liliales are difficult to characterize. No single morphological character appears to be diagnostic of the order Asparagales.
* The flowers of Asparagales are of a general type among the lilioid monocots. Compared to Liliales, they usually have plain tepals without markings in the form of dots. If nectaries are present, they are in the septa of the ovaries rather than at the base of the tepals or stamens.
* Those species which have relatively large dry seeds have a dark, crust-like (crustose) outer layer containing the pigment phytomelan. However, some species with hairy seeds (e.g. &quot;Eriospermum&quot;, family Asparagaceae &quot;s.l.&quot;), berries (e.g. &quot;Maianthemum&quot;, family Asparagaceae &quot;s.l.&quot;), or highly reduced seeds (e.g. orchids) lack this dark pigment in their seed coats. Phytomelan is not unique to Asparagales (i.e. it is not a synapomorphy) but it is common within the order and rare outside it. The inner portion of the seed coat is usually completely collapsed. In contrast, the morphologically similar seeds of Liliales have no phytomelan, and usually retain a cellular structure in the inner portion of the seed coat.
* Most monocots are unable to thicken their stems once they have formed, since they lack the cylindrical meristem present in other angiosperm groups. Asparagales have a method of secondary thickening which is otherwise only found in &quot;Dioscorea&quot; (in the monocot order Disoscoreales). In a process called &#x27;anomalous secondary growth&#x27;, they are able to create new vascular bundles around which thickening growth occurs. &quot;Agave&quot;, &quot;Yucca&quot;, &quot;Aloidendron&quot;, &quot;Dracaena&quot;, &quot;Nolina&quot; and &quot;Cordyline&quot; can become massive trees, albeit not of the height of the tallest dicots, and with less branching. Other genera in the order, such as &quot;Lomandra&quot; and &quot;Aphyllanthes&quot;, have the same type of secondary growth but confined to their underground stems.
* Microsporogenesis (part of pollen formation) distinguishes some members of Asparagales from Liliales. Microsporogenesis involves a cell dividing twice (meiotically) to form four daughter cells. There are two kinds of microsporogenesis: successive and simultaneous (although intermediates exist). In successive microsporogenesis, walls are laid down separating the daughter cells after each division. In simultaneous microsporogenesis, there is no wall formation until all four cell nuclei are present. Liliales all have successive microsporogenesis, which is thought to be the primitive condition in monocots. It seems that when the Asparagales first diverged they developed simultaneous microsporogenesis, which the &#x27;lower&#x27; Asparagales families retain. However, the &#x27;core&#x27; Asparagales (&quot;see&quot; Phylogenetics ) have reverted to successive microsporogenesis.
* The Asparagales appear to be unified by a mutation affecting their telomeres (a region of repetitive DNA at the end of a chromosome). The typical &quot;&#x27;Arabidopsis&quot;-type&#x27; sequence of bases has been fully or partially replaced by other sequences, with the &#x27;human-type&#x27; predominating.
* Other apomorphic characters of the order according to Stevens are: the presence of chelidonic acid, anthers longer than wide, tapetal cells bi- to tetra-nuclear, tegmen not persistent, endosperm helobial, and loss of mitochondrial gene &quot;sdh3&quot;.

According to telomere sequence, at least two evolutionary switch-points happened within the order. The basal sequence is formed by TTTAGGG like in the majority of higher plants. Basal motif was changed to vertebrate-like TTAGGG and finally, the most divergent motif CTCGGTTATGGG appears in &quot;Allium&quot;.

==Taxonomy==

As circumscribed within the Angiosperm Phylogeny Group system Asparagales is the largest order within the monocotyledons, with 14 families, 1,122 genera and about 25,000–42,000 species, thus accounting for about 50% of all monocots and 10–15% of the flowering plants (angiosperms). The attribution of botanical authority for the name Asparagales belongs to Johann Heinrich Friedrich Link (1767–1851) who coined the word &#x27;Asparaginae&#x27; in 1829 for a higher order taxon that included &quot;Asparagus&quot; although Adanson and Jussieau had also done so earlier (see History). Earlier circumscriptions of Asparagales attributed the name to Bromhead (1838), who had been the first to use the term &#x27;Asparagales&#x27;.

=== History ===

==== Pre-Darwinian ====
The type genus, &quot;Asparagus&quot;, from which the name of the order is derived, was described by Carl Linnaeus in 1753, with ten species. He placed &quot;Asparagus&quot; within the &quot;Hexandria Monogynia&quot; (six stamens, one carpel) in his sexual classification in the &quot;Species Plantarum&quot;. The majority of taxa now considered to constitute Asparagales have historically been placed within the very large and diverse family, Liliaceae. The family Liliaceae was first described by Michel Adanson in 1763, and in his taxonomic scheme he created eight sections within it, including the Asparagi with &quot;Asparagus&quot; and three other genera. The system of organising genera into families is generally credited to Antoine Laurent de Jussieu who formally described both the Liliaceae and the type family of Asparagales, the Asparagaceae, as Lilia and Asparagi, respectively, in 1789. Jussieu established the hierarchical system of taxonomy (phylogeny), placing &quot;Asparagus&quot; and related genera within a division of Monocotyledons, a class (III) of &quot;Stamina Perigynia&quot; and &#x27;order&#x27; Asparagi, divided into three subfamilies. The use of the term &quot;Ordo&quot; (order) at that time was closer to what we now understand as Family, rather than Order. In creating his scheme he used a modified form of Linnaeus&#x27; sexual classification but using the respective topography of stamens to carpels rather than just their numbers. While De Jussieu&#x27;s &quot;Stamina Perigynia&quot; also included a number of &#x27;orders&#x27; that would eventually form families within the Asparagales such as the Asphodeli (Asphodelaceae), Narcissi (Amaryllidaceae) and Irides (Iridaceae), the remainder are now allocated to other orders. Jussieu&#x27;s Asparagi soon came to be referred to as &quot;Asparagacées&quot; in the French literature (Latin: Asparagaceae). Meanwhile, the &#x27;Narcissi&#x27; had been renamed as the &#x27;Amaryllidées&#x27; (Amaryllideae) in 1805, by Jean Henri Jaume Saint-Hilaire, using &quot;Amaryllis&quot; as the type species rather than &quot;Narcissus&quot;, and thus has the authority attribution for Amaryllidaceae. In 1810, Brown proposed that a subgroup of Liliaceae be distinguished on the basis of the position of the ovaries and be referred to as Amaryllideae and in 1813 de Candolle described Liliacées Juss. and Amaryllidées Brown as two quite separate families.

The literature on the organisation of genera into families and higher ranks became available in the English language with Samuel Frederick Gray&#x27;s &quot;A natural arrangement of British plants&quot; (1821). Gray used a combination of Linnaeus&#x27; sexual classification and Jussieu&#x27;s natural classification to group together a number of families having in common six equal stamens, a single style and a perianth that was simple and petaloid, but did not use formal names for these higher ranks. Within the grouping he separated families by the characteristics of their fruit and seed. He treated groups of genera with these characteristics as separate families, such as Amaryllideae, Liliaceae, Asphodeleae and Asparageae.
The circumscription of Asparagales has been a source of difficulty for many botanists from the time of John Lindley (1846), the other important British taxonomist of the early nineteenth century. In his first taxonomic work, &quot;An Introduction to the Natural System of Botany&quot; (1830) he partly followed Jussieu by describing a subclass he called Endogenae, or Monocotyledonous Plants (preserving de Candolle&#x27;s &quot;Endogenæ phanerogamæ&quot;) divided into two tribes, the Petaloidea and Glumaceae. He divided the former, often referred to as petaloid monocots, into 32 orders, including the Liliaceae (defined narrowly), but also most of the families considered to make up the Asparagales today, including the Amaryllideae.

By 1846, in his final scheme Lindley had greatly expanded and refined the treatment of the monocots, introducing both an intermediate ranking (Alliances) and tribes within orders (&quot;i.e.&quot; families). Lindley placed the Liliaceae within the Liliales, but saw it as a paraphyletic (&quot;catch-all&quot;) family, being all Liliales not included in the other orders, but hoped that the future would reveal some characteristic that would group them better. The order Liliales was very large and included almost all monocotyledons with colourful tepals and without starch in their endosperm (the lilioid monocots). The Liliales was difficult to divide into families because morphological characters were not present in patterns that clearly demarcated groups. This kept the Liliaceae separate from the Amaryllidaceae (Narcissales). Of these, Liliaceae was divided into eleven tribes (with 133 genera) and Amaryllidaceae into four tribes (with 68 genera), yet both contained many genera that would eventually segregate to each other&#x27;s contemporary orders (Liliales and Asparagales respectively). The Liliaceae would be reduced to a small &#x27;core&#x27; represented by the tribe Tulipae, while large groups such Scilleae and Asparagae would become part of Asparagales either as part of the Amaryllidaceae or as separate families. While of the Amaryllidaceae, the Agaveae would be part of Asparagaceae but the Alstroemeriae would become a family within the Liliales.

The number of known genera (and species) continued to grow and by the time of the next major British classification, that of the Bentham &amp; Hooker system in 1883 (published in Latin) several of Lindley&#x27;s other families had been absorbed into the Liliaceae. They used the term &#x27;series&#x27; to indicate suprafamilial rank, with seven series of monocotyledons (including Glumaceae), but did not use Lindley&#x27;s terms for these. However, they did place the Liliaceous and Amaryllidaceous genera into separate series. The Liliaceae were placed in series Coronariae, while the Amaryllideae were placed in series Epigynae. The Liliaceae now consisted of twenty tribes (including Tulipeae, Scilleae and Asparageae), and the Amaryllideae of five (including Agaveae and Alstroemerieae). An important addition to the treatment of the Liliaceae was the recognition of the Allieae as a distinct tribe that would eventually find its way to the Asparagales as the subfamily Allioideae of the Amaryllidaceae.

==== Post-Darwinian ====
The appearance of Charles Darwin&#x27;s Origin of Species in 1859 changed the way that taxonomists considered plant classification, incorporating evolutionary information into their schemata. The Darwinian approach led to the concept of phylogeny (tree-like structure) in assembling classification systems, starting with Eichler. Eichler, having established a hierarchical system in which the flowering plants (angiosperms) were divided into monocotyledons and dicotyledons, further divided into former into seven orders. Within the Liliiflorae were seven families, including Liliaceae and Amaryllidaceae. Liliaceae included &quot;Allium&quot; and &quot;Ornithogalum&quot; (modern Allioideae) and &quot;Asparagus&quot;.

Engler, in his system developed Eichler&#x27;s ideas into a much more elaborate scheme which he treated in a number of works including &quot;Die Natürlichen Pflanzenfamilien&quot; (Engler and Prantl 1888) and &quot;Syllabus der Pflanzenfamilien&quot; (1892–1924). In his treatment of Liliiflorae the Liliineae were a suborder which included both families Liliaceae and Amaryllidaceae. The Liliaceae had eight subfamilies and the Amaryllidaceae four. In this rearrangement of Liliaceae, with fewer subdivisions, the core Liliales were represented as subfamily Lilioideae (with Tulipae and Scilleae as tribes), the Asparagae were represented as Asparagoideae and the Allioideae was preserved, representing the alliaceous genera. Allieae, Agapantheae and Gilliesieae were the three tribes within this subfamily. In the Amaryllidaceae, there was little change from the Bentham &amp; Hooker. A similar approach was adopted by Wettstein.

==== Twentieth century ====
In the twentieth century the Wettstein system (1901–1935) placed many of the taxa in an order called &#x27;Liliiflorae&#x27;. Next Johannes Paulus Lotsy (1911) proposed dividing the Liliiflorae into a number of smaller families including Asparagaceae. Then Herbert Huber (1969, 1977), following Lotsy&#x27;s example, proposed that the Liliiflorae be split into four groups including the &#x27;Asparagoid&#x27; Liliiflorae.
The widely used Cronquist system (1968–1988) used the very broadly defined order Liliales.

These various proposals to separate small groups of genera into more homogeneous families made little impact till that of Dahlgren (1985) incorporating new information including synapomorphy. Dahlgren developed Huber&#x27;s ideas further and popularised them, with a major deconstruction of existing families into smaller units. They created a new order, calling it Asparagales. This was one of five orders within the superorder Liliiflorae. Where Cronquist saw one family, Dahlgren saw forty distributed over three orders (predominantly Liliales and Asparagales). Over the 1980s, in the context of a more general review of the classification of angiosperms, the Liliaceae were subjected to more intense scrutiny. By the end of that decade, the Royal Botanic Gardens at Kew, the British Museum of Natural History and the Edinburgh Botanical Gardens formed a committee to examine the possibility of separating the family at least for the organization of their herbaria. That committee finally recommended that 24 new families be created in the place of the original broad Liliaceae, largely by elevating subfamilies to the rank of separate families.

=== Phylogenetics ===
The order Asparagales as currently circumscribed has only recently been recognized in classification systems, through the advent of phylogenetics. The 1990s saw considerable progress in plant phylogeny and phylogenetic theory, enabling a phylogenetic tree to be constructed for all of the flowering plants. The establishment of major new clades necessitated a departure from the older but widely used classifications such as Cronquist and Thorne based largely on morphology rather than genetic data. This complicated the discussion about plant evolution and necessitated a major restructuring. &quot;rbc&quot;L gene sequencing and cladistic analysis of monocots had redefined the Liliales in 1995. from four morphological orders &quot;sensu&quot; Dahlgren. The largest clade representing the Liliaceae, all previously included in Liliales, but including both the Calochortaceae and Liliaceae &quot;sensu&quot; Tamura. This redefined family, that became referred to as core Liliales, but corresponded to the emerging circumscription of the Angiosperm Phylogeny Group (1998).

===Phylogeny and APG system===
The 2009 revision of the Angiosperm Phylogeny Group system, APG III, places the order in the clade monocots.

From the Dahlgren system of 1985 onwards, studies based mainly on morphology had identified the Asparagales as a distinct group, but had also included groups now located in Liliales, Pandanales and Zingiberales. Research in the 21st century has supported the monophyly of Asparagales, based on morphology, 18S rDNA, and other DNA sequences, although some phylogenetic reconstructions based on molecular data have suggested that Asparagales may be paraphyletic, with Orchidaceae separated from the rest. Within the monocots, Asparagales is the sister group of the commelinid clade.

This cladogram shows the placement of Asparagales within the orders of Lilianae &quot;sensu&quot; Chase &amp; Reveal (monocots) based on molecular phylogenetic evidence. The lilioid monocot orders are bracketed, namely Petrosaviales, Dioscoreales, Pandanales, Liliales and Asparagales. These constitute a paraphyletic assemblage, that is groups with a common ancestor that do not include all direct descendants (in this case commelinids as the sister group to Asparagales); to form a clade, all the groups joined by thick lines would need to be included. While Acorales and Alismatales have been collectively referred to as &quot;alismatid monocots&quot; (basal or early branching monocots), the remaining clades (lilioid and commelinid monocots) have been referred to as the &quot;core monocots&quot;. The relationship between the orders (with the exception of the two sister orders) is , that is diverging in succession from the line that leads to the commelinids. Numbers indicate crown group (most recent common ancestor of the sampled species of the clade of interest) divergence times in mya (million years ago).

=== Subdivision ===
A phylogenetic tree for the Asparagales, generally to family level, but including groups which were recently and widely treated as families but which are now reduced to subfamily rank, is shown below.

The tree shown above can be divided into a basal paraphyletic group, the &#x27;lower Asparagales (asparagoids)&#x27;, from Orchidaceae to Asphodelaceae, and a well-supported monophyletic group of &#x27;core Asparagales&#x27; (higher asparagoids), comprising the two largest families, Amaryllidaceae &quot;sensu lato&quot; and Asparagaceae &quot;sensu lato&quot;.

Two differences between these two groups (although with exceptions) are: the mode of microsporogenesis and the position of the ovary. The &#x27;lower Asparagales&#x27; typically have simultaneous microsporogenesis (i.e. cell walls develop only after both meiotic divisions), which appears to be an apomorphy within the monocots, whereas the &#x27;core Asparagales&#x27; have reverted to successive microsporogenesis (i.e. cell walls develop after each division). The &#x27;lower Asparagales&#x27; typically have an inferior ovary, whereas the &#x27;core Asparagales&#x27; have reverted to a superior ovary. A 2002 morphological study by Rudall treated possessing an inferior ovary as a synapomorphy of the Asparagales, stating that reversions to a superior ovary in the &#x27;core Asparagales&#x27; could be associated with the presence of nectaries below the ovaries. However, Stevens notes that superior ovaries are distributed among the &#x27;lower Asparagales&#x27; in such a way that it is not clear where to place the evolution of different ovary morphologies. The position of the ovary seems a much more flexible character (here and in other angiosperms) than previously thought.

==== Changes to family structure in APG III ====
The APG III system when it was published in 2009, greatly expanded the families Xanthorrhoeaceae, Amaryllidaceae, and Asparagaceae. Thirteen of the families of the earlier APG II system were thereby reduced to subfamilies within these three families. The expanded Xanthorrhoeaceae is now called &quot;Asphodelaceae&quot;. The APG II families (left) and their equivalent APG III subfamilies (right) are as follows:

==== Structure of Asparagales ====

=====Orchid clade=====
Orchidaceae is possibly the largest family of all angiosperms (only Asteraceae might – or might not – be more speciose) and hence by far the largest in the order. The Dahlgren system recognized three families of orchids, but DNA sequence analysis later showed that these families are polyphyletic and so should be combined. Several studies suggest (with high bootstrap support) that Orchidaceae is the sister of the rest of the Asparagales. Other studies have placed the orchids differently in the phylogenetic tree, generally among the Boryaceae-Hypoxidaceae clade. The position of Orchidaceae shown above seems the best current hypothesis, but cannot be taken as confirmed.

Orchids have simultaneous microsporogenesis and inferior ovaries, two characters that are typical of the &#x27;lower Asparagales&#x27;. However, their nectaries are rarely in the septa of the ovaries, and most orchids have dust-like seeds, atypical of the rest of the order. (Some members of Vanilloideae and Cypripedioideae have crustose seeds, probably associated with dispersal by birds and mammals that are attracted by fermenting fleshy fruit releasing fragrant compounds, e.g. vanilla.)

In terms of the number of species, Orchidaceae diversification is remarkable, with recent estimations suggesting that despite the old origin of the family dating back to the late cretaceous, modern orchid diversity originated mostly during the last 5 million years. However, although the other Asparagales may be less rich in species, they are more variable morphologically, including tree-like forms.

=====Boryaceae to Hypoxidaceae=====
The four families excluding Boryaceae form a well-supported clade in studies based on DNA sequence analysis. All four contain relatively few species, and it has been suggested that they be combined into one family under the name Hypoxidaceae &quot;sensu lato&quot;. The relationship between Boryaceae (which includes only two genera, &quot;Borya&quot; and &quot;Alania&quot;), and other Asparagales has remained unclear for a long time. The Boryaceae are mycorrhizal, but not in the same way as orchids. Morphological studies have suggested a close relationship between Boryaceae and Blandfordiaceae. There is relatively low support for the position of Boryaceae in the tree shown above.

=====Ixioliriaceae to Xeronemataceae=====
The relationship shown between Ixioliriaceae and Tecophilaeaceae is still unclear. Some studies have supported a clade of these two families, others have not. The position of Doryanthaceae has also varied, with support for the position shown above, but also support for other positions.

The clade from Iridaceae upwards appears to have stronger support. All have some genetic characteristics in common, having lost Arabidopsis-type telomeres. Iridaceae is distinctive among the Asparagales in the unique structure of the inflorescence (a rhipidium), the combination of an inferior ovary and three stamens, and the common occurrence of unifacial leaves whereas bifacial leaves are the norm in other Asparagales.

Members of the clade from Iridaceae upwards have infra-locular septal nectaries, which Rudall interpreted as a driver towards secondarily superior ovaries.

=====Asphodelaceae + &#x27;core Asparagales&#x27;=====
The next node in the tree (Xanthorrhoeaceae &quot;sensu lato&quot; + the &#x27;core Asparagales&#x27;) has strong support. &#x27;Anomalous&#x27; secondary thickening occurs among this clade, e.g. in &quot;Xanthorrhoea&quot; (family Asphodelaceae) and &quot;Dracaena&quot; (family Asparagaceae &quot;sensu lato&quot;), with species reaching tree-like proportions.

The &#x27;core Asparagales&#x27;, comprising Amaryllidaceae &quot;sensu lato&quot; and Asparagaceae &quot;sensu lato&quot;, are a strongly supported clade, as are clades for each of the families. Relationships within these broadly defined families appear less clear, particularly within the Asparagaceae &quot;sensu lato&quot;. Stevens notes that most of its subfamilies are difficult to recognize, and that significantly different divisions have been used in the past, so that the use of a broadly defined family to refer to the entire clade is justified. Thus the relationships among subfamilies shown above, based on APWeb , is somewhat uncertain.

===Evolution===
Several studies have attempted to date the evolution of the Asparagales, based on phylogenetic evidence. Earlier studies generally give younger dates than more recent studies, which have been preferred in the table below.

A 2009 study suggests that the Asparagales have the highest diversification rate in the monocots, about the same as the order Poales, although in both orders the rate is little over half that of the eudicot order Lamiales, the clade with the highest rate.

=== Comparison of family structures ===

The taxonomic diversity of the monocotyledons is described in detail by Kubitzki. Up-to-date information on the Asparagales can be found on the Angiosperm Phylogeny Website.

The APG III system&#x27;s family circumscriptions are being used as the basis of the Kew-hosted &quot;World Checklist of Selected Plant Families&quot;. With this circumscription, the order consists of 14 families (Dahlgren had 31) with approximately 1120 genera and 26000 species.

Order Asparagales 
* Family Amaryllidaceae (including Agapanthaceae , Alliaceae )
* Family Asparagaceae (including Agavaceae [which includes Anemarrhenaceae, Anthericaceae, Behniaceae and Herreriaceae], Aphyllanthaceae , Hesperocallidaceae , Hyacinthaceae , Laxmanniaceae , Ruscaceae [which includes Convallariaceae] and Themidaceae )
* Family Asteliaceae 
* Family Blandfordiaceae 
* Family Boryaceae 
* Family Doryanthaceae 
* Family Hypoxidaceae 
* Family Iridaceae 
* Family Ixioliriaceae 
* Family Lanariaceae 
* Family Orchidaceae 
* Family Tecophilaeaceae 
* Family Xanthorrhoeaceae (including Asphodelaceae and Hemerocallidaceae ), now Asphodelaceae 
* Family Xeronemataceae 

The earlier 2003 version, APG II, allowed &#x27;bracketed&#x27; families, i.e. families which could either be segregated from more comprehensive families or could be included in them. These are the families given under &quot;including&quot; in the list above. APG III does not allow bracketed families, requiring the use of the more comprehensive family; otherwise the circumscription of the Asparagales is unchanged. A separate paper accompanying the publication of the 2009 APG III system provided subfamilies to accommodate the families which were discontinued. The first APG system of 1998 contained some extra families, included in square brackets in the list above.

Two older systems which use the order Asparagales are the Dahlgren system and the Kubitzki system. The families included in the circumscriptions of the order in these two systems are shown in the first and second columns of the table below. The equivalent family in the modern APG III system (see below) is shown in the third column. Note that although these systems may use the same name for a family, the genera which it includes may be different, so the equivalence between systems is only approximate in some cases.

== Uses ==
The Asparagales include many important crop plants and ornamental plants. Crops include Allium, Asparagus and Vanilla, while ornamentals include irises, hyacinths and orchids.

== See also ==
* Taxonomy of Liliaceae

== Notes ==
==References==
== Bibliography ==

=== Books ===
* contents
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 

=== Chapters ===
* in 
* in 
* in 
* in 
* 

=== Articles ===
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 

=== APG ===
* 
* 
* 

=== Historical sources ===
* 
* 
* 
* digital edition by the University and State Library Düsseldorf
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 1st ed. 1901–1908; 2nd ed. 1910–1911; 3rd ed. 1923–1924; 4th ed. 1933–1935

=== Websites ===
* 
* : Families included in the checklist
* 

=== Reference materials ===
* 
== External links ==
*
* Biodiversity Heritage Library</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q26229" start="0" end="11" title="Asparagales" label="Asparagales"/>
<link wikidata="Q26229" start="13" end="30" title="Asparagales" label="asparagoid lilies"/>
<link wikidata="Q36602" start="46" end="51" title="order (biology)" label="order"/>
<link wikidata="Q25314" start="55" end="70" title="flowering plant" label="flowering plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q78961" start="79" end="87" title="monocots" label="monocots"/>
<link wikidata="Q24895148" start="99" end="112" title="APG IV system" label="APG IV system"/>
<link wikidata="Q34740" start="218" end="224" title="Genus" label="genera"/>
<link wikidata="Q7432" start="243" end="250" title="species" label="species"/>
<link wikidata="Q28367" start="278" end="287" title="asparagus" label="asparagus"/>
<link wikidata="Q25308" start="289" end="295" title="orchid" label="orchid"/>
<link wikidata="Q156317" start="298" end="303" title="yucca" label="yucca"/>
<link wikidata="Q156901" start="306" end="312" title="Iris (plant)" label="irises"/>
<link wikidata="Q23485" start="314" end="320" title="onions" label="onions"/>
<link wikidata="Q23400" start="322" end="328" title="garlic" label="garlic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1807269" start="330" end="334" title="leek" label="leek"/>
<link wikidata="Q49391" start="347" end="353" title="Allium" label="Allium"/>
<link wikidata="Q29465" start="356" end="365" title="Narcissus (plant)" label="daffodils"/>
<link wikidata="Q105415" start="367" end="376" title="Galanthus" label="snowdrops"/>
<link wikidata="Q757257" start="378" end="387" title="Hippeastrum" label="amaryllis"/>
<link wikidata="Q155874" start="389" end="394" title="agave" label="agave"/>
<link wikidata="Q157597" start="397" end="417" title="Ruscus" label="butcher&amp;#x27;s broom"/>
<link wikidata="Q159541" start="419" end="429" title="Agapanthus" label="Agapanthus"/>
<link wikidata="Q161152" start="431" end="450" title="Polygonatum" label="Solomon&amp;#x27;s seal"/>
<link wikidata="Q158758" start="452" end="460" title="hyacinth" label="hyacinth"/>
<link wikidata="Q159311" start="463" end="472" title="Hyacinthoides" label="bluebells"/>
<link wikidata="Q1164349" start="474" end="486" title="Chlorophytum comosum" label="spider plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q767448" start="489" end="499" title="Xanthorrhoea" label="grasstrees"/>
<link wikidata="Q127134" start="501" end="505" title="aloe" label="aloe"/>
<link wikidata="Q157392" start="507" end="514" title="freesia" label="freesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q156207" start="517" end="525" title="Gladiolus" label="gladioli"/>
<link wikidata="Q157806" start="527" end="533" title="crocus" label="crocus"/>
<link wikidata="Q25434" start="541" end="548" title="saffron" label="saffron"/>
<link wikidata="Q190903" start="583" end="593" title="herbaceous" label="herbaceous"/>
<link wikidata="Q157957" start="594" end="603" title="perennial" label="perennial"/>
<link wikidata="Q917284" start="624" end="632" title="vines" label="climbers"/>
<link wikidata="Q912153" start="692" end="700" title="geophyte" label="geophyte"/>
<link wikidata="Q33971" start="750" end="756" title="Leaf" label="leaves"/>
<link wikidata="Q753457" start="792" end="799" title="rosette (botany)" label="rosette"/>
<link wikidata="Q134267" start="854" end="858" title="plant stem" label="stem"/>
<link wikidata="Q506" start="897" end="903" title="flower" label="flower"/>
<link wikidata="Q756954" start="977" end="982" title="tepal" label="tepal"/>
<link wikidata="Q103129" start="998" end="1005" title="stamen" label="stamina"/>
<link wikidata="Q962872" start="1044" end="1058" title="Synapomorphy" label="synapomorphies"/>
<link wikidata="Q3746188" start="1092" end="1104" title="phytomelanin" label="phytomelanin"/>
<link wikidata="Q25308" start="1246" end="1257" title="Orchidaceae" label="Orchidaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q3707858" start="1364" end="1368" title="type (biology)" label="type"/>
<link wikidata="Q157167" start="1376" end="1388" title="Asparagaceae" label="Asparagaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q2007033" start="1505" end="1528" title="molecular phylogenetics" label="molecular phylogenetics"/>
<link wikidata="Q655362" start="1560" end="1575" title="plant morphology" label="morphologically"/>
<link wikidata="Q19056546" start="1655" end="1660" title="Herbert Huber (botanist)" label="Huber"/>
<link wikidata="Q901201" start="1695" end="1710" title="Dahlgren system" label="Dahlgren system"/>
<link wikidata="Q539818" start="1732" end="1758" title="Angiosperm Phylogeny Group" label="Angiosperm Phylogeny Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q53478" start="1833" end="1841" title="Liliales" label="Liliales"/>
<link wikidata="Q53478" start="1886" end="1894" title="Liliales" label="Liliales"/>
<link wikidata="Q747698" start="1913" end="1925" title="Dioscoreales" label="Dioscoreales"/>
<link wikidata="Q1230536" start="2181" end="2189" title="genetic divergence" label="diverged"/>
<link wikidata="Q44626" start="2263" end="2280" title="Cretaceous period" label="Cretaceous period"/>
<link wikidata="Q28502" start="2506" end="2512" title="Poales" label="Poales"/>
<link wikidata="Q43238" start="2529" end="2534" title="grass" label="grass"/>
<link wikidata="Q12117" start="2541" end="2547" title="cereal" label="cereal"/>
<link wikidata="Q23485" start="2598" end="2603" title="onion" label="onion"/>
<link wikidata="Q23400" start="2605" end="2611" title="garlic" label="garlic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1807269" start="2613" end="2617" title="leek" label="leek"/>
<link wikidata="Q28367" start="2619" end="2628" title="asparagus" label="asparagus"/>
<link wikidata="Q13241" start="2630" end="2637" title="vanilla" label="vanilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q25434" start="2639" end="2646" title="saffron" label="saffron"/>
<link wikidata="Q127134" start="2694" end="2698" title="Aloe" label="Aloe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1576780" start="2710" end="2721" title="cut flowers" label="cut flowers"/>
<link wikidata="Q157392" start="2728" end="2735" title="freesia" label="freesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q156207" start="2737" end="2746" title="gladiolus" label="gladiolus"/>
<link wikidata="Q156901" start="2748" end="2752" title="iris (plant)" label="iris"/>
<link wikidata="Q25308" start="2754" end="2760" title="orchid" label="orchid"/>
<link wikidata="Q199182" start="2778" end="2789" title="Ornamental plant" label="ornamentals"/>
<link wikidata="Q156275" start="2796" end="2806" title="Hemerocallis" label="day lilies"/>
<link wikidata="Q134911" start="2808" end="2826" title="Convallaria" label="lily of the valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q159541" start="2834" end="2844" title="Agapanthus" label="Agapanthus"/>
<link wikidata="Q190903" start="2910" end="2920" title="herbaceous plant" label="herbaceous"/>
<link wikidata="Q917284" start="2974" end="2982" title="vines" label="climbers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2853420" start="3024" end="3033" title="Asparagus (genus)" label="Asparagus"/>
<link wikidata="Q10884" start="3076" end="3080" title="tree" label="tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q155874" start="3094" end="3099" title="Agave" label="Agave"/>
<link wikidata="Q1543189" start="3113" end="3122" title="Cordyline" label="Cordyline"/>
<link wikidata="Q156317" start="3136" end="3141" title="Yucca" label="Yucca"/>
<link wikidata="Q158009" start="3155" end="3163" title="Dracaena (plant)" label="Dracaena"/>
<link wikidata="Q13539278" start="3177" end="3188" title="Aloidendron" label="Aloidendron"/>
<link wikidata="Q189939" start="3231" end="3240" title="Succulent" label="Succulent"/>
<link wikidata="Q33971" start="3343" end="3349" title="Leaf" label="leaves"/>
<link wikidata="Q753457" start="3353" end="3360" title="rosette (botany)" label="rosette"/>
<link wikidata="Q134267" start="3433" end="3437" title="plant stem" label="stem"/>
<link wikidata="Q156317" start="3452" end="3457" title="Yucca" label="Yucca"/>
<link wikidata="Q506" start="3524" end="3530" title="flower" label="flower"/>
<link wikidata="Q756954" start="3629" end="3634" title="tepal" label="tepal"/>
<link wikidata="Q103129" start="3686" end="3693" title="stamen" label="stamina"/>
<link wikidata="Q53478" start="3809" end="3817" title="Liliales" label="Liliales"/>
<link wikidata="Q171934" start="3873" end="3889" title="septal nectaries" label="septal nectaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q148515" start="3897" end="3904" title="ovary (botany)" label="ovaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q1209966" start="3983" end="3999" title="secondary growth" label="secondary growth"/>
<link wikidata="Q912153" start="4020" end="4029" title="geophytes" label="geophytes"/>
<link wikidata="Q33971" start="4074" end="4092" title="reticular venation" label="reticular venation"/>
<link wikidata="Q40763" start="4099" end="4103" title="seed" label="seed"/>
<link wikidata="Q3746188" start="4261" end="4273" title="phytomelanin" label="phytomelanin"/>
<link wikidata="Q6547831" start="4740" end="4755" title="lilioid monocot" label="lilioid monocot"/>
<link wikidata="Q756954" start="4804" end="4809" title="tepal" label="tepal"/>
<link wikidata="Q171934" start="4852" end="4861" title="nectary" label="nectaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q346579" start="4891" end="4896" title="septum" label="septa"/>
<link wikidata="Q148515" start="4904" end="4911" title="ovary (plant)" label="ovaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q103129" start="4953" end="4959" title="stamen" label="stamen"/>
<link wikidata="Q147008" start="5149" end="5160" title="Eriospermum" label="Eriospermum"/>
<link wikidata="Q157848" start="5227" end="5238" title="Maianthemum" label="Maianthemum"/>
<link wikidata="Q962872" start="5426" end="5438" title="synapomorphy" label="synapomorphy"/>
<link wikidata="Q207604" start="5826" end="5834" title="meristem" label="meristem"/>
<link wikidata="Q71549" start="5960" end="5969" title="Dioscorea" label="Dioscorea"/>
<link wikidata="Q155874" start="6164" end="6169" title="Agave" label="Agave"/>
<link wikidata="Q156317" start="6183" end="6188" title="Yucca" label="Yucca"/>
<link wikidata="Q13539278" start="6202" end="6213" title="Aloidendron" label="Aloidendron"/>
<link wikidata="Q158009" start="6227" end="6235" title="Dracaena (plant)" label="Dracaena"/>
<link wikidata="Q139062" start="6249" end="6255" title="Nolina" label="Nolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1543189" start="6272" end="6281" title="Cordyline" label="Cordyline"/>
<link wikidata="Q5233357" start="6428" end="6436" title="Lomandra" label="Lomandra"/>
<link wikidata="Q2858279" start="6453" end="6465" title="Aphyllanthes" label="Aphyllanthes"/>
<link wikidata="Q79932" start="6555" end="6572" title="Microsporogenesis" label="Microsporogenesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q79932" start="6582" end="6588" title="pollen" label="pollen"/>
<link wikidata="Q16424695" start="6707" end="6718" title="meiosis" label="meiotically"/>
<link wikidata="Q40260" start="7037" end="7043" title="nucleus (cell)" label="nuclei"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7378" end="7391" title="#Phylogenetics" label="Phylogenetics"/>
<link wikidata="Q14872779" start="7510" end="7518" title="telomere" label="telomere"/>
<link wikidata="Q7430" start="7544" end="7547" title="DNA" label="DNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q37748" start="7564" end="7574" title="chromosome" label="chromosome"/>
<link wikidata="Q14872779" start="8022" end="8039" title="Telomere" label="telomere sequence"/>
<link wikidata="Q5121761" start="8337" end="8350" title="circumscription (taxonomy)" label="circumscribed"/>
<link wikidata="Q539818" start="8362" end="8388" title="Angiosperm Phylogeny Group" label="Angiosperm Phylogeny Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q36602" start="8423" end="8428" title="Order (biology)" label="order"/>
<link wikidata="Q78961" start="8440" end="8454" title="monocotyledons" label="monocotyledons"/>
<link wikidata="Q34740" start="8480" end="8486" title="Genus" label="genera"/>
<link wikidata="Q7432" start="8511" end="8518" title="species" label="species"/>
<link wikidata="Q25314" start="8584" end="8599" title="flowering plant" label="flowering plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q215466" start="8691" end="8721" title="Johann Heinrich Friedrich Link" label="Johann Heinrich Friedrich Link"/>
<link wikidata="Q28367" start="8831" end="8840" title="Asparagus" label="Asparagus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1291771" start="8980" end="8988" title="Edward Bromhead" label="Bromhead"/>
<link wikidata="Q842832" start="9107" end="9117" title="type genus" label="type genus"/>
<link wikidata="Q28367" start="9125" end="9134" title="Asparagus" label="Asparagus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1043" start="9204" end="9217" title="Carl Linnaeus" label="Carl Linnaeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q103129" start="9325" end="9331" title="stamen" label="stamen"/>
<link wikidata="Q588964" start="9338" end="9344" title="carpel" label="carpel"/>
<link wikidata="Q10372154" start="9353" end="9374" title="Linnaean taxonomy" label="sexual classification"/>
<link wikidata="Q849308" start="9388" end="9405" title="Species Plantarum" label="Species Plantarum"/>
<link wikidata="Q16521" start="9429" end="9433" title="taxa" label="taxa"/>
<link wikidata="Q53480" start="9547" end="9556" title="Liliaceae" label="Liliaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q315861" start="9602" end="9616" title="Michel Adanson" label="Michel Adanson"/>
<link wikidata="Q18350176" start="9633" end="9653" title="Adanson system" label="his taxonomic scheme"/>
<link wikidata="Q223963" start="9836" end="9862" title="Antoine Laurent de Jussieu" label="Antoine Laurent de Jussieu"/>
<link wikidata="Q157167" start="9945" end="9957" title="Asparagaceae" label="Asparagaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q188619" start="10029" end="10041" title="hierarchical" label="hierarchical"/>
<link wikidata="Q8269924" start="10052" end="10060" title="taxonomy (biology)" label="taxonomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q242125" start="10062" end="10071" title="phylogeny" label="phylogeny"/>
<link wikidata="Q334460" start="10132" end="10140" title="division (botany)" label="division"/>
<link wikidata="Q78961" start="10144" end="10158" title="Monocotyledons" label="Monocotyledons"/>
<link wikidata="Q37517" start="10162" end="10167" title="Class (biology)" label="class"/>
<link wikidata="Q3488992" start="10408" end="10418" title="De Jussieu system" label="his scheme"/>
<link wikidata="Q14554941" start="10754" end="10767" title="Asphodelaceae" label="Asphodelaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q155848" start="10780" end="10794" title="Amaryllidaceae" label="Amaryllidaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q155941" start="10808" end="10817" title="Iridaceae" label="Iridaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q2596093" start="11109" end="11139" title="Jean Henri Jaume Saint-Hilaire" label="Jean Henri Jaume Saint-Hilaire"/>
<link wikidata="Q161577" start="11153" end="11162" title="Amaryllis" label="Amaryllis"/>
<link wikidata="Q29465" start="11207" end="11216" title="Narcissus (plant)" label="Narcissus"/>
<link wikidata="Q155848" start="11267" end="11281" title="Amaryllidaceae" label="Amaryllidaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q155764" start="11292" end="11297" title="Robert Brown (Scottish botanist from Montrose)" label="Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q148515" start="11389" end="11396" title="Ovary (botany)" label="ovaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q123057" start="11444" end="11455" title="de Candolle" label="de Candolle"/>
<link wikidata="Q540667" start="11660" end="11681" title="Samuel Frederick Gray" label="Samuel Frederick Gray"/>
<link wikidata="Q5121761" start="12275" end="12290" title="Circumscription (taxonomy)" label="circumscription"/>
<link wikidata="Q378629" start="12374" end="12386" title="John Lindley" label="John Lindley"/>
<link wikidata="Q17140977" start="12474" end="12494" title="Lindley system" label="first taxonomic work"/>
<link wikidata="Q6547831" start="12757" end="12767" title="Petaloidea" label="Petaloidea"/>
<link wikidata="Q2430829" start="12772" end="12781" title="Glumaceae" label="Glumaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q4705234" start="12995" end="13007" title="Amaryllideae" label="Amaryllideae"/>
<link wikidata="Q53478" start="13258" end="13266" title="Liliales" label="Liliales"/>
<link wikidata="Q208755" start="13284" end="13296" title="Paraphyly" label="paraphyletic"/>
<link wikidata="Q6547831" start="13609" end="13624" title="lilioid monocot" label="lilioid monocot"/>
<link wikidata="Q133292" start="14230" end="14238" title="Scilleae" label="Scilleae"/>
<link wikidata="Q157167" start="14243" end="14252" title="Asparagaceae" label="Asparagae"/>
<link wikidata="Q162802" start="14381" end="14388" title="Agavaceae" label="Agaveae"/>
<link wikidata="Q660752" start="14427" end="14440" title="Alstroemeriaceae" label="Alstroemeriae"/>
<link wikidata="Q53478" start="14474" end="14482" title="Liliales" label="Liliales"/>
<link wikidata="Q2510579" start="14614" end="14641" title="Bentham &amp;amp; Hooker system" label="Bentham &amp;amp; Hooker system"/>
<link wikidata="Q5669305" start="15362" end="15369" title="Allieae" label="Allieae"/>
<link wikidata="Q49392" start="15461" end="15471" title="Allioideae" label="Allioideae"/>
<link wikidata="Q1035" start="15539" end="15553" title="Charles Darwin" label="Charles Darwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q20124" start="15561" end="15578" title="Origin of Species" label="Origin of Species"/>
<link wikidata="Q183493" start="15717" end="15726" title="Darwinian" label="Darwinian"/>
<link wikidata="Q242125" start="15758" end="15767" title="phylogeny" label="phylogeny"/>
<link wikidata="Q2101074" start="15842" end="15849" title="Eichler system" label="Eichler"/>
<link wikidata="Q62142" start="15851" end="15858" title="August Eichler" label="Eichler"/>
<link wikidata="Q188619" start="15881" end="15893" title="hierarchical" label="hierarchical"/>
<link wikidata="Q25314" start="15932" end="15942" title="angiosperm" label="angiosperm"/>
<link wikidata="Q78961" start="15963" end="15977" title="monocotyledons" label="monocotyledons"/>
<link wikidata="Q8316" start="15982" end="15994" title="dicotyledons" label="dicotyledons"/>
<link wikidata="Q6547763" start="16054" end="16065" title="Liliiflorae" label="Liliiflorae"/>
<link wikidata="Q49391" start="16152" end="16158" title="Allium" label="Allium"/>
<link wikidata="Q161148" start="16175" end="16187" title="Ornithogalum" label="Ornithogalum"/>
<link wikidata="Q49392" start="16202" end="16212" title="Allioideae" label="Allioideae"/>
<link wikidata="Q28367" start="16224" end="16233" title="Asparagus" label="Asparagus"/>
<link wikidata="Q60718" start="16242" end="16248" title="Adolf Engler" label="Engler"/>
<link wikidata="Q1480083" start="16257" end="16263" title="Engler system" label="system"/>
<link wikidata="Q14931236" start="16383" end="16415" title="Die Natürlichen Pflanzenfamilien" label="Die Natürlichen Pflanzenfamilien"/>
<link wikidata="Q64995" start="16434" end="16440" title="Karl Anton Prantl" label="Prantl"/>
<link wikidata="Q27696301" start="16457" end="16486" title="Syllabus der Pflanzenfamilien" label="Syllabus der Pflanzenfamilien"/>
<link wikidata="Q389901" start="16801" end="16811" title="Lilioideae" label="Lilioideae"/>
<link wikidata="Q49392" start="16907" end="16917" title="Allioideae" label="Allioideae"/>
<link wikidata="Q5669305" start="16969" end="16976" title="Allieae" label="Allieae"/>
<link wikidata="Q1850957" start="16978" end="16989" title="Agapantheae" label="Agapantheae"/>
<link wikidata="Q5879772" start="16994" end="17005" title="Gilliesieae" label="Gilliesieae"/>
<link wikidata="Q78599" start="17163" end="17172" title="Richard Wettstein" label="Wettstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q739045" start="17232" end="17248" title="Wettstein system" label="Wettstein system"/>
<link wikidata="Q2718138" start="17334" end="17355" title="Johannes Paulus Lotsy" label="Johannes Paulus Lotsy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6547763" start="17385" end="17396" title="Liliiflorae" label="Liliiflorae"/>
<link wikidata="Q157167" start="17441" end="17453" title="Asparagaceae" label="Asparagaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q19056546" start="17460" end="17473" title="Herbert Huber (botanist)" label="Herbert Huber"/>
<link wikidata="Q6547763" start="17613" end="17624" title="Liliiflorae" label="Liliiflorae"/>
<link wikidata="Q213094" start="17642" end="17658" title="Cronquist system" label="Cronquist system"/>
<link wikidata="Q901201" start="17840" end="17848" title="Dahlgren system" label="Dahlgren"/>
<link wikidata="Q962872" start="17896" end="17908" title="synapomorphy" label="synapomorphy"/>
<link wikidata="Q36602" start="18066" end="18071" title="order (biology)" label="order"/>
<link wikidata="Q53478" start="18256" end="18264" title="Liliales" label="Liliales"/>
<link wikidata="Q25314" start="18364" end="18375" title="angiosperms" label="angiosperms"/>
<link wikidata="Q18748726" start="18463" end="18491" title="Royal Botanic Gardens at Kew" label="Royal Botanic Gardens at Kew"/>
<link wikidata="Q309388" start="18497" end="18530" title="British Museum of Natural History" label="British Museum of Natural History"/>
<link wikidata="Q1807521" start="18539" end="18566" title="Edinburgh Botanical Gardens" label="Edinburgh Botanical Gardens"/>
<link wikidata="Q181916" start="18677" end="18685" title="herbaria" label="herbaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q5121761" start="18925" end="18938" title="circumscription (taxonomy)" label="circumscribed"/>
<link wikidata="Q171184" start="19022" end="19035" title="phylogenetics" label="phylogenetics"/>
<link wikidata="Q53478" start="19570" end="19578" title="Liliales" label="Liliales"/>
<link wikidata="Q3049579" start="19637" end="19645" title="Rolf Dahlgren" label="Dahlgren"/>
<link wikidata="Q539818" start="19929" end="19955" title="Angiosperm Phylogeny Group" label="Angiosperm Phylogeny Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q539818" start="20021" end="20047" title="Angiosperm Phylogeny Group" label="Angiosperm Phylogeny Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q156982" start="20056" end="20063" title="APG III system" label="APG III"/>
<link wikidata="Q78961" start="20095" end="20103" title="Monocotyledon" label="monocots"/>
<link wikidata="Q901201" start="20115" end="20130" title="Dahlgren system" label="Dahlgren system"/>
<link wikidata="Q210958" start="20365" end="20374" title="monophyly" label="monophyly"/>
<link wikidata="Q1567633" start="20649" end="20661" title="sister group" label="sister group"/>
<link wikidata="Q868546" start="20669" end="20679" title="commelinid" label="commelinid"/>
<link wikidata="Q2333562" start="20693" end="20702" title="cladogram" label="cladogram"/>
<link wikidata="Q6547763" start="20759" end="20767" title="Lilianae" label="Lilianae"/>
<link wikidata="Q1087319" start="20774" end="20779" title="sensu" label="sensu"/>
<link wikidata="Q6547831" start="20862" end="20877" title="lilioid monocot" label="lilioid monocot"/>
<link wikidata="Q131296" start="20907" end="20920" title="Petrosaviales" label="Petrosaviales"/>
<link wikidata="Q747698" start="20922" end="20934" title="Dioscoreales" label="Dioscoreales"/>
<link wikidata="Q269303" start="20936" end="20946" title="Pandanales" label="Pandanales"/>
<link wikidata="Q53478" start="20948" end="20956" title="Liliales" label="Liliales"/>
<link wikidata="Q208755" start="20993" end="21005" title="Paraphyly" label="paraphyletic"/>
<link wikidata="Q25057362" start="21318" end="21336" title="alismatid monocots" label="alismatid monocots"/>
<link wikidata="Q868546" start="21414" end="21424" title="commelinid" label="commelinid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1462809" start="21672" end="21683" title="crown group" label="crown group"/>
<link wikidata="Q20764" start="21782" end="21785" title="mya (unit)" label="mya"/>
<link wikidata="Q242125" start="21830" end="21847" title="phylogenetic tree" label="phylogenetic tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q79932" start="22479" end="22496" title="microsporogenesis" label="microsporogenesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q16424695" start="22649" end="22656" title="meiosis" label="meiotic"/>
<link wikidata="Q962872" start="22692" end="22701" title="apomorphy" label="apomorphy"/>
<link wikidata="Q148515" start="22909" end="22923" title="inferior ovary" label="inferior ovary"/>
<link wikidata="Q148515" start="22985" end="22999" title="superior ovary" label="superior ovary"/>
<link wikidata="Q962872" start="23080" end="23092" title="synapomorphy" label="synapomorphy"/>
<link wikidata="Q25314" start="23543" end="23553" title="angiosperm" label="angiosperm"/>
<link wikidata="Q156982" start="23635" end="23649" title="APG III system" label="APG III system"/>
<link wikidata="Q767448" start="23711" end="23727" title="Xanthorrhoeaceae" label="Xanthorrhoeaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q155848" start="23729" end="23743" title="Amaryllidaceae" label="Amaryllidaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q157167" start="23749" end="23761" title="Asparagaceae" label="Asparagaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q156518" start="23803" end="23816" title="APG II system" label="APG II system"/>
<link wikidata="Q25308" start="24105" end="24116" title="Orchidaceae" label="Orchidaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q25314" start="24155" end="24165" title="angiosperm" label="angiosperm"/>
<link wikidata="Q25400" start="24173" end="24183" title="Asteraceae" label="Asteraceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q901201" start="24272" end="24287" title="Dahlgren system" label="Dahlgren system"/>
<link wikidata="Q217743" start="24389" end="24401" title="polyphyletic" label="polyphyletic"/>
<link wikidata="Q894305" start="24642" end="24651" title="Boryaceae" label="Boryaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q131282" start="24652" end="24664" title="Hypoxidaceae" label="Hypoxidaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q133360" start="25074" end="25086" title="Vanilloideae" label="Vanilloideae"/>
<link wikidata="Q132226" start="25091" end="25106" title="Cypripedioideae" label="Cypripedioideae"/>
<link wikidata="Q13241" start="25265" end="25272" title="vanilla" label="vanilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q894305" start="25743" end="25752" title="Boryaceae" label="Boryaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q2911373" start="26055" end="26060" title="Borya" label="Borya"/>
<link wikidata="Q5662306" start="26077" end="26083" title="Alania (plant)" label="Alania"/>
<link wikidata="Q99974" start="26170" end="26180" title="mycorrhiza" label="mycorrhiza"/>
<link wikidata="Q131628" start="26477" end="26490" title="Ixioliriaceae" label="Ixioliriaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q331169" start="26495" end="26510" title="Tecophilaeaceae" label="Tecophilaeaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140728" start="26621" end="26634" title="Doryanthaceae" label="Doryanthaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q155941" start="26749" end="26758" title="Iridaceae" label="Iridaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q14872779" start="26879" end="26887" title="telomere" label="telomere"/>
<link wikidata="Q156428" start="26968" end="26981" title="inflorescence" label="inflorescence"/>
<link wikidata="Q155941" start="27185" end="27194" title="Iridaceae" label="Iridaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q767448" start="27576" end="27588" title="Xanthorrhoea" label="Xanthorrhoea"/>
<link wikidata="Q158009" start="27628" end="27636" title="Dracaena (plant)" label="Dracaena"/>
<link wikidata="Q600295" start="28355" end="28360" title="APWeb" label="APWeb"/>
<link wikidata="Q28502" start="28752" end="28758" title="Poales" label="Poales"/>
<link wikidata="Q165468" start="28825" end="28832" title="eudicot" label="eudicot"/>
<link wikidata="Q21742" start="28839" end="28847" title="Lamiales" label="Lamiales"/>
<link wikidata="Q600295" start="29068" end="29096" title="Angiosperm Phylogeny Website" label="Angiosperm Phylogeny Website"/>
<link wikidata="Q155848" start="29409" end="29423" title="Amaryllidaceae" label="Amaryllidaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q157167" start="29472" end="29484" title="Asparagaceae" label="Asparagaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q131348" start="29725" end="29736" title="Asteliaceae" label="Asteliaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q137543" start="29747" end="29762" title="Blandfordiaceae" label="Blandfordiaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q894305" start="29773" end="29782" title="Boryaceae" label="Boryaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140728" start="29793" end="29806" title="Doryanthaceae" label="Doryanthaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q131282" start="29817" end="29829" title="Hypoxidaceae" label="Hypoxidaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q155941" start="29840" end="29849" title="Iridaceae" label="Iridaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q131628" start="29860" end="29873" title="Ixioliriaceae" label="Ixioliriaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q131624" start="29884" end="29895" title="Lanariaceae" label="Lanariaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q25308" start="29906" end="29917" title="Orchidaceae" label="Orchidaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q331169" start="29928" end="29943" title="Tecophilaeaceae" label="Tecophilaeaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q14554941" start="30025" end="30038" title="Asphodelaceae" label="Asphodelaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q132946" start="30049" end="30063" title="Xeronemataceae" label="Xeronemataceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q156518" start="30092" end="30098" title="APG II system" label="APG II"/>
<link wikidata="Q433179" start="30655" end="30659" title="APG system" label="1998"/>
<link wikidata="Q901201" start="30797" end="30812" title="Dahlgren system" label="Dahlgren system"/>
<link wikidata="Q3489024" start="30821" end="30836" title="Kubitzki system" label="Kubitzki system"/>
<link wikidata="Q235352" start="31310" end="31321" title="crop plants" label="crop plants"/>
<link wikidata="Q199182" start="31326" end="31343" title="ornamental plants" label="ornamental plants"/>
<link wikidata="Q49391" start="31359" end="31365" title="Allium" label="Allium"/>
<link wikidata="Q28367" start="31367" end="31376" title="Asparagus" label="Asparagus"/>
<link wikidata="Q162044" start="31381" end="31388" title="Vanilla (genus)" label="Vanilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q156901" start="31416" end="31422" title="iris (plant)" label="irises"/>
<link wikidata="Q158758" start="31424" end="31433" title="hyacinths" label="hyacinths"/>
<link wikidata="Q25308" start="31438" end="31445" title="orchids" label="orchids"/>
<link wikidata="Q17166096" start="31465" end="31486" title="Taxonomy of Liliaceae" label="Taxonomy of Liliaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q2496254" start="31785" end="31824" title="University and State Library Düsseldorf" label="University and State Library Düsseldorf"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="787" wikidata="Q27341" url="?curid=787" title="Alismatales">
<text>The Alismatales (alismatids) are an order of flowering plants including about 4,500 species. Plants assigned to this order are mostly tropical or aquatic. Some grow in fresh water, some in marine habitats. Perhaps the most important food crop in the order is the taro plant, &quot;Colocasia esculenta&quot;.

==Description==
The Alismatales comprise herbaceous flowering plants of often aquatic and marshy habitats, and the only monocots known to have green embryos other than the Amaryllidaceae. They also include the only marine angiosperms growing completely submerged, the seagrasses. The flowers are usually arranged in inflorescences, and the mature seeds lack endosperm.

Both marine and freshwater forms include those with staminate flowers that detach from the parent plant and float to the surface. There they can pollinate carpellate flowers floating on the surface via long pedicels. In others, pollination occurs underwater, where pollen may form elongated strands, increasing chance of success. Most aquatic species have a totally submerged juvenile phase, and flowers are either floating or emerge above the water&#x27;s surface. Vegetation may be totally submersed, have floating leaves, or protrude from the water. Collectively, they are commonly known as &quot;water plantain&quot;.

==Taxonomy==
The Alismatales contain about 165 genera in 13 families, with a cosmopolitan distribution. Phylogenetically, they are basal monocots, diverging early in evolution relative to the lilioid and commelinid monocot lineages. Together with the Acorales, the Alismatales are referred to informally as the alismatid monocots.

===Early systems===
The Cronquist system (1981) places the Alismatales in subclass Alismatidae, class Liliopsida [= monocotyledons] and includes only three families as shown:
* Alismataceae
* Butomaceae
* Limnocharitaceae
Cronquist&#x27;s subclass Alismatidae conformed fairly closely to the order Alismatales as defined by APG, minus the Araceae.

The Dahlgren system places the Alismatales in the superorder Alismatanae in the subclass Liliidae [= monocotyledons] in the class Magnoliopsida [= angiosperms] with the following families included:
* Alismataceae
* Aponogetonaceae
* Butomaceae
* Hydrocharitaceae
* Limnocharitaceae

In Tahktajan&#x27;s classification (1997), the order Alismatales contains only the Alismataceae and Limnocharitaceae, making it equivalent to the Alismataceae as revised in APG-III. Other families included in the Alismatates as currently defined are here distributed among 10 additional orders, all of which are assigned, with the following exception, to the Subclass Alismatidae. Araceae in Tahktajan 1997 is assigned to the Arales and placed in the Subclass Aridae; Tofieldiaceae to the Melanthiales and placed in the Liliidae.

===Angiosperm Phylogeny Group===
The Angiosperm Phylogeny Group system (APG) of 1998 and APG II (2003) assigned the Alismatales to the monocots, which may be thought of as an unranked clade containing the families listed below. The biggest departure from earlier systems (see below) is the inclusion of family Araceae. By its inclusion, the order has grown enormously in number of species. The family Araceae alone accounts for about a hundred genera, totaling over two thousand species. The rest of the families together contain only about five hundred species, many of which are in very small families.

The APG III system (2009) differs only in that the Limnocharitaceae are combined with the Alismataceae; it was also suggested that the genus &quot;Maundia&quot; (of the Juncaginaceae) could be separated into a monogeneric family, the Maundiaceae, but the authors noted that more study was necessary before the Maundiaceae could be recognized.

* order Alismatales &quot;sensu&quot; APG III
*: family Alismataceae (&quot;including&quot; Limnocharitaceae)
*: family Aponogetonaceae
*: family Araceae
*: family Butomaceae 
*: family Cymodoceaceae
*: family Hydrocharitaceae
*: family Juncaginaceae
*: family Posidoniaceae
*: family Potamogetonaceae
*: family Ruppiaceae
*: family Scheuchzeriaceae
*: family Tofieldiaceae
*: family Zosteraceae

In APG IV (2016), it was decided that evidence was sufficient to elevate &quot;Maundia&quot; to family level as the monogeneric Maundiaceae. The authors considered including a number of the smaller orders within the Juncaginaceae, but an online survey of botanists and other users found little support for this &quot;lumping&quot; approach. Consequently, the family structure for APG IV is:

*: family Alismataceae (&quot;including&quot; Limnocharitaceae)
*: family Aponogetonaceae
*: family Araceae
*: family Butomaceae 
*: family Cymodoceaceae
*: family Hydrocharitaceae
*: family Juncaginaceae
*: family Maundiaceae
*: family Posidoniaceae
*: family Potamogetonaceae
*: family Ruppiaceae
*: family Scheuchzeriaceae
*: family Tofieldiaceae
*: family Zosteraceae

=== Phylogeny ===
Cladogram showing the orders of monocots (Lilianae &quot;sensu&quot; Chase &amp; Reveal) based on molecular phylogenetic evidence:

== References ==
== Further reading ==

* B. C. J. du Mortier 1829. Analyse des Familles de Plantes : avec l&#x27;indication des principaux genres qui s&#x27;y rattachent. Imprimerie de J. Casterman, Tournay
* W. S. Judd, C. S. Campbell, E. A. Kellogg, P. F. Stevens, M. J. Donoghue, 2002. Plant Systematics: A Phylogenetic Approach, 2nd edition. Sinauer Associates, Sunderland, Massachusetts .
* 
* , in 
* 
== External links ==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q27341" start="4" end="15" title="Alismatales" label="Alismatales"/>
<link wikidata="Q27341" start="17" end="27" title="Alismatales" label="alismatids"/>
<link wikidata="Q25314" start="45" end="60" title="flowering plant" label="flowering plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q7846186" start="134" end="142" title="Tropical vegetation" label="tropical"/>
<link wikidata="Q186101" start="146" end="153" title="Aquatic plant" label="aquatic"/>
<link wikidata="Q102192" start="168" end="179" title="fresh water" label="fresh water"/>
<link wikidata="Q6764288" start="189" end="204" title="marine habitats" label="marine habitats"/>
<link wikidata="Q227997" start="263" end="267" title="taro" label="taro"/>
<link wikidata="Q190903" start="350" end="360" title="herbaceous" label="herbaceous"/>
<link wikidata="Q420011" start="458" end="464" title="Plant embryonic development" label="embryo"/>
<link wikidata="Q155848" start="481" end="495" title="Amaryllidaceae" label="Amaryllidaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q646660" start="577" end="585" title="seagrass" label="seagrass"/>
<link wikidata="Q506" start="593" end="599" title="flower" label="flower"/>
<link wikidata="Q156428" start="625" end="638" title="inflorescence" label="inflorescence"/>
<link wikidata="Q25624" start="667" end="676" title="endosperm" label="endosperm"/>
<link wikidata="Q215402" start="1379" end="1404" title="cosmopolitan distribution" label="cosmopolitan distribution"/>
<link wikidata="Q171184" start="1406" end="1422" title="Phylogenetically" label="Phylogenetically"/>
<link wikidata="Q379061" start="1433" end="1446" title="basal monocot" label="basal monocot"/>
<link wikidata="Q6547831" start="1494" end="1501" title="lilioid" label="lilioid"/>
<link wikidata="Q868546" start="1506" end="1516" title="commelinid" label="commelinid"/>
<link wikidata="Q78961" start="1517" end="1524" title="monocot" label="monocot"/>
<link wikidata="Q160087" start="1553" end="1561" title="Acorales" label="Acorales"/>
<link wikidata="Q213094" start="1658" end="1674" title="Cronquist system" label="Cronquist system"/>
<link wikidata="Q2014103" start="1717" end="1728" title="Alismatidae" label="Alismatidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147601" start="1736" end="1746" title="Liliopsida" label="Liliopsida"/>
<link wikidata="Q156025" start="1811" end="1823" title="Alismataceae" label="Alismataceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q13409713" start="1826" end="1836" title="Butomaceae" label="Butomaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069484" start="1839" end="1855" title="Limnocharitaceae" label="Limnocharitaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q901201" start="1987" end="2002" title="Dahlgren system" label="Dahlgren system"/>
<link wikidata="Q27341" start="2044" end="2055" title="Alismatanae" label="Alismatanae"/>
<link wikidata="Q777069" start="2072" end="2080" title="Liliidae" label="Liliidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q1307404" start="2113" end="2126" title="Magnoliopsida" label="Magnoliopsida"/>
<link wikidata="Q156025" start="2183" end="2195" title="Alismataceae" label="Alismataceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q858081" start="2198" end="2213" title="Aponogetonaceae" label="Aponogetonaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q13409713" start="2216" end="2226" title="Butomaceae" label="Butomaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q156029" start="2229" end="2245" title="Hydrocharitaceae" label="Hydrocharitaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069484" start="2248" end="2264" title="Limnocharitaceae" label="Limnocharitaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q773378" start="2692" end="2698" title="Arales" label="Arales"/>
<link wikidata="Q11777036" start="2755" end="2767" title="Melanthiales" label="Melanthiales"/>
<link wikidata="Q777069" start="2786" end="2794" title="Liliidae" label="Liliidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q433179" start="2869" end="2872" title="APG system" label="APG"/>
<link wikidata="Q156518" start="2886" end="2892" title="APG II system" label="APG II"/>
<link wikidata="Q2629799" start="3052" end="3067" title="list of systems of plant taxonomy" label="earlier systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q156982" start="3407" end="3421" title="APG III system" label="APG III system"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069484" start="3454" end="3470" title="Limnocharitaceae" label="Limnocharitaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q10327524" start="3550" end="3557" title="Maundia" label="Maundia"/>
<link wikidata="Q862544" start="3572" end="3585" title="Juncaginaceae" label="Juncaginaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q10327524" start="3637" end="3648" title="Maundiaceae" label="Maundiaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q1087319" start="3773" end="3778" title="sensu" label="sensu"/>
<link wikidata="Q156025" start="3803" end="3815" title="Alismataceae" label="Alismataceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069484" start="3839" end="3855" title="Limnocharitaceae" label="Limnocharitaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q858081" start="3867" end="3882" title="Aponogetonaceae" label="Aponogetonaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q48227" start="3893" end="3900" title="Araceae" label="Araceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q13409713" start="3911" end="3921" title="Butomus" label="Butomaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q131606" start="3933" end="3946" title="Cymodoceaceae" label="Cymodoceaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q156029" start="3957" end="3973" title="Hydrocharitaceae" label="Hydrocharitaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q862544" start="3984" end="3997" title="Juncaginaceae" label="Juncaginaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q877147" start="4008" end="4021" title="Posidoniaceae" label="Posidoniaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q156233" start="4032" end="4048" title="Potamogetonaceae" label="Potamogetonaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q157048" start="4059" end="4069" title="Ruppiaceae" label="Ruppiaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q156984" start="4080" end="4096" title="Scheuchzeriaceae" label="Scheuchzeriaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q868540" start="4107" end="4120" title="Tofieldiaceae" label="Tofieldiaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q21037" start="4131" end="4142" title="Zosteraceae" label="Zosteraceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q24895148" start="4147" end="4153" title="APG IV" label="APG IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q310890" start="4260" end="4271" title="monogeneric" label="monogeneric"/>
<link wikidata="Q1662868" start="4461" end="4468" title="lumping" label="lumping"/>
<link wikidata="Q156025" start="4546" end="4558" title="Alismataceae" label="Alismataceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069484" start="4582" end="4598" title="Limnocharitaceae" label="Limnocharitaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q858081" start="4610" end="4625" title="Aponogetonaceae" label="Aponogetonaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q48227" start="4636" end="4643" title="Araceae" label="Araceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q13409713" start="4654" end="4664" title="Butomus" label="Butomaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q131606" start="4676" end="4689" title="Cymodoceaceae" label="Cymodoceaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q156029" start="4700" end="4716" title="Hydrocharitaceae" label="Hydrocharitaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q862544" start="4727" end="4740" title="Juncaginaceae" label="Juncaginaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q10327524" start="4751" end="4762" title="Maundiaceae" label="Maundiaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q877147" start="4773" end="4786" title="Posidoniaceae" label="Posidoniaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q156233" start="4797" end="4813" title="Potamogetonaceae" label="Potamogetonaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q157048" start="4824" end="4834" title="Ruppiaceae" label="Ruppiaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q156984" start="4845" end="4861" title="Scheuchzeriaceae" label="Scheuchzeriaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q868540" start="4872" end="4885" title="Tofieldiaceae" label="Tofieldiaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q21037" start="4896" end="4907" title="Zosteraceae" label="Zosteraceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q2333562" start="4927" end="4936" title="Cladogram" label="Cladogram"/>
<link wikidata="Q6547763" start="4969" end="4977" title="Lilianae" label="Lilianae"/>
<link wikidata="Q1087319" start="4984" end="4989" title="sensu" label="sensu"/>
<link wikidata="Q316571" start="5101" end="5120" title="Barthélemy Charles Joseph du Mortier" label="B. C. J. du Mortier"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="788" wikidata="Q21138" url="?curid=788" title="Apiales">
<text>The Apiales are an order of flowering plants, included in the asterid group of dicotyledons. Well-known members of Apiales include carrots, celery, coriander, parsley, parsnips, poison hemlock, ginseng, ivies, and pittosporums.

Apiales consist of nine families, with the type family being the celery, carrot or parsley family, Apiaceae.

==Taxonomy==
There are nine accepted families within the Apiales, though there is some slight variation and in particular, the Torriceliaceae may also be divided.

* Apiaceae (carrot family)
* Araliaceae (ginseng family)
* Griseliniaceae
* Myodocarpaceae
* Pennantiaceae
* Pittosporaceae
* Torricelliaceae

The present understanding of the Apiales is fairly recent and is based upon comparison of DNA sequences by phylogenetic methods. The circumscriptions of some of the families have changed. In 2009, one of the subfamilies of Araliaceae was shown to be polyphyletic.

The order Apiales is placed within the asterid group of eudicots as circumscribed by the APG III system. Within the asterids, Apiales belongs to an unranked group called the campanulids, and within the campanulids, it belongs to a clade known in phylogenetic nomenclature as Apiidae. In 2010, a subclade of Apiidae named Dipsapiidae was defined to consist of the three orders: Apiales, Paracryphiales, and Dipsacales.

Under the Cronquist system, only the Apiaceae and Araliaceae were included here, and the restricted order was placed among the rosids rather than the asterids. The Pittosporaceae were placed within the Rosales, and many of the other forms within the family Cornaceae. &quot;Pennantia&quot; was in the family Icacinaceae. In the classification system of Dahlgren the families Apiaceae and Araliaceae were placed in the order Ariales, in the superorder Araliiflorae (also called Aralianae).

==Gynoecia==
The largest and obviously closely related families of Apiales are Araliaceae, Myodocarpaceae and
Apiaceae, which resemble each other in the structure of their gynoecia. In this respect however, the Pittosporaceae is notably distinct from them.

Typical syncarpous gynoecia exhibit four vertical zones, determined by the extent of fusion of the carpels. In most plants, the synascidiate (i.e. &quot;united bottle-shaped&quot;) and symplicate zones are fertile and bear the ovules. Each of the first three families possess mainly bi- or multilocular ovaries in a gynoecium with a long synascidiate, but very short symplicate zone, where the ovules are inserted at their transition, the so-called cross-zone (or &quot;Querzone&quot;).

In gynoecia of the Pittosporaceae, the symplicate is much longer than the synascidiate zone, and the ovules are arranged along the first. Members of the latter family consequently have unilocular ovaries with a single cavity between adjacent carpels.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q21138" start="4" end="11" title="Apiales" label="Apiales"/>
<link wikidata="Q36602" start="19" end="24" title="Order (biology)" label="order"/>
<link wikidata="Q25314" start="28" end="43" title="flowering plant" label="flowering plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q747502" start="62" end="69" title="asterid" label="asterid"/>
<link wikidata="Q8316" start="79" end="90" title="dicotyledon" label="dicotyledon"/>
<link wikidata="Q81" start="131" end="137" title="carrot" label="carrot"/>
<link wikidata="Q23012379" start="140" end="146" title="celery" label="celery"/>
<link wikidata="Q41611" start="148" end="157" title="coriander" label="coriander"/>
<link wikidata="Q25284" start="159" end="166" title="parsley" label="parsley"/>
<link wikidata="Q188614" start="168" end="175" title="parsnip" label="parsnip"/>
<link wikidata="Q218041" start="178" end="192" title="Conium maculatum" label="poison hemlock"/>
<link wikidata="Q182881" start="194" end="201" title="Panax ginseng" label="ginseng"/>
<link wikidata="Q26771" start="203" end="208" title="Hedera" label="ivies"/>
<link wikidata="Q158896" start="214" end="225" title="pittosporum" label="pittosporum"/>
<link wikidata="Q3707858" start="272" end="276" title="Type (biology)" label="type"/>
<link wikidata="Q145794" start="328" end="336" title="Apiaceae" label="Apiaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q145794" start="505" end="513" title="Apiaceae" label="Apiaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q81" start="515" end="521" title="carrot" label="carrot"/>
<link wikidata="Q193335" start="532" end="542" title="Araliaceae" label="Araliaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q20817212" start="544" end="551" title="ginseng" label="ginseng"/>
<link wikidata="Q135212" start="562" end="576" title="Griseliniaceae" label="Griseliniaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q131828" start="579" end="593" title="Myodocarpaceae" label="Myodocarpaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q131946" start="596" end="609" title="Pennantiaceae" label="Pennantiaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q161261" start="612" end="626" title="Pittosporaceae" label="Pittosporaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q131817" start="629" end="644" title="Torricelliaceae" label="Torricelliaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q863908" start="736" end="749" title="DNA sequences" label="DNA sequences"/>
<link wikidata="Q171184" start="753" end="765" title="Phylogenetics" label="phylogenetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q5121761" start="779" end="795" title="Circumscription (taxonomy)" label="circumscriptions"/>
<link wikidata="Q217743" start="896" end="908" title="polyphyletic" label="polyphyletic"/>
<link wikidata="Q165468" start="967" end="975" title="eudicots" label="eudicots"/>
<link wikidata="Q427626" start="1059" end="1067" title="Taxonomic rank" label="unranked"/>
<link wikidata="Q747502" start="1085" end="1096" title="campanulids" label="campanulids"/>
<link wikidata="Q713623" start="1142" end="1147" title="clade" label="clade"/>
<link wikidata="Q2976606" start="1157" end="1182" title="phylogenetic nomenclature" label="phylogenetic nomenclature"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1186" end="1193" title="Apiidae" label="Apiidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q7630927" start="1206" end="1214" title="subclade" label="subclade"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1232" end="1243" title="Dipsapiidae" label="Dipsapiidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q132028" start="1297" end="1311" title="Paracryphiales" label="Paracryphiales"/>
<link wikidata="Q21774" start="1317" end="1327" title="Dipsacales" label="Dipsacales"/>
<link wikidata="Q213094" start="1340" end="1356" title="Cronquist system" label="Cronquist system"/>
<link wikidata="Q161261" start="1494" end="1508" title="Pittosporaceae" label="Pittosporaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q21895" start="1532" end="1539" title="Rosales" label="Rosales"/>
<link wikidata="Q161403" start="1587" end="1596" title="Cornaceae" label="Cornaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q131946" start="1604" end="1613" title="Pennantia" label="Pennantia"/>
<link wikidata="Q133316" start="1638" end="1649" title="Icacinaceae" label="Icacinaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q3049579" start="1683" end="1691" title="Rolf Dahlgren" label="Dahlgren"/>
<link wikidata="Q36602" start="1770" end="1780" title="superorder" label="superorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q193335" start="1899" end="1909" title="Araliaceae" label="Araliaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q131828" start="1911" end="1925" title="Myodocarpaceae" label="Myodocarpaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q145794" start="1930" end="1938" title="Apiaceae" label="Apiaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q588964" start="1992" end="2000" title="gynoecium" label="gynoecia"/>
<link wikidata="Q161261" start="2031" end="2045" title="Pittosporaceae" label="Pittosporaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q3818113" start="2751" end="2761" title="Locule" label="unilocular"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="789" wikidata="Q21730" url="?curid=789" title="Asterales">
<text>Asterales ( ) is an order of dicotyledonous flowering plants that includes the large family Asteraceae (or Compositae) known for composite flowers made of florets, and ten families related to the Asteraceae. While asterids in general are characterized by fused petals, composite flowers consisting of many florets create the false appearance of separate petals (as found in the rosids).

The order is cosmopolitan (plants found throughout most of the world including desert and frigid zones), and includes mostly herbaceous species, although a small number of trees (such as the &quot;Lobelia deckenii&quot;, the giant lobelia, and &quot;Dendrosenecio&quot;, giant groundsels) and shrubs are also present.

Asterales are organisms that seem to have evolved from one common ancestor. Asterales share characteristics on morphological and biochemical levels. Synapomorphies (a character that is shared by two or more groups through evolutionary development) include the presence in the plants of oligosaccharide inulin, a nutrient storage molecule used instead of starch; and unique stamen morphology. The stamens are usually found around the style, either aggregated densely or fused into a tube, probably an adaptation in association with the plunger (brush; or secondary) pollination that is common among the families of the order, wherein pollen is collected and stored on the length of the pistil.

== Taxonomy ==
The name and order Asterales is botanically venerable, dating back to at least 1926 in the Hutchinson system of plant taxonomy when it contained only five families, of which only two are retained in the APG III classification. Under the Cronquist system of taxonomic classification of flowering plants, Asteraceae was the only family in the group, but newer systems (such as APG II and APG III) have expanded it to 11. In the classification system of Rolf Dahlgren the Asterales were in the superorder Asteriflorae (also called Asteranae).

The order Asterales currently includes 11 families, the largest of which are the Asteraceae, with about 25,000 species, and the Campanulaceae (bellflowers), with about 2,000 species. The remaining families count together for less than 1500 species. The two large families are cosmopolitan, with many of their species found in the Northern Hemisphere, and the smaller families are usually confined to Australia and the adjacent areas, or sometimes South America.

Only the Asteraceae have composite flower heads; the other families do not, but share other characteristics such as storage of inulin that define the 11 families as more closely related to each other than to other plant families or orders such as the rosids.

The phylogenetic tree according to APG III for the Campanulid clade is as below.

=== Phylogeny ===
Although most extant species of Asteraceae are herbaceous, the examination of the basal members in the family suggests that the common ancestor of the family was an arborescent plant, a tree or shrub, perhaps adapted to dry conditions, radiating from South America. Less can be said about the Asterales themselves with certainty, although since several families in Asterales contain trees, the ancestral member is most likely to have been a tree or shrub.

Because all clades are represented in the Southern Hemisphere but many not in the Northern Hemisphere, it is natural to conjecture that there is a common southern origin to them. Asterales belong to angiosperms or flowering plants, a clade that appeared about 140 million years ago. The Asterales order probably originated in the Cretaceous (145 – 66 Mya) on the supercontinent Gondwana which broke up from 184 – 80 Mya, forming the area that is now Australia, South America, Africa, India and Antarctica.

Asterales contain about 14% of eudicot diversity. From an analysis of relationships and diversities within the Asterales and with their superorders, estimates of the age of the beginning of the Asterales have been made, which range from 116 Mya to 82Mya. However few fossils have been found, of the Menyanthaceae-Asteraceae clade in the Oligocene, about 29 Mya.

Fossil evidence of the Asterales is rare and belongs to rather recent epochs, so the precise estimation of the order&#x27;s age is quite difficult. An Oligocene (34 – 23 Mya) pollen is known for Asteraceae and Goodeniaceae, and seeds from Oligocene and Miocene (23 – 5.3 Mya) are known for Menyanthaceae and Campanulaceae respectively. According to molecular clock calculations, the lineage that led to Asterales split from other plants about 112 million years ago or 94 million years ago.

==Biogeography==
The core Asterales are Stylidiaceae (six genera), APA clade (Alseuosmiaceae, Phellinaceae and Argophyllaceae, together seven genera), MGCA clade (Menyanthaceae, Goodeniaceae, Calyceraceae, in total twenty genera), and Asteraceae (about sixteen hundred genera). Other Asterales are Rousseaceae (four genera), Campanulaceae (eighty-four genera) and Pentaphragmataceae (one genus).

All Asterales families are represented in the Southern Hemisphere; however, Asteraceae and Campanulaceae are cosmopolitan and Menyanthaceae nearly so.

==Uses==
The Asterales, by dint of being a super-set of the family Asteraceae, include some species grown for food, including the sunflower (&quot;Helianthus annuus&quot;), lettuce (&quot;Lactuca sativa&quot;) and chicory (&quot;Cichorium&quot;). Many are also used as spices and traditional medicines.

Asterales are common plants and have many known uses. For example, pyrethrum (derived from Old World members of the genus &quot;Chrysanthemum&quot;) is a natural insecticide with minimal environmental impact. Wormwood, derived from a genus that includes the sagebrush, is used as a source of flavoring for absinthe, a bitter classical liquor of European origin.

==References==
== Further reading ==
* W. S. Judd, C. S. Campbell, E. A. Kellogg, P. F. Stevens, M. J. Donoghue (2002). &quot;Plant Systematics: A Phylogenetic Approach, 2nd edition.&quot; pp. 476–486 (Asterales). Sinauer Associates, Sunderland, Massachusetts. .
* 
*

==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q21730" start="0" end="9" title="Asterales" label="Asterales"/>
<link wikidata="Q36602" start="20" end="25" title="Order (biology)" label="order"/>
<link wikidata="Q8316" start="29" end="40" title="dicotyledon" label="dicotyledon"/>
<link wikidata="Q25314" start="44" end="59" title="flowering plant" label="flowering plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q35409" start="85" end="91" title="Family (biology)" label="family"/>
<link wikidata="Q25400" start="92" end="102" title="Asteraceae" label="Asteraceae"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="155" end="162" title="Floret#floret" label="florets"/>
<link wikidata="Q747502" start="214" end="222" title="asterids" label="asterids"/>
<link wikidata="Q338878" start="378" end="384" title="rosids" label="rosids"/>
<link wikidata="Q215402" start="401" end="413" title="Cosmopolitan distribution" label="cosmopolitan"/>
<link wikidata="Q190903" start="513" end="523" title="Herbaceous plant" label="herbaceous"/>
<link wikidata="Q2250670" start="585" end="601" title="Lobelia deckenii" label="Lobelia deckenii"/>
<link wikidata="Q2634151" start="638" end="651" title="Dendrosenecio" label="Dendrosenecio"/>
<link wikidata="Q42295" start="681" end="686" title="shrub" label="shrub"/>
<link wikidata="Q402152" start="773" end="781" title="ancestor" label="ancestor"/>
<link wikidata="Q183252" start="818" end="831" title="Morphology (biology)" label="morphological"/>
<link wikidata="Q962872" start="856" end="870" title="Synapomorphies" label="Synapomorphies"/>
<link wikidata="Q320607" start="993" end="1008" title="oligosaccharide" label="oligosaccharide"/>
<link wikidata="Q201552" start="1009" end="1015" title="inulin" label="inulin"/>
<link wikidata="Q41534" start="1061" end="1067" title="starch" label="starch"/>
<link wikidata="Q103129" start="1080" end="1086" title="stamen" label="stamen"/>
<link wikidata="Q588964" start="1140" end="1145" title="Gynoecium" label="style"/>
<link wikidata="Q483921" start="1207" end="1217" title="adaptation" label="adaptation"/>
<link wikidata="Q134624" start="1272" end="1283" title="pollination" label="pollination"/>
<link wikidata="Q3506078" start="1507" end="1542" title="Hutchinson system" label="Hutchinson system of plant taxonomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q156982" start="1619" end="1626" title="APG III system" label="APG III"/>
<link wikidata="Q213094" start="1653" end="1669" title="Cronquist system" label="Cronquist system"/>
<link wikidata="Q25400" start="1719" end="1729" title="Asteraceae" label="Asteraceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q156518" start="1791" end="1797" title="APG II system" label="APG II"/>
<link wikidata="Q3049579" start="1867" end="1880" title="Rolf Dahlgren" label="Rolf Dahlgren"/>
<link wikidata="Q36602" start="1907" end="1917" title="superorder" label="superorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q155802" start="2085" end="2098" title="Campanulaceae" label="Campanulaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q338878" start="2671" end="2677" title="rosids" label="rosids"/>
<link wikidata="Q25314" start="3436" end="3447" title="angiosperms" label="angiosperms"/>
<link wikidata="Q44626" start="3567" end="3577" title="Cretaceous" label="Cretaceous"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3588" end="3591" title="Mya (unit)#Symbols y and yr" label="Mya"/>
<link wikidata="Q80583" start="3615" end="3623" title="Gondwana" label="Gondwana"/>
<link wikidata="Q165468" start="3775" end="3782" title="eudicot" label="eudicot"/>
<link wikidata="Q161177" start="4043" end="4056" title="Menyanthaceae" label="Menyanthaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q101873" start="4081" end="4090" title="Oligocene" label="Oligocene"/>
<link wikidata="Q547938" start="4317" end="4329" title="Goodeniaceae" label="Goodeniaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q76267" start="4360" end="4367" title="Miocene" label="Miocene"/>
<link wikidata="Q827541" start="4456" end="4471" title="molecular clock" label="molecular clock"/>
<link wikidata="Q132216" start="4638" end="4650" title="Stylidiaceae" label="Stylidiaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q34740" start="4656" end="4662" title="Genus" label="genera"/>
<link wikidata="Q713623" start="4669" end="4674" title="clade" label="clade"/>
<link wikidata="Q131963" start="4676" end="4690" title="Alseuosmiaceae" label="Alseuosmiaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q131849" start="4692" end="4704" title="Phelline" label="Phellinaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q132235" start="4709" end="4723" title="Argophyllaceae" label="Argophyllaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q132299" start="4790" end="4802" title="Calyceraceae" label="Calyceraceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q132691" start="4896" end="4907" title="Rousseaceae" label="Rousseaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q132791" start="4962" end="4974" title="Pentaphragma" label="Pentaphragma"/>
<link wikidata="Q171497" start="5277" end="5286" title="sunflower" label="sunflower"/>
<link wikidata="Q171497" start="5294" end="5311" title="Common sunflower" label="Helianthus annuus"/>
<link wikidata="Q83193" start="5320" end="5327" title="lettuce" label="lettuce"/>
<link wikidata="Q2544599" start="5361" end="5368" title="chicory" label="chicory"/>
<link wikidata="Q158514" start="5376" end="5385" title="Cichorium" label="Cichorium"/>
<link wikidata="Q16269373" start="5518" end="5527" title="pyrethrum" label="pyrethrum"/>
<link wikidata="Q59882" start="5579" end="5592" title="Chrysanthemum" label="Chrysanthemum"/>
<link wikidata="Q156421" start="5660" end="5668" title="Artemisia (genus)" label="Wormwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q7399162" start="5709" end="5718" title="sagebrush" label="sagebrush"/>
<link wikidata="Q170210" start="5757" end="5765" title="absinthe" label="absinthe"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="791" wikidata="Q3863" url="?curid=791" title="Asteroid">
<text>An asteroid is a minor planet—an object larger than a meteoroid that is neither a planet nor an identified comet—that orbits within the inner Solar System or is co-orbital with Jupiter (Trojan asteroids). Asteroids are rocky, metallic, or icy bodies with no atmosphere, and are broadly classified into C-type (carbonaceous), M-type (metallic), or S-type (silicaceous). The size and shape of asteroids vary significantly, ranging from small rubble piles under a kilometer across to Ceres, a dwarf planet almost 1000 km in diameter. A body is classified as a comet, not an asteroid, if it shows a coma (tail) when warmed by solar radiation, although recent observations suggest a continuum between these types of bodies.

Of the roughly one million known asteroids, the greatest number are located between the orbits of Mars and Jupiter, approximately 2 to 4 AU from the Sun, in a region known as the main asteroid belt. The total mass of all the asteroids combined is only 3% that of Earth&#x27;s Moon. The majority of main belt asteroids follow slightly elliptical, stable orbits, revolving in the same direction as the Earth and taking from three to six years to complete a full circuit of the Sun.

Asteroids have historically been observed from Earth. The first close-up observation of an asteroid was made by the Galileo spacecraft. Several dedicated missions to asteroids were subsequently launched by NASA and JAXA, with plans for other missions in progress. NASA&#x27;s &quot;NEAR Shoemaker&quot; studied Eros, and &quot;Dawn&quot; observed Vesta and Ceres. JAXA&#x27;s missions &quot;Hayabusa&quot; and &quot;Hayabusa2&quot; studied and returned samples of Itokawa and Ryugu, respectively. OSIRIS-REx studied Bennu, collecting a sample in 2020 which was delivered back to Earth in 2023. NASA&#x27;s &quot;Lucy&quot;, launched in 2021, is tasked with studying ten different asteroids, two from the main belt and eight Jupiter trojans. &quot;Psyche&quot;, launched October 2023, aims to study the metallic asteroid Psyche.

Near-Earth asteroids have the potential for catastrophic consequences if they strike Earth, with a notable example being the Chicxulub impact, widely thought to have induced the Cretaceous–Paleogene mass extinction. As an experiment to meet this danger, in September 2022 the Double Asteroid Redirection Test spacecraft successfully altered the orbit of the non-threatening asteroid Dimorphos by crashing into it.

== Terminology ==
In 2006, the International Astronomical Union (IAU) introduced the currently preferred broad term small Solar System body, defined as an object in the Solar System that is neither a planet, a dwarf planet, nor a natural satellite; this includes asteroids, comets, and more recently discovered classes. According to IAU, &quot;the term &#x27;minor planet&#x27; may still be used, but generally, &#x27;Small Solar System Body&#x27; will be preferred.&quot;

Historically, the first discovered asteroid, Ceres, was at first considered a new planet. It was followed by the discovery of other similar bodies, which with the equipment of the time appeared to be points of light like stars, showing little or no planetary disc, though readily distinguishable from stars due to their apparent motions. This prompted the astronomer Sir William Herschel to propose the term &quot;asteroid&quot;, coined in Greek as ἀστεροειδής, or &quot;asteroeidēs&quot;, meaning &#x27;star-like, star-shaped&#x27;, and derived from the Ancient Greek &quot;astēr&quot; &#x27;star, planet&#x27;. In the early second half of the 19th century, the terms &quot;asteroid&quot; and &quot;planet&quot; (not always qualified as &quot;minor&quot;) were still used interchangeably.

Traditionally, small bodies orbiting the Sun were classified as comets, asteroids, or meteoroids, with anything smaller than one meter across being called a meteoroid. The term &quot;asteroid,&quot; never officially defined, can be informally used to mean &quot;an irregularly shaped rocky body orbiting the Sun that does not qualify as a planet or a dwarf planet under the IAU definitions&quot;. The main difference between an asteroid and a comet is that a comet shows a coma (tail) due to sublimation of its near-surface ices by solar radiation. A few objects were first classified as minor planets but later showed evidence of cometary activity. Conversely, some (perhaps all) comets are eventually depleted of their surface volatile ices and become asteroid-like. A further distinction is that comets typically have more eccentric orbits than most asteroids; highly eccentric asteroids are probably dormant or extinct comets.

The minor planets beyond Jupiter&#x27;s orbit are sometimes also called &quot;asteroids&quot;, especially in popular presentations. However, it is becoming increasingly common for the term &quot;asteroid&quot; to be restricted to minor planets of the inner Solar System. Therefore, this article will restrict itself for the most part to the classical asteroids: objects of the asteroid belt, Jupiter trojans, and near-Earth objects.

For almost two centuries after the discovery of Ceres in 1801, all known asteroids spent most of their time at or within the orbit of Jupiter, though a few, such as 944 Hidalgo, ventured farther for part of their orbit. Starting in 1977 with 2060 Chiron, astronomers discovered small bodies that permanently resided further out than Jupiter, now called centaurs. In 1992, 15760 Albion was discovered, the first object beyond the orbit of Neptune (other than Pluto); soon large numbers of similar objects were observed, now called trans-Neptunian object. Further out are Kuiper-belt objects, scattered-disc objects, and the much more distant Oort cloud, hypothesized to be the main reservoir of dormant comets. They inhabit the cold outer reaches of the Solar System where ices remain solid and comet-like bodies exhibit little cometary activity; if centaurs or trans-Neptunian objects were to venture close to the Sun, their volatile ices would sublimate, and traditional approaches would classify them as comets.

The Kuiper-belt bodies are called &quot;objects&quot; partly to avoid the need to classify them as asteroids or comets. They are thought to be predominantly comet-like in composition, though some may be more akin to asteroids. Most do not have the highly eccentric orbits associated with comets, and the ones so far discovered are larger than traditional comet nuclei. Other recent observations, such as the analysis of the cometary dust collected by the &quot;Stardust&quot; probe, are increasingly blurring the distinction between comets and asteroids, suggesting &quot;a continuum between asteroids and comets&quot; rather than a sharp dividing line.

In 2006, the IAU created the class of dwarf planets for the largest minor planets—those massive enough to have become ellipsoidal under their own gravity. Only the largest object in the asteroid belt has been placed in this category: Ceres, at about across.

== History of observations ==
Despite their large numbers, asteroids are a relatively recent discovery, with the first one—Ceres—only being identified in 1801. Only one asteroid, 4 Vesta, which has a relatively reflective surface, is normally visible to the naked eye in dark skies when it is favorably positioned. Rarely, small asteroids passing close to Earth may be briefly visible to the naked eye. , the Minor Planet Center had data on 1,199,224 minor planets in the inner and outer Solar System, of which about 614,690 had enough information to be given numbered designations.

===Discovery of Ceres===
In 1772, German astronomer Johann Elert Bode, citing Johann Daniel Titius, published a numerical procession known as the Titius–Bode law (now discredited). Except for an unexplained gap between Mars and Jupiter, Bode&#x27;s formula seemed to predict the orbits of the known planets. He wrote the following explanation for the existence of a &quot;missing planet&quot;:

This latter point seems in particular to follow from the astonishing relation which the known six planets observe in their distances from the Sun. Let the distance from the Sun to Saturn be taken as 100, then Mercury is separated by 4 such parts from the Sun. Venus is 4 + 3 = 7. The Earth 4 + 6 = 10. Mars 4 + 12 = 16. Now comes a gap in this so orderly progression. After Mars there follows a space of 4 + 24 = 28 parts, in which no planet has yet been seen. Can one believe that the Founder of the universe had left this space empty? Certainly not. From here we come to the distance of Jupiter by 4 + 48 = 52 parts, and finally to that of Saturn by 4 + 96 = 100 parts.

Bode&#x27;s formula predicted another planet would be found with an orbital radius near 2.8 astronomical units (AU), or 420 million km, from the Sun. The Titius–Bode law got a boost with William Herschel&#x27;s discovery of Uranus near the predicted distance for a planet beyond Saturn. In 1800, a group headed by Franz Xaver von Zach, editor of the German astronomical journal &quot;Monatliche Correspondenz&quot; (Monthly Correspondence), sent requests to 24 experienced astronomers (whom he dubbed the &quot;celestial police&quot;), asking that they combine their efforts and begin a methodical search for the expected planet. Although they did not discover Ceres, they later found the asteroids 2 Pallas, 3 Juno and 4 Vesta.

One of the astronomers selected for the search was Giuseppe Piazzi, a Catholic priest at the Academy of Palermo, Sicily. Before receiving his invitation to join the group, Piazzi discovered Ceres on 1 January 1801. He was searching for &quot;the 87th [star] of the Catalogue of the Zodiacal stars of Mr la Caille&quot;, but found that &quot;it was preceded by another&quot;. Instead of a star, Piazzi had found a moving star-like object, which he first thought was a comet:

The light was a little faint, and of the colour of Jupiter, but similar to many others which generally are reckoned of the eighth magnitude. Therefore I had no doubt of its being any other than a fixed star. [...] The evening of the third, my suspicion was converted into certainty, being assured it was not a fixed star. Nevertheless before I made it known, I waited till the evening of the fourth, when I had the satisfaction to see it had moved at the same rate as on the preceding days.

Piazzi observed Ceres a total of 24 times, the final time on 11 February 1801, when illness interrupted his work. He announced his discovery on 24 January 1801 in letters to only two fellow astronomers, his compatriot Barnaba Oriani of Milan and Bode in Berlin. He reported it as a comet but &quot;since its movement is so slow and rather uniform, it has occurred to me several times that it might be something better than a comet&quot;. In April, Piazzi sent his complete observations to Oriani, Bode, and French astronomer Jérôme Lalande. The information was published in the September 1801 issue of the &quot;Monatliche Correspondenz&quot;.

By this time, the apparent position of Ceres had changed (mostly due to Earth&#x27;s motion around the Sun), and was too close to the Sun&#x27;s glare for other astronomers to confirm Piazzi&#x27;s observations. Toward the end of the year, Ceres should have been visible again, but after such a long time it was difficult to predict its exact position. To recover Ceres, mathematician Carl Friedrich Gauss, then 24 years old, developed an efficient method of orbit determination. In a few weeks, he predicted the path of Ceres and sent his results to von Zach. On 31 December 1801, von Zach and fellow celestial policeman Heinrich W. M. Olbers found Ceres near the predicted position and thus recovered it. At 2.8 AU from the Sun, Ceres appeared to fit the Titius–Bode law almost perfectly; however, Neptune, once discovered in 1846, was 8 AU closer than predicted, leading most astronomers to conclude that the law was a coincidence. Piazzi named the newly discovered object &quot;Ceres Ferdinandea,&quot; &quot;in honor of the patron goddess of Sicily and of King Ferdinand of Bourbon&quot;.

===Further search===
Three other asteroids (2 Pallas, 3 Juno, and 4 Vesta) were discovered by von Zach&#x27;s group over the next few years, with Vesta found in 1807. No new asteroids were discovered until 1845. Amateur astronomer Karl Ludwig Hencke started his searches of new asteroids in 1830, and fifteen years later, while looking for Vesta, he found the asteroid later named 5 Astraea. It was the first new asteroid discovery in 38 years. Carl Friedrich Gauss was given the honor of naming the asteroid. After this, other astronomers joined; 15 asteroids were found by the end of 1851. In 1868, when James Craig Watson discovered the 100th asteroid, the French Academy of Sciences engraved the faces of Karl Theodor Robert Luther, John Russell Hind, and Hermann Goldschmidt, the three most successful asteroid-hunters at that time, on a commemorative medallion marking the event.

In 1891, Max Wolf pioneered the use of astrophotography to detect asteroids, which appeared as short streaks on long-exposure photographic plates. This dramatically increased the rate of detection compared with earlier visual methods: Wolf alone discovered 248 asteroids, beginning with 323 Brucia, whereas only slightly more than 300 had been discovered up to that point. It was known that there were many more, but most astronomers did not bother with them, some calling them &quot;vermin of the skies&quot;, a phrase variously attributed to Eduard Suess and Edmund Weiss. Even a century later, only a few thousand asteroids were identified, numbered and named.

=== 19th and 20th centuries ===
In the past, asteroids were discovered by a four-step process. First, a region of the sky was photographed by a wide-field telescope or astrograph. Pairs of photographs were taken, typically one hour apart. Multiple pairs could be taken over a series of days. Second, the two films or plates of the same region were viewed under a stereoscope. A body in orbit around the Sun would move slightly between the pair of films. Under the stereoscope, the image of the body would seem to float slightly above the background of stars. Third, once a moving body was identified, its location would be measured precisely using a digitizing microscope. The location would be measured relative to known star locations.

These first three steps do not constitute asteroid discovery: the observer has only found an apparition, which gets a provisional designation, made up of the year of discovery, a letter representing the half-month of discovery, and finally a letter and a number indicating the discovery&#x27;s sequential number (example: ). The last step is sending the locations and time of observations to the Minor Planet Center, where computer programs determine whether an apparition ties together earlier apparitions into a single orbit. If so, the object receives a catalogue number and the observer of the first apparition with a calculated orbit is declared the discoverer, and granted the honor of naming the object subject to the approval of the International Astronomical Union.

== Naming ==

By 1851, the Royal Astronomical Society decided that asteroids were being discovered at such a rapid rate that a different system was needed to categorize or name asteroids. In 1852, when de Gasparis discovered the twentieth asteroid, Benjamin Valz gave it a name and a number designating its rank among asteroid discoveries, 20 Massalia. Sometimes asteroids were discovered and not seen again. So, starting in 1892, new asteroids were listed by the year and a capital letter indicating the order in which the asteroid&#x27;s orbit was calculated and registered within that specific year. For example, the first two asteroids discovered in 1892 were labeled 1892A and 1892B. However, there were not enough letters in the alphabet for all of the asteroids discovered in 1893, so 1893Z was followed by 1893AA. A number of variations of these methods were tried, including designations that included year plus a Greek letter in 1914. A simple chronological numbering system was established in 1925.

Currently all newly discovered asteroids receive a provisional designation (such as ) consisting of the year of discovery and an alphanumeric code indicating the half-month of discovery and the sequence within that half-month. Once an asteroid&#x27;s orbit has been confirmed, it is given a number, and later may also be given a name (e.g. ). The formal naming convention uses parentheses around the number—e.g. (433) Eros—but dropping the parentheses is quite common. Informally, it is also common to drop the number altogether, or to drop it after the first mention when a name is repeated in running text. In addition, names can be proposed by the asteroid&#x27;s discoverer, within guidelines established by the International Astronomical Union.

=== Symbols ===

The first asteroids to be discovered were assigned iconic symbols like the ones traditionally used to designate the planets. By 1852 there were two dozen asteroid symbols, which often occurred in multiple variants.

In 1851, after the fifteenth asteroid, Eunomia, had been discovered, Johann Franz Encke made a major change in the upcoming 1854 edition of the &quot;Berliner Astronomisches Jahrbuch&quot; (BAJ, &quot;Berlin Astronomical Yearbook&quot;). He introduced a disk (circle), a traditional symbol for a star, as the generic symbol for an asteroid. The circle was then numbered in order of discovery to indicate a specific asteroid. The numbered-circle convention was quickly adopted by astronomers, and the next asteroid to be discovered (16 Psyche, in 1852) was the first to be designated in that way at the time of its discovery. However, Psyche was given an iconic symbol as well, as were a few other asteroids discovered over the next few years. 20 Massalia was the first asteroid that was not assigned an iconic symbol, and no iconic symbols were created after the 1855 discovery of 37 Fides.

== Formation ==

Many asteroids are the shattered remnants of planetesimals, bodies within the young Sun&#x27;s solar nebula that never grew large enough to become planets. It is thought that planetesimals in the asteroid belt evolved much like the rest of objects in the solar nebula until Jupiter neared its current mass, at which point excitation from orbital resonances with Jupiter ejected over 99% of planetesimals in the belt. Simulations and a discontinuity in spin rate and spectral properties suggest that asteroids larger than approximately in diameter accreted during that early era, whereas smaller bodies are fragments from collisions between asteroids during or after the Jovian disruption. Ceres and Vesta grew large enough to melt and differentiate, with heavy metallic elements sinking to the core, leaving rocky minerals in the crust.

In the Nice model, many Kuiper-belt objects are captured in the outer asteroid belt, at distances greater than 2.6 AU. Most were later ejected by Jupiter, but those that remained may be the D-type asteroids, and possibly include Ceres.

== Distribution within the Solar System ==


Various dynamical groups of asteroids have been discovered orbiting in the inner Solar System. Their orbits are perturbed by the gravity of other bodies in the Solar System and by the Yarkovsky effect. Significant populations include:

=== Asteroid belt ===

The majority of known asteroids orbit within the asteroid belt between the orbits of Mars and Jupiter, generally in relatively low-eccentricity (i.e. not very elongated) orbits. This belt is estimated to contain between 1.1 and 1.9 million asteroids larger than in diameter, and millions of smaller ones. These asteroids may be remnants of the protoplanetary disk, and in this region the accretion of planetesimals into planets during the formative period of the Solar System was prevented by large gravitational perturbations by Jupiter.

Contrary to popular imagery, the asteroid belt is mostly empty. The asteroids are spread over such a large volume that reaching an asteroid without aiming carefully would be improbable. Nonetheless, hundreds of thousands of asteroids are currently known, and the total number ranges in the millions or more, depending on the lower size cutoff. Over 200 asteroids are known to be larger than 100 km, and a survey in the infrared wavelengths has shown that the asteroid belt has between 700,000 and 1.7 million asteroids with a diameter of 1 km or more. The absolute magnitudes of most of the known asteroids are between 11 and 19, with the median at about 16.

The total mass of the asteroid belt is estimated to be kg, which is just 3% of the mass of the Moon; the mass of the Kuiper Belt and Scattered Disk is over 100 times as large. The four largest objects, Ceres, Vesta, Pallas, and Hygiea, account for maybe 62% of the belt&#x27;s total mass, with 39% accounted for by Ceres alone.

=== Trojans ===

Trojans are populations that share an orbit with a larger planet or moon, but do not collide with it because they orbit in one of the two Lagrangian points of stability, and , which lie 60° ahead of and behind the larger body.

In the Solar System, most known trojans share the orbit of Jupiter. They are divided into the Greek camp at (ahead of Jupiter) and the Trojan camp at (trailing Jupiter). More than a million Jupiter trojans larger than one kilometer are thought to exist, of which more than 7,000 are currently catalogued. In other planetary orbits only nine Mars trojans, 28 Neptune trojans, two Uranus trojans, and two Earth trojans, have been found to date. A temporary Venus trojan is also known. Numerical orbital dynamics stability simulations indicate that Saturn and Uranus probably do not have any primordial trojans.

=== Near-Earth asteroids ===
Near-Earth asteroids, or NEAs, are asteroids that have orbits that pass close to that of Earth. Asteroids that actually cross Earth&#x27;s orbital path are known as &quot;Earth-crossers&quot;. , a total of 28,772 near-Earth asteroids were known; 878 have a diameter of one kilometer or larger.

A small number of NEAs are extinct comets that have lost their volatile surface materials, although having a faint or intermittent comet-like tail does not necessarily result in a classification as a near-Earth comet, making the boundaries somewhat fuzzy. The rest of the near-Earth asteroids are driven out of the asteroid belt by gravitational interactions with Jupiter.

Many asteroids have natural satellites (minor-planet moons). , there were 85 NEAs known to have at least one moon, including three known to have two moons. The asteroid 3122 Florence, one of the largest potentially hazardous asteroids with a diameter of , has two moons measuring across, which were discovered by radar imaging during the asteroid&#x27;s 2017 approach to Earth.

Near-Earth asteroids are divided into groups based on their semi-major axis (a), perihelion distance (q), and aphelion distance (Q):
* The &quot;Atiras&quot; or &quot;Apoheles&quot; have orbits strictly inside Earth&#x27;s orbit: an Atira asteroid&#x27;s aphelion distance (Q) is smaller than Earth&#x27;s perihelion distance (0.983 AU). That is, , which implies that the asteroid&#x27;s semi-major axis is also less than 0.983 AU.
* The &quot;Atens&quot; have a semi-major axis of less than 1 AU and cross Earth&#x27;s orbit. Mathematically, and . (0.983 AU is Earth&#x27;s perihelion distance.)
* The &quot;Apollos&quot; have a semi-major axis of more than 1 AU and cross Earth&#x27;s orbit. Mathematically, and . (1.017 AU is Earth&#x27;s aphelion distance.)
* The &quot;Amors&quot; have orbits strictly outside Earth&#x27;s orbit: an Amor asteroid&#x27;s perihelion distance (q) is greater than Earth&#x27;s aphelion distance (1.017 AU). Amor asteroids are also near-earth objects so . In summary, . (This implies that the asteroid&#x27;s semi-major axis (a) is also larger than 1.017 AU.) Some Amor asteroid orbits cross the orbit of Mars.

=== Martian moons ===

It is unclear whether Martian moons Phobos and Deimos are captured asteroids or were formed due to impact event on Mars. Phobos and Deimos both have much in common with carbonaceous C-type asteroids, with spectra, albedo, and density very similar to those of C- or D-type asteroids. Based on their similarity, one hypothesis is that both moons may be captured main-belt asteroids. Both moons have very circular orbits which lie almost exactly in Mars&#x27;s equatorial plane, and hence a capture origin requires a mechanism for circularizing the initially highly eccentric orbit, and adjusting its inclination into the equatorial plane, most probably by a combination of atmospheric drag and tidal forces, although it is not clear whether sufficient time was available for this to occur for Deimos. Capture also requires dissipation of energy. The current Martian atmosphere is too thin to capture a Phobos-sized object by atmospheric braking. Geoffrey A. Landis has pointed out that the capture could have occurred if the original body was a binary asteroid that separated under tidal forces.

Phobos could be a second-generation Solar System object that coalesced in orbit after Mars formed, rather than forming concurrently out of the same birth cloud as Mars.

Another hypothesis is that Mars was once surrounded by many Phobos- and Deimos-sized bodies, perhaps ejected into orbit around it by a collision with a large planetesimal. The high porosity of the interior of Phobos (based on the density of 1.88 g/cm3, voids are estimated to comprise 25 to 35 percent of Phobos&#x27;s volume) is inconsistent with an asteroidal origin. Observations of Phobos in the thermal infrared suggest a composition containing mainly phyllosilicates, which are well known from the surface of Mars. The spectra are distinct from those of all classes of chondrite meteorites, again pointing away from an asteroidal origin. Both sets of findings support an origin of Phobos from material ejected by an impact on Mars that reaccreted in Martian orbit, similar to the prevailing theory for the origin of Earth&#x27;s moon.

== Characteristics ==

=== Size distribution ===
Asteroids vary greatly in size, from almost for the largest down to rocks just 1 meter across, below which an object is classified as a meteoroid. The three largest are very much like miniature planets: they are roughly spherical, have at least partly differentiated interiors, and are thought to be surviving protoplanets. The vast majority, however, are much smaller and are irregularly shaped; they are thought to be either battered planetesimals or fragments of larger bodies.

The dwarf planet Ceres is by far the largest asteroid, with a diameter of . The next largest are 4 Vesta and 2 Pallas, both with diameters of just over . Vesta is the brightest of the four main-belt asteroids that can, on occasion, be visible to the naked eye. On some rare occasions, a near-Earth asteroid may briefly become visible without technical aid; see 99942 Apophis.

The mass of all the objects of the asteroid belt, lying between the orbits of Mars and Jupiter, is estimated to be , ≈ 3.25% of the mass of the Moon. Of this, Ceres comprises , about 40% of the total. Adding in the next three most massive objects, Vesta (11%), Pallas (8.5%), and Hygiea (3–4%), brings this figure up to a bit over 60%, whereas the next seven most-massive asteroids bring the total up to 70%. The number of asteroids increases rapidly as their individual masses decrease.

The number of asteroids decreases markedly with increasing size. Although the size distribution generally follows a power law, there are &#x27;bumps&#x27; at about and , where more asteroids than expected from such a curve are found. Most asteroids larger than approximately 120 km in diameter are primordial (surviving from the accretion epoch), whereas most smaller asteroids are products of fragmentation of primordial asteroids. The primordial population of the main belt was probably 200 times what it is today.

====Largest asteroids====


Three largest objects in the asteroid belt, Ceres, Vesta, and Pallas, are intact protoplanets that share many characteristics common to planets, and are atypical compared to the majority of irregularly shaped asteroids. The fourth-largest asteroid, Hygiea, appears nearly spherical although it may have an undifferentiated interior, like the majority of asteroids. The four largest asteroids constitute half the mass of the asteroid belt.

Ceres is the only asteroid that appears to have a plastic shape under its own gravity and hence the only one that is a dwarf planet. It has a much higher absolute magnitude than the other asteroids, of around 3.32, and may possess a surface layer of ice. Like the planets, Ceres is differentiated: it has a crust, a mantle and a core. No meteorites from Ceres have been found on Earth.

Vesta, too, has a differentiated interior, though it formed inside the Solar System&#x27;s frost line, and so is devoid of water; its composition is mainly of basaltic rock with minerals such as olivine. Aside from the large crater at its southern pole, Rheasilvia, Vesta also has an ellipsoidal shape. Vesta is the parent body of the Vestian family and other V-type asteroids, and is the source of the HED meteorites, which constitute 5% of all meteorites on Earth.

Pallas is unusual in that, like Uranus, it rotates on its side, with its axis of rotation tilted at high angles to its orbital plane. Its composition is similar to that of Ceres: high in carbon and silicon, and perhaps partially differentiated. Pallas is the parent body of the Palladian family of asteroids.

Hygiea is the largest carbonaceous asteroid and, unlike the other largest asteroids, lies relatively close to the plane of the ecliptic. It is the largest member and presumed parent body of the Hygiean family of asteroids. Because there is no sufficiently large crater on the surface to be the source of that family, as there is on Vesta, it is thought that Hygiea may have been completely disrupted in the collision that formed the Hygiean family and recoalesced after losing a bit less than 2% of its mass. Observations taken with the Very Large Telescope&#x27;s SPHERE imager in 2017 and 2018, revealed that Hygiea has a nearly spherical shape, which is consistent both with it being in hydrostatic equilibrium, or formerly being in hydrostatic equilibrium, or with being disrupted and recoalescing.

Internal differentiation of large asteroids is possibly related to their lack of natural satellites, as satellites of main belt asteroids are mostly believed to form from collisional disruption, creating a rubble pile structure.

=== Rotation ===

Measurements of the rotation rates of large asteroids in the asteroid belt show that there is an upper limit. Very few asteroids with a diameter larger than 100 meters have a rotation period less than 2.2 hours. For asteroids rotating faster than approximately this rate, the inertial force at the surface is greater than the gravitational force, so any loose surface material would be flung out. However, a solid object should be able to rotate much more rapidly. This suggests that most asteroids with a diameter over 100 meters are rubble piles formed through the accumulation of debris after collisions between asteroids.

=== Color ===
Asteroids become darker and redder with age due to space weathering. However evidence suggests most of the color change occurs rapidly, in the first hundred thousand years, limiting the usefulness of spectral measurement for determining the age of asteroids.

=== Surface features ===
Except for the &quot;big four&quot; (Ceres, Pallas, Vesta, and Hygiea), asteroids are likely to be broadly similar in appearance, if irregular in shape. 253 Mathilde is a rubble pile saturated with craters with diameters the size of the asteroid&#x27;s radius. Earth-based observations of 511 Davida, one of the largest asteroids after the big four, reveal a similarly angular profile, suggesting it is also saturated with radius-size craters. Medium-sized asteroids such as Mathilde and 243 Ida, that have been observed up close, also reveal a deep regolith covering the surface. Of the big four, Pallas and Hygiea are practically unknown. Vesta has compression fractures encircling a radius-size crater at its south pole but is otherwise a spheroid.

&quot;Dawn spacecraft&quot; revealed that Ceres has a heavily cratered surface, but with fewer large craters than expected. Models based on the formation of the current asteroid belt had suggested Ceres should possess 10 to 15 craters larger than in diameter. The largest confirmed crater on Ceres, Kerwan Basin, is across. The most likely reason for this is viscous relaxation of the crust slowly flattening out larger impacts.

=== Composition ===
Asteroids are classified by their characteristic emission spectra, with the majority falling into three main groups: C-type, M-type, and S-type. These describe carbonaceous (carbon-rich), metallic, and silicaceous (stony) compositions, respectively. The physical composition of asteroids is varied and in most cases poorly understood. Ceres appears to be composed of a rocky core covered by an icy mantle; Vesta is thought to have a nickel-iron core, olivine mantle, and basaltic crust. Thought to be the largest undifferentiated asteroid, 10 Hygiea seems to have a uniformly primitive composition of carbonaceous chondrite, but it may actually be a differentiated asteroid that was globally disrupted by an impact and then reassembled. Other asteroids appear to be the remnant cores or mantles of proto-planets, high in rock and metal. Most small asteroids are believed to be piles of rubble held together loosely by gravity, although the largest are probably solid. Some asteroids have moons or are co-orbiting binaries: rubble piles, moons, binaries, and scattered asteroid families are thought to be the results of collisions that disrupted a parent asteroid, or possibly a planet.

In the main asteroid belt, there appear to be two primary populations of asteroid: a dark, volatile-rich population, consisting of the C-type and P-type asteroids, with albedos less than 0.10 and densities under , and a dense, volatile-poor population, consisting of the S-type and M-type asteroids, with albedos over 0.15 and densities greater than 2.7. Within these populations, larger asteroids are denser, presumably due to compression. There appears to be minimal macro-porosity (interstitial vacuum) in the score of asteroids with masses greater than .

Composition is calculated from three primary sources: albedo, surface spectrum, and density. The last can only be determined accurately by observing the orbits of moons the asteroid might have. So far, every asteroid with moons has turned out to be a rubble pile, a loose conglomeration of rock and metal that may be half empty space by volume. The investigated asteroids are as large as 280 km in diameter, and include 121 Hermione (268×186×183 km), and 87 Sylvia (384×262×232 km). Few asteroids are larger than 87 Sylvia, none of them have moons. The fact that such large asteroids as Sylvia may be rubble piles, presumably due to disruptive impacts, has important consequences for the formation of the Solar System: computer simulations of collisions involving solid bodies show them destroying each other as often as merging, but colliding rubble piles are more likely to merge. This means that the cores of the planets could have formed relatively quickly.

==== Water ====
Scientists hypothesize that some of the first water brought to Earth was delivered by asteroid impacts after the collision that produced the Moon. In 2009, the presence of water ice was confirmed on the surface of 24 Themis using NASA&#x27;s Infrared Telescope Facility. The surface of the asteroid appears completely covered in ice. As this ice layer is sublimating, it may be getting replenished by a reservoir of ice under the surface. Organic compounds were also detected on the surface. The presence of ice on 24 Themis makes the initial theory plausible.

In October 2013, water was detected on an extrasolar body for the first time, on an asteroid orbiting the white dwarf GD 61. On 22 January 2014, European Space Agency (ESA) scientists reported the detection, for the first definitive time, of water vapor on Ceres, the largest object in the asteroid belt. The detection was made by using the far-infrared abilities of the Herschel Space Observatory. The finding is unexpected because comets, not asteroids, are typically considered to &quot;sprout jets and plumes&quot;. According to one of the scientists, &quot;The lines are becoming more and more blurred between comets and asteroids.&quot;

Findings have shown that solar winds can react with the oxygen in the upper layer of the asteroids and create water. It has been estimated that &quot;every cubic metre of irradiated rock could contain up to 20 litres&quot;; study was conducted using an atom probe tomography, numbers are given for the Itokawa S-type asteroid.

Acfer 049, a meteorite discovered in Algeria in 1990, was shown in 2019 to have an ultraporous lithology (UPL): porous texture that could be formed by removal of ice that filled these pores, this suggests that UPL &quot;represent fossils of primordial ice&quot;.

==== Organic compounds ====

Asteroids contain traces of amino acids and other organic compounds, and some speculate that asteroid impacts may have seeded the early Earth with the chemicals necessary to initiate life, or may have even brought life itself to Earth (an event called &quot;panspermia&quot;). In August 2011, a report, based on NASA studies with meteorites found on Earth, was published suggesting DNA and RNA components (adenine, guanine and related organic molecules) may have been formed on asteroids and comets in outer space.

In November 2019, scientists reported detecting, for the first time, sugar molecules, including ribose, in meteorites, suggesting that chemical processes on asteroids can produce some fundamentally essential bio-ingredients important to life, and supporting the notion of an RNA world prior to a DNA-based origin of life on Earth, and possibly, as well, the notion of panspermia.

== Classification ==
Asteroids are commonly categorized according to two criteria: the characteristics of their orbits, and features of their reflectance spectrum.

=== Orbital classification ===
Many asteroids have been placed in groups and families based on their orbital characteristics. Apart from the broadest divisions, it is customary to name a group of asteroids after the first member of that group to be discovered. Groups are relatively loose dynamical associations, whereas families are tighter and result from the catastrophic break-up of a large parent asteroid sometime in the past. Families are more common and easier to identify within the main asteroid belt, but several small families have been reported among the Jupiter trojans. Main belt families were first recognized by Kiyotsugu Hirayama in 1918 and are often called Hirayama families in his honor.

About 30–35% of the bodies in the asteroid belt belong to dynamical families, each thought to have a common origin in a past collision between asteroids. A family has also been associated with the plutoid dwarf planet .

Some asteroids have unusual horseshoe orbits that are co-orbital with Earth or another planet. Examples are 3753 Cruithne and . The first instance of this type of orbital arrangement was discovered between Saturn&#x27;s moons Epimetheus and Janus. Sometimes these horseshoe objects temporarily become quasi-satellites for a few decades or a few hundred years, before returning to their earlier status. Both Earth and Venus are known to have quasi-satellites.

Such objects, if associated with Earth or Venus or even hypothetically Mercury, are a special class of Aten asteroids. However, such objects could be associated with the outer planets as well.

=== Spectral classification ===
In 1975, an asteroid taxonomic system based on color, albedo, and spectral shape was developed by Chapman, Morrison, and Zellner. These properties are thought to correspond to the composition of the asteroid&#x27;s surface material. The original classification system had three categories: C-types for dark carbonaceous objects (75% of known asteroids), S-types for stony (silicaceous) objects (17% of known asteroids) and U for those that did not fit into either C or S. This classification has since been expanded to include many other asteroid types. The number of types continues to grow as more asteroids are studied.

The two most widely used taxonomies now used are the Tholen classification and SMASS classification. The former was proposed in 1984 by David J. Tholen, and was based on data collected from an eight-color asteroid survey performed in the 1980s. This resulted in 14 asteroid categories. In 2002, the Small Main-Belt Asteroid Spectroscopic Survey resulted in a modified version of the Tholen taxonomy with 24 different types. Both systems have three broad categories of C, S, and X asteroids, where X consists of mostly metallic asteroids, such as the M-type. There are also several smaller classes.

The proportion of known asteroids falling into the various spectral types does not necessarily reflect the proportion of all asteroids that are of that type; some types are easier to detect than others, biasing the totals.

==== Problems ====
Originally, spectral designations were based on inferences of an asteroid&#x27;s composition. However, the correspondence between spectral class and composition is not always very good, and a variety of classifications are in use. This has led to significant confusion. Although asteroids of different spectral classifications are likely to be composed of different materials, there are no assurances that asteroids within the same taxonomic class are composed of the same (or similar) materials.

=== Active asteroids ===
Active asteroids are objects that have asteroid-like orbits but show comet-like visual characteristics. That is, they show comae, tails, or other visual evidence of mass-loss (like a comet), but their orbit remains within Jupiter&#x27;s orbit (like an asteroid). These bodies were originally designated main-belt comets (MBCs) in 2006 by astronomers David Jewitt and Henry Hsieh, but this name implies they are necessarily icy in composition like a comet and that they only exist within the main-belt, whereas the growing population of active asteroids shows that this is not always the case.

The first active asteroid discovered is 7968 Elst–Pizarro. It was discovered (as an asteroid) in 1979 but then was found to have a tail by Eric Elst and Guido Pizarro in 1996 and given the cometary designation 133P/Elst-Pizarro. Another notable object is 311P/PanSTARRS: observations made by the Hubble Space Telescope revealed that it had six comet-like tails. The tails are suspected to be streams of material ejected by the asteroid as a result of a rubble pile asteroid spinning fast enough to remove material from it.

By smashing into the asteroid Dimorphos, NASA&#x27;s Double Asteroid Redirection Test spacecraft made it an active asteroid. Scientists had proposed that some active asteroids are the result of impact events, but no one had ever observed the activation of an asteroid. The DART mission activated Dimorphos under precisely known and carefully observed impact conditions, enabling the detailed study of the formation of an active asteroid for the first time. Observations show that Dimorphos lost approximately 1 million kilograms after the collision. Impact produced a dust plume that temporarily brightened the Didymos system and developed a -long dust tail that persisted for several months.

== Observation and exploration ==
Until the age of space travel, objects in the asteroid belt could only be observed with large telescopes, their shapes and terrain remaining a mystery. The best modern ground-based telescopes and the Earth-orbiting Hubble Space Telescope can only resolve a small amount of detail on the surfaces of the largest asteroids. Limited information about the shapes and compositions of asteroids can be inferred from their light curves (variation in brightness during rotation) and their spectral properties. Sizes can be estimated by timing the lengths of star occultations (when an asteroid passes directly in front of a star). Radar imaging can yield good information about asteroid shapes and orbital and rotational parameters, especially for near-Earth asteroids. Spacecraft flybys can provide much more data than any ground or space-based observations; sample-return missions gives insights about regolith composition.

=== Ground-based observations ===

As asteroids are rather small and faint objects, the data that can be obtained from ground-based observations (GBO) are limited. By means of ground-based optical telescopes the visual magnitude can be obtained; when converted into the absolute magnitude it gives a rough estimate of the asteroid&#x27;s size. Light-curve measurements can also be made by GBO; when collected over a long period of time it allows an estimate of the rotational period, the pole orientation (sometimes), and a rough estimate of the asteroid&#x27;s shape. Spectral data (both visible-light and near-infrared spectroscopy) gives information about the object&#x27;s composition, used to classify the observed asteroids. Such observations are limited as they provide information about only the thin layer on the surface (up to several micrometers). As planetologist Patrick Michel writes:

Mid- to thermal-infrared observations, along with polarimetry measurements, are probably the only data that give some indication of actual physical properties. Measuring the heat flux of an asteroid at a single wavelength gives an estimate of the dimensions of the object; these measurements have lower uncertainty than measurements of the reflected sunlight in the visible-light spectral region. If the two measurements can be combined, both the effective diameter and the geometric albedo—the latter being a measure of the brightness at zero phase angle, that is, when illumination comes from directly behind the observer—can be derived. In addition, thermal measurements at two or more wavelengths, plus the brightness in the visible-light region, give information on the thermal properties. The thermal inertia, which is a measure of how fast a material heats up or cools off, of most observed asteroids is lower than the bare-rock reference value but greater than that of the lunar regolith; this observation indicates the presence of an insulating layer of granular material on their surface. Moreover, there seems to be a trend, perhaps related to the gravitational environment, that smaller objects (with lower gravity) have a small regolith layer consisting of coarse grains, while larger objects have a thicker regolith layer consisting of fine grains. However, the detailed properties of this regolith layer are poorly known from remote observations. Moreover, the relation between thermal inertia and surface roughness is not straightforward, so one needs to interpret the thermal inertia with caution.

Near-Earth asteroids that come into close vicinity of the planet can be studied in more details with radar; it provides information about the surface of the asteroid (for example can show the presence of craters and boulders). Such observations were conducted by the Arecibo Observatory in Puerto Rico (305 meter dish) and Goldstone Observatory in California (70 meter dish). Radar observations can also be used for accurate determination of the orbital and rotational dynamics of observed objects.

=== Space-based observations ===
Both space and ground-based observatories conducted asteroid search programs; the space-based searches are expected to detect more objects because there is no atmosphere to interfere and because they can observe larger portions of the sky. NEOWISE observed more than 100,000 asteroids of the main belt, Spitzer Space Telescope observed more than 700 near-Earth asteroids. These observations determined rough sizes of the majority of observed objects, but provided limited detail about surface properties (such as regolith depth and composition, angle of repose, cohesion, and porosity).

Asteroids were also studied by the Hubble Space Telescope, such as tracking the colliding asteroids in the main belt, break-up of an asteroid, observing an active asteroid with six comet-like tails, and observing asteroids that were chosen as targets of dedicated missions.

=== Space probe missions ===
According to Patrick Michel

The internal structure of asteroids is inferred only from indirect evidence: bulk densities measured by spacecraft, the orbits of natural satellites in the case of asteroid binaries, and the drift of an asteroid&#x27;s orbit due to the Yarkovsky thermal effect. A spacecraft near an asteroid is perturbed enough by the asteroid&#x27;s gravity to allow an estimate of the asteroid&#x27;s mass. The volume is then estimated using a model of the asteroid&#x27;s shape. Mass and volume allow the derivation of the bulk density, whose uncertainty is usually dominated by the errors made on the volume estimate. The internal porosity of asteroids can be inferred by comparing their bulk density with that of their assumed meteorite analogues, dark asteroids seem to be more porous (&gt;40%) than bright ones. The nature of this porosity is unclear.

==== Dedicated missions ====
The first asteroid to be photographed in close-up was 951 Gaspra in 1991, followed in 1993 by 243 Ida and its moon Dactyl, all of which were imaged by the &quot;Galileo&quot; probe en route to Jupiter. Other asteroids briefly visited by spacecraft en route to other destinations include 9969 Braille (by &quot;Deep Space 1&quot; in 1999), 5535 Annefrank (by &quot;Stardust&quot; in 2002), 2867 Šteins and 21 Lutetia (by the &quot;Rosetta&quot; probe in 2008), and 4179 Toutatis (China&#x27;s lunar orbiter &quot;Chang&#x27;e 2&quot;, which flew within in 2012).

The first dedicated asteroid probe was NASA&#x27;s &quot;NEAR Shoemaker&quot;, which photographed 253 Mathilde in 1997, before entering into orbit around 433 Eros, finally landing on its surface in 2001. It was the first spacecraft to successfully orbit and land on an asteroid. From September to November 2005, the Japanese &quot;Hayabusa&quot; probe studied 25143 Itokawa in detail and returned samples of its surface to Earth on 13 June 2010, the first asteroid sample-return mission. In 2007, NASA launched the &quot;Dawn&quot; spacecraft, which orbited 4 Vesta for a year, and observed the dwarf planet Ceres for three years.

&quot;Hayabusa2&quot;, a probe launched by JAXA 2014, orbited its target asteroid 162173 Ryugu for more than a year and took samples that were delivered to Earth in 2020. The spacecraft is now on an extended mission and expected to arrive at a new target in 2031.

NASA launched the OSIRIS-REx in 2016, a sample return mission to asteroid 101955 Bennu. In 2021, the probe departed the asteroid with a sample from its surface. Sample was delivered to Earth in September 2023. The spacecraft continues its extended mission, designated OSIRIS-APEX, to explore near-Earth asteroid Apophis in 2029.

In 2021, NASA launched Double Asteroid Redirection Test (DART), a mission to test technology for defending Earth against potential hazardous objects. DART deliberately crashed into the minor-planet moon Dimorphos of the double asteroid Didymos in September 2022 to assess the potential of a spacecraft impact to deflect an asteroid from a collision course with Earth. In October, NASA declared DART a success, confirming it had shortened Dimorphos&#x27; orbital period around Didymos by about 32 minutes.

NASA&#x27;s &quot;Lucy&quot;, launched in 2021, is a multiple-asteroid flyby probe focused on flying by 7 Jupiter trojans of varying types. While not yet set to reach its first main target, 3548 Eurybates, until 2027, it has made a flyby of main-belt asteroid 152830 Dinkinesh and is set to flyby another asteroid 52246 Donaldjohanson in 2025.

==== Planned missions ====
* NASA&#x27;s &quot;Psyche&quot;, launched in October 2023, is intended to study the large metallic asteroid of the same name, and is on track to arrive there in 2029.
* ESA&#x27;s &quot;Hera&quot;, launched in October 2024, is intended study the results of the DART impact. It is expected to measure the size and morphology of the crater, and momentum transmitted by the impact, to determine the efficiency of the deflection produced by DART.
* JAXA&#x27;s DESTINY+ is a mission for a flyby of the Geminids meteor shower parent body 3200 Phaethon, as well as various minor bodies. Its launch is planned for 2024.
* CNSA&#x27;s &quot;Tianwen-2&quot; is planned to launch in 2025. If all goes as planned, it will use solar electric propulsion to explore the co-orbital near-Earth asteroid 469219 Kamoʻoalewa and the active asteroid 311P/PanSTARRS. The spacecraft is tasked with collecting samples of the regolith of Kamo&#x27;oalewa.

== Asteroid mining ==

The concept of asteroid mining was proposed in 1970s. Matt Anderson defines successful asteroid mining as &quot;the development of a mining program that is both financially self-sustaining and profitable to its investors&quot;. It has been suggested that asteroids might be used as a source of materials that may be rare or exhausted on Earth, or materials for constructing space habitats. Materials that are heavy and expensive to launch from Earth may someday be mined from asteroids and used for space manufacturing and construction.

As resource depletion on Earth becomes more real, the idea of extracting valuable elements from asteroids and returning these to Earth for profit, or using space-based resources to build solar-power satellites and space habitats, becomes more attractive. Hypothetically, water processed from ice could refuel orbiting propellant depots.

From the astrobiological perspective, asteroid prospecting could provide scientific data for the search for extraterrestrial intelligence (SETI). Some astrophysicists have suggested that if advanced extraterrestrial civilizations employed asteroid mining long ago, the hallmarks of these activities might be detectable.

== Threats to Earth ==


There is increasing interest in identifying asteroids whose orbits cross Earth&#x27;s, and that could, given enough time, collide with Earth. The three most important groups of near-Earth asteroids are the Apollos, Amors, and Atens.

The near-Earth asteroid 433 Eros had been discovered as long ago as 1898, and the 1930s brought a flurry of similar objects. In order of discovery, these were: 1221 Amor, 1862 Apollo, 2101 Adonis, and finally 69230 Hermes, which approached within 0.005 AU of Earth in 1937. Astronomers began to realize the possibilities of Earth impact.

Two events in later decades increased the alarm: the increasing acceptance of the Alvarez hypothesis that an impact event resulted in the Cretaceous–Paleogene extinction, and the 1994 observation of Comet Shoemaker-Levy 9 crashing into Jupiter. The U.S. military also declassified the information that its military satellites, built to detect nuclear explosions, had detected hundreds of upper-atmosphere impacts by objects ranging from one to ten meters across.

All of these considerations helped spur the launch of highly efficient surveys, consisting of charge-coupled device (CCD) cameras and computers directly connected to telescopes. , it was estimated that 89% to 96% of near-Earth asteroids one kilometer or larger in diameter had been discovered. , the LINEAR system alone had discovered 147,132 asteroids. Among the surveys, 19,266 near-Earth asteroids have been discovered including almost 900 more than in diameter.

In June 2018, the National Science and Technology Council warned that the United States is unprepared for an asteroid impact event, and has developed and released the &quot;National Near-Earth Object Preparedness Strategy Action Plan&quot; to better prepare. According to expert testimony in the United States Congress in 2013, NASA would require at least five years of preparation before a mission to intercept an asteroid could be launched.

=== Asteroid deflection strategies ===
Various collision avoidance techniques have different trade-offs with respect to metrics such as overall performance, cost, failure risks, operations, and technology readiness. There are various methods for changing the course of an asteroid/comet. These can be differentiated by various types of attributes such as the type of mitigation (deflection or fragmentation), energy source (kinetic, electromagnetic, gravitational, solar/thermal, or nuclear), and approach strategy (interception, rendezvous, or remote station).

Strategies fall into two basic sets: fragmentation and delay. Fragmentation concentrates on rendering the impactor harmless by fragmenting it and scattering the fragments so that they miss the Earth or are small enough to burn up in the atmosphere. Delay exploits the fact that both the Earth and the impactor are in orbit. An impact occurs when both reach the same point in space at the same time, or more correctly when some point on Earth&#x27;s surface intersects the impactor&#x27;s orbit when the impactor arrives. Since the Earth is approximately 12,750 km in diameter and moves at approx. 30 km per second in its orbit, it travels a distance of one planetary diameter in about 425 seconds, or slightly over seven minutes. Delaying, or advancing the impactor&#x27;s arrival by times of this magnitude can, depending on the exact geometry of the impact, cause it to miss the Earth.

&quot;Project Icarus&quot; was one of the first projects designed in 1967 as a contingency plan in case of collision with 1566 Icarus. The plan relied on the new Saturn V rocket, which did not make its first flight until after the report had been completed. Six Saturn V rockets would be used, each launched at variable intervals from months to hours away from impact. Each rocket was to be fitted with a single 100-megaton nuclear warhead as well as a modified Apollo Service Module and uncrewed Apollo Command Module for guidance to the target. The warheads would be detonated 30 meters from the surface, deflecting or partially destroying the asteroid. Depending on the subsequent impacts on the course or the destruction of the asteroid, later missions would be modified or cancelled as needed. The &quot;last-ditch&quot; launch of the sixth rocket would be 18 hours prior to impact.

== Fiction ==
Asteroids and the asteroid belt are a staple of science fiction stories. Asteroids play several potential roles in science fiction: as places human beings might colonize, resources for extracting minerals, hazards encountered by spacecraft traveling between two other points, and as a threat to life on Earth or other inhabited planets, dwarf planets, and natural satellites by potential impact.

== See also ==
* Exoasteroid
* List of minor planets
* List of exceptional asteroids
* List of asteroid close approaches to Earth
* Lost minor planet
* Meanings of minor-planet names

== Notes ==
== References ==
== Further reading ==
* 
* 
* 
* 

== External links ==
* 
* 
* NASA Asteroid and Comet Watch site</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3863" start="3" end="11" title="Asteroid" label="asteroid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1022867" start="17" end="29" title="minor planet" label="minor planet"/>
<link wikidata="Q7012" start="54" end="63" title="meteoroid" label="meteoroid"/>
<link wikidata="Q634" start="82" end="88" title="planet" label="planet"/>
<link wikidata="Q3559" start="107" end="112" title="comet" label="comet"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="136" end="154" title="Solar System#Inner Solar System" label="inner Solar System"/>
<link wikidata="Q19635" start="186" end="201" title="Trojan asteroid" label="Trojan asteroid"/>
<link wikidata="Q729623" start="302" end="308" title="C-type asteroid" label="C-type"/>
<link wikidata="Q623" start="310" end="316" title="carbon" label="carbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q847310" start="325" end="331" title="M-type asteroid" label="M-type"/>
<link wikidata="Q11426" start="333" end="338" title="metal" label="metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q543157" start="347" end="353" title="S-type asteroid" label="S-type"/>
<link wikidata="Q116269" start="355" end="361" title="silica" label="silica"/>
<link wikidata="Q596" start="481" end="486" title="Ceres (dwarf planet)" label="Ceres"/>
<link wikidata="Q2199" start="490" end="502" title="dwarf planet" label="dwarf planet"/>
<link wikidata="Q111" start="818" end="822" title="Mars" label="Mars"/>
<link wikidata="Q319" start="827" end="834" title="Jupiter" label="Jupiter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1811" start="857" end="859" title="astronomical unit" label="AU"/>
<link wikidata="Q2179" start="904" end="917" title="asteroid belt" label="asteroid belt"/>
<link wikidata="Q405" start="983" end="1000" title="Moon" label="Earth&amp;#x27;s Moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q105425030" start="1317" end="1335" title="Galileo (spacecraft)" label="Galileo spacecraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q23548" start="1407" end="1411" title="NASA" label="NASA"/>
<link wikidata="Q179103" start="1416" end="1420" title="JAXA" label="JAXA"/>
<link wikidata="Q217188" start="1483" end="1497" title="NEAR Shoemaker" label="NEAR Shoemaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q16711" start="1512" end="1516" title="433 Eros" label="Eros"/>
<link wikidata="Q48558" start="1528" end="1532" title="Dawn (spacecraft)" label="Dawn"/>
<link wikidata="Q3030" start="1548" end="1553" title="4 Vesta" label="Vesta"/>
<link wikidata="Q596" start="1558" end="1563" title="1 Ceres" label="Ceres"/>
<link wikidata="Q275444" start="1592" end="1600" title="Hayabusa" label="Hayabusa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2113134" start="1617" end="1626" title="Hayabusa2" label="Hayabusa2"/>
<link wikidata="Q149374" start="1665" end="1672" title="25143 Itokawa" label="Itokawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1385178" start="1677" end="1682" title="162173 Ryugu" label="Ryugu"/>
<link wikidata="Q604428" start="1698" end="1708" title="OSIRIS-REx" label="OSIRIS-REx"/>
<link wikidata="Q11558" start="1717" end="1722" title="101955 Bennu" label="Bennu"/>
<link wikidata="Q21076293" start="1813" end="1817" title="Lucy (spacecraft)" label="Lucy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2179" start="1905" end="1914" title="Asteroid belt" label="main belt"/>
<link wikidata="Q8101032" start="1925" end="1939" title="Jupiter trojan" label="Jupiter trojan"/>
<link wikidata="Q21079313" start="1948" end="1954" title="Psyche (spacecraft)" label="Psyche"/>
<link wikidata="Q107517" start="2012" end="2027" title="16 Psyche" label="asteroid Psyche"/>
<link wikidata="Q55816" start="2155" end="2171" title="Chicxulub impact" label="Chicxulub impact"/>
<link wikidata="Q55811" start="2208" end="2244" title="Cretaceous–Paleogene extinction event" label="Cretaceous–Paleogene mass extinction"/>
<link wikidata="Q47482008" start="2306" end="2338" title="Double Asteroid Redirection Test" label="Double Asteroid Redirection Test"/>
<link wikidata="Q25387442" start="2413" end="2422" title="Dimorphos" label="Dimorphos"/>
<link wikidata="Q6867" start="2476" end="2508" title="International Astronomical Union" label="International Astronomical Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q193275" start="2561" end="2584" title="small Solar System bodies" label="small Solar System body"/>
<link wikidata="Q544" start="2614" end="2626" title="Solar System" label="Solar System"/>
<link wikidata="Q634" start="2645" end="2651" title="planet" label="planet"/>
<link wikidata="Q2199" start="2655" end="2667" title="dwarf planet" label="dwarf planet"/>
<link wikidata="Q2537" start="2675" end="2692" title="natural satellite" label="natural satellite"/>
<link wikidata="Q596" start="2964" end="2969" title="Ceres (dwarf planet)" label="Ceres"/>
<link wikidata="Q14277" start="3290" end="3306" title="William Herschel" label="William Herschel"/>
<link wikidata="Q3559" start="3774" end="3779" title="comet" label="comet"/>
<link wikidata="Q7012" start="3796" end="3805" title="meteoroid" label="meteoroid"/>
<link wikidata="Q778653" start="4202" end="4213" title="Outgassing" label="sublimation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1306723" start="4439" end="4452" title="Volatile (astrogeology)" label="volatile ices"/>
<link wikidata="Q2179" start="5019" end="5032" title="asteroid belt" label="asteroid belt"/>
<link wikidata="Q8101032" start="5034" end="5048" title="Jupiter trojan" label="Jupiter trojan"/>
<link wikidata="Q265392" start="5055" end="5072" title="near-Earth object" label="near-Earth object"/>
<link wikidata="Q596" start="5124" end="5129" title="Ceres (dwarf planet)" label="Ceres"/>
<link wikidata="Q158170" start="5241" end="5252" title="944 Hidalgo" label="944 Hidalgo"/>
<link wikidata="Q15611" start="5318" end="5329" title="2060 Chiron" label="2060 Chiron"/>
<link wikidata="Q10734" start="5429" end="5437" title="centaur (minor planet)" label="centaurs"/>
<link wikidata="Q140980" start="5448" end="5460" title="15760 Albion" label="15760 Albion"/>
<link wikidata="Q339" start="5534" end="5539" title="Pluto" label="Pluto"/>
<link wikidata="Q6592" start="5606" end="5628" title="trans-Neptunian object" label="trans-Neptunian object"/>
<link wikidata="Q427" start="5646" end="5665" title="Kuiper belt" label="Kuiper-belt objects"/>
<link wikidata="Q180380" start="5667" end="5688" title="scattered-disc object" label="scattered-disc object"/>
<link wikidata="Q40864" start="5717" end="5727" title="Oort cloud" label="Oort cloud"/>
<link wikidata="Q131800" start="6021" end="6030" title="Sublimation (phase transition)" label="sublimate"/>
<link wikidata="Q427" start="6095" end="6106" title="Kuiper belt" label="Kuiper-belt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1773534" start="6446" end="6458" title="Comet nucleus" label="comet nuclei"/>
<link wikidata="Q205747" start="6546" end="6566" title="Stardust (spacecraft)" label="&amp;quot;Stardust&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q2199" start="6784" end="6796" title="dwarf planet" label="dwarf planet"/>
<link wikidata="Q596" start="6980" end="6985" title="Ceres (dwarf planet)" label="Ceres"/>
<link wikidata="Q3030" start="7184" end="7191" title="4 Vesta" label="4 Vesta"/>
<link wikidata="Q101038" start="7216" end="7234" title="Albedo" label="reflective surface"/>
<link wikidata="Q522039" start="7414" end="7433" title="Minor Planet Center" label="Minor Planet Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q76966" start="7641" end="7658" title="Johann Elert Bode" label="Johann Elert Bode"/>
<link wikidata="Q375195" start="7667" end="7687" title="Johann Daniel Titius" label="Johann Daniel Titius"/>
<link wikidata="Q193698" start="7735" end="7750" title="Titius–Bode law" label="Titius–Bode law"/>
<link wikidata="Q1811" start="8749" end="8766" title="astronomical unit" label="astronomical unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q14277" start="8844" end="8860" title="William Herschel" label="William Herschel"/>
<link wikidata="Q324" start="8881" end="8887" title="Uranus" label="Uranus"/>
<link wikidata="Q193" start="8936" end="8942" title="Saturn" label="Saturn"/>
<link wikidata="Q60662" start="8971" end="8991" title="Franz Xaver von Zach" label="Franz Xaver von Zach"/>
<link wikidata="Q1389100" start="9168" end="9184" title="celestial police" label="celestial police"/>
<link wikidata="Q3002" start="9356" end="9364" title="2 Pallas" label="2 Pallas"/>
<link wikidata="Q3009" start="9366" end="9372" title="3 Juno" label="3 Juno"/>
<link wikidata="Q3030" start="9377" end="9384" title="4 Vesta" label="4 Vesta"/>
<link wikidata="Q14280" start="9438" end="9453" title="Giuseppe Piazzi" label="Giuseppe Piazzi"/>
<link wikidata="Q42603" start="9466" end="9472" title="priest" label="priest"/>
<link wikidata="Q202703" start="9687" end="9699" title="Nicolas Louis de Lacaille" label="Mr la Caille"/>
<link wikidata="Q319" start="9913" end="9920" title="Jupiter" label="Jupiter"/>
<link wikidata="Q124313" start="9992" end="10001" title="Apparent magnitude" label="magnitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q708082" start="10572" end="10586" title="Barnaba Oriani" label="Barnaba Oriani"/>
<link wikidata="Q168419" start="10879" end="10893" title="Jérôme Lalande" label="Jérôme Lalande"/>
<link wikidata="Q6722" start="11384" end="11404" title="Carl Friedrich Gauss" label="Carl Friedrich Gauss"/>
<link wikidata="Q11860323" start="11438" end="11454" title="Gauss&amp;#x27;s method" label="efficient method"/>
<link wikidata="Q302660" start="11458" end="11477" title="orbit determination" label="orbit determination"/>
<link wikidata="Q75828" start="11621" end="11642" title="Heinrich Wilhelm Matthäus Olbers" label="Heinrich W. M. Olbers"/>
<link wikidata="Q32102" start="12028" end="12052" title="Ceres (Roman mythology)" label="patron goddess of Sicily"/>
<link wikidata="Q312325" start="12060" end="12085" title="Ferdinand I of the Two Sicilies" label="King Ferdinand of Bourbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3002" start="12138" end="12146" title="2 Pallas" label="2 Pallas"/>
<link wikidata="Q3009" start="12148" end="12154" title="3 Juno" label="3 Juno"/>
<link wikidata="Q3030" start="12160" end="12167" title="4 Vesta" label="4 Vesta"/>
<link wikidata="Q77055" start="12325" end="12343" title="Karl Ludwig Hencke" label="Karl Ludwig Hencke"/>
<link wikidata="Q105328" start="12475" end="12484" title="5 Astraea" label="5 Astraea"/>
<link wikidata="Q6722" start="12539" end="12559" title="Carl Friedrich Gauss" label="Carl Friedrich Gauss"/>
<link wikidata="Q311220" start="12700" end="12718" title="James Craig Watson" label="James Craig Watson"/>
<link wikidata="Q188771" start="12754" end="12780" title="French Academy of Sciences" label="French Academy of Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q77050" start="12803" end="12829" title="Karl Theodor Robert Luther" label="Karl Theodor Robert Luther"/>
<link wikidata="Q310479" start="12831" end="12848" title="John Russell Hind" label="John Russell Hind"/>
<link wikidata="Q77022" start="12854" end="12873" title="Hermann Mayer Salomon Goldschmidt" label="Hermann Goldschmidt"/>
<link wikidata="Q76712" start="12990" end="12998" title="Maximilian Franz Joseph Cornelius Wolf" label="Max Wolf"/>
<link wikidata="Q280855" start="13020" end="13036" title="astrophotography" label="astrophotography"/>
<link wikidata="Q151093" start="13268" end="13278" title="323 Brucia" label="323 Brucia"/>
<link wikidata="Q156941" start="13525" end="13537" title="Eduard Suess" label="Eduard Suess"/>
<link wikidata="Q78850" start="13542" end="13554" title="Edmund Weiss" label="Edmund Weiss"/>
<link wikidata="Q280855" start="13772" end="13784" title="Astrophotography" label="photographed"/>
<link wikidata="Q4213" start="13801" end="13810" title="telescope" label="telescope"/>
<link wikidata="Q751474" start="13814" end="13824" title="astrograph" label="astrograph"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138868" start="13963" end="13969" title="photographic plate" label="plates"/>
<link wikidata="Q11723296" start="14009" end="14020" title="stereoscope" label="stereoscope"/>
<link wikidata="Q1645659" start="14503" end="14526" title="provisional designation in astronomy" label="provisional designation"/>
<link wikidata="Q522039" start="14781" end="14800" title="Minor Planet Center" label="Minor Planet Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q6867" start="15126" end="15158" title="International Astronomical Union" label="International Astronomical Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q753299" start="15188" end="15214" title="Royal Astronomical Society" label="Royal Astronomical Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q110709" start="15363" end="15374" title="Annibale de Gasparis" label="de Gasparis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351828" start="15410" end="15423" title="Benjamin Valz" label="Benjamin Valz"/>
<link wikidata="Q107524" start="15501" end="15512" title="20 Massalia" label="20 Massalia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1645659" start="16223" end="16246" title="Provisional designation in astronomy" label="provisional designation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5641618" start="16334" end="16344" title="half-month" label="half-month"/>
<link wikidata="Q107528" start="17195" end="17202" title="15 Eunomia" label="Eunomia"/>
<link wikidata="Q57294" start="17225" end="17243" title="Johann Franz Encke" label="Johann Franz Encke"/>
<link wikidata="Q127042" start="17306" end="17338" title="Berliner Astronomisches Jahrbuch" label="Berliner Astronomisches Jahrbuch"/>
<link wikidata="Q107517" start="17688" end="17697" title="16 Psyche" label="16 Psyche"/>
<link wikidata="Q107524" start="17899" end="17910" title="20 Massalia" label="20 Massalia"/>
<link wikidata="Q206982" start="18037" end="18045" title="37 Fides" label="37 Fides"/>
<link wikidata="Q389824" start="18110" end="18122" title="planetesimal" label="planetesimal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3535" start="18160" end="18172" title="solar nebula" label="solar nebula"/>
<link wikidata="Q634" start="18212" end="18218" title="planet" label="planet"/>
<link wikidata="Q271561" start="18403" end="18420" title="orbital resonance" label="orbital resonance"/>
<link wikidata="Q419978" start="18612" end="18620" title="Accretion (astrophysics)" label="accreted"/>
<link wikidata="Q910022" start="18800" end="18813" title="Planetary differentiation" label="differentiate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1120" start="18910" end="18920" title="Nice model" label="Nice model"/>
<link wikidata="Q427" start="18927" end="18946" title="Kuiper belt" label="Kuiper-belt objects"/>
<link wikidata="Q1814074" start="19093" end="19108" title="D-type asteroid" label="D-type asteroid"/>
<link wikidata="Q139771" start="19369" end="19385" title="Yarkovsky effect" label="Yarkovsky effect"/>
<link wikidata="Q111" start="19529" end="19533" title="Mars" label="Mars"/>
<link wikidata="Q319" start="19538" end="19545" title="Jupiter" label="Jupiter"/>
<link wikidata="Q208474" start="19575" end="19587" title="orbital eccentricity" label="eccentricity"/>
<link wikidata="Q505781" start="19788" end="19807" title="protoplanetary disk" label="protoplanetary disk"/>
<link wikidata="Q419978" start="19832" end="19841" title="accretion (astrophysics)" label="accretion"/>
<link wikidata="Q389824" start="19845" end="19857" title="planetesimal" label="planetesimal"/>
<link wikidata="Q319" start="19974" end="19981" title="Jupiter" label="Jupiter"/>
<link wikidata="Q159653" start="20540" end="20558" title="absolute magnitude" label="absolute magnitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q190463" start="21128" end="21144" title="Lagrangian point" label="Lagrangian point"/>
<link wikidata="Q8101032" start="21268" end="21284" title="Jupiter trojan" label="orbit of Jupiter"/>
<link wikidata="Q2357068" start="21312" end="21322" title="Greek camp" label="Greek camp"/>
<link wikidata="Q2357148" start="21353" end="21364" title="Trojan camp" label="Trojan camp"/>
<link wikidata="Q1902545" start="21559" end="21570" title="Mars trojan" label="Mars trojan"/>
<link wikidata="Q336004" start="21576" end="21590" title="Neptune trojan" label="Neptune trojan"/>
<link wikidata="Q12014479" start="21597" end="21610" title="Uranus trojan" label="Uranus trojan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2658049" start="21621" end="21633" title="Earth trojan" label="Earth trojan"/>
<link wikidata="Q15194836" start="21673" end="21685" title="2013 ND15" label="Venus trojan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1765388" start="22179" end="22193" title="extinct comets" label="extinct comets"/>
<link wikidata="Q319" start="22516" end="22523" title="Jupiter" label="Jupiter"/>
<link wikidata="Q2537" start="22546" end="22563" title="natural satellite" label="natural satellite"/>
<link wikidata="Q657829" start="22566" end="22583" title="minor-planet moon" label="minor-planet moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q150892" start="22695" end="22708" title="3122 Florence" label="3122 Florence"/>
<link wikidata="Q21143897" start="22965" end="22980" title="semi-major axis" label="semi-major axis"/>
<link wikidata="Q83481" start="22986" end="22996" title="Apsis" label="perihelion"/>
<link wikidata="Q83481" start="23015" end="23023" title="Apsis" label="aphelion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1347759" start="23050" end="23056" title="Atira asteroid" label="Atiras"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048390" start="23349" end="23354" title="Aten asteroid" label="Atens"/>
<link wikidata="Q207391" start="23514" end="23521" title="Apollo asteroid" label="Apollos"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048303" start="23679" end="23684" title="Amor asteroid" label="Amors"/>
<link wikidata="Q729623" start="24256" end="24271" title="C-type asteroid" label="C-type asteroid"/>
<link wikidata="Q133139" start="24279" end="24286" title="electromagnetic spectrum" label="spectra"/>
<link wikidata="Q101038" start="24288" end="24294" title="albedo" label="albedo"/>
<link wikidata="Q29539" start="24300" end="24307" title="density" label="density"/>
<link wikidata="Q2179" start="24434" end="24453" title="main-belt asteroids" label="main-belt asteroids"/>
<link wikidata="Q187646" start="24532" end="24548" title="equatorial plane" label="equatorial plane"/>
<link wikidata="Q223325" start="24766" end="24777" title="tidal force" label="tidal force"/>
<link wikidata="Q918443" start="25018" end="25036" title="Geoffrey A. Landis" label="Geoffrey A. Landis"/>
<link wikidata="Q947662" start="25117" end="25132" title="binary asteroid" label="binary asteroid"/>
<link wikidata="Q419978" start="25230" end="25239" title="Accretion (astrophysics)" label="coalesced"/>
<link wikidata="Q389824" start="25497" end="25509" title="planetesimal" label="planetesimal"/>
<link wikidata="Q11388" start="25739" end="25755" title="thermal infrared" label="thermal infrared"/>
<link wikidata="Q178977" start="25796" end="25811" title="phyllosilicates" label="phyllosilicates"/>
<link wikidata="Q48361" start="25914" end="25923" title="chondrite" label="chondrite"/>
<link wikidata="Q723219" start="26125" end="26142" title="Giant impact hypothesis" label="prevailing theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q7012" start="26366" end="26375" title="meteoroid" label="meteoroid"/>
<link wikidata="Q849009" start="26540" end="26551" title="protoplanet" label="protoplanet"/>
<link wikidata="Q389824" start="26666" end="26678" title="planetesimal" label="planetesimal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2199" start="26716" end="26728" title="dwarf planet" label="dwarf planet"/>
<link wikidata="Q596" start="26729" end="26734" title="Ceres (dwarf planet)" label="Ceres"/>
<link wikidata="Q3030" start="26809" end="26816" title="4 Vesta" label="4 Vesta"/>
<link wikidata="Q3002" start="26821" end="26829" title="2 Pallas" label="2 Pallas"/>
<link wikidata="Q118931" start="27073" end="27086" title="99942 Apophis" label="99942 Apophis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2179" start="27124" end="27137" title="asteroid belt" label="asteroid belt"/>
<link wikidata="Q111" start="27167" end="27171" title="Mars" label="Mars"/>
<link wikidata="Q319" start="27176" end="27183" title="Jupiter" label="Jupiter"/>
<link wikidata="Q596" start="27248" end="27253" title="Ceres (dwarf planet)" label="Ceres"/>
<link wikidata="Q3030" start="27337" end="27342" title="4 Vesta" label="Vesta"/>
<link wikidata="Q3002" start="27350" end="27356" title="2 Pallas" label="Pallas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2640" start="27369" end="27375" title="10 Hygiea" label="Hygiea"/>
<link wikidata="Q428971" start="27694" end="27703" title="power law" label="power law"/>
<link wikidata="Q596" start="28168" end="28173" title="Ceres (dwarf planet)" label="Ceres"/>
<link wikidata="Q3030" start="28175" end="28180" title="4 Vesta" label="Vesta"/>
<link wikidata="Q3002" start="28186" end="28192" title="2 Pallas" label="Pallas"/>
<link wikidata="Q849009" start="28205" end="28216" title="protoplanet" label="protoplanet"/>
<link wikidata="Q2640" start="28373" end="28379" title="10 Hygiea" label="Hygiea"/>
<link wikidata="Q472074" start="28614" end="28621" title="Plasticity (physics)" label="plastic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2199" start="28683" end="28695" title="dwarf planet" label="dwarf planet"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="28718" end="28736" title="Absolute magnitude#Solar System bodies (H)" label="absolute magnitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q590180" start="29042" end="29052" title="Frost line (astrophysics)" label="frost line"/>
<link wikidata="Q2631008" start="29205" end="29215" title="Rheasilvia" label="Rheasilvia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1814081" start="29286" end="29300" title="Vestian family" label="Vestian family"/>
<link wikidata="Q1400344" start="29311" end="29326" title="V-type asteroid" label="V-type asteroid"/>
<link wikidata="Q536491" start="29354" end="29367" title="HED meteorite" label="HED meteorite"/>
<link wikidata="Q324" start="29451" end="29457" title="Uranus" label="Uranus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2301543" start="29697" end="29713" title="Palladian family" label="Palladian family"/>
<link wikidata="Q79852" start="29843" end="29864" title="plane of the ecliptic" label="plane of the ecliptic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2575513" start="29923" end="29937" title="Hygiean family" label="Hygiean family"/>
<link wikidata="Q265628" start="30266" end="30286" title="Very Large Telescope" label="Very Large Telescope"/>
<link wikidata="Q25052403" start="30294" end="30300" title="VLT-SPHERE" label="SPHERE"/>
<link wikidata="Q208641" start="30419" end="30442" title="hydrostatic equilibrium" label="hydrostatic equilibrium"/>
<link wikidata="Q2537" start="30614" end="30631" title="natural satellite" label="natural satellite"/>
<link wikidata="Q462326" start="30739" end="30750" title="rubble pile" label="rubble pile"/>
<link wikidata="Q462326" start="31316" end="31327" title="rubble pile" label="rubble pile"/>
<link wikidata="Q1570174" start="31473" end="31489" title="space weathering" label="space weathering"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="31728" end="31736" title="List of exceptional asteroids#Largest by mass" label="big four"/>
<link wikidata="Q149417" start="31860" end="31872" title="253 Mathilde" label="253 Mathilde"/>
<link wikidata="Q155017" start="31996" end="32006" title="511 Davida" label="511 Davida"/>
<link wikidata="Q149012" start="32195" end="32202" title="243 Ida" label="243 Ida"/>
<link wikidata="Q106551" start="32257" end="32265" title="regolith" label="regolith"/>
<link wikidata="Q208395" start="32449" end="32457" title="spheroid" label="spheroid"/>
<link wikidata="Q48558" start="32466" end="32481" title="Dawn (spacecraft)" label="Dawn spacecraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q20717548" start="32759" end="32771" title="Kerwan (crater)" label="Kerwan Basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q910483" start="32819" end="32837" title="Viscoelasticity" label="viscous relaxation"/>
<link wikidata="Q216817" start="32959" end="32975" title="Emission spectrum" label="emission spectra"/>
<link wikidata="Q729623" start="33027" end="33033" title="C-type asteroid" label="C-type"/>
<link wikidata="Q847310" start="33035" end="33041" title="M-type asteroid" label="M-type"/>
<link wikidata="Q543157" start="33047" end="33053" title="S-type asteroid" label="S-type"/>
<link wikidata="Q623" start="33084" end="33095" title="Carbon" label="carbon-rich"/>
<link wikidata="Q11426" start="33098" end="33103" title="metal" label="metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q116269" start="33112" end="33118" title="silica" label="silica"/>
<link wikidata="Q903965" start="33343" end="33354" title="nickel-iron" label="nickel-iron"/>
<link wikidata="Q22693" start="33361" end="33368" title="olivine" label="olivine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2640" start="33450" end="33459" title="10 Hygiea" label="10 Hygiea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062169" start="33511" end="33533" title="carbonaceous chondrite" label="carbonaceous chondrite"/>
<link wikidata="Q657829" start="33898" end="33903" title="Asteroid moon" label="moons"/>
<link wikidata="Q947662" start="33923" end="33931" title="binary asteroid" label="binaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q249083" start="33978" end="33995" title="asteroid family" label="asteroid families"/>
<link wikidata="Q48999992" start="34088" end="34094" title="disrupted planet" label="planet"/>
<link wikidata="Q729623" start="34232" end="34238" title="C-type asteroid" label="C-type"/>
<link wikidata="Q2373252" start="34243" end="34249" title="P-type asteroid" label="P-type"/>
<link wikidata="Q543157" start="34368" end="34374" title="S-type asteroid" label="S-type"/>
<link wikidata="Q847310" start="34379" end="34385" title="M-type asteroid" label="M-type"/>
<link wikidata="Q101038" start="34711" end="34717" title="albedo" label="albedo"/>
<link wikidata="Q137019" start="35077" end="35089" title="121 Hermione" label="121 Hermione"/>
<link wikidata="Q107673" start="35112" end="35121" title="87 Sylvia" label="87 Sylvia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="35158" end="35179" title="List of notable asteroids#Largest by diameter" label="larger than 87 Sylvia"/>
<link wikidata="Q405" start="35777" end="35781" title="Moon" label="Moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q23392" start="35808" end="35817" title="ice" label="water ice"/>
<link wikidata="Q108361" start="35850" end="35859" title="24 Themis" label="24 Themis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1662664" start="35878" end="35905" title="Infrared Telescope Facility" label="Infrared Telescope Facility"/>
<link wikidata="Q131800" start="35991" end="36002" title="Sublimation (phase transition)" label="sublimating"/>
<link wikidata="Q5871" start="36304" end="36315" title="white dwarf" label="white dwarf"/>
<link wikidata="Q5872807" start="36316" end="36321" title="GD 61" label="GD 61"/>
<link wikidata="Q42262" start="36343" end="36364" title="European Space Agency" label="European Space Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q190120" start="36440" end="36451" title="water vapor" label="water vapor"/>
<link wikidata="Q596" start="36455" end="36460" title="Ceres (dwarf planet)" label="Ceres"/>
<link wikidata="Q5434481" start="36539" end="36561" title="Far-infrared astronomy" label="far-infrared abilities"/>
<link wikidata="Q209630" start="36569" end="36595" title="Herschel Space Observatory" label="Herschel Space Observatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q79833" start="36867" end="36877" title="solar wind" label="solar wind"/>
<link wikidata="Q8066" start="37491" end="37501" title="amino acid" label="amino acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q188458" start="37721" end="37731" title="panspermia" label="panspermia"/>
<link wikidata="Q23548" start="37775" end="37779" title="NASA" label="NASA"/>
<link wikidata="Q60186" start="37793" end="37802" title="meteorite" label="meteorite"/>
<link wikidata="Q2" start="37813" end="37818" title="Earth" label="Earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q7430" start="37845" end="37848" title="DNA" label="DNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q11053" start="37853" end="37856" title="RNA" label="RNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q15277" start="37869" end="37876" title="adenine" label="adenine"/>
<link wikidata="Q169313" start="37878" end="37885" title="guanine" label="guanine"/>
<link wikidata="Q174211" start="37898" end="37915" title="organic molecules" label="organic molecules"/>
<link wikidata="Q3559" start="37955" end="37960" title="comet" label="comet"/>
<link wikidata="Q4169" start="37965" end="37976" title="outer space" label="outer space"/>
<link wikidata="Q11002" start="38048" end="38063" title="Sugar" label="sugar molecules"/>
<link wikidata="Q59817493" start="38075" end="38081" title="ribose" label="ribose"/>
<link wikidata="Q60186" start="38086" end="38095" title="meteorite" label="meteorite"/>
<link wikidata="Q3" start="38216" end="38220" title="life" label="life"/>
<link wikidata="Q407525" start="38254" end="38263" title="RNA world" label="RNA world"/>
<link wikidata="Q231218" start="38285" end="38299" title="Abiogenesis" label="origin of life"/>
<link wikidata="Q188458" start="38347" end="38357" title="panspermia" label="panspermia"/>
<link wikidata="Q76299" start="38514" end="38522" title="visible spectrum" label="spectrum"/>
<link wikidata="Q8101032" start="39093" end="39107" title="Jupiter trojan" label="Jupiter trojan"/>
<link wikidata="Q11900" start="39154" end="39172" title="Kiyotsugu Hirayama" label="Kiyotsugu Hirayama"/>
<link wikidata="Q1309405" start="39202" end="39219" title="Hirayama families" label="Hirayama families"/>
<link wikidata="Q2199" start="39440" end="39452" title="dwarf planet" label="dwarf planet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1634050" start="39484" end="39499" title="horseshoe orbit" label="horseshoe orbit"/>
<link wikidata="Q2" start="39526" end="39531" title="Earth" label="Earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q152091" start="39564" end="39577" title="3753 Cruithne" label="3753 Cruithne"/>
<link wikidata="Q193" start="39662" end="39668" title="Saturn" label="Saturn"/>
<link wikidata="Q17751" start="39682" end="39692" title="Epimetheus (moon)" label="Epimetheus"/>
<link wikidata="Q17754" start="39697" end="39702" title="Janus (moon)" label="Janus"/>
<link wikidata="Q876712" start="39757" end="39772" title="quasi-satellite" label="quasi-satellite"/>
<link wikidata="Q313" start="39873" end="39878" title="Venus" label="Venus"/>
<link wikidata="Q308" start="39987" end="39994" title="Mercury (planet)" label="Mercury"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048390" start="40019" end="40032" title="Aten asteroid" label="Aten asteroid"/>
<link wikidata="Q7211" start="40163" end="40172" title="Taxonomy (general)" label="taxonomic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075" start="40189" end="40194" title="color" label="color"/>
<link wikidata="Q101038" start="40196" end="40202" title="albedo" label="albedo"/>
<link wikidata="Q212111" start="40208" end="40222" title="spectral line" label="spectral shape"/>
<link wikidata="Q795306" start="40240" end="40247" title="Clark R. Chapman" label="Chapman"/>
<link wikidata="Q5237750" start="40249" end="40257" title="David Morrison (astrophysicist)" label="Morrison"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="40263" end="40270" title="Ben Zellner" label="Zellner"/>
<link wikidata="Q729623" start="40432" end="40439" title="C-type asteroid" label="C-types"/>
<link wikidata="Q543157" start="40496" end="40503" title="S-type asteroid" label="S-types"/>
<link wikidata="Q1750705" start="40819" end="40840" title="Tholen classification" label="Tholen classification"/>
<link wikidata="Q1750705" start="40845" end="40865" title="SMASS classification" label="SMASS classification"/>
<link wikidata="Q1174839" start="40902" end="40917" title="David J. Tholen" label="David J. Tholen"/>
<link wikidata="Q847310" start="41316" end="41322" title="M-type asteroid" label="M-type"/>
<link wikidata="Q3559" start="42200" end="42205" title="comet" label="comet"/>
<link wikidata="Q259854" start="42254" end="42259" title="Coma (cometary)" label="comae"/>
<link wikidata="Q559875" start="42261" end="42266" title="comet tail" label="tails"/>
<link wikidata="Q319" start="42353" end="42360" title="Jupiter" label="Jupiter"/>
<link wikidata="Q382992" start="42481" end="42493" title="David Jewitt" label="David Jewitt"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="42498" end="42509" title="Henry Hsieh (astronomer)" label="Henry Hsieh"/>
<link wikidata="Q2179" start="42622" end="42631" title="asteroid belt" label="main-belt"/>
<link wikidata="Q834654" start="42765" end="42782" title="7968 Elst–Pizarro" label="7968 Elst–Pizarro"/>
<link wikidata="Q312755" start="42864" end="42873" title="Eric Walter Elst" label="Eric Elst"/>
<link wikidata="Q15138364" start="42980" end="42994" title="311P/PanSTARRS" label="311P/PanSTARRS"/>
<link wikidata="Q2513" start="43021" end="43043" title="Hubble Space Telescope" label="Hubble Space Telescope"/>
<link wikidata="Q462326" start="43178" end="43189" title="rubble pile" label="rubble pile"/>
<link wikidata="Q25387442" start="43279" end="43288" title="Dimorphos" label="Dimorphos"/>
<link wikidata="Q47482008" start="43302" end="43334" title="Double Asteroid Redirection Test" label="Double Asteroid Redirection Test"/>
<link wikidata="Q559875" start="43897" end="43906" title="comet tail" label="dust tail"/>
<link wikidata="Q2513" start="44192" end="44214" title="Hubble Space Telescope" label="Hubble Space Telescope"/>
<link wikidata="Q675076" start="44393" end="44404" title="light curve" label="light curve"/>
<link wikidata="Q47528" start="44600" end="44605" title="Radar" label="Radar"/>
<link wikidata="Q3369696" start="45772" end="45786" title="Patrick Michel" label="Patrick Michel"/>
<link wikidata="Q47528" start="47513" end="47518" title="radar" label="radar"/>
<link wikidata="Q102327045" start="47679" end="47698" title="Arecibo Observatory" label="Arecibo Observatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q618630" start="47735" end="47756" title="Goldstone Observatory" label="Goldstone Observatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q693552" start="48185" end="48192" title="NEOWISE" label="NEOWISE"/>
<link wikidata="Q201953" start="48248" end="48271" title="Spitzer Space Telescope" label="Spitzer Space Telescope"/>
<link wikidata="Q2513" start="48568" end="48590" title="Hubble Space Telescope" label="Hubble Space Telescope"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144996" start="48689" end="48704" title="active asteroid" label="active asteroid"/>
<link wikidata="Q3369696" start="48850" end="48864" title="Patrick Michel" label="Patrick Michel"/>
<link wikidata="Q158244" start="49793" end="49803" title="951 Gaspra" label="951 Gaspra"/>
<link wikidata="Q149012" start="49833" end="49840" title="243 Ida" label="243 Ida"/>
<link wikidata="Q149012" start="49854" end="49860" title="Dactyl (asteroid)" label="Dactyl"/>
<link wikidata="Q105425030" start="49894" end="49919" title="Galileo (spacecraft)" label="&amp;quot;Galileo&amp;quot; probe"/>
<link wikidata="Q319" start="49932" end="49939" title="Jupiter" label="Jupiter"/>
<link wikidata="Q158518" start="50026" end="50038" title="9969 Braille" label="9969 Braille"/>
<link wikidata="Q49502" start="50049" end="50061" title="Deep Space 1" label="Deep Space 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q155500" start="50078" end="50092" title="5535 Annefrank" label="5535 Annefrank"/>
<link wikidata="Q205747" start="50103" end="50111" title="Stardust (spacecraft)" label="Stardust"/>
<link wikidata="Q150249" start="50128" end="50139" title="2867 Šteins" label="2867 Šteins"/>
<link wikidata="Q107556" start="50144" end="50154" title="21 Lutetia" label="21 Lutetia"/>
<link wikidata="Q48572" start="50163" end="50188" title="Rosetta (spacecraft)" label="&amp;quot;Rosetta&amp;quot; probe"/>
<link wikidata="Q152907" start="50203" end="50216" title="4179 Toutatis" label="4179 Toutatis"/>
<link wikidata="Q831345" start="50251" end="50265" title="Chang&amp;#x27;e 2" label="Chang&amp;#x27;e 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q217188" start="50359" end="50373" title="NEAR Shoemaker" label="NEAR Shoemaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q149417" start="50400" end="50412" title="253 Mathilde" label="253 Mathilde"/>
<link wikidata="Q16711" start="50456" end="50464" title="433 Eros" label="433 Eros"/>
<link wikidata="Q275444" start="50633" end="50641" title="Hayabusa (spacecraft)" label="Hayabusa"/>
<link wikidata="Q149374" start="50662" end="50675" title="25143 Itokawa" label="25143 Itokawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1093833" start="50690" end="50706" title="Sample return mission" label="returned samples"/>
<link wikidata="Q23548" start="50799" end="50803" title="NASA" label="NASA"/>
<link wikidata="Q48558" start="50817" end="50833" title="Dawn (spacecraft)" label="&amp;quot;Dawn&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q3030" start="50860" end="50867" title="4 Vesta" label="4 Vesta"/>
<link wikidata="Q596" start="50910" end="50915" title="Ceres (dwarf planet)" label="Ceres"/>
<link wikidata="Q2113134" start="50940" end="50949" title="Hayabusa2" label="Hayabusa2"/>
<link wikidata="Q179103" start="50977" end="50981" title="JAXA" label="JAXA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1385178" start="51016" end="51028" title="162173 Ryugu" label="162173 Ryugu"/>
<link wikidata="Q604428" start="51217" end="51227" title="OSIRIS-REx" label="OSIRIS-REx"/>
<link wikidata="Q11558" start="51273" end="51285" title="101955 Bennu" label="101955 Bennu"/>
<link wikidata="Q47482008" start="51552" end="51584" title="Double Asteroid Redirection Test" label="Double Asteroid Redirection Test"/>
<link wikidata="Q657829" start="51714" end="51731" title="minor-planet moon" label="minor-planet moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q25387442" start="51732" end="51741" title="Dimorphos" label="Dimorphos"/>
<link wikidata="Q2265762" start="51765" end="51772" title="65803 Didymos" label="Didymos"/>
<link wikidata="Q21076293" start="52053" end="52057" title="Lucy (spacecraft)" label="Lucy"/>
<link wikidata="Q8101032" start="52141" end="52155" title="Jupiter trojan" label="Jupiter trojan"/>
<link wikidata="Q116663" start="52225" end="52239" title="3548 Eurybates" label="3548 Eurybates"/>
<link wikidata="Q63240864" start="52295" end="52311" title="152830 Dinkinesh" label="152830 Dinkinesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q15163754" start="52349" end="52369" title="52246 Donaldjohanson" label="52246 Donaldjohanson"/>
<link wikidata="Q21079313" start="52427" end="52433" title="Psyche (spacecraft)" label="Psyche"/>
<link wikidata="Q107517" start="52516" end="52532" title="16 Psyche" label="of the same name"/>
<link wikidata="Q60965184" start="52594" end="52598" title="Hera (space mission)" label="Hera"/>
<link wikidata="Q42266261" start="52865" end="52873" title="DESTINY+" label="DESTINY+"/>
<link wikidata="Q1237067" start="52906" end="52914" title="Geminids" label="Geminids"/>
<link wikidata="Q18944" start="52941" end="52954" title="3200 Phaethon" label="3200 Phaethon"/>
<link wikidata="Q65005927" start="53041" end="53050" title="Tianwen-2" label="Tianwen-2"/>
<link wikidata="Q25312612" start="53123" end="53148" title="solar electric propulsion" label="solar electric propulsion"/>
<link wikidata="Q61535146" start="53164" end="53174" title="co-orbital" label="co-orbital"/>
<link wikidata="Q24646251" start="53195" end="53213" title="469219 Kamoʻoalewa" label="469219 Kamoʻoalewa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144996" start="53222" end="53237" title="active asteroid" label="active asteroid"/>
<link wikidata="Q15138364" start="53238" end="53252" title="311P/PanSTARRS" label="311P/PanSTARRS"/>
<link wikidata="Q9328551" start="53738" end="53751" title="space habitat" label="space habitat"/>
<link wikidata="Q7572600" start="53863" end="53882" title="space manufacturing" label="space manufacturing"/>
<link wikidata="Q3737914" start="53905" end="53923" title="resource depletion" label="resource depletion"/>
<link wikidata="Q2" start="54031" end="54036" title="Earth" label="Earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1981843" start="54089" end="54111" title="Space-based solar power" label="solar-power satellites"/>
<link wikidata="Q9328551" start="54116" end="54130" title="space habitats" label="space habitats"/>
<link wikidata="Q3044952" start="54220" end="54236" title="propellant depot" label="propellant depot"/>
<link wikidata="Q411" start="54249" end="54264" title="astrobiology" label="astrobiological"/>
<link wikidata="Q484587" start="54379" end="54383" title="SETI" label="SETI"/>
<link wikidata="Q2" start="54659" end="54664" title="Earth" label="Earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q265392" start="54763" end="54782" title="near-Earth asteroid" label="near-Earth asteroid"/>
<link wikidata="Q207391" start="54792" end="54799" title="Apollo asteroid" label="Apollos"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048303" start="54801" end="54806" title="Amor asteroid" label="Amors"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048390" start="54812" end="54817" title="Aten asteroid" label="Atens"/>
<link wikidata="Q265392" start="54824" end="54834" title="near-Earth object" label="near-Earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q16711" start="54844" end="54852" title="433 Eros" label="433 Eros"/>
<link wikidata="Q137114" start="54980" end="54989" title="1221 Amor" label="1221 Amor"/>
<link wikidata="Q144927" start="54991" end="55002" title="1862 Apollo" label="1862 Apollo"/>
<link wikidata="Q147561" start="55004" end="55015" title="2101 Adonis" label="2101 Adonis"/>
<link wikidata="Q144505" start="55029" end="55041" title="69230 Hermes" label="69230 Hermes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1811" start="55073" end="55075" title="Astronomical unit" label="AU"/>
<link wikidata="Q2" start="55079" end="55084" title="Earth" label="Earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q683975" start="55241" end="55259" title="Alvarez hypothesis" label="Alvarez hypothesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q463796" start="55268" end="55280" title="impact event" label="impact event"/>
<link wikidata="Q55811" start="55297" end="55328" title="Cretaceous–Paleogene extinction event" label="Cretaceous–Paleogene extinction"/>
<link wikidata="Q3076" start="55358" end="55380" title="Comet Shoemaker-Levy 9" label="Comet Shoemaker-Levy 9"/>
<link wikidata="Q3735402" start="55395" end="55402" title="impact events on Jupiter" label="Jupiter"/>
<link wikidata="Q973887" start="55465" end="55483" title="military satellite" label="military satellite"/>
<link wikidata="Q2656967" start="55495" end="55520" title="detect nuclear explosions" label="detect nuclear explosions"/>
<link wikidata="Q189880" start="55740" end="55743" title="Charge-coupled device" label="CCD"/>
<link wikidata="Q6978287" start="56108" end="56147" title="National Science and Technology Council" label="National Science and Technology Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q11268" start="56386" end="56408" title="United States Congress" label="United States Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q23548" start="56418" end="56422" title="NASA" label="NASA"/>
<link wikidata="Q2" start="57628" end="57633" title="Earth" label="Earth"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="57992" end="58006" title="1566 Icarus#Project Icarus" label="Project Icarus"/>
<link wikidata="Q140874" start="58108" end="58119" title="1566 Icarus" label="1566 Icarus"/>
<link wikidata="Q54363" start="58148" end="58156" title="Saturn V" label="Saturn V"/>
<link wikidata="Q12802" start="58410" end="58425" title="nuclear warhead" label="nuclear warhead"/>
<link wikidata="Q680027" start="58448" end="58469" title="Apollo Service Module" label="Apollo Service Module"/>
<link wikidata="Q680027" start="58483" end="58504" title="Apollo Command Module" label="Apollo Command Module"/>
<link wikidata="Q65231048" start="59303" end="59314" title="Exoasteroid" label="Exoasteroid"/>
<link wikidata="Q37651" start="59317" end="59338" title="List of minor planets" label="List of minor planets"/>
<link wikidata="Q5193851" start="59341" end="59370" title="List of exceptional asteroids" label="List of exceptional asteroids"/>
<link wikidata="Q6606299" start="59373" end="59415" title="List of asteroid close approaches to Earth" label="List of asteroid close approaches to Earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q6684357" start="59418" end="59435" title="Lost minor planet" label="Lost minor planet"/>
<link wikidata="Q6803709" start="59438" end="59468" title="Meanings of minor-planet names" label="Meanings of minor-planet names"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="794" wikidata="Q504275" url="?curid=794" title="Allocution">
<text>An allocution, or allocutus, is a formal statement made to a court by the defendant who has been found guilty before being sentenced. It is part of the criminal procedure in some jurisdictions using common law.

== Concept ==
An allocution allows the defendant to explain why the sentence should be lenient. In plea bargains, an allocution may be required of the defendant. The defendant explicitly admits specifically and in detail the actions and their reasons in exchange for a reduced sentence.

In principle, that removes any doubt as to the exact nature of the defendant&#x27;s guilt in the matter.

The term &quot;allocution&quot; is used generally only in jurisdictions in the United States, but there are vaguely similar processes in other common law countries. In many other jurisdictions, it is for the defense lawyer to mitigate on their client&#x27;s behalf, and the defendant rarely has the opportunity to speak.

==Australia==
In Australia, the term &quot;allocutus&quot; is used by the Clerk of Arraigns or another formal associate of the court.

It is generally phrased as: &quot;Prisoner at the Bar, you have been found Guilty by a jury of your peers of the offence of XYZ. Do you have anything to say as to why the sentence of this Court should not now be passed upon you?&quot;

The defense counsel will then make a &quot;plea in mitigation&quot; (also called &quot;submissions on penalty&quot;) in an attempt to mitigate the relative seriousness of the offense, and heavily refer to and rely upon the defendant&#x27;s previous good character and good works, if any.

The right to make a plea in mitigation is absolute: if a judge or magistrate refuses to hear such a plea or does not properly consider it, the sentence can be overturned on appeal.

==United States==
In most of the United States, defendants are allowed the opportunity to allocute before a sentence is passed. Some jurisdictions hold that as an absolute right. In its absence, a sentence but not the conviction may be overturned, resulting in the need for a new sentencing hearing. In the federal system, Federal Rules of Criminal Procedure 32(i)(4) provides that the court must &quot;address the defendant personally in order to permit the defendant to speak or present any information to mitigate the sentence&quot;.

The Federal Public Defender recommends that defendants speak in terms of how a lenient sentence will be sufficient but not greater than necessary to comply with the statutory directives set forth in .

==See also==
* Confession (law)
* Newton hearing, the equivalent in England and Wales

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q504275" start="3" end="13" title="Allocution" label="allocution"/>
<link wikidata="Q504275" start="18" end="27" title="Allocution" label="allocutus"/>
<link wikidata="Q159394" start="74" end="83" title="defendant" label="defendant"/>
<link wikidata="Q146071" start="152" end="170" title="criminal procedure" label="criminal procedure"/>
<link wikidata="Q30216" start="199" end="209" title="common law" label="common law"/>
<link wikidata="Q664736" start="311" end="323" title="plea bargain" label="plea bargain"/>
<link wikidata="Q131005600" start="749" end="769" title="common law countries" label="common law countries"/>
<link wikidata="Q512345" start="814" end="828" title="Criminal defense lawyer" label="defense lawyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q838247" start="1303" end="1318" title="Defense (legal)" label="defense counsel"/>
<link wikidata="Q651929" start="2093" end="2128" title="Federal Rules of Criminal Procedure" label="Federal Rules of Criminal Procedure"/>
<link wikidata="Q23131706" start="2312" end="2335" title="Federal Public Defender" label="Federal Public Defender"/>
<link wikidata="Q1219996" start="2525" end="2541" title="Confession (law)" label="Confession (law)"/>
<link wikidata="Q16957654" start="2544" end="2558" title="Newton hearing" label="Newton hearing"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="795" wikidata="Q454263" url="?curid=795" title="Affidavit">
<text>An  ( ; Medieval Latin for &quot;he has declared under oath&quot;) is a written statement voluntarily made by an &quot;affiant&quot; or &quot;deponent&quot; under an oath or affirmation which is administered by a person who is authorized to do so by law. Such a statement is witnessed as to the authenticity of the affiant&#x27;s signature by a taker of oaths, such as a notary public or commissioner of oaths. An affidavit is a type of verified statement or showing, or containing a verification, meaning it is made under oath on penalty of perjury. It serves as evidence for its veracity and is required in court proceedings.

==Definition==

An affidavit is typically defined as a written declaration or statement that is sworn or affirmed before a person who has authority to administer an oath. There is no general defined form for an affidavit, although for some proceedings an affidavit must satisfy legal or statutory requirements in order to be considered. An affidavit may include,
* a &quot;commencement&quot; which identifies the affiant;
* an &quot;attestation&quot; clause, usually a jurat, at the end certifying that the affiant made the statement under oath on the specified date;
* signatures of the affiant and person who administered the oath.
In some cases, an introductory clause, called a &quot;preamble&quot;, is added attesting that the affiant personally appeared before the authenticating authority. An affidavit may also recite that the statement it records was made under penalty of perjury.

An affidavit that is prepared for use within the context of litigation may also include a caption that identifies the venue and parties to the relevant judicial proceedings.

==Worldwide==

===Australia===
On 2 March 2016, the High Court of Australia held that the ACT Uniform Evidence Legislation is neutral in the way sworn evidence and unsworn evidence is treated as being of equal weight.

===United Kingdom===
The term &quot;affidavit&quot; is used in the UK. According to the UK government website, &quot;The affidavit can be sworn or affirmed by a solicitor, notary or commissioner for oaths (for a charge) or by an authorised member of court staff.&quot;

===India===
In Indian law, although an affidavit may be taken as proof of the facts stated therein, the courts have no jurisdiction to admit evidence by way of affidavit. Affidavit is not treated as &quot;evidence&quot; within the meaning of Section 3 of the Evidence Act. However, it was held by the Supreme Court that an affidavit can be used as evidence only if the court so orders for sufficient reasons, namely, the right of the opposite party to have the deponent produced for cross-examination. Therefore, an affidavit cannot ordinarily be used as evidence in absence of a specific order of the court.

===Sri Lanka===
In Sri Lanka, under the Oaths Ordinance, with the exception of a court-martial, a person may submit an affidavit signed in the presence of a commissioner for oaths or a justice of the peace.

===Ireland===
Affidavits are made in a similar way as to England and Wales, although &quot;make oath&quot; is sometimes omitted. An affirmed affidavit may be substituted for an sworn affidavit in most cases for those opposed to swearing oaths. The person making the affidavit is known as the deponent and signs the affidavit. The affidavit concludes in the standard format &quot;sworn/affirmed (declared) before me, [name of commissioner for oaths/solicitor], a commissioner for oaths (solicitor), on the [date] at [location] in the county/city of [county/city], and I know the deponent&quot;, and it is signed and stamped by the commissioner for oaths. It is important that the Commissioner states his/her name clearly, sometimes documents are rejected when the name cannot be ascertained.

In August 2020, a new method of filing affidavits came into force. Under Section 21 of the Civil Law and Criminal Law (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 2020 witnesses are no longer required to swear before God or make an affirmation when filing an affidavit. Instead, witnesses will make a non-religious &quot;statement of truth&quot; and, if it is breached, will be liable for up to one year in prison if convicted summarily or, upon conviction on indictment, to a maximum fine of €250,000 or imprisonment for a term not exceeding 5 years, or both.

This is designed to replace affidavits and statutory declarations in situations where the electronic means of lodgement or filing of documents with the Court provided for in Section 20 is utilised. As of January 2022, it has yet to be adopted widely, and it is expected it will not be used for some time by lay litigants who will still lodge papers in person.

===United States===
In American jurisprudence, under the rules for hearsay, admission of an unsupported affidavit as evidence is unusual (especially if the affiant is not available for cross-examination) with regard to material facts which may be dispositive of the matter at bar. Affidavits from persons who are dead or otherwise incapacitated, or who cannot be located or made to appear, may be accepted by the court, but usually only in the presence of corroborating evidence. An affidavit which reflected a better grasp of the facts close in time to the actual events may be used to refresh a witness&#x27;s recollection. Materials used to refresh recollection are admissible as evidence. If the affiant is a party in the case, the affiant&#x27;s opponent may be successful in having the affidavit admitted as evidence, as statements by a party-opponent are admissible through an exception to the hearsay rule.

Affidavits are typically included in the response to interrogatories. Requests for admissions under Federal Rule of Civil Procedure 36, however, are not required to be sworn.

When a person signs an affidavit, that person is eligible to take the stand at a trial or evidentiary hearing. One party may wish to summon the affiant to verify the contents of the affidavit, while the other party may want to cross-examine the affiant about the affidavit.

Some types of motions will not be accepted by the court unless accompanied by an independent sworn statement or other evidence in support of the need for the motion. In such a case, a court will accept an affidavit from the filing attorney in support of the motion, as certain assumptions are made, to wit: The affidavit in place of sworn testimony promotes judicial economy. The lawyer is an officer of the court and knows that a false swearing by them, if found out, could be grounds for severe penalty up to and including disbarment. The lawyer if called upon would be able to present independent and more detailed evidence to prove the facts set forth in his affidavit.

Affidavits should not be confused with unsworn declarations under penalty of perjury. In federal courts and about 20 states as of 2006, unsworn declarations under penalty of perjury are authorized by statute as acceptable in lieu of affidavits. The key differences are that an unsworn declaration does not bear the jurat of a notary public and the declarant is not required to swear an oath or affirmation. Rather, the signature of the declarant under a carefully worded phrase binding them to the truth of their statements &quot;under penalty of perjury&quot; is deemed as a matter of law to be sufficiently solemn to remind the declarant of their duty to tell the truth, the whole truth, and nothing but the truth (that is, the oath they would normally swear if they were testifying in person in a court of law). The point of such affidavit substitution statutes is that unsworn declarations can be prepared and executed far more quickly and economically than affidavits, in that the witness need not meet personally with a notary public for the notarization process. 

The acceptance of an affidavit by one society does not confirm its acceptance as a legal document in other jurisdictions. Equally, the acceptance that a lawyer is an officer of the court (for swearing the affidavit) is not a given. This matter is addressed by the use of the apostille, a means of certifying the legalization of a document for international use under the terms of the 1961 Hague Convention Abolishing the Requirement of Legalization for Foreign Public Documents. Documents which have been notarized by a notary public, and certain other documents, and then certified with a conformant apostille, are accepted for legal use in all the nations that have signed the Hague Convention. Thus most affidavits now require to be apostilled if used for cross border issues.

==See also==
* Declaration (law)
* Deposition (law)
* Fishman Affidavit, a well-known example of an affidavit
* Performativity
* Statutory declaration
* Sworn declaration

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q454263" start="3" end="3" title="Affidavit" label=""/>
<link wikidata="Q1163234" start="8" end="22" title="Medieval Latin" label="Medieval Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5260784" start="142" end="150" title="deposition (law)" label="deponent"/>
<link wikidata="Q381045" start="166" end="170" title="oath" label="oath"/>
<link wikidata="Q188675" start="330" end="339" title="signature" label="signature"/>
<link wikidata="Q15479268" start="371" end="384" title="notary public" label="notary public"/>
<link wikidata="Q310229" start="542" end="549" title="perjury" label="perjury"/>
<link wikidata="Q17125125" start="1098" end="1103" title="jurat (clause)" label="jurat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1358798" start="1748" end="1771" title="High Court of Australia" label="High Court of Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1973852" start="2200" end="2210" title="Law of India" label="Indian law"/>
<link wikidata="Q752080" start="2876" end="2889" title="court-martial" label="court-martial"/>
<link wikidata="Q15479268" start="2952" end="2974" title="commissioner for oaths" label="commissioner for oaths"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2980" end="3000" title="Justice of the peace#Sri Lanka" label="justice of the peace"/>
<link wikidata="Q4932206" start="4736" end="4749" title="jurisprudence" label="jurisprudence"/>
<link wikidata="Q17164755" start="4771" end="4778" title="Hearsay in United States law" label="hearsay"/>
<link wikidata="Q195414" start="4889" end="4906" title="cross-examination" label="cross-examination"/>
<link wikidata="Q4964998" start="5160" end="5182" title="corroborating evidence" label="corroborating evidence"/>
<link wikidata="Q11273023" start="5673" end="5688" title="interrogatories" label="interrogatories"/>
<link wikidata="Q7314796" start="5690" end="5713" title="Requests for admissions" label="Requests for admissions"/>
<link wikidata="Q125402" start="6429" end="6445" title="judicial economy" label="judicial economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2135588" start="6464" end="6484" title="officer of the court" label="officer of the court"/>
<link wikidata="Q5281373" start="6596" end="6606" title="disbarment" label="disbarment"/>
<link wikidata="Q2032476" start="8202" end="8295" title="Apostille Convention" label="1961 Hague Convention Abolishing the Requirement of Legalization for Foreign Public Documents"/>
<link wikidata="Q2620826" start="8614" end="8631" title="Declaration (law)" label="Declaration (law)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5260784" start="8634" end="8650" title="Deposition (law)" label="Deposition (law)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5455111" start="8653" end="8670" title="Fishman Affidavit" label="Fishman Affidavit"/>
<link wikidata="Q3627138" start="8711" end="8725" title="Performativity" label="Performativity"/>
<link wikidata="Q27282970" start="8728" end="8749" title="Statutory declaration" label="Statutory declaration"/>
<link wikidata="Q11681030" start="8752" end="8769" title="Sworn declaration" label="Sworn declaration"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="798" wikidata="Q10584" url="?curid=798" title="Aries (constellation)">
<text>Aries is one of the constellations of the zodiac. It is located in the Northern celestial hemisphere between Pisces to the west and Taurus to the east. The name Aries is Latin for ram. Its old astronomical symbol is (♈︎). It is one of the 48 constellations described by the 2nd century astronomer Ptolemy, and remains one of the 88 modern constellations. It is a mid-sized constellation ranking 39th in overall size, with an area of 441 square degrees (1.1% of the celestial sphere).

Aries has represented a ram since late Babylonian times. Before that, the stars of Aries formed a farmhand. Different cultures have incorporated the stars of Aries into different constellations including twin inspectors in China and a porpoise in the Marshall Islands. Aries is a relatively dim constellation, possessing only four bright stars: Hamal (Alpha Arietis, second magnitude), Sheratan (Beta Arietis, third magnitude), Mesarthim (Gamma Arietis, fourth magnitude), and 41 Arietis (also fourth magnitude). The few deep-sky objects within the constellation are quite faint and include several pairs of interacting galaxies. Several meteor showers appear to radiate from Aries, including the Daytime Arietids and the Epsilon Arietids.

== History and mythology ==
Aries is now recognized as an official constellation, albeit as a specific region of the sky, by the International Astronomical Union. It was originally defined in ancient texts as a specific pattern of stars, and has remained a constellation since ancient times; it now includes the ancient pattern and the surrounding stars. In the description of the Babylonian zodiac given in the clay tablets known as the MUL.APIN, the constellation, now known as Aries, was the final station along the ecliptic. The MUL.APIN was a comprehensive table of the rising and settings of stars, which likely served as an agricultural calendar. Modern-day Aries was known as , &quot;The Agrarian Worker&quot; or &quot;The Hired Man&quot;. Although likely compiled in the 12th or 11th century BC, the MUL.APIN reflects a tradition that marks the Pleiades as the vernal equinox, which was the case with some precision at the beginning of the Middle Bronze Age. The earliest identifiable reference to Aries as a distinct constellation comes from the boundary stones that date from 1350 to 1000 BC. On several boundary stones, a zodiacal ram figure is distinct from the other characters. The shift in identification from the constellation as the Agrarian Worker to the Ram likely occurred in later Babylonian tradition because of its growing association with Dumuzi the Shepherd. By the time the MUL.APIN was created—in 1000 BC—modern Aries was identified with both Dumuzi&#x27;s ram and a hired labourer. The exact timing of this shift is difficult to determine due to the lack of images of Aries or other ram figures.

In ancient Egyptian astronomy, Aries was associated with the god Amun-Ra, who was depicted as a man with a ram&#x27;s head and represented fertility and creativity. Because it was the location of the vernal equinox, it was called the &quot;Indicator of the Reborn Sun&quot;. During the times of the year when Aries was prominent, priests would process statues of Amon-Ra to temples, a practice that was modified by Persian astronomers centuries later. Aries acquired the title of &quot;Lord of the Head&quot; in Egypt, referring to its symbolic and mythological importance.

Aries was not fully accepted as a constellation until classical times. In Hellenistic astrology, the constellation of Aries is associated with the golden ram of Greek mythology that rescued Phrixus and Helle on orders from Hermes, taking Phrixus to the land of Colchis. Phrixus and Helle were the son and daughter of King Athamas and his first wife Nephele. The king&#x27;s second wife, Ino, was jealous and wished to kill his children. To accomplish this, she induced famine in Boeotia, then falsified a message from the Oracle of Delphi that said Phrixus must be sacrificed to end the famine. Athamas was about to sacrifice his son atop Mount Laphystium when Aries, sent by Nephele, arrived. Helle fell off of Aries&#x27;s back in flight and drowned in the Dardanelles, also called the Hellespont in her honour.

Historically, Aries has been depicted as a crouched, wingless ram with its head turned towards Taurus. Ptolemy asserted in his &quot;Almagest&quot; that Hipparchus depicted Alpha Arietis as the ram&#x27;s muzzle, though Ptolemy did not include it in his constellation figure. Instead, it was listed as an &quot;unformed star&quot;, and denoted as &quot;the star over the head&quot;. John Flamsteed, in his &quot;Atlas Coelestis&quot;, followed Ptolemy&#x27;s description by mapping it above the figure&#x27;s head. Flamsteed followed the general convention of maps by depicting Aries lying down. Astrologically, Aries has been associated with the head and its humors. It was strongly associated with Mars, both the planet and the god. It was considered to govern Western Europe and Syria and to indicate a strong temper in a person.

The First Point of Aries, the location of the vernal equinox, is named for the constellation. This is because the Sun crossed the celestial equator from south to north in Aries more than two millennia ago. Hipparchus defined it in 130 BC. as a point south of Gamma Arietis. Because of the precession of the equinoxes, the First Point of Aries has since moved into Pisces and will move into Aquarius by around 2600 AD. The Sun now appears in Aries from late April through mid-May, though the constellation is still associated with the beginning of spring.

Medieval Muslim astronomers depicted Aries in various ways. Astronomers like al-Sufi saw the constellation as a ram, modelled on the precedent of Ptolemy. However, some Islamic celestial globes depicted Aries as a nondescript four-legged animal with what may be antlers instead of horns. Some early Bedouin observers saw a ram elsewhere in the sky; this constellation featured the Pleiades as the ram&#x27;s tail. The generally accepted Arabic formation of Aries consisted of thirteen stars in a figure along with five &quot;unformed&quot; stars, four of which were over the animal&#x27;s hindquarters and one of which was the disputed star over Aries&#x27;s head. Al-Sufi&#x27;s depiction differed from both other Arab astronomers&#x27; and Flamsteed&#x27;s, in that his Aries was running and looking behind itself.

The obsolete constellations Apes, Vespa, Lilium, and Musca Borealis all centred on the same four stars, now known as 33, 35, 39, and 41 Arietis. In 1612, Petrus Plancius introduced Apes, a constellation representing a bee. In 1624, the same stars were used by Jakob Bartsch for Vespa, representing a wasp. In 1679, Augustin Royer used these stars for his constellation Lilium, representing the fleur-de-lis. None of these constellations became widely accepted. Johann Hevelius renamed the constellation &quot;Musca&quot; in 1690 in his &quot;Firmamentum Sobiescianum&quot;. To differentiate it from Musca, the southern fly, it was later renamed Musca Borealis but it did not gain acceptance and its stars were ultimately officially reabsorbed into Aries.

In 1922, the International Astronomical Union defined its recommended three-letter abbreviation, &quot;Ari&quot;. The official boundaries of Aries were defined in 1930 by Eugène Delporte as a polygon of 12 segments. Its right ascension is between 1h 46.4m and 3h 29.4m and its declination is between 10.36° and 31.22° in the equatorial coordinate system.

=== In non-Western astronomy ===
In traditional Chinese astronomy, stars from Aries were used in several constellations. The brightest stars—Alpha, Beta, and Gamma Arietis—formed a constellation called &#x27;Lou&#x27;,variously translated as &quot;bond&quot; or &quot;lasso&quot; also &quot;sickle&quot;, which was associated with the ritual sacrifice of cattle. This name was shared by the 16th lunar mansion, the location of the full moon closest to the autumnal equinox. This constellation has also been associated with harvest-time as it could represent a woman carrying a basket of food on her head. 35, 39, and 41 Arietis were part of a constellation called &quot;Wei&quot; (胃), which represented a fat abdomen and was the namesake of the 17th lunar mansion, which represented granaries. Delta and Zeta Arietis were a part of the constellation &quot;Tianyin&quot; (天陰), thought to represent the Emperor&#x27;s hunting partner. &quot;Zuogeng&quot; (左更), a constellation depicting a marsh and pond inspector, was composed of Mu, Nu, Omicron, Pi, and Sigma Arietis. He was accompanied by &quot;Yeou-kang&quot;, a constellation depicting an official in charge of pasture distribution.

In a similar system to the Chinese, the first lunar mansion in Hindu astronomy was called &quot;Aswini&quot;, after the traditional names for Beta and Gamma Arietis, the Aswins. Because the Hindu new year began with the vernal equinox, the Rig Veda contains over 50 new-year&#x27;s related hymns to the twins, making them some of the most prominent characters in the work. Aries itself was known as &quot;&quot;Aja&quot; and &quot;Mesha&quot;. In Hebrew astronomy Aries was named &quot;Taleh&quot;&quot;; it signified either Simeon or Gad, and generally symbolizes the &quot;Lamb of the World&quot;. The neighboring Syrians named the constellation &quot;Amru&quot;, and the bordering Turks named it &quot;Kuzi&quot;. Half a world away, in the Marshall Islands, several stars from Aries were incorporated into a constellation depicting a porpoise, along with stars from Cassiopeia, Andromeda, and Triangulum. Alpha, Beta, and Gamma Arietis formed the head of the porpoise, while stars from Andromeda formed the body and the bright stars of Cassiopeia formed the tail. Other Polynesian peoples recognized Aries as a constellation. The Marquesas islanders called it &quot;Na-pai-ka&quot;; the Māori constellation &quot;Pipiri&quot; may correspond to modern Aries as well. In indigenous Peruvian astronomy, a constellation with most of the same stars as Aries existed. It was called the &quot;Market Moon&quot; and the &quot;Kneeling Terrace&quot;, as a reminder of when to hold the annual harvest festival, Ayri Huay.

== Features ==
=== Stars ===

==== Bright stars ====
Aries has three prominent stars forming an asterism, designated Alpha, Beta, and Gamma Arietis by Johann Bayer. Alpha (Hamal) and Beta (Sheratan) are commonly used for navigation. There is also one other star above the fourth magnitude, 41 Arietis (Bharani). α Arietis, called Hamal, is the brightest star in Aries. Its traditional name is derived from the Arabic word for &quot;lamb&quot; or &quot;head of the ram&quot; (&quot;ras al-hamal&quot;), which references Aries&#x27;s mythological background. With a spectral class of K2 and a luminosity class of III, it is an orange giant with an apparent visual magnitude of 2.00, which lies 66 light-years from Earth. Hamal has a luminosity of and its absolute magnitude is −0.1.

β Arietis, also known as Sheratan, is a blue-white star with an apparent visual magnitude of 2.64. Its traditional name is derived from &quot;sharatayn&quot;, the Arabic word for &quot;the two signs&quot;, referring to both Beta and Gamma Arietis in their position as heralds of the vernal equinox. The two stars were known to the Bedouin as &quot;qarna al-hamal&quot;, &quot;horns of the ram&quot;. It is 59 light-years from Earth. It has a luminosity of and its absolute magnitude is 2.1. It is a spectroscopic binary star, one in which the companion star is only known through analysis of the spectra. The spectral class of the primary is A5. Hermann Carl Vogel determined that Sheratan was a spectroscopic binary in 1903; its orbit was determined by Hans Ludendorff in 1907. It has since been studied for its eccentric orbit.

γ Arietis, with a common name of Mesarthim, is a binary star with two white-hued components, located in a rich field of magnitude 8–12 stars. Its traditional name has conflicting derivations. It may be derived from a corruption of &quot;al-sharatan&quot;, the Arabic word meaning &quot;pair&quot; or a word for &quot;fat ram&quot;. However, it may also come from the Sanskrit for &quot;first star of Aries&quot; or the Hebrew for &quot;ministerial servants&quot;, both of which are unusual languages of origin for star names. Along with Beta Arietis, it was known to the Bedouin as &quot;qarna al-hamal&quot;. The primary is of magnitude 4.59 and the secondary is of magnitude 4.68. The system is 164 light-years from Earth. The two components are separated by 7.8 arcseconds, and the system as a whole has an apparent magnitude of 3.9. The primary has a luminosity of and the secondary has a luminosity of ; the primary is an A-type star with an absolute magnitude of 0.2 and the secondary is a B9-type star with an absolute magnitude of 0.4. The angle between the two components is 1°. Mesarthim was discovered to be a double star by Robert Hooke in 1664, one of the earliest such telescopic discoveries. The primary, γ1 Arietis, is an Alpha² Canum Venaticorum variable star that has a range of 0.02 magnitudes and a period of 2.607 days. It is unusual because of its strong silicon emission lines.

The constellation is home to several double stars, including Epsilon, Lambda, and Pi Arietis. ε Arietis is a binary star with two white components. The primary is of magnitude 5.2 and the secondary is of magnitude 5.5. The system is 290 light-years from Earth. Its overall magnitude is 4.63, and the primary has an absolute magnitude of 1.4. Its spectral class is A2. The two components are separated by 1.5 arcseconds. λ Arietis is a wide double star with a white-hued primary and a yellow-hued secondary. The primary is of magnitude 4.8 and the secondary is of magnitude 7.3. The primary is 129 light-years from Earth. It has an absolute magnitude of 1.7 and a spectral class of F0. The two components are separated by 36 arcseconds at an angle of 50°; the two stars are located 0.5° east of 7 Arietis. π Arietis is a close binary star with a blue-white primary and a white secondary. The primary is of magnitude 5.3 and the secondary is of magnitude 8.5. The primary is 776 light-years from Earth. The primary itself is a wide double star with a separation of 25.2 arcseconds; the tertiary has a magnitude of 10.8. The primary and secondary are separated by 3.2 arcseconds.

Most of the other stars in Aries visible to the naked eye have magnitudes between 3 and 5. δ Ari, called Boteïn, is a star of magnitude 4.35, 170 light-years away. It has an absolute magnitude of −0.1 and a spectral class of K2. ζ Arietis is a star of magnitude 4.89, 263 light-years away. Its spectral class is A0 and its absolute magnitude is 0.0. 14 Arietis is a star of magnitude 4.98, 288 light-years away. Its spectral class is F2 and its absolute magnitude is 0.6. 39 Arietis (Lilii Borea) is a similar star of magnitude 4.51, 172 light-years away. Its spectral class is K1 and its absolute magnitude is 0.0. 35 Arietis is a dim star of magnitude 4.55, 343 light-years away. Its spectral class is B3 and its absolute magnitude is −1.7. 41 Arietis, known both as c Arietis and Nair al Butain, is a brighter star of magnitude 3.63, 165 light-years away. Its spectral class is B8 and it has a luminosity of . Its absolute magnitude is −0.2. 53 Arietis is a runaway star of magnitude 6.09, 815 light-years away. Its spectral class is B2. It was likely ejected from the Orion Nebula approximately five million years ago, possibly due to supernovae. Finally, Teegarden&#x27;s Star is the closest star to Earth in Aries. It is a red dwarf of magnitude 15.14 and spectral class M6.5V. With a proper motion of 5.1 arcseconds per year, it is the 24th closest star to Earth overall.
==== Variable stars ====
Aries has its share of variable stars, including R and U Arietis, Mira-type variable stars, and T Arietis, a semi-regular variable star. R Arietis is a Mira variable star that ranges in magnitude from a minimum of 13.7 to a maximum of 7.4 with a period of 186.8 days. It is 4,080 light-years away. U Arietis is another Mira variable star that ranges in magnitude from a minimum of 15.2 to a maximum of 7.2 with a period of 371.1 days. T Arietis is a semiregular variable star that ranges in magnitude from a minimum of 11.3 to a maximum of 7.5 with a period of 317 days. It is 1,630 light-years away. One particularly interesting variable in Aries is SX Arietis, a rotating variable star considered to be the prototype of its class, helium variable stars. SX Arietis stars have very prominent emission lines of Helium I and Silicon III. They are normally main-sequence B0p—B9p stars, and their variations are not usually visible to the naked eye. Therefore, they are observed photometrically, usually having periods that fit in the course of one night. Similar to α2s, SX Arietis stars have periodic changes in their light and magnetic field, which correspond to the periodic rotation; they differ from the α2 Canum Venaticorum variables in their higher temperature. There are between 39 and 49 SX Arietis variable stars currently known; ten are noted as being &quot;uncertain&quot; in the General Catalog of Variable Stars.

==== Deep sky objects ====

NGC 772 is a spiral galaxy with an integrated magnitude of 10.3, located southeast of β Arietis and 15 arcminutes west of 15 Arietis. It is a relatively bright galaxy and shows obvious nebulosity and ellipticity in an amateur telescope. It is 7.2 by 4.2 arcminutes, meaning that its surface brightness, magnitude 13.6, is significantly lower than its integrated magnitude. NGC 772 is a class SA(s)b galaxy, which means that it is an unbarred spiral galaxy without a ring that possesses a somewhat prominent bulge and spiral arms that are wound somewhat tightly. The main arm, on the northwest side of the galaxy, is home to many star forming regions; this is due to previous gravitational interactions with other galaxies. NGC 772 has a small companion galaxy, NGC 770, that is about 113,000 light-years away from the larger galaxy. The two galaxies together are also classified as Arp 78 in the Arp peculiar galaxy catalog. NGC 772 has a diameter of 240,000 light-years and the system is 114 million light-years from Earth. Another spiral galaxy in Aries is NGC 673, a face-on class SAB(s)c galaxy. It is a weakly barred spiral galaxy with loosely wound arms. It has no ring and a faint bulge and is 2.5 by 1.9 arcminutes. It has two primary arms with fragments located farther from the core. 171,000 light-years in diameter, NGC 673 is 235 million light-years from Earth.

NGC 678 and NGC 680 are a pair of galaxies in Aries that are only about 200,000 light-years apart. Part of the NGC 691 group of galaxies, both are at a distance of approximately 130 million light-years. NGC 678 is an edge-on spiral galaxy that is 4.5 by 0.8 arcminutes. NGC 680, an elliptical galaxy with an asymmetrical boundary, is the brighter of the two at magnitude 12.9; NGC 678 has a magnitude of 13.35. Both galaxies have bright cores, but NGC 678 is the larger galaxy at a diameter of 171,000 light-years; NGC 680 has a diameter of 72,000 light-years. NGC 678 is further distinguished by its prominent dust lane. NGC 691 itself is a spiral galaxy slightly inclined to our line of sight. It has multiple spiral arms and a bright core. Because it is so diffuse, it has a low surface brightness. It has a diameter of 126,000 light-years and is 124 million light-years away. NGC 877 is the brightest member of an 8-galaxy group that also includes NGC 870, NGC 871, and NGC 876, with a magnitude of 12.53. It is 2.4 by 1.8 arcminutes and is 178 million light-years away with a diameter of 124,000 light-years. Its companion is NGC 876, which is about 103,000 light-years from the core of NGC 877. They are interacting gravitationally, as they are connected by a faint stream of gas and dust. Arp 276 is a different pair of interacting galaxies in Aries, consisting of NGC 935 and IC 1801.

NGC 821 is an E6 elliptical galaxy. It is unusual because it has hints of an early spiral structure, which is normally only found in lenticular and spiral galaxies. NGC 821 is 2.6 by 2.0 arcminutes and has a visual magnitude of 11.3. Its diameter is 61,000 light-years and it is 80 million light-years away. Another unusual galaxy in Aries is Segue 2, a dwarf and satellite galaxy of the Milky Way, recently discovered to be a potential relic of the epoch of reionization.

==== Meteor showers ====
Aries is home to several meteor showers. The Daytime Arietid meteor shower is one of the strongest meteor showers that occurs during the day, lasting from 22 May to 2 July. It is an annual shower associated with the Marsden group of comets that peaks on 7 June with a maximum zenithal hourly rate of 54 meteors. Its parent body may be the asteroid Icarus. The meteors are sometimes visible before dawn, because the radiant is 32 degrees away from the Sun. They usually appear at a rate of 1–2 per hour as &quot;earthgrazers&quot;, meteors that last several seconds and often begin at the horizon. Because most of the Daytime Arietids are not visible to the naked eye, they are observed in the radio spectrum. This is possible because of the ionized gas they leave in their wake. Other meteor showers radiate from Aries during the day; these include the Daytime Epsilon Arietids and the Northern and Southern Daytime May Arietids. The Jodrell Bank Observatory discovered the Daytime Arietids in 1947 when James Hey and G. S. Stewart adapted the World War II-era radar systems for meteor observations.

The Delta Arietids are another meteor shower radiating from Aries. Peaking on 9 December with a low peak rate, the shower lasts from 8 December to 14 January, with the highest rates visible from 8 to 14 December. The average Delta Arietid meteor is very slow, with an average velocity of per second. However, this shower sometimes produces bright fireballs. This meteor shower has northern and southern components, both of which are likely associated with 1990 HA, a near-Earth asteroid.

The Autumn Arietids also radiate from Aries. The shower lasts from 7 September to 27 October and peaks on 9 October. Its peak rate is low. The Epsilon Arietids appear from 12 to 23 October. Other meteor showers radiating from Aries include the October Delta Arietids, Daytime Epsilon Arietids, Daytime May Arietids, Sigma Arietids, Nu Arietids, and Beta Arietids. The Sigma Arietids, a class IV meteor shower, are visible from 12 to 19 October, with a maximum zenithal hourly rate of less than two meteors per hour on 19 October.

==== Planetary systems ====
Aries contains several stars with extrasolar planets. HIP 14810, a G5 type star, is orbited by three giant planets (those more than ten times the mass of Earth). HD 12661, like HIP 14810, is a G-type main sequence star, slightly larger than the Sun, with two orbiting planets. One planet is 2.3 times the mass of Jupiter, and the other is 1.57 times the mass of Jupiter. HD 20367 is a G0 type star, approximately the size of the Sun, with one orbiting planet. The planet, discovered in 2002, has a mass 1.07 times that of Jupiter and orbits every 500 days. In 2019, scientists conducting the CARMENES survey at the Calar Alto Observatory announced evidence of two Earth-mass exoplanets orbiting Teegarden&#x27;s star, located in Aries, within its habitable zone. The star is a small red dwarf with only around a tenth of the mass and radius of the Sun. It has a large radial velocity.

== See also ==
* Aries (Chinese astronomy)

== References ==

===Explanatory notes===
===Citations===
===Bibliography===
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
===Online sources===
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 

&quot;SIMBAD&quot;
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 


== External links ==

* The Deep Photographic Guide to the Constellations: Aries
* The clickable Aries
* Star Tales – Aries
* Warburg Institute Iconographic Database (medieval and early modern images of Aries)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q10584" start="0" end="5" title="Aries (constellation)" label="Aries"/>
<link wikidata="Q8928" start="20" end="33" title="constellation" label="constellation"/>
<link wikidata="Q40540" start="42" end="48" title="zodiac" label="zodiac"/>
<link wikidata="Q1998069" start="71" end="100" title="Northern celestial hemisphere" label="Northern celestial hemisphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q8679" start="109" end="115" title="Pisces (constellation)" label="Pisces"/>
<link wikidata="Q10570" start="132" end="138" title="Taurus (constellation)" label="Taurus"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="170" end="175" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7368" start="180" end="183" title="sheep" label="ram"/>
<link wikidata="Q34943" start="297" end="304" title="Ptolemy" label="Ptolemy"/>
<link wikidata="Q12134" start="465" end="481" title="celestial sphere" label="celestial sphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q13213" start="830" end="835" title="Hamal" label="Hamal"/>
<link wikidata="Q13215" start="871" end="879" title="Sheratan" label="Sheratan"/>
<link wikidata="Q970572" start="913" end="922" title="Mesarthim" label="Mesarthim"/>
<link wikidata="Q854835" start="962" end="972" title="41 Arietis" label="41 Arietis"/>
<link wikidata="Q249389" start="1006" end="1021" title="deep-sky object" label="deep-sky object"/>
<link wikidata="Q105000" start="1123" end="1136" title="meteor shower" label="meteor shower"/>
<link wikidata="Q387592" start="1182" end="1198" title="Daytime Arietids" label="Daytime Arietids"/>
<link wikidata="Q6867" start="1355" end="1387" title="International Astronomical Union" label="International Astronomical Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q4450794" start="1607" end="1624" title="Babylonian zodiac" label="Babylonian zodiac"/>
<link wikidata="Q83076" start="1664" end="1672" title="MUL.APIN" label="MUL.APIN"/>
<link wikidata="Q79852" start="1745" end="1753" title="ecliptic" label="ecliptic"/>
<link wikidata="Q13423" start="2080" end="2088" title="Pleiades" label="Pleiades"/>
<link wikidata="Q12889843" start="2096" end="2110" title="Vernal equinox (Northern Hemisphere)" label="vernal equinox"/>
<link wikidata="Q11761" start="2175" end="2192" title="Middle Bronze Age" label="Middle Bronze Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q921099" start="2282" end="2296" title="boundary stone" label="boundary stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q549619" start="2590" end="2609" title="Dumuzi the Shepherd" label="Dumuzi the Shepherd"/>
<link wikidata="Q58373" start="2917" end="2924" title="Amun-Ra" label="Amun-Ra"/>
<link wikidata="Q5960561" start="3267" end="3286" title="Persian astronomy" label="Persian astronomers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2068914" start="3501" end="3522" title="Hellenistic astrology" label="Hellenistic astrology"/>
<link wikidata="Q34726" start="3588" end="3603" title="Greek mythology" label="Greek mythology"/>
<link wikidata="Q743482" start="3617" end="3624" title="Phrixus" label="Phrixus"/>
<link wikidata="Q638578" start="3629" end="3634" title="Helle (mythology)" label="Helle"/>
<link wikidata="Q41484" start="3650" end="3656" title="Hermes" label="Hermes"/>
<link wikidata="Q183150" start="3688" end="3695" title="Colchis" label="Colchis"/>
<link wikidata="Q143880" start="3749" end="3756" title="Athamas" label="Athamas"/>
<link wikidata="Q624551" start="3776" end="3783" title="Nephele" label="Nephele"/>
<link wikidata="Q223690" start="3814" end="3817" title="Ino (Greek mythology)" label="Ino"/>
<link wikidata="Q8257871" start="3906" end="3913" title="Boeotia" label="Boeotia"/>
<link wikidata="Q220344" start="3949" end="3965" title="Oracle of Delphi" label="Oracle of Delphi"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4066" end="4082" title="Mount Laphystium" label="Mount Laphystium"/>
<link wikidata="Q6514" start="4186" end="4197" title="Dardanelles" label="Dardanelles"/>
<link wikidata="Q34943" start="4345" end="4352" title="Ptolemy" label="Ptolemy"/>
<link wikidata="Q155952" start="4375" end="4383" title="Almagest" label="Almagest"/>
<link wikidata="Q159905" start="4395" end="4405" title="Hipparchus" label="Hipparchus"/>
<link wikidata="Q13213" start="4415" end="4428" title="Alpha Arietis" label="Alpha Arietis"/>
<link wikidata="Q242388" start="4625" end="4639" title="John Flamsteed" label="John Flamsteed"/>
<link wikidata="Q1756522" start="4654" end="4669" title="Atlas Coelestis" label="Atlas Coelestis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5782572" start="4902" end="4908" title="humors" label="humors"/>
<link wikidata="Q111" start="4942" end="4946" title="Mars" label="Mars"/>
<link wikidata="Q80360" start="5080" end="5100" title="First Point of Aries" label="First Point of Aries"/>
<link wikidata="Q12889843" start="5122" end="5136" title="Vernal equinox (Northern Hemisphere)" label="vernal equinox"/>
<link wikidata="Q187646" start="5206" end="5223" title="celestial equator" label="celestial equator"/>
<link wikidata="Q970572" start="5335" end="5348" title="Gamma Arietis" label="Gamma Arietis"/>
<link wikidata="Q83094" start="5365" end="5392" title="precession of the equinoxes" label="precession of the equinoxes"/>
<link wikidata="Q8679" start="5440" end="5446" title="Pisces (constellation)" label="Pisces"/>
<link wikidata="Q10576" start="5466" end="5474" title="Aquarius (constellation)" label="Aquarius"/>
<link wikidata="Q1255366" start="5632" end="5659" title="Islamic astronomy" label="Medieval Muslim astronomers"/>
<link wikidata="Q11075" start="5709" end="5716" title="al-Sufi" label="al-Sufi"/>
<link wikidata="Q180688" start="5931" end="5938" title="Bedouin" label="Bedouin"/>
<link wikidata="Q13423" start="6013" end="6021" title="Pleiades" label="Pleiades"/>
<link wikidata="Q1620914" start="6454" end="6477" title="obsolete constellations" label="obsolete constellations"/>
<link wikidata="Q1939728" start="6478" end="6482" title="Apes (constellation)" label="Apes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1939728" start="6484" end="6489" title="Vespa (constellation)" label="Vespa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1939728" start="6491" end="6497" title="Lilium (constellation)" label="Lilium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1939728" start="6503" end="6517" title="Musca Borealis" label="Musca Borealis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2401516" start="6567" end="6569" title="33 Arietis" label="33"/>
<link wikidata="Q2608346" start="6571" end="6573" title="35 Arietis" label="35"/>
<link wikidata="Q2718994" start="6575" end="6577" title="39 Arietis" label="39"/>
<link wikidata="Q854835" start="6583" end="6593" title="41 Arietis" label="41 Arietis"/>
<link wikidata="Q333534" start="6604" end="6619" title="Petrus Plancius" label="Petrus Plancius"/>
<link wikidata="Q66394" start="6710" end="6723" title="Jakob Bartsch" label="Jakob Bartsch"/>
<link wikidata="Q2358422" start="6765" end="6779" title="Augustin Royer" label="Augustin Royer"/>
<link wikidata="Q211568" start="6844" end="6856" title="fleur-de-lis" label="fleur-de-lis"/>
<link wikidata="Q57963" start="6911" end="6926" title="Johann Hevelius" label="Johann Hevelius"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6992" end="7016" title="Prodromus_Astronomiae#Firmamentum_Sobiescianum" label="Firmamentum Sobiescianum"/>
<link wikidata="Q10435" start="7049" end="7054" title="Musca" label="Musca"/>
<link wikidata="Q20009" start="7377" end="7392" title="Eugène Delporte" label="Eugène Delporte"/>
<link wikidata="Q13442" start="7426" end="7441" title="right ascension" label="right ascension"/>
<link wikidata="Q76287" start="7483" end="7494" title="declination" label="declination"/>
<link wikidata="Q208617" start="7531" end="7559" title="equatorial coordinate system" label="equatorial coordinate system"/>
<link wikidata="Q1268276" start="7610" end="7627" title="Chinese astronomy" label="Chinese astronomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1378760" start="7953" end="7971" title="Twenty-eight mansions" label="16th lunar mansion"/>
<link wikidata="Q7530126" start="8018" end="8034" title="September equinox" label="autumnal equinox"/>
<link wikidata="Q2608346" start="8167" end="8169" title="35 Arietis" label="35"/>
<link wikidata="Q2718994" start="8171" end="8173" title="39 Arietis" label="39"/>
<link wikidata="Q854835" start="8179" end="8189" title="41 Arietis" label="41 Arietis"/>
<link wikidata="Q114768" start="8345" end="8354" title="Granary" label="granaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q894687" start="8356" end="8361" title="Delta Arietis" label="Delta"/>
<link wikidata="Q2545448" start="8366" end="8378" title="Zeta Arietis" label="Zeta Arietis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3232610" start="8591" end="8593" title="Mu Arietis" label="Mu"/>
<link wikidata="Q3232617" start="8595" end="8597" title="Nu Arietis" label="Nu"/>
<link wikidata="Q2608303" start="8599" end="8606" title="Omicron Arietis" label="Omicron"/>
<link wikidata="Q2718309" start="8608" end="8610" title="Pi Arietis" label="Pi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2608330" start="8616" end="8629" title="Sigma Arietis" label="Sigma Arietis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1292962" start="8813" end="8828" title="Hindu astronomy" label="Hindu astronomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q726593" start="8920" end="8926" title="Aswins" label="Aswins"/>
<link wikidata="Q727413" start="8990" end="8998" title="Rig Veda" label="Rig Veda"/>
<link wikidata="Q5695906" start="9197" end="9213" title="Hebrew astronomy" label="Hebrew astronomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370197" start="9275" end="9281" title="Tribe of Simeon" label="Simeon"/>
<link wikidata="Q548841" start="9285" end="9288" title="Tribe of Gad" label="Gad"/>
<link wikidata="Q858" start="9366" end="9371" title="Syria" label="Syria"/>
<link wikidata="Q709" start="9493" end="9509" title="Marshall Islands" label="Marshall Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q10867" start="9587" end="9595" title="porpoise" label="porpoise"/>
<link wikidata="Q10464" start="9619" end="9629" title="Cassiopeia (constellation)" label="Cassiopeia"/>
<link wikidata="Q9256" start="9631" end="9640" title="Andromeda (constellation)" label="Andromeda"/>
<link wikidata="Q10565" start="9646" end="9656" title="Triangulum" label="Triangulum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1042001" start="9823" end="9840" title="Polynesian people" label="Polynesian people"/>
<link wikidata="Q172697" start="9883" end="9892" title="Marquesas" label="Marquesas"/>
<link wikidata="Q6122670" start="9940" end="9945" title="Māori people" label="Māori"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10254" end="10263" title="Ayri Huay" label="Ayri Huay"/>
<link wikidata="Q9262" start="10362" end="10370" title="Asterism (astronomy)" label="asterism"/>
<link wikidata="Q78427" start="10417" end="10429" title="Johann Bayer" label="Johann Bayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q13213" start="10596" end="10601" title="Hamal" label="Hamal"/>
<link wikidata="Q523" start="10620" end="10624" title="star" label="star"/>
<link wikidata="Q25377588" start="10830" end="10844" title="spectral class" label="spectral class"/>
<link wikidata="Q25377588" start="10857" end="10873" title="luminosity class" label="luminosity class"/>
<link wikidata="Q5875" start="10891" end="10903" title="orange giant" label="orange giant"/>
<link wikidata="Q124313" start="10912" end="10937" title="apparent visual magnitude" label="apparent visual magnitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q531" start="10961" end="10971" title="light-year" label="light-year"/>
<link wikidata="Q105902" start="10997" end="11007" title="luminosity" label="luminosity"/>
<link wikidata="Q159653" start="11019" end="11037" title="absolute magnitude" label="absolute magnitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q13215" start="11048" end="11057" title="β Arietis" label="β Arietis"/>
<link wikidata="Q180688" start="11379" end="11386" title="Bedouin" label="Bedouin"/>
<link wikidata="Q50053" start="11547" end="11567" title="spectroscopic binary" label="spectroscopic binary"/>
<link wikidata="Q483666" start="11628" end="11651" title="spectroscopy" label="analysis of the spectra"/>
<link wikidata="Q58812" start="11694" end="11712" title="Hermann Carl Vogel" label="Hermann Carl Vogel"/>
<link wikidata="Q31259" start="11802" end="11817" title="Hans Ludendorff" label="Hans Ludendorff"/>
<link wikidata="Q970572" start="11879" end="11888" title="γ Arietis" label="γ Arietis"/>
<link wikidata="Q50053" start="11928" end="11939" title="binary star" label="binary star"/>
<link wikidata="Q12097402" start="12644" end="12653" title="arcsecond" label="arcsecond"/>
<link wikidata="Q124313" start="12689" end="12707" title="apparent magnitude" label="apparent magnitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q46830" start="13015" end="13027" title="Robert Hooke" label="Robert Hooke"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141942" start="13117" end="13150" title="Alpha² Canum Venaticorum variable" label="Alpha² Canum Venaticorum variable"/>
<link wikidata="Q670" start="13256" end="13263" title="silicon" label="silicon"/>
<link wikidata="Q212111" start="13264" end="13278" title="emission lines" label="emission lines"/>
<link wikidata="Q66477095" start="13375" end="13384" title="ε Arietis" label="ε Arietis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2718017" start="13701" end="13710" title="λ Arietis" label="λ Arietis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2402984" start="14075" end="14084" title="7 Arietis" label="7 Arietis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2718309" start="14086" end="14095" title="π Arietis" label="π Arietis"/>
<link wikidata="Q894687" start="14550" end="14555" title="Delta Arietis" label="δ Ari"/>
<link wikidata="Q2545448" start="14688" end="14697" title="ζ Arietis" label="ζ Arietis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2608337" start="14809" end="14819" title="14 Arietis" label="14 Arietis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2718994" start="14931" end="14941" title="39 Arietis" label="39 Arietis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2608346" start="15075" end="15085" title="35 Arietis" label="35 Arietis"/>
<link wikidata="Q854835" start="15202" end="15212" title="41 Arietis" label="41 Arietis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133939" start="15404" end="15414" title="53 Arietis" label="53 Arietis"/>
<link wikidata="Q6440" start="15420" end="15432" title="runaway star" label="runaway star"/>
<link wikidata="Q13903" start="15531" end="15543" title="Orion Nebula" label="Orion Nebula"/>
<link wikidata="Q3937" start="15598" end="15607" title="supernova" label="supernova"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057336" start="15619" end="15640" title="Teegarden&amp;#x27;s Star" label="Teegarden&amp;#x27;s Star"/>
<link wikidata="Q5893" start="15688" end="15697" title="red dwarf" label="red dwarf"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16000" end="16009" title="R Arietis" label="R Arietis"/>
<link wikidata="Q744691" start="16015" end="16028" title="Mira variable" label="Mira variable"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16161" end="16170" title="U Arietis" label="U Arietis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16298" end="16307" title="T Arietis" label="T Arietis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054411" start="16313" end="16338" title="semiregular variable star" label="semiregular variable star"/>
<link wikidata="Q384165" start="16514" end="16524" title="SX Arietis" label="SX Arietis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1392904" start="16596" end="16611" title="helium variable" label="helium variable"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141942" start="16927" end="16929" title="Alpha2 Canum Venaticorum variable" label="α2"/>
<link wikidata="Q222662" start="17253" end="17286" title="General Catalog of Variable Stars" label="General Catalog of Variable Stars"/>
<link wikidata="Q747344" start="17317" end="17324" title="NGC 772" label="NGC 772"/>
<link wikidata="Q2488" start="17330" end="17343" title="spiral galaxy" label="spiral galaxy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048103" start="17352" end="17372" title="integrated magnitude" label="integrated magnitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q2401507" start="17439" end="17449" title="15 Arietis" label="15 Arietis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048103" start="17600" end="17618" title="surface brightness" label="surface brightness"/>
<link wikidata="Q1648748" start="17703" end="17722" title="galaxy morphological classification" label="class SA(s)b galaxy"/>
<link wikidata="Q854155" start="17824" end="17829" title="bulge (astronomy)" label="bulge"/>
<link wikidata="Q16744" start="17946" end="17966" title="star formation" label="star forming regions"/>
<link wikidata="Q5518150" start="17992" end="18018" title="galaxy merger" label="gravitational interactions"/>
<link wikidata="Q1038977" start="18078" end="18085" title="NGC 770" label="NGC 770"/>
<link wikidata="Q757251" start="18213" end="18240" title="Arp number" label="Arp peculiar galaxy catalog"/>
<link wikidata="Q1038164" start="18376" end="18383" title="NGC 673" label="NGC 673"/>
<link wikidata="Q2490" start="18432" end="18452" title="barred spiral galaxy" label="barred spiral galaxy"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18692" end="18699" title="NGC 678" label="NGC 678"/>
<link wikidata="Q1038230" start="18704" end="18711" title="NGC 680" label="NGC 680"/>
<link wikidata="Q1038340" start="18803" end="18810" title="NGC 691" label="NGC 691"/>
<link wikidata="Q184348" start="18974" end="18991" title="elliptical galaxy" label="elliptical galaxy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5317012" start="19303" end="19312" title="dust lane" label="dust lane"/>
<link wikidata="Q1039902" start="19572" end="19579" title="NGC 877" label="NGC 877"/>
<link wikidata="Q1040318" start="19988" end="19995" title="Arp 276" label="Arp 276"/>
<link wikidata="Q192078" start="20219" end="20229" title="lenticular galaxy" label="lenticular"/>
<link wikidata="Q2266221" start="20429" end="20436" title="Segue 2" label="Segue 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q190438" start="20440" end="20445" title="dwarf galaxy" label="dwarf"/>
<link wikidata="Q46039" start="20450" end="20483" title="List of Milky Way&amp;#x27;s satellite galaxies" label="satellite galaxy of the Milky Way"/>
<link wikidata="Q1670901" start="20536" end="20557" title="epoch of reionization" label="epoch of reionization"/>
<link wikidata="Q105000" start="20610" end="20623" title="meteor shower" label="meteor shower"/>
<link wikidata="Q387592" start="20630" end="20645" title="Daytime Arietid" label="Daytime Arietid"/>
<link wikidata="Q3559" start="20818" end="20823" title="comet" label="comet"/>
<link wikidata="Q189623" start="20861" end="20881" title="zenithal hourly rate" label="zenithal hourly rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q140874" start="20933" end="20939" title="1566 Icarus" label="Icarus"/>
<link wikidata="Q258190" start="21000" end="21007" title="radiant (meteor shower)" label="radiant"/>
<link wikidata="Q902174" start="21278" end="21292" title="radio spectrum" label="radio spectrum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1569783" start="21519" end="21543" title="Jodrell Bank Observatory" label="Jodrell Bank Observatory"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="21629" end="21659" title="Battle of Britain#Control systems" label="World War II-era radar systems"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="21690" end="21704" title="Delta Arietids" label="Delta Arietids"/>
<link wikidata="Q131136" start="22033" end="22041" title="Fireball (meteor)" label="fireball"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="22142" end="22149" title="1990 HA" label="1990 HA"/>
<link wikidata="Q265392" start="22153" end="22172" title="near-Earth asteroid" label="near-Earth asteroid"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="22179" end="22194" title="Autumn Arietids" label="Autumn Arietids"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="22318" end="22334" title="Epsilon Arietids" label="Epsilon Arietids"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="22443" end="22467" title="Daytime Epsilon Arietids" label="Daytime Epsilon Arietids"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="22469" end="22489" title="Daytime May Arietids" label="Daytime May Arietids"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="22491" end="22505" title="Sigma Arietids" label="Sigma Arietids"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="22507" end="22518" title="Nu Arietids" label="Nu Arietids"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="22524" end="22537" title="Beta Arietids" label="Beta Arietids"/>
<link wikidata="Q44559" start="22768" end="22786" title="extrasolar planets" label="extrasolar planets"/>
<link wikidata="Q1563714" start="22788" end="22797" title="HIP 14810" label="HIP 14810"/>
<link wikidata="Q21857994" start="22835" end="22847" title="giant planet" label="giant planet"/>
<link wikidata="Q681996" start="22880" end="22893" title="mass of Earth" label="mass of Earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1464492" start="22896" end="22904" title="HD 12661" label="HD 12661"/>
<link wikidata="Q1077262" start="23105" end="23113" title="HD 20367" label="HD 20367"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026264" start="23349" end="23371" title="Calar Alto Observatory" label="Calar Alto Observatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q2670101" start="23398" end="23419" title="Earth analog" label="Earth-mass exoplanets"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057336" start="23429" end="23450" title="Teegarden&amp;#x27;s star" label="Teegarden&amp;#x27;s star"/>
<link wikidata="Q215913" start="23481" end="23495" title="habitable zone" label="habitable zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q5893" start="23517" end="23526" title="red dwarf" label="red dwarf"/>
<link wikidata="Q240105" start="23602" end="23617" title="radial velocity" label="radial velocity"/>
<link wikidata="Q4790505" start="23637" end="23662" title="Aries (Chinese astronomy)" label="Aries (Chinese astronomy)"/>
<link wikidata="Q654724" start="23823" end="23829" title="SIMBAD" label="SIMBAD"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="799" wikidata="Q10576" url="?curid=799" title="Aquarius (constellation)">
<text>Aquarius is an equatorial constellation of the zodiac, between Capricornus and Pisces. Its name is Latin for &quot;water-carrier&quot; or &quot;cup-carrier&quot;, and its old astronomical symbol is (♒︎), a representation of water. Aquarius is one of the oldest of the recognized constellations along the zodiac (the Sun&#x27;s apparent path). It was one of the 48 constellations listed by the 2nd century astronomer Ptolemy, and it remains one of the 88 modern constellations. It is found in a region often called the Sea due to its profusion of constellations with watery associations such as Cetus the whale, Pisces the fish, and Eridanus the river.

At apparent magnitude 2.9, Beta Aquarii is the brightest star in the constellation.

==History and mythology==
Aquarius is identified as &quot;The Great One&quot; in the Babylonian star catalogues and represents the god Ea himself, who is commonly depicted holding an overflowing vase. The Babylonian star-figure appears on entitlement stones and cylinder seals from the second millennium. It contained the winter solstice in the Early Bronze Age. In Old Babylonian astronomy, Ea was the ruler of the southernmost quarter of the Sun&#x27;s path, the &quot;Way of Ea&quot;, corresponding to the period of 45 days on either side of winter solstice. Aquarius was also associated with the destructive floods that the Babylonians regularly experienced, and thus was negatively connoted. In Ancient Egypt astronomy, Aquarius was associated with the annual flood of the Nile; the banks were said to flood when Aquarius put his jar into the river, beginning spring.

In the Greek tradition, the constellation came to be represented simply as a single vase from which a stream poured down to Piscis Austrinus. The name in the Hindu zodiac is likewise &quot;kumbha&quot; &quot;water-pitcher&quot;.

In Greek mythology, Aquarius is sometimes associated with Deucalion, the son of Prometheus who built a ship with his wife Pyrrha to survive an imminent flood. They sailed for nine days before washing ashore on Mount Parnassus. Aquarius is also sometimes identified with beautiful Ganymede, a youth in Greek mythology and the son of Trojan king Tros, who was taken to Mount Olympus by Zeus to act as cup-carrier to the gods. Neighboring Aquila represents the eagle, under Zeus&#x27; command, that snatched the young boy; some versions of the myth indicate that the eagle was in fact Zeus transformed. One tradition, stated that he was carried off by Eos. Yet another figure associated with the water bearer is Cecrops I, a king of Athens who sacrificed water instead of wine to the gods.

===Depictions===
In the first century, Ptolemy&#x27;s &quot;Almagest&quot; established the common Western depiction of Aquarius. His water jar, an asterism itself, consists of Gamma, Pi, Eta, and Zeta Aquarii; it pours water in a stream of more than 20 stars terminating with Fomalhaut, now assigned solely to Piscis Austrinus. The water bearer&#x27;s head is represented by 5th magnitude 25 Aquarii while his left shoulder is Beta Aquarii; his right shoulder and forearm are represented by Alpha and Gamma Aquarii respectively.

===In Eastern astronomy===
In Chinese astronomy, the stream of water flowing from the Water Jar was depicted as the &quot;Army of Yu-Lin&quot; (&quot;Yu-lim-kiun&quot; or &quot;Yulinjun&quot;, Hanzi: 羽林君). The name &quot;Yu-lin&quot; means &quot;feathers and forests&quot;, referring to the numerous light-footed soldiers from the northern reaches of the empire represented by these faint stars. The constellation&#x27;s stars were the most numerous of any Chinese constellation, numbering 45, the majority of which were located in modern Aquarius. The celestial army was protected by the wall &quot;Leibizhen&quot; (垒壁阵), which counted Iota, Lambda, Phi, and Sigma Aquarii among its 12 stars. 88, 89, and 98 Aquarii represent &quot;Fou-youe&quot;, the axes used as weapons and for hostage executions. Also in Aquarius is &quot;Loui-pi-tchin&quot;, the ramparts that stretch from 29 and 27 Piscium and 33 and 30 Aquarii through Phi, Lambda, Sigma, and Iota Aquarii to Delta, Gamma, Kappa, and Epsilon Capricorni. Similarly in the Hindu calendar Aquarius is depicted as Kumbha, and Kumbha, which means a pot or a jug, stands for the zodiac sign of Aquarius.

Near the border with Cetus, the axe &quot;Fuyue&quot; was represented by three stars; its position is disputed and may have instead been located in Sculptor. &quot;Tienliecheng&quot; also has a disputed position; the 13-star castle replete with ramparts may have possessed Nu and Xi Aquarii but may instead have been located south in Piscis Austrinus. The Water Jar asterism was seen to the ancient Chinese as the tomb, &quot;Fenmu&quot;. Nearby, the emperors&#x27; mausoleum &quot;Xiuliang&quot; stood, demarcated by Kappa Aquarii and three other collinear stars. &quot;Ku&quot; (&quot;crying&quot;) and &quot;Qi&quot; (&quot;weeping&quot;), each composed of two stars, were located in the same region.

Three of the Chinese lunar mansions shared their name with constellations. &quot;Nu&quot;, also the name for the 10th lunar mansion, was a handmaiden represented by Epsilon, Mu, 3, and 4 Aquarii. The 11th lunar mansion shared its name with the constellation &quot;Xu&quot; (&quot;emptiness&quot;), formed by Beta Aquarii and Alpha Equulei; it represented a bleak place associated with death and funerals. &quot;Wei&quot;, the rooftop and 12th lunar mansion, was a V-shaped constellation formed by Alpha Aquarii, Theta Pegasi, and Epsilon Pegasi; it shared its name with two other Chinese constellations, in modern-day Scorpius and Aries.

==Features==
===Stars===
Despite both its prominent position on the zodiac and its large size, Aquarius has no particularly bright stars, its four brightest stars being less bright than (The Apparent Magnitude scale is reverse logarithmic, with increasingly bright objects having lower and lower (more negative) magnitudes.) Recent research has shown that there are several stars lying within its borders that possess planetary systems.

The two brightest stars, α Aquarii and β Aquarii, are luminous yellow supergiants, of spectral types G0Ib and G2Ib respectively, that were once hot blue-white B-class main sequence stars 5 to 9 times as massive as the Sun. The two are also moving through space perpendicular to the plane of the Milky Way. β Aquarii is the brightest star in Aquarius with apparent — only slightly brighter than α Aquarii. It also has the proper name of Sadalsuud. Having cooled and swollen to around 50 times the Sun&#x27;s diameter, it is around 2200 times as luminous as the Sun. It is around 6.4 times as massive as the Sun and around 56 million years old. Sadalsuud is from Earth. α Aquarii, also known as &quot;Sadalmelik&quot;, has apparent It is distant from Earth, and is around 6.5 times as massive as the Sun, and 3000 times as luminous. It is 53 million years old.

γ Aquarii, also called &quot;Sadachbia&quot;, is a white main sequence star of spectral type star of spectral type A0V that is between 158 and 315 million years old and is around 2.5 times the Sun&#x27;s mass (), and double its radius. Its magnitude is 3.85, and it is away, hence its luminosity is . The name &quot;Sadachbia&quot; comes from the Arabic for &quot;lucky stars of the tents&quot;, &quot;sa&#x27;d al-akhbiya&quot;.

δ Aquarii, also known as &quot;Skat&quot; or &quot;Scheat&quot; is a blue-white spectral type A2 star with apparent magnitude 3.27 and luminosity .

ε Aquarii, also known as &quot;Albali&quot;, is a blue-white spectral type A1 star with apparent magnitude 3.77, absolute magnitude 1.2, and a luminosity of .

ζ Aquarii is a spectral type F2 double star; both stars are white. In combination, they appear to be magnitude 3.6 with luminosity . The primary has magnitude 4.53 and the secondary&#x27;s magnitude is 4.31, but both have absolute The system&#x27;s orbital period is 760 years; currently the two components are moving farther apart.

θ Aquarii, sometimes called &quot;Ancha&quot;, is spectral type G8 with apparent magnitude 4.16 and an absolute 

κ Aquarii, also called &quot;Situla&quot;, has an apparent 

λ Aquarii, also called &quot;Hudoor&quot; or &quot;Ekchusis&quot;, is spectral type M2 with magnitude 3.74 and luminosity .

ξ Aquarii, also called &quot;Bunda&quot;, is spectral type A7 with an apparent magnitude 4.69 and an absolute 

π Aquarii, also called &quot;Seat&quot;, is spectral type B0 with apparent magnitude 4.66 and absolute 

===Planetary systems===
Twelve exoplanet systems have been found in Aquarius as of 2013. Gliese 876, one of the nearest stars to Earth at a distance of 15 light-years, was the first red dwarf star to be found to possess a planetary system. It is orbited by four planets, including one terrestrial planet 6.6 times the mass of Earth. The planets vary in orbital period from 2 days to 124 days. 91 Aquarii is an orange giant star orbited by one planet, 91 Aquarii b. The planet&#x27;s mass is 2.9 times the mass of Jupiter, and its orbital period is 182 days. Gliese 849 is a red dwarf star orbited by the first known long-period Jupiter-like planet, Gliese 849 b. The planet&#x27;s mass is 0.99 times that of Jupiter and its orbital period is 1,852 days.

There are also less-prominent systems in Aquarius. WASP-6, a type G8 star of magnitude 12.4, is host to one exoplanet, WASP-6 b. The star is 307 parsecs from Earth and has a mass of 0.888 solar masses and a radius of 0.87 solar radii. WASP-6 b was discovered in 2008 by the transit method. It orbits its parent star every 3.36 days at a distance of 0.042 astronomical units (AU). It is 0.503 Jupiter masses but has a proportionally larger radius of 1.224 Jupiter radii. HD 206610, a K0 star located 194 parsecs from Earth, is host to one planet, HD 206610 b. The host star is larger than the Sun; more massive at 1.56 solar masses and larger at 6.1 solar radii. The planet was discovered by the radial velocity method in 2010 and has a mass of 2.2 Jupiter masses. It orbits every 610 days at a distance of 1.68 AU. Much closer to its sun is WASP-47 b, which orbits every 4.15 days only 0.052 AU from its sun, yellow dwarf (G9V) WASP-47. WASP-47 is close in size to the Sun, having a radius of 1.15 solar radii and a mass even closer at 1.08 solar masses. WASP-47 b was discovered in 2011 by the transit method, like WASP-6 b. It is slightly larger than Jupiter with a mass of 1.14 Jupiter masses and a radius of 1.15 Jupiter masses.

There are several more single-planet systems in Aquarius. HD 210277, a magnitude 6.63 yellow star located 21.29 parsecs from Earth, is host to one known planet: HD 210277 b. The 1.23 Jupiter mass planet orbits at nearly the same distance as Earth orbits the Sun1.1 AU, though its orbital period is significantly longer at around 442 days. HD 210277 b was discovered earlier than most of the other planets in Aquarius, detected by the radial velocity method in 1998. The star it orbits resembles the Sun beyond their similar spectral class; it has a radius of 1.1 solar radii and a mass of 1.09 solar masses. HD 212771 b, a larger planet at 2.3 Jupiter masses, orbits host star HD 212771 at a distance of 1.22 AU. The star itself, barely below the threshold of naked-eye visibility at magnitude 7.6, is a G8IV (yellow subgiant) star located 131 parsecs from Earth. Though it has a similar mass to the Sun1.15 solar massesit is significantly less dense with its radius of 5 solar radii. Its lone planet was discovered in 2010 by the radial velocity method, like several other exoplanets in the constellation.

As of 2013, there were only two known multiple-planet systems within the bounds of Aquarius: the Gliese 876 and HD 215152 systems. The former is quite prominent; the latter has only two planets and has a host star farther away at 21.5 parsecs. The HD 215152 system consists of the planets HD 215152 b and HD 215152 c orbiting their K0-type, magnitude 8.13 sun. Both discovered in 2011 by the radial velocity method, the two tiny planets orbit very close to their host star. HD 215152 c is the larger at 0.0097 Jupiter masses (still significantly larger than the Earth, which weighs in at 0.00315 Jupiter masses); its smaller sibling is barely smaller at 0.0087 Jupiter masses. The error in the mass measurements (0.0032 and respectively) is large enough to make this discrepancy statistically insignificant. HD 215152 c also orbits further from the star than HD 215152 b, 0.0852 AU compared to 0.0652.

On 23 February 2017, NASA announced that ultracool dwarf star TRAPPIST-1 in Aquarius has seven Earth-like rocky planets. Of these, as many as four may lie within the system&#x27;s habitable zone, and may have liquid water on their surfaces. The discovery of the TRAPPIST-1 system is seen by astronomers as a significant step toward finding life beyond Earth.

===Deep sky objects===
Because of its position away from the galactic plane, the majority of deep-sky objects in Aquarius are galaxies, globular clusters, and planetary nebulae. Aquarius contains three deep sky objects that are in the Messier catalog: the globular clusters Messier 2, Messier 72, and the asterism Messier 73. While M73 was originally catalogued as a sparsely populated open cluster, modern analysis indicates the 6 main stars are not close enough together to fit this definition, reclassifying M73 as an asterism. Two well-known planetary nebulae are also located in Aquarius: the Saturn Nebula (NGC 7009), to the southeast of μ Aquarii; and the famous Helix Nebula (NGC 7293), southwest of δ Aquarii.

M2, also catalogued as NGC 7089, is a rich globular cluster located approximately 37,000 light-years from Earth. At magnitude 6.5, it is viewable in small-aperture instruments, but a 100 mm aperture telescope is needed to resolve any stars. M72, also catalogued as NGC 6981, is a small 9th magnitude globular cluster located approximately 56,000 light-years from Earth. M73, also catalogued as NGC 6994, is an open cluster with highly disputed status.

Aquarius is also home to several planetary nebulae. NGC 7009, also known as the Saturn Nebula, is an 8th magnitude planetary nebula located 3,000 light-years from Earth. It was given its moniker by the 19th century astronomer Lord Rosse for its resemblance to the planet Saturn in a telescope; it has faint protrusions on either side that resemble Saturn&#x27;s rings. It appears blue-green in a telescope and has a central star of magnitude 11.3. Compared to the Helix Nebula, another planetary nebula in Aquarius, it is quite small. NGC 7293, also known as the Helix Nebula, is the closest planetary nebula to Earth at a distance of 650 light-years. It covers 0.25 square degrees, making it also the largest planetary nebula as seen from Earth. However, because it is so large, it is only viewable as a very faint object, though it has a fairly high integrated magnitude of 6.0.

One of the visible galaxies in Aquarius is NGC 7727, of particular interest for amateur astronomers who wish to discover or observe supernovae. A spiral galaxy (type S), it has an integrated magnitude of 10.7 and is 3 by 3 arcseconds. NGC 7252 is a tangle of stars resulting from the collision of two large galaxies and is known as the Atoms-for-Peace galaxy because of its resemblance to a cartoon atom.

===Meteor showers===
There are three major meteor showers with radiants in Aquarius: the Eta Aquariids, the Delta Aquariids, and the Iota Aquariids.

The Eta Aquariids are the strongest meteor shower radiating from Aquarius. It peaks between 5 and 6 May with a rate of approximately 35 meteors per hour. Originally discovered by Chinese astronomers in 401, Eta Aquariids can be seen coming from the Water Jar beginning on 21 April and as late as 12 May. The parent body of the shower is Halley&#x27;s Comet, a periodic comet. Fireballs are common shortly after the peak, approximately between 9 May and 11 May. The normal meteors appear to have yellow trails.

The Delta Aquariids is a double radiant meteor shower that peaks first on 29 July and second on 6 August. The first radiant is located in the south of the constellation, while the second radiant is located in the northern circlet of Pisces asterism. The southern radiant&#x27;s peak rate is about 20 meteors per hour, while the northern radiant&#x27;s peak rate is about 10 meteors per hour.

The Iota Aquariids is a fairly weak meteor shower that peaks on 6 August, with a rate of approximately 8 meteors per hour.

==Astrology==
, the Sun appears in the constellation Aquarius from 16 February to 12 March. In tropical astrology, the Sun is considered to be in the sign Aquarius from 20 January to 19 February, and in sidereal astrology, from 15 February to 14 March.

Aquarius is also associated with the Age of Aquarius, a concept popular in 1960s counterculture and Medieval Alchemy. The date of the start of The Age of Aquarius is a topic of much debate.

==Notes==
==See also==
* Aquarius (Chinese astronomy)

==References==
* 
* 
* 
* 
** 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 

==External links==

* The Deep Photographic Guide to the Constellations: Aquarius
* The clickable Aquarius
* Warburg Institute Iconographic Database (medieval and early modern images of Aquarius)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q10576" start="0" end="8" title="Aquarius (constellation)" label="Aquarius"/>
<link wikidata="Q187646" start="15" end="39" title="celestial equator" label="equatorial constellation"/>
<link wikidata="Q40540" start="47" end="53" title="zodiac" label="zodiac"/>
<link wikidata="Q10535" start="63" end="74" title="Capricornus" label="Capricornus"/>
<link wikidata="Q8679" start="79" end="85" title="Pisces (constellation)" label="Pisces"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="99" end="104" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q525" start="316" end="319" title="Sun" label="Sun"/>
<link wikidata="Q34943" start="416" end="423" title="Ptolemy" label="Ptolemy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7439839" start="518" end="521" title="Sea (astronomy)" label="Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q8839" start="594" end="599" title="Cetus" label="Cetus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1865281" start="604" end="609" title="whale" label="whale"/>
<link wikidata="Q152" start="622" end="626" title="fish" label="fish"/>
<link wikidata="Q10433" start="632" end="640" title="Eridanus (constellation)" label="Eridanus"/>
<link wikidata="Q4022" start="645" end="650" title="river" label="river"/>
<link wikidata="Q124313" start="656" end="674" title="apparent magnitude" label="apparent magnitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q13243" start="680" end="692" title="Beta Aquarii" label="Beta Aquarii"/>
<link wikidata="Q4450794" start="823" end="849" title="Babylonian star catalogues" label="Babylonian star catalogues"/>
<link wikidata="Q189726" start="873" end="875" title="Ea (god)" label="Ea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1123756" start="1000" end="1014" title="cylinder seals" label="cylinder seals"/>
<link wikidata="Q26257" start="1024" end="1041" title="2nd millennium BC" label="second millennium"/>
<link wikidata="Q207932" start="1060" end="1075" title="winter solstice" label="winter solstice"/>
<link wikidata="Q787929" start="1104" end="1128" title="Old Babylonian astronomy" label="Old Babylonian astronomy"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1438" end="1461" title="Egyptian astronomy#Ancient Egypt" label="Ancient Egypt astronomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1519552" start="1503" end="1520" title="flood of the Nile" label="flood of the Nile"/>
<link wikidata="Q2390452" start="1619" end="1634" title="Ancient Greek astronomy" label="Greek tradition"/>
<link wikidata="Q10409" start="1736" end="1752" title="Piscis Austrinus" label="Piscis Austrinus"/>
<link wikidata="Q740253" start="1770" end="1782" title="Hindu zodiac" label="Hindu zodiac"/>
<link wikidata="Q207715" start="1900" end="1909" title="Deucalion" label="Deucalion"/>
<link wikidata="Q83160" start="1922" end="1932" title="Prometheus" label="Prometheus"/>
<link wikidata="Q622809" start="1964" end="1970" title="Pyrrha" label="Pyrrha"/>
<link wikidata="Q105261" start="2052" end="2067" title="Mount Parnassus" label="Mount Parnassus"/>
<link wikidata="Q131588" start="2122" end="2130" title="Ganymede (mythology)" label="Ganymede"/>
<link wikidata="Q34726" start="2143" end="2158" title="Greek mythology" label="Greek mythology"/>
<link wikidata="Q22647" start="2174" end="2180" title="Troy" label="Trojan"/>
<link wikidata="Q599482" start="2186" end="2190" title="Tros (mythology)" label="Tros"/>
<link wikidata="Q80344" start="2209" end="2222" title="Mount Olympus" label="Mount Olympus"/>
<link wikidata="Q34201" start="2226" end="2230" title="Zeus" label="Zeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q34726" start="2260" end="2264" title="Greek pantheon" label="gods"/>
<link wikidata="Q10586" start="2278" end="2284" title="Aquila (constellation)" label="Aquila"/>
<link wikidata="Q500739" start="2551" end="2560" title="Cecrops I" label="Cecrops I"/>
<link wikidata="Q1524" start="2572" end="2578" title="Athens" label="Athens"/>
<link wikidata="Q179723" start="2583" end="2592" title="sacrifice" label="sacrifice"/>
<link wikidata="Q282" start="2611" end="2615" title="wine" label="wine"/>
<link wikidata="Q34943" start="2669" end="2676" title="Ptolemy" label="Ptolemy"/>
<link wikidata="Q155952" start="2690" end="2698" title="Almagest" label="Almagest"/>
<link wikidata="Q13252" start="2826" end="2838" title="Zeta Aquarii" label="Zeta Aquarii"/>
<link wikidata="Q13169" start="2906" end="2915" title="Fomalhaut" label="Fomalhaut"/>
<link wikidata="Q2446746" start="3019" end="3029" title="25 Aquarii" label="25 Aquarii"/>
<link wikidata="Q13246" start="3121" end="3126" title="Alpha Aquarii" label="Alpha"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146408" start="3131" end="3144" title="Gamma Aquarii" label="Gamma Aquarii"/>
<link wikidata="Q1268276" start="3190" end="3207" title="Chinese astronomy" label="Chinese astronomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q8201" start="3353" end="3358" title="Hanzi" label="Hanzi"/>
<link wikidata="Q190552" start="4190" end="4204" title="Hindu calendar" label="Hindu calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q3200366" start="4229" end="4235" title="Kumbha" label="Kumbha"/>
<link wikidata="Q3200366" start="4241" end="4247" title="Kumbha" label="Kumbha"/>
<link wikidata="Q162119" start="4307" end="4315" title="Aquarius (astrology)" label="Aquarius"/>
<link wikidata="Q9286" start="4466" end="4474" title="Sculptor (constellation)" label="Sculptor"/>
<link wikidata="Q162875" start="4784" end="4793" title="mausoleum" label="mausoleum"/>
<link wikidata="Q6413359" start="5044" end="5057" title="lunar mansion" label="lunar mansion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1627992" start="5162" end="5172" title="handmaiden" label="handmaiden"/>
<link wikidata="Q8865" start="5641" end="5649" title="Scorpius" label="Scorpius"/>
<link wikidata="Q10584" start="5654" end="5659" title="Aries (constellation)" label="Aries"/>
<link wikidata="Q44559" start="6080" end="6097" title="extrasolar planet" label="planetary systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q13246" start="6125" end="6134" title="Alpha Aquarii" label="α Aquarii"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146408" start="6960" end="6969" title="Gamma Aquarii" label="γ Aquarii"/>
<link wikidata="Q13250" start="7391" end="7400" title="delta Aquarii" label="δ Aquarii"/>
<link wikidata="Q105902" start="7526" end="7536" title="luminosity" label="luminosity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501569" start="7540" end="7549" title="epsilon Aquarii" label="ε Aquarii"/>
<link wikidata="Q159653" start="7653" end="7671" title="absolute magnitude" label="absolute magnitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q13252" start="7700" end="7709" title="zeta Aquarii" label="ζ Aquarii"/>
<link wikidata="Q13890" start="7732" end="7743" title="double star" label="double star"/>
<link wikidata="Q337846" start="8034" end="8043" title="theta Aquarii" label="θ Aquarii"/>
<link wikidata="Q1759022" start="8148" end="8157" title="Kappa Aquarii" label="κ Aquarii"/>
<link wikidata="Q2545411" start="8209" end="8218" title="lambda Aquarii" label="λ Aquarii"/>
<link wikidata="Q25377588" start="8279" end="8295" title="M-type star" label="spectral type M2"/>
<link wikidata="Q1005366" start="8334" end="8343" title="xi Aquarii" label="ξ Aquarii"/>
<link wikidata="Q25377588" start="8379" end="8395" title="A-type star" label="spectral type A7"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194554" start="8446" end="8455" title="pi Aquarii" label="π Aquarii"/>
<link wikidata="Q25377588" start="8490" end="8506" title="B-type star" label="spectral type B0"/>
<link wikidata="Q740780" start="8640" end="8650" title="Gliese 876" label="Gliese 876"/>
<link wikidata="Q5893" start="8733" end="8742" title="red dwarf" label="red dwarf"/>
<link wikidata="Q206717" start="8773" end="8789" title="planetary system" label="planetary system"/>
<link wikidata="Q128207" start="8836" end="8854" title="terrestrial planet" label="terrestrial planet"/>
<link wikidata="Q284836" start="8944" end="8954" title="91 Aquarii" label="91 Aquarii"/>
<link wikidata="Q5875" start="8961" end="8973" title="orange giant" label="orange giant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070265" start="9002" end="9014" title="91 Aquarii b" label="91 Aquarii b"/>
<link wikidata="Q955530" start="9109" end="9119" title="Gliese 849" label="Gliese 849"/>
<link wikidata="Q1170862" start="9200" end="9212" title="Gliese 849 b" label="Gliese 849 b"/>
<link wikidata="Q1811358" start="9357" end="9363" title="WASP-6" label="WASP-6"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196362" start="9425" end="9433" title="WASP-6 b" label="WASP-6 b"/>
<link wikidata="Q12129" start="9451" end="9457" title="parsec" label="parsec"/>
<link wikidata="Q180892" start="9494" end="9504" title="solar mass" label="solar mass"/>
<link wikidata="Q48440" start="9528" end="9539" title="solar radii" label="solar radii"/>
<link wikidata="Q591022" start="9580" end="9594" title="transit method" label="transit method"/>
<link wikidata="Q1811" start="9661" end="9678" title="astronomical unit" label="astronomical unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q651336" start="9698" end="9710" title="Jupiter mass" label="Jupiter mass"/>
<link wikidata="Q3421309" start="9761" end="9774" title="Jupiter radius" label="Jupiter radii"/>
<link wikidata="Q4039897" start="9776" end="9785" title="HD 206610" label="HD 206610"/>
<link wikidata="Q4039902" start="9852" end="9863" title="HD 206610 b" label="HD 206610 b"/>
<link wikidata="Q25389922" start="10147" end="10156" title="WASP-47 b" label="WASP-47 b"/>
<link wikidata="Q25389922" start="10234" end="10241" title="WASP-47" label="WASP-47"/>
<link wikidata="Q1563271" start="10598" end="10607" title="HD 210277" label="HD 210277"/>
<link wikidata="Q1077290" start="10701" end="10712" title="HD 210277 b" label="HD 210277 b"/>
<link wikidata="Q25377588" start="11064" end="11078" title="spectral class" label="spectral class"/>
<link wikidata="Q4039904" start="11148" end="11159" title="HD 212771 b" label="HD 212771 b"/>
<link wikidata="Q4039898" start="11217" end="11226" title="HD 212771" label="HD 212771"/>
<link wikidata="Q24910866" start="11760" end="11769" title="HD 215152" label="HD 215152"/>
<link wikidata="Q24910866" start="11937" end="11948" title="HD 215152 b" label="HD 215152 b"/>
<link wikidata="Q24910866" start="11953" end="11964" title="HD 215152 c" label="HD 215152 c"/>
<link wikidata="Q29485" start="12329" end="12334" title="error" label="error"/>
<link wikidata="Q24039974" start="12592" end="12612" title="Ultra-cool dwarf" label="ultracool dwarf star"/>
<link wikidata="Q23986556" start="12613" end="12623" title="TRAPPIST-1" label="TRAPPIST-1"/>
<link wikidata="Q44559" start="12646" end="12670" title="Exoplanet" label="Earth-like rocky planets"/>
<link wikidata="Q215913" start="12731" end="12745" title="habitable zone" label="habitable zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q249389" start="13113" end="13128" title="deep sky object" label="deep sky object"/>
<link wikidata="Q14530" start="13146" end="13161" title="Messier catalog" label="Messier catalog"/>
<link wikidata="Q11099" start="13185" end="13194" title="Messier 2" label="Messier 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q14008" start="13196" end="13206" title="Messier 72" label="Messier 72"/>
<link wikidata="Q14009" start="13225" end="13235" title="Messier 73" label="Messier 73"/>
<link wikidata="Q13632" start="13457" end="13473" title="planetary nebula" label="planetary nebula"/>
<link wikidata="Q15831" start="13509" end="13522" title="Saturn Nebula" label="Saturn Nebula"/>
<link wikidata="Q3291470" start="13555" end="13564" title="μ Aquarii" label="μ Aquarii"/>
<link wikidata="Q97017154" start="13581" end="13593" title="Helix Nebula" label="Helix Nebula"/>
<link wikidata="Q13250" start="13619" end="13628" title="δ Aquarii" label="δ Aquarii"/>
<link wikidata="Q6434802" start="13786" end="13794" title="aperture" label="aperture"/>
<link wikidata="Q4213" start="13830" end="13839" title="telescope" label="telescope"/>
<link wikidata="Q15831" start="14136" end="14144" title="NGC 7009" label="NGC 7009"/>
<link wikidata="Q310121" start="14310" end="14320" title="Lord Rosse" label="Lord Rosse"/>
<link wikidata="Q193" start="14355" end="14361" title="Saturn" label="Saturn"/>
<link wikidata="Q194" start="14432" end="14451" title="Saturn&amp;#x27;s rings" label="Saturn&amp;#x27;s rings"/>
<link wikidata="Q97017154" start="14619" end="14627" title="NGC 7293" label="NGC 7293"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048103" start="14936" end="14956" title="integrated magnitude" label="integrated magnitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139565" start="15009" end="15017" title="NGC 7727" label="NGC 7727"/>
<link wikidata="Q3937" start="15098" end="15108" title="supernovae" label="supernovae"/>
<link wikidata="Q2488" start="15112" end="15125" title="spiral galaxy" label="spiral galaxy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1648748" start="15127" end="15133" title="galaxy morphological classification" label="type S"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048103" start="15146" end="15166" title="integrated magnitude" label="integrated magnitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q869582" start="15201" end="15209" title="NGC 7252" label="NGC 7252"/>
<link wikidata="Q258190" start="15435" end="15442" title="radiant (meteor shower)" label="radiant"/>
<link wikidata="Q249546" start="15461" end="15474" title="Eta Aquariids" label="Eta Aquariids"/>
<link wikidata="Q2914592" start="15480" end="15495" title="Delta Aquariids" label="Delta Aquariids"/>
<link wikidata="Q71928" start="15830" end="15841" title="parent body" label="parent body"/>
<link wikidata="Q23054" start="15859" end="15878" title="Halley&amp;#x27;s Comet" label="Halley&amp;#x27;s Comet"/>
<link wikidata="Q28872341" start="15882" end="15896" title="periodic comet" label="periodic comet"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15898" end="15906" title="Meteoroid#Fireball" label="Fireball"/>
<link wikidata="Q2281810" start="16645" end="16663" title="tropical astrology" label="tropical astrology"/>
<link wikidata="Q162119" start="16705" end="16713" title="Aquarius (astrology)" label="Aquarius"/>
<link wikidata="Q2281810" start="16753" end="16771" title="sidereal astrology" label="sidereal astrology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1569944" start="16841" end="16856" title="Age of Aquarius" label="Age of Aquarius"/>
<link wikidata="Q2995893" start="16879" end="16899" title="1960s counterculture" label="1960s counterculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q39689" start="16913" end="16920" title="Alchemy" label="Alchemy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4782762" start="17020" end="17048" title="Aquarius (Chinese astronomy)" label="Aquarius (Chinese astronomy)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="800" wikidata="Q1107" url="?curid=800" title="Anime">
<text>is hand-drawn and computer-generated animation originating from Japan. Outside Japan and in English, &quot;anime&quot; refers specifically to animation produced in Japan. However, in Japan and in Japanese, describes all animated works, regardless of style or origin. Many works of animation with a similar style to Japanese animation are also produced outside Japan. Video games sometimes also feature themes and art styles that are sometimes labelled as anime.

The earliest commercial Japanese animation dates to 1917. A characteristic art style emerged in the 1960s with the works of cartoonist Osamu Tezuka and spread in the following decades, developing a large domestic audience. Anime is distributed theatrically, through television broadcasts, directly to home media, and over the Internet. In addition to original works, anime are often adaptations of Japanese comics (manga), light novels, or video games. It is classified into numerous genres targeting various broad and niche audiences.

Anime is a diverse medium with distinctive production methods that have adapted in response to emergent technologies. It combines graphic art, characterization, cinematography, and other forms of imaginative and individualistic techniques. Compared to Western animation, anime production generally focuses less on movement, and more on the detail of settings and use of &quot;camera effects&quot;, such as panning, zooming, and angle shots. Diverse art styles are used, and character proportions and features can be quite varied, with a common characteristic feature being large and emotive eyes.

The anime industry consists of over 430 production companies, including major studios such as Studio Ghibli, Kyoto Animation, Sunrise, Bones, Ufotable, MAPPA, Wit Studio, CoMix Wave Films, Madhouse, Inc., TMS Entertainment, Pierrot, Production I.G, Nippon Animation and Toei Animation. Since the 1980s, the medium has also seen widespread international success with the rise of foreign dubbed, subtitled programming, and since the 2010s due to the rise of streaming services and a widening demographic embrace of anime culture, both within Japan and worldwide. Japanese animation accounted for 60% of the world&#x27;s animated television shows.

== Etymology ==
As a type of animation, anime is an art form that comprises many genres found in other mediums; it is sometimes mistakenly classified as a genre itself. In Japanese, the term &quot;anime&quot; is used to refer to all animated works, regardless of style or origin. English-language dictionaries typically define &quot;anime&quot; () as &quot;a style of Japanese animation&quot; or as &quot;a style of animation originating in Japan&quot;. Other definitions are based on origin, making production in Japan a requisite for a work to be considered &quot;anime&quot;.

The etymology of the term &quot;anime&quot; is disputed. The English word &quot;animation&quot; is written in Japanese &quot;katakana&quot; as () and as (, ) in its shortened form. Some sources claim that the term is derived from the French term for animation (&quot;cartoon&quot;, literally &#x27;animated drawing&#x27;), but others believe this to be a myth derived from the popularity of anime in France in the late 1970s and 1980s.

In English, &quot;anime&quot;—when used as a common noun—normally functions as a mass noun. (For example: &quot;Do you watch anime?&quot; or &quot;How much anime have you watched?&quot;) As with a few other Japanese words, such as &quot;saké&quot; and &quot;Pokémon&quot;, English texts sometimes spell &quot;anime&quot; as &quot;animé&quot; (as in French), with an acute accent over the final &quot;e&quot;, to cue the reader to pronounce the letter, not to leave it silent as English orthography may suggest. Prior to the widespread use of &quot;anime&quot;, the term &quot;Japanimation&quot;, a portmanteau of Japan and animation, was prevalent throughout the 1970s and 1980s. In the mid-1980s, the term &quot;anime&quot; began to supplant &quot;Japanimation&quot;; in general, the latter term now only appears in period works where it is used to distinguish and identify Japanese animation.

== History ==
=== Precursors ===
 and shadow plays (&quot;kage-e&quot;) are considered precursors of Japanese animation. was common in the eleventh century. Traveling storytellers narrated legends and anecdotes while the was unrolled from the right to left in chronological order, as a moving panorama. &quot;Kage-e&quot; was popular during the Edo period and originated from the shadow plays of China. Magic lanterns from the Netherlands were also popular in the eighteenth century. The paper play called &quot;kamishibai&quot; surged in the twelfth century and remained popular in the street theater until the 1930s. Puppets of the Bunraku theater and &quot;ukiyo-e&quot; prints are considered ancestors of characters of most Japanese animation. Finally, manga were a heavy inspiration for anime. Cartoonists Kitzawa Rakuten and Okamoto Ippei used film elements in their strips.

=== Pioneers ===
Animation in Japan began in the early 20th century, when filmmakers started to experiment with techniques pioneered in France, Germany, the United States, and Russia. A claim for the earliest Japanese animation is &quot;Katsudō Shashin&quot; (), a private work by an unknown creator. In 1917, the first professional and publicly displayed works began to appear; animators such as Ōten Shimokawa, Seitarō Kitayama, and Jun&#x27;ichi Kōuchi (considered the &quot;fathers of anime&quot;) produced numerous films, the oldest surviving of which is Kōuchi&#x27;s &quot;Namakura Gatana&quot;. Many early works were lost with the destruction of Shimokawa&#x27;s warehouse in the 1923 Great Kantō earthquake.

By the mid-1930s, animation was well-established in Japan as an alternative format to the live-action industry. It suffered competition from foreign producers, such as Disney, and many animators, including Noburō Ōfuji and Yasuji Murata, continued to work with cheaper cutout animation rather than cel animation. Other creators, including Kenzō Masaoka and Mitsuyo Seo, nevertheless made great strides in technique, benefiting from the patronage of the government, which employed animators to produce educational shorts and propaganda. In 1940, the government dissolved several artists&#x27; organizations to form the The first talkie anime was &quot;Chikara to Onna no Yo no Naka&quot; (1933), a short film produced by Masaoka. The first feature-length anime film was &quot;&quot; (1945), produced by Seo with a sponsorship from the Imperial Japanese Navy. The 1950s saw a proliferation of short, animated advertisements created for television.

===Modern era===
In the 1960s, manga artist and animator Osamu Tezuka adapted and simplified Disney animation techniques to reduce costs and limit frame counts in his productions. Originally intended as temporary measures to allow him to produce material on a tight schedule with inexperienced staff, many of his limited animation practices came to define the medium&#x27;s style. &quot;Three Tales&quot; (1960) was the first anime film broadcast on television; the first anime television series was &quot;Instant History&quot; (1961–64). An early and influential success was &quot;Astro Boy&quot; (1963–66), a television series directed by Tezuka based on his manga of the same name. Many animators at Tezuka&#x27;s Mushi Production later established major anime studios (including Madhouse, Sunrise, and Pierrot).

The 1970s saw growth in the popularity of manga, many of which were later animated. Tezuka&#x27;s work—and that of other pioneers in the field—inspired characteristics and genres that remain fundamental elements of anime today. The giant robot genre (also known as &quot;mecha&quot;), for instance, took shape under Tezuka, developed into the super robot genre under Go Nagai and others, and was revolutionized at the end of the decade by Yoshiyuki Tomino, who developed the real robot genre. Robot anime series such as &quot;Gundam&quot; and &quot;Super Dimension Fortress Macross&quot; became instant classics in the 1980s, and the genre remained one of the most popular in the following decades. The bubble economy of the 1980s spurred a new era of high-budget and experimental anime films, including &quot;Nausicaä of the Valley of the Wind&quot; (1984), &quot;Royal Space Force: The Wings of Honnêamise&quot; (1987), and &quot;Akira&quot; (1988).

&quot;Neon Genesis Evangelion&quot; (1995), a television series produced by Gainax and directed by Hideaki Anno, began another era of experimental anime titles, such as &quot;Ghost in the Shell&quot; (1995) and &quot;Cowboy Bebop&quot; (1998). In the 1990s, anime also began attracting greater interest in Western countries; major international successes include &quot;Sailor Moon&quot; and &quot;Dragon Ball Z&quot;, both of which were dubbed into more than a dozen languages worldwide. In 2003, &quot;Spirited Away&quot;, a Studio Ghibli feature film directed by Hayao Miyazaki, won the Academy Award for Best Animated Feature at the 75th Academy Awards. It later became the highest-grossing anime film, earning more than $355 million. Since the 2000s, an increased number of anime works have been adaptations of light novels and visual novels; successful examples include &quot;The Melancholy of Haruhi Suzumiya&quot; and &quot;Fate/stay night&quot; (both 2006). &quot;Demon Slayer: Kimetsu no Yaiba the Movie: Mugen Train&quot; became the highest-grossing Japanese film and one of the world&#x27;s highest-grossing films of 2020. It also became the fastest grossing film in Japanese cinema, because in 10 days it made 10 billion yen ($95.3m; £72m). It beat the previous record of &quot;Spirited Away&quot; which took 25 days.

In 2021, the anime adaptations of &quot;Jujutsu Kaisen&quot;, &quot;Demon Slayer: Kimetsu no Yaiba&quot; and &quot;Tokyo Revengers&quot; were among the top 10 most discussed TV shows worldwide on Twitter. In 2022, &quot;Attack on Titan&quot; won the award of &quot;Most In-Demand TV Series in the World 2021&quot; in the Global TV Demand Awards. &quot;Attack on Titan&quot; became the first ever non-English language series to earn the title of World&#x27;s Most In-Demand TV Show, previously held by only &quot;The Walking Dead&quot; and &quot;Game of Thrones&quot;. In 2024, &quot;Jujutsu Kaisen&quot; broke the Guinness World Record for the &quot;Most in-demand animated TV show&quot; with a global demand rating 71.2 times than that of the average TV show, previously held by &quot;Attack on Titan&quot;.

== Attributes ==
Anime differs from other forms of animation by its art styles, methods of animation, its production, and its process. Visually, anime works exhibit a wide variety of art styles, differing between creators, artists, and studios. While no single art style predominates anime as a whole, they do share some similar attributes in terms of animation technique and character design.

Anime is fundamentally characterized by the use of limited animation, flat expression, the suspension of time, its thematic range, the presence of historical figures, its complex narrative line and, above all, a peculiar drawing style, with characters characterized by large and oval eyes, with very defined lines, bright colors and reduced movement of the lips.

=== Technique ===
Modern anime follows a typical animation production process, involving storyboarding, voice acting, character design, and cel production. Since the 1990s, animators have increasingly used computer animation to improve the efficiency of the production process. Early anime works were experimental, and consisted of images drawn on blackboards, stop motion animation of paper cutouts, and silhouette animation. Cel animation grew in popularity until it came to dominate the medium. In the 21st century, the use of other animation techniques is mostly limited to independent short films, including the stop motion puppet animation work produced by Tadahito Mochinaga, Kihachirō Kawamoto and Tomoyasu Murata. Computers were integrated into the animation process in the 1990s, with works such as &quot;Ghost in the Shell&quot; and &quot;Princess Mononoke&quot; mixing cel animation with computer-generated images. Fuji Film, a major cel production company, announced it would stop cel production, producing an industry panic to procure cel imports and hastening the switch to digital processes.

Prior to the digital era, anime was produced with traditional animation methods using a pose to pose approach. The majority of mainstream anime uses fewer expressive key frames and more in-between animation.

Japanese animation studios were pioneers of many limited animation techniques, and have given anime a distinct set of conventions. Unlike Disney animation, where the emphasis is on the movement, anime emphasizes the art quality and let limited animation techniques make up for the lack of time spent on movement. Such techniques are often used not only to meet deadlines but also as artistic devices. Anime scenes place emphasis on achieving three-dimensional views, and backgrounds are instrumental in creating the atmosphere of the work. The backgrounds are not always invented and are occasionally based on real locations, as exemplified in &quot;Howl&#x27;s Moving Castle&quot; and &quot;The Melancholy of Haruhi Suzumiya&quot;. Oppliger stated that anime is one of the rare mediums where putting together an all-star cast usually comes out looking &quot;tremendously impressive&quot;.

The cinematic effects of anime differentiates itself from the stage plays found in American animation. Anime is cinematically shot as if by camera, including panning, zooming, distance and angle shots to more complex dynamic shots that would be difficult to produce in reality. In anime, the animation is produced before the voice acting, contrary to American animation which does the voice acting first.

=== Characters ===
The body proportions of human anime characters tend to accurately reflect the proportions of the human body in reality. The height of the head is considered by the artist as the base unit of proportion. Head to height ratios vary drastically by art style, with most anime characters falling between 5 and 8 heads tall. Anime artists occasionally make deliberate modifications to body proportions to produce chibi characters that feature a disproportionately small body compared to the head; many chibi characters are two to four heads tall. Some anime works like &quot;Crayon Shin-chan&quot; completely disregard these proportions, in such a way that they resemble caricatured Western cartoons.

A common anime character design convention is exaggerated eye size. The animation of characters with large eyes in anime can be traced back to Osamu Tezuka, who was deeply influenced by such early animation characters as Betty Boop, who was drawn with disproportionately large eyes. Tezuka is a central figure in anime and manga history, whose iconic art style and character designs allowed for the entire range of human emotions to be depicted solely through the eyes. The artist adds variable color shading to the eyes and particularly to the cornea to give them greater depth. Generally, a mixture of a light shade, the tone color, and a dark shade is used. However, not all anime characters have large eyes. For example, the works of Hayao Miyazaki are known for having realistically proportioned eyes, as well as realistic hair colors on their characters.

Hair in anime is often unnaturally lively and colorful or uniquely styled. The movement of hair in anime is exaggerated and &quot;hair actions&quot; is used to emphasize the action and emotions of characters for added visual effect. Gilles Poitras traces hairstyle color to cover illustrations on manga, where eye-catching artwork and colorful tones are attractive for children&#x27;s manga. Some anime will depict non-Japanese characters with specific ethnic features, such as a pronounced nose and jutting jaw for European characters. In other cases, anime feature characters whose race or nationality is not always defined, and this is often a deliberate decision, such as in the &quot;Pokémon&quot; animated series.

Anime and manga artists often draw from a common canon of iconic facial expression illustrations to denote particular moods and thoughts. These techniques are often different in form than their counterparts in Western animation, and they include a fixed iconography that is used as shorthand for certain emotions and moods. For example, a male character may develop a nosebleed when aroused. A variety of visual symbols are employed, including sweat drops to depict nervousness, visible blushing for embarrassment, or glowing eyes for an intense glare. Another recurring sight gag is the use of chibi (deformed, simplified character designs) figures to comedically punctuate emotions like confusion or embarrassment.

=== Music ===
The opening and credits sequences of most anime television series are accompanied by J-pop or J-rock songs, often by reputed bands—as written with the series in mind—but are also aimed at the general music market, therefore they often allude only vaguely or not at all, to the thematic settings or plot of the series. Also, they are often used as incidental music (&quot;insert songs&quot;) in an episode, in order to highlight particularly important scenes.

Future funk, a musical microgenre that evolved in the early 2010s from Vaporwave with a French house Euro disco influence, heavily uses anime visuals and samples along with Japanese City pop to build an aesthetic.

Since the 2020s anime songs have experienced a rapid growth in global online popularity due to their widened availability on music streaming services like Spotify and promotion by fans and artists on social media. In 2023, the opening theme &quot;Idol&quot; by Yoasobi of the anime series &quot;Oshi no Ko&quot; topped the Billboard Global 200 Excl. U.S. charts with 45.7 million streams and 24,000 copies sold outside the U.S. &quot;Idol&quot; has become the first Japanese song and anime song to top the Billboard Global chart as well as taking the first spot on the Apple Music&#x27;s Top 100: Global chart.

=== Genres ===
Anime are often classified by target demographic, including , , , , and a diverse range of genres targeting an adult audience. Shōjo and shōnen anime sometimes contain elements popular with children of all genders in an attempt to gain crossover appeal. Adult anime may feature a slower pace or greater plot complexity that younger audiences may typically find unappealing, as well as adult themes and situations. A subset of adult anime works featuring pornographic elements are labeled &quot;R18&quot; in Japan, and are internationally known as &quot;hentai&quot; (originating from ). By contrast, some anime subgenres incorporate &quot;ecchi&quot;, sexual themes or undertones without depictions of sexual intercourse, as typified in the comedic or harem genres; due to its popularity among adolescent and adult anime enthusiasts, the inclusion of such elements is considered a form of fan service. Some genres explore homosexual romances, such as &quot;yaoi&quot; (male homosexuality) and &quot;yuri&quot; (female homosexuality). While often used in a pornographic context, the terms &quot;yaoi&quot; and &quot;yuri&quot; can also be used broadly in a wider context to describe or focus on the themes or the development of the relationships themselves.

Anime&#x27;s genre classification differs from other types of animation and does not lend itself to simple classification. Gilles Poitras compared the labeling of &quot;Gundam 0080&quot; and its complex depiction of war as a &quot;giant robot&quot; anime akin to simply labeling &quot;War and Peace&quot; a &quot;war novel&quot;. Science fiction is a major anime genre and includes important historical works like Tezuka&#x27;s &quot;Astro Boy&quot; and Yokoyama&#x27;s &quot;Tetsujin 28-go&quot;. A major subgenre of science fiction is mecha, with the &quot;Gundam&quot; metaseries being iconic. The diverse fantasy genre includes works based on Asian and Western traditions and folklore; examples include the Japanese feudal fairytale &quot;InuYasha&quot;, and the depiction of Scandinavian goddesses who move to Japan to maintain a computer called Yggdrasil in &quot;Ah! My Goddess&quot;. Genre crossing in anime is also prevalent, such as the blend of fantasy and comedy in &quot;Dragon Half&quot;, and the incorporation of slapstick humor in the crime anime film &quot;Castle of Cagliostro&quot;. Other subgenres found in anime include magical girl, harem, sports, martial arts, literary adaptations, medievalism, and war.

=== Formats ===
Early anime works were made for theatrical viewing, and required played musical components before sound and vocal components were added to the production. In 1958, Nippon Television aired &quot;Mogura no Abanchūru&quot; (&quot;Mole&#x27;s Adventure&quot;), both the first televised and first color anime to debut. It was not until the 1960s when the first televised series were broadcast and it has remained a popular medium since. Works released in a direct-to-video format are called &quot;original video animation&quot; (OVA) or &quot;original animation video&quot; (OAV); and are typically not released theatrically or televised prior to home media release. The emergence of the Internet has led some animators to distribute works online in a format called &quot;original net animation&quot; (ONA).

The home distribution of anime releases was popularized in the 1980s with the VHS and LaserDisc formats. The VHS NTSC video format used in both Japan and the United States is credited with aiding the rising popularity of anime in the 1990s. The LaserDisc and VHS formats were transcended by the DVD format which offered the unique advantages; including multiple subtitling and dubbing tracks on the same disc. The DVD format also has its drawbacks in its usage of region coding; adopted by the industry to solve licensing, piracy and export problems and restricted region indicated on the DVD player. The Video CD (VCD) format was popular in Hong Kong and Taiwan, but became only a minor format in the United States that was closely associated with bootleg copies.

A key characteristic of many anime television shows is serialization, where a continuous story arc stretches over multiple episodes or seasons. Traditional American television had an episodic format, with each episode typically consisting of a self-contained story. In contrast, anime shows such as &quot;Dragon Ball Z&quot; had a serialization format, where continuous story arcs stretch over multiple episodes or seasons, which distinguished them from traditional American television shows; serialization has since also become a common characteristic of American streaming television shows during the &quot;Peak TV&quot; era.

== Industry ==

The animation industry consists of more than 430 production companies with some of the major studios including Toei Animation, Gainax, Madhouse, Gonzo, Sunrise, Bones, TMS Entertainment, Nippon Animation, P.A.Works, Studio Pierrot, Production I.G, Ufotable and Studio Ghibli. Many of the studios are organized into a trade association, The Association of Japanese Animations. There is also a labor union for workers in the industry, the Japanese Animation Creators Association. Studios will often work together to produce more complex and costly projects, as done with Studio Ghibli&#x27;s &quot;Spirited Away&quot;. An anime episode can cost between US$100,000 and US$300,000 to produce. In 2001, animation accounted for 7% of the Japanese film market, above the 4.6% market share for live-action works. The popularity and success of anime is seen through the profitability of the DVD market, contributing nearly 70% of total sales. According to a 2016 article on &quot;Nikkei Asian Review&quot;, Japanese television stations have bought over worth of anime from production companies &quot;over the past few years&quot;, compared with under from overseas. There has been a rise in sales of shows to television stations in Japan, caused by late night anime with adults as the target demographic. This type of anime is less popular outside Japan, being considered &quot;more of a niche product&quot;. &quot;Spirited Away&quot; (2001) was the all-time highest-grossing film in Japan until overtaken by &quot;Demon Slayer: Kimetsu no Yaiba – The Movie: Mugen Train&quot; in 2020. It was also the highest-grossing anime film worldwide until it was overtaken by Makoto Shinkai&#x27;s 2016 film &quot;Your Name&quot;. Anime films represent a large part of the highest-grossing Japanese films yearly in Japan, with 6 out of the top 10 in 2014, 2015 and also in 2016.

Anime has to be licensed by companies in other countries in order to be legally released. While anime has been licensed by its Japanese owners for use outside Japan since at least the 1960s, the practice became well-established in the United States in the late 1970s to early 1980s, when such TV series as &quot;Gatchaman&quot; and &quot;Captain Harlock&quot; were licensed from their Japanese parent companies for distribution in the US market. The trend towards American distribution of anime continued into the 1980s with the licensing of titles such as &quot;Voltron&quot; and the &#x27;creation&#x27; of new series such as &quot;Robotech&quot; through the use of source material from several original series.

In the early 1990s, several companies began to experiment with the licensing of less child-oriented material. Some, such as A.D. Vision, and Central Park Media and its imprints, achieved fairly substantial commercial success and went on to become major players in the now very lucrative American anime market. Others, such as AnimEigo, achieved limited success. Many companies created directly by Japanese parent companies did not do as well, most releasing only one or two titles before completing their American operations.

Licenses are expensive, often hundreds of thousands of dollars for one series and tens of thousands for one movie. The prices vary widely; for example, &quot;&quot; cost only $91,000 to license while &quot;Kurau Phantom Memory&quot; cost $960,000. Simulcast Internet streaming rights can be cheaper, with prices around $1,000–2,000 an episode, but can also be more expensive, with some series costing more than per episode.

The anime market for the United States was worth approximately $2.74 billion in 2009. Dubbed animation began airing in the United States in 2000 on networks like The WB and Cartoon Network&#x27;s Adult Swim. In 2005, this resulted in five of the top ten anime titles having previously aired on Cartoon Network. As a part of localization, some editing of cultural references may occur to better follow the references of the non-Japanese culture. The cost of English localization averages US$10,000 per episode.

The industry has been subject to both praise and condemnation for fansubs, the addition of unlicensed and unauthorized subtitled translations of anime series or films. Fansubs, which were originally distributed on VHS bootlegged cassettes in the 1980s, have been freely available and disseminated online since the 1990s. Since this practice raises concerns for copyright and piracy issues, fansubbers tend to adhere to an unwritten moral code to destroy or no longer distribute an anime once an official translated or subtitled version becomes licensed. They also try to encourage viewers to buy an official copy of the release once it comes out in English, although fansubs typically continue to circulate through file-sharing networks. Even so, the laid back regulations of the Japanese animation industry tend to overlook these issues, allowing it to grow underground and thus increasing its popularity until there is a demand for official high-quality releases for animation companies. This has led to an increase in global popularity of Japanese animation, reaching $40 million in sales in 2004. Fansub practices have rapidly declined since the early-2010s due to the advent of legal streaming services which simulcast new anime series often within a few hours of their domestic release.

Since the 2010s, anime has become a global multibillion industry setting a sales record in 2017 of ¥2.15 trillion ($19.8 billion), driven largely by demand from overseas audiences. In 2019, Japan&#x27;s anime industry was valued at $24 billion a year with 48% of that revenue coming from overseas (which is now its largest industry sector). By 2025 the anime industry is expected to reach a value of $30 billion with over 60% of that revenue coming from
overseas.

=== Markets ===
Japan External Trade Organization (JETRO) valued the domestic anime market in Japan at (), including from licensed products, in 2005. JETRO reported sales of overseas anime exports in 2004 to be (). JETRO valued the anime market in the United States at (), including in home video sales and over from licensed products, in 2005. JETRO projected in 2005 that the worldwide anime market, including sales of licensed products, would grow to (). The anime market in China was valued at in 2017, and is projected to reach by 2020. In Europe the anime merchandising market was valued at about $950 million with the figurine segment accounting for most of the share and is expected to reach a value of over $2 billion by 2030. The global anime market size was valued at $26.055 billion in 2021 with 29% of the revenue coming from merchandise. It is expected that the global anime market will reach a value of $47.14 billion by 2028. In 2023 the anime industry generated a $19.8 billion in total global revenue, including $5.5 billion from streaming and $14.3 billion from merchandising sales. North America and Asia contributed a combined $14.3 billion in total revenue, accounting for over 72% of anime&#x27;s global impact. By 2030 the global anime market is expected to reach a value of $48.3 Billion with the largest contributors to this growth being North America, Europe, Asia–Pacific and The Middle East. The global anime market size was valued at $25.8 Billion in 2022 and is expected to have a market size of $62.7 Billion by 2032 with a CAGR of 9.4%.
In 2019, the annual overseas exports of Japanese animation exceeded $10 billion for the first time in history.

=== Awards ===
The anime industry has several annual awards that honor the year&#x27;s best works. Major annual awards in Japan include the Ōfuji Noburō Award, the Mainichi Film Award for Best Animation Film, the Animation Kobe Awards, the Japan Media Arts Festival animation awards, the Seiyu Awards for voice actors, the Tokyo Anime Award and the Japan Academy Prize for Animation of the Year. In the United States, anime films compete in the Crunchyroll Anime Awards. There were also the American Anime Awards, which were designed to recognize excellence in anime titles nominated by the industry, and were held only once in 2006. Anime productions have also been nominated and won awards not exclusively for anime, like the Academy Award for Best Animated Feature or the Golden Bear.

=== Working conditions ===
In recent years, the anime industry has been accused by both Japanese and foreign media of underpaying and overworking its animators. In response the Japanese Prime Minister Fumio Kishida promised to improve the working conditions and salary of all animators and creators working in the industry. A few anime studios such as MAPPA have taken actions to improve the working conditions of their employees. There has also been a slight increase in production costs and animator pays during the COVID-19 pandemic. Throughout 2020 and 2021 the American streaming service Netflix announced that it will greatly invest and fund the anime industry as well as support training programs for new animators. On April 27, 2023, Nippon Anime Film Culture Association (NAFCA) was officially founded. The association aims to solve problems in the industry, including the improvement of conditions of the workers.

== Global popularity and cultural impact ==
Anime has become commercially profitable in Western countries, as demonstrated by early commercially successful Western adaptations of anime, such as &quot;Astro Boy&quot; and &quot;Speed Racer&quot;. Early American adaptions in the 1960s made Japan expand into the continental European market, first with productions aimed at European and Japanese children, such as &quot;Heidi&quot;, &quot;Vicky the Viking&quot; and &quot;Barbapapa&quot;, which aired in various countries. Italy, Spain, and France grew a particular interest in Japan&#x27;s output, due to its cheap selling price and productive output. As of 2014, Italy imported the most anime outside Japan. Anime and manga were introduced to France in the late 1970s and became massively popular in spite of a moral panic led by French politicians in the 1980s and 1990s. These mass imports influenced anime popularity in East Asian, Southeast Asian, Latin American, Arabic and German markets.

The beginning of 1980 saw the introduction of Japanese anime series into the American culture. In the 1990s, Japanese animation slowly gained popularity in America. Media companies such as Viz and Mixx began publishing and releasing animation into the American market. The 1988 film &quot;Akira&quot; is largely credited with popularizing anime in the Western world during the early 1990s, before anime was further popularized by television shows such as &quot;Pokémon&quot; and &quot;Dragon Ball Z&quot; in the late 1990s. By 1997, Japanese anime was the fastest-growing genre in the American video industry. The growth of the Internet later provided international audiences with an easy way to access Japanese content. Early on, online piracy played a major role in this, through over time many legal alternatives appeared which significantly reduced illegal practices. Since the 2010s streaming services have become increasingly involved in the production, licensing and distribution of anime for the international markets. This is especially the case with net services such as Netflix and Crunchyroll which have large catalogs in Western countries, although until 2020 anime fans in multiple developing countries, such as India and the Philippines, had fewer options for obtaining access to legal content, and therefore would still turn to online piracy. However beginning with the 2020s anime has been experiencing yet another boom in global popularity and demand due to the COVID-19 pandemic and streaming services like Netflix, Amazon Prime Video, HBO Max, Disney+, Hulu and anime-only services like Crunchyroll and Hidive, increasing the international availability of the amount of new licensed anime shows as well as the size of their catalogs.
Netflix reported that, between October 2019 and September 2020, more than member households worldwide had watched at least one anime title on the platform. Anime titles appeared on the streaming platform&#x27;s top-ten lists in almost 100 countries within the one-year period.
As of 2021, anime series are the most demanded foreign-language television shows in the United States accounting for 30.5% of the market share. (In comparison, Spanish-language and Korean-language shows account for 21% and 11% of the market share, respectively.) In 2021 more than half of Netflix&#x27;s global members watched anime.
In 2022, the anime series &quot;Attack on Titan&quot; won the award of &quot;Most In-Demand TV Series in the World 2021&quot; in the Global TV Demand Awards. &quot;Attack on Titan&quot; became the first ever non-English language series to earn the title of &quot;World&#x27;s Most In-Demand TV Show&quot;, previously held by only &quot;The Walking Dead&quot; and &quot;Game of Thrones&quot;. In 2024, the anime series &quot;Jujutsu Kaisen&quot; won the award of &quot;Most In-Demand TV Series in the World 2023&quot; in the Global TV Demand Awards.

Rising interest in anime as well as Japanese video games has led to an increase of university students in the United Kingdom wanting to get a degree in the Japanese language. The word &quot;anime&quot; alongside other Japanese pop cultural terms like &quot;shonen&quot;, &quot;shojo&quot; and &quot;isekai&quot; have been added to the Oxford English Dictionary.

Various anime and manga series have influenced Hollywood in the making of numerous famous movies and characters. Hollywood itself has produced live-action adaptations of various anime series such as &quot;Ghost in the Shell&quot;, &quot;Death Note&quot;, &quot;Dragon Ball Evolution&quot; and &quot;Cowboy Bebop&quot;. However most of these adaptations have been reviewed negatively by both the critics and the audience and have become box-office flops. The main reasons for the unsuccessfulness of Hollywood&#x27;s adaptions of anime being the often change of plot and characters from the original source material and the limited capabilities a live-action movie or series can do in comparison to an animated counterpart. One of the few particular exceptions to this includes &quot;&quot;, which has become a moderate commercial success, receiving generally positive reviews from both the critics and the audience for its visual effects and following the source material. The movie grossed $404 million worldwide, making it director Robert Rodriguez&#x27;s highest-grossing film.

Anime and manga alongside many other imports of Japanese pop culture have helped Japan to gain a positive worldwide image and improve its relations with other countries. In 2015, during remarks welcoming Japanese Prime Minister Shinzo Abe to the White House, President Barack Obama thanked Japan for its cultural contributions to the United States by saying:

In July 2020, after the approval of a Chilean government project in which citizens of Chile would be allowed to withdraw up to 10% of their privately held retirement savings, journalist Pamela Jiles celebrated by running through Congress with her arms spread out behind her, imitating the move of many characters of the anime and manga series &quot;Naruto&quot;. In April 2021, Peruvian politicians Jorge Hugo Romero of the PPC and Milagros Juárez of the UPP cosplayed as anime characters to get the &quot;otaku&quot; vote. On October 28, 2024, The Vatican unveiled its own anime-styled mascot, &quot;Luce&quot;, in order to connect with Catholic youth through pop culture.

In April 2023, the Japan Business Federation laid out a proposal aiming to spur the economic growth of Japan by further promoting the contents industry abroad, primarily anime, manga and video games, for measures to invite industry experts from abroad to come to Japan to work, and to link with the tourism sector to help foreign fans of manga and anime visit sites across the country associated with particular manga stories. The federation seeks on quadrupling the sales of Japanese content in overseas markets within the upcoming 10 years.

A 2018 survey conducted in 20 countries and territories using a sample consisting of 6,600 respondents held by Dentsu revealed that 34% of all surveyed people found excellency in anime and manga more than other Japanese cultural or technological aspects, which makes this mass Japanese media the third most-liked &quot;Japanese thing&quot;, below Japanese cuisine (34.6%) and Japanese robotics (35.1%). The advertisement company views anime as a profitable tool for marketing campaigns in foreign countries due to its popularity and high reception.

Anime plays a role in driving tourism to Japan. In surveys held by Statista between 2019 and 2020, 24.2% of tourists from the United States, 7.7% of tourists from China and 6.1% of tourists from South Korea said they were motivated to visit Japan because of Japanese popular culture. In a 2021 survey held by Crunchyroll market research, 94% of Gen-Z&#x27;s and 73% of the general population said that they are familiar with anime.

=== Fan response ===


Anime clubs gave rise to anime conventions in the 1990s with the &quot;anime boom&quot;, a period marked by anime&#x27;s increased global popularity. These conventions are dedicated to anime and manga and include elements like cosplay contests and industry talk panels. Cosplay, a portmanteau of &quot;costume play&quot;, is not unique to anime and has become popular in contests and masquerades at anime conventions. Japanese culture and words have entered English usage through the popularity of the medium, including &quot;otaku&quot;, an unflattering Japanese term commonly used in English to denote an obsessive fan of anime or manga. Another word that has arisen describing obsessive fans in the United States is &quot;wapanese&quot; meaning &#x27;white individuals who want to be Japanese, or later known as &quot;weeaboo&quot; or &quot;weeb&quot;, individuals who demonstrate an obsession with Japanese anime subculture, a term that originated from abusive content posted on the website 4chan.org. While originally derogatory, the terms &quot;Otaku&quot; and &quot;Weeb&quot; have been reappropriated by the anime fandom overtime and today are used by some fans to refer to themselves in a comedic and more positive way.
Anime enthusiasts have produced fan fiction and fan art, including computer wallpapers, and anime music videos (AMVs).

Many fans visit sites depicted in anime, games, manga and other forms of otaku culture. This behavior is known as &quot;Anime pilgrimage&quot;.

As of the 2020s, many anime fans and followers use social media platforms and other sites like YouTube, Bilibili, Twitch, Fandom, Facebook, Reddit, Discord, Tumblr, 4chan, TikTok and Twitter with online communities and databases such as IMDb, MyAnimeList to discuss anime, manga and track their progress watching respective series as well as using news outlets such as Anime News Network.

According to Crunchyroll&#x27;s research data from 2023 to 2024 provided by its President Rahul Parini, revealed that there are approximately 800 million people globally (outside of China and Japan) who are either highly aware of anime, show interest in anime or currently watch anime and identify as fans.

According to a 2024 survey conducted on anime fans by Polygon, 65% of the surveyed anime fans said that they find anime more emotionally compelling than other forms of media and more than 3 in 4 of Millennial and Gen-Z fans use the medium as a form of escapism. Almost two-thirds of the anime-watching Gen Z audience said they emotionally connect better with anime than they do with traditional media. Over 50% of surveyed Gen-Z anime fans said that anime influences their identity, fashion and social understanding.

Due to anime&#x27;s increased popularity in recent years, a large number of celebrities such as Elon Musk, BTS and Ariana Grande have come out as anime fans.

=== Anime style ===

One of the key points that differentiated anime from a handful of Western cartoons is the potential for visceral content. Once the expectation that the aspects of visual intrigue or animation are just for children is put aside, the audience can realize that themes involving violence, suffering, sexuality, pain, and death can all be storytelling elements utilized in anime just as much as other media.

However, as anime itself became increasingly popular, its styling has been inevitably the subject of both satire and serious creative productions. &quot;South Park&quot;″s &quot;Chinpokomon&quot; and &quot;Good Times with Weapons&quot; episodes, Adult Swim&#x27;s &quot;Perfect Hair Forever&quot;, and Nickelodeon&#x27;s &quot;Kappa Mikey&quot; are examples of Western satirical depictions of Japanese culture and anime, but anime tropes have also been satirized by some anime such as &quot;KonoSuba.&quot;

Traditionally only Japanese works have been considered anime, but some works have sparked debate about blurring the lines between anime and cartoons, such as the American anime-style productions &quot;&quot; and &quot;&quot;. These anime-styled works have become defined as anime-influenced animation, in an attempt to classify all anime styled works of non-Japanese origin. Some creators of these works cite anime as a source of inspiration, for example the French production team for &quot;Ōban Star-Racers&quot; that moved to Tokyo to collaborate with a Japanese production team. When anime is defined as a &quot;style&quot; rather than as a national product, it leaves open the possibility of anime being produced in other countries, but this has been contentious amongst fans, with John Oppliger stating, &quot;The insistence on referring to original American art as Japanese &quot;anime&quot; or &quot;manga&quot; robs the work of its cultural identity.&quot;

While some anime will depict non-Japanese characters with specific ethnic features, such as a pronounced nose and jutting jaw for European characters, there are some styles that deliberately forgo any identification of its characters with real-world ethnicities or nationalities, termed in criticism as &quot;mukokuseki&quot; (statelessness). &quot;Mukokuseki&quot; characters can significantly impact the reception of a property outside of Japan.

A U.A.E.-Filipino produced TV series called &quot;Torkaizer&quot; is dubbed as the &quot;Middle East&#x27;s First Anime Show&quot;, and is currently in production and looking for funding. Netflix has produced multiple anime series in collaboration with Japanese animation studios, and in doing so, has offered a more accessible channel for distribution to Western markets. Similar initiatives have been enacted by the US-based streaming service Crunchyroll, producing titles such as &quot;High Guardian Spice&quot; and an adaptation of &quot;Tower of God&quot;.

The web-based series &quot;RWBY&quot;, produced by Texas-based company Rooster Teeth, is produced using an anime art style, and the series has been described as &quot;anime&quot; by multiple sources. For example, &quot;Adweek&quot;, in the headline to one of its articles, described the series as &quot;American-made anime&quot;, and in another headline, &quot;The Huffington Post&quot; described it as simply &quot;anime&quot;, without referencing its country of origin. In 2013, Monty Oum, the creator of &quot;RWBY&quot;, said &quot;Some believe just like Scotch needs to be made in Scotland, an American company can&#x27;t make anime. I think that&#x27;s a narrow way of seeing it. Anime is an art form, and to say only one country can make this art is wrong.&quot; &quot;RWBY&quot; has been released in Japan with a Japanese language dub; the CEO of Rooster Teeth, Matt Hullum, commented &quot;This is the first time any American-made anime has been marketed to Japan. It definitely usually works the other way around, and we&#x27;re really pleased about that.&quot;

=== Media franchises ===

In Japanese culture and entertainment, media mix is a strategy to disperse content across multiple representations: different broadcast media, gaming technologies, cell phones, toys, amusement parks, and other methods. It is the Japanese term for a transmedia franchise. The term gained its circulation in late 1980s, but the origins of the strategy can be traced back to the 1960s with the proliferation of anime, with its interconnection of media and commodity goods.

A number of anime and manga media franchises such as &quot;Demon Slayer: Kimetsu no Yaiba&quot;, &quot;Dragon Ball&quot; and &quot;Gundam&quot; have gained considerable global popularity, and are among the world&#x27;s highest-grossing media franchises. &quot;Pokémon&quot; in particular is estimated to be the highest-grossing media franchise of all time.

== See also ==

* Animation director 
* Cinema of Japan
* Cool Japan
* Culture of Japan
* History of anime
* Japanese language
* Japanese popular culture 
* Japanophilia
* Lists of anime 
* Manga
* Mass media in Japan
* &quot;Mechademia&quot;
* Otaku 
* Soft power § Japan
* Television in Japan
* Video games in Japan
* Voice acting in Japan
* Vtuber 

== Notes ==
== References ==
=== Sources ===
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q184781" start="3" end="13" title="Traditional animation" label="hand-drawn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1401416" start="18" end="36" title="computer animation" label="computer-generated"/>
<link wikidata="Q11425" start="37" end="46" title="animation" label="animation"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="64" end="69" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2580761" start="298" end="333" title="Anime-influenced animation" label="similar style to Japanese animation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7889" start="367" end="378" title="Video games" label="Video games"/>
<link wikidata="Q193300" start="598" end="610" title="Osamu Tezuka" label="Osamu Tezuka"/>
<link wikidata="Q220898" start="752" end="774" title="Original video animation" label="directly to home media"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047299" start="780" end="797" title="Original net animation" label="over the Internet"/>
<link wikidata="Q8274" start="878" end="883" title="manga" label="manga"/>
<link wikidata="Q747381" start="886" end="898" title="light novels" label="light novels"/>
<link wikidata="Q7927929" start="903" end="914" title="video games in Japan" label="video games"/>
<link wikidata="Q6605995" start="1629" end="1658" title="List of anime companies" label="over 430 production companies"/>
<link wikidata="Q182950" start="1692" end="1705" title="Studio Ghibli" label="Studio Ghibli"/>
<link wikidata="Q877325" start="1707" end="1722" title="Kyoto Animation" label="Kyoto Animation"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1724" end="1731" title="Bandai Namco Filmworks#Sunrise" label="Sunrise"/>
<link wikidata="Q834471" start="1733" end="1738" title="Bones (studio)" label="Bones"/>
<link wikidata="Q306422" start="1740" end="1748" title="Ufotable" label="Ufotable"/>
<link wikidata="Q11231001" start="1750" end="1755" title="MAPPA" label="MAPPA"/>
<link wikidata="Q14508383" start="1757" end="1767" title="Wit Studio" label="Wit Studio"/>
<link wikidata="Q17222692" start="1769" end="1785" title="CoMix Wave Films" label="CoMix Wave Films"/>
<link wikidata="Q650867" start="1787" end="1801" title="Madhouse, Inc." label="Madhouse, Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q1054807" start="1803" end="1820" title="TMS Entertainment" label="TMS Entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q611346" start="1822" end="1829" title="Pierrot (company)" label="Pierrot"/>
<link wikidata="Q735670" start="1831" end="1845" title="Production I.G" label="Production I.G"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051884" start="1847" end="1863" title="Nippon Animation" label="Nippon Animation"/>
<link wikidata="Q730179" start="1868" end="1882" title="Toei Animation" label="Toei Animation"/>
<link wikidata="Q187657" start="1984" end="1990" title="dubbing (filmmaking)" label="dubbed"/>
<link wikidata="Q204028" start="1992" end="2001" title="Subtitles" label="subtitled"/>
<link wikidata="Q107035379" start="2054" end="2072" title="streaming services" label="streaming services"/>
<link wikidata="Q581714" start="2216" end="2241" title="Animated series" label="animated television shows"/>
<link wikidata="Q11425" start="2273" end="2282" title="animation" label="animation"/>
<link wikidata="Q483394" start="2325" end="2330" title="genre" label="genre"/>
<link wikidata="Q82946" start="2949" end="2957" title="katakana" label="katakana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1084" start="3313" end="3317" title="noun" label="noun"/>
<link wikidata="Q489168" start="3342" end="3351" title="mass noun" label="mass noun"/>
<link wikidata="Q170219" start="3498" end="3502" title="saké" label="saké"/>
<link wikidata="Q864" start="3519" end="3526" title="Pokémon" label="Pokémon"/>
<link wikidata="Q216042" start="3627" end="3639" title="acute accent" label="acute accent"/>
<link wikidata="Q208674" start="3859" end="3870" title="portmanteau" label="portmanteau"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="3874" end="3879" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q854836" start="4195" end="4206" title="shadow play" label="shadow play"/>
<link wikidata="Q654393" start="4560" end="4573" title="Magic lantern" label="Magic lantern"/>
<link wikidata="Q1423940" start="4669" end="4679" title="kamishibai" label="kamishibai"/>
<link wikidata="Q243170" start="4791" end="4798" title="Bunraku" label="Bunraku"/>
<link wikidata="Q185905" start="4817" end="4824" title="ukiyo-e" label="ukiyo-e"/>
<link wikidata="Q325196" start="4968" end="4983" title="Kitazawa Rakuten" label="Kitzawa Rakuten"/>
<link wikidata="Q1647940" start="4988" end="5001" title="Okamoto Ippei" label="Okamoto Ippei"/>
<link wikidata="Q2526255" start="5113" end="5123" title="Film director" label="filmmakers"/>
<link wikidata="Q546713" start="5276" end="5291" title="Katsudō Shashin" label="Katsudō Shashin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1150879" start="5436" end="5450" title="Ōten Shimokawa" label="Ōten Shimokawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q390140" start="5452" end="5468" title="Seitarō Kitayama" label="Seitarō Kitayama"/>
<link wikidata="Q361501" start="5474" end="5494" title="Jun&amp;#x27;ichi Kōuchi" label="Jun&amp;#x27;ichi Kōuchi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2054133" start="5619" end="5634" title="Namakura Gatana" label="Namakura Gatana"/>
<link wikidata="Q274498" start="5727" end="5754" title="1923 Great Kantō earthquake" label="1923 Great Kantō earthquake"/>
<link wikidata="Q517386" start="5847" end="5858" title="Live action" label="live-action"/>
<link wikidata="Q7414" start="5925" end="5931" title="The Walt Disney Company" label="Disney"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154208" start="5963" end="5975" title="Noburō Ōfuji" label="Noburō Ōfuji"/>
<link wikidata="Q3571985" start="5980" end="5993" title="Yasuji Murata" label="Yasuji Murata"/>
<link wikidata="Q2291325" start="6026" end="6042" title="cutout animation" label="cutout animation"/>
<link wikidata="Q184781" start="6055" end="6068" title="cel animation" label="cel animation"/>
<link wikidata="Q768263" start="6096" end="6109" title="Kenzō Masaoka" label="Kenzō Masaoka"/>
<link wikidata="Q3859572" start="6114" end="6125" title="Mitsuyo Seo" label="Mitsuyo Seo"/>
<link wikidata="Q6158963" start="6281" end="6291" title="Japanese propaganda during World War II" label="propaganda"/>
<link wikidata="Q848512" start="6385" end="6391" title="talkie" label="talkie"/>
<link wikidata="Q2963555" start="6408" end="6437" title="Chikara to Onna no Yo no Naka" label="Chikara to Onna no Yo no Naka"/>
<link wikidata="Q219712" start="6591" end="6613" title="Imperial Japanese Navy" label="Imperial Japanese Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q8274" start="6735" end="6740" title="manga" label="manga"/>
<link wikidata="Q193300" start="6761" end="6773" title="Osamu Tezuka" label="Osamu Tezuka"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130164" start="7017" end="7034" title="limited animation" label="limited animation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3241344" start="7091" end="7102" title="Three Tales (anime)" label="Three Tales"/>
<link wikidata="Q2663963" start="7210" end="7225" title="Instant History" label="Instant History"/>
<link wikidata="Q2868550" start="7280" end="7301" title="Astro Boy (1963 TV series)" label="&amp;quot;Astro Boy&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q673036" start="7361" end="7387" title="Astro Boy" label="his manga of the same name"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377799" start="7421" end="7437" title="Mushi Production" label="Mushi Production"/>
<link wikidata="Q650867" start="7487" end="7495" title="Madhouse (company)" label="Madhouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q854654" start="7497" end="7504" title="Sunrise (company)" label="Sunrise"/>
<link wikidata="Q611346" start="7510" end="7517" title="Pierrot (company)" label="Pierrot"/>
<link wikidata="Q858784" start="7792" end="7797" title="mecha" label="mecha"/>
<link wikidata="Q4292083" start="7864" end="7875" title="Super Robot" label="super robot"/>
<link wikidata="Q551359" start="7888" end="7896" title="Go Nagai" label="Go Nagai"/>
<link wikidata="Q1325374" start="7960" end="7976" title="Yoshiyuki Tomino" label="Yoshiyuki Tomino"/>
<link wikidata="Q4292083" start="7996" end="8006" title="Real Robot" label="real robot"/>
<link wikidata="Q732120" start="8047" end="8053" title="Gundam" label="Gundam"/>
<link wikidata="Q702373" start="8070" end="8102" title="Super Dimension Fortress Macross" label="Super Dimension Fortress Macross"/>
<link wikidata="Q6500827" start="8224" end="8238" title="Japanese asset price bubble" label="bubble economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q8885676" start="8331" end="8365" title="Nausicaä of the Valley of the Wind (film)" label="Nausicaä of the Valley of the Wind"/>
<link wikidata="" start="8386" end="8428" title="Royal Space Force: The Wings of Honnêamise" label="Royal Space Force: The Wings of Honnêamise"/>
<link wikidata="Q1905968" start="8453" end="8458" title="Akira (1988 film)" label="Akira"/>
<link wikidata="Q662" start="8480" end="8503" title="Neon Genesis Evangelion" label="Neon Genesis Evangelion"/>
<link wikidata="Q834328" start="8550" end="8556" title="Gainax" label="Gainax"/>
<link wikidata="Q23261" start="8573" end="8585" title="Hideaki Anno" label="Hideaki Anno"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066948" start="8649" end="8667" title="Ghost in the Shell (1995 film)" label="Ghost in the Shell"/>
<link wikidata="Q232246" start="8691" end="8703" title="Cowboy Bebop" label="Cowboy Bebop"/>
<link wikidata="Q704353" start="8843" end="8854" title="Sailor Moon (TV series)" label="Sailor Moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q477916" start="8871" end="8884" title="Dragon Ball Z" label="Dragon Ball Z"/>
<link wikidata="Q187657" start="8911" end="8917" title="Dubbing (filmmaking)" label="dubbed"/>
<link wikidata="Q155653" start="8977" end="8990" title="Spirited Away" label="Spirited Away"/>
<link wikidata="Q182950" start="9000" end="9013" title="Studio Ghibli" label="Studio Ghibli"/>
<link wikidata="Q55400" start="9039" end="9053" title="Hayao Miyazaki" label="Hayao Miyazaki"/>
<link wikidata="Q106800" start="9063" end="9102" title="Academy Award for Best Animated Feature" label="Academy Award for Best Animated Feature"/>
<link wikidata="Q740425" start="9110" end="9129" title="75th Academy Awards" label="75th Academy Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q11546839" start="9151" end="9178" title="List of highest-grossing anime films" label="highest-grossing anime film"/>
<link wikidata="Q747381" start="9289" end="9300" title="light novel" label="light novel"/>
<link wikidata="Q689445" start="9306" end="9318" title="visual novel" label="visual novel"/>
<link wikidata="Q498992" start="9355" end="9388" title="The Melancholy of Haruhi Suzumiya" label="The Melancholy of Haruhi Suzumiya"/>
<link wikidata="Q857823" start="9405" end="9420" title="Fate/stay night" label="Fate/stay night"/>
<link wikidata="" start="9446" end="9499" title="Demon Slayer: Kimetsu no Yaiba the Movie: Mugen Train" label="Demon Slayer: Kimetsu no Yaiba the Movie: Mugen Train"/>
<link wikidata="Q11267773" start="9517" end="9547" title="List of highest-grossing films in Japan" label="highest-grossing Japanese film"/>
<link wikidata="Q155653" start="9764" end="9777" title="Spirited Away" label="Spirited Away"/>
<link wikidata="Q55522899" start="9845" end="9859" title="Jujutsu Kaisen" label="Jujutsu Kaisen"/>
<link wikidata="" start="9873" end="9903" title="Demon Slayer: Kimetsu no Yaiba (TV series)" label="Demon Slayer: Kimetsu no Yaiba"/>
<link wikidata="Q63981675" start="9920" end="9935" title="Tokyo Revengers" label="Tokyo Revengers"/>
<link wikidata="Q22126305" start="10025" end="10040" title="Attack on Titan (TV series)" label="Attack on Titan"/>
<link wikidata="Q232737" start="10317" end="10333" title="The Walking Dead (TV series)" label="The Walking Dead"/>
<link wikidata="Q23572" start="10350" end="10365" title="Game of Thrones" label="Game of Thrones"/>
<link wikidata="Q41675" start="10419" end="10440" title="Guinness World Record" label="Guinness World Record"/>
<link wikidata="Q334667" start="11463" end="11473" title="storyboard" label="storyboard"/>
<link wikidata="Q22920017" start="11478" end="11490" title="voice acting" label="voice acting"/>
<link wikidata="Q5073735" start="11492" end="11508" title="Character creation" label="character design"/>
<link wikidata="Q184781" start="11514" end="11528" title="cel animation" label="cel production"/>
<link wikidata="Q1401416" start="11580" end="11598" title="computer animation" label="computer animation"/>
<link wikidata="Q308876" start="11735" end="11746" title="stop motion" label="stop motion"/>
<link wikidata="Q2850055" start="11779" end="11799" title="silhouette animation" label="silhouette animation"/>
<link wikidata="Q24862" start="11964" end="11975" title="Short subject" label="short films"/>
<link wikidata="Q5964666" start="12037" end="12055" title="Tadahito Mochinaga" label="Tadahito Mochinaga"/>
<link wikidata="Q997647" start="12057" end="12075" title="Kihachirō Kawamoto" label="Kihachirō Kawamoto"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066948" start="12189" end="12207" title="Ghost in the Shell (1995 film)" label="Ghost in the Shell"/>
<link wikidata="Q186572" start="12224" end="12241" title="Princess Mononoke" label="Princess Mononoke"/>
<link wikidata="Q164740" start="12301" end="12310" title="Fujifilm" label="Fuji Film"/>
<link wikidata="Q184781" start="12533" end="12554" title="traditional animation" label="traditional animation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1493902" start="12649" end="12658" title="key frame" label="key frame"/>
<link wikidata="Q2002674" start="12669" end="12679" title="Inbetweening" label="in-between"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130164" start="12741" end="12758" title="limited animation" label="limited animation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7414" start="12830" end="12836" title="Disney" label="Disney"/>
<link wikidata="Q29011" start="13342" end="13367" title="Howl&amp;#x27;s Moving Castle (film)" label="Howl&amp;#x27;s Moving Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q498992" start="13384" end="13417" title="The Melancholy of Haruhi Suzumiya (anime)" label="The Melancholy of Haruhi Suzumiya"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146647" start="14415" end="14420" title="Chibi (style)" label="chibi"/>
<link wikidata="Q120300" start="14577" end="14593" title="Crayon Shin-chan" label="Crayon Shin-chan"/>
<link wikidata="Q482919" start="14673" end="14683" title="caricature" label="caricature"/>
<link wikidata="Q627603" start="14693" end="14700" title="cartoon" label="cartoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q583810" start="14925" end="14935" title="Betty Boop" label="Betty Boop"/>
<link wikidata="Q55400" start="15442" end="15456" title="Hayao Miyazaki" label="Hayao Miyazaki"/>
<link wikidata="Q5562084" start="15799" end="15813" title="Gilles Poitras" label="Gilles Poitras"/>
<link wikidata="Q239937" start="16255" end="16262" title="Pokémon (anime)" label="Pokémon"/>
<link wikidata="Q492090" start="16541" end="16552" title="manga iconography" label="iconography"/>
<link wikidata="Q202013" start="16655" end="16664" title="nosebleed" label="nosebleed"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146647" start="16882" end="16887" title="Chibi (slang)" label="chibi"/>
<link wikidata="Q131578" start="17104" end="17109" title="J-pop" label="J-pop"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055871" start="17113" end="17119" title="Japanese rock" label="J-rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q15733887" start="17479" end="17490" title="Future funk" label="Future funk"/>
<link wikidata="Q39086178" start="17502" end="17512" title="microgenre" label="microgenre"/>
<link wikidata="Q15733887" start="17550" end="17559" title="Vaporwave" label="Vaporwave"/>
<link wikidata="Q1455292" start="17567" end="17579" title="French house" label="French house"/>
<link wikidata="Q1374731" start="17580" end="17590" title="Euro disco" label="Euro disco"/>
<link wikidata="Q11307326" start="17661" end="17669" title="City pop" label="City pop"/>
<link wikidata="Q608862" start="17710" end="17721" title="anison" label="anime songs"/>
<link wikidata="Q689141" start="17849" end="17856" title="Spotify" label="Spotify"/>
<link wikidata="Q117462019" start="17941" end="17945" title="Idol (Yoasobi song)" label="Idol"/>
<link wikidata="Q95688943" start="17955" end="17962" title="Yoasobi" label="Yoasobi"/>
<link wikidata="Q97310775" start="17989" end="17999" title="Oshi no Ko" label="Oshi no Ko"/>
<link wikidata="Q99337381" start="18017" end="18037" title="Billboard Global 200" label="Billboard Global 200"/>
<link wikidata="Q20056642" start="18263" end="18274" title="Apple Music" label="Apple Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q172067" start="18874" end="18880" title="hentai" label="hentai"/>
<link wikidata="Q219559" start="18960" end="18965" title="ecchi" label="ecchi"/>
<link wikidata="Q5873" start="19023" end="19041" title="sexual intercourse" label="sexual intercourse"/>
<link wikidata="Q690342" start="19073" end="19078" title="Harem (genre)" label="harem"/>
<link wikidata="Q747359" start="19210" end="19221" title="fan service" label="fan service"/>
<link wikidata="Q242488" start="19278" end="19282" title="yaoi" label="yaoi"/>
<link wikidata="Q320568" start="19320" end="19324" title="yuri (genre)" label="yuri"/>
<link wikidata="Q5562084" start="19702" end="19716" title="Gilles Poitras" label="Gilles Poitras"/>
<link wikidata="Q2466311" start="19748" end="19759" title="Gundam 0080" label="Gundam 0080"/>
<link wikidata="Q161531" start="19864" end="19877" title="War and Peace" label="War and Peace"/>
<link wikidata="Q24925" start="19909" end="19924" title="Science fiction genre" label="Science fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q673036" start="20013" end="20022" title="Astro Boy" label="Astro Boy"/>
<link wikidata="Q471133" start="20033" end="20041" title="Mitsuteru Yokoyama" label="Yokoyama"/>
<link wikidata="Q95159" start="20055" end="20069" title="Tetsujin 28-go" label="Tetsujin 28-go"/>
<link wikidata="Q858784" start="20116" end="20121" title="mecha" label="mecha"/>
<link wikidata="Q196600" start="20151" end="20161" title="metaseries" label="metaseries"/>
<link wikidata="Q132311" start="20188" end="20201" title="fantasy genre" label="fantasy genre"/>
<link wikidata="Q182056" start="20322" end="20330" title="InuYasha" label="InuYasha"/>
<link wikidata="Q131135" start="20430" end="20439" title="Yggdrasil" label="Yggdrasil"/>
<link wikidata="Q467681" start="20449" end="20463" title="Oh My Goddess!" label="Ah! My Goddess"/>
<link wikidata="Q1254842" start="20563" end="20574" title="Dragon Half" label="Dragon Half"/>
<link wikidata="Q608079" start="20653" end="20673" title="Castle of Cagliostro" label="Castle of Cagliostro"/>
<link wikidata="Q752321" start="20720" end="20732" title="magical girl" label="magical girl"/>
<link wikidata="Q12348939" start="20785" end="20796" title="medievalism" label="medievalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q864910" start="20988" end="21005" title="Nippon Television" label="Nippon Television"/>
<link wikidata="Q11344274" start="21051" end="21072" title="Mole&amp;#x27;s Adventure" label="Mole&amp;#x27;s Adventure"/>
<link wikidata="Q220898" start="21316" end="21340" title="original video animation" label="original video animation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047299" start="21591" end="21613" title="original net animation" label="original net animation"/>
<link wikidata="Q273309" start="21714" end="21723" title="LaserDisc" label="LaserDisc"/>
<link wikidata="Q185796" start="21741" end="21745" title="NTSC" label="NTSC"/>
<link wikidata="Q746611" start="22092" end="22105" title="DVD region code" label="region coding"/>
<link wikidata="Q321259" start="22233" end="22241" title="Video CD" label="Video CD"/>
<link wikidata="Q502918" start="22377" end="22384" title="counterfeit" label="bootleg"/>
<link wikidata="Q2620972" start="22483" end="22492" title="story arc" label="story arc"/>
<link wikidata="Q2256160" start="22550" end="22569" title="American television" label="American television"/>
<link wikidata="Q477916" start="22699" end="22712" title="Dragon Ball Z" label="Dragon Ball Z"/>
<link wikidata="Q841645" start="22959" end="22979" title="streaming television" label="streaming television"/>
<link wikidata="Q19571984" start="23003" end="23010" title="Peak TV" label="Peak TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q730179" start="23150" end="23164" title="Toei Animation" label="Toei Animation"/>
<link wikidata="Q834328" start="23166" end="23172" title="Gainax" label="Gainax"/>
<link wikidata="Q650867" start="23174" end="23182" title="Madhouse (company)" label="Madhouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137522" start="23184" end="23189" title="Gonzo (company)" label="Gonzo"/>
<link wikidata="Q854654" start="23191" end="23198" title="Sunrise (company)" label="Sunrise"/>
<link wikidata="Q834471" start="23200" end="23205" title="Bones (studio)" label="Bones"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054807" start="23207" end="23224" title="TMS Entertainment" label="TMS Entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051884" start="23226" end="23242" title="Nippon Animation" label="Nippon Animation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1584469" start="23244" end="23253" title="P.A.Works" label="P.A.Works"/>
<link wikidata="Q611346" start="23255" end="23269" title="Studio Pierrot" label="Studio Pierrot"/>
<link wikidata="Q735670" start="23271" end="23285" title="Production I.G" label="Production I.G"/>
<link wikidata="Q306422" start="23287" end="23295" title="Ufotable" label="Ufotable"/>
<link wikidata="Q182950" start="23300" end="23313" title="Studio Ghibli" label="Studio Ghibli"/>
<link wikidata="Q2178147" start="23356" end="23373" title="trade association" label="trade association"/>
<link wikidata="Q556694" start="23375" end="23413" title="The Association of Japanese Animations" label="The Association of Japanese Animations"/>
<link wikidata="Q6158098" start="23476" end="23515" title="Japanese Animation Creators Association" label="Japanese Animation Creators Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q155653" start="23635" end="23648" title="Spirited Away" label="Spirited Away"/>
<link wikidata="Q2983424" start="24279" end="24295" title="late night anime" label="late night anime"/>
<link wikidata="Q3249257" start="24301" end="24333" title="adult animation" label="adults as the target demographic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1758705" start="24418" end="24431" title="niche market" label="niche product"/>
<link wikidata="Q155653" start="24445" end="24458" title="Spirited Away" label="Spirited Away"/>
<link wikidata="Q11267773" start="24480" end="24519" title="List of highest-grossing films in Japan" label="all-time highest-grossing film in Japan"/>
<link wikidata="" start="24545" end="24600" title="Demon Slayer: Kimetsu no Yaiba – The Movie: Mugen Train" label="Demon Slayer: Kimetsu no Yaiba – The Movie: Mugen Train"/>
<link wikidata="Q11546839" start="24632" end="24669" title="List of highest-grossing anime films" label="highest-grossing anime film worldwide"/>
<link wikidata="Q335080" start="24696" end="24710" title="Makoto Shinkai" label="Makoto Shinkai"/>
<link wikidata="Q21697406" start="24734" end="24743" title="Your Name" label="Your Name"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="24870" end="24874" title="List of Japanese films of 2014#Highest-grossing films" label="2014"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="24876" end="24880" title="List of Japanese films of 2015#Highest-grossing films" label="2015"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="24893" end="24897" title="List of Japanese films of 2016#Highest-grossing films" label="2016"/>
<link wikidata="Q700127" start="25212" end="25221" title="Gatchaman" label="Gatchaman"/>
<link wikidata="Q15284139" start="25238" end="25253" title="Captain Harlock" label="Captain Harlock"/>
<link wikidata="Q60768356" start="25463" end="25470" title="Voltron (1984 TV series)" label="Voltron"/>
<link wikidata="Q1023459" start="25534" end="25542" title="Robotech" label="Robotech"/>
<link wikidata="Q2293215" start="25739" end="25750" title="A.D. Vision" label="A.D. Vision"/>
<link wikidata="Q5061612" start="25756" end="25774" title="Central Park Media" label="Central Park Media"/>
<link wikidata="Q3545423" start="25941" end="25949" title="AnimEigo" label="AnimEigo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3812229" start="26348" end="26368" title="Kurau Phantom Memory" label="Kurau Phantom Memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q844972" start="26729" end="26735" title="The WB" label="The WB"/>
<link wikidata="Q708290" start="26740" end="26755" title="Cartoon Network" label="Cartoon Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q379052" start="26763" end="26773" title="Adult Swim" label="Adult Swim"/>
<link wikidata="Q3605072" start="26910" end="26917" title="Editing of anime in American distribution" label="editing"/>
<link wikidata="Q506787" start="27144" end="27151" title="fansubs" label="fansubs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1933770" start="28292" end="28301" title="simulcast" label="simulcast"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364370" start="28853" end="28886" title="Japan External Trade Organization" label="Japan External Trade Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q2561317" start="29123" end="29133" title="home video" label="home video"/>
<link wikidata="Q46" start="29382" end="29388" title="Europe" label="Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q740777" start="29399" end="29412" title="merchandising" label="merchandising"/>
<link wikidata="Q6888327" start="29462" end="29470" title="model figure" label="figurine"/>
<link wikidata="Q740777" start="29676" end="29687" title="merchandise" label="merchandise"/>
<link wikidata="Q49" start="30201" end="30214" title="North America" label="North America"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070940" start="30224" end="30236" title="Asia–Pacific" label="Asia–Pacific"/>
<link wikidata="Q7204" start="30241" end="30256" title="The Middle East" label="The Middle East"/>
<link wikidata="Q1422850" start="30393" end="30397" title="CAGR" label="CAGR"/>
<link wikidata="Q384857" start="30659" end="30677" title="Ōfuji Noburō Award" label="Ōfuji Noburō Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q6736646" start="30683" end="30726" title="Mainichi Film Award for Best Animation Film" label="Mainichi Film Award for Best Animation Film"/>
<link wikidata="Q547818" start="30732" end="30746" title="Animation Kobe" label="Animation Kobe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371522" start="30759" end="30784" title="Japan Media Arts Festival" label="Japan Media Arts Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q2991042" start="30807" end="30819" title="Seiyu Awards" label="Seiyu Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q1996996" start="30842" end="30859" title="Tokyo Anime Award" label="Tokyo Anime Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q2510955" start="30868" end="30913" title="Japan Academy Prize for Animation of the Year" label="Japan Academy Prize for Animation of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q28408321" start="30964" end="30988" title="Crunchyroll Anime Awards" label="Crunchyroll Anime Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q2076154" start="31010" end="31031" title="American Anime Awards" label="American Anime Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q106800" start="31247" end="31286" title="Academy Award for Best Animated Feature" label="Academy Award for Best Animated Feature"/>
<link wikidata="Q154590" start="31294" end="31305" title="Golden Bear" label="Golden Bear"/>
<link wikidata="Q359480" start="31509" end="31522" title="Fumio Kishida" label="Fumio Kishida"/>
<link wikidata="Q11231001" start="31660" end="31665" title="MAPPA" label="MAPPA"/>
<link wikidata="Q907311" start="31901" end="31908" title="Netflix" label="Netflix"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="32050" end="32087" title="Nippon Anime Film Culture Association" label="Nippon Anime Film Culture Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q160381" start="32321" end="32338" title="Western world" label="Western countries"/>
<link wikidata="Q2868550" start="32433" end="32442" title="Astro Boy (1963 TV series)" label="Astro Boy"/>
<link wikidata="Q432319" start="32459" end="32470" title="Speed Racer" label="Speed Racer"/>
<link wikidata="Q715718" start="32644" end="32661" title="Heidi, Girl of the Alps" label="&amp;quot;Heidi&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q713578" start="32669" end="32685" title="Vicky the Viking" label="Vicky the Viking"/>
<link wikidata="Q755021" start="32702" end="32711" title="Barbapapa" label="Barbapapa"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="32753" end="32758" title="Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q29" start="32760" end="32765" title="Spain" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="32771" end="32777" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q2914277" start="33043" end="33054" title="moral panic" label="moral panic"/>
<link wikidata="Q27231" start="33155" end="33165" title="East Asia" label="East Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q11708" start="33167" end="33182" title="Southeast Asia" label="Southeast Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q12585" start="33184" end="33198" title="Latin America" label="Latin American"/>
<link wikidata="Q143487" start="33200" end="33206" title="Arab World" label="Arabic"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="33211" end="33217" title="Germany" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q1905968" start="33517" end="33522" title="Akira (1988 film)" label="Akira"/>
<link wikidata="Q239937" start="33689" end="33696" title="Pokémon (anime)" label="Pokémon"/>
<link wikidata="Q477916" start="33713" end="33726" title="Dragon Ball Z" label="Dragon Ball Z"/>
<link wikidata="Q907311" start="34309" end="34316" title="Netflix" label="Netflix"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142035" start="34321" end="34332" title="Crunchyroll" label="Crunchyroll"/>
<link wikidata="Q928" start="34468" end="34479" title="Philippines" label="Philippines"/>
<link wikidata="Q81068910" start="34708" end="34725" title="COVID-19 pandemic" label="COVID-19 pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q4740856" start="34763" end="34781" title="Amazon Prime Video" label="Amazon Prime Video"/>
<link wikidata="Q117078710" start="34783" end="34790" title="HBO Max" label="HBO Max"/>
<link wikidata="Q54958752" start="34792" end="34799" title="Disney+" label="Disney+"/>
<link wikidata="Q1630304" start="34801" end="34805" title="Hulu" label="Hulu"/>
<link wikidata="Q97575019" start="34851" end="34857" title="Hidive" label="Hidive"/>
<link wikidata="Q22126305" start="35625" end="35640" title="Attack on Titan (TV series)" label="Attack on Titan"/>
<link wikidata="Q232737" start="35929" end="35945" title="The Walking Dead (TV series)" label="The Walking Dead"/>
<link wikidata="Q23572" start="35962" end="35977" title="Game of Thrones" label="Game of Thrones"/>
<link wikidata="Q55522899" start="36017" end="36031" title="Jujutsu Kaisen" label="Jujutsu Kaisen"/>
<link wikidata="Q7927929" start="36179" end="36199" title="Video games in Japan" label="Japanese video games"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="36253" end="36267" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q5287" start="36299" end="36316" title="Japanese language" label="Japanese language"/>
<link wikidata="Q53911753" start="36442" end="36448" title="isekai" label="isekai"/>
<link wikidata="Q44996" start="36478" end="36503" title="Oxford English Dictionary" label="Oxford English Dictionary"/>
<link wikidata="Q380675" start="36553" end="36562" title="Cinema of the United States" label="Hollywood"/>
<link wikidata="Q517386" start="36649" end="36660" title="live-action" label="live-action"/>
<link wikidata="Q22575835" start="36711" end="36729" title="Ghost in the Shell (2017)" label="Ghost in the Shell"/>
<link wikidata="Q22077183" start="36743" end="36753" title="Death Note (2017 film)" label="Death Note"/>
<link wikidata="Q653303" start="36767" end="36788" title="Dragon Ball Evolution" label="Dragon Ball Evolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q101252448" start="36805" end="36817" title="Cowboy Bebop (2021 TV series)" label="Cowboy Bebop"/>
<link wikidata="Q2165644" start="36942" end="36958" title="Box-office bomb" label="box-office flops"/>
<link wikidata="Q47284" start="37540" end="37556" title="Robert Rodriguez" label="Robert Rodriguez"/>
<link wikidata="Q10901350" start="37588" end="37603" title="Anime and manga" label="Anime and manga"/>
<link wikidata="Q6158957" start="37636" end="37656" title="Japanese pop culture" label="Japanese pop culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q132345" start="37816" end="37826" title="Shinzo Abe" label="Shinzo Abe"/>
<link wikidata="Q76" start="37857" end="37869" title="Barack Obama" label="Barack Obama"/>
<link wikidata="Q298" start="38034" end="38039" title="Chile" label="Chile"/>
<link wikidata="Q501161" start="38134" end="38146" title="Pamela Jiles (journalist)" label="Pamela Jiles"/>
<link wikidata="Q26971382" start="38297" end="38303" title="Naruto" label="Naruto"/>
<link wikidata="Q419" start="38326" end="38330" title="Peru" label="Peru"/>
<link wikidata="Q1234101" start="38372" end="38375" title="Christian People&amp;#x27;s Party (Peru)" label="PPC"/>
<link wikidata="Q2306078" start="38403" end="38406" title="Union for Peru" label="UPP"/>
<link wikidata="Q194448" start="38454" end="38459" title="otaku" label="otaku"/>
<link wikidata="Q237" start="38493" end="38504" title="Vatican City" label="The Vatican"/>
<link wikidata="Q130720143" start="38549" end="38553" title="Luce (mascot)" label="Luce"/>
<link wikidata="Q967832" start="38642" end="38667" title="Japan Business Federation" label="Japan Business Federation"/>
<link wikidata="Q319831" start="38726" end="38731" title="Economy of Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7927929" start="38810" end="38821" title="Video games in Japan" label="video games"/>
<link wikidata="Q1060220" start="38922" end="38936" title="Tourism in Japan" label="tourism sector"/>
<link wikidata="Q1189945" start="39278" end="39284" title="Dentsu" label="Dentsu"/>
<link wikidata="Q10901350" start="39346" end="39361" title="anime and manga" label="anime and manga"/>
<link wikidata="Q234138" start="39514" end="39530" title="Japanese cuisine" label="Japanese cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q6158996" start="39543" end="39560" title="Japanese robotics" label="Japanese robotics"/>
<link wikidata="Q2333891" start="39784" end="39792" title="Statista" label="Statista"/>
<link wikidata="Q6158957" start="39975" end="39999" title="Japanese popular culture" label="Japanese popular culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1987589" start="40062" end="40074" title="Generation Z" label="Gen-Z&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q3481821" start="40173" end="40183" title="Anime club" label="Anime club"/>
<link wikidata="Q548126" start="40198" end="40214" title="anime convention" label="anime convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q142554" start="40400" end="40407" title="cosplay" label="cosplay"/>
<link wikidata="Q208674" start="40454" end="40465" title="portmanteau" label="portmanteau"/>
<link wikidata="Q194448" start="40699" end="40704" title="otaku" label="otaku"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="40994" end="41001" title="Japanophilia#21st century" label="weeaboo"/>
<link wikidata="Q238330" start="41168" end="41177" title="4chan.org" label="4chan.org"/>
<link wikidata="Q1520214" start="41267" end="41281" title="reappropriated" label="reappropriated"/>
<link wikidata="Q461524" start="41434" end="41445" title="fan fiction" label="fan fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053619" start="41450" end="41457" title="fan art" label="fan art"/>
<link wikidata="Q548206" start="41494" end="41511" title="anime music video" label="anime music video"/>
<link wikidata="Q123923583" start="41642" end="41658" title="Seichi junrei" label="Anime pilgrimage"/>
<link wikidata="Q866" start="41762" end="41769" title="YouTube" label="YouTube"/>
<link wikidata="Q3077586" start="41771" end="41779" title="Bilibili" label="Bilibili"/>
<link wikidata="Q4555537" start="41781" end="41787" title="Twitch (service)" label="Twitch"/>
<link wikidata="Q17459" start="41789" end="41795" title="Fandom (website)" label="Fandom"/>
<link wikidata="Q355" start="41797" end="41805" title="Facebook" label="Facebook"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136" start="41807" end="41813" title="Reddit" label="Reddit"/>
<link wikidata="Q22907849" start="41815" end="41822" title="Discord" label="Discord"/>
<link wikidata="Q384060" start="41824" end="41830" title="Tumblr" label="Tumblr"/>
<link wikidata="Q238330" start="41832" end="41837" title="4chan" label="4chan"/>
<link wikidata="Q48938223" start="41839" end="41845" title="TikTok" label="TikTok"/>
<link wikidata="Q918" start="41850" end="41857" title="Twitter" label="Twitter"/>
<link wikidata="Q37312" start="41904" end="41908" title="IMDb" label="IMDb"/>
<link wikidata="Q4044680" start="41910" end="41921" title="MyAnimeList" label="MyAnimeList"/>
<link wikidata="Q220509" start="42036" end="42054" title="Anime News Network" label="Anime News Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q7226423" start="42419" end="42426" title="Polygon (website)" label="Polygon"/>
<link wikidata="Q277633" start="42563" end="42573" title="Millennial" label="Millennial"/>
<link wikidata="Q898449" start="42617" end="42625" title="escapism" label="escapism"/>
<link wikidata="Q317521" start="42979" end="42988" title="Elon Musk" label="Elon Musk"/>
<link wikidata="Q13580495" start="42990" end="42993" title="BTS" label="BTS"/>
<link wikidata="Q151892" start="42998" end="43011" title="Ariana Grande" label="Ariana Grande"/>
<link wikidata="Q16538" start="43620" end="43630" title="South Park" label="South Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q860783" start="43645" end="43656" title="Chinpokomon" label="Chinpokomon"/>
<link wikidata="Q898143" start="43673" end="43696" title="Good Times with Weapons" label="Good Times with Weapons"/>
<link wikidata="Q379052" start="43713" end="43723" title="Adult Swim" label="Adult Swim"/>
<link wikidata="Q4197853" start="43737" end="43757" title="Perfect Hair Forever" label="Perfect Hair Forever"/>
<link wikidata="Q154958" start="43769" end="43780" title="Nickelodeon" label="Nickelodeon"/>
<link wikidata="Q305127" start="43794" end="43805" title="Kappa Mikey" label="Kappa Mikey"/>
<link wikidata="Q19750843" start="43958" end="43966" title="KonoSuba" label="KonoSuba"/>
<link wikidata="Q2580761" start="44249" end="44275" title="anime-influenced animation" label="anime-influenced animation"/>
<link wikidata="Q384738" start="44467" end="44483" title="Ōban Star-Racers" label="Ōban Star-Racers"/>
<link wikidata="Q124077595" start="45251" end="45261" title="mukokuseki" label="mukokuseki"/>
<link wikidata="Q878" start="45393" end="45399" title="United Arab Emirates" label="U.A.E."/>
<link wikidata="Q928" start="45400" end="45408" title="Philippines" label="Filipino"/>
<link wikidata="Q60769974" start="45880" end="45899" title="High Guardian Spice" label="High Guardian Spice"/>
<link wikidata="Q487202" start="45933" end="45945" title="Tower of God" label="Tower of God"/>
<link wikidata="Q13479326" start="45981" end="45985" title="RWBY" label="RWBY"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439" start="46005" end="46010" title="Texas" label="Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q7366534" start="46025" end="46038" title="Rooster Teeth" label="Rooster Teeth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134747" start="46173" end="46179" title="Adweek" label="Adweek"/>
<link wikidata="Q18049522" start="46315" end="46334" title="HuffPost" label="The Huffington Post"/>
<link wikidata="Q16221496" start="46435" end="46444" title="Monty Oum" label="Monty Oum"/>
<link wikidata="Q7366534" start="46809" end="46822" title="Rooster Teeth" label="Rooster Teeth"/>
<link wikidata="Q6788826" start="46824" end="46835" title="Matt Hullum" label="Matt Hullum"/>
<link wikidata="Q831454" start="47056" end="47072" title="Japanese culture" label="Japanese culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q15078788" start="47179" end="47194" title="broadcast media" label="broadcast media"/>
<link wikidata="Q194195" start="47236" end="47250" title="amusement park" label="amusement park"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="47302" end="47322" title="Media franchise#Transmedia franchise" label="transmedia franchise"/>
<link wikidata="Q196600" start="47552" end="47567" title="media franchise" label="media franchise"/>
<link wikidata="" start="47583" end="47613" title="Demon Slayer: Kimetsu no Yaiba" label="Demon Slayer: Kimetsu no Yaiba"/>
<link wikidata="Q2020" start="47627" end="47638" title="Dragon Ball" label="Dragon Ball"/>
<link wikidata="Q732120" start="47655" end="47661" title="Gundam" label="Gundam"/>
<link wikidata="Q28136443" start="47743" end="47776" title="List of highest-grossing media franchises" label="highest-grossing media franchises"/>
<link wikidata="Q864" start="47784" end="47791" title="Pokémon" label="Pokémon"/>
<link wikidata="Q779815" start="47900" end="47918" title="Animation director" label="Animation director"/>
<link wikidata="Q850204" start="47922" end="47937" title="Cinema of Japan" label="Cinema of Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129667" start="47940" end="47950" title="Cool Japan" label="Cool Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q831454" start="47953" end="47969" title="Culture of Japan" label="Culture of Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q285578" start="47972" end="47988" title="History of anime" label="History of anime"/>
<link wikidata="Q5287" start="47991" end="48008" title="Japanese language" label="Japanese language"/>
<link wikidata="Q6158957" start="48011" end="48035" title="Japanese popular culture" label="Japanese popular culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q2983393" start="48039" end="48051" title="Japanophilia" label="Japanophilia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1379187" start="48054" end="48068" title="Lists of anime" label="Lists of anime"/>
<link wikidata="Q8274" start="48072" end="48077" title="Manga" label="Manga"/>
<link wikidata="Q1459946" start="48080" end="48099" title="Mass media in Japan" label="Mass media in Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6804452" start="48108" end="48118" title="Mechademia" label="Mechademia"/>
<link wikidata="Q194448" start="48127" end="48132" title="Otaku" label="Otaku"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="48136" end="48154" title="Soft power#Japan" label="Soft power § Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1407200" start="48157" end="48176" title="Television in Japan" label="Television in Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7927929" start="48179" end="48199" title="Video games in Japan" label="Video games in Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q622807" start="48202" end="48223" title="Voice acting in Japan" label="Voice acting in Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q55155641" start="48226" end="48232" title="Vtuber" label="Vtuber"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="801" wikidata="Q747726" url="?curid=801" title="Asterism">
<text>Asterism may refer to:

* Asterism (astronomy), a pattern of stars
* Asterism (band), a Japanese rock band
* Asterism (gemology), an optical phenomenon in gemstones
* Asterism (typography), (⁂) a moderately rare typographical symbol denoting a break in passages

==See also==
* 
* Aster (disambiguation)
* Asterisk (disambiguation)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q747726" start="0" end="8" title="Asterism" label="Asterism"/>
<link wikidata="Q9262" start="26" end="46" title="Asterism (astronomy)" label="Asterism (astronomy)"/>
<link wikidata="Q117235050" start="69" end="84" title="Asterism (band)" label="Asterism (band)"/>
<link wikidata="Q747746" start="109" end="128" title="Asterism (gemology)" label="Asterism (gemology)"/>
<link wikidata="Q747707" start="167" end="188" title="Asterism (typography)" label="Asterism (typography)"/>
<link wikidata="Q747334" start="281" end="303" title="Aster (disambiguation)" label="Aster (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q26429" start="306" end="331" title="Asterisk (disambiguation)" label="Asterisk (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="802" wikidata="Q3640" url="?curid=802" title="Ankara">
<text>Ankara is the capital city of Turkey. Located in the central part of Anatolia, the city has a population of about 5.2 million in its urban center and about 5.8 million in Ankara Province. Ankara is Turkey&#x27;s second-largest city by population after Istanbul, first by urban area, and third by metro area after Konya and Sivas.

Ankara was historically known as Ancyra and Angora. Serving as the capital of the ancient Celtic state of Galatia (280–64 BC), and later of the Roman province with the same name (25 BC–7th century), Ankara has various Hattian, Hittite, Lydian, Phrygian, Galatian, Greek, Persian, Roman, Byzantine, and Ottoman archeological sites. The Ottomans made the city the capital first of the Anatolia Eyalet (1393 – late 15th century) and then the Angora Eyalet (1827–1864) and the Angora Vilayet (1867–1922). On 23 April 1920, the Grand National Assembly of Turkey was established in Ankara, which became the headquarters of the Turkish National Movement during the Turkish War of Independence. Ankara became the new Turkish capital upon the establishment of the Republic on 29 October 1923, succeeding in this role as the former Turkish capital Istanbul following the fall of the Ottoman Empire. 

The historical center of Ankara is a rocky hill rising over the left bank of the Ankara River, a tributary of the Sakarya River. The hill remains crowned by the ruins of Ankara Castle. Although few of its outworks have survived, there are well-preserved examples of Roman and Ottoman architecture throughout the city.

The government is a prominent employer, but Ankara is also an important commercial and industrial city located at the center of Turkey&#x27;s road and railway networks. The city gave its name to the Angora wool shorn from Angora rabbits, the long-haired Angora goat (the source of mohair), and the Angora cat. The area is also known for its pears, honey and Muscat grapes. Although situated in one of the driest regions of Turkey and surrounded mostly by steppe vegetation (except for the forested areas on the southern periphery), Ankara can be considered a green city in terms of green areas per inhabitant, at per head. Ankara is among the top 100 science and technology clusters in the world.

== Etymology ==
The orthography of the name &quot;Ankara&quot; has varied over the ages. It has been identified with the Hittite cult center , although this remains a matter of debate. In classical antiquity and during the medieval period, the city was known as (, ) in Greek and in Latin; the Galatian Celtic name was probably a similar variant. Following its annexation by the Seljuk Turks in 1073, the city became known in many European languages as &quot;Angora&quot;; it was also known in Ottoman Turkish as (). The form &quot;Angora&quot; is preserved in the names of breeds of many different kinds of animals, and in the names of several locations in the US (see Angora).

== History ==

The region&#x27;s history can be traced back to the Bronze Age Hattic civilization, which was succeeded in the 2nd millennium BC by the Hittites, in the 10th century BC by the Phrygians, and later by the Lydians, Persians, Greeks, Galatians, Romans, Byzantines, and Turks (the Seljuk Sultanate of Rûm, the Ottoman Empire and finally republican Türkiye).

===Ancient history===
The oldest settlements in and around the city center of Ankara belonged to the Hattic civilization which existed during the Bronze Age and was gradually absorbed c. 2000 – 1700 BC by the Indo-European Hittites. The city grew significantly in size and importance under the Phrygians starting around 1000 BC, and experienced a large expansion following the mass migration from Gordion, (the capital of Phrygia), after an earthquake which severely damaged that city around that time. In Phrygian tradition, King Midas was venerated as the founder of Ancyra, but Pausanias mentions that the city was actually far older, which accords with present archeological knowledge.

Phrygian rule was succeeded first by Lydian and later by Persian rule, though the strongly Phrygian character of the peasantry remained, as evidenced by the gravestones of the much later Roman period. Persian sovereignty lasted until the Persians&#x27; defeat at the hands of Alexander the Great who conquered the city in 333 BC. Alexander came from Gordion to Ankara and stayed in the city for a short period. After his death at Babylon in 323 BC and the subsequent division of his empire among his generals, Ankara, and its environs fell into the share of Antigonus.

Another important expansion took place under the Greeks of Pontos who came there around 300 BC and developed the city as a trading center for the commerce of goods between the Black Sea ports and Crimea to the north; Assyria, Cyprus, and Lebanon to the south; and Georgia, Armenia and Persia to the east. By that time the city also took its name Ἄγκυρα (&quot;Ánkyra&quot;, meaning &quot;anchor&quot; in Greek) which, in slightly modified form, provides the modern name of &quot;Ankara&quot;.

===Celtic history===
In 278 BC, the city, along with the rest of central Anatolia, was occupied by a Celtic group, the Galatians, who were the first to make Ankara one of their main tribal centers, the headquarters of the Tectosages tribe. Other centers were Pessinus, today&#x27;s Ballıhisar, for the Trocmi tribe, and Tavium, to the east of Ankara, for the Tolistobogii tribe. The city was then known as &quot;Ancyra&quot;. The Celtic element was probably relatively small in numbers; a warrior aristocracy which ruled over Phrygian-speaking peasants. However, the Celtic language continued to be spoken in Galatia for many centuries. At the end of the 4th century, St. Jerome, a native of Dalmatia, observed that the language spoken around Ankara was very similar to that being spoken in the northwest of the Roman world near Trier.

===Roman history===
The city was subsequently passed under the control of the Roman Empire. In 25 BC, Emperor Augustus raised it to the status of a &quot;polis&quot; and made it the capital city of the Roman province of Galatia. Ankara is famous for the &quot;Monumentum Ancyranum&quot; (&quot;Temple of Augustus and Rome&quot;) which contains the official record of the &quot;Acts of Augustus&quot;, known as the &quot;Res Gestae Divi Augusti&quot;, an inscription cut in marble on the walls of this temple. The ruins of Ancyra still furnish today valuable bas-reliefs, inscriptions and other architectural fragments. Two other Galatian tribal centers, Tavium near Yozgat, and Pessinus (Balhisar) to the west, near Sivrihisar, continued to be reasonably important settlements in the Roman period, but it was Ancyra that grew into a grand metropolis.

An estimated 200,000 people lived in Ancyra in good times during the Roman Empire, a far greater number than was to be the case from after the fall of the Roman Empire until the early 20th century. The small Ankara River ran through the center of the Roman town. It has now been covered and diverted, but it formed the northern boundary of the old town during the Roman, Byzantine and Ottoman periods. Çankaya, the rim of the majestic hill to the south of the present city center, stood well outside the Roman city, but may have been a summer resort. In the 19th century, the remains of at least one Roman villa or large house were still standing not far from where the Çankaya Presidential Residence stands today. To the west, the Roman city extended until the area of the Gençlik Park and Railway Station, while on the southern side of the hill, it may have extended downward as far as the site presently occupied by Hacettepe University. It was thus a sizeable city by any standards and much larger than the Roman towns of Gaul or Britannia.

Ancyra&#x27;s importance rested on the fact that it was the junction point where the roads in northern Anatolia running north–south and east–west intersected, giving it major strategic importance for Rome&#x27;s eastern frontier. The great imperial road running east passed through Ankara and a succession of emperors and their armies came this way. They were not the only ones to use the Roman highway network, which was equally convenient for invaders. In the second half of the 3rd century, Ancyra was invaded in rapid succession by the Goths coming from the west (who rode far into the heart of Cappadocia, taking slaves and pillaging) and later by the Arabs. For about a decade, the town was one of the western outposts of one of Palmyrean empress Zenobia in the Syrian Desert, who took advantage of a period of weakness and disorder in the Roman Empire to set up a short-lived state of her own.

The town was reincorporated into the Roman Empire under Emperor Aurelian in 272. The tetrarchy, a system of multiple (up to four) emperors introduced by Diocletian (284–305), seems to have engaged in a substantial program of rebuilding and of road construction from Ancyra westwards to Germe and Dorylaeum (now Eskişehir).

In its heyday, Roman Ancyra was a large market and trading center but it also functioned as a major administrative capital, where a high official ruled from the city&#x27;s Praetorium, a large administrative palace or office. During the 3rd century, life in Ancyra, as in other Anatolian towns, seems to have become somewhat militarized in response to the invasions and instability of the town.

===Byzantine history===
The city is well known during the 4th century as a center of Christian activity (see also below), due to frequent imperial visits, and through the letters of the pagan scholar Libanius. Bishop Marcellus of Ancyra and Basil of Ancyra were active in the theological controversies of their day, and the city was the site of no fewer than three church synods in 314, 358 and 375, the latter two in favor of Arianism.

The city was visited by Emperor Constans I (r. 337–350) in 347 and 350, Julian (r. 361–363) during his Persian campaign in 362, and Julian&#x27;s successor Jovian (r. 363–364) in winter 363/364 (he entered his consulship while in the city). After Jovian&#x27;s death soon after, Valentinian I (r. 364–375) was acclaimed emperor at Ancyra, and in the next year his brother Valens (r. 364–378) used Ancyra as his base against the usurper Procopius. When the province of Galatia was divided sometime in 396/99, Ancyra remained the civil capital of Galatia I, as well as its ecclesiastical center (metropolitan see). Emperor Arcadius (r. 383–408) frequently used the city as his summer residence, and some information about the ecclesiastical affairs of the city during the early 5th century is found in the works of Palladius of Galatia and Nilus of Ancyra.

In 479, the rebel Marcian attacked the city, without being able to capture it. In 610/11, Comentiolus, brother of Emperor Phocas (r. 602–610), launched his own unsuccessful rebellion in the city against Heraclius (r. 610–641). Ten years later, in 620 or more likely 622, it was captured by the Sassanid Persians during the Byzantine–Sassanid War of 602–628. Although the city returned to Byzantine hands after the end of the war, the Persian presence left traces in the city&#x27;s archeology, and likely began the process of its transformation from a late antique city to a medieval fortified settlement.

In 654, the city, also known in Arabic sources as &quot;Qalat as-Salasil&quot; (&quot;fortress of the chains&quot;), was captured for the first time by the Arabs of the Rashidun Caliphate, under Muawiyah, the future founder of the Umayyad Caliphate. At about the same time, the themes were established in Anatolia, and Ancyra became capital of the Opsician Theme, which was the largest and most important theme until it was split up under Emperor Constantine V (r. 741–775); Ancyra then became the capital of the new Bucellarian Theme. The city was captured at least temporarily by the Umayyad prince Maslama ibn Hisham in 739/40, the last of the Umayyads&#x27; territorial gains from the Byzantine Empire. Ancyra was attacked without success by Abbasid forces in 776 and in 798/99. In 805, Emperor Nikephoros I (r. 802–811) strengthened its fortifications, a fact which probably saved it from sack during the large-scale invasion of Anatolia by Caliph Harun al-Rashid in the next year. Arab sources report that Harun and his successor al-Ma&#x27;mun (r. 813–833) took the city, but this information is later invention. In 838, however, during the Amorium campaign, the armies of Caliph al-Mu&#x27;tasim (r. 833–842) converged and met at the city; abandoned by its inhabitants, Ancara was razed to the ground, before the Arab armies went on to besiege and destroy Amorium reaching as far as Smyrna. In 859, Emperor Michael III (r. 842–867) came to the city during a campaign against the Arabs, and ordered its fortifications restored. In 872, the city was menaced, but not taken, by the Paulicians under Chrysocheir. The last Arab raid to reach the city was undertaken in 931, by the Abbasid governor of Tarsus, Thamal al-Dulafi, but the city again was not captured.

=== Ecclesiastical history ===
Early Christian martyrs of Ancyra, about whom little is known, included Proklos and Hilarios who were natives of the otherwise unknown nearby village of Kallippi, and suffered repression under the emperor Trajan (98–117). In the 280s we hear of Philumenos, a Christian corn merchant from southern Anatolia, being captured and martyred in Ankara, and Eustathius.

As in other Roman towns, the reign of Diocletian marked the culmination of the persecution of the Christians. In 303, Ancyra was one of the towns where the co-emperors Diocletian and his deputy Galerius launched their anti-Christian persecution. In Ancyra, their first target was the 38-year-old Bishop of the town, whose name was Clement. Clement&#x27;s life describes how he was taken to Rome, then sent back, and forced to undergo many interrogations and hardship before he, and his brother, and various companions were put to death. The remains of the church of St. Clement can be found today in a building just off Işıklar Caddesi in the Ulus district. Quite possibly this marks the site where Clement was originally buried. Four years later, a doctor of the town named Plato and his brother Antiochus also became celebrated martyrs under Galerius. Theodotus of Ancyra is also venerated as a saint.

However, the persecution proved unsuccessful and in 314 Ancyra was the center of an important council of the early church; its 25 disciplinary canons constitute one of the most important documents in the early history of the administration of the Sacrament of Penance. The synod also considered ecclesiastical policy for the reconstruction of the Christian Church after the persecutions, and in particular the treatment of &quot;lapsi&quot;—Christians who had given in to forced paganism (sacrifices) to avoid martyrdom during these persecutions.

Though paganism was probably tottering in Ancyra in Clement&#x27;s day, it may still have been the majority religion. Twenty years later, Christianity and monotheism had taken its place. Ancyra quickly turned into a Christian city, with a life dominated by monks and priests and theological disputes. The town council or senate gave way to the bishop as the main local figurehead. During the middle of the 4th century, Ancyra was involved in the complex theological disputes over the nature of Christ, and a form of Arianism seems to have originated there.

In 362–363, Emperor Julian passed through Ancyra on his way to an ill-fated campaign against the Persians, and according to Christian sources, engaged in a persecution of various holy men. The stone base for a statue, with an inscription describing Julian as &quot;Lord of the whole world from the British Ocean to the barbarian nations&quot;, can still be seen, built into the eastern side of the inner circuit of the walls of Ankara Castle. The Column of Julian which was erected in honor of the emperor&#x27;s visit to the city in 362 still stands today. In 375, Arian bishops met at Ancyra and deposed several bishops, among them St. Gregory of Nyssa.

In the late 4th century, Ancyra became something of an imperial holiday resort. After Constantinople became the East Roman capital, emperors in the 4th and 5th centuries would retire from the humid summer weather on the Bosporus to the drier mountain atmosphere of Ancyra. Theodosius II (408–450) kept his court in Ancyra in the summers. Laws issued in Ancyra testify to the time they spent there.

The Metropolis of Ancyra continued to be a residential see of the Eastern Orthodox Church until the 20th century, with about 40,000 faithful, mostly Turkish-speaking, but that situation ended as a result of the 1923 Convention Concerning the Exchange of Greek and Turkish Populations. The earlier Armenian genocide put an end to the residential eparchy of Ancyra of the Armenian Catholic Church, which had been established in 1850. It is also a titular metropolis of the Ecumenical Patriarchate of Constantinople.

Both the Ancient Byzantine Metropolitan archbishopric and the &#x27;modern&#x27; Armenian eparchy are now listed by the Catholic Church as titular sees, with separate apostolic successions.

=== Seljuk and Ottoman history ===
After the Battle of Manzikert in 1071, the Seljuk Turks overran much of Anatolia. By 1073, the Turkish settlers had reached the vicinity of Ancyra, and the city was captured shortly after, at the latest by the time of the rebellion of Nikephoros Melissenos in 1081. In 1101, when the Crusade under Raymond IV of Toulouse arrived, the city had been under Danishmend control for some time. The Crusaders captured the city, and handed it over to the Byzantine emperor Alexios I Komnenos (r. 1081–1118). Byzantine rule did not last long, and the city was captured by the Seljuk Sultanate of Rum at some unknown point; in 1127, it returned to Danishmend control until 1143, when the Seljuks of Rum retook it.

After the Battle of Köse Dağ in 1243, in which the Mongols defeated the Seljuks, most of Anatolia became part of the dominion of the Mongols. Taking advantage of Seljuk decline, a semi-religious cast of craftsmen and trade people named &quot;Ahiler&quot; chose Angora as their independent city-state in 1290. Orhan, the second Bey of the Ottoman Empire, captured the city in 1356. Timur defeated Bayezid I at the Battle of Ankara in 1402 and took the city, but in 1403 Angora was again under Ottoman control.

The Levant Company maintained a factory in the town from 1639 to 1768. In the 19th century, its population was estimated at 20,000 to 60,000. It was sacked by Egyptians under Ibrahim Pasha in 1832.

From 1867 to 1922, the city served as the capital of the Angora Vilayet, which included most of ancient Galatia.

Prior to World War I, the town had a British consulate and a population of around 28,000, roughly of whom were Christian.

=== Turkish republican capital ===
Following the Ottoman defeat in World War I, the Ottoman capital Constantinople (modern Istanbul) and much of Anatolia was occupied by the Allies, who planned to share these lands between Armenia, France, Greece, Italy and the United Kingdom, leaving for the Turks the core piece of land in central Anatolia. In response, the leader of the Turkish nationalist movement, Mustafa Kemal Atatürk, established the headquarters of his resistance movement in Angora in 1920. After the Turkish War of Independence was won and the Treaty of Sèvres was superseded by the Treaty of Lausanne (1923), the Turkish nationalists replaced the Ottoman Empire with the Republic of Turkey on 29 October 1923. A few days earlier, Angora had officially replaced Constantinople as the new Turkish capital city, on 13 October 1923, and Republican officials declared that the city&#x27;s name is Ankara.

After Ankara became the capital of the newly founded Republic of Turkey, new development divided the city into an old section, called &quot;Ulus&quot;, and a new section, called &quot;Yenişehir&quot;. Ancient buildings reflecting Roman, Byzantine, and Ottoman history and narrow winding streets mark the old section. The new section, now centered on Kızılay Square, has the trappings of a more modern city: wide streets, hotels, theaters, shopping malls, and high-rises.

Government offices and foreign embassies are also located in the new section. Ankara has experienced a phenomenal growth since it was made Turkey&#x27;s capital in 1923, when it was &quot;a small town of no importance&quot;. In 1924, the year after the government had moved there, Ankara had about 35,000 residents. By 1927 there were 44,553 residents and by 1950 the population had grown to 286,781. After 1930, the city officially became known in Western languages as Ankara. By the late 1930s, the English name &quot;Angora&quot; was no longer in popular use.

Ankara continued to grow rapidly during the latter half of the 20th century and eventually outranked İzmir as Turkey&#x27;s second-largest city, after Istanbul. Ankara&#x27;s urban population reached 4,587,558 in 2014, while the population of Ankara Province reached 5,150,072 in 2015.

The Presidential Palace of Türkiye is situated in Ankara. This building serves as the main residence of the president.

== Geography ==
Geographically, Ankara is located in the middle of the Kızılırmak and Sakarya rivers, and the Sakarya River forms its border with Eskişehir in the west. Ankara shares its borders with Bolu and Çankırı in the north; Konya in the south and Kırıkkale in the east.

Ankara and its province are located in the Central Anatolia Region of Turkey. The Çubuk Brook flows through the city center of Ankara. It is connected in the western suburbs of the city to the Ankara River, which is a tributary of the Sakarya River.

=== Climate ===
Ankara has a cold semi-arid climate under the Köppen climate classification (&quot;BSk&quot;), while under the Trewartha climate classification, the city is classified as humid continental (&quot;Dc&quot;). Due to its elevation and inland location, Ankara has cold and snowy winters, and hot and dry summers. Rainfall occurs mostly during the spring and autumn. The city lies in USDA Hardiness zone 7b, and its annual average precipitation is fairly low at , nevertheless precipitation can be observed throughout the year. Monthly mean temperatures range from in January to in July, with an annual mean of . Ankara&#x27;s overall temperature regime is very similar to New York City.

== Demographics ==

Ankara had a population of 75,000 in 1927. There were 74,632 male residents and 48,882 female residents in Ankara according to the 1935 census. As of 2022, the population of the Ankara Province was 5,782,285. When Ankara became the capital of the Republic of Turkey in 1923, it was designated as a planned city for 500,000 future inhabitants. During the 1920s, 1930s and 1940s, the city grew in a planned and orderly pace. However, from the 1950s onward, the city grew much faster than envisioned, because unemployment and poverty forced people to migrate from the countryside into the city to seek a better standard of living. As a result, many illegal houses called gecekondu were built around the city, causing the unplanned and uncontrolled urban landscape of Ankara, as not enough planned housing could be built fast enough. Although precariously built, the vast majority of them have electricity, running water and modern household amenities.

Nevertheless, many of these gecekondus have been replaced by huge public housing projects in the form of tower blocks such as Elvankent, Eryaman and Güzelkent; and also as mass housing compounds for military and civil service accommodation. Although many gecekondus still remain, they too are gradually being replaced by mass housing compounds, as empty land plots in the city of Ankara for new construction projects are becoming impossible to find.

Çorum and Yozgat, which are located in Central Anatolia and whose population is decreasing, are the provinces with the highest net migration to Ankara. About one third of the Central Anatolia population of 15,608,868 people resides in Ankara.

The literacy rate in the whole province for people who are 15 years old or older is 98.18% according to 2020 TÜİK data. Ankara Province also has the highest percentage of tertiary education graduates in Turkey with 29.08% of the population having either an undergraduate, master&#x27;s or doctor&#x27;s degree.

== Economy and infrastructure ==
Ankara has long been a productive agricultural region in Anatolia. In the Ottoman period, Ankara was well known for producing grain, cotton, and fruits.

The city has exported mohair (from the Angora goat) and Angora wool (from the Angora rabbit) internationally for centuries. In the 19th century, the city also exported substantial amounts of goat and cat skins, gum, wax, honey, berries, and madder root. It was connected to Istanbul by railway before the First World War, continuing to export mohair, wool, berries, and grain.

The Central Anatolia Region is one of the primary locations of grape and wine production in Turkey, and Ankara is particularly famous for its Kalecik Karası and Muscat grapes; and its Kavaklıdere wine, which is produced in the Kavaklıdere neighborhood within the Çankaya district of the city. Ankara is also famous for its pears. Another natural product of Ankara is its indigenous type of honey (&quot;Ankara Balı&quot;) which is known for its light color and is mostly produced by the Atatürk Forest Farm and Zoo in the Gazi district, and by other facilities in the Elmadağ, Çubuk and Beypazarı districts. Çubuk-1 and Çubuk-2 dams on the Çubuk Brook in Ankara were among the first dams constructed in the Turkish Republic.

Ankara is the center of the state-owned and private Turkish defence and aerospace companies, where the industrial plants and headquarters of the Turkish Aerospace Industries, MKE, ASELSAN, HAVELSAN, ROKETSAN, FNSS, Nurol Makina, and numerous other firms are located. Exports to foreign countries from these defense and aerospace firms have steadily increased in the past decades. The IDEF in Ankara is one of the largest international expositions of the global arms industry. A number of the global automotive companies also have production facilities in Ankara, such as the German bus and truck manufacturer MAN SE. Ankara hosts the OSTIM Industrial Zone, Turkey&#x27;s largest industrial park.

A large percentage of the complicated employment in Ankara is provided by the state institutions; such as the ministries, subministries, and other administrative bodies of the Turkish government. There are also many foreign citizens working as diplomats or clerks in the embassies of their respective countries.

==Transportation==


The &quot;Electricity, Gas, Bus General Directorate&quot; (EGO) operates the Ankara Metro and other forms of public transportation. Ankara is served by a suburban rail named Başkentray (B1) and five Metro lines (A1, M1, M2, M3, M4) of the Ankara Metro with about 400,000 total daily commuters, while additional subway lines (A2 and M2a/b) are under construction. A long gondola lift with four stations connects the district of Şentepe to the Yenimahalle metro station.

Ankara Central Station is a major rail hub in Turkey. The Turkish State Railways operates passenger train service from Ankara to other major cities, such as: Istanbul, Eskişehir, Balıkesir, Kütahya, İzmir, Kayseri, Adana, Kars, Elazığ, Malatya, Diyarbakır, Karabük, Zonguldak and Sivas. Commuter rail also runs between the stations of Sincan and Kayaş. On 13 March 2009, the new Yüksek Hızlı Tren (YHT) high-speed rail service began operation between Ankara and Eskişehir. On 23 August 2011, another YHT high-speed line commercially started its service between Ankara and Konya. On 25 July 2014, the Ankara–Istanbul high-speed line of YHT entered service.

Ankara Esenboğa Airport, located in the north-east of the city, is Ankara&#x27;s main airport. Whilst the AŞTİ is the main coach terminal.

===Ankara public transportation statistics===
The average amount of time people spend commuting on public transit in Ankara on a weekday is 71 minutes. 17% of public transit passengers, ride for more than two hours every day. The average amount of time people wait at a stop or station for public transit is sixteen minutes, while 28% of users wait for over twenty minutes on average every day. The average distance people usually ride in a single trip with public transit is , while 27% travel for over in a single direction.

== Politics ==


Since 8 April 2019, the mayor of Ankara is Mansur Yavaş from the Republican People&#x27;s Party (CHP), who won the mayoral election in 2019 and 2024.

Ankara is politically a triple battleground between the ruling conservative AK Party, the opposition Kemalist center-left Republican People&#x27;s Party (CHP) and the nationalist far-right MHP. The province of Ankara is divided into 25 districts. Historically, the CHP&#x27;s key and almost only political stronghold in Ankara lied within the central area of Çankaya, which is the city&#x27;s most populous district. While the CHP has always gained between 60 and 70% of the vote in Çankaya since 2002, political support elsewhere throughout Ankara was minimal. The high population within Çankaya, as well as Yenimahalle to an extent, has allowed the CHP to take overall second place behind the AK Party in both local and general elections, with the MHP a close third, despite the fact that the MHP was politically stronger than the CHP in almost every other district. Overall, the AK Party enjoyed the most support throughout the city. The electorate of Ankara thus tended to vote in favor of the political right, far more so than the other main cities of Istanbul and İzmir. In retrospect, the 2013–14 protests against the AK Party government were particularly strong in Ankara, proving to be fatal on multiple occasions. 

The city suffered from a series of terrorist attacks in 2015 and 2016, most notably on 10 October 2015; 17 February 2016; and 13 March 2016. The city was also one of the sites of the coup attempt on 15 July 2016.

Melih Gökçek was the Metropolitan Mayor of Ankara between 1994 and 2017. Initially elected in the 1994 local elections, he was re-elected in 1999, 2004 and 2009. In the 2014 local elections, Gökçek stood for a fifth term. The MHP&#x27;s metropolitan mayoral candidate for the 2009 local elections, Mansur Yavaş, stood as the CHP&#x27;s candidate against Gökçek in 2014. In a heavily controversial election, Gökçek was declared the winner by just 1% ahead of Yavaş amid allegations of systematic electoral fraud. With the Supreme Electoral Council and courts rejecting his appeals, Yavaş declared his intention to take the irregularities to the European Court of Human Rights. Although Gökçek was inaugurated for a fifth term, most election observers believe that Yavaş was the winner of the election. Gökçek resigned on 28 October 2017 and was replaced by the former mayor of Sincan district, Mustafa Tuna; who was succeeded by Mansur Yavaş of the CHP, the current mayor of Ankara, elected in 2019.

== Main sights ==
===Ancient/archeological sites===

====Ankara Citadel====
The foundations of the Ankara castle and citadel were laid by the Galatians on a prominent lava outcrop (), and the rest was completed by the Romans. The Byzantines and Seljuks further made restorations and additions. The area around and inside the citadel, being the oldest part of Ankara, contains many fine examples of traditional architecture. There are also recreational areas to relax. Many restored traditional Turkish houses inside the citadel area have found new life as restaurants, serving local cuisine.

The citadel was depicted in various Turkish banknotes during 1927–1952 and 1983–1989.

====Roman Theater====
The remains, the stage, and the backstage of the Antique Rome theatre of Ankara can be seen outside the castle. Roman statues that were found here are exhibited in the Museum of Anatolian Civilizations. The seating area is still under excavation.

====Temple of Augustus and Rome====

The Augusteum, now known as the Temple of Augustus and Rome, was built 25  20 BC following the conquest of Central Anatolia by the Roman Empire. Ancyra then formed the capital of the new province of Galatia. After the death of Augustus in AD 14, a copy of the text of the &quot;Res Gestae Divi Augusti&quot; (the &quot;Monumentum Ancyranum&quot;) was inscribed on the interior of the temple&#x27;s &#x27; in Latin and a Greek translation on an exterior wall of the &#x27;. The temple on the ancient acropolis of Ancyra was enlarged in the 2nd century and converted into a church in the 5th century. It is located in the Ulus quarter of the city. It was subsequently publicized by the Austrian ambassador Ogier Ghiselin de Busbecq in the 16th century.

====Roman Baths====
The Roman Baths of Ankara have all the typical features of a classical Roman bath complex: a &quot;frigidarium&quot; (cold room), a &quot;tepidarium&quot; (warm room) and a &quot;caldarium&quot; (hot room). The baths were built during the reign of the Roman emperor Caracalla in the early 3rd century to honor Asclepios, the God of Medicine. Today, only the basement and first floors remain. It is situated in the Ulus quarter.

====Roman Road====
The Roman Road of Ankara or &quot;Cardo Maximus&quot; was found in 1995 by Turkish archeologist Cevdet Bayburtluoğlu. It is long and wide. Many ancient artifacts were discovered during the excavations along the road and most of them are displayed at the Museum of Anatolian Civilizations.

====Column of Julian====
The Column of Julian or Julianus, now in the Ulus district, was erected in honor of the Roman emperor Julian the Apostate&#x27;s visit to Ancyra in 362.

=== Mosques ===

====Kocatepe Mosque====

Kocatepe Mosque is the largest mosque in the city. Located in the Kocatepe quarter, it was constructed between 1967 and 1987 in classical Ottoman style with four minarets. Its size and prominent location have made it a landmark for the city.

====Ahmet Hamdi Akseki Mosque====
Ahmet Hamdi Akseki Mosque is located near the Presidency of Religious Affairs on the Eskişehir Road. Built in the Turkish neoclassical style, it is one of the largest new mosques in the city, completed and opened in 2013. It can accommodate 6 thousand people during general prayers, and up to 30 thousand people during funeral prayers. The mosque was decorated with Anatolian Seljuk style patterns.

====Yeni (Cenab Ahmet) Mosque====
It is the largest Ottoman mosque in Ankara and was built by the famous architect Sinan in the 16th century. The mimber (pulpit) and mihrap (prayer niche) are of white marble, and the mosque itself is of Ankara stone, an example of very fine workmanship.

====Hacı Bayram Mosque====

This mosque, in the Ulus quarter next to the Temple of Augustus, was built in the early 15th century in Seljuk style by an unknown architect. It was subsequently restored by architect Mimar Sinan in the 16th century, with Kütahya tiles being added in the 18th century. The mosque was built in honor of Hacı Bayram-ı Veli, whose tomb is next to the mosque, two years before his death (1427–28). The usable space inside this mosque is on the first floor and on the second floor.

====Ahi Elvan Mosque====
It was founded in the Ulus quarter near the Ankara Citadel and was constructed by the Ahi fraternity during the late 14th and early 15th centuries. The finely carved walnut mimber (pulpit) is of particular interest.

====Alâeddin Mosque====
The Alâeddin Mosque is the oldest mosque in Ankara. It has a carved walnut mimber, the inscription on which records that the mosque was completed in early AH 574 (which corresponds to the summer of 1178 AD) and was built by the Seljuk prince Muhiddin Mesud Şah (died 1204), the Bey of Ankara, who was the son of the Anatolian Seljuk sultan Kılıç Arslan II (reigned 1156–1192.)

===Modern monuments===
There are at least 50 monuments and reliefs throughout the city. Some notables are;

====Victory Monument====
The Victory Monument (Turkish: &quot;Zafer Anıtı&quot;) was crafted by Austrian sculptor Heinrich Krippel in 1925 and was erected in 1927 at Ulus Square. The monument is made of marble and bronze and features an equestrian statue of Mustafa Kemal Atatürk, who wears a Republic era modern military uniform, with the rank Field Marshal.

====Statue of Atatürk====
Located at Zafer(Victory) Square (Turkish: &quot;Zafer Meydanı&quot;), the marble and bronze statue was crafted by the Italian sculptor Pietro Canonica in 1927 and depicts a standing Atatürk who wears a Republic era modern military uniform, with the rank Field Marshal.

====Monument of Security====
The Security Monument, located in Güvenpark near Kızılay Square, was erected in 1935 and bears Atatürk&#x27;s advice to his people: &quot;Turk! Be proud, work hard, and believe in yourself.&quot; (There is debate on whether or not Atatürk actually said &quot;Use your mind&quot;(Turkish: öğün) instead of &quot;Be proud&quot;(Turkish: övün))

The monument was depicted on the reverse of the Turkish 5 lira banknote of 1937–1952 and of the 1000 lira banknotes of 1939–1946.

====Hatti Monument====
Erected in 1978 at Sıhhiye Square, this impressive monument symbolizes the Hatti Sun Disc (which was later adopted by the Hittites) and commemorates Anatolia&#x27;s earliest known civilization. The Hatti Sun Disc has been used in the previous logo of Ankara Metropolitan Municipality. It was also used in the previous logo of the Ministry of Culture &amp; Tourism.

====Korean War Monument====
The Monument to Turkish Soldiers Fighting in Korea opened in 1973 to commemorate the veterans and martyrs of the Turkish Brigade.

===Inns===

====Suluhan====

Suluhan is a historical Inn in Ankara. It is also called the &quot;Hasanpaşa Han&quot;. It is about southeast of Ulus Square and situated in the Hacıdoğan neighborhood. According to the &quot;vakfiye&quot; (inscription) of the building, the Ottoman era &quot;han&quot; was commissioned by Hasan Pasha, a regional beylerbey, and was constructed between 1508 and 1511, during the final years of the reign of Sultan Bayezid II.
There are 102 rooms (now shops) which face the two yards. In each room there is a window, a niche and a chimney.

====Çengelhan Rahmi M. Koç Museum====
Çengelhan Rahmi M. Koç Museum is a museum of industrial technology situated in Çengel Han, an Ottoman era Inn which was completed in 1523, during the early years of the reign of Sultan Suleiman the Magnificent. The exhibits include industrial/technological artifacts from the 1850s onwards. There are also sections about Mustafa Kemal Atatürk, the founder of modern Turkey; Vehbi Koç, Rahmi Koç&#x27;s father and one of the first industrialists of Turkey, and Ankara city.

== Shopping ==

Foreign visitors to Ankara usually like to visit the old shops in &quot;Çıkrıkçılar Yokuşu&quot; (Weavers&#x27; Road) near Ulus, where myriad things ranging from traditional fabrics, hand-woven carpets and leather products can be found at bargain prices. &quot;Bakırcılar Çarşısı&quot; (Bazaar of Coppersmiths) is particularly popular, and many interesting items, not just of copper, can be found here like jewelry, carpets, costumes, antiques and embroidery. Up the hill to the castle gate, there are many shops selling a huge and fresh collection of spices, dried fruits, nuts, and other produce.
Modern shopping areas are mostly found in Kızılay, or on Tunalı Hilmi Avenue, including the modern mall of Karum (named after the ancient Assyrian merchant colonies called &quot;Kârum&quot; that were established in central Anatolia at the beginning of the 2nd millennium BC) which is located towards the end of the Avenue; and in Çankaya, the quarter with the highest elevation in the city. Atakule Tower next to Atrium Mall in Çankaya has views over Ankara and also has a revolving restaurant at the top. The symbol of the Armada Shopping Mall is an anchor, and there&#x27;s a large anchor monument at its entrance, as a reference to the ancient Greek name of the city, Ἄγκυρα (Ánkyra), which means anchor. Likewise, the anchor monument is also related with the Spanish name of the mall, Armada, which means naval fleet.
As Ankara started expanding westward in the 1970s, several modern, suburbia-style developments, mini-cities and business districts such as Söğütözü began to rise along the western highway, also known as the Eskişehir Road. The &quot;Armada&quot;, &quot;CEPA&quot; and &quot;Kentpark&quot; malls on the highway, the &quot;Galleria&quot;, &quot;Arcadium&quot; and &quot;Gordion&quot; in Ümitköy, and a huge mall, &quot;Real&quot; in Bilkent Center, offer North American and European style shopping opportunities (these places can be reached through the Eskişehir Highway.) There is also the newly expanded &quot;ANKAmall&quot; at the outskirts, on the Istanbul Highway, which houses most of the well-known international brands. This mall is the largest throughout the Ankara region. In 2014, a few more shopping malls were open in Ankara. They are &quot;Next Level&quot; and &quot;Taurus&quot; on the Boulevard of Mevlana (also known as Konya Road).

==Culture==
=== The arts ===

Turkish State Opera and Ballet, the national directorate of opera and ballet companies of Turkey, has its headquarters in Ankara, and serves the city with three venues:

*Ankara Opera House (&quot;Opera Sahnesi&quot;, also known as &quot;Büyük Tiyatro&quot;) is the largest of the three venues for opera and ballet in Ankara.

==== Music ====

Ankara is host to five classical music orchestras:
*Presidential Symphony Orchestra (Turkish Presidential Symphony Orchestra)
*Bilkent Symphony Orchestra (BSO) is a major symphony orchestra of Turkey.
*Hacettepe Symphony Orchestra was founded in 2003 and directed by Erol Erdinç 
*Başkent Oda Orkestrası (Chamber Orchestra of the Capital)

There are four concert halls in the city:
*CSO Concert Hall
*Bilkent Concert Hall is a performing arts center in Ankara. It is located in the Bilkent University campus.
*MEB Şura Salonu (also known as the Festival Hall), It is noted for its tango performances.
*Çankaya Çağdaş Sanatlar Merkezi Concert Hall was founded in 1994.

The city has been host to several well-established, annual theater, music, film festivals:

*Ankara International Music Festival, a music festival organized in the Turkish capital presenting classical music and ballet programs.

Ankara also has a number of concert venues such as &quot;Eskiyeni&quot;, &quot;IF Performance Hall&quot;, &quot;Jolly Joker&quot;, &quot;Kite&quot;, &quot;Nefes Bar&quot;, and &quot;Route&quot;, which host the live performances and events of popular musicians.

==== Theater ====

The Turkish State Theatres also has its head office in Ankara and runs the following stages in the city:

*125. Yıl Çayyolu Sahnesi
*Büyük Tiyatro,
*Küçük Tiyatro,
*Şinasi Sahnesi,
*Akün Sahnesi,
*Altındağ Tiyatrosu,
*İrfan Şahinbaş Atölye Sahnesi,
*Oda Tiyatrosu,
*Mahir Canova Sahnesi,
*Muhsin Ertuğrul Sahnesi.
In addition, the city is served by several private theater companies, among which Ankara Sanat Tiyatrosu, who have their own stage in the city center, is a notable example.

=== Museums ===
There are about 50 museums in the city. Some notables include;

====Museum of Anatolian Civilizations====
The Museum of Anatolian Civilizations (&quot;Anadolu Medeniyetleri Müzesi&quot;) is situated at the entrance of the Ankara Castle. It is an old 15th century bedesten (covered bazaar) that has been restored and now houses a collection of Paleolithic, Neolithic, Hatti, Hittite, Phrygian, Urartian and Roman works as well as a major section dedicated to Lydian treasures.

==== Anıtkabir ====

Anıtkabir is located on an imposing hill, which forms the &quot;Anıttepe&quot; quarter of the city, where the mausoleum of Mustafa Kemal Atatürk, founder of the Republic of Turkey, stands. Completed in 1953, it is a fusion of ancient and modern architectural styles. An adjacent museum houses a wax statue of Atatürk, his writings, letters and personal items, as well as an exhibition of photographs recording important moments in his life and during the establishment of the Republic. Anıtkabir is open every day, while the adjacent museum is open every day except Mondays.

====Ankara Aviation Museum====
Ankara Aviation Museum (&quot;Hava Kuvvetleri Müzesi Komutanlığı&quot;) is located near the Istanbul Road in Etimesgut. The museum opened to the public in September 1998. It is home to various missiles, avionics, aviation materials and aircraft that have served in the Turkish Air Force (e.g. combat aircraft such as the F-86 Sabre, F-100 Super Sabre, F-102 Delta Dagger, F-104 Starfighter, F-5 Freedom Fighter, F-4 Phantom; and cargo planes such as the Transall C-160.) Also a Hungarian MiG-21, a Pakistani MiG-19, and a Bulgarian MiG-17 are on display at the museum.

====Cer Modern====
Cer Modern is the modern-arts museum of Ankara, inaugurated on 1 April 2010. It is situated in the renovated building of the historic TCDD Cer Atölyeleri, formerly a workshop of the Turkish State Railways. The museum incorporates the largest exhibition hall in Turkey. The museum holds periodic exhibitions of modern and contemporary art as well as hosting other contemporary arts events.

====Ankara Ethnography Museum====

Ankara Ethnography Museum (&quot;Etnoğrafya Müzesi&quot;) is located opposite to the Ankara Opera House on Talat Paşa Boulevard, in the Ulus district. There is a fine collection of folkloric items, as well as artifacts from the Seljuk and Ottoman periods. In front of the museum building, there is a marble and bronze equestrian statue of Mustafa Kemal Atatürk (who wears a Republic era modern military uniform, with the rank Field Marshal) which was crafted in 1927 by the Italian sculptor Pietro Canonica.

====Mehmet Akif Literature Museum Library====
The Mehmet Akif Literature Museum Library is an important literary museum and archive opened in 2011 and dedicated to Mehmet Akif Ersoy (1873–1936), the poet of the Turkish National Anthem.

====METU Science and Technology Museum / Archaeology Museum ====
Both the METU Science and Technology Museum (&quot;ODTÜ Bilim ve Teknoloji Müzesi&quot;) and the Archaeology Museum (&quot;ODTÜ Arkeoloji Müzesi&quot;) are located inside the Middle East Technical University campus.

====Republic &amp; War of Independence Museum====

Both the Republic Museum and War of Independence Museum are located on Ulus Square. They were originally the first and second Parliament building (TBMM) of the Republic of Turkey, respectively. The War of Independence was planned and directed here as recorded in various photographs and items presently on exhibition. In another display, wax figures of former presidents of the Republic of Turkey are on exhibit.

====State Art and Sculpture Museum====

The State Art and Sculpture Museum (&quot;Resim-Heykel Müzesi&quot;) which opened to the public in 1980 is close to the Ethnography Museum and houses a rich collection of Turkish art from the late 19th century to the present day. There are also galleries which host guest exhibitions.

====TCDD Open Air Steam Locomotive Museum====
The TCDD Open Air Steam Locomotive Museum is an open-air museum which traces the history of steam locomotives.

=== Sports ===

As with all other cities of Turkey, football is the most popular sport in Ankara. The city currently has one football club competing in the Turkish Süper Lig: Ankaragücü, founded in 1910, is the oldest club in Ankara and is associated with Ankara&#x27;s military arsenal manufacturing company MKE. They were the Turkish Cup winners in 1972 and 1981. Gençlerbirliği, founded in 1923, play in the TFF First League and are known as the &quot;Ankara Gale&quot; or the &quot;Poppies&quot; because of their colors: red and black. They were the Turkish Cup winners in 1987 and 2001. Ankara Keçiörengücü also currently play in the TFF First League. Büyükşehir Belediye Ankaraspor also played in the Süper Lig until 2010, when they were expelled. The club was reconstituted in 2014 as Osmanlıspor but have since returned to their old identity as Ankaraspor. Ankaraspor currently play in the TFF Second League at the Etimesgut Belediyesi Atatürk Stadium. Gençlerbirliği&#x27;s B team, Hacettepe S.K. (formerly known as Gençlerbirliği OFTAŞ) played in the Süper Lig but folded in 2023. Ankara Demirspor and Etimesgut Belediyespor also play in the TFF Second League. Ankara has a large number of minor teams, playing at regional levels, including Çankaya FK, Altındağspor, Mamak FK, Çubukspor, and Bağlumspor.

In the Turkish Basketball Super League, Ankara is represented by Türk Telekom B.K., who play at the Ankara Arena. TED Ankara Kolejliler, MKE Ankaragücü, and OGM Ormanspor play in the second-tier Turkish First League. Türk Telekom became the fourth team in the country&#x27;s history to participate in EuroCup finals (22-23).

Halkbank Ankara is the leading domestic powerhouse in men&#x27;s volleyball, having won many championships and cups in the Turkish Men&#x27;s Volleyball League and even the CEV Cup in 2013.

Ankara Buz Pateni Sarayı is where the ice skating and ice hockey competitions take place in the city.

There are many popular spots for skateboarding which is active in the city since the 1980s. Skaters in Ankara usually meet in the park near the Grand National Assembly of Turkey.

The 2012-built THF Sport Hall hosts the Handball Super League and Women&#x27;s Handball Super League matches scheduled in Ankara.

== Parks ==

Ankara has many parks and open spaces mainly established in the early years of the Republic and well maintained and expanded thereafter. The most important of these parks are: Gençlik Parkı (houses an amusement park with a large pond for rowing), the Botanical garden, Seğmenler Park, Anayasa Park, Kuğulu Park (famous for the swans received as a gift from the Chinese government), Abdi İpekçi Park, Esertepe Parkı, Güven Park (see above for the monument), Kurtuluş Park (has an ice-skating rink), Altınpark (also a prominent exposition/fair area), Harikalar Diyarı (claimed to be Biggest Park of Europe inside city borders) and Göksu Park. Dikmen Vadisi (Dikmen Valley) is a park and recreation area situated in Çankaya district.

Gençlik Park was depicted on the reverse of the Turkish 100 lira banknotes of 1952–1976.

Atatürk Forest Farm and Zoo (&quot;Atatürk Orman Çiftliği&quot;) is an expansive recreational farming area which houses a zoo, several small agricultural farms, greenhouses, restaurants, a dairy farm and a brewery. It is a pleasant place to spend a day with family, be it for having picnics, hiking, biking or simply enjoying good food and nature. There is also an exact replica of the house where Atatürk was born in 1881, in Thessaloniki, Greece. Visitors to the &quot;Çiftlik&quot; (farm) as it is affectionately called by Ankarans, can sample such famous products of the farm such as old-fashioned beer and ice cream, fresh dairy products and meat rolls/kebabs made on charcoal, at a traditional restaurant (&quot;Merkez Lokantası&quot;, Central Restaurant), cafés and other establishments scattered around the farm.

== Education ==
===Universities===
Ankara is noted, within Turkey, for the multitude of universities it is home to. These include the following, several of them being among the most reputable in the country:
*Ankara University
*Atılım University
*Başkent University
*Bilkent University
*Çankaya University
*Gazi University
*Gülhane Military Medical Academy
*Hacettepe University
*Middle East Technical University
*TED University
*TOBB University of Economics and Technology
*Turkish Aeronautical Association University
*Turkish Military Academy
*Turkish National Police Academy
*Ufuk University
*Yıldırım Beyazıt University
==Fauna==

===Angora cat===

Ankara is home to a world-famous domestic cat breed – the Turkish Angora, called &quot;Ankara kedisi&quot; (Ankara cat) in Turkish. Turkish Angoras are one of the ancient, naturally occurring cat breeds, having originated in Ankara and its surrounding region in central Anatolia.

They mostly have a white, silky, medium to long length coat, no undercoat and a fine bone structure. There seems to be a connection between the Angora Cats and Persians, and the Turkish Angora is also a distant cousin of the Turkish Van. Although they are known for their shimmery white coat, there are more than twenty varieties including black, blue and reddish fur. They come in tabby and tabby-white, along with smoke varieties, and are in every color other than pointed, lavender, and cinnamon (all of which would indicate breeding to an outcross.)

Eyes may be blue, green, or amber, or even one blue and one amber or green. The W gene which is responsible for the white coat and blue eye is closely related to the hearing ability, and the presence of a blue eye can indicate that the cat is deaf to the side the blue eye is located. However, a great many blue and odd-eyed white cats have normal hearing, and even deaf cats lead a very normal life if kept indoors.

Ears are pointed and large, eyes are almond shaped and the head is massive with a two plane profile. Another characteristic is the tail, which is often kept parallel to the back.

===Angora goat===

The Angora goat () is a breed of domestic goat that originated in Ankara and its surrounding region in central Anatolia.

This breed was first mentioned in the time of Moses, roughly in 1500 BC. The first Angora goats were brought to Europe by Charles V, Holy Roman Emperor, about 1554, but, like later imports, were not very successful. Angora goats were first introduced in the United States in 1849 by James P. Davis. Seven adult goats were a gift from Sultan Abdülmecid I in appreciation for his services and advice on the raising of cotton.

The fleece taken from an Angora goat is called mohair. A single goat produces between of hair per year. Angoras are shorn twice a year, unlike sheep, which are shorn only once. Angoras have high nutritional requirements due to their rapid hair growth. A poor quality diet will curtail mohair development. The United States, Turkey, and South Africa are the top producers of mohair.

For a long period of time, Angora goats were bred for their white coat. In 1998, the Colored Angora Goat Breeders Association was set up to promote breeding of colored Angoras. Today, Angora goats produce white, black (deep black to greys and silver), red (the color fades significantly as the goat gets older), and brownish fiber.

Angora goats were depicted on the reverse of the Turkish 50 lira banknotes of 1938–1952.

===Angora rabbit===

The Angora rabbit () is a variety of domestic rabbit bred for its long, soft hair. The Angora is one of the oldest types of domestic rabbit, originating in Ankara and its surrounding region in central Anatolia, along with the Angora cat and Angora goat. The rabbits were popular pets with French royalty in the mid-18th century, and spread to other parts of Europe by the end of the century. They first appeared in the United States in the early 20th century. They are bred largely for their long Angora wool, which may be removed by shearing, combing, or plucking (gently pulling loose wool).

Angoras are bred mainly for their wool because it is silky and soft. They have a humorous appearance, as they oddly resemble a fur ball. Most are calm and docile but should be handled carefully. Grooming is necessary to prevent the fiber from matting and felting on the rabbit. A condition called &quot;wool block&quot; is common in Angora rabbits and should be treated quickly. Sometimes they are shorn in the summer as the long fur can cause the rabbits to overheat.

==International relations==
===Twin towns and sister cities===
Ankara is twinned with:
* Seoul, South Korea (since 1971)
* Islamabad, Pakistan (since 1982)
* Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia (since 1984)
* Beijing, China (since 1990)
* Amman, Jordan (since 1992)
* Bishkek, Kyrgyzstan (since 1992)
* Budapest, Hungary (since 1992)
* Khartoum, Sudan (since 1992)
* Moscow, Russia (since 1992)
* Sofia, Bulgaria (since 1992)
* Havana, Cuba (since 1993)
* Kyiv, Ukraine (since 1993)
* Ashgabat, Turkmenistan (since 1994)
* Kuwait City, Kuwait (since 1994)
* Sarajevo, Bosnia and Herzegovina (since 1994)
* Tirana, Albania (since 1995)
* Tbilisi, Georgia (since 1996)
* Ufa, Bashkortostan, Russia (since 1997)
* Alanya, Turkey
* Bucharest, Romania (since 1998)
* Hanoi, Vietnam (since 1998)
* Manama, Bahrain (since 2000)
* Mogadishu, Somalia (since 2000)
* Santiago, Chile (since 2000)
* Astana, Kazakhstan (since 2001)
* Dushanbe, Tajikistan (since 2003)
* Kabul, Afghanistan (since 2003)
* Ulaanbaatar, Mongolia (since 2003)
* Cairo, Egypt (since 2004)
* Chișinău, Moldova (since 2004)
* Sana&#x27;a, Yemen (since 2004)
* Tashkent, Uzbekistan (since 2004)
* Pristina, Kosovo (since 2005)
* Kazan, Tatarstan, Russia (since 2005)
* Kinshasa, Democratic Republic of the Congo (since 2005)
* Addis Ababa, Ethiopia (since 2006)
* Minsk, Belarus (since 2007)
* Zagreb, Croatia (since 2008)
* Damascus, Syria (since 2010)
* Bissau, Guinea-Bissau (since 2011)
* Washington, D.C., US (since 2011)
* Bangkok, Thailand (since 2012)
* Tehran, Iran (since 2013)
* Doha, Qatar (since 2016)
* Podgorica, Montenegro (since 7 March 2019)
* North Nicosia, Northern Cyprus
* Djibouti City, Djibouti (since 2017)
===Partner cities===
* Skopje, North Macedonia (since 1995)
* Vienna, Austria

== List of notable people ==
== See also ==

*Ankara Agreement
*ATO Congresium
*Battle of Ancyra
*Battle of Ankara
*List of bridges in Ankara
*List of hospitals in Ankara Province
*List of libraries in Ankara
*List of tallest buildings in Ankara
*Synod of Ancyra
*Treaty of Ankara (disambiguation)
*Victory Monument (Ankara)

==Notes==
==References==
===Sources===
*
* 

===Attribution===
*

==Further reading==

== External links ==

* Governorate of Ankara
* Municipality of Ankara
* GCatholic – (former and) Latin titular see
* GCatholic – former and titular Armenian Catholic see
* Ankara Development Agency
* Esenboğa International Airport</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3640" start="0" end="6" title="Ankara" label="Ankara"/>
<link wikidata="Q5119" start="14" end="26" title="capital city" label="capital city"/>
<link wikidata="Q43" start="30" end="36" title="Turkey" label="Turkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q155526" start="53" end="65" title="Central Anatolia Region" label="central part"/>
<link wikidata="Q51614" start="69" end="77" title="Anatolia" label="Anatolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2297724" start="171" end="186" title="Ankara Province" label="Ankara Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q43" start="198" end="204" title="Turkey" label="Turkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q106247" start="212" end="231" title="List of cities in Turkey" label="second-largest city"/>
<link wikidata="Q406" start="252" end="260" title="Istanbul" label="Istanbul"/>
<link wikidata="Q79857" start="313" end="318" title="Konya" label="Konya"/>
<link wikidata="Q107401" start="323" end="328" title="Sivas" label="Sivas"/>
<link wikidata="Q35966" start="421" end="425" title="Celts" label="Celt"/>
<link wikidata="Q26847" start="437" end="444" title="Galatia" label="Galatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277" start="475" end="480" title="Roman Empire" label="Roman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1249412" start="499" end="508" title="Galatia (Roman province)" label="same name"/>
<link wikidata="Q7322482" start="549" end="556" title="Hattians" label="Hattian"/>
<link wikidata="Q5406" start="558" end="565" title="Hittites" label="Hittite"/>
<link wikidata="Q620765" start="567" end="572" title="Lydia" label="Lydia"/>
<link wikidata="Q32579" start="575" end="582" title="Phrygia" label="Phrygia"/>
<link wikidata="Q11073103" start="585" end="593" title="Galatians (people)" label="Galatian"/>
<link wikidata="Q428995" start="595" end="600" title="Hellenistic civilization" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q389688" start="602" end="609" title="Achaemenid Empire" label="Persian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747689" start="611" end="616" title="Ancient Rome" label="Roman"/>
<link wikidata="Q12544" start="618" end="627" title="Byzantine Empire" label="Byzantine"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="633" end="640" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman"/>
<link wikidata="Q839954" start="641" end="659" title="archeological site" label="archeological site"/>
<link wikidata="Q3331869" start="714" end="729" title="Anatolia Eyalet" label="Anatolia Eyalet"/>
<link wikidata="Q3736234" start="770" end="783" title="Ankara Eyalet" label="Angora Eyalet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345660" start="804" end="818" title="Angora Vilayet" label="Angora Vilayet"/>
<link wikidata="Q274918" start="854" end="887" title="Grand National Assembly of Turkey" label="Grand National Assembly of Turkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q6302107" start="952" end="977" title="Turkish National Movement" label="Turkish National Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q234738" start="989" end="1016" title="Turkish War of Independence" label="Turkish War of Independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1837704" start="1192" end="1218" title="Defeat and dissolution of the Ottoman Empire" label="fall of the Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q2850284" start="1303" end="1315" title="Ankara River" label="Ankara River"/>
<link wikidata="Q217466" start="1336" end="1349" title="Sakarya River" label="Sakarya River"/>
<link wikidata="Q206225" start="1392" end="1405" title="Ankara Castle" label="Ankara Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q223750" start="1488" end="1493" title="Roman architecture" label="Roman"/>
<link wikidata="Q527449" start="1498" end="1518" title="Ottoman architecture" label="Ottoman architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q15462156" start="1545" end="1555" title="Government of Turkey" label="government"/>
<link wikidata="Q542460" start="1740" end="1751" title="Angora wool" label="Angora wool"/>
<link wikidata="Q542500" start="1763" end="1776" title="Angora rabbit" label="Angora rabbit"/>
<link wikidata="Q542544" start="1795" end="1806" title="Angora goat" label="Angora goat"/>
<link wikidata="Q179628" start="1822" end="1828" title="mohair" label="mohair"/>
<link wikidata="Q42720" start="1839" end="1849" title="Turkish Angora" label="Angora cat"/>
<link wikidata="Q181486" start="1899" end="1905" title="muscat (grape)" label="Muscat"/>
<link wikidata="Q123991" start="1996" end="2002" title="steppe" label="steppe"/>
<link wikidata="Q652360" start="2100" end="2110" title="green city" label="green city"/>
<link wikidata="Q5406" start="2360" end="2367" title="Hittites" label="Hittite"/>
<link wikidata="Q35497" start="2509" end="2514" title="Ancient Greek" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="2522" end="2527" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q27403" start="2533" end="2548" title="Galatian language" label="Galatian Celtic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3708255" start="2618" end="2630" title="Seljuk Turks" label="Seljuk Turks"/>
<link wikidata="Q36730" start="2733" end="2748" title="Ottoman Turkish language" label="Ottoman Turkish"/>
<link wikidata="Q226711" start="2909" end="2915" title="Angora (disambiguation)" label="Angora"/>
<link wikidata="Q11761" start="2986" end="2996" title="Bronze Age" label="Bronze Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q7322482" start="2997" end="3003" title="Hattians" label="Hattic"/>
<link wikidata="Q31107" start="3004" end="3016" title="Hattic language" label="civilization"/>
<link wikidata="Q5406" start="3070" end="3078" title="Hittites" label="Hittites"/>
<link wikidata="Q32579" start="3110" end="3117" title="Phrygia" label="Phrygia"/>
<link wikidata="Q620765" start="3138" end="3143" title="Lydia" label="Lydia"/>
<link wikidata="Q389688" start="3147" end="3153" title="Achaemenid Empire" label="Persia"/>
<link wikidata="Q539051" start="3157" end="3163" title="Greeks" label="Greeks"/>
<link wikidata="Q26847" start="3165" end="3172" title="Galatia" label="Galatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277" start="3176" end="3182" title="Roman Empire" label="Romans"/>
<link wikidata="Q12544" start="3184" end="3194" title="Byzantine Empire" label="Byzantines"/>
<link wikidata="Q84072" start="3200" end="3205" title="Turkish people" label="Turks"/>
<link wikidata="Q3708094" start="3211" end="3217" title="Great Seljuq Empire" label="Seljuk"/>
<link wikidata="Q975405" start="3218" end="3234" title="Sultanate of Rûm" label="Sultanate of Rûm"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="3240" end="3254" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q43" start="3278" end="3285" title="Turkey" label="Türkiye"/>
<link wikidata="Q7322482" start="3390" end="3396" title="Hattians" label="Hattic"/>
<link wikidata="Q31107" start="3397" end="3409" title="Hattic language" label="civilization"/>
<link wikidata="Q11761" start="3435" end="3445" title="Bronze Age" label="Bronze Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q35668" start="3498" end="3511" title="Hittite language" label="Indo-European"/>
<link wikidata="Q5406" start="3512" end="3520" title="Hittites" label="Hittites"/>
<link wikidata="Q32579" start="3583" end="3590" title="Phrygia" label="Phrygia"/>
<link wikidata="Q542854" start="3686" end="3693" title="Gordium" label="Gordion"/>
<link wikidata="Q32579" start="3711" end="3718" title="Phrygia" label="Phrygia"/>
<link wikidata="Q308398" start="3820" end="3825" title="Midas" label="Midas"/>
<link wikidata="Q192931" start="3870" end="3879" title="Pausanias (geographer)" label="Pausanias"/>
<link wikidata="Q620765" start="4017" end="4022" title="Lydia" label="Lydia"/>
<link wikidata="Q794" start="4037" end="4043" title="Iran" label="Persia"/>
<link wikidata="Q8409" start="4256" end="4275" title="Alexander the Great" label="Alexander the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q542854" start="4330" end="4337" title="Gordium" label="Gordion"/>
<link wikidata="Q5684" start="4410" end="4417" title="Babylon" label="Babylon"/>
<link wikidata="Q200401" start="4538" end="4547" title="Antigonus I Monophthalmus" label="Antigonus"/>
<link wikidata="Q679524" start="4599" end="4605" title="Pontic Greeks" label="Greeks"/>
<link wikidata="Q621672" start="4609" end="4615" title="Pontus (region)" label="Pontos"/>
<link wikidata="Q166" start="4726" end="4735" title="Black Sea" label="Black Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q168432" start="4938" end="4944" title="anchor" label="anchor"/>
<link wikidata="Q9129" start="4954" end="4959" title="Greek language" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q35966" start="5145" end="5149" title="Celts" label="Celt"/>
<link wikidata="Q26847" start="5163" end="5170" title="Galatia" label="Galatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2205471" start="5266" end="5276" title="Tectosages" label="Tectosages"/>
<link wikidata="Q728353" start="5303" end="5311" title="Pessinus" label="Pessinus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2395658" start="5346" end="5352" title="Trocmi" label="Trocmi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1413514" start="5364" end="5370" title="Tavium" label="Tavium"/>
<link wikidata="Q2297986" start="5403" end="5415" title="Tolistobogii" label="Tolistobogii"/>
<link wikidata="Q36751" start="5570" end="5578" title="Phrygian language" label="Phrygian"/>
<link wikidata="Q25293" start="5611" end="5626" title="Celtic languages" label="Celtic language"/>
<link wikidata="Q44248" start="5712" end="5722" title="Jerome" label="St. Jerome"/>
<link wikidata="Q3138" start="5873" end="5878" title="Trier" label="Trier"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277" start="5959" end="5971" title="Roman Empire" label="Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1405" start="5991" end="5999" title="Augustus" label="Augustus"/>
<link wikidata="Q148837" start="6035" end="6040" title="polis" label="polis"/>
<link wikidata="Q182547" start="6083" end="6097" title="Roman province" label="Roman province"/>
<link wikidata="Q1249412" start="6101" end="6108" title="Galatia (Roman province)" label="Galatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1640233" start="6141" end="6161" title="Monumentum Ancyranum" label="Monumentum Ancyranum"/>
<link wikidata="Q734095" start="6301" end="6324" title="Res Gestae Divi Augusti" label="Res Gestae Divi Augusti"/>
<link wikidata="Q245117" start="6439" end="6449" title="relief" label="bas-relief"/>
<link wikidata="Q1413514" start="6535" end="6541" title="Tavium" label="Tavium"/>
<link wikidata="Q210292" start="6547" end="6553" title="Yozgat" label="Yozgat"/>
<link wikidata="Q728353" start="6559" end="6567" title="Pessinus" label="Pessinus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2850284" start="6941" end="6953" title="Ankara River" label="Ankara River"/>
<link wikidata="Q918230" start="7333" end="7344" title="Roman villa" label="Roman villa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1567050" start="7652" end="7672" title="Hacettepe University" label="Hacettepe University"/>
<link wikidata="Q38060" start="7759" end="7763" title="Gaul" label="Gaul"/>
<link wikidata="Q138396" start="7767" end="7776" title="Britannia" label="Britannia"/>
<link wikidata="Q42193" start="8319" end="8324" title="Goths" label="Goths"/>
<link wikidata="Q217265" start="8378" end="8388" title="Cappadocia" label="Cappadocia"/>
<link wikidata="Q35323" start="8436" end="8440" title="Arab people" label="Arab"/>
<link wikidata="Q189705" start="8532" end="8539" title="Zenobia" label="Zenobia"/>
<link wikidata="Q339162" start="8547" end="8560" title="Syrian Desert" label="Syrian Desert"/>
<link wikidata="Q46780" start="8745" end="8753" title="Aurelian" label="Aurelian"/>
<link wikidata="Q174450" start="8766" end="8775" title="tetrarchy" label="tetrarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q43107" start="8834" end="8844" title="Diocletian" label="Diocletian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1250866" start="8977" end="8986" title="Dorylaeum" label="Dorylaeum"/>
<link wikidata="Q168866" start="8992" end="9001" title="Eskişehir" label="Eskişehir"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9515" end="9520" title="#Ecclesiastical history" label="below"/>
<link wikidata="Q263892" start="9601" end="9609" title="Libanius" label="Libanius"/>
<link wikidata="Q519513" start="9618" end="9637" title="Marcellus of Ancyra" label="Marcellus of Ancyra"/>
<link wikidata="Q770924" start="9642" end="9657" title="Basil of Ancyra" label="Basil of Ancyra"/>
<link wikidata="Q2985432" start="9783" end="9786" title="Synod of Ancyra" label="314"/>
<link wikidata="Q83922" start="9828" end="9836" title="Arianism" label="Arianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q185538" start="9871" end="9881" title="Constans I" label="Constans I"/>
<link wikidata="Q33941" start="9911" end="9917" title="Julian (emperor)" label="Julian"/>
<link wikidata="Q34074" start="9995" end="10001" title="Jovian (emperor)" label="Jovian"/>
<link wikidata="Q40779" start="10049" end="10059" title="Roman consul" label="consulship"/>
<link wikidata="Q46720" start="10118" end="10131" title="Valentinian I" label="Valentinian I"/>
<link wikidata="Q172471" start="10211" end="10217" title="Valens" label="Valens"/>
<link wikidata="Q316284" start="10275" end="10284" title="Procopius (usurper)" label="Procopius"/>
<link wikidata="Q427961" start="10433" end="10449" title="metropolitan see" label="metropolitan see"/>
<link wikidata="Q159369" start="10460" end="10468" title="Arcadius" label="Arcadius"/>
<link wikidata="Q2047944" start="10652" end="10672" title="Palladius of Galatia" label="Palladius of Galatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q882941" start="10713" end="10720" title="Marcian (usurper)" label="Marcian"/>
<link wikidata="Q882702" start="10785" end="10796" title="Comentiolus (brother of Phocas)" label="Comentiolus"/>
<link wikidata="Q31556" start="10817" end="10823" title="Phocas" label="Phocas"/>
<link wikidata="Q41852" start="10898" end="10907" title="Heraclius" label="Heraclius"/>
<link wikidata="Q83891" start="10989" end="11004" title="Sassanid Persia" label="Sassanid Persia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2326099" start="11018" end="11051" title="Byzantine–Sassanid War of 602–628" label="Byzantine–Sassanid War of 602–628"/>
<link wikidata="Q484206" start="11129" end="11136" title="Persians" label="Persian"/>
<link wikidata="Q217050" start="11247" end="11259" title="late antique" label="late antique"/>
<link wikidata="Q35323" start="11458" end="11463" title="Arabs" label="Arabs"/>
<link wikidata="Q12490507" start="11471" end="11489" title="Rashidun Caliphate" label="Rashidun Caliphate"/>
<link wikidata="Q181154" start="11497" end="11505" title="Mu&amp;#x27;awiya I" label="Muawiyah"/>
<link wikidata="Q8575586" start="11533" end="11550" title="Umayyad Caliphate" label="Umayyad Caliphate"/>
<link wikidata="Q379817" start="11580" end="11585" title="theme (Byzantine district)" label="theme"/>
<link wikidata="Q2027242" start="11650" end="11664" title="Opsician Theme" label="Opsician Theme"/>
<link wikidata="Q41635" start="11749" end="11762" title="Constantine V" label="Constantine V"/>
<link wikidata="Q1003257" start="11819" end="11836" title="Bucellarian Theme" label="Bucellarian Theme"/>
<link wikidata="Q87724579" start="11903" end="11921" title="Maslama ibn Hisham" label="Maslama ibn Hisham"/>
<link wikidata="Q12536" start="12048" end="12055" title="Abbasid" label="Abbasid"/>
<link wikidata="Q208754" start="12101" end="12113" title="Nikephoros I" label="Nikephoros I"/>
<link wikidata="Q3153818" start="12212" end="12232" title="Abbasid invasion of Asia Minor (806)" label="large-scale invasion"/>
<link wikidata="Q131002" start="12255" end="12270" title="Harun al-Rashid" label="Harun al-Rashid"/>
<link wikidata="Q61056" start="12338" end="12352" title="al-Ma&amp;#x27;mun" label="al-Ma&amp;#x27;mun"/>
<link wikidata="Q1669285" start="12450" end="12466" title="Sack of Amorium" label="Amorium campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q284550" start="12489" end="12505" title="al-Mu&amp;#x27;tasim" label="al-Mu&amp;#x27;tasim"/>
<link wikidata="Q174270" start="12666" end="12673" title="Amorium" label="Amorium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1379299" start="12693" end="12699" title="Smyrna" label="Smyrna"/>
<link wikidata="Q41622" start="12717" end="12728" title="Michael III" label="Michael III"/>
<link wikidata="Q334727" start="12889" end="12899" title="Paulicians" label="Paulicians"/>
<link wikidata="Q2967359" start="12906" end="12917" title="Chrysocheir" label="Chrysocheir"/>
<link wikidata="Q134287" start="13006" end="13012" title="Tarsus (city)" label="Tarsus"/>
<link wikidata="Q20644091" start="13014" end="13030" title="Thamal al-Dulafi" label="Thamal al-Dulafi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425" start="13306" end="13312" title="Trajan" label="Trajan"/>
<link wikidata="Q43107" start="13502" end="13512" title="Diocletian" label="Diocletian"/>
<link wikidata="Q172168" start="13658" end="13666" title="Galerius" label="Galerius"/>
<link wikidata="Q2980720" start="14030" end="14041" title="Clement of Ancyra" label="St. Clement"/>
<link wikidata="Q1260525" start="14318" end="14337" title="Theodotus of Ancyra (martyr)" label="Theodotus of Ancyra"/>
<link wikidata="Q2985432" start="14450" end="14470" title="Synod of Ancyra" label="an important council"/>
<link wikidata="Q51644" start="14478" end="14490" title="Early Christianity" label="early church"/>
<link wikidata="Q183959" start="14616" end="14636" title="Confession (religion)" label="Sacrament of Penance"/>
<link wikidata="Q34651" start="14716" end="14732" title="Christian Church" label="Christian Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365805" start="14798" end="14803" title="Lapsi (Christianity)" label="lapsi"/>
<link wikidata="Q29536" start="14848" end="14856" title="paganism" label="paganism"/>
<link wikidata="Q6498826" start="14879" end="14888" title="martyrdom" label="martyrdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q9159" start="15072" end="15082" title="monotheism" label="monotheism"/>
<link wikidata="Q83922" start="15433" end="15441" title="Arianism" label="Arianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q191734" start="16109" end="16129" title="Gregory of Nyssa" label="St. Gregory of Nyssa"/>
<link wikidata="Q875157" start="16196" end="16210" title="resort" label="holiday resort"/>
<link wikidata="Q16869" start="16218" end="16232" title="Constantinople" label="Constantinople"/>
<link wikidata="Q12544" start="16244" end="16254" title="Byzantine Empire" label="East Roman"/>
<link wikidata="Q35958" start="16352" end="16360" title="Bosphorus" label="Bosporus"/>
<link wikidata="Q160353" start="16405" end="16418" title="Theodosius II" label="Theodosius II"/>
<link wikidata="Q20496998" start="16535" end="16555" title="Metropolis of Ancyra" label="Metropolis of Ancyra"/>
<link wikidata="Q866196" start="16586" end="16589" title="episcopal see" label="see"/>
<link wikidata="Q35032" start="16597" end="16620" title="Eastern Orthodox Church" label="Eastern Orthodox Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q5166224" start="16747" end="16814" title="Convention Concerning the Exchange of Greek and Turkish Populations" label="Convention Concerning the Exchange of Greek and Turkish Populations"/>
<link wikidata="Q80034" start="16828" end="16845" title="Armenian genocide" label="Armenian genocide"/>
<link wikidata="Q64842" start="16901" end="16925" title="Armenian Catholic Church" label="Armenian Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q211004" start="17002" end="17043" title="Ecumenical Patriarchate of Constantinople" label="Ecumenical Patriarchate of Constantinople"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="17166" end="17181" title="Catholic Church" label="Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q15217609" start="17185" end="17196" title="titular see" label="titular see"/>
<link wikidata="Q49482" start="17213" end="17233" title="apostolic succession" label="apostolic succession"/>
<link wikidata="Q200032" start="17282" end="17301" title="Battle of Manzikert" label="Battle of Manzikert"/>
<link wikidata="Q3708255" start="17315" end="17327" title="Seljuk Turks" label="Seljuk Turks"/>
<link wikidata="Q960351" start="17507" end="17528" title="Nikephoros Melissenos" label="Nikephoros Melissenos"/>
<link wikidata="Q51653" start="17556" end="17563" title="Crusade of 1101" label="Crusade"/>
<link wikidata="Q299612" start="17570" end="17592" title="Raymond IV of Toulouse" label="Raymond IV of Toulouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q846670" start="17626" end="17636" title="Danishmend" label="Danishmend"/>
<link wikidata="Q41600" start="17737" end="17755" title="Alexios I Komnenos" label="Alexios I Komnenos"/>
<link wikidata="Q975405" start="17846" end="17862" title="Sultanate of Rum" label="Sultanate of Rum"/>
<link wikidata="Q136344" start="17987" end="18005" title="Battle of Köse Dağ" label="Battle of Köse Dağ"/>
<link wikidata="Q12557" start="18028" end="18035" title="Mongol Empire" label="Mongols"/>
<link wikidata="Q400290" start="18219" end="18225" title="Ahis" label="Ahiler"/>
<link wikidata="Q133168" start="18286" end="18291" title="Orhan" label="Orhan"/>
<link wikidata="Q181217" start="18304" end="18307" title="Bey" label="Bey"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="18315" end="18329" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q8462" start="18358" end="18363" title="Timur" label="Timur"/>
<link wikidata="Q128358" start="18373" end="18382" title="Bayezid I" label="Bayezid I"/>
<link wikidata="Q209387" start="18390" end="18406" title="Battle of Ankara" label="Battle of Ankara"/>
<link wikidata="Q3557480" start="18491" end="18505" title="Levant Company" label="Levant Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q127861" start="18646" end="18654" title="Khedivate of Egypt" label="Egyptian"/>
<link wikidata="Q311789" start="18662" end="18675" title="Ibrahim Pasha of Egypt" label="Ibrahim Pasha"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345660" start="18743" end="18757" title="Angora Vilayet" label="Angora Vilayet"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="18809" end="18820" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q174193" start="18837" end="18844" title="United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland" label="British"/>
<link wikidata="Q207978" start="18845" end="18854" title="consul (representative)" label="consulate"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="18972" end="18979" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="18990" end="19001" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q32357" start="19023" end="19037" title="Ottoman Constantinople" label="Constantinople"/>
<link wikidata="Q51614" start="19068" end="19076" title="Anatolia" label="Anatolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q139670" start="19146" end="19153" title="First Republic of Armenia" label="Armenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q70802" start="19155" end="19161" title="French Third Republic" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q209065" start="19163" end="19169" title="Kingdom of Greece (Glücksburg)" label="Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q172579" start="19171" end="19176" title="Kingdom of Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5152" start="19328" end="19349" title="Mustafa Kemal Atatürk" label="Mustafa Kemal Atatürk"/>
<link wikidata="Q6302107" start="19387" end="19406" title="Turkish National Movement" label="resistance movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q234738" start="19436" end="19463" title="Turkish War of Independence" label="Turkish War of Independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q182515" start="19480" end="19496" title="Treaty of Sèvres" label="Treaty of Sèvres"/>
<link wikidata="Q193258" start="19519" end="19544" title="Treaty of Lausanne (1923)" label="Treaty of Lausanne (1923)"/>
<link wikidata="Q43" start="19608" end="19626" title="Republic of Turkey" label="Republic of Turkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q6046415" start="20188" end="20202" title="Kızılay Meydanı" label="Kızılay Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q35997" start="20975" end="20980" title="İzmir" label="İzmir"/>
<link wikidata="Q406" start="21025" end="21033" title="Istanbul" label="Istanbul"/>
<link wikidata="Q2297724" start="21117" end="21132" title="Ankara Province" label="Ankara Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q40894456" start="21165" end="21195" title="Presidential Complex (Turkey)" label="Presidential Palace of Türkiye"/>
<link wikidata="Q257785" start="21352" end="21362" title="Kızılırmak River" label="Kızılırmak"/>
<link wikidata="Q217466" start="21367" end="21374" title="Sakarya River" label="Sakarya"/>
<link wikidata="Q217466" start="21391" end="21404" title="Sakarya River" label="Sakarya River"/>
<link wikidata="Q168866" start="21427" end="21436" title="Eskişehir" label="Eskişehir"/>
<link wikidata="Q200951" start="21481" end="21485" title="Bolu" label="Bolu"/>
<link wikidata="Q209925" start="21490" end="21497" title="Çankırı" label="Çankırı"/>
<link wikidata="Q79857" start="21512" end="21517" title="Konya" label="Konya"/>
<link wikidata="Q206891" start="21535" end="21544" title="Kırıkkale" label="Kırıkkale"/>
<link wikidata="Q2297724" start="21570" end="21582" title="Ankara Province" label="its province"/>
<link wikidata="Q155526" start="21602" end="21625" title="Central Anatolia Region" label="Central Anatolia Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q2850284" start="21752" end="21764" title="Ankara River" label="Ankara River"/>
<link wikidata="Q159675" start="21777" end="21786" title="tributary" label="tributary"/>
<link wikidata="Q217466" start="21794" end="21807" title="Sakarya River" label="Sakarya River"/>
<link wikidata="Q124196" start="21839" end="21861" title="cold semi-arid climate" label="cold semi-arid climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q124095" start="21872" end="21901" title="Köppen climate classification" label="Köppen climate classification"/>
<link wikidata="Q17174435" start="21937" end="21969" title="Trewartha climate classification" label="Trewartha climate classification"/>
<link wikidata="Q10856115" start="21997" end="22014" title="humid continental climate" label="humid continental"/>
<link wikidata="Q501542" start="22205" end="22209" title="USDA" label="USDA"/>
<link wikidata="Q925615" start="22210" end="22224" title="Hardiness zone" label="Hardiness zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="22494" end="22507" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q571341" start="23198" end="23207" title="gecekondu" label="gecekondu"/>
<link wikidata="Q18142" start="23585" end="23596" title="tower block" label="tower block"/>
<link wikidata="Q5396249" start="23617" end="23624" title="Eryaman, Etimesgut" label="Eryaman"/>
<link wikidata="Q5627197" start="23629" end="23638" title="Güzelkent, Etimesgut" label="Güzelkent"/>
<link wikidata="Q8236" start="24179" end="24192" title="literacy rate" label="literacy rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q179628" start="24696" end="24702" title="mohair" label="mohair"/>
<link wikidata="Q542544" start="24713" end="24724" title="Angora goat" label="Angora goat"/>
<link wikidata="Q542460" start="24730" end="24741" title="Angora wool" label="Angora wool"/>
<link wikidata="Q542500" start="24752" end="24765" title="Angora rabbit" label="Angora rabbit"/>
<link wikidata="Q198779" start="24865" end="24869" title="Goatskin (material)" label="goat"/>
<link wikidata="Q535814" start="24885" end="24888" title="gum arabic" label="gum"/>
<link wikidata="Q143739" start="24890" end="24893" title="beeswax" label="wax"/>
<link wikidata="Q10987" start="24895" end="24900" title="honey" label="honey"/>
<link wikidata="Q162108" start="24915" end="24926" title="madder root" label="madder root"/>
<link wikidata="Q406" start="24948" end="24956" title="Istanbul" label="Istanbul"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="24979" end="24994" title="First World War" label="First World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q155526" start="25056" end="25079" title="Central Anatolia Region" label="Central Anatolia Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q969280" start="25125" end="25150" title="Turkish wine" label="wine production in Turkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q740341" start="25194" end="25208" title="Kalecik Karası" label="Kalecik Karası"/>
<link wikidata="Q181486" start="25213" end="25226" title="Muscat (grape and wine)" label="Muscat grapes"/>
<link wikidata="Q6379028" start="25236" end="25252" title="Kavaklıdere (winery)" label="Kavaklıdere wine"/>
<link wikidata="Q6379026" start="25279" end="25290" title="Kavaklıdere, Ankara" label="Kavaklıdere"/>
<link wikidata="Q1020646" start="25315" end="25322" title="Çankaya, Ankara" label="Çankaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q10987" start="25442" end="25447" title="honey" label="honey"/>
<link wikidata="Q4811611" start="25539" end="25566" title="Atatürk Forest Farm and Zoo" label="Atatürk Forest Farm and Zoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1089296" start="25660" end="25667" title="Çubuk-1 Dam" label="Çubuk-1"/>
<link wikidata="Q29588681" start="25672" end="25679" title="Çubuk-2 Dam" label="Çubuk-2"/>
<link wikidata="Q392933" start="25838" end="25845" title="Arms industry" label="defence"/>
<link wikidata="Q936518" start="25850" end="25859" title="Aerospace manufacturer" label="aerospace"/>
<link wikidata="Q2002470" start="25923" end="25951" title="Turkish Aerospace Industries" label="Turkish Aerospace Industries"/>
<link wikidata="Q56884" start="25953" end="25956" title="Mechanical and Chemical Industry Corporation (Turkey)" label="MKE"/>
<link wikidata="Q297600" start="25958" end="25965" title="ASELSAN" label="ASELSAN"/>
<link wikidata="Q5628993" start="25967" end="25975" title="HAVELSAN" label="HAVELSAN"/>
<link wikidata="Q2548367" start="25977" end="25985" title="ROKETSAN" label="ROKETSAN"/>
<link wikidata="Q5426786" start="25987" end="25991" title="FNSS Defence Systems" label="FNSS"/>
<link wikidata="Q6095754" start="25993" end="26005" title="Nurol Makina" label="Nurol Makina"/>
<link wikidata="Q6050099" start="26162" end="26166" title="International Defence Industry Fair" label="IDEF"/>
<link wikidata="Q392933" start="26239" end="26252" title="arms industry" label="arms industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q190117" start="26277" end="26297" title="automotive industry" label="automotive companies"/>
<link wikidata="Q35953" start="26387" end="26393" title="MAN SE" label="MAN SE"/>
<link wikidata="Q6062101" start="26412" end="26433" title="OSTIM Industrial Zone" label="OSTIM Industrial Zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1662100" start="26457" end="26472" title="industrial park" label="industrial park"/>
<link wikidata="Q192350" start="26585" end="26595" title="Ministry (government department)" label="ministries"/>
<link wikidata="Q213283" start="26746" end="26755" title="embassy" label="embassies"/>
<link wikidata="Q748402" start="26886" end="26898" title="Ankara Metro" label="Ankara Metro"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412403" start="26963" end="26976" title="Commuter rail" label="suburban rail"/>
<link wikidata="Q7521893" start="26983" end="26993" title="Başkentray" label="Başkentray"/>
<link wikidata="Q5503" start="27008" end="27013" title="Rapid transit" label="Metro"/>
<link wikidata="Q1576693" start="27179" end="27191" title="gondola lift" label="gondola lift"/>
<link wikidata="Q1865363" start="27251" end="27276" title="Yenimahalle" label="Yenimahalle metro station"/>
<link wikidata="Q800389" start="27279" end="27301" title="Ankara railway station" label="Ankara Central Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q499967" start="27337" end="27359" title="Turkish State Railways" label="Turkish State Railways"/>
<link wikidata="Q406" start="27437" end="27445" title="Istanbul" label="Istanbul"/>
<link wikidata="Q168866" start="27447" end="27456" title="Eskişehir" label="Eskişehir"/>
<link wikidata="Q199723" start="27458" end="27467" title="Balıkesir" label="Balıkesir"/>
<link wikidata="Q188894" start="27469" end="27476" title="Kütahya" label="Kütahya"/>
<link wikidata="Q35997" start="27478" end="27483" title="İzmir" label="İzmir"/>
<link wikidata="Q48338" start="27485" end="27492" title="Kayseri" label="Kayseri"/>
<link wikidata="Q38545" start="27494" end="27499" title="Adana" label="Adana"/>
<link wikidata="Q127063" start="27501" end="27505" title="Kars" label="Kars"/>
<link wikidata="Q174060" start="27507" end="27513" title="Elazığ" label="Elazığ"/>
<link wikidata="Q165995" start="27515" end="27522" title="Malatya" label="Malatya"/>
<link wikidata="Q83387" start="27524" end="27534" title="Diyarbakır" label="Diyarbakır"/>
<link wikidata="Q189697" start="27536" end="27543" title="Karabük" label="Karabük"/>
<link wikidata="Q187895" start="27545" end="27554" title="Zonguldak" label="Zonguldak"/>
<link wikidata="Q107401" start="27559" end="27564" title="Sivas" label="Sivas"/>
<link wikidata="Q7521893" start="27614" end="27630" title="Sincan-Kayaş Line" label="Sincan and Kayaş"/>
<link wikidata="Q17097982" start="27658" end="27675" title="Yüksek Hızlı Tren" label="Yüksek Hızlı Tren"/>
<link wikidata="Q840389" start="27682" end="27705" title="High-speed rail in Turkey" label="high-speed rail service"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070179" start="27832" end="27856" title="Ankara-Konya high-speed railway" label="between Ankara and Konya"/>
<link wikidata="Q513146" start="27879" end="27910" title="Ankara-Istanbul high-speed railway" label="Ankara–Istanbul high-speed line"/>
<link wikidata="Q430490" start="27936" end="27959" title="Ankara Esenboğa Airport" label="Ankara Esenboğa Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q7223434" start="28042" end="28046" title="AŞTİ" label="AŞTİ"/>
<link wikidata="Q6086970" start="28664" end="28676" title="Mansur Yavaş" label="Mansur Yavaş"/>
<link wikidata="Q19079" start="28686" end="28716" title="Republican People&amp;#x27;s Party" label="Republican People&amp;#x27;s Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q60543226" start="28736" end="28760" title="2019 Ankara mayoral election" label="mayoral election in 2019"/>
<link wikidata="Q124157961" start="28765" end="28769" title="2024 Ankara mayoral election" label="2024"/>
<link wikidata="Q19077" start="28848" end="28856" title="AK Party" label="AK Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q269443" start="28873" end="28881" title="Kemalism" label="Kemalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q19079" start="28894" end="28924" title="Republican People&amp;#x27;s Party" label="Republican People&amp;#x27;s Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q251077" start="28961" end="28964" title="Nationalist Movement Party" label="MHP"/>
<link wikidata="Q2297724" start="28970" end="28988" title="Ankara Province" label="province of Ankara"/>
<link wikidata="Q1020646" start="29131" end="29138" title="Çankaya, Ankara (district)" label="Çankaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q1865363" start="29381" end="29392" title="Yenimahalle" label="Yenimahalle"/>
<link wikidata="Q406" start="29829" end="29837" title="Istanbul" label="Istanbul"/>
<link wikidata="Q35997" start="29842" end="29847" title="İzmir" label="İzmir"/>
<link wikidata="Q13410316" start="29868" end="29916" title="2013–14 protests in Turkey" label="2013–14 protests against the AK Party government"/>
<link wikidata="Q21083277" start="30085" end="30100" title="2015 Ankara bombings" label="10 October 2015"/>
<link wikidata="Q22812485" start="30102" end="30118" title="February 2016 Ankara bombing" label="17 February 2016"/>
<link wikidata="Q23045905" start="30124" end="30137" title="March 2016 Ankara bombing" label="13 March 2016"/>
<link wikidata="Q25906338" start="30181" end="30185" title="2016 Turkish coup attempt" label="coup"/>
<link wikidata="Q366274" start="30212" end="30224" title="Melih Gökçek" label="Melih Gökçek"/>
<link wikidata="Q7855372" start="30310" end="30330" title="1994 Turkish local elections" label="1994 local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q7855373" start="30353" end="30357" title="1999 Turkish local elections" label="1999"/>
<link wikidata="Q3722202" start="30359" end="30363" title="2004 Turkish local elections" label="2004"/>
<link wikidata="Q1126296" start="30368" end="30372" title="2009 Turkish local elections" label="2009"/>
<link wikidata="Q1710058" start="30381" end="30401" title="2014 Turkish local elections" label="2014 local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q6086970" start="30510" end="30522" title="Mansur Yavaş" label="Mansur Yavaş"/>
<link wikidata="Q7645037" start="30733" end="30758" title="Supreme Election Council (Turkey)" label="Supreme Electoral Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q122880" start="30856" end="30886" title="European Court of Human Rights" label="European Court of Human Rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q1020659" start="31088" end="31094" title="Sincan, Ankara" label="Sincan"/>
<link wikidata="Q19612046" start="31105" end="31117" title="Mustafa Tuna" label="Mustafa Tuna"/>
<link wikidata="Q6086970" start="31140" end="31152" title="Mansur Yavaş" label="Mansur Yavaş"/>
<link wikidata="Q19079" start="31160" end="31163" title="Republican People&amp;#x27;s Party" label="CHP"/>
<link wikidata="Q60543226" start="31194" end="31209" title="2019 Ankara mayoral election" label="elected in 2019"/>
<link wikidata="Q206225" start="31311" end="31336" title="Ankara Castle" label="Ankara castle and citadel"/>
<link wikidata="Q40157" start="31379" end="31383" title="lava" label="lava"/>
<link wikidata="Q19610522" start="31963" end="31993" title="Antique Rome theatre of Ankara" label="Antique Rome theatre of Ankara"/>
<link wikidata="Q206225" start="32014" end="32024" title="Ankara Castle" label="the castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q754322" start="32082" end="32115" title="Museum of Anatolian Civilizations" label="Museum of Anatolian Civilizations"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277" start="32330" end="32342" title="Roman Empire" label="Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q182547" start="32386" end="32394" title="Roman province" label="province"/>
<link wikidata="Q26847" start="32398" end="32405" title="Galatia" label="Galatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1405" start="32426" end="32434" title="Augustus" label="Augustus"/>
<link wikidata="Q734095" start="32477" end="32500" title="Res Gestae Divi Augusti" label="Res Gestae Divi Augusti"/>
<link wikidata="Q1640233" start="32518" end="32538" title="Monumentum Ancyranum" label="Monumentum Ancyranum"/>
<link wikidata="Q131964" start="32883" end="32891" title="Austrian Empire" label="Austrian"/>
<link wikidata="Q647633" start="32903" end="32928" title="Ogier Ghiselin de Busbecq" label="Ogier Ghiselin de Busbecq"/>
<link wikidata="Q7361597" start="32975" end="32996" title="Roman Baths of Ankara" label="Roman Baths of Ankara"/>
<link wikidata="Q6581615" start="33042" end="33060" title="Thermae" label="Roman bath complex"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142866" start="33070" end="33081" title="frigidarium" label="frigidarium"/>
<link wikidata="Q601970" start="33109" end="33119" title="tepidarium" label="tepidarium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026403" start="33150" end="33159" title="caldarium" label="caldarium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1446" start="33237" end="33246" title="Caracalla" label="Caracalla"/>
<link wikidata="Q83223" start="33281" end="33290" title="Asclepius" label="Asclepios"/>
<link wikidata="Q6044801" start="33423" end="33443" title="Roman Road of Ankara" label="Roman Road of Ankara"/>
<link wikidata="Q754322" start="33673" end="33706" title="Museum of Anatolian Civilizations" label="Museum of Anatolian Civilizations"/>
<link wikidata="Q33941" start="33836" end="33855" title="Julian the Apostate" label="Julian the Apostate"/>
<link wikidata="Q853935" start="33930" end="33945" title="Kocatepe Mosque" label="Kocatepe Mosque"/>
<link wikidata="Q527449" start="34068" end="34081" title="Ottoman architecture" label="Ottoman style"/>
<link wikidata="Q168866" start="34292" end="34301" title="Eskişehir" label="Eskişehir"/>
<link wikidata="Q127632740" start="34573" end="34595" title="Anatolian Seljuk architecture" label="Anatolian Seljuk style"/>
<link wikidata="Q1640233" start="34969" end="34987" title="Monumentum Ancyranum" label="Temple of Augustus"/>
<link wikidata="Q5600" start="35108" end="35119" title="Mimar Sinan" label="Mimar Sinan"/>
<link wikidata="Q188894" start="35146" end="35153" title="Kütahya" label="Kütahya"/>
<link wikidata="Q3777281" start="35226" end="35244" title="Hacı Bayram-ı Veli" label="Hacı Bayram-ı Veli"/>
<link wikidata="Q400290" start="35513" end="35527" title="Ahis" label="Ahi fraternity"/>
<link wikidata="Q337907" start="35729" end="35735" title="wood carving" label="carved"/>
<link wikidata="Q2453469" start="35736" end="35742" title="Juglans" label="walnut"/>
<link wikidata="Q443676" start="35743" end="35749" title="minbar" label="mimber"/>
<link wikidata="Q28892" start="35823" end="35829" title="Islamic calendar" label="AH 574"/>
<link wikidata="Q3708255" start="35896" end="35902" title="Seljuk dynasty" label="Seljuk"/>
<link wikidata="Q181217" start="35946" end="35949" title="Bey" label="Bey"/>
<link wikidata="Q975405" start="35984" end="36007" title="Anatolian Seljuk Sultanate" label="Anatolian Seljuk sultan"/>
<link wikidata="Q58982" start="36008" end="36023" title="Kilij Arslan II" label="Kılıç Arslan II"/>
<link wikidata="Q140152" start="36183" end="36199" title="Victory Monument (Ankara)" label="Victory Monument"/>
<link wikidata="Q256" start="36201" end="36208" title="Turkish language" label="Turkish"/>
<link wikidata="" start="36216" end="36227" title=":tr:Ankara Zafer Anıtı" label="Zafer Anıtı"/>
<link wikidata="Q16958844" start="36320" end="36331" title="Ulus Square" label="Ulus Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q40861" start="36357" end="36363" title="marble" label="marble"/>
<link wikidata="Q34095" start="36368" end="36374" title="bronze" label="bronze"/>
<link wikidata="Q659396" start="36391" end="36408" title="equestrian statue" label="equestrian statue"/>
<link wikidata="Q5152" start="36412" end="36433" title="Mustafa Kemal Atatürk" label="Mustafa Kemal Atatürk"/>
<link wikidata="Q7821620" start="36499" end="36512" title="Field Marshal" label="Field Marshal"/>
<link wikidata="Q256" start="36575" end="36582" title="Turkish language" label="Turkish"/>
<link wikidata="Q40861" start="36616" end="36622" title="marble" label="marble"/>
<link wikidata="Q34095" start="36627" end="36633" title="bronze" label="bronze"/>
<link wikidata="Q1333398" start="36677" end="36692" title="Pietro Canonica" label="Pietro Canonica"/>
<link wikidata="Q7821620" start="36796" end="36809" title="Field Marshal" label="Field Marshal"/>
<link wikidata="Q6076995" start="36845" end="36862" title="Security Monument" label="Security Monument"/>
<link wikidata="Q6044471" start="36875" end="36884" title="Güvenpark" label="Güvenpark"/>
<link wikidata="Q20725526" start="37217" end="37224" title="Obverse and reverse" label="reverse"/>
<link wikidata="Q172872" start="37242" end="37246" title="Turkish lira" label="lira"/>
<link wikidata="Q6009963" start="37357" end="37371" title="Sıhhiye Square" label="Sıhhiye Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q7322482" start="37413" end="37418" title="Hattians" label="Hatti"/>
<link wikidata="Q5406" start="37460" end="37468" title="Hittites" label="Hittites"/>
<link wikidata="Q12621097" start="37736" end="37782" title="Monument to Turkish Soldiers Fighting in Korea" label="Monument to Turkish Soldiers Fighting in Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q2614642" start="37845" end="37860" title="Turkish Brigade" label="Turkish Brigade"/>
<link wikidata="Q16933438" start="37892" end="37899" title="Suluhan" label="Suluhan"/>
<link wikidata="Q16958844" start="38005" end="38016" title="Ulus Square" label="Ulus Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q740406" start="38205" end="38214" title="beylerbey" label="beylerbey"/>
<link wikidata="Q165983" start="38305" end="38315" title="Bayezid II" label="Bayezid II"/>
<link wikidata="Q8077662" start="38469" end="38498" title="Çengelhan Rahmi M. Koç Museum" label="Çengelhan Rahmi M. Koç Museum"/>
<link wikidata="" start="38548" end="38558" title=":tr:Çengel Han" label="Çengel Han"/>
<link wikidata="Q8474" start="38654" end="38678" title="Suleiman the Magnificent" label="Suleiman the Magnificent"/>
<link wikidata="Q234901" start="39519" end="39530" title="dried fruit" label="dried fruit"/>
<link wikidata="Q2115982" start="39600" end="39607" title="Kızılay, Ankara" label="Kızılay"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="39665" end="39670" title="List of shopping malls in Turkey#Ankara" label="Karum"/>
<link wikidata="Q41137" start="39696" end="39703" title="Assyria" label="Assyria"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="39730" end="39747" title="Kültepe#Kârum Kaneš" label="&amp;quot;Kârum&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q155526" start="39773" end="39780" title="Central Anatolia Region" label="central"/>
<link wikidata="Q51614" start="39781" end="39789" title="Anatolia" label="Anatolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q26257" start="39814" end="39831" title="2nd millennium BC" label="2nd millennium BC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1020646" start="39888" end="39895" title="Çankaya, Ankara" label="Çankaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q753230" start="39949" end="39962" title="Atakule" label="Atakule Tower"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="39971" end="39982" title="Atakule#Atrium shopping mall" label="Atrium Mall"/>
<link wikidata="Q925352" start="40031" end="40051" title="revolving restaurant" label="revolving restaurant"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="40082" end="40102" title="List of shopping malls in Turkey#Ankara" label="Armada Shopping Mall"/>
<link wikidata="Q168432" start="40109" end="40115" title="anchor" label="anchor"/>
<link wikidata="Q189524" start="40367" end="40378" title="naval fleet" label="naval fleet"/>
<link wikidata="Q6053406" start="40519" end="40527" title="Söğütözü" label="Söğütözü"/>
<link wikidata="Q168866" start="40587" end="40596" title="Eskişehir" label="Eskişehir"/>
<link wikidata="Q2586706" start="40990" end="40998" title="ANKAmall" label="ANKAmall"/>
<link wikidata="Q43347" start="41292" end="41299" title="Mevlana" label="Mevlana"/>
<link wikidata="Q79857" start="41315" end="41320" title="Konya" label="Konya"/>
<link wikidata="Q7855315" start="41359" end="41389" title="Turkish State Opera and Ballet" label="Turkish State Opera and Ballet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1110361" start="41530" end="41548" title="Ankara Opera House" label="Ankara Opera House"/>
<link wikidata="Q4376829" start="41755" end="41786" title="Presidential Symphony Orchestra" label="Presidential Symphony Orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q861892" start="41830" end="41856" title="Bilkent Symphony Orchestra" label="Bilkent Symphony Orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q5637026" start="41905" end="41933" title="Hacettepe Symphony Orchestra" label="Hacettepe Symphony Orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q6076599" start="42086" end="42102" title="CSO Concert Hall" label="CSO Concert Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q4907813" start="42104" end="42124" title="Bilkent Concert Hall" label="Bilkent Concert Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q6003127" start="42213" end="42228" title="MEB Şura Salonu" label="MEB Şura Salonu"/>
<link wikidata="Q8077520" start="42305" end="42349" title="Çankaya Çağdaş Sanatlar Merkezi Concert Hall" label="Çankaya Çağdaş Sanatlar Merkezi Concert Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q6025527" start="42465" end="42500" title="Ankara International Music Festival" label="Ankara International Music Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q20988445" start="42680" end="42699" title="IF Performance Hall" label="IF Performance Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q97599073" start="42713" end="42724" title="Jolly Joker (venues chain)" label="Jolly Joker"/>
<link wikidata="Q12809198" start="42886" end="42908" title="Turkish State Theatres" label="Turkish State Theatres"/>
<link wikidata="Q4548386" start="42989" end="43013" title="125. Yıl Çayyolu Sahnesi" label="125. Yıl Çayyolu Sahnesi"/>
<link wikidata="" start="43015" end="43028" title=":tr:Ankara Devlet Tiyatrosu" label="Büyük Tiyatro"/>
<link wikidata="Q112641261" start="43031" end="43044" title="Küçük Tiyatro" label="Küçük Tiyatro"/>
<link wikidata="Q8082530" start="43047" end="43061" title="Şinasi Sahnesi" label="Şinasi Sahnesi"/>
<link wikidata="Q12809198" start="43064" end="43076" title="Akün Sahnesi" label="Akün Sahnesi"/>
<link wikidata="Q4737074" start="43079" end="43097" title="Altındağ Tiyatrosu" label="Altındağ Tiyatrosu"/>
<link wikidata="Q8080171" start="43100" end="43129" title="İrfan Şahinbaş Atölye Sahnesi" label="İrfan Şahinbaş Atölye Sahnesi"/>
<link wikidata="Q7077211" start="43132" end="43145" title="Oda Tiyatrosu" label="Oda Tiyatrosu"/>
<link wikidata="Q6734081" start="43148" end="43168" title="Mahir Canova Sahnesi" label="Mahir Canova Sahnesi"/>
<link wikidata="Q16878749" start="43171" end="43194" title="Muhsin Ertuğrul Sahnesi" label="Muhsin Ertuğrul Sahnesi"/>
<link wikidata="" start="43278" end="43300" title=":tr:Ankara Sanat Tiyatrosu" label="Ankara Sanat Tiyatrosu"/>
<link wikidata="Q754322" start="43496" end="43529" title="Museum of Anatolian Civilizations" label="Museum of Anatolian Civilizations"/>
<link wikidata="Q206225" start="43608" end="43621" title="Ankara Castle" label="Ankara Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q829896" start="43649" end="43657" title="bedesten" label="bedesten"/>
<link wikidata="Q40203" start="43729" end="43740" title="Paleolithic" label="Paleolithic"/>
<link wikidata="Q36422" start="43742" end="43751" title="Neolithic" label="Neolithic"/>
<link wikidata="Q5406" start="43753" end="43758" title="Hittite empire" label="Hatti"/>
<link wikidata="Q5406" start="43760" end="43767" title="Hittites" label="Hittite"/>
<link wikidata="Q32579" start="43769" end="43776" title="Phrygia" label="Phrygia"/>
<link wikidata="Q185068" start="43779" end="43787" title="Urartu" label="Urartian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277" start="43792" end="43797" title="Roman Empire" label="Roman"/>
<link wikidata="Q620765" start="43844" end="43849" title="Lydia" label="Lydia"/>
<link wikidata="Q615404" start="43884" end="43893" title="Anıtkabir" label="Anıtkabir"/>
<link wikidata="Q5152" start="44007" end="44028" title="Mustafa Kemal Atatürk" label="Mustafa Kemal Atatürk"/>
<link wikidata="Q28220945" start="44491" end="44513" title="Ankara Aviation Museum" label="Ankara Aviation Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1983085" start="44760" end="44777" title="Turkish Air Force" label="Turkish Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q153826" start="44812" end="44822" title="F-86 Sabre" label="F-86 Sabre"/>
<link wikidata="Q531053" start="44824" end="44841" title="F-100 Super Sabre" label="F-100 Super Sabre"/>
<link wikidata="Q657597" start="44843" end="44861" title="F-102 Delta Dagger" label="F-102 Delta Dagger"/>
<link wikidata="Q159881" start="44863" end="44880" title="F-104 Starfighter" label="F-104 Starfighter"/>
<link wikidata="Q308940" start="44882" end="44901" title="Northrop F-5" label="F-5 Freedom Fighter"/>
<link wikidata="Q151432" start="44903" end="44914" title="F-4 Phantom II" label="F-4 Phantom"/>
<link wikidata="Q643820" start="44945" end="44959" title="Transall C-160" label="Transall C-160"/>
<link wikidata="Q150609" start="44979" end="44985" title="Mikoyan-Gurevich MiG-21" label="MiG-21"/>
<link wikidata="Q153307" start="44999" end="45005" title="Mikoyan-Gurevich MiG-19" label="MiG-19"/>
<link wikidata="Q152976" start="45023" end="45029" title="Mikoyan-Gurevich MiG-17" label="MiG-17"/>
<link wikidata="Q499967" start="45214" end="45218" title="Turkish State Railways" label="TCDD"/>
<link wikidata="Q499967" start="45262" end="45284" title="Turkish State Railways" label="Turkish State Railways"/>
<link wikidata="Q4533056" start="45505" end="45530" title="Ethnography Museum of Ankara" label="Ankara Ethnography Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1110361" start="45590" end="45608" title="Ankara Opera House" label="Ankara Opera House"/>
<link wikidata="Q40861" start="45805" end="45811" title="marble" label="marble"/>
<link wikidata="Q34095" start="45816" end="45822" title="bronze" label="bronze"/>
<link wikidata="Q659396" start="45823" end="45840" title="equestrian statue" label="equestrian statue"/>
<link wikidata="Q5152" start="45844" end="45865" title="Mustafa Kemal Atatürk" label="Mustafa Kemal Atatürk"/>
<link wikidata="Q7821620" start="45931" end="45944" title="Field Marshal" label="Field Marshal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1333398" start="45996" end="46011" title="Pietro Canonica" label="Pietro Canonica"/>
<link wikidata="Q16334461" start="46064" end="46101" title="Mehmet Akif Literature Museum Library" label="Mehmet Akif Literature Museum Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q316443" start="46178" end="46195" title="Mehmet Akif Ersoy" label="Mehmet Akif Ersoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q344452" start="46225" end="46248" title="Turkish National Anthem" label="Turkish National Anthem"/>
<link wikidata="Q6715515" start="46325" end="46359" title="METU Science and Technology Museum" label="METU Science and Technology Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q756126" start="46491" end="46523" title="METU" label="Middle East Technical University"/>
<link wikidata="Q6090164" start="46593" end="46608" title="Republic Museum" label="Republic Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q7968654" start="46613" end="46639" title="War of Independence Museum" label="War of Independence Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q16958844" start="46655" end="46666" title="Ulus Square" label="Ulus Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055622" start="46922" end="46932" title="wax sculpture" label="wax figure"/>
<link wikidata="Q4818221" start="47042" end="47072" title="State Art and Sculpture Museum" label="State Art and Sculpture Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q7669659" start="47374" end="47411" title="TCDD Open Air Steam Locomotive Museum" label="TCDD Open Air Steam Locomotive Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q756102" start="47418" end="47433" title="open-air museum" label="open-air museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q171043" start="47462" end="47478" title="steam locomotive" label="steam locomotive"/>
<link wikidata="Q28083137" start="47607" end="47620" title="football team" label="football club"/>
<link wikidata="Q485568" start="47638" end="47655" title="Süper Lig" label="Turkish Süper Lig"/>
<link wikidata="Q492826" start="47657" end="47667" title="MKE Ankaragücü" label="Ankaragücü"/>
<link wikidata="Q56884" start="47791" end="47794" title="Mechanical and Chemical Industry Corporation" label="MKE"/>
<link wikidata="Q752145" start="47810" end="47821" title="Turkish Cup" label="Turkish Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q641373" start="47848" end="47862" title="Gençlerbirliği S.K." label="Gençlerbirliği"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141692" start="47893" end="47909" title="TFF First League" label="TFF First League"/>
<link wikidata="Q1536956" start="48074" end="48093" title="Ankara Keçiörengücü" label="Ankara Keçiörengücü"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141692" start="48121" end="48137" title="TFF First League" label="TFF First League"/>
<link wikidata="Q556570" start="48139" end="48169" title="Büyükşehir Belediye Ankaraspor" label="Büyükşehir Belediye Ankaraspor"/>
<link wikidata="Q556570" start="48274" end="48285" title="Osmanlıspor" label="Osmanlıspor"/>
<link wikidata="Q556570" start="48335" end="48345" title="Ankaraspor" label="Ankaraspor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1780954" start="48380" end="48397" title="TFF Second League" label="TFF Second League"/>
<link wikidata="Q340133" start="48473" end="48487" title="Hacettepe S.K." label="Hacettepe S.K."/>
<link wikidata="Q556437" start="48573" end="48589" title="Ankara Demirspor" label="Ankara Demirspor"/>
<link wikidata="Q18411578" start="48594" end="48616" title="Etimesgut Belediyespor" label="Etimesgut Belediyespor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1780954" start="48634" end="48651" title="TFF Second League" label="TFF Second League"/>
<link wikidata="Q6091798" start="48733" end="48743" title="Çankaya FK" label="Çankaya FK"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351014" start="48759" end="48767" title="Mamak FK" label="Mamak FK"/>
<link wikidata="Q1324416" start="48804" end="48835" title="Basketbol Süper Ligi" label="Turkish Basketball Super League"/>
<link wikidata="Q1781239" start="48862" end="48879" title="Türk Telekom B.K." label="Türk Telekom B.K."/>
<link wikidata="Q2413840" start="48897" end="48909" title="Ankara Arena" label="Ankara Arena"/>
<link wikidata="Q2625411" start="48911" end="48932" title="TED Ankara Kolejliler" label="TED Ankara Kolejliler"/>
<link wikidata="Q28662594" start="48954" end="48967" title="OGM Ormanspor" label="OGM Ormanspor"/>
<link wikidata="Q4001328" start="48992" end="49012" title="Türkiye Basketbol Ligi" label="Turkish First League"/>
<link wikidata="Q456092" start="49098" end="49105" title="EuroCup Basketball" label="EuroCup"/>
<link wikidata="Q112615466" start="49114" end="49119" title="2022–23 EuroCup Basketball" label="22-23"/>
<link wikidata="Q16562645" start="49123" end="49138" title="Halkbank Ankara" label="Halkbank Ankara"/>
<link wikidata="Q2735889" start="49246" end="49282" title="Turkish Men&amp;#x27;s Volleyball League" label="Turkish Men&amp;#x27;s Volleyball League"/>
<link wikidata="Q300114" start="49296" end="49303" title="CEV Cup" label="CEV Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q131320307" start="49314" end="49338" title="Ankara Ice Palace" label="Ankara Buz Pateni Sarayı"/>
<link wikidata="Q779272" start="49352" end="49363" title="ice skating" label="ice skating"/>
<link wikidata="Q41466" start="49368" end="49378" title="ice hockey" label="ice hockey"/>
<link wikidata="Q842284" start="49450" end="49463" title="skateboarding" label="skateboarding"/>
<link wikidata="Q274918" start="49561" end="49594" title="Grand National Assembly of Turkey" label="Grand National Assembly of Turkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q16632571" start="49612" end="49626" title="THF Sport Hall" label="THF Sport Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q1328315" start="49637" end="49658" title="Turkish Handball Super League" label="Handball Super League"/>
<link wikidata="Q643579" start="49663" end="49697" title="Turkish Women&amp;#x27;s Handball Super League" label="Women&amp;#x27;s Handball Super League"/>
<link wikidata="Q5533865" start="49917" end="49930" title="Gençlik Parkı" label="Gençlik Parkı"/>
<link wikidata="Q194195" start="49942" end="49956" title="amusement park" label="amusement park"/>
<link wikidata="Q167346" start="49992" end="50008" title="Botanical garden" label="Botanical garden"/>
<link wikidata="Q6102675" start="50040" end="50051" title="Kuğulu Park" label="Kuğulu Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="50102" end="50109" title="PRC" label="Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q308154" start="50123" end="50134" title="Abdi İpekçi" label="Abdi İpekçi"/>
<link wikidata="Q20988350" start="50141" end="50155" title="Esertepe Parkı" label="Esertepe Parkı"/>
<link wikidata="Q4737090" start="50239" end="50248" title="Altınpark" label="Altınpark"/>
<link wikidata="Q85969772" start="50382" end="50395" title="Dikmen Vadisi" label="Dikmen Vadisi"/>
<link wikidata="Q20725526" start="50506" end="50513" title="Obverse and reverse" label="reverse"/>
<link wikidata="Q172872" start="50533" end="50537" title="Turkish lira" label="lira"/>
<link wikidata="Q4811611" start="50563" end="50590" title="Atatürk Forest Farm and Zoo" label="Atatürk Forest Farm and Zoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q43501" start="50685" end="50688" title="zoo" label="zoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q165044" start="50724" end="50734" title="greenhouse" label="greenhouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q14096331" start="50752" end="50762" title="dairy farming" label="dairy farm"/>
<link wikidata="Q17151" start="50990" end="51002" title="Thessaloniki" label="Thessaloniki"/>
<link wikidata="Q13233" start="51174" end="51183" title="ice cream" label="ice cream"/>
<link wikidata="Q185217" start="51191" end="51204" title="dairy product" label="dairy product"/>
<link wikidata="Q1060621" start="51594" end="51611" title="Ankara University" label="Ankara University"/>
<link wikidata="Q3321507" start="51613" end="51630" title="Atılım University" label="Atılım University"/>
<link wikidata="Q170171" start="51632" end="51650" title="Başkent University" label="Başkent University"/>
<link wikidata="Q861904" start="51652" end="51670" title="Bilkent University" label="Bilkent University"/>
<link wikidata="Q272614" start="51672" end="51690" title="Çankaya University" label="Çankaya University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1496662" start="51692" end="51707" title="Gazi University" label="Gazi University"/>
<link wikidata="" start="51709" end="51741" title=":tr:Gülhane Askerî Tıp Akademisi" label="Gülhane Military Medical Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1567050" start="51743" end="51763" title="Hacettepe University" label="Hacettepe University"/>
<link wikidata="Q756126" start="51765" end="51797" title="Middle East Technical University" label="Middle East Technical University"/>
<link wikidata="" start="51799" end="51813" title=":tr:TED Üniversitesi" label="TED University"/>
<link wikidata="Q3021766" start="51815" end="51858" title="TOBB University of Economics and Technology" label="TOBB University of Economics and Technology"/>
<link wikidata="" start="51860" end="51903" title=":tr:Türk Hava Kurumu Üniversitesi" label="Turkish Aeronautical Association University"/>
<link wikidata="Q7855290" start="51905" end="51929" title="Turkish Military Academy" label="Turkish Military Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7855292" start="51931" end="51962" title="Turkish National Police Academy" label="Turkish National Police Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5299037" start="51964" end="51979" title="Ufuk University" label="Ufuk University"/>
<link wikidata="Q6084324" start="51981" end="52008" title="Yıldırım Beyazıt University" label="Yıldırım Beyazıt University"/>
<link wikidata="Q42707" start="52080" end="52089" title="cat breed" label="cat breed"/>
<link wikidata="Q42720" start="52096" end="52110" title="Turkish Angora" label="Turkish Angora"/>
<link wikidata="Q42610" start="52479" end="52487" title="Persian (cat)" label="Persians"/>
<link wikidata="Q42724" start="52544" end="52555" title="Turkish Van" label="Turkish Van"/>
<link wikidata="Q1474329" start="52701" end="52706" title="tabby cat" label="tabby"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="52954" end="52960" title="Cat coat genetics#White spotting and epistatic white" label="W gene"/>
<link wikidata="Q2084237" start="53190" end="53198" title="odd-eyed cat" label="odd-eyed"/>
<link wikidata="Q542544" start="53495" end="53506" title="Angora goat" label="Angora goat"/>
<link wikidata="Q2934" start="53524" end="53537" title="goat" label="domestic goat"/>
<link wikidata="Q9077" start="53659" end="53664" title="Moses" label="Moses"/>
<link wikidata="Q32500" start="53735" end="53764" title="Charles V, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Charles V, Holy Roman Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q174772" start="53954" end="53966" title="Abdülmecid I" label="Abdülmecid I"/>
<link wikidata="Q2397733" start="54042" end="54048" title="Pile (textile)" label="fleece"/>
<link wikidata="Q179628" start="54085" end="54091" title="mohair" label="mohair"/>
<link wikidata="Q7368" start="54181" end="54186" title="Domestic sheep" label="sheep"/>
<link wikidata="Q43" start="54362" end="54368" title="Turkey" label="Turkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q20725526" start="54788" end="54795" title="Obverse and reverse" label="reverse"/>
<link wikidata="Q172872" start="54814" end="54818" title="Turkish lira" label="lira"/>
<link wikidata="Q542500" start="54869" end="54882" title="Angora rabbit" label="Angora rabbit"/>
<link wikidata="Q42720" start="55091" end="55101" title="Turkish Angora" label="Angora cat"/>
<link wikidata="Q542544" start="55106" end="55117" title="Angora goat" label="Angora goat"/>
<link wikidata="Q542460" start="55362" end="55373" title="Angora wool" label="Angora wool"/>
<link wikidata="Q261839" start="55399" end="55404" title="sheep shearing" label="shear"/>
<link wikidata="Q7205222" start="55421" end="55426" title="plucking (hair removal)" label="pluck"/>
<link wikidata="Q184711" start="56003" end="56010" title="Twin towns and sister cities" label="twinned"/>
<link wikidata="Q8684" start="56019" end="56024" title="Seoul" label="Seoul"/>
<link wikidata="Q1362" start="56053" end="56062" title="Islamabad" label="Islamabad"/>
<link wikidata="Q1865" start="56088" end="56100" title="Kuala Lumpur" label="Kuala Lumpur"/>
<link wikidata="Q3805" start="56156" end="56161" title="Amman" label="Amman"/>
<link wikidata="Q9361" start="56185" end="56192" title="Bishkek" label="Bishkek"/>
<link wikidata="Q1781" start="56220" end="56228" title="Budapest" label="Budapest"/>
<link wikidata="Q1963" start="56253" end="56261" title="Khartoum" label="Khartoum"/>
<link wikidata="Q472" start="56314" end="56319" title="Sofia" label="Sofia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1563" start="56345" end="56351" title="Havana" label="Havana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1899" start="56373" end="56377" title="Kyiv" label="Kyiv"/>
<link wikidata="Q23438" start="56402" end="56410" title="Ashgabat" label="Ashgabat"/>
<link wikidata="Q35178" start="56440" end="56451" title="Kuwait City" label="Kuwait City"/>
<link wikidata="Q11194" start="56475" end="56483" title="Sarajevo" label="Sarajevo"/>
<link wikidata="Q19689" start="56523" end="56529" title="Tirana" label="Tirana"/>
<link wikidata="Q994" start="56554" end="56561" title="Tbilisi" label="Tbilisi"/>
<link wikidata="Q911" start="56586" end="56589" title="Ufa" label="Ufa"/>
<link wikidata="Q5710" start="56591" end="56604" title="Bashkortostan" label="Bashkortostan"/>
<link wikidata="Q171810" start="56628" end="56634" title="Alanya" label="Alanya"/>
<link wikidata="Q19660" start="56645" end="56654" title="Bucharest" label="Bucharest"/>
<link wikidata="Q1858" start="56679" end="56684" title="Hanoi" label="Hanoi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3882" start="56709" end="56715" title="Manama" label="Manama"/>
<link wikidata="Q2449" start="56740" end="56749" title="Mogadishu" label="Mogadishu"/>
<link wikidata="Q2887" start="56774" end="56782" title="Santiago" label="Santiago"/>
<link wikidata="Q1520" start="56805" end="56811" title="Astana" label="Astana"/>
<link wikidata="Q9365" start="56839" end="56847" title="Dushanbe" label="Dushanbe"/>
<link wikidata="Q5838" start="56875" end="56880" title="Kabul" label="Kabul"/>
<link wikidata="Q23430" start="56909" end="56920" title="Ulaanbaatar" label="Ulaanbaatar"/>
<link wikidata="Q85" start="56946" end="56951" title="Cairo" label="Cairo"/>
<link wikidata="Q21197" start="56974" end="56982" title="Chișinău" label="Chișinău"/>
<link wikidata="Q2471" start="57007" end="57018" title="Sana&amp;#x27;a" label="Sana&amp;#x27;a"/>
<link wikidata="Q269" start="57041" end="57049" title="Tashkent" label="Tashkent"/>
<link wikidata="Q25270" start="57077" end="57085" title="Pristina" label="Pristina"/>
<link wikidata="Q900" start="57109" end="57114" title="Kazan" label="Kazan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5481" start="57116" end="57125" title="Tatarstan" label="Tatarstan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3838" start="57149" end="57157" title="Kinshasa" label="Kinshasa"/>
<link wikidata="Q974" start="57159" end="57191" title="Democratic Republic of the Congo" label="Democratic Republic of the Congo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3624" start="57207" end="57218" title="Addis Ababa" label="Addis Ababa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2280" start="57244" end="57249" title="Minsk" label="Minsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1435" start="57274" end="57280" title="Zagreb" label="Zagreb"/>
<link wikidata="Q3766" start="57305" end="57313" title="Damascus" label="Damascus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3739" start="57336" end="57342" title="Bissau" label="Bissau"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="57373" end="57389" title="Washington, D.C." label="Washington, D.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q1861" start="57409" end="57416" title="Bangkok" label="Bangkok"/>
<link wikidata="Q3616" start="57442" end="57448" title="Tehran" label="Tehran"/>
<link wikidata="Q3861" start="57470" end="57474" title="Doha" label="Doha"/>
<link wikidata="Q23564" start="57497" end="57506" title="Podgorica" label="Podgorica"/>
<link wikidata="Q2762100" start="57542" end="57555" title="North Nicosia" label="North Nicosia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3604" start="57575" end="57588" title="Djibouti City" label="Djibouti City"/>
<link wikidata="Q384" start="57635" end="57641" title="Skopje" label="Skopje"/>
<link wikidata="Q1741" start="57674" end="57680" title="Vienna" label="Vienna"/>
<link wikidata="Q745136" start="57737" end="57753" title="Ankara Agreement" label="Ankara Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q48808411" start="57755" end="57769" title="ATO Congresium" label="ATO Congresium"/>
<link wikidata="Q16207085" start="57771" end="57787" title="Battle of Ancyra" label="Battle of Ancyra"/>
<link wikidata="Q209387" start="57789" end="57805" title="Battle of Ankara" label="Battle of Ankara"/>
<link wikidata="Q29915075" start="57807" end="57832" title="List of bridges in Ankara" label="List of bridges in Ankara"/>
<link wikidata="Q6623537" start="57834" end="57870" title="List of hospitals in Ankara Province" label="List of hospitals in Ankara Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q6040492" start="57872" end="57899" title="List of libraries in Ankara" label="List of libraries in Ankara"/>
<link wikidata="Q6642177" start="57901" end="57936" title="List of tallest buildings in Ankara" label="List of tallest buildings in Ankara"/>
<link wikidata="Q2985432" start="57938" end="57953" title="Synod of Ancyra" label="Synod of Ancyra"/>
<link wikidata="Q6002340" start="57955" end="57988" title="Treaty of Ankara (disambiguation)" label="Treaty of Ankara (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q140152" start="57990" end="58015" title="Victory Monument (Ankara)" label="Victory Monument (Ankara)"/>
</links>
</doc>
